and gone away, he observed that the youth, who appeared to be a
fisherman from his dress, went after her.

Without well knowing what he did, and without any very definite
intentions, Fred Temple followed them, and left his friend busy with his
pencil.

The Norwegian youth soon overtook the girl, who at once received him
with a bright smile, and held out her hand.  The two then went on
together, turned to the left, and followed a winding road, which led up
the side of the mountain.  They appeared to converse earnestly as they
went.  Fred still followed them, but in a few minutes they paused in
front of a small white house, with a green door, so he was now compelled
to pass them.  As he did so, it suddenly occurred to his mind that he
was acting a mean, contemptible part in following them thus.  He blushed
as he thought of this, and passed quickly forward, intending to deny his
curiosity and take a ramble.  He could not help observing, however, that
the girl was weeping, and that the youth did not look happy by any
means.

Having gained the brow of an eminence which overlooked the city, Fred
sat down behind a rock to admire the beautiful scenery and to ponder
what he had seen.

While he was thus engaged, he heard the voices of two men who approached
on the other side of the rock, and did not observe him.  They talked
loud, in the Norse language.  Fred understood enough of it to make out
their meaning pretty well.

"I tell you what it is, Hans," said one, "give her up.  You have no
chance of gaining the required sum for many years, and it's a hard case
to keep a poor girl waiting.  Give her up, man, and don't go on like a
silly love-sick boy."

"Give her up!" cried he who was called Hans,--"give her up!  Ah! my
friend Ole, I did not expect such counsel from thee.  But I tell thee
flatly I will _not_ give her up.  She loves me; I love her!  Sweet
Raneilda! nothing but death shall separate us!"

"A very pretty sentiment," retorted Old, "but pray, what do you mean to
do?"

"I have decided that," replied Hans; "I will fish all winter in the deep
sea, and all summer I will--"

"Well, what will you?"

"Alas!  I know not.  Would that I were a pilot, but I am not."

"But you know the coast as well as any pilot," said 016.

"True, but who would trust me--an unknown boy?" replied Hans sadly.

There was silence for a few minutes; then Ole said: "How much money do
you require to pay for your father's farm and set yourself up?"

"Two hundred dollars," [The dollar is equal to about 4 shillings and 6
pence sterling] answered Hans.

"A goodly sum," said Ole despondingly.  "No, no, Hans, give her up, boy,
give her up.  It is the advice of an oldish man and a true friend."

"It is the advice of an ass," retorted Hans fiercely.  "Go, my true
friend,--when I want your advice I will ask it."

The youth flung off from his friend, and came suddenly on Fred Temple,
who rose and saluted him.

"This is a splendid city of yours, Hans," said he.  "You know my name,
and you speak Norse," exclaimed the youth in surprise.

"I know your name, Hans, because I heard your friend mention it, and I
can speak a little Norse because I have studied it.  I have come to stay
in Old Norway for a few months, and would like to get a little
information about it from some one.  Are you a busy man just now?"

"No, not very busy," said Hans, with a disconcerted look.

"Then, could you call on me this afternoon?  I live in Madame Sontoom's
house."

"I will come," said Hans, whose face beamed with good-humour.

"Good; I shall expect you.  Farewell."

"Farvel," replied Hans.

Fred sauntered down the hill that morning with a very peculiar smile on
his countenance.  There was something quite sly about his aspect, and
more than once his companions caught him chuckling at breakfast in a way
that surprised them much, for Fred Temple was not given to secrets, or
to act in an outrageous manner without any apparent reason.  But Fred
had his own peculiar thoughts that morning, and they tickled him to such
an extent that more than once he burst into a fit of laughter.

"Come, Fred, you're meditating something.  Out with it," said Grant.
"It is selfish to keep all your good thoughts to yourself."

"Not yet, not yet," replied Fred, with a mysterious look.  "You shall
know before our excursion comes to an end."

Further conversation was interrupted by the entrance of Hans Ericsson,
who was impatient to get employment of any kind in order to earn a few
dollars, and lay them up with a view to the future.  Fred took him
aside, and said in a low tone--"Hans, are you very anxious to wed
Raneilda?"

The young Norseman's face flushed, and he started as if he had received
a blow.

"Don't be angry, Hans," continued Fred; "I ask the question because I
think I can help you in the matter if you will allow me.  I do not ask
it out of idle curiosity.  Come, tell me your troubles like a good
fellow, and I'll put you in the way of getting out of them."

Hans was inclined to repel Fred's kind intentions at first, but the
Englishman's open, honest manner won upon him so much that he related to
him all his sorrows.

He was the son of Eric, who dwelt in a valley at the head of the Nord
Fiord.  His father was too old to manage his farm, and Hans wished to
take it up and work it on his own account.  But, in order to do so, he
must buy up the shares of the other members of his family.  This would
require 500 dollars.  He had worked hard for two years to make this sum,
but there was still 200 dollars to pay.  He could make this in the
course of time, but he had been engaged to Raneilda long, and he wished
now to make her his wife.  In short, he was tired of waiting.

"So, then, you would be glad to get some sort of work with good pay,"
said Fred.

"Ya," said Hans, with a nod of his head.

"Can you pilot a schooner from this to the Nord Fiord?"

"_Ya_, I know every island on the coast."

"Good; then be ready to start this evening.  I shall send my vessel
there in your charge, and I myself with my friends will travel overland
and meet you there.  Farewell!"

Hans went off to tell Raneilda, his handsome face beaming with joy.

"Now," said Fred, returning to his friends, "I have made arrangements
with a pilot to take the _Snowflake_ round to the Nord Fiord, and we
will travel overland to the same place and meet it.  The journey will be
a very charming one of several days, through wild magnificent scenery.
By the way, Grant, did you order the two sheep to be killed and sent
aboard immediately?"

"Of course I did.  Have I not always proved myself a trustworthy
messenger?  I told the man, in my best Norse, to have two `Kos' killed
without delay."

"Two what?" exclaimed Fred, with a look of alarm.

"Two Kos," returned Grant; "did you not tell me that Ko is the Norse
word for a sheep?"

"Why, as I live, you have ordered two _cows_ to be killed.  Quick, come
with me to the butcher's!"

The two friends rushed out of the house, and reached the shop of the man
of meat just in time, fortunately, to arrest the fatal blow.  The order
was of course countermanded, and they were thus saved the necessity of
setting up a butcher's shop in Bergen to get rid of their superabundant
beef!

That night the _Snowflake_ set sail for the far north, and next morning
our three adventurers were galloping through the wilds of Norway.



CHAPTER FIVE.

CARIOLE TRAVELLING--MISERABLE LODGING AND POOR FARE--NATIVE
PECULIARITIES--A NIGHT BATTLE.

As I am now about to drag my reader through the wild interior of Norway,
let me try to describe it.  Don't be alarmed, dear reader, I do not mean
to be tedious on this point, but I candidly confess that I am puzzled as
to how I should begin!  Norway is _such_ a jumble of Nature's elements.
Perhaps a jumbled description may answer the purpose better than any
other.  Here it is, then.

Mountains, and crags, and gorges, and rocks, and serried ridges;
towering peaks and dark ravines; lakes, and fords, and glens, and
valleys; pine-woods, and glaciers, [For a full description of glaciers,
see "Fast in the Ice," page 86, volume 3 of this _Miscellany_]
streamlets, rivulets, rivers, cascades, waterfalls, and cataracts.  Add
to this--in summer--sweltering heat in the valleys and everlasting snow
and ice on the mountain-tops, with sunlight all night as well as all
day--and the description of Norway is complete.  No arrangement of these
materials is necessary.  Conceive them arranged as you will, and no
matter how wild your fancy, your conception will be a pretty fair idea
of Norway.  Toes these elements into some chamber of your brain; shake
them well up,--don't be timid about it,--then look at the result, and
you will behold Norway!

Having said thus much, it is unnecessary to say more.  Rugged grandeur
is the main feature of Norway.

On a lovely summer's evening, not long after the departure of the
_Snowflake_ from Bergen, our three travellers found themselves trotting
through a wild glen on each side of which rose a range of rugged
mountains, and down the centre of which roared a small river.  The glen
was so steep, and the bed of the torrent so broken, that there was not a
spot of clear water in its whole course.  From the end of the lake out
of which it flowed, to the head of the fiord or firth into which it ran,
the river was one boiling, roaring mass of milk-white foam.

Fred Temple and his friends travelled in the ordinary vehicle of the
country, which is called a _cariole_.  The Norwegian cariole holds only
one person, and the driver or attendant sits on a narrow board above the
axle-tree.

Of course it follows that each traveller in Norway must have a cariole
and a pony to himself.  These are hired very cheaply, however.  You can
travel post there at the rate of about twopence a mile!  Our friends had
three carioles among them, three ponies, and three drivers or
"shooscarles," [This word is spelt as it should be pronounced] besides a
small native cart to carry the luggage.

Their drive that day, and indeed every day since starting, had been
emphatically up hill and down dale.  It was, therefore, impossible to
cross such a country in the ordinary jog-trot manner.  When not
ascending a steep hill, they were necessarily descending one; for the
level parts of the land are few and far between.  In order, therefore,
to get on at all, it was needful to descend the hills at a slapping
pace, so as to make up for time lost in ascending them.

There was something delightfully wild in this mode of progressing, which
gladdened the hearts of our travellers, each of whom had a strong dash
of recklessness in his composition.  There was a little danger, too,
connected with it, which made it all the more attractive.  Frequently
the roads were narrow, and they wound along the top of precipices over
which a false step might easily have hurled them.  At the foot of many
of the roads, too, there were sharp turns, and it was a matter of
intense delight to Sam Sorrel to try how fast he could gallop down and
take the turn without upsetting.

The Norwegian ponies are usually small and cream-coloured, with black
manes and tails or white manes and tails; always, from some
incomprehensible reason, with manes and tails different in colour from
their bodies.  They are hardy, active animals, and they seem to take
positive pleasure in the rattling, neck-or-nothing scamper that succeeds
each toilsome ascent.

The shooscarle is usually the owner of the pony.  He may be a man or a
boy, but whether man or boy he almost invariably wears a red worsted
nightcap.  He also wears coarse homespun trousers, immensely too long in
the body, and a waistcoat monstrously too short.  He will hold the reins
and drive if you choose, but most travellers prefer to drive themselves.

During the journey Fred Temple usually led the way.  Norman Grant, being
a careless, easy-going, drowsy fellow, not to be trusted, was placed in
the middle, and Sam Sorrel brought up the rear.  Sam's duty was to
prevent straggling, and pick up stray articles or baggage.

On the day of which I write the three friends had travelled far, and
were very sleepy.  It was near midnight when they came to a steep and
broken part of the road, which ran alongside of the foaming river
already mentioned, and, turning at a sharp angle, crossed it by means of
a rude wooden bridge.

Notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, the sky was almost as bright
as at noon.

"Mind yourself here," shouted Fred, looking back at Grant, who was
almost asleep.

"Hallo! oh, all right!" cried Grant, gathering up the reins and
attempting to drive.  Fortunately for him Norwegian ponies need no
driving.  They are trained to look after themselves.  Fred went down the
hill at a canter.  Grant followed at a spanking trot, and both of them
reached the bridge, and made the turn in safety.

Sam Sorrel was some distance behind.  Both he and his shooscarle were
sitting bolt-upright, more than half-asleep, with the reins hanging
loose on the pony's back.  The first thing that awakened Sam was the
feeling of going down hill like a locomotive engine.  Rousing himself,
he seized the reins, and tried to check the pony.  This only confused
it, and made it run the cariole so near to the edge of the river, that
they were almost upset into it.

When Sam became fully aware of his position, he opened his eyes, pursed
his lips, and prepared for "squalls."  Not being a practised driver, he
did not make sufficient allowance for a large stone which had fallen
from the cliffs, and lay on the road.  He saw what was coming, and
gathered himself up for a smash; but the tough little cariole took it as
an Irish hunter takes a stone wall.  There was a tremendous crash.
Sam's teeth came together with a snap, and the shooscarle uttered a
roar; no wonder, poor fellow, for his seat being over the axle, and
having no spring to it, the shock which he received must have been
_absolutely_ shocking!  However, they got over that without damage, and
the river was crossed by all three in safety.

The next hill they came to was a still worse one.  When they were
half-way down the leader came to a sudden halt; Grant's cariole almost
ran over it; Sam and the luggage-cart pulled up just in time, and so,
from front to rear, they were jammed up into the smallest space they
could occupy.

"Hallo! what's wrong?" shouted Grant.

"Oh! nothing, only a trace or something broken," replied Fred.  "Mend it
in a minute."

It was mended in a minute, and away they went again on their reckless
course over hill and dale.

The mending of the trace was a simple affair.  The harness of each pony
consisted of nothing more than the reins, a wooden collar, and a wooden
saddle.  The shafts were fastened to the collar by means of an iron pin,
and this pin was secured in its place by a green withe or birch-bough
twisted in a peculiar manner, so as to resemble a piece of rope.  This
was the only part of the harness that could break, so that when an
accident of the kind occurred the driver had only to step into the woods
and cut a new one.  It is a rough-and-ready style of thing, but well
suited to the rough country and the simple people of Norway.

Fred, being anxious to see as much as possible, had compelled his guide
to turn out of the usual high-road, the consequence of which was that he
soon got into difficulties; for although each shooscarle knew the
district through which they were passing, they could not quite
understand to what part of the country this peculiar Englishman was
going.  This is not surprising, for the peculiar Englishman was not
quite sure of that point himself!

On this particular night they seemed to have got quite lost among the
hills.  At every stage of ten or twelve English miles they changed
