the matter.

"You would hardly think so," he replied. "It involves the safety of a
woman." I regarded him with unfeigned astonishment, and he, in turn,
looked at me with a face as full of anger and disappointment as I had
ever beheld.

"Why, you young rascal!" I exclaimed; "what do you know of me that you
should speak so? For less than nothing I'll give you a strapping and
send you to your daddy."

"You couldn't do me a greater service. He is in heaven." You may
imagine my feelings, if you can, when, as he said this, he turned
toward me a countenance from which all feeling had died out save that
of sadness. If he had plunged a knife in my vitals he could not have
hurt me worse. "Well, sir," he insisted, "proceed with your strapping."

"You are more than even with me, my lad," I said, "and I humbly
apologize for my words. But why should you be so short with one who
certainly wishes you no harm?"

"I am unable to tell you. You seem to be always smiling, while I am in
trouble: perhaps that is why I am irritable." He looked at me hard as
he resumed his seat in the rocker, and again I had the curious feeling
that I had met him somewhere before--perhaps in some sphere of former
existence. Memory, however, refused to disgorge the details, and I
could only gaze helplessly into the fire.

After a little the lad hitched his chair closer to mine, and I could
have thanked him for that. He drew on his glove and drew it off again.
"Will you shake hands with me?" he inquired. "I feel that I am all to
blame." As I took his hand in mine I could but notice how small and
soft it was.

"No, you are not all to blame," I said. "I am ill-mannered by nature."

"I never will believe it," he declared with something like a smile.
"No, it is not so."

Before I could make any reply, in walked Jasper Goodrum, of the
Independents, and, following hard at his heels, was the man who had the
appearance of a prize-fighter. This last comer appeared to be in a
state of great excitement, and his brutal, overbearing nature was
clearly in evidence. He walked across the room to my lad--I was now
beginning to feel a proprietary interest in him--and seized him roughly
by the arm.

"Come 'ere!" he said, and his voice was thick with anger. "You've got
more'n you bargained for. Come into the next room; you better had! Say,
ain't you comin'?" He tried to pull the lad along, but the youngster
was not to be pulled.

"Don't touch me!" he exclaimed. "Don't you dare to put your hands on
me. You have lied to me, and that is enough!" The short-haired man was
almost beside himself with anger, and I could see that the lad would be
no match for him. He was not at all frightened, but when he turned his
eyes toward me, with a little smile, I saw the face of Jane Ryder, the
little lady I had seen in a top-buggy on her way to carry aid to Jack
Bledsoe. And instantly I was furious with a blind rage that stung me
like a thousand hornets.

I rose and slapped the ruffian on the shoulder in a way that would have
knocked an ordinary man down. "You dirty brute!" I cried, "say to me
what you have to say to the lad!"




VI


The man regarded me with an amazement that soon flamed up into anger.
His under-jaw stuck out ferociously, and the veins on his neck and
forehead were swollen with indignation. Before he could say anything
Jasper Goodrum intervened. "This is partly my affair," he said to the
short-haired man, "and you'd better leave this countryman alone."

"You're wrong," said the man; "it is not your affair. How can it be
when I don't know you?"

"Still," insisted Goodrum, "you'd better not bother the countryman.
You'll git yourself in trouble."

"Trouble!" he snorted. "Say! that's what I'm after. He's waded into the
creek and he can't git out without wettin' his feet." Then he turned to
me, his eyes full of venomous rage. "Say! what do you take me for?" He
came closer and stuck his ugly mug near my face.

My reply was made with an exceedingly willing mind. I struck him on the
jaw with my open hand and sent him reeling. He recovered his balance
almost instantly and made at me with a roar of rage and pain, but he
never reached me, for Whistling Jim ran into him head down like a bull.
The result was a collision that put the man out of business and knocked
all the fight out of him. He lay on the floor and rolled about in an
agony of pain, and the negro stood over him, apparently waiting for a
fitting opportunity to put in the finishing touch, but his hard head
had done the work for the time being.

[Illustration: Whistling Jim ran into him head down like a bull.]

I judged that the ruffian had friends among the guests, but when I
turned to keep an eye on them the room was clear. Even the landlord had
retired. The lad was standing by my side, and my impression is that he
was holding me by the sleeve of my coat. I turned to him, and I was
more certain than ever that he was either Jane Ryder or her brother.
But it was only when she spoke again that I was sure--for not even a
twin brother could simulate that round and singularly mellow voice. "I
am afraid you have made matters somewhat hard for me," she said,
somewhat sadly, "and heaven knows that I have had trouble enough for
one night."

"Well, you will have no more trouble here, at any rate," I said.

"I'd feel easier if I were sure of that," she remarked.

"Be assured," I answered. "When I leave this house you will go with me.
I propose to take you to your friends, if you have any in the
neighborhood; otherwise you go with me. You shall not stay here for
that ruffian to abuse and misuse you."

"I'll go with you as far as the door if only to thank you for the
unnecessary protection you have given me. There are many things that
you do not understand."

"And many that I do," I replied as significantly as I dared. "I want no
thanks, and you shall not remain in this house to-night. That is
settled." She made a birdlike movement with her head and shoulders,
looked me up and down, and smiled, but she saw that I was in earnest,
and the smile left her face.

"Where shall I go?" she asked.

"Anywhere but here," I answered. "Anywhere away from that," I pointed
to the man on the floor. He had raised himself to a sitting posture,
and was rocking himself to and fro with his arms hugging his knees,
apparently in great pain.

"He is not always as you see him to-night," she insisted. Then she
turned to me impulsively, "I'll go with you; I know a house where I
have very dear friends. But I must tell my friend here good-night--the
lady you spoke with." She ran into the inner room, and then I heard her
going lightly upstairs. She came down in a moment with color in her
face and with some agitation in her manner. She seized me by the sleeve
in a way that no man would have thought of, exclaiming, "Let us go at
once--come!" Her sudden anxiety to be off took me entirely by surprise.

"You have a horse?" I said, hearing the jingling of her spurs. But she
declared that her horse was well enough off where he was. "Come!" she
said; "let us be off!"

"With all my heart," I replied. I was so highly elated that I forgot
for the moment that I was dealing with a woman, and I threw my arm
lightly over her shoulder with a gesture of friendliness and
protection.

She threw it off and shrank from it as if it were a serpent. "What do
you mean?" she cried. Her face was red with anger, and her eyes were
blazing with scorn. "Don't dare to touch me!" For an instant I knew not
what to do or say, and then it suddenly occurred to me that it would be
well to hide from her the fact that I knew who she was and so I made a
great pretence of anger. I seized her by the arm. "If you give me
another word of your impertinence I'll carry out my threat of half an
hour ago."

All the anger died out of her eyes. "You hurt me," she said almost in a
whisper. "Oh, pray pardon me; I have travelled far to-day, and I am
weak and nervous. Why did you come here to-night? But for you----" she
paused and glanced up into my face, and placed her hand on mine. And
then I would have known if I had not known before that she was no other
than Jane Ryder, the little lady of the top-buggy. I looked in her
eyes, and they fell; in her face, and it was covered with blushes; and
somehow I was happier than I had been in many a long day.

"Come!" said I with some sternness, and held out my hand to her.
Instinctively she seized it and clung to it as we went out into the
night, followed by Whistling Jim.

"I have a friend who lives farther up the road," she said. "It is not
far, but perhaps it is farther than you care to come--and you have no
overcoat." I was not thinking of what she was saying, but of the warm
little hand that nestled so confidingly in mine. I knew then, or
thought I knew, that this little hand so soft and white, nestling in my
big paw like a young bird under its mother's wing, had the power to
make or mar my life. But, as is ever the way with birdlike things, the
hand slipped from its nest and left it empty.

She was worrying about the ruffian we had left on the floor. "The
trouble with him," I said, "is that he is selling information to both
sides. He is an impostor. I think he is the scout they call Leroy."
Whereupon she gave utterance to a laugh so merry that it sounded out of
place in the gloomy woods. It brought Whistling Jim alongside to see
what the trouble was. He said he thought the young master was crying.
She laughed again, and then suddenly paused.

"We are very near the house," she said, "and all who live there are my
friends. I shall be perfectly safe there. You have been very kind to
me--kinder than you know. We have both seen each other at our very
worst. Should we meet again, I hope we shall appear to better
advantage."

She had entirely recovered her self-possession, but in doing so she
forgot the part she was playing, forgot that she was arrayed in the
toggery of a man, and was now altogether a woman. I do not remember all
that was said, but I tried as hard as I could to conceal from her the
fact that I had discovered her sex and her identity; I had not the
least desire to humiliate her by airing my penetration. She stood
silent for a while, as if in thought, or perhaps she was waiting for me
to say farewell.

"You will do well to go in," I said. "The night is cold and damp."

"The cold and the damp are nothing to me," she replied. "I am warm
enough. You were speaking a while ago of Frank Leroy. Don't forget that
he is the best friend I have in the world except my mother.
Good-night!" She held out her hand, and again it nestled, white and
soft and warm, in my great paw, and stayed there a moment. The little
hand must have been frightened, for it fluttered slightly and then flew
back to its mistress.

I said good-night, but it was not a very gracious farewell, I am
afraid. "I knew I had something to say to you," she remarked. "In the
house there is a young Federal officer who was wounded some time ago.
He has been in a very bad way, but he is better now. While he was at
the worst of his illness he was constantly calling the names of some
friends he has among the rebels. One of them he seems to be specially
fond of--he calls him Harry Herndon. The other he calls Carroll
Shannon. It may be that you know them."

"I am acquainted with Herndon," I replied. "Shannon I have never met,
and I have no desire to meet him."

She was silent a moment, and then went on: "I thought that if the two
would take the trouble to call on the wounded man it would do him
good--though I am astonished that he should desire to see rebels and
traitors. I hate them all without exception, and the more I see of them
the more I hate them."

The little lady had worked herself into a grand fury against the
rebels, and I am sure she believed what she said for the moment. "I
shall take pleasure in informing Herndon that his friend is here," said
I. "Shannon, as I have told you, I never met."

"You are fortunate," she replied. "I met him once, and it needed only a
glance to tell me what he was."

"And what was he?" I inquired.

"The matter is not worth speaking of," she said. "I have just as much
contempt for him as you have. Good-night!" and once more the little
fluttering hand touched mine, and away she marched into the darkness.
At the steps she turned and listened, but, as neither Whistling Jim nor
I had stirred out of our tracks, she could hear nothing. "Why don't you
go?" she called.

"I want to see you safe in the house," I said.

"You are taking a deal of responsibility on yourself," she responded.
"You must think me a child or a woman." With that she slipped through
the door, which yielded to her touch, and disappeared in the house.




VII


Now, when the foolish girl disappeared behind the door, I turned away
from the gate full of anger at all mundane things. But the only human
being near at hand was Whistling Jim, and him I seized by the collar.

"You scoundrel!" I exclaimed, shaking him vigorously; "what do you mean
by going off and leaving the stable-door unlocked?"

"Mar--Marse Cal--Cally--lem--lemme tell you 'bout it!" he cried,
affrighted; and then, ashamed of my silly display of temper, I turned
him loose. "What make you so fractious ter-night, Marse Cally? A little
mo' an' you'd 'a' shuck my head off. I declar' ter gracious, Marse
Cally, I thought I locked dat stable-door. I know I turned de key--dey
ain't no two ways 'bout dat. I tuck de key out'n de lock when I went
in, an' put it back in de lock when I come out--I put it in de lock an'
turned it des like I allers do."

"But what you didn't do," said I, now angry with myself, "was to make
sure that the bolt of the lock had caught. It didn't catch, and when I
went there to-night the door yielded to my hand. It was a piece of pure
carelessness, and if you ever do the like again----"

"Don't talk dat way, Marse Cally; you sho is been mighty good ter me,
an' I don't want ter make you mad. I never is ter do dat trick ag'in."

Then I told him that there was a plot on foot to steal the horses, and
advised him as to the identity of the two men. He knew them
both--especially did he know the prominent citizen, who, on various
occasions, had invited him into the store and made him presents of pipe
and tobacco, and had even hinted to him that he could find a good job
for him when he grew tired of working for nothing. He had also given
him whiskey, which was a contraband article in the recruiting camp.

We walked along very friendly, for I was ashamed of myself for giving
way to my temper. When the negro thought I was in a sufficiently good
humor, he endeavored to ease his own curiosity on a matter that had
evidently been worrying him. "Marse Cally," he said, "who wuz dat
little chap we tuck home des now?"

"I don't know his name. Why do you ask?"

"Kaze he look so funny an' done so funny. He ain't look like no man ter
me."

"Why, of course not; he is little more than a boy; that's the reason I
made him come out of that house."

"He moughter been a boy," remarked Whistling Jim, after taking some
time to think the matter over. "He wuz right knock-kneed, an' when he
walked he walked des like de flo' wuz burnin' his foots."

I could only pretend to laugh, but I wondered at the negro's keep
observation. Seeing that I made no reply, he went on: "You know what I
think, Marse Cally? Dat uppity li'l chap is des ez much a man ez you is
a 'oman."

"Well, it may be so," I replied. "He is nothing to me."

Whistling Jim laughed one of his irritating laughs. "Dat's so, suh, but
I tuck notice dat you helt han's wid 'im a mighty long time."

This was intolerable, and I remarked with some severity that I proposed
to make it my special business to inform Harry Herndon how his negro
had neglected his duty. "Now, don't do dat, Marse Cally, please, suh!
You know mighty well dat Marse Harry can't keep his temper like you
does. I dunner when you been ez fractious ez you is ter-night."

"You are the cause of it," I declared, "you and no one else. First you
leave the stable-door unlocked, and then you say that this young fellow
is neither man nor boy."

"Did I say dat, Marse Cally?" exclaimed Whistling Jim, apparently
almost as much amazed as if I had drawn a pistol on him. He stood a
moment, as if trying to remember the circumstances under which the
remark had been made, but he shook his head sadly. "Ef I said dat,
Marse Cally, I must 'a' been dreamin'; I wuz mighty nigh fast asleep
when we started back des now, an' ef you'd 'a' lissened right close I
speck you'd 'a' hearn me a sno'in'. Ef you say I said it, den I reckon
I must 'a' said it, but I wan't at myse'f, kaze ef dey ever wuz a grown
man on top er de groun', dat chap is one."

"You are sharper than I thought you were," I remarked.

"You must be makin' fun er me, Marse Cally, kaze dey ain't nothin'
sharp 'bout knowin' a man fum a 'oman. Ef I didn't know de diffunce I'd
turn myse'f out ter graze wid de dry cattle, an' stay wid um all thoo
de season."

"Now, that's the way to talk," said I with some heartiness; "but if I
ever find the stable-door unlocked again I'll take it for granted that
you have changed your opinion about our young friend."

"I may leave de stable-door onlocked time an' time ag'in," remarked
Whistling Jim solemnly, "but I never is ter b'lieve dat dat boy is
anything but a man."

I made haste to inform Harry Herndon that Jack Bledsoe was in the
neighborhood, and, as was perfectly natural, he was keen to see him,
less for Jack's sake, I imagine, though he loved the young fellow well,
than for the sake of having some news of the fair Katherine. As the
heaviest part of his work at headquarters was over, and as pretty much
everything had depended on the reply to General Forrest's requisition
on his superior officer--who, unfortunately, chanced to be General
Bragg--for arms and ammunition, Harry had no difficulty in securing
leave of absence for the day; and so, when all the arrangements had
been made, we set out the next evening for the house where Jack Bledsoe
lay.

On the way, I suggested that perhaps Jack's mother and the fair cousin
would probably be found there; and this possibility was in Harry's mind
also, for he leaned from his horse toward me and extended his hand,
uttering not a word. I gripped it with mine, and hoped that before I
died I should have the opportunity of shaking another hand as true. One
other I found--but only one.

Jack's mother met us at the door, and not far behind her was the fair
Katherine, more beautiful than ever. I saw at a glance that the ladies
were expecting us, for they were rigged out in their best, which was
not very bad, considering that they had been caught between the lines
with a wounded man on their hands. Another face that I had expected to
see was not in evidence, and whatever enthusiasm I may have felt in the
beginning soon died away, and I was sorry that I had been foolish
enough to accompany Harry.

We were taken at once to Jack's room, and it was very evident that he
was glad to see us again. He had changed a great deal; he looked older,
and appeared to be worn by illness. He had been removed from the cabin
on the river at a critical period, and, as a result, he was compelled
to go through a long and drastic illness. He was on the high road to
recovery, but I thought he would never be the same handsome Jack again,
so cadaverous was his countenance and so changed his voice. The two
ladies and myself left the friends together and went into the room that
had been the parlor, where there was a brisk fire burning.

The house was a very commodious country home and had evidently been
built by some prosperous person whose heart and mind turned to the
country after he had acquired wealth in the town. But the owner had
deserted it when the Federals took possession of Murfreesborough,
leaving furniture and everything to the mercy of circumstance--the
cruel circumstance that goes hand in hand with war. But everything was
intact. The old piano stood in the corner as glossy as if it had been
newly bought, and the carpets on the floor wore a clean look, though
some of them were threadbare.

After a while, Harry came in search of Kate--she was more important
than his wounded friend--and Mrs. Bledsoe went to take her place by
Jack's bedside. This arrangement would have left me very much alone,
but for the thoughtfulness of Kate, who intimated that I should find
