
The sun shone upon the beautiful green isle as brilliantly as if no
ruthless invader had passed and laid it in ruins. The birds still
chirped among the trees and the butterflies darted from flower to flower
as happily as when the land was filled with a prosperous and contented
people.

Inga feared that only he was left of all his nation. Perhaps he might be
obliged to pass his life there alone. He would not starve, for the sea
would give him oysters and fish, and the trees fruit; yet the life that
confronted him was far from enticing.

The boy's first act was to walk over to where the palace had stood and
search the ruins until he found some scraps of food that had been
overlooked by the enemy. He sat upon a block of marble and ate of this,
and tears filled his eyes as he gazed upon the desolation around him.
But Inga tried to bear up bravely, and having satisfied his hunger he
walked over to the well, intending to draw a bucket of drinking water.

Fortunately, this well had been overlooked by the invaders and the
bucket was still fastened to the chain that wound around a stout wooden
windlass. Inga took hold of the crank and began letting the bucket down
into the well, when suddenly he was startled by a muffled voice crying
out:

"Be careful, up there!"

The sound and the words seemed to indicate that the voice came from the
bottom of the well, so Inga looked down. Nothing could be seen, on
account of the darkness.

"Who are you?" he shouted.

"It's I--Rinkitink," came the answer, and the depths of the well echoed:
"Tink-i-tink-i-tink!" in a ghostly manner.

"Are you in the well?" asked the boy, greatly surprised.

"Yes, and nearly drowned. I fell in while running from those terrible
warriors, and I've been standing in this damp hole ever since, with my
head just above the water. It's lucky the well was no deeper, for had my
head been under water, instead of above it--hoo, hoo, hoo, keek,
eek!--under instead of over, you know--why, then I wouldn't be talking
to you now! Ha, hoo, hee!" And the well dismally echoed: "Ha, hoo,
hee!" which you must imagine was a laugh half merry and half sad.

"I'm awfully sorry," cried the boy, in answer. "I wonder you have the
heart to laugh at all. But how am I to get you out?"

"I've been considering that all night," said Rinkitink, "and I believe
the best plan will be for you to let down the bucket to me, and I'll
hold fast to it while you wind up the chain and so draw me to the top."

"I will try to do that," replied Inga, and he let the bucket down very
carefully until he heard the King call out:

"I've got it! Now pull me up--slowly, my boy, slowly--so I won't rub
against the rough sides."

Inga began winding up the chain, but King Rinkitink was so fat that he
was very heavy and by the time the boy had managed to pull him halfway
up the well his strength was gone. He clung to the crank as long as
possible, but suddenly it slipped from his grasp and the next minute he
heard Rinkitink fall "plump!" into the water again.

"That's too bad!" called Inga, in real distress; "but you were so heavy
I couldn't help it."

"Dear me!" gasped the King, from the darkness below, as he spluttered
and coughed to get the water out of his mouth. "Why didn't you tell me
you were going to let go?"

"I hadn't time," said Inga, sorrowfully.

"Well, I'm not suffering from thirst," declared the King, "for there's
enough water inside me to float all the boats of Regos and Coregos--or
at least it feels that way. But never mind! So long as I'm not actually
drowned, what does it matter?"

"What shall we do next?" asked the boy anxiously.

"Call someone to help you," was the reply.

"There is no one on the island but myself," said the boy; "--excepting
you," he added, as an afterthought.

"I'm not on it--more's the pity!--but _in_ it," responded Rinkitink.
"Are the warriors all gone?"

"Yes," said Inga, "and they have taken my father and mother, and all our
people, to be their slaves," he added, trying in vain to repress a sob.

"So--so!" said Rinkitink softly; and then he paused a moment, as if in
thought. Finally he said: "There are worse things than slavery, but I
never imagined a well could be one of them. Tell me, Inga, could you let
down some food to me? I'm nearly starved, and if you could manage to
send me down some food I'd be _well_ fed--hoo, hoo, heek, keek,
eek!--well fed. Do you see the joke, Inga?"

"Do not ask me to enjoy a joke just now, Your Majesty," begged Inga in a
sad voice; "but if you will be patient I will try to find something for
you to eat."

He ran back to the ruins of the palace and began searching for bits of
food with which to satisfy the hunger of the King, when to his surprise
he observed the goat, Bilbil, wandering among the marble blocks.

"What!" cried Inga. "Didn't the warriors get you, either?"

"If they had," calmly replied Bilbil, "I shouldn't be here."

"But how did you escape?" asked the boy.

"Easily enough. I kept my mouth shut and stayed away from the rascals,"
said the goat. "I knew that the soldiers would not care for a skinny old
beast like me, for to the eye of a stranger I seem good for nothing. Had
they known I could talk, and that my head contained more wisdom than a
hundred of their own noddles, I might not have escaped so easily."

"Perhaps you are right," said the boy.

"I suppose they got the old man?" carelessly remarked Bilbil.

"What old man?"

"Rinkitink."

"Oh, no! His Majesty is at the bottom of the well," said Inga, "and I
don't know how to get him out again."

"Then let him stay there," suggested the goat.

"That would be cruel. I am sure, Bilbil, that you are fond of the good
King, your master, and do not mean what you say. Together, let us find
some way to save poor King Rinkitink. He is a very jolly companion, and
has a heart exceedingly kind and gentle."

"Oh, well; the old boy isn't so bad, taken altogether," admitted Bilbil,
speaking in a more friendly tone. "But his bad jokes and fat laughter
tire me dreadfully, at times."

Prince Inga now ran back to the well, the goat following more leisurely.

"Here's Bilbil!" shouted the boy to the King. "The enemy didn't get him,
it seems."

"That's lucky for the enemy," said Rinkitink. "But it's lucky for me,
too, for perhaps the beast can assist me out of this hole. If you can
let a rope down the well, I am sure that you and Bilbil, pulling
together, will be able to drag me to the earth's surface."

[Illustration]

"Be patient and we will make the attempt," replied Inga encouragingly,
and he ran to search the ruins for a rope. Presently he found one that
had been used by the warriors in toppling over the towers, which in
their haste they had neglected to remove, and with some difficulty he
untied the knots and carried the rope to the mouth of the well.

Bilbil had lain down to sleep and the refrain of a merry song came in
muffled tones from the well, proving that Rinkitink was making a patient
endeavor to amuse himself.

"I've found a rope!" Inga called down to him; and then the boy proceeded
to make a loop in one end of the rope, for the King to put his arms
through, and the other end he placed over the drum of the windlass. He
now aroused Bilbil and fastened the rope firmly around the goat's
shoulders.

"Are you ready?" asked the boy, leaning over the well.

"I am," replied the King.

"And I am not," growled the goat, "for I have not yet had my nap out.
Old Rinki will be safe enough in the well until I've slept an hour or
two longer."

"But it is damp in the well," protested the boy, "and King Rinkitink may
catch the rheumatism, so that he will have to ride upon your back
wherever he goes."

Hearing this, Bilbil jumped up at once.

"Let's get him out," he said earnestly.

"Hold fast!" shouted Inga to the King. Then he seized the rope and
helped Bilbil to pull. They soon found the task more difficult than they
had supposed. Once or twice the King's weight threatened to drag both
the boy and the goat into the well, to keep Rinkitink company. But they
pulled sturdily, being aware of this danger, and at last the King popped
out of the hole and fell sprawling full length upon the ground.

For a time he lay panting and breathing hard to get his breath back,
while Inga and Bilbil were likewise worn out from their long strain at
the rope; so the three rested quietly upon the grass and looked at one
another in silence.

Finally Bilbil said to the King:

"I'm surprised at you. Why were you so foolish as to fall down that
well? Don't you know it's a dangerous thing to do? You might have broken
your neck in the fall, or been drowned in the water."

"Bilbil," replied the King solemnly, "you're a goat. Do you imagine I
fell down the well on purpose?"

"I imagine nothing," retorted Bilbil. "I only know you were there."

"There? Heh-heh-heek-keek-eek! To be sure I was there," laughed
Rinkitink. "There in a dark hole, where there was no light; there in a
watery well, where the wetness soaked me through and
through--keek-eek-eek-eek!--through and through!"

"How did it happen?" inquired Inga.

"I was running away from the enemy," explained the King, "and I was
carelessly looking over my shoulder at the same time, to see if they
were chasing me. So I did not see the well, but stepped into it and
found myself tumbling down to the bottom. I struck the water very neatly
and began struggling to keep myself from drowning, but presently I found
that when I stood upon my feet on the bottom of the well, that my chin
was just above the water. So I stood still and yelled for help; but no
one heard me."

"If the warriors had heard you," said Bilbil, "they would have pulled
you out and carried you away to be a slave. Then you would have been
obliged to work for a living, and that would be a new experience."

"Work!" exclaimed Rinkitink. "Me work? Hoo, hoo, heek-keek-eek! How
absurd! I'm so stout--not to say chubby--not to say fat--that I can
hardly walk, and I couldn't earn my salt at hard work. So I'm glad the
enemy did not find me, Bilbil. How many others escaped?"

"That I do not know," replied the boy, "for I have not yet had time to
visit the other parts of the island. When you have rested and satisfied
your royal hunger, it might be well for us to look around and see what
the thieving warriors of Regos and Coregos have left us."

"An excellent idea," declared Rinkitink. "I am somewhat feeble from my
long confinement in the well, but I can ride upon Bilbil's back and we
may as well start at once."

Hearing this, Bilbil cast a surly glance at his master but said nothing,
since it was really the goat's business to carry King Rinkitink wherever
he desired to go.

They first searched the ruins of the palace, and where the kitchen had
once been they found a small quantity of food that had been half hidden
by a block of marble. This they carefully placed in a sack to preserve
it for future use, the little fat King having first eaten as much as he
cared for. This consumed some time, for Rinkitink had been exceedingly
hungry and liked to eat in a leisurely manner. When he had finished the
meal he straddled Bilbil's back and set out to explore the island,
Prince Inga walking by his side.

They found on every hand ruin and desolation. The houses of the people
had been pilfered of all valuables and then torn down or burned. Not a
boat had been left upon the shore, nor was there a single person, man or
woman or child, remaining upon the island, save themselves. The only
inhabitants of Pingaree now consisted of a fat little King, a boy and a
goat.

Even Rinkitink, merry hearted as he was, found it hard to laugh in the
face of this mighty disaster. Even the goat, contrary to its usual
habit, refrained from saying anything disagreeable. As for the poor boy
whose home was now a wilderness, the tears came often to his eyes as he
marked the ruin of his dearly loved island.

When, at nightfall, they reached the lower end of Pingaree and found it
swept as bare as the rest, Inga's grief was almost more than he could
bear. Everything had been swept from him--parents, home and country--in
so brief a time that his bewilderment was equal to his sorrow.

[Illustration]

Since no house remained standing, in which they might sleep, the three
wanderers crept beneath the overhanging branches of a cassa tree and
curled themselves up as comfortably as possible. So tired and
exhausted were they by the day's anxieties and griefs that their
troubles soon faded into the mists of dreamland. Beast and King and boy
slumbered peacefully together until wakened by the singing of the birds
which greeted the dawn of a new day.

[Illustration]




The Three Pearls

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 5


When King Rinkitink and Prince Inga had bathed themselves in the sea and
eaten a simple breakfast, they began wondering what they could do to
improve their condition.

"The poor people of Gilgad," said Rinkitink cheerfully, "are little
likely ever again to behold their King in the flesh, for my boat and my
rowers are gone with everything else. Let us face the fact that we are
imprisoned for life upon this island, and that our lives will be short
unless we can secure more to eat than is in this small sack."

"I'll not starve, for I can eat grass," remarked the goat in a pleasant
tone--or a tone as pleasant as Bilbil could assume.

"True, quite true," said the King. Then he seemed thoughtful for a
moment and turning to Inga he asked: "Do you think, Prince, that if the
worst comes, we could eat Bilbil?"

The goat gave a groan and cast a reproachful look at his master as he
said:

