these heathen Danes."

"But methinks," Prince Alfred said, "that the brave Algar and his
valiant companions did wrong to throw away their lives when all was
lost. So long as there is the remotest chance of victory it is the duty
of a leader to set an example of valour to his followers, but when all
is lost he should think of his country. What though the brave thanes
slew each a score of Danes before they died, their death has left their
countrymen without a leader, and by that one battle the Danes have made
themselves masters of the north of East Anglia. Better far had they,
when the day was lost, retreated, to gather the people together when a
better opportunity presented itself, and again to make head against the
invaders. It is heathen rather than Christian warfare thus to throw
away their lives rather than to retreat and wait for God's time to come
again. To stake all on one throw, which if lost loses a whole people,
seems to me the act of a gamester. I trust that, should the time ever
come, as it is too much to be feared it will ere long, that the Danes
invade my brother's kingdom of Wessex, I shall not be found wanting in
courage; but assuredly when defeated in battle I would not throw away
my life, for that belongs to our people rather than to myself, but
would retire to some refuge until I could again gather the Saxons
around me and attack the invaders. I like the face of the young
ealdorman, and doubt not that he will prove a valiant warrior like his
father. My brother will doubtless assign him lands for his maintenance
and yours; but if he will let me I will attach him to my person, and
will be at once a master and a friend to him. Wouldst thou like this,
young Edmund?"

The lad, greatly pleased at the young prince's kindness of speech and
manner, replied enthusiastically that he would follow him to the death
if he would accept him as his faithful thane.

"Had the times been more peaceful, Edmund," Alfred said, "I would fain
have imparted to you some of the little knowledge that I have gained,
for I see an intelligence in your face which tells me that you would
have proved an apt and eager pupil; but, alas, in the days that are
coming it is the sword rather than the book which will prevail, and the
cares of state, and the defence of the country, will shortly engross
all my time and leave me but little leisure for the studies I love so
well."

"There are the lands," the king said, "of Eabald, Ealdorman of
Sherborne, in Dorset. He died but last week and has left no children.
These lands I will grant to Edmund in return for liege and true
service." The lad knelt before the king, and, kissing his hand, swore
to be his true and faithful thane, and to spend land, goods, and life
in his service.

"And now," the king said, "since the audience is over, and none other
comes before us with petitions, we will retire to our private
apartments, and there my brother Alfred will present you to the fair
Elswitha, his wife."

The room into which Egbert and Edmund followed the king and his brother
was spacious and lofty. The walls were covered with hangings of red
cloth, and a thick brown baize covered the floor. The ceiling was
painted a dark brown with much gilding. Round the sides of the room
stood several dressers of carved oak, upon which stood gold and silver
cups.

On a table were several illuminated vellums. At Croyland Edmund had
seen a civilization far in advance of that to which he had been
accustomed in his father's abode; but he saw here a degree of luxury
and splendour which surprised him. Alfred had, during his two visits to
Rome, learned to appreciate the high degree of civilization which
reigned there, and many of the articles of furniture and other objects
which met Edmund's eye he had brought with him on his return with his
father from that city.

Across the upper end of the room was a long table laid with a white
cloth. Elswitha was sitting in a large gilded chair by the great fire
which was blazing on the hearth.

Prince Alfred presented Edmund and Egbert to her. Elswitha was well
acquainted with the Ealdorman Eldred, as his lands lay on the very
border of her native Mercia, and she received the lad and his kinsman
with great kindness. In a short time they took their places at table.
First the attendance brought in bowls containing broth, which they
presented, kneeling, to each of those at table. The broth was drunk
from the bowl itself; then a silver goblet was placed by each diner,
and was filled with wine. Fish was next served. Plates were placed
before each; but instead of their cutting food with their own daggers,
as Edmund had been accustomed to see in his father's house, knives were
handed round. After the fish came venison, followed by wild boar,
chickens, and other meats. After these confections, composed chiefly of
honey, were placed on the table. The king and Prince Alfred pledged
their guests when they drank. No forks were used, the meat as cut being
taken up by pieces of bread to the mouth. During the meal a harper
played and sung.

Edmund observed the decorum with which his royal hosts fed, and the
care which they took to avoid dipping their fingers into their saucers
or their plates. He was also struck with the small amount of wine which
they took; for the Saxons in general were large feeders, and drank
heavily at their meals.

When the dinner was over a page brought round a basin of warm water, in
which lavender had been crushed, and each dipped his fingers in this
and then dried them on the cloth. Then at Prince Alfred's request
Egbert again related in full the details of the two days' desperate
struggle at Kesteven, giving the most minute particulars of the Danes'
method of fighting. Egbert and Edmund then retired to the royal
guest-house adjoining the palace, where apartments were assigned to
them.

After remaining for a week at Reading they took leave of the king and
started for the lands which he had assigned to Edmund. They were
accompanied by an officer of the royal household, who was to inform the
freemen and serfs of the estate that by the king's pleasure Edmund had
been appointed ealdorman of the lands. They found on arrival that the
house had been newly built, and was large and comfortable. The thanes
of the district speedily came in to pay their respects to their new
ealdorman, and although surprised to find him so young, they were
pleased with his bearing and manner, and knowing that he came of good
fighting blood doubted not that in time he would make a valiant leader.
All who came were hospitably entertained, and for many days there was
high feasting. So far removed was this part of England from the
district which the Danes had invaded, that at present but slight alarm
had been caused by them; but Edmund and his kinsman lost no time in
impressing upon them the greatness of the coming danger.

"You may be sure," he said, "that ere long we shall see their galleys
on the coast. When they have eaten up Mercia and Anglia they will
assuredly come hither, and we shall have to fight for our lives, and
unless we are prepared it will go hard with us."

After he had been at his new residence for a month Edmund sent out
messengers to all the thanes in his district requesting them to
assemble at a council, and then formally laid the matter before them.

"It is, above all things," he said, "necessary that we should have some
place where we can place the women and children in case of invasion and
where we can ourselves retire in extreme necessity. Therefore I propose
that we shall build a fort of sufficient size to contain all the
inhabitants of the district, with many flocks and herds. My cousin
Egbert has ridden far over the country, and recommends that the Roman
fortification at Moorcaster shall be utilized. It is large in extent,
and has a double circle of earthen banks. These differ from those which
we are wont to build, since we Saxons always fill up the ground so as
to be flat with the top of the earthen banks, while the Romans left
theirs hollow. However, the space is so large that it would take a vast
labour to fill it up, therefore I propose that we should merely thicken
the banks, and should, in Saxon custom, build a wall with turrets upon
them. The sloping banks alone would be but a small protection against
the onslaught of the Danes, but stone walls are another matter, and
could only be carried after a long siege. If you fall in with my views
you will each of you send half your serfs to carry out the work, and I
will do the same, and will, moreover, pay fifty freemen who may do the
squaring of the stones and the proper laying of them."

The proposal led to a long discussion, as some thought that there was
no occasion as yet to take such a measure; but the thanes finally
agreed to carry out Edmund's proposal.




CHAPTER IV: THE INVASION OF WESSEX


Edmund and Egbert devoted most of their time to the building of the new
fort, living very simply, and expended the whole of the revenues of the
lands on the payment of the freemen and masons engaged upon the work.
The Roman fort was a parallelogram, the sides being about 200 yards
long, and the ends half that length. It was surrounded by two earthen
banks with wide ditches. These were deepened considerably, and the
slopes were cut down more sharply. The inner bank was widened until it
was 15 feet across the top.

On this the wall was built. It was faced on both sides with square
stones, the space between filled up with rubble and cement, the total
thickness being 4 feet. The height of the wall was 8 feet, and at
intervals of 30 yards apart towers were raised 10 feet above it, one of
these being placed at either side of the entrance. Here the bank was
cut away, and solid buttresses of masonry supported the high gates. The
opening in the outer bank was not opposite to the gate in the inner,
being fifty yards away, so that any who entered by it would have for
that distance to follow the ditch between the two banks, exposed to the
missiles of those on the wall before arriving at the inner gate.

Five hundred men laboured incessantly at the work. The stone for the
walls was fortunately found close at hand, but, notwithstanding this,
the work took nearly six months to execute; deep wells were sunk in the
centre of the fort, and by this means an ample supply of water was
secured, however large might be the number within it.

A very short time after the commencement of the work the news arrived
that King Edmund of East Anglia had gathered his forces together and
had met the Danes in a great battle near Thetford on Sunday the 20th of
November, and had been totally defeated by them, Edmund himself having
been taken prisoner. The captive king, after having been for a long
time cruelly tortured by the Danes, was shot to death with arrows. It
was not long after this that news came that the whole of East Anglia
had fallen into the hands of the Danes.

Early in the month of February, 871, just as the walls of his fort had
begun to rise, a messenger arrived from the king bidding Edmund
assemble all the men in his earlship and march at once to join him near
Devizes, as the news had come that a great Danish fleet had sailed up
the Thames and had already captured the royal town of Reading.

Messengers were sent out in all directions, and early the next morning,
400 men having assembled, Edmund and his kinsman marched away with them
towards Devizes. Upon their arrival at that town they found the king
and his brother with 8000 men, and the following day the army moved
east towards Reading.

They had not marched many miles before a messenger arrived saying that
two of the Danish jarls with a great following had gone out to plunder
the country, that they had been encountered by Aethelwulf, Earl of
Berkshire, with his men at Englefield, and a fierce battle had taken
place. The Saxons had gained the victory, and great numbers of the
Danes had been slain, Sidroc, one of their jarls, being among the
fallen.

Three days later the royal army arrived in sight of Reading, being
joined on their march by Aethelwulf and his men. The Danes had thrown
up a great rampart between the Thames and the Kennet, and many were
still at work on this fortification. These were speedily slain by the
Saxons, but their success was a short one. The main body of the
invaders swarmed out from the city and a desperate engagement took
place.

The Saxons fought valiantly, led by the king and Prince Alfred; but
being wholly undisciplined and unaccustomed to war they were unable to
withstand the onslaught of the Danes, who fought in better order,
keeping together in ranks: after four hours' hard fighting the Saxons
were compelled to fall back.

They rallied again a few miles from Reading. Ethelred and Alfred went
among them bidding them be of good cheer, for that another time, when
they fought in better order, they would gain the victory; and that
their loss had not been greater than the Danes, only that unhappily the
valiant Ealdorman Aethelwulf had been slain. Fresh messengers were sent
throughout the country bidding all the men of Wessex to rally round
their king, and on the fourth morning after the defeat Ethelred found
himself at the head of larger forces than had fought with him in the
last battle.

The Danes had moved out from Reading and had taken post at Ashdown, and
as the Saxon army approached they were seen to be divided into two
bodies, one of which was commanded by their two kings and the other by
two jarls. The Saxons therefore made a similar division of their army,
the king commanding one division and Prince Alfred the other.

Edmund with the men of Sherborne was in the division of Alfred. The
Danes advanced to the attack and fell with fury upon them. It had been
arranged that this division should not advance to the attack until that
commanded by the king was also put in motion. For some time Alfred and
his men supported the assaults of the Danes, and then, being hardly
pressed, the prince sent a messenger to his brother to urge that a
movement should be made. The Saxons were impatient at standing on the
defensive, and Alfred saw that he must either allow them to charge the
enemy or must retreat.

Presently the messenger returned saying that the king was in his tent
hearing mass, and that he had given orders that no man should move or
any should disturb him until mass was concluded. Alfred hesitated no
longer; he formed his men into a solid body, and then, raising his
battle cry, rushed upon the Danes. The battle was a furious one. The
Danes were upon higher ground, their standard being planted by the side
of a single thorn-tree which grew on the slopes of the hill. Towards
this Alfred with his men fought their way.

The lesson of the previous battle had not been lost, the Saxons kept
together in a solid body which made its way with irresistible weight
through the ranks of the Danes. Still the latter closed in on all
sides, and the fight was doubtful until the king, having finished his
devotions, led his division into the battle. For a long time a
desperate strife continued and great numbers on both sides were killed;
but the Saxons, animated at once by love of their country and hatred of
the invaders and by humiliation at their previous defeat, fought with
such fury that the Danes began to give way. Then the Saxons pressed
them still more hotly, and the invaders presently lost heart and fled
in confusion, pursued in all directions by the exulting Saxons.

The Danish king Bergsecg and five jarls, the two Sidrocs, Osbearn,
Frene, and Hareld, were slain, and many thousands of their followers.
Great spoil of arms and armour fell into the hands of the victors.

Edmund had fought bravely in the battle at the head of his men. Egbert
had kept beside him, and twice, when the lad had been smitten to his
knees by the enemy, covered him with his shield and beat off the foe.

"You are over-young for such a fight as this, Edmund," he said when the
Danes had taken to flight. "You will need another four or five years
over your head before you can stand in battle against these fierce
Northmen. They break down your guard by sheer weight; but you bore
yourself gallantly, and I doubt not will yet be as famous a warrior as
was your brave father."

Edmund did not join in the pursuit, being too much bruised and
exhausted to do so; but Egbert with the men of Sherborne followed the
flying Danes until nightfall.

"You have done well, my young ealdorman," Prince Alfred said to the lad
after the battle. "I have been wishing much that you could be with me
during the past month, but I heard that you were building a strong fort
and deemed it better to let you continue your work undisturbed. When it
is finished I trust that I shall have you often near me; but I fear
that for a time we shall have but little space for peaceful pursuits,
for the Danes are coming, as I hear, in great troops westward, and we
shall have many battles to fight ere we clear the land of them."

In those days a defeat, however severe, had not the same decisive
effect as it has in modern warfare. There were no cannons to lose, no
great stores to fall into the hands of the victors. The army was simply
dispersed, and its component parts reassembled in the course of a day
or two, ready, when reinforcements arrived, to renew the fight. Thus,
decisive as was the victory of Ashdown, Prince Alfred saw that many
such victories must be won, and a prolonged and exhausting struggle
carried on before the tide of invasion would be finally hurled back
from Wessex. The next few days were spent in making a fair distribution
of the spoil and arms among the conquerors. Some of the thanes then
returned home with their people; but the remainder, on the king's
entreaty, agreed to march with him against the Danes, who after the
battle had fallen back to Basing, where they had been joined by others
coming from the coast. The royal army advanced against them, and
fourteen days after the battle of Ashdown the struggle was renewed. The
fight lasted for many hours, but towards nightfall the Saxons were
compelled to retreat, moving off the field, however, in good order, so
that no spoil fell into the hands of the Danes.

This check was a great disappointment to the Saxons, who after their
late victory had hoped that they should speedily clear the kingdom of
the Danes. These, indeed, taught prudence by the manner in which the
West Saxons had fought, for a while refrained from plundering
excursions. Two months later the Saxons were again called to arms.
Somerled, a Danish chieftain, had again advanced to Reading, and had
captured and burned the town. The king marched against him, and the two
armies met at Merton. Here another desperate battle took place.

During the first part of the day the Saxons were victorious over both
the divisions of the Danish army, but in the afternoon the latter
received some reinforcements and renewed the fight. The Saxons,
believing that the victory had been won, had fallen into disorder and
were finally driven from the field. Great numbers were slain on both
sides. Bishop Edmund and many Saxon nobles were killed, and King
Ethelred so severely wounded that he expired a few days later, April
23rd, 871, having reigned for five years. He was buried at Wimbourne
Minster, and Prince Alfred ascended the throne.

Ethelred was much regretted by his people, but the accession of Alfred
increased their hopes of battling successfully against the Danes.
Although wise and brave, King Ethelred had been scarcely the monarch
for a warlike people in troubled times. Religious exercises occupied
too large a share of his thoughts. His rule was kindly rather than
strong, and his authority was but weak over his nobles. From Prince
Alfred the Saxons hoped better things. From his boyhood he had been
regarded with special interest and affection by the people, as his
father had led them to regard him as their future king.

The fact that he had been personally consecrated by the pope appeared
to invest him with a special authority. His immense superiority in
learning over all his people greatly impressed them. Though gentle he
was firm and resolute, prompt in action, daring in the field. Thus,
then, although the people regretted King Ethelred, there was a general
feeling of hope and joy when Alfred took his place on the throne. He
had succeeded to the crown but a month when the Danes again advanced in
great numbers. The want of success which had attended them in the last
two battles had damped the spirit of the people, and it was with a very
small force only that Alfred was able to advance against them.

The armies met near Wilton, where the Danes in vastly superior numbers
were posted on a hill. King Alfred led his forces forward and fell upon
the Danes, and so bravely did the Saxons fight that for some time the
day went favourably for them. Gradually the Danes were driven from
their post of vantage, and after some hours' fighting turned to fly;
but, as at Merton and Kesteven, the impetuosity of the Saxons proved
their ruin. Breaking their compact ranks they scattered in pursuit of
the Danes, and these, seeing how small was the number of their
pursuers, rallied and turned upon them, and the Saxons were driven from
the field which they had so bravely won.

"Unless my brave Saxons learn order and discipline," the king said to
Edmund and some of his nobles who gathered round him on the evening
after the defeat, "our cause is assuredly lost. We have proved now in
each battle that we are superior man to man to the Danes, but we throw
away the fruits of victory by our impetuosity. The great Caesar, who
wrote an account of his battles which I have read in Latin, described
the order and discipline with which the Roman troops fought. They were
always in heavy masses, and even after a battle the heavy-armed
soldiers kept their ranks and did not scatter in pursuit of the enemy,
leaving this task to the more lightly armed troops.

"Would that we had three or four years before us to teach our men
discipline and order, but alas! there is no time for this. The Danes
have fallen in great numbers in every fight, but they are ever
receiving reinforcements and come on in fresh waves of invasion; while
the Saxons, finding that all their efforts and valour seem to avail
nothing, are beginning fast to lose heart. See how small a number
assembled round my standard yesterday, and yet the war is but
beginning. Truly the look-out is bad for England."

The king made strenuous efforts again to raise an army, but the people
did not respond to his call. In addition to the battles which have been
spoken of several others had been fought in different parts of Wessex
by the ealdormen and their followers against bodies of invading Danes.
In the space of one year the Saxons had engaged in eight pitched
battles and in many skirmishes. Great numbers had been slain on both
sides, but the Danes ever received fresh accessions of strength, and
seemed to grow stronger and more numerous after every battle, while the
Saxons were dwindling rapidly. Wide tracts of country had been
devastated, the men slaughtered, and the women and children taken
captives, and the people, utterly dispirited and depressed, no longer
listened to the voices of their leaders, and refused again to peril
their lives in a strife which seemed hopeless. Alfred therefore called
his ealdormen together and proposed to them, that since the people
would no longer fight, the sole means that remained to escape
destruction was to offer to buy off the Danes.

The proposal was agreed to, for although none of them had any hope that
the Danes would long keep any treaty they might make, yet even a little
respite might give heart and spirit to the Saxons again. Accordingly
negotiations were entered into with the Danes, and these, in
consideration of a large money payment, agreed to retire from Wessex.
The money was paid, the Danes retired from Reading, which they had used
as their headquarters, and marched to London. King Burhred, the feeble
King of Mercia, could do nothing to oppose them, and he too agreed to
pay them a large annual tribute.

From the end of 872 till the autumn of 875 the country was
comparatively quiet. Alfred ruled it wisely, and tried to repair the
terrible damages the war had made. Edmund looked after his earldom, and
grew into a powerful young man of nineteen years old.

King Alfred had not deceived himself for a moment as to the future.
"The Danes," he said, "are still in England. East Anglia and
Northumbria swarm with them. Had this army, after being bought off by
