
"Yes, and a gripsack."

"Oh yes," said the agent his face lighting up with satisfaction. "It is
the man I mean--where is he now?"

"In his room."

"Did he say how long he intended to stay?"

"No, sir. He said nothing about his plans."

"Did he seem specially careful about the casket?"

"Yes, sir. He carried that in his hands, but let the servant carry up
the gripsack."

"My friend," said the agent in an impressive tone, "I am going to
surprise you."

The country clerk looked all curiosity.

"Is it about Mr. Wheeler?" he asked.

"Yes, the man is a thief. He stole the casket, which contains valuable
jewelry, from my young friend here. We are here to demand a return of
the property or to arrest him. Is there a policeman within call?"

"I can summon a constable."

"Do so, but don't breathe a word of what I have told you."

The clerk called a boy in from the street and gave him instructions in
a low voice. He went at once on his errand, and in ten minutes a stout
broad shouldered man made his appearance.

"This gentleman sent for you, Mr. Barlow," said the clerk.

"What can I do for you?" asked the constable.

"Help me to recover stolen property."

"That I will do with pleasure if you will tell me what you want me to
do."

Adin Woods held a brief conference with the constable, then he led the
way up stairs, followed immediately by Rodney, while the constable kept
a little behind.

"His room is No. 9," said the bell boy.

The agent paused before the door of No. 9, and knocked.

"Come in!" said a voice.

The agent opened the door, and entered, accompanied by Rodney. A glance
showed that the occupant answered the description given by the lady in
the car.

Louis Wheeler changed color, for he recognized both the agent and
Rodney.

"What is your business?" he asked in a tone which he tried to make
indifferent.

"That," answered Woods, pointing to the jewel casket on the bureau.

It looked to him as if Wheeler, if that was his name, had been trying to
open it.

"I don't understand."

"Then I will try to make things clear to you. You have, doubtless by
accident" he emphasized the last word, "taken from the car a casket
belonging to my young friend here."

"You are mistaken, sir," said Wheeler with brazen hardihood. "That
casket belongs to me."

"Indeed. What does it contain?"

"I fail to see how that is any of your business," returned Wheeler,
determined, if possible, to bluff off his visitors.

"I admire your cheek, sir. I really do. But I am too old a traveler to
be taken in by such tricks. I propose to have that casket."

"Well, sir, you are the most impudent thief and burglar I ever met. You
break into a gentleman's room, and undertake to carry off his private
property. Unless you go out at once, I will have you arrested."

"That you can do very readily, for I have an officer within call."

Louis Wheeler changed color. He began to see that the situation was
getting serious.

"There is a great mistake here," he said.

"I agree with you."

The agent went to the door, and called "Constable Barlow."

The constable promptly presented himself.

"Do you want me, sir?" he asked.

"That depends on this gentleman here. If he will peacefully restore to
my young friend here yonder jewel casket I am willing to let him go.
Otherwise--" and he glanced at Wheeler significantly.

"Perhaps I have made a mistake," admitted the thief. "I had a casket
exactly like this. Possibly I have taken the wrong one."

"I have the key to the casket here," said Rodney, "and I can tell you
without opening it what it contains."

"What did yours contain?" asked the agent.

"Jewelry," answered Wheeler shortly.

"What articles?"

"Never mind. I am inclined to think this casket belongs to the boy."

"Rodney, you can take it and Mr. Wheeler will probably find his where he
left it."

No objection was made, and the discomfited thief was left a prey to
mortification and disappointment.

Rodney handed a dollar to the constable which that worthy official
received with thanks, and he and the agent resumed their journey by an
afternoon train. They saw nothing further of Louis Wheeler who sent for
dinner to be served in his room.



CHAPTER V.


A YOUNG FINANCIAL WRECK.


"You have been very fortunate in recovering your jewels," said the
agent.

"I owe it to you," replied Rodney gratefully.

"Well, perhaps so. If I have rendered you a service I am very glad."

"And I am very glad to have found so good a friend. I hope you will let
me pay for your ticket to New York."

"It won't be necessary. The interruption of our journey won't invalidate
the ticket we have."

An hour later they reached New York.

"What are your plans, Rodney?" asked Adin Woods, who by this time had
become quite intimate with his young companion.

"I shall call on my guardian, and perhaps he may give me some advice as
to what I do. Where would you advise me to go--to a hotel?"

"No; it will be too expensive. I know of a plain boarding house on West
Fourteenth Street where you can be accommodated with lodging and two
meals--breakfast and supper, or dinner as we call it here--for a dollar
a day."

"I shall be glad to go there, for the present, at least. I haven't much
money, and must find something to do as soon as possible."

"We will both go there, and if you don't object we will take a room
together. That will give us a larger apartment. Mrs. Marcy is an old
acquaintance of mine, and will give you a welcome."

Rodney was glad to accept his companion's proposal. They proceeded at
once to the boarding house, and fortunately found a good room vacant on
the third floor. Mr. Woods went out in the evening to make a call, but
Rodney was glad to go to bed at nine o'clock.

The next morning after breakfast Rodney consulted his companion as to
what he should do with the casket.

"Do you want to raise money on it?" asked the agent.

"No; I shall not do this unless I am obliged to."

"Have you any idea as to the value of the jewels?"

"No."

"Then I will take you first to a jeweler in Maiden Lane, a friend of
mine, who will appraise them. Afterwards I advise you to deposit the
casket at a storage warehouse, or get Tiffany to keep it for you."

"I will do as you suggest."

Maiden Lane is a street largely devoted to jewelers, wholesale and
retail. Rodney followed Mr. Woods into a store about midway between
Broadway and Nassau Street. A pleasant looking man of middle age greeted
the agent cordially.

"What can I do for you?" he asked. "Do you wish to buy a diamond ring
for the future Mrs. Woods?"

"Not much. I would like to have you appraise some jewelry belonging to
my young friend here."

The casket was opened, and the jeweler examined the contents admiringly.

"This is choice jewelry," he said. "Does your friend wish to sell?"

"Not at present," answered Rodney.

"When you do give me a call. I will treat you fairly. You wish me to
appraise these articles?"

"Yes, sir, if you will."

"It will take me perhaps fifteen minutes."

The jeweler retired to the back part of the store with the casket.

In about a quarter of an hour he returned.

"Of course I can't give exact figures," he said, "but I value the
jewelry at about twelve hundred dollars."

Rodney looked surprised.

"I didn't think it so valuable," he said.

"I don't mean that you could sell it for so much, but if you wish to
dispose of it I will venture to give you eleven hundred."

"Thank you. If I decide to sell I will certainly come to you."

"Now," said the agent, "I advise you on the whole to store the casket
with Tiffany."

"Shall I have to pay storage in advance?" asked Rodney anxiously.

"I think not. The value of the jewels will be a sufficient guarantee
that storage will be paid."

Rodney accompanied Adin Woods to the great jewelry store on the corner
of Fifteenth Street and Union Square, and soon transacted his business.

"Now, you won't have any anxiety as to the safety of the casket," said
the agent. "Your friend of the train will find it difficult to get hold
of the jewels. Now I shall have to leave you, as I have some business to
attend to. We will meet at supper."

Rodney decided to call at the office of his late guardian, Benjamin
Fielding. It was in the lower part of the city.

On his way down town he purchased a copy of a morning paper. Almost the
first article he glanced at proved to be of especial interest to him. It
was headed--


SKIPPED TO CANADA

Rumors have been rife for some time affecting the business standing of
Mr. Benjamin Fielding, the well known commission merchant. Yesterday
it was discovered that he had left the city, but where he has gone is
unknown. It is believed that he is very deeply involved, and seeing no
way out of his embarrassment has skipped to Canada, or perhaps taken
passage to Europe. Probably his creditors will appoint a committee to
look into his affairs and report what can be done.

LATER--An open letter has been found in Mr. Fielding's desk, addressed
to his creditors. It expresses regret for their losses, and promises,
if his life is spared, and fortune favors him, to do all in his power to
make them good. No one doubts Mr. Fielding's integrity, and regrets are
expressed that he did not remain in the city and help unravel the tangle
in which his affairs are involved. He is a man of ability, and as he is
still in the prime of life, it may be that he will be able to redeem his
promises and pay his debts in full, if sufficient time is given him.


"I can get no help or advice from Mr. Fielding," thought Rodney. "I am
thrown upon my own resources, and must fight the battle of life as well
as I can alone."

He got out in front of the Astor House. As he left the car he soiled his
shoes with the mud so characteristic of New York streets.

"Shine your boots?" asked a young Arab, glancing with a business eye at
Rodney's spattered shoes.

Rodney accepted his offer, not so much because he thought the blacking
would last, as for the opportunity of questioning the free and
independent young citizen who was doing, what he hoped to do, that is,
making a living for himself.

"Is business good with you?" asked Rodney. "It ought to be with the
street in this condition."

"Yes; me and de Street Commissioner is in league together. He makes
business good for me."

"And do you pay him a commission?" asked Rodney smiling.

"I can't tell no official secrets. It might be bad for me."

"You are an original genius."

"Am I? I hope you ain't callin' me names."

"Oh no. I am only paying you a compliment. What is your name?"

"Mike Flynn."

"Were do you live, Mike?"

"At the Lodge."

"I suppose you mean at the Newsboys' 'Lodge?'"

"Yes."

"How much do you have to pay there?"

