speaking to himself.

"I don't know why I did it," he said.  "But the thing had to be done."

In the street he turned into he came upon the robbed girl, running,
panting, and crying.  She uttered a shout and flung herself upon him,
clutching his coat.

"Gawd!" she sobbed hysterically, "I thort I'd lost yer!  I thort I'd
lost all of it, I did!  Strewth!  I 'm glad I've found yer--" and she
stopped, choking with her sobs and sniffs, rubbing her face in her sack.

"Here is your sovereign," Dart said, handing it to her.

She dropped the corner of the sack and looked up with a queer laugh.

"Did yer find a copper?  Did yer give him in charge?"

"No," answered Dart.  "He was worse off than you.  He was starving. I
took this from him; but I gave him some money and told him to meet us at
Apple Blossom Court."

She stopped short and drew back a pace to stare up at him.

"Well," she gave forth, "y' ARE a queer one!"

And yet in the amazement on her face he perceived a remote dawning of an
understanding of the meaning of the thing he had done.

He had spoken like a man in a dream.  He felt like a man in a dream,
being led in the thick mist from place to place.  He was led back to the
coffee-stand, where now Barney, the proprietor, was pouring out coffee
for a hoarse-voiced coster girl with a draggled feather in her hat, who
greeted their arrival hilariously.

"Hello, Glad!" she cried out. "Got yer suvrink back?"

Glad--it seemed to be the creature's wild name--nodded, but held close
to her companion's side, clutching his coat.

"Let's go in there an' change it," she said, nodding toward a small pork
and ham shop near by.  "An' then yer can take care of it for me."

"What did she call you?"  Antony Dart asked her as they went.

"Glad.  Don't know as I ever 'ad a nime o' me own, but a little cove as
went once to the pantermine told me about a young lady as was Fairy
Queen an' 'er name was Gladys Beverly St. John, so I called mesself
that. No one never said it all at onct--they don't never say nothin'
but Glad.  I'm glad enough this mornin'," chuckling again, "'avin' the
luck to come up with you, mister. Never had luck like it 'afore."

They went into the pork and ham shop and changed the sovereign. There
was cooked food in the windows--roast pork and boiled ham and corned
beef.  She bought slices of pork and beef, and of suet-pudding with a
few currants sprinkled through it.

"Will yer 'elp me to carry it?" she inquired.  "I'll 'ave to get a few
pen'worth o' coal an' wood an' a screw o' tea an' sugar.  My wig, wot a
feed me an' Polly'll 'ave!"

As they returned to the coffee-stand she broke more than once into a
hop of glee.  Barney had changed his mind concerning her.  A solid
sovereign which must be changed and a companion whose shabby gentility
was absolute grandeur when compared with his present surroundings made a
difference.

She received her mug of coffee and thick slice of bread and dripping
with a grin, and swallowed the hot sweet liquid down in ecstatic gulps.

"Ain't I in luck?" she said, handing her mug back when it was empty.
"Gi' me another, Barney."

Antony Dart drank coffee also and ate bread and dripping.  The coffee
was hot and the bread and dripping, dashed with salt, quite eatable.  He
had needed food and felt the better for it.

"Come on, mister," said Glad, when their meal was ended.  "I want to get
back to Polly, an' there's coal and bread and things to buy."

She hurried him along, breaking her pace with hops at intervals.  She
darted into dirty shops and brought out things screwed up in paper.  She
went last into a cellar and returned carrying a small sack of coal over
her shoulders.

"Bought sack an' all," she said elatedly.  "A sack's a good thing to
'ave."

"Let me carry it for you," said Antony Dart

"Spile yer coat," with her sidelong upward glance.

"I don't care," he answered.  "I don't care a damn."

The final expletive was totally unnecessary, but it meant a thing he did
not say.  Whatsoever was thrusting him this way and that, speaking
through his speech, leading him to do things he had not dreamed of
doing, should have its will with him. He had been fastened to the skirts
of this beggar imp and he would go on to the end and do what was to be
done this day.  It was part of the dream.

The sack of coal was over his shoulder when they turned into Apple
Blossom Court.  It would have been a black hole on a sunny day, and now
it was like Hades, lit grimly by a gas-jet or two, small and flickering,
with the orange haze about them.  Filthy, flagging, murky doorways,
broken steps and broken windows stuffed with rags, and the smell of the
sewers let loose had Apple Blossom Court.

Glad, with the wealth of the pork and ham shop and other riches in her
arms, entered a repellent doorway in a spirit of great good cheer and
Dart followed her.  Past a room where a drunken woman lay sleeping with
her head on a table, a child pulling at her dress and crying, up a
stairway with broken balusters and breaking steps, through a landing,
upstairs again, and up still farther until they reached the top.  Glad
stopped before a door and shook the handle, crying out:

"'S only me, Polly.  You can open it."  She added to Dart in an
undertone:  "She 'as to keep it locked. No knowin' who'd want to get in.
Polly," shaking the door-handle again, "Polly's only me."

The door opened slowly.  On the other side of it stood a girl with a
dimpled round face which was quite pale; under one of her childishly
vacant blue eyes was a discoloration, and her curly fair hair was tucked
up on the top of her head in a knot. As she took in the fact of Antony
Dart's presence her chin began to quiver.

"I ain't fit to--to see no one," she stammered pitifully.  "Why did you,
Glad--why did you?"

"Ain't no 'arm in 'IM," said Glad. "'E's one o' the friendly ones.  'E
give me a suvrink.  Look wot I've got," hopping about as she showed her
parcels.

"You need not be afraid of me," Antony Dart said.  He paused a second,
staring at her, and suddenly added, "Poor little wretch!"

Her look was so scared and uncertain a thing that he walked away from
her and threw the sack of coal on the hearth.  A small grate with broken
bars hung loosely in the fireplace, a battered tin kettle tilted
drunkenly near it.  A mattress, from the holes in whose ticking straw
bulged, lay on the floor in a corner, with some old sacks thrown over
it. Glad had, without doubt, borrowed her shoulder covering from the
collection.  The garret was as cold as the grave, and almost as dark;
the fog hung in it thickly.  There were crevices enough through which it
could penetrate.

Antony Dart knelt down on the hearth and drew matches from his pocket.

"We ought to have brought some paper," he said.

Glad ran forward.

"Wot a gent ye are!" she cried. "Y' ain't never goin' to light it?"

"Yes."

She ran back to the rickety table and collected the scraps of paper
which had held her purchases. They were small, but useful.

"That wot was round the sausage an' the puddin's greasy," she exulted.

Polly hung over the table and trembled at the sight of meat and bread.
Plainly, she did not understand what was happening.  The greased paper
set light to the wood, and the wood to the coal.  All three flared and
blazed with a sound of cheerful crackling.  The blaze threw out its glow
as finely as if it had been set alight to warm a better place. The
wonder of a fire is like the wonder of a soul.  This one changed the
murk and gloom to brightness, and the deadly damp and cold to warmth.
It drew the girl Polly from the table despite her fears. She turned
involuntarily, made two steps toward it, and stood gazing while its
light played on her face. Glad whirled and ran to the hearth.

"Ye've put on a lot," she cried; "but, oh, my Gawd, don't it warm yer!
Come on, Polly--come on."

She dragged out a wooden stool, an empty soap-box, and bundled the sacks
into a heap to be sat upon.  She swept the things from the table and set
them in their paper wrappings on the floor.

"Let's all sit down close to it--close," she said, "an' get warm an'
eat, an' eat."

She was the leaven which leavened the lump of their humanity.  What this
leaven is--who has found out? But she--little rat of the gutter--was
formed of it, and her mere pure animal joy in the temporary animal
comfort of the moment stirred and uplifted them from their depths.

III

They drew near and sat upon the substitutes for seats in a circle--and
the fire threw up flame and made a glow in the fog hanging in the black
hole of a room.

It was Glad who set the battered kettle on and when it boiled made tea.
The other two watched her, being under her spell.  She handed out slices
of bread and sausage and pudding on bits of paper.  Polly fed with
tremulous haste; Glad herself with rejoicing and exulting in flavors.
Antony Dart ate bread and meat as he had eaten the bread and dripping at
the stall--accepting his normal hunger as part of the dream.

Suddenly Glad paused in the midst of a huge bite.

"Mister," she said, "p'raps that cove's waitin' fer yer.  Let's 'ave 'im
in.  I'll go and fetch 'im."

She was getting up, but Dart was on his feet first.

"I must go," he said.  "He is expecting me and--"

"Aw," said Glad, "lemme go along o' yer, mister--jest to show there's no
ill feelin'."

"Very well," he answered.

It was she who led, and he who followed.  At the door she stopped and
looked round with a grin.

"Keep up the fire, Polly," she threw back.  "Ain't it warm and cheerful?
It'll do the cove good to see it."

She led the way down the black, unsafe stairway.  She always led.

Outside the fog had thickened again, but she went through it as if she
could see her way.

At the entrance to the court the thief was standing, leaning against the
wall with fevered, unhopeful waiting in his eyes.  He moved miserably
when he saw the girl, and she called out to reassure him.

"I ain't up to no 'arm," she said; "I on'y come with the gent."

Antony Dart spoke to him.

"Did you get food?"

The man shook his head.

"I turned faint after you left me, and when I came to I was afraid I
might miss you," he answered.  "I daren't lose my chance.  I bought some
bread and stuffed it in my pocket.  I've been eating it while I've stood
here."

"Come back with us," said Dart. "We are in a place where we have some
food."

He spoke mechanically, and was aware that he did so.  He was a pawn
pushed about upon the board of this day's life.

"Come on," said the girl.  "Yer can get enough to last fer three days."

She guided them back through the fog until they entered the murky
doorway again.  Then she almost ran up the staircase to the room they
