the column of accidents, casualties, etc., and her spirits were visibly
exhilarated when she encountered a familiar name in either list.

Mr. Crump continued to look out for work, but it was with a more
cheerful spirit. He did not now feel as if the comfort of his family
depended absolutely upon his immediate success. Used economically, the
money he had by him would last nine months, and during that time it was
impossible that he should not find something to do. It was this sense
of security--of possessing something upon which he could fall back--that
enabled him to keep up good heart. It is too generally the case that
people are content to live as if they were sure of constantly retaining
their health and never losing their employment. When a reverse does come
they are at once plunged into discouragement, and feel that something
must be done immediately. There is only one way to fend off such an
embarrassment, and that is to resolve, whatever may be the amount of
the income, to lay aside some part to serve as a reliance in time of
trouble. A little economy--though it involves privation--will be well
repaid by the feeling of security thus engendered.

Mr. Crump was not compelled to remain inactive as long as he feared. Not
that his line of business revived,--that still remained depressed,--but
another path was opened to him for a time.

Returning home late one evening, the cooper saw a man steal out from
a doorway, and assault a gentleman whose dress and general appearance
indicated probable wealth. Seizing him by the throat, the villain
effectually prevented him from calling the police, and was engaged in
rifling his pockets when the cooper arrived at the scene. A sudden blow
on the side of the head admonished the robber that he had more than one
to deal with.

"Leave this man instantly," said the cooper, sternly, "or I will deliver
you into the hands of the police."

The villain hesitated, but fear prevailed, and springing to his feet, he
hastily made off under cover of the darkness.

"I hope you have received no injury," said Timothy, respectfully,
turning towards the stranger he had rescued.

"No, my worthy friend, thanks to your timely assistance. The rascal
nearly succeeded, however."

"I hope you have lost nothing, sir."

"Nothing, fortunately. You can form an idea of the value of your
interference, when I say that I have fifteen hundred dollars with me,
all of which I should undoubtedly have lost."

"I am glad," said the cooper, "that I was able to do you such essential
service. It was by the merest chance that I came this way."

"Will you add to my indebtedness by accompanying me with that trusty
club of yours? I have some little distance yet to go, and the amount
of money I have with me makes me feel desirous of taking every possible
precaution."

"Willingly," said the cooper.

"But I am forgetting," said the gentleman, "that you yourself will be
obliged to return alone."

"I do not carry enough money to make me fear an attack," said Mr. Crump,
laughing. "Money brings care I have always heard, and now I realize it."

"Yet most people are willing to take their chance of that," said the
merchant.

"You are right, sir, nor can I call myself an exception. Still I should
be satisfied with the certainty of constant employment."

"I hope you have that, at least."

"I have had until recently."

"Then, at present, you are unemployed?"

"Yes, sir."

"What is your business?"

"That of a cooper."

"I must see what I can do for you. Can you call at my office to-morrow,
say at twelve o'clock?"

"I shall be glad to do so, sir."

"I believe I have a card with me. Yes, here is one. And this is my
house. Thank you for your company, my good friend. I shall see you
to-morrow."

They stood before a handsome dwelling-house, from whose windows, draped
by heavy crimson curtains, a soft light proceeded. The cooper could hear
the ringing of childish voices welcoming home their father, whose
life, unknown to them, had been in such peril, and he could not but be
grateful to Providence that he had been the means of frustrating the
designs of the villain who would have robbed him, and perhaps done him
farther injury.

He determined to say nothing to his wife of the night's adventure until
after his meeting appointed for the next day. Then if any advantage
accrued to him from it, he would tell the whole at once.

When he reached home, Mrs. Crump was sewing beside the fire. Aunt
Rachel sat with her hands folded in her lap, with an air of martyr-like
resignation to the woes of life.

"I've brought you home a paper, Aunt Rachel," said the cooper,
cheerfully. "You may find something interesting in it."

"I sha'n't be able to read it this evening," said Rachel, mournfully.
"My eyes have troubled me lately. I feel that it is more than probable
that I am growing blind. But I trust I shall not live to be a burden to
you. Your prospects are dark enough without that."

"Don't trouble yourself with any fears of that sort, Rachel," said the
cooper, cheerily. "I think I know what will enable you to use your eyes
as well as ever."

"What?" asked Rachel, with melancholy curiosity.

"A pair of spectacles," said her brother, incautiously.

"Spectacles!" retorted Rachel, indignantly. "It will be a good many
years before I am old enough to wear spectacles. I didn't expect to be
insulted by my own brother. But it's one of my trials."

"I didn't mean to hurt your feelings, Rachel," said the cooper,
perplexed.

"Good night," said Rachel, rising and taking a small lamp from the
table.

"Come, Rachel, don't go yet. It is early."

"After what you have said to me, Timothy, my self-respect will not
permit me to stay."

Rachel swept out of the room with something more than her customary
melancholy.

"I wish Rachel war'n't quite so contrary," said the cooper. "She turns
upon a body so sudden, it's hard to know how to take her. How's the
little girl, Mary?"

"She's been asleep ever since six o'clock."

"I hope you don't find her very much trouble. That all comes upon you,
while we have the benefit of the money."

"I don't think of that, Timothy. She is a sweet child, and I love her
almost as much as if she were my own. As for Jack, he perfectly idolizes
her."

"And how does Aunt Rachel look upon her?"

"I am afraid she will never be a favorite with Rachel."

"Rachel never took to children much. It isn't her way. Now, Mary, while
you are sewing, I will read you the news."



CHAPTER VI. WHAT THE ENVELOPE CONTAINED.



THE card which had been handed to Timothy Crump contained the name
of Thomas Merriam,----Wall Street. Punctually at twelve, the cooper
reported himself at the counting-room, and received a cordial welcome
from the merchant.

"I am glad to see you," he said. "I will come to business at once, as
I am particularly engaged this morning. Is there any way in which I can
serve you?"

"Not unless you can procure me a situation, sir."

"I think you told me you were a cooper."

"Yes sir."

"Does this yield you a good support?"

"In good times it pays me two dollars a day. Lately it has been
depressed, and for a time paid me but a dollar and a half."

"When do you anticipate its revival?"

"That is uncertain. It may be some months first."

"And, in the mean time, you are willing to undertake some other
employment?"

"Yes, sir. I have no objection to any honest employment."

Mr. Merriam reflected a moment.

"Just at present," he said, "I have nothing to offer except the post of
porter. If that will suit you, you can enter upon the duties to-morrow."

"I shall be very glad to take it, sir. Anything is better than
idleness."

"Your compensation shall be the same that you have been accustomed to
earn by your trade,--two dollars a day."

"I only received that in the best times," said Timothy, conscientiously.

"Your services will be worth it. I will expect you, then, to-morrow
morning at eight. You are married, I suppose?"

"Yes, sir. I am blessed with a good wife."

"I am glad of that. Stay a moment."

The merchant went to his desk, and presently returned with a scaled
envelope.

"Give that to your wife," he said.

The interview terminated, and the cooper went home, quite elated by his
success. His present engagement would enable him to bridge over the dull
time, and save him from incurring debt, of which he had a just horror.

"Just in time," said Mrs. Crump. "We've got an apple-pudding to-day."

"You haven't forgotten what I like, Mary."

"There's no knowing how long you will be able to afford puddings," said
Aunt Rachel. "To my mind it's extravagant to have meat and pudding both,
when a month hence you may be in the poor-house."

"Then," said Jack, "I wouldn't eat any."

"Oh, if you grudge me the little I eat," said his aunt, in severe
sorrow, "I will go without."

"Tut, Rachel, nobody grudges you anything here," said her brother, "and
as to the poor-house, I've got some good news to tell you that will put
that thought out of your heads."

"What is it?" asked Mrs. Crump, looking up brightly.

"I have found employment."

"Not at your trade?"

"No, but at something else, which will pay equally well, till trade
revives."

Here he told the story of the chance by which he was enabled to serve
Mr. Merriam, and of the engagement to which it had led.

"You are, indeed, fortunate," said Mrs. Crump. "Two dollars a day, and
we've got nearly the whole of the money that came with this dear child.
How rich we shall be!"

"Well, Rachel, where are your congratulations?" asked the cooper of his
sister, who, in subdued sorrow, was eating her second slice of pudding.

"I don't see anything so very fortunate in being engaged as a porter,"
said Rachel, lugubriously. "I heard of a porter, once, who had a great
box fall upon him and crush him; and another, who committed suicide."

The cooper laughed.

"So, Rachel, you conclude that one or the other is the inevitable lot of
all who are engaged in this business."

"It is always well to be prepared for the worst," said Rachel,
oracularly.

"But not to be always looking for it," said her brother.

"It'll come, whether you look for it or not," returned his sister,
sententiously.

"Then, suppose we spend no thoughts upon it, since, according to your
admission, it's sure to come either way."

Rachel pursued her knitting, in severe melancholy.

"Won't you have another piece of pudding, Timothy?" asked Mrs. Crump.

"I don't care if I do, Mary, it's so good," said the cooper, passing his
plate. "Seems to me it's the best pudding you ever made."

"You've got a good appetite, that is all," said Mrs. Crump, modestly.

"By the way, Mary," said the cooper, with a sudden thought, "I quite
forgot that I have something for you."

"For me?"

"Yes, from Mr. Merriam."

"But he don't know me," said Mrs. Crump, in surprise.

"At any rate, he asked me if I were married, and then handed me this
envelope for you. I am not quite sure whether I ought to allow gentlemen
to write letters to my wife."

Mrs. Crump opened the envelope with considerable curiosity, and uttered
an exclamation of surprise, as a bank-note fluttered to the carpet.

"By gracious, mother," said Jack, springing to get it, "you're in luck.
It's a hundred dollar bill."

"So it is, I declare," said Mrs. Crump, joyfully. "But, Timothy, it
isn't mine. It belongs to you."

"No, Mary, it shall be yours. I'll put it in the Savings Bank for you."

"Merriam's a trump, and no mistake," said Jack. "By the way, father,
when you see him again, won't you just insinuate that you have a son?
Ain't we in luck, Aunt Rachel?"

"'Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall,'"
said Rachel.
