"Come," said the wife. "What will ye take?"

"As it's you, I'll take off twenty-five cents," replied the clerk.

"And sell it to me for two dollars?" inquired his customer, who had good
cause for her inaccurate arithmetic.

"For two dollars and seventy-five cents."

"Two dollars and seventy-five cents! It's taking the bread out of the
childer's mouths you'd have us, paying such a price as that! I'll give
you two twenty-five, an' I'll be coming again some time."

"We couldn't take so low as two twenty-five, ma'am. You may have it for
two dollars and a half."

After another ineffectual attempt to get it for two dollars and a
quarter, the Irish woman finally offered two dollars and forty-five
cents, and this offer was accepted.

She pulled out a paper of change and counted out two dollars and forty
cents, when she declared that she had not another cent. But the clerk
understood her game and coolly proceeded to put the coat back on the
pile. Then the woman very opportunely found another five-cent piece
stored away in the corner of her pocket.

"It's robbin' me, ye are," said she as she paid it over.

"Oh, no, ma'am, you are getting a great bargain," answered the clerk.

Joe had witnessed the bargaining with a good deal of quiet amusement. As
soon as the Irish couple had gone the clerk came toward the boy.

"Well, young man, what can I do for you?" he asked, pleasantly.

"I want a suit of clothing. Not an expensive suit, but one guaranteed to
be all wool."

"A light or a dark suit?"

"A dark gray."

"I can fit you out in a fine suit of this order," and the clerk pointed
to several lying in a heap nearby.

"I don't want that sort. I want something on the order of those in the
window marked nine dollars and a half."

"Oh, all right."

Several suits were brought forth, and one was found that fitted Joe
exceedingly well.

"You guarantee this to be all wool?" asked the boy.

"Every thread of it."

"Then I'll take it."

"Very well; the price is twelve dollars."

"Isn't it like that in the window?"

"On that order, but a trifle better."

"It seems to me to be about the same suit. I'll give you nine dollars
and a half."

"I can't take it. I'll give it to you for eleven and a half. That is our
best figure."

"Then I'll go elsewhere for a suit," answered Joe, and started to leave
the clothing establishment.

"Hold on, don't be so fast!" cried the clerk, catching him by the arm.
"I'll make it eleven and a quarter."

"Not a cent more than the advertised price, nine and a half," replied
Joe, firmly.

"Oh, but this isn't the same suit."

"It's just like it, to my eye. But you needn't sell it for that if you
don't want it. Mason & Harris are offering some bargains, I believe."

"You can get a better bargain here than anywhere in this town, or in
Philadelphia either," answered the clerk, who did not intend to let his
prospective customer get away. "We'll make it an even eleven dollars and
say no more about it."

Instead of answering Joe started once more for the door.

"Hold on!"

"I haven't got time."

"Make it ten and a half. At that price we are losing exactly half a
dollar on that suit."

"Not a cent over what I offered."

"We can't sell suits at such a loss. It would ruin us."

"Then don't do it. I think Mason & Harris have some good suits very
cheap. And they are quite up-to-date, too," added Joe.

"Our suits are the best in town, young man. Take this one for an even
ten dollar bill."

"I will if you'll throw in one of those half dollar caps," answered our
hero.

"Well, have your own way, but it's a sacrifice," grumbled the clerk.

He wanted to wrap up the suit, but, afraid he might substitute something
else, Joe insisted upon donning the suit then and there and likewise the
new cap. Then he had the old articles of wearing apparel done up into a
bundle and paid over the ten dollars.

"You're pretty smart after a bargain," said the clerk.

"I've got to be--when I strike such fellows as you," was the reply.

"You got a better bargain than that Irish woman did."

"I did--if the suit is all wool. But if it's cotton, I'm stuck,"
returned our hero, and with his bundle under his arm he walked from the
store.

He had left his rowboat in charge of an old boatman named Ike Fairfield,
and now he walked down to the boathouse.

"Just in time, Joe," said the old boatman. "Want to earn a dollar?"

"To be sure I do," answered our hero.

"A party of ladies want a long row around the lake. You can have the
job."

"All right, Ike."

"I charged them a dollar and a quarter. I'll keep the quarter for my
commission."

"That is fair."

"One of the ladies said she wanted somebody that looked pretty decent. I
think you'll fill the bill with that new suit."

"I didn't expect to wear the suit out on the lake, but in this case I'll
keep it on," answered Joe.

"I find it pays to keep well dressed, when you take out the summer
boarders," answered the old boatman. "And it pays to keep the boats in
good shape, too."

"Where am I to get the party?"

"Over to the dock of Mallison's Hotel. One of the ladies is Mallison's
niece."

"Why don't they take a hotel boat?"

"All engaged, two days ago. It's a busy season. But I've got to be
going. You had better go over to the dock at once. They want to go out
at three o'clock sharp."

"Very well, I'll be on hand," answered our hero.



CHAPTER VI.


AN ACCIDENT ON THE LAKE.


Joe certainly presented a neat appearance when he rowed over to the
hotel dock. Before going he purchased a new collar and a dark blue tie,
and these, with his new suit and new cap, set him off very well.

The boat had been cleaned in the morning, and when the ladies appeared
they inspected the craft with satisfaction.

"What a nice clean boat," said Mabel Mallison, the niece of the
proprietor of the hotel.

"And a nice clean boatman, too," whispered one of her friends. "I
couldn't bear that man we had day before yesterday, with his dirty hands
and the tobacco juice around his mouth."

The ladies to go out were four in number, and two sat in the bow and two
in the stern. It made quite a heavy load, but as they were not out for
speed our hero did not mind it.

"We wish to go up to Fern Rock," said Mabel Mallison. "They tell me
there are some beautiful ferns to be gathered there."

"There are," answered Joe. "I saw them last week."

"And I wish to get some nice birch bark if I can," said another of the
ladies.

"I can get you plenty of it."

Joe rowed along in his best style, and while doing so the ladies of the
party asked him numerous questions concerning the lake and vicinity.
When Fern Rock was reached, all went ashore, and our hero pointed out
the ferns he had seen, and dug up such as the others wished to take
along. An hour was spent over the ferns, and in getting some birch bark,
and then they started on the return for the hotel.

"I'd like to row," cried one of the ladies, a rather plump personage.

"Oh, Jennie, I don't think you can!" cried another.

"Of course I can," answered Jennie, and sprang up from her seat to take
the oars.

"Be careful!" came in a warning from Joe, as the boat began to rock.

"Oh, I'm not afraid!" said the plump young lady, and leaned forward to
catch hold of one oar. Just then her foot slipped and she fell on the
gunwale, causing the boat to tip more than ever. As she did this, Mabel
Mallison, who was leaning over the side, gazing down into the clear
waters of the lake, gave a shriek.

"Oh, save me!" came from her, and then she went over, with a loud
splash.

Joe was startled, and the ladies left in the boat set up a wail of
terror.

"She will be drowned!"

"Oh, save her! Save her, somebody!"

"It is my fault!" shrieked the plump young lady. "I tipped the boat
over!"

Joe said nothing, but looked over the side of the boat. He saw the body
of Mabel Mallison not far away. But it was at the lake bottom and did
not offer to rise.

"It's queer she doesn't come up," he thought.

Then he gave a second look and saw that the dress of the unfortunate one
was caught in some sharp rocks. Without hesitation he dived overboard,
straight for the bottom.

It was no easy matter to unfasten the garment, which was caught in a
crack between two heavy stones. But at the second tug it came free, and
a moment later both our hero and Mabel Mallison came to the surface.

"Oh!" cried two of the ladies in the row-boat. "Is she drowned?"

"I trust not," answered Joe. "Sit still, please, or the boat will surely
go over."

As best he could Joe hoisted Mabel into the craft and then clambered in
himself. As he did so the unfortunate girl gave a gasp and opened her
eyes.

"Oh!" she murmured.

"You are safe now, Mabel!" said one of her companions.

"And to think it was my fault!" murmured the plump young lady. "I shall
never forgive myself as long as I live!"

Mabel Mallison had swallowed some water, but otherwise she was unhurt.
But her pretty blue dress was about ruined, and Joe's new suit did not
look near as well as it had when he had donned it.

"Let us row for the hotel," said one of the young ladies. "Are you all
right?" she asked of Joe.

"Yes, ma'am, barring the wetting."

"It was brave of you to go down after Mabel."

"Indeed it was!" cried that young lady. "If it hadn't been for you I
might have been drowned." And she gave a deep shudder.

"I saw she was caught and that's why I went over after her," answered
our hero simply. "It wasn't so much to do."

All dripping as he was, Joe caught up the oars of the boat and sent the
craft in the direction of the hotel at a good speed. That she might not
take cold, a shawl was thrown over Mabel's wet shoulders.

The arrival of the party at the hotel caused a mild sensation. Mabel
hurried to her room to put on dry clothing, and Joe was directed to go
around to the kitchen. But when the proprietor of the place had heard
what Joe had done for his niece he sent the lad to a private apartment
and provided him with dry clothing belonging to another who was of our
hero's size.

"That was a fine thing to do, young man," said the hotel proprietor,
when Joe appeared, dressed in the dry garments, and his own clothing had
been sent to the laundry to be dried and pressed.

"I'm glad I was there to do it, Mr. Mallison."

"Let me see, aren't you Hiram Bodley's boy?"

"I lived with Mr. Bodley, yes."

"That is what I mean. It was a terrible accident that killed him. Are
you still living at the tumbled-down cabin?"

"No, sir. I've just sold off the things, and I am going to settle in
town."

"Where?"

"I haven't decided that yet. I was going to hunt up a place when Ike
Fairfield gave me the job of rowing out the young ladies."

"I see. You own the boat, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

"You ought to be able to make a fair living, taking out summer
boarders."

"I suppose so, but that won't give me anything to do this winter."

"Well, perhaps something else will turn up by that time." Andrew
Mallison drew out a fat wallet. "I want to reward you for saving Mabel."

He drew out two ten-dollar bills and held them towards our hero. But Joe
shook his head and drew back.

"Thank you very much, Mr. Mallison, but I don't want any reward."

"But you have earned it fairly, my lad."

"I won't touch it. If you want to help me you can throw some odd rowing
jobs from the hotel in my way."

"Then you won't really touch the money?"

"No, sir."

"How would you like to work for the hotel regularly?"

"I'd like it first-rate if it paid."

"I can guarantee you regular work so long as the summer season lasts."

"And what would it pay?"

"At least a dollar a day, and your board."

"Then I'll accept and with thanks for your kindness."

"When can you come?"

"I'm here already."

"That means that you can stay from now on?"

"Yes, sir."

"I don't suppose you want the job of hauling somebody from the lake
every day," said Andrew Mallison, with a smile.

"Not unless I was dressed for it, Mr. Mallison. Still, it has been the
means of getting me a good position."

"I shall feel safe in sending out parties with you for I know you will
do your best to keep them from harm."

"I'll certainly do that, I can promise you."
