of the great green leaves of the fern. Peter gave a great sigh. Then he
remembered how rude he had been to stare so.

"I--I beg your pardon," said Peter in his politest manner, which is very
polite indeed, for Peter can be very polite when he wants to be. "I beg
your pardon. I didn't mean to frighten you. Please forgive me."

With the greatest eagerness Peter waited for a reply. You know it was
because he had been so lonesome that he had left his home in the dear
Old Briar-patch on the Green Meadows. And since he had been in the Old
Pasture he had been almost as lonesome, for he had had no one to talk
to. So now he waited eagerly for a reply. You see, he felt sure that
the owner of such soft, gentle eyes must have a soft, gentle voice and a
soft, gentle heart, and there was nothing in the world that Peter needed
just then so much as sympathy. But though he waited and waited, there
wasn't a sound from the big fern.

"Perhaps you don't know who I am. I'm Peter Rabbit, and I've come up
here from the Green Meadows, and I'd like very much to be your friend,"
continued Peter after a while. Still there was no sound. Peter peeped
from the corner of one eye at the place where he had seen the two soft,
gentle eyes, but there was nothing to be seen but the gently waving leaf
of the big fern. Peter didn't know just what to do. He wanted to hop
over to the big fern and peep behind it, but he didn't dare to. He was
afraid that whoever was hiding there would run away.

"I'm very lonesome; won't you speak to me?" said Peter, in his gentlest
voice, and he sighed a deep, doleful sort of sigh. Still there was no
reply. Peter had just about made up his mind that he would go over to
the big fern when he saw those two soft, gentle eyes peeping from under
a different leaf. It seemed to Peter that never in all his life had he
seen such beautiful eyes. They looked so shy and bashful that Peter held
his breath for fear that he would frighten them away.

After a time the eyes disappeared. Then Peter saw a little movement
among the ferns, and he knew that whoever was there was stealing away.
He wanted to follow, but something down inside him warned him that It
was best to sit still. So Peter sat just where he was and kept perfectly
still for the longest time.

But the eyes didn't appear again, and at last he felt sure that whoever
they belonged to had really gone away. Then he sighed another great
sigh, for suddenly he felt more lonesome than ever. He hopped over
to the big fern and looked behind it. There in the soft earth was a
footprint, the footprint of a Rabbit, and it was SMALLER than his own.
It seemed to Peter that it was the most wonderful little footprint he
ever had seen.

"I believe," said Peter right out loud, "that I'll change my mind. I
won't go back to the dear Old Briar-patch just yet, after all."




CHAPTER XII

PETER LEARNS SOMETHING FEOM TOMMY TIT


 When you find a friend in trouble
   Pass along a word of cheer.
 Often it is very helpful
   Just to feel a friend is near.
                              Peter Rabbit.

"Hello, Peter Rabbit! What are you doing way up here, and what are you
looking so mournful about?"

Peter gave a great start of pleased surprise. That was the first
friendly voice he had heard for days and days.

"Hello yourself, Tommy Tit!" shouted Peter joyously. "My, my, my, but
I am glad to see you! But what are you doing up here in the Old Pasture
yourself?"

Tommy Tit the Chickadee hung head down from the tip of a slender branch
of a maple-tree and winked a saucy bright eye at Peter. "I've got a
secret up here," he said.

Now there is nothing in the world Peter Rabbit loves more than a secret.
But he cannot keep one to save him. No, Sir, Peter Rabbit can no more
keep a secret than he can fly. He means to. His intentions are the very
best in the world, but--

Alas! alack! poor Peter's tongue Is very, very loosely hung. And so,
because he MUST talk and WILL talk every chance he gets, he cannot keep
a secret. People who talk too much never can.

"What is your secret?" asked Peter eagerly.

Tommy Tit looked down at Peter, and his sharp little eyes twinkled.
"It's a nest with six of the dearest little babies in the world in it,"
he replied.

"Oh, how lovely!" cried Peter. "Where is it, Tommy Tit?"

"In a hollow birch-stub," replied Tommy, his eyes twinkling more than
ever.

"But where is the hollow birch-stub?" persisted Peter.

Tommy laughed. "That's my real secret," said he, "and if I should tell
you it wouldn't be a secret at all. Now tell me what you are doing up
here in the Old Pasture, Peter Rabbit."

Peter saw that it was of no use to tease Tommy Tit for his secret, so
instead he poured out all his own troubles. He told how lonesome he had
been in the dear Old Briar-patch on the Green Meadows because he didn't
dare to go about for fear of Old Man Coyote, and how at last he had
decided to visit the Old Pasture. He told how Hooty the Owl had nearly
caught him on his way, and then how, ever since his arrival, he had been
hunted by the big, gray, old Rabbit so that he could neither eat nor
sleep and had become so miserable that at last he had made up his mind
to go back to the dear Old Briar-patch.

"Ho!" interrupted Tommy Tit, "I know him. He's Old Jed Thumper, the
oldest, biggest, crossest Rabbit anywhere around. He's lived in the Old
Pasture so long that he thinks he owns it. It's a wonder that he hasn't
killed you."

"I guess perhaps he would have only I can run faster than he can,"
replied Peter, looking a little shamefaced because he had to own up that
he ran away instead of fighting.

Tommy Tit laughed. "That's the very wisest thing you could have done,"
said he. "But why don't you go back to the dear Old Briar-patch in the
Green Meadows?"

Peter hesitated and looked a wee bit foolish. Finally he told Tommy
Tit all about the two soft, gentle eyes he had seen peeping at him from
behind a big fern, and how he wanted to know who the eyes belonged to.

"If that's all you want to know, I can tell you," said Tommy Tit,
jumping out into the air to catch a foolish little bug who tried to
fly past. "Those eyes belong to little Miss Fuzzy-tail, and she's the
favorite daughter of Old Jed Thumper. You take my advice, Peter Rabbit,
and trot along home to the Old Briar-patch before you get into any
more trouble. There's my wife calling. Yes, my dear, I'm coming!
Chickadee-dee-dee!"

And with a wink and a nod to Peter Rabbit, off flew Tommy Tit.




CHAPTER XIII

LITTLE MISS FUZZYTAIL


Foolish questions waste time, but wise questions lead to knowledge.
--Peter Rabbit.

"Little Miss Fuzzytail!" Peter said it over and over again, as he sat on
the sunning-bank in the far corner of the Old Pasture, where Tommy Tit
the Chickadee had left him.

"It's a pretty name," said Peter. "Yes, Sir, it's a pretty name. It's
the prettiest name I've ever heard. I wonder if she is just as pretty.
I--I--think she must be. Yes, I am quite sure she must be." Peter was
thinking of the soft, gentle eyes he had seen peeping at him from behind
the big fern, and of the dainty little footprint he had found there
afterward. So he sat on the sunning-bank, dreaming pleasant dreams and
wondering if he could find little Miss Fuzzytail if he should go look
for her.

Now all the time, although Peter didn't know it, little Miss Fuzzytail
was very close by. She was right back in her old hiding-place behind the
big fern, shyly peeping out at him from under a great leaf, where she
was sure he wouldn't see her. She saw the long tears in Peter's coat,
made by the cruel claws of Hooty the Owl, and she saw the places where
her father, Old Jed Thumper, had pulled the hair out with his teeth. She
saw how thin and miserable Peter looked, and tears of pity filled the
soft, gentle eyes of little Miss Fuzzytail, for, you see, she had a very
tender heart.

"He's got a very nice face," thought Miss Fuzzytail, "and he certainly
was very polite, and I do love good manners. And Peter is such a nice
sounding name! It sounds so honest and good and true. Poor fellow! Poor
Peter Rabbit!" Here little Miss Fuzzytail wiped her eyes. "He looks so
miserable I do wish I could do something for him. I--I--oh, dear, I do
believe he is coming right over here! I guess I better be going. How he
limps!"

Once more the tears filled her soft, gentle eyes as she stole away,
making not the least little sound. When she was sure she was far enough
away to hurry without attracting Peter's attention, she began to run.

"I saw him talking to my old friend Tommy Tit the Chickadee, and I
just know that Tommy will tell me all about him," she thought, as she
scampered along certain private little paths of her own.

Just as she expected, she found Tommy Tit and his anxious little wife,
Phoebe, very busy hunting for food for six hungry little babies snugly
hidden in a hollow near the top of the old birch-stub. Tommy was too
busy to talk then, so little Miss Fuzzytail sat down under a friendly
bramble-bush to rest and wait, and while she waited, she carefully
washed her face and brushed her coat until it fairly shone. You see, not
in all the Old Pasture, or the Green Forest, was there so slim and trim
and neat and dainty a Rabbit as little Miss Fuzzytail, and she was very,
very particular about her appearance.

By and by, Tommy Tit stopped to rest. He looked down at Miss Fuzzytail
and winked a saucy black eye. Miss Fuzzytail winked back. Then both
laughed, for they were very good friends, indeed.

"Tell me, Tommy Tit, all about Peter Rabbit," commanded little Miss
Fuzzytail. And Tommy did.




CHAPTER XIV

SOME ONE FOOLS OLD JED THUMPER


     You cannot judge a person's temper by his size.
     There is more meanness in the head of a Weasel
     than in the whole of a Bear.
     --Peter Rabbit.

Old Jed Thumper sat in his bull-briar castle in the middle of the Old
Pasture, scowling fiercely and muttering to himself. He was very angry,
was Old Jed Thumper. He was so angry that presently he stopped muttering
and began to chew rapidly on nothing at all but his temper, which is a
way angry Rabbits have.

The more he chewed his temper, the angrier he grew. He was big and stout
and strong and gray. He had lived so long in the Old Pasture that he
felt that it belonged to him and that no other Rabbit had any right
there unless he said so. Yet here was a strange Rabbit who had had the
impudence to come up from the Green Meadows and refused to be driven
away. Such impudence!

Of course it was Peter Rabbit of whom Old Jed Thumper was thinking. It
was two days since he had caught a glimpse of Peter, but he knew that
Peter was still in the Old Pasture, for he had found fresh tracks each
day. That very morning he had visited his favorite feeding ground, only
to find Peter's tracks there. It had made him so angry that he had lost
his appetite, and he had gone straight back to his bull-briar castle to
think it over. At last Old Jed Thumper stopped chewing on his temper. He
scowled more fiercely than ever and stamped the ground impatiently.

"I'll hunt that fellow till I kill him, or drive him so far from the
Old Pasture that he'll never think of coming back. I certainly will!" he
said aloud, and started forth to hunt.

Now it would have been better for the plans of Old Jed Thumper if he had
kept them to himself instead of speaking aloud. Two dainty little ears
heard what he said, and two soft, gentle eyes watched him leave the
bull-briar castle. He started straight for the far corner of the Old
Pasture where, although he didn't know it, Peter Rabbit had found a warm
little sunning-bank. But he hadn't gone far when, from way off in the
opposite direction, he heard a sound that made him stop short and prick
up his long ears to listen. There it was again--thump, thump! He was
just going to thump back an angry reply, when he thought better of it.

"If do that," thought he, "I'll only warn him, and he'll run away, just
as he has before."

So instead, he turned and hurried in the direction from which the thumps
had come, taking the greatest care to make no noise. Every few jumps he
would stop to listen. Twice more he heard those thumps, and each time
new rage filled his heart, and for a minute or two he chewed his temper.

"He's down at my blueberry-patch," he muttered.

At last he reached the blueberry-patch. Very softly he crept to a place
where he could see and not be seen. No one was there. No, Sir, no one
was there! He waited and watched, and there wasn't a hair of Peter
Rabbit to be seen. He was just getting ready to go look for Peter's
tracks when he heard that thump, thump again. This time it came from his
favorite clover-patch where he never allowed even his favorite daughter,
little Miss Fuzzytail, to go. Anger nearly choked him as he hurried in
that direction. But when he got there, just as before no one was to be
seen.

So, all the morning long, Old Jed Thumper hurried from one place to
another and never once caught sight of Peter Rabbit. Can you guess why?
Well, the reason was that all the time Peter was stretched out on his
warm sunning-bank getting the rest he so much needed. It was some one
else who was fooling Old Jed Thumper.




CHAPTER XV

A PLEASANT SURPRISE FOR PETER


 Sticks will break and sticks will bend,
 And all things bad will have an end.
                                     Peter Rabbit.

All morning, while someone was fooling Old Jed Thumper, the cross old
Rabbit who thought he owned the Old Pasture, Peter Rabbit lay stretched
out on the warm little sunning-bank, dreaming of soft, gentle eyes and
beautiful little footprints. It was a dangerous place to go to sleep,
