the hair on his neck rise as it always did when he heard that hiss,
and he wasn't at all surprised, when he turned his head, to find Mr.
Blacksnake close by. Mr. Blacksnake glided swiftly up to the old log and
coiled himself in front of the opening. Then he raised his head and ran
out his tongue in the most impudent way.

"Run along, Johnny Chuck! I've decided to sleep here myself to-night!"
he said sharply.

Now when Johnny Chuck was a very little fellow, he had been in great
fear of Mr. Blacksnake, as he had had reason to be. And because he
didn't know any better, he had been afraid ever since. Mr. Blacksnake
knew this and so now he looked as ugly as he knew how. But you see he
didn't know about the great fight that Johnny Chuck had just won.

Now to win an honest fight always makes one feel very strong and very
sure of oneself. Johnny looked at Mr. Blacksnake and saw that Mr.
Blacksnake didn't look half as big as Johnny had always thought he did.
He made up his mind that as he had found the old log first, he had the
best right to it.

"I found it first and I'm going to keep it!" snapped Johnny Chuck,
and with every hair on end and gritting his teeth, he walked straight
towards Mr. Blacksnake.

Now Mr. Blacksnake is a great bluffer, while at heart he is really a
coward. With a fierce hiss he rushed right at Johnny Chuck, expecting
to see him turn tail and run. But Johnny stood his ground and showed all
his sharp teeth. Instead of attacking Johnny, Mr. Blacksnake glided past
him and sneaked away through the grass.

Johnny Chuck chuckled as he crept into the hollow log.

"Only a coward runs away without fighting," he murmured sleepily.




IX. ANOTHER STRANGE CHUCK


Johnny Chuck awoke just as jolly, round, red Mr. Sun pulled his own
nightcap off. At first Johnny couldn't think where he was. He blinked
and blinked. Then he rolled over. "Ouch!" cried Johnny Chuck. You see he
was so stiff and sore from his great fight the day before, that it hurt
to roll over. But when he felt the smart of those wounds, he remembered
where he was. He was in the old hollow log that he had found on the edge
of the Green Meadows just before dark. It was the first time that Johnny
had ever slept anywhere, excepting underground, and as he lay blinking
his eyes, it seemed very strange and rather nice, too.

"Well, well, well! What are you doing here?" cried a sharp voice.

Johnny Chuck looked towards the open end of the old log. There, peeping
in, was a little face as sharp as the voice.

"Hello, Chatterer!" cried Johnny.

"I say, what are you doing here?" persisted Chatterer the Red Squirrel,
for it was he.

"Just waking up," replied Johnny, with a grin.

"It's time," replied Chatterer. "But that isn't telling me what you are
doing so far from home."

"I haven't any home," said Johnny, his face growing just a wee bit
wistful.

"You haven't any home!" Chatterer's voice sounded as if he didn't think
he had heard aright. "What have you done with it?"

"Given it to Jimmy Skunk," replied Johnny Chuck.

Now Chatterer never gives anything to anybody, and how any one could
give away his home was more than he could understand. He stared at
Johnny as if he thought Johnny had gone crazy. Finally he found his
tongue. "I don't believe it!" he snapped. "If Jimmy Skunk has got your
old home, it's because he put you out of it."

"No such thing! I'd like to see Jimmy Skunk or anybody else put me out
of my home!" Johnny Chuck spoke scornfully. "I gave it to him because
I didn't want it any longer. I'm going to see the world, and then I'm
going to build me a new home. Everybody else seems to be building new
homes this spring; why shouldn't I?"

"I'm not!" retorted Chatterer. "I know enough to know when I am well
off.

    "Who has a discontented heart
     Is sure to play a sorry part."

Johnny Chuck crawled out of the old log and stretched himself somewhat
painfully. "That may be, but there are different kinds of discontent.

     Who never looks for better things
     Will live his life in little rings.

Well, I must be moving along, if I am to see the world." So Johnny Chuck
bade Chatterer good-by and started on. It was very delightful to wander
over the Green Meadows on such a beautiful spring morning. The violets
and the wind-flowers nodded to him, and the dandelions smiled up at him.
Johnny almost forgot his torn clothes and the bites and scratches of his
great fight with the gray old Chuck the day before. It was fun to just
go where he pleased and not have a care in the world.

He was thinking of this, as he sat up to look over the Green Meadows.
His heart gave a great throb. What was that over near the lone elm-tree?
It was--yes, it certainly was another Chuck! Could it be the old gray
Chuck come back for another fight? A great anger filled the heart of
Johnny Chuck, and he whistled sharply. The strange Chuck didn't answer.
Johnny ground his teeth and started for the lone elm-tree. He would show
this other Chuck who was master of the Green Meadows!




X. WHY JOHNNY CHUCK DIDN'T FIGHT


     Anger is an awful thing;
     It never stops to reason.
     It boils right over all at once,
     No matter what the season.

It was so with Johnny Chuck. The minute he caught sight of the strange
Chuck over by the lone elm-tree, anger filled his heart and fairly
boiled over, until he was in a terrible rage. Of course it was foolish,
very foolish indeed. The strange Chuck hadn't said or done anything to
make Johnny Chuck angry, not the least thing in the world, excepting to
come down on to the Green Meadows. Now the Green Meadows are very broad,
and there is room for many Chucks. It was pure selfishness on the part
of Johnny Chuck to want to drive away every other Chuck.

But anger never stops to reason. It didn't now. Johnny Chuck hurried as
fast as his short legs could take him towards the lone elm-tree, and in
his mind was just one thought--to drive that strange Chuck off the Green
Meadows and to punish him so that he never, never would dare even think
of coming back. So great was Johnny's anger that every hair stood on
end, and as he ran he chattered and scolded.

"I'll fix him! These are my Green Meadows, and no one else has any
business here unless I say so! I'll fix him! I'll fix him!"

Then Johnny would grind his teeth, and in his eyes was the ugliest look.
He wasn't nice to see, not a bit nice. The Merry Little Breezes of Old
Mother West Wind didn't know what to make of him. Could this be the
Johnny Chuck they had known so long, the good-natured, happy Johnny
Chuck whom everybody loved? They drew away from him, for they didn't
want anything to do with any one in such a frightful temper. But Johnny
Chuck didn't even notice, and if he had he wouldn't have cared. That
is the trouble with anger. It crowds out everything else, when it once
fills the heart.

When Johnny had first seen the stranger, he had thought right away that
it was the old gray Chuck with whom he had had such a terrible fight the
day before and whom he whipped. Perhaps that was one reason for Johnny
Chuck's terrible anger now, for the old gray Chuck had tried to drive
Johnny Chuck off the Green Meadows.

But when he had to stop for breath and sat up to look again, he saw that
it wasn't the old gray Chuck at all. It was a younger Chuck and much
smaller than the old gray Chuck. It was smaller than Johnny himself.

"He'll be all the easier to whip," muttered Johnny, as he started on
again, never once thinking of how unfair it would be to fight with one
smaller than himself. That was because he was so angry. Anger never is
fair.

Pretty soon he reached the lone elm-tree. The stranger wasn't to be
seen! No, Sir, the stranger wasn't anywhere in sight. Johnny Chuck sat
up and looked this way and looked that way, but the stranger was nowhere
in sight.

"Pooh!" said Johnny Chuck, "He's afraid to fight! He's a coward. But
he can't get away from me so easily. He's hiding, and I'll find him and
then---" Johnny didn't finish, but he ground his teeth, and it wasn't a
pleasant sound to hear.

So Johnny Chuck hunted for the stranger, and the longer he hunted the
angrier he grew. Somehow the stranger managed to keep out of his
sight. He was almost ready to give up, when he almost stumbled over the
stranger, hiding in a little clump of bushes. And then a funny thing
happened. What do you think it was?

Why, all the anger left Johnny Chuck. His hair no longer stood on end.
He didn't know why, but all of a sudden he felt foolish, very foolish
indeed.

"Who are you?" he demanded gruffly.

"I--I'm Polly Chuck," replied the stranger, in a small, timid voice.




XI. THE GREATEST THING IN THE WORLD


Johnny Chuck had begun to think about his clothes. Yes, Sir, he spent a
whole lot of time thinking about how he looked and wishing that he had
a handsomer coat. For the first time in all his life he began to envy
Reddy Fox, because of the beautiful red coat of which Reddy is so proud.
It seemed to Johnny that his own coat was so plain and so dull that no
one would look at it twice. Besides, it was torn now, because of the
great fight Johnny had had with the old gray Chuck who came down from
the Old Pasture. Johnny smoothed it down and brushed it carefully and
tried to make himself look as spick and span as he knew how.

"Oh, dear!" he sighed. "I don't see why Old Mother Nature didn't give me
as handsome a coat as she did Reddy Fox. And there are Jimmy Skunk
and Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel and--and--why, almost every one has a
handsomer coat than I have!" Now this wasn't at all like Johnny Chuck.
First he had been discontented with his house and had given it to Jimmy
Skunk. Now he was discontented with his clothes. What was coming over
Johnny Chuck? He really didn't know himself. At least, he wouldn't have
admitted that he knew. But right down deep in his heart was a great
desire--the desire to have Polly Chuck admire him. Yes, Sir, that is
what it was! And it seemed to him that she would admire him a great deal
more if he wore fine clothes. You see, he hadn't learned yet what Peter
Rabbit had learned a long time ago, which is that

     Fine clothes but catch the passing eye;
     Fine deeds win love from low and high.

So Johnny Chuck wished and wished that he had a handsome suit, but as he
didn't, and no amount of wishing would bring him one, he just made the
one he did have look as good as he could, and then went in search of
Polly Chuck.

