grown sons and daughters, he wondered if in their rough, unthinking way
they had not quite broken the spirit of the motherless lad in their midst.

"Sit down here," ordered the farmer, turning the seat so it faced Frank.
"This boy is going to Bellwood, Robert. He's agreed to take you along with
him, and I'm going back home."

Robert shot a glance of dislike and suspicion at Frank, as if he was a link
in a chain of jailers waiting for him along the line of life.

"You behave yourself along with him down at the academy, or I'll put you in
the reform school," threatened the farmer harshly.

"Oh, give Bob something to think of that's pleasant," put in Frank
cheerily. "It's a scary thing for a fellow, first time he goes among
strangers. I'm bracing up myself to meet the rollicking, mischief-making
crowd at Bellwood, who will just be lying in wait to guy us and haze us.
We'll stand together, Bob, hey? and give them good as they send," and Frank
slapped the lad on the shoulder, with a ringing laugh.

"They won't haze me," muttered Bob.

"Yes, they will, and then you and I will lay around to haze the new fellows
who came after us," cried Frank. "Ha! ha! you'll see some fun down at
Bellwood, Bob. They're a capital set of fellows, I'm told. We'll make the
best of them, anyhow, and the best of ourselves. Come, friend Bob, we'll
stick together and get all the fun out of life we can. Chums, is it?"

Frank was irresistible in his cheery, open-hearted good nature. Bob was
ashamed to refuse his hand, but the set, glum look on his face did not
lighten.

They had to change cars at a place called Chester. The farmer gave Frank
minute instructions as to his charge. He went over his "perky meanness" in
all its details, and he said to his stepson at parting:

"Now, then, you've got your chance to make a man of yourself. Any tantrums,
and you'll hear from me quick, and hot and heavy."

This was his parental farewell, and Frank felt truly sorry for poor Bob,
who, with all his sullenness, seemed entitled to a little better treatment.

After Farmer Upton had left them, Frank tried to break in on his stepson's
sulky reserve, but failed utterly. Bob drew within himself. He made
ungracious replies to questions put to him when Frank tried to interest
him, and about two o'clock went over to a vacant seat and curled up in it
and went fast asleep.

It was about six o'clock when the train pulled into Bellwood. Frank found
it to be a quaint, pretty town with delightful country surrounding it.

"Come on, Bob," he spoke as they stepped to the depot platform; "we must
arrange to have our trunks sent up to the academy."

"You've got my check," said Bob. "You can attend to all that; I'll wait
here."

"Oh, no," replied Frank lightly, "we'll stick together until we get
landed."

He was determined to afford his companion no opportunity to stray off.
There was a look in Bob Upton's eye that recalled the oft-repeated
injunction of his stepfather to watch out for "tantrums."

Frank arranged for the delivery of the trunks, and then made an inquiry of
a truckman as to the location of Bellwood School. The man pointed out its
towers about half a mile away.

They passed through the business part of the little town. At the village
post-office several boys were waiting for their mail. They looked the
newcomers over, but did not address them, and in a few minutes Frank and
Bob found themselves pursuing a path following the windings of a little
stream.

"We'll soon be there," announced Frank as they came to where on a slight
rise of landscape the academy buildings stood pretty plainly in view.
"What's the matter, Bob?"

The latter had halted in a peculiar, positive way. He backed slightly. His
eye was defiant and determined now, instead of sullen.

"The matter is this," he announced bluntly. "I don't intend to go to that
school."




CHAPTER X

AN OBSTINATE REBEL


"What's that?" demanded Frank, looking Bob over in a quiet but resolute
way.

"I said it," observed Bob Upton obstinately. "I don't go to that school."

"Nonsense!" retorted Frank simply with a laugh.

He understood that a crisis had come. He read in the face of his companion
a set purpose, and he prepared to meet the dilemma squarely.

"I think all the more of you, Bob," he observed, "for speaking your mind
right out, but you'll have to change it this time."

"Why will I?" demanded Bob.

"Because I'm going to convince you that your scheme won't work at all."

"We'll see," muttered Bob.

"We will," declared Frank. "In the first place, you're thinking things out
wrong. In the second place, I've promised your stepfather to take you to
the academy."

"What of it? I didn't agree."

"No; but I never break my word. I'm going to fill my contract, if I have to
carry you to Bellwood School."

"You'll have to do it, then," retorted Bob Upton. "I shan't budge an inch."

"I won't argue with you, Bob," said Frank evenly. "I'll give you some
advice----"

"Don't want none," flared up Bob.

"Then I'll give you two minutes to resume the tramp."

Frank took out his watch and held it in his hand, surveying his opponent
with a pleasant smile. Bob Upton with scowling brows dug his shoes into the
ground for sixty seconds, and then began to back away.

"It won't do," said Frank, stepping after him and seizing his arm firmly.
"Come, now, be a good fellow."

"You let me alone."

"I shan't."

There was a vigorous struggle. Bob was stoutly built, but he was no match
for Frank. The latter laughed at his threatening struggles.

"Give me a chance to fix my shoe, will you?" growled Bob as he gave up the
fight and Frank released him. Then he stood patiently awaiting his
pleasure, while his companion fumbled at his feet.

Bob's back was to Frank, but the latter suspected no trick. Of a sudden,
however, Bob whipped off both shoes, flinging them into the creek, his cap
after them, stripped his coat from place and tossed it also into the water.
Then he flopped flat to the ground.

"I won't go another foot," he declared. "I'll rip every stitch of clothes
on me to tatters and I'll fight like a wildcat before I'll make another
step."

Frank's eyes flashed. His settled will showed in his resolute face.

"All right," he said quietly. "If you want to be handled like a wildcat, I
can give you the treatment."

Quick as a flash Frank sprang to a plank reaching a few feet out into the
stream. It appeared to have been a landing place for small boats. Lying
across it was a piece of rope, evidently used in securing some water craft.
Seizing this, Frank made a leap back to his stubborn companion, jumped
squarely astride of him, and snatching his knife from his pocket, cut the
rope in two. In a jiffy he had bound the struggling hands of Bob. He
performed the same function for his feet. Then, arising, he looked down
steadily at his helpless captive.

"I can carry you easily that way," he observed.

Frank went along the banks of the stream until he found a long branch.
There was little current to the rivulet, and he soon fished out the
floating coat and cap. One of the shoes had sunk, but it was in shallow
water, and he managed to rescue this also.

"You're making a good deal of trouble, Bob," he remarked, "but you'll think
better of it when you get cooled down."

All the stubborn resistance began to fade from the face of the wretched
lad. He realized that he had found his master. The mute misery and
helplessness in his eyes appealed more strongly to Frank's sympathies than
had his former unpleasant mood.

"See here, Bob," said Frank, sitting down beside his companion, "while
these articles are drying, better listen a bit to reason from a fellow who
wants to be your friend. Will you?"

Bob turned his face away, his laps puckering.

"Oh, leave me alone," he sobbed. "I've got no friends. I never had any. I
wish I could die and be out of everybody's way, that's what I wish."

"See here, Bob," said Frank, "that's downright wicked, if you mean it. I'd
like to know what's the matter with you? Can't you see any sunshine in
life?"

"Sunshine!" retorted Bob hotly. "Oh, yes, lots of it. Blazing, blistering
sunshine in the harvest fields, where those big, selfish louts my
stepfather told you about were loafing. Many a night I've crawled up to bed
so tired and sore I could hardly get there, to have those fellows torment
me or kick and cuff me because I wouldn't sneak down into the cellar and
steal cider or preserves for them. I tell you, my stepfather has treated me
wrong. I tell you, that heartless family of his had made my life so dark,
I'm just discouraged."

Bob Upton broke down and cried bitterly. Frank felt very sorry for him.

"Bob," he said, "I'm glad you told me all of this. I begin to understand
now. They haven't given you a fair chance; I see that. They've cowed you
down and have nearly broken your spirit. All right. Show them that you're
going to make something of yourself, all the same. We all have our
troubles," and Frank told something of his own irksome, unpleasant life
with his fault-finding aunt.

It was by slow degrees that Bob Upton livened up and then braced up. No one
could help liking Frank Jordan.

"You're a cracking good fellow," said the farmer boy at last. "I hope it
isn't like the spurts Jeff Upton used to have one day, and wallop me like
thunder the next."

"I'll see to it that no one wallops you or jumps on you," promised Frank.
"You keep right with me till you learn the ropes and unlearn all the
bitterness those relations of yours have put into you. I'm going to have
you and me paired off for the same room, if I can."

"Say," choked up Bob at this, "any fellow who would do that, after seeing
how measly mean I can be, is a brick. Just wait. When the time comes that I
can show you what I think of you, I'll be there, true as steel."

"I believe you will," said Frank heartily. "You've been a good deal of a
martyr, Bob Upton, and--there's your chance to be a hero! Quick, for
mercy's sake, stop that runaway!"

Frank shouted the words excitedly. He had removed the ropes from Bob's
wrists and ankles, and they had been standing near the coat spread out on
the grass while they conversed. A clatter and wild shouts had suddenly
pierced the air, and whirling about Frank saw coming down a steep roadway
toward the river a spirited team of horses attached to a light carriage.

It had two seats, but the front one held no driver. In the rear seat,
clinging frantically to one another and swung dangerously about by the
swaying vehicle, were two affrighted children.

Frank was speedy, but Bob Upton was quicker. It amazed and gratified Frank
to see his companion dart off like a shot. He himself ran to where the road
curved down to the river to obstruct the runaway's progress when it reached
that point. Bob, however, who knew all about horses from his farm
experience, had made a rush on a short cut to intercept the runaway horses
before they reached a spot where the descent was sharp, and where deep
ravines showed on either side of the winding roadway.

Frank ran with all his might up the road, but Bob Upton by his short cut
reached the point where it narrowed in an incredibly brief space of time.
He had to catch at saplings and bushes to make the ascent. He was so far in
advance of our hero that, while Frank continued running, he foresaw that he
could not be first on the scene, and he watched Bob's progress with
admiration and suspense.

Bob Upton did a risky thing. He seemed to think only of diverting or
stopping the runaway team--anything to keep the spirited horses from
reaching the dangerous point where the road narrowed.

Frank saw him pick up a great tree branch lying on the incline. Bearing
this before him, Bob ran at the fast approaching horses with a loud shout.

Squarely into their foam-flecked faces the farm boy drove the branch,
dropped hold of it, and let it rest on the carriage pole. The horses reared
and tried to turn. Quick as lightning Bob grabbed a bit strap in either
hand, gave them a jerk, then grasped the nose of each horse, and brought
them to a panting standstill.

A man, the driver, pale and breathless, came running up from behind as
Frank reached the spot.

"Oh, you've saved them! Oh, I'll never leave them unhitched again! Boy, you
shall have my month's wages--all I've got--for this!" shouted the man
hysterically.

"Get the lines," directed Bob. "The horses are restive yet. Hold them till
I see what the matter is."

His practiced eye had noticed one of the horses acting queerly with one
foot. As the driver gained the front seat and held the team under control,
Bob picked up the off foot of one of the animals.

"This is what started them," he explained, holding up a sharp, long thorn.

"Say, who are you--what's your name? I want to see you again about this."

"Nothing to see me about," responded Bob. "Glad I was on hand, that's all.
If you loosened that check rein your horses will go a great deal easier."

"He's Robert Upton," spoke Frank, determined to give his valorous comrade
all the distinction he deserved. "Bob," he added, as the restive team
proceeded on their way, "you have been something of a martyr--now you are a
positive hero."

"Pshaw! that little thing!" observed Bob carelessly, but his face flushed
at Frank's honest compliment. "I've had a wild stallion drag me all around
a forty-foot lot, and never got a scratch."

"You've made a fine beginning in the new life, Bob; you can't deny that,"
said Frank. "Come, get on your duds and let's travel."

Half an hour later, within the classic precincts of the big hall of
learning on the hill, Frank Jordan and Robert Upton were duly registered as
students of Bellwood School.




CHAPTER XI

TURNING THE TABLES


"Frank, we are marked men!" declared Bob Upton tragically.

"Ha!" retorted Frank with a laugh. "The deadly enemy approaches!"

"No nonsense!" declared Bob, quite earnestly now. "We're in for a course of
sprouts; it's to come off this very night, and the savage horde which is to
begin the hazing operations is that gang of ten who occupy the big
dormitory room next to us."

"How did you find all this out, Bob?"

"I overheard them plotting."

"I see."

"I'm going to spike their guns and turn the laugh on them."

"How?"

"That's telling. You'd object, so I'm going to keep my own counsel. There
are four degrees of initiation. If a fellow consents to all the tests with
a good-natured grin he passes muster. If he doesn't, he's tabooed."

"Well, then, let's stand muster cheerfully."

"Not I," retorted Bob grimly. "We'll turn the tables; then they'll think
all the more of us. Ever hear of the Chevaliers of the Bath? Or the Knights
of the Garter?"

"They are new to me--some school rigmarole, I suppose."

"Yes. Then there's Scouts of the Gauntlet."

"Worse and worse."

"And finally the Guides of Mystery."

"Whew!"

"To be a free and accepted Chevalier of the Bath a fellow has to be a
water-proof rat. To be a Knight of the Garter he must consent to wake up at
midnight to find a rope tackle around one ankle, and be dragged out of bed
and down the hall."

"Well, we'll have to take our medicine, I suppose," said Frank lightly.

"To be a Scout of the Gauntlet," went on Bob, "is to be sent in the dark
down the stairs on a fool errand, and come back to face a pillow shower. A
genuine Guide of Mystery must have the grit to be left blindfolded in the
village graveyard at midnight, barefooted, and with a skeleton stolen from
the museum hitched to one arm."

"That's the program, is it, Bob?"

"Exactly," assented Frank's new chum. "The show begins to-night, as I say.
Stick close to me and you won't lose any rest."

Frank looked blandly and admiringly at his comrade, and was rather proud of
him.

There had never come so marked and agreeable a change over a boy as that
manifested in the instance of Bob Upton within three days.

There was still under the surface with Bob, when he met strangers, a
certain suspicious element that had been engrafted in him. The least hint
that any one was guying him or imposing upon him would bring the old look
back to his face, but Frank watched him closely, and coming to Bellwood
School had indeed been the beginning of a new life for Bob.

An incident had occurred the morning after their arrival that, outside of
Frank's friendly effort in behalf of Bob, had been the means of lifting the
farmer boy to a new level.

The fellows at Bellwood School were of the average class in such
institutions, a mixture of jolly and gruff, good and bad. Like attracts
like, and the very first morning stroll on the campus Frank found himself
attracted to some boys who took him into their ranks as naturally as if he
had come recommended to them by special testimonials. Of course Bob went
where Frank went, and loyally followed his leader.

Frank soon found out that there were two cliques in the so-called
"freshman" crowd. A boy named Dean Ritchie lead the coterie that had
accepted Frank and Bob as new recruits. Frank liked him from the first. He
was a keen-witted, sharp-tongued fellow, out for fun most of the time and
never still for a minute.

At any time the appearance of a lad named Nat Banbury or any of his cohorts
was a signal for repartee, challenges, sometimes a sortie. Advances were
made by Banbury toward the enlistment of the two new recruits in his ranks,
but Frank had already made his choice.

"Oh, come on, he isn't worth wasting breath on," spoke up a big, uncouth
fellow named Porter, when Frank had politely announced to Banbury that Dean
Ritchie was a friend of some old friends of his at Tipton. "Ta, ta,
Bob-up!" rallied Porter maliciously to Frank's chum. "Keep close to
brother!"

Bob flushed and his eyes sparkled. His fists clenched.

"Easy, Bob," warned Frank in an undertone.

"Say, Banbury Cross," observed Bob, "there was a fellow of your name chased
out of our county for sheep stealing, and another kept the dog pound. You
snarl just exactly like some of the curs he keeps there."

"Banbury, cranberry, bow, wow, wow!" derided Ritchie. "Good for you,
Upton--you hit the nail on the head that time."

"Upton--Robert Upton!" bellowed the old janitor, Scroggins, appearing on
the campus just then.

"That's me," acknowledged Bob.

"President Elliott wishes to see you in the library," said Scroggins.

"Aha!" snorted Banbury. "Called down already! Look out, Bob-up, you're in
for a quake in the shoes."

"No; the president is going to consult him on how to raise squashes,"
sneered a crony of Banbury.

"Say, Frank," whispered Bob, quite in a quake, "I'm going to get it for
something. What can it be?"

"Don't worry," replied Frank. "Face the music. I fancy you won't be hit
very hard."

Bob went away with the old, worried look on his face. He came back radiant,
and seemed to walk on air, and he never even heard the jeers of the Banbury
crowd as he passed them. He made a beckoning motion to Frank, and the two
strolled away together.

"Frank," said Bob, choking up, "I believe I'm some good in the world, after
all."

"I told you so, didn't I?"

"I'm glad you made me come here," went on Bob. "Oh, so awfully glad! I
declare----" and there Bob broke down and turned his face away for a moment
or two.

"Say, Frank," he continued, "so is the president glad I came, too. He told
me so. What do you think? The two children in that runaway belong to his
family."

"Well! well!" commented Frank.

"I almost sunk through the floor when the good old man, with tears in his
eyes, thanked me for saving them, as he called it. He said he was proud of
me, and that he predicted that the academy would be proud of me, too. I
tell you, Frank, it stirred me up. Strike me blue, if I don't try to behave
myself."

"Good for you, Bob!"

"Strike me scarlet red and sky blue, if I don't try to deserve his kind
words."

Nothing seemed to ruffle Bob after that. He simply laughed at the snubs and
jeers of the Banbury crowd. He seemed to lose his old-time unsociability,
and went right in with the jolly crowd that composed the stanch following
of Dean Ritchie.

It was just after the nine o'clock bell had rung that evening when Bob so
mysteriously disclosed his suspicions of the initiation plots of the
occupants of the adjoining room.

"They're all Banbury's crowd," he explained to Frank. "Get into bed and
take in the fun. They're waiting for us to quiet down. Don't speak above a
whisper. Just stay awake long enough to see the program out."

Bob turned out the light and both snuggled down on the pillows luxuriously
after a strenuous day of sport and study.

"Act first," whispered Bob. "Soon as the Banbury crowd think we're fast
asleep, you'll hear them come stealthily out into the corridor. They've
fixed the transom over our door so it will swing open without a jar. One
fellow will stand on a chair. The others will hand him up the nozzle of a
hose running to the faucet in their room."

"And we'll be Knights of the Bath--I see," observed Frank.

"Yes, without having to take any of the medicine. Hist--they're coming."

Frank could readily guess what the enemy had in view--the old school trick
of dousing them in their sleep. He relied on the mysterious promises of his
chum, and lay still and listened intently.

There was a vast whispering in the next room, a rustling about, and then
more than one person could be heard just outside in the corridor.

A stool seemed to be placed near to the door. The slightest creaking in the
world told that the transom had been pushed ajar.

"Hand up the hose," whispered a cautious voice.

"Here you are."

There was a fumbling sound at the transom. Then came the impatient words:

"It don't work."

"Turn on the screw."

"I have. The water can't be on."

"Yes, it is. I turned it."

"I tell you it won't work," was whispered from the stool. "Go back to the
room and turn on the faucet, I tell you."

Hurried footsteps retreated from the door. Some one could be heard entering
the next room. Then some one rushed out of it again.

"Say," spoke an excited voice, "we're flooded! The hose has burst, and we
are deluged, and----"

"Boys, a light--the monitor's coming," interrupted a warning voice.

"Cut for it! Something's wrong! We're caught!"

There was heedless rush now from the next room. Frank could hear the hose
dragged along the corridor. The door of the adjoining room was hurriedly
closed.

"Off with your clothes--hustle into bed," ordered some one in that
apartment.

Shoes were kicked off, beds creaked, and then came odd cries.

"Wow!"

"Murder!"

Tap--tap--tap! came a knock at the door.

"What's going on here?" asked the sharp, stern voice of the dormitory
watchman.

"Thunder!"

"Oh, my back!"

"I'm scratched to pieces!" So ran the cries, and half a dozen persons
seemed to bound from beds to the floor.

Bob Upton was shaking with suppressed laughter, stuffing the end of the
pillow into his mouth to keep from yelling outright.

"Bob," whispered Frank, "what have you been up to?"

"Drove a plug into their hose ten feet from the faucet, slit the rubber
full of holes--and filled the beds with cockle burrs," replied Bob, and,
quaking with inward mirth, he rolled out on the floor.

