
"Do you keep his money?"

"Yes."

"Is he easy to manage?" asked John Blake.

"Well, some folks might find trouble with him," said Fox,
complacently. "The fact is, gentlemen, I don't mind telling you that
he's been trying to buck agin' his guardeen a'ready. Where do you
think I left him?" continued Fox, chuckling.

"Where?"

"Up in the attic, locked up in his chamber. I'm goin' to feed him on
bread and water a while, just to show him what sort of a man John Fox
is."

A grin overspread the face of Eben Bond, who had just looked out of
the front window.

"So you left him in the attic, hey?" he said, waggishly.

"Yes, I did. Do you mean to say I didn't?"

"I'm willin' to bet he isn't there now."

"You just tell me what you mean, Eben Bond!" said John Fox, provoked.

"I mean that I saw that boy of yours go by the tavern only two minutes
since."

"Where did he go? In what direction?" demanded Fox, eagerly.

"Down toward the river."

"He's running away," Fox said to himself, in dismay. "How in the the
world did he get out?"

He ran up the road, gazing anxiously on this side and on that, hoping
to come upon the runaway. One thing was favorable; it was a straight
road, with no roads opening out of it at least a mile beyond the
tavern. It led by the river at a point half a mile on.

"I'll catch him yet. He can't escape me!" Fox reflected.

John Fox pushed on breathless, and a minute later came in sight of the
fugitive.

Harry had sobered down to a walk, thinking himself no longer in
danger. If Mr. Fox had been wise enough to keep silent till he had
come within a few rods he might have caught him easily, but excitement
and anger were too much for prudence, and he called out, angrily:
"Just wait till I get hold of you, you young villain! I'll give you a
lesson."

Harry turned quickly and saw his enemy close upon him.

That was enough. He set out on what the boys call a dead run, though
he hardly knew in what direction to look for refuge. But through the
trees at the west side of the road he caught sight of something that
put new hope into his heart. It was a boat, floating within three feet
of shore. In it sat a boy of about Harry's own age. It was Willie
Foster.

There was no time for ceremony, Harry sprang into the boat, and,
seizing an idle oar, pushed out into the river.

The owner of the boat, who had been thoughtfully gazing into the
water, looked up in surprise.

"Well, that's cool!" he ejaculated.

"I beg your pardon," said Harry, still plying the oar; "I couldn't
help it; Mr. Fox is after me."

John Fox, by this time, stood on the river bank shaking his fist, with
a discomfited expression, at his intended victim.

"Come back here!" he shouted.

"Thank you, I would rather not," answered Harry, still increasing the
distance between himself and his guardian.

"You Willie Foster, row the boat back!" bawled John Fox,

"Is your name Willie Foster?" asked Harry, turning to his companion,
who was looking, with a puzzled expression, from one to the other.

"Yes."

"Then, Willie, if you will help me row over to the other side of the
river and set me off there, I'll give you a dollar."

"I'll do it," said Willie, seizing the other oar, "but you needn't
give me any money."

To his intense disgust, Fox saw the boat, propelled by the two boys,
leaping forward energetically, while he stood helplessly on the bank.

The other bank was half a mile away, and could not be reached except
by a bridge a considerable distance away. The two boys said little
until the trip was accomplished.

"I hope you won't get into any serious trouble with Mr. Fox," said
Harry, as they drew near the bank.

"I don't care for old Fox, and father doesn't like him, either."

As he got out of the boat he pressed a dollar into Willie's reluctant
hand.

"Now, which way had I better go?"

"Take that footpath. It will lead to Medfield. There you can take the
cars."

"Good-by, Willie; and thank you."

Willie didn't row back immediately. John Fox was lying in wait on the
other side, and he didn't care to meet him.

Harry pushed on till he reached a highway. He felt in doubt as to
where it might lead him, but followed it at a venture. He wondered
whether John Fox would pursue him, and from time to time looked back
to make sure that his guardian was not on his trail. In about three
hours he found himself eight miles away. Then, for the first time, he
felt that it might be safe to stop and rest. In a village a little way
back he had entered a bakeshop and purchased some rolls and a glass of
milk, which he ate with a good relish.

He resumed his walk, but had not gone a quarter of a mile when he
heard the noise of wheels, which on coming up with him, came to a
halt.

"Shall I give you a lift?" said the driver of the team.

Looking up, he saw that it was a covered wagon with four wheels, such
as is often to be met in New England towns. The man who held the reins
was of large frame and portly, with dark hair and whiskers. He might
be about forty-five years of age.

"Thank you, sir, said Harry.

"Where are you bound, if you don't mind my being inquisitive?"

"I don't know," answered Harry, doubtfully. "I'm seeking my fortune,
as they say."

"Well you ought to find it," returned the other, after a deliberate
survey of his young companion. "You're well-built, and look healthy
and strong. Have you got any money?"

"A little. My father died lately and left me three hundred dollars. He
recommended to me as guardian a man named John Fox, living eight miles
back. Well, I have tried Mr. Fox, and I prefer to be my own guardian."

"I've heard of John Fox. He's fox by name and fox by nature. So you
and he didn't hitch horses. When did you leave him?"

"This morning. I don't know but I may say that I am running away from
him, as I left without his knowledge or permission, but as he is not
yet my legal guardian, I don't consider that he has any right to
interfere with me."

"You haven't told me your name yet."

"My name is Harry Vane."

"I am the Magician of Madagascar. You may have heard of me."

"I don't think I have," said Harry, puzzled.

"I have been before the public many years," he said. "I give magical
entertainments, and, in the course of the last twenty years, have
traveled all over the continent."

"You see," explained Harry, apologetically, "I have always lived in a
small country town, where there were few amusements, and so I know
very little of such things. I never saw a magical entertainment in my
life."

"Didn't you, indeed? Then you shall see me perform to-night. I am to
give a magical soiree in Conway, the town we are coming to."

"I should like it very much, Mr. ----" and Harry paused in doubt.

"I am called Professor Hemenway--Hiram Hemenway," said the magician.

"Do you like your business?" asked Harry, curiously.

"Why shouldn't I? I have a chance to travel. The people appreciate my
efforts and reward me generously."

By a fortunate accident Harry happened to turn in his seat and look
through a small window in the back part of the wagon. What he saw
startled him. In a buggy, ten rods back, he recognized his late
guardian and Joel. They were making good speed, and were doubtless in
pursuit of him.

Harry quickly imparted his discovery to his companion.

"Don't let them capture me!" he said.

"I should like to see him do it," responded the professor. "Get into
the back part of the wagon, and crouch down."

Harry did as directed.

Then the professor slackened his speed, and allowed the pursuers to
overtake him.

"I say, stranger," said Fox, as he drew up alongside. "A boy ran away
from me this morning. Perhaps you have seen him?"

"I saw a boy about a mile back," said the magician, reflectively, "a
stout, good-looking lad, dark-brown hair, and a pleasant expression;
didn't look at all like you. I chatted with him a while. He said he
was leaving a man who claimed to be his guardian, but wasn't."

"The young liar!" ejaculated Fox, wrathfully. "Where is he now?"

"Is he in your wagon?" put in Joel, sharply.

"If he were you'd see him, wouldn't you?"

"In behind you?"

"Yes, are you kidnapping him?" demanded Fox, fiercely.

"There is a boy in the back part of my wagon," said the magician,
coolly. "If you ain't afraid of smallpox, you may see him. Which shall
it be, you or the boy?"

A pallid hue overspread the face of John Fox, which was increased by
an agonizing moan, which appeared to proceed from behind the magician.

"Turn the horse, Joel," was all he said.

He whipped up his horse without a word, and did not pull up for half a
mile.

"You can come out now, Harry," said the professor, with a queer smile.
"I am a ventriloquist, and that moan did the business."




CHAPTER VII

A NEW ENGAGEMENT


Harry was not a little relieved at his narrow escape. He did not
propose to be taken captive without making a strong resistance; but
still, in a struggle with Mr. Fox and Joel, he felt that he would be
considerably at a disadvantage.

"I am much obliged to you for saving me, Professor Hemenway," he said.

"You are quite welcome. So you didn't like old Fox?"

"Not much."

"He doesn't appear to like you any better."

"There isn't much love lost between us," returned Harry, laughing.

"How do you like the boy?"

"He served me a good turn--for five dollars--but he would help capture
me for the same money, or less."

"You seem to know him."

"He is fond of money, and would do almost anything for it."

"You thank me for saving you from capture, my lad," continued the
magician. "Well, I had an object in it--a selfish object."

Harry looked puzzled.

"It struck me that I needed a boy about your size, and character, for
a general assistant, to sell tickets, take money, and help me on the
stage. How do you like the idea?"

"I like it," answered Harry; "but there is one objection."

"What is that?"

"I don't come from Madagascar," responded Harry, slyly.

Professor Hemenway laughed.

"You've been as near there as I have," he said. "Did you really think
I came from Madagascar?"

"You look more as if you came from Maine, sir."

"You've hit it! There's where I did come from. I was raised
twenty-five miles from Portland on a farm. But it would never do to
put that on the bills. People are ready to pay more for imported than
for native curiosities. However, to come to business. I had a young
man traveling with me who wasn't suited to the business. He was a
dry-goods clerk when I took him, and is better adapted to that
business than to mine. He left me last week, and I have been in a
quandary about his successor. How much do you consider your time
worth?"

"Just at present it isn't worth much. If you will pay my traveling
expenses, that will satisfy me."

"I will do better than that I will give you five dollars a week
besides, if business is good."

"Thank you, sir. I think I shall enjoy traveling."

There are few boys who do not like change of scene, and the chance of
seeing new places is attractive to all. Harry was decidedly of the
opinion that he had a streak of luck. It would be much better in all
ways than living with his late guardian, and working for partial
board.

As they approached the village of Conway, Harry's attention was drawn
to a variety of posters setting forth, in mammoth letters, that the
world-renowned Magician of Madagascar would give a magical _soiree_ at
the Town Hall in the evening. Tickets, fifteen cents; children under
twelve years, ten cents. The posters, furthermore, attracted attention
by a large figure of the professor, dressed in bizarre style,
performing one of his tricks.

"That draws attention," observed the professor, "particularly among
the boys. I think I shall have a hall full this evening. An audience
of three hundred will pay very well. My expenses are light. I do most
of my traveling in this wagon, and at hotels I get the usual
professional reduction."

"Did it take you long to learn the business?"

"I have been learning all along. Every now and then I add a new
trick. I will teach you some."

"I might leave you and set up on my own hook when I have learned,"
suggested Harry, with a smile.

"It will be some time before you look old enough for a magician. When
you are, I'll give you my blessing and send you out."

Meanwhile they had been jogging along, and were already in the main
street of Conway. The professor drew up in front of the village hotel,
and a groom came forward and took his horse.

"Wait a minute my friend," said the professor. "Harry, you can help me
take my implements out of the back of the wagon."

These "implements" were of a heterogeneous character, but all would
come in use in the evening. A number of boys watched their transfer
with mingled awe and curiosity.

"What's them?" Harry heard one ask another, in a half-whispered tone.

"Those," said the professor, in an impressive tone, turning toward the
boys. "Those are paraphernalia!"

The boys looked more awestruck than ever. All inwardly resolved to go
to the Town Hall that evening, and get a nearer view of the articles
which had such a grand name.

After a while Harry came downstairs from the room assigned him, and
stood on the piazza.

One of the boys drew near him cautiously.

"Are you the magician's son?" he asked.

"No," answered Harry, smiling.

"Do you come from Madagascar?"

"I have not been there recently."

"Are all the people there magicians?"

"Not quite all."

This information was rather scanty, but it was whispered about among
the boys, the first boy boasting that he had a talk with the young man
magician. If Harry had heard himself called thus, he would have been
very much amused.

Directly after supper Harry went with his employer to assist in
preparing the stage for the evening performance. Though novice, he
acquitted himself to the satisfaction of his employer, who
congratulated himself on having secured so efficient an assistant.
Half an hour before the performance he stationed himself in the entry,
provided with tickets. He sat at a small table, and received the
crowd. Though new to the business, he managed to make change rapidly.
He found his position one in which he had a chance to study human
nature.

During the evening Harry was called upon to assist the professor in
some of his tricks. Some boys would have been embarrassed upon finding
themselves objects of general attention, but Harry was by temperament
cool and self-possessed. He had been fond of declamation at school,
and this had accustomed him, to some extent, to a public appearance.

The entertainment was in two parts, with an intermission of ten
minutes.

"I wish you were a singer," said the professor, when they were
standing behind the screen.

"Why?" asked Harry.

"Because the audience sometimes gets impatient during the
intermission. If I could put you on for a song, it would help quiet
them."

"I can sing a little," said Harry, modestly.

"What can you sing?"

"How would 'The Last Rose of Summer' do?"

"Capital. Can you sing it?"

"I can try."

"You are sure you won't break down? That would make a bad impression."

"I can promise you I won't break down, sir."

"Then I'll give you a trial. Are you ready to appear at once?"

"Yes, sir."

"Wait, then, till I announce you."

The professor came from behind the screen, and, addressing the
audience, said: "Ladies and gentlemen, lest you should find the
necessary intermission tedious, I am happy to announce to you that the
young vocalist, Master Harry Vane, has kindly consented to favor you
with one of his popular melodies. He has selected by request, 'The
Last Rose of Summer.'"

Harry could hardly refrain from laughing when he heard this
introduction.

"One would think I was a well-known singer," he said to himself.

He came forward, and, standing before the audience, with his face a
little flushed, made a graceful bow. Then, pausing an instant, he
commenced the song announced. He had not sung two lines before the
professor, who waited the result with some curiosity and some anxiety,
found that he could sing. His voice was high, clear, and musical, and
his rendition was absolutely correct. The fact was, Harry had taken
lessons in a singing school at home, and had practiced privately also,
so that he had reason to feel confidence in himself.

The song was listened to with earnest attention and evident enjoyment
by all. When the last strain died away, and Harry made his farewell
bow, there was an enthusiastic burst of applause, emphasized by the
