
"Yes, but that made but little noise."

"Quite enough to startle a red deer, Edward, as you will find out
before you have been long a forester. These checks will happen, and
have happened to me a hundred times, and then all the work is to be
done over again. Now then to make the circuit--we had better not say a
word. If we get safe now to the other side, we are sure of him."

They proceeded at a quick walk through the forest, and in half an hour
had gained the side where the deer were feeding. When about three
hundred yards from the game, Jacob again sunk down on his hands and
knees, crawling from bush to bush, stopping whenever the stag raised
his head, and advancing again when it resumed feeding; at last they
came to the fern at the side of the wood, and crawled through it as
before, but still more cautiously as they approached the stag. In this
manner they arrived at last to within eighty yards of the animal, and
then Jacob advanced his gun ready to put it to his shoulder, and, as he
cocked the lock, raised himself to fire. The click occasioned by the
cocking of the lock roused up the stag instantly, and he turned his
head in the direction from whence the noise proceeded; as he did so
Jacob fired, aiming behind the animal's shoulder: the stag made a
bound, came down again, dropped on his knees, attempted to run, and
fell dead, while the does fled away with the rapidity of the wind.

Edward started up on his legs with a shout of exultation. Jacob
commenced reloading his gun, and stopped Edward as he was about to run
up to where the animal lay.

"Edward, you must learn your craft," said Jacob; "never do that again;
never shout in that way--on the contrary, you should have remained
still in the fern."

"Why so?--the stag is dead."

"Yes, my dear boy, that stag is dead; but how do you know but what
there may be another lying down in the fern close to us, or at some
distance from us, which you have alarmed by your shout? Suppose that we
both had guns, and that the report of mine had started another stag
lying in the fern within shot, you would have been able to shoot it; or
if a stag was lying at a distance, the report of the gun might have
started him so as to induce him to move his head without rising. I
should have seen his antlers move and have marked his lair, and we
should then have gone after him and stalked him too."

"I see," replied Edward, "I was wrong; but I shall know better another
time."

"That's why I tell you, my boy," replied Jacob. "Now let us go to our
quarry. Ay, Edward, this is a noble beast. I thought that he was a hart
royal, and so he is."

"What is a hart royal, Jacob?"

"Why, a stag is called a brocket until he is three years old, at four
years he is a staggart; at five years a warrantable stag; and after
five years he becomes a hart royal."

"And how do you know his age?"

"By his antlers: you see that this stag has nine antlers; now, a
brocket has but two antlers, a staggart three, and a warrantable stag
but four; at six years old, the antlers increase in number until they
sometimes have twenty or thirty. This is a fine beast, and the venison
is now getting very good. Now you must see me do the work of my craft."

Jacob then cut the throat of the animal, and afterward cut off its head
and took out its bowels.

"Are you tired, Edward?" said Jacob, as he wiped his hunting-knife on
the coat of the stag.

"No, not the least."

"Well, then, we are now, I should think, about four or five miles from
the cottage. Could you find your way home? but that is of no
consequence--Smoker will lead you home by the shortest path. I will
stay here, and you can saddle White Billy and come back with him, for
he must carry the venison back. It's more than we can manage--indeed,
as much as we can manage with White Billy to help us. There's more than
twenty stone of venison lying there, I can tell you."

Edward immediately assented, and Jacob, desiring Smoker to go home, set
about flaying and cutting up the animal for its more convenient
transportation. In an hour and a half, Edward, attended by Smoker,
returned with the pony, on whose back the chief portion of the venison
was packed. Jacob took a large piece on his own shoulders, and Edward
carried another, and Smoker, after regaling himself with a portion of
the inside of the animal, came after them. During the walk home, Jacob
initiated Edward into the terms of venery and many other points
connected with deer-stalking, with which we shall not trouble our
readers. As soon as they arrived at the cottage, the venison was hung
up, the pony put in the stable, and then they sat down to dinner with
an excellent appetite after their long morning's walk. Alice and
Humphrey had cooked the dinner themselves, and it was in the pot,
smoking hot, when they returned; and Jacob declared he never ate a
better mess in his life. Alice was not a little proud of this, and of
the praises she received from Edward and the old forester. The next
day, Jacob stated his intention of going to Lymington to dispose of a
large portion of the venison, and bring back a sack of oatmeal for
their cakes. Edward asked to accompany him, but Jacob replied,

"Edward, you must not think of showing yourself at Lymington, or any
where else, for a long while, until you are grown out of memory. It
would be folly, and you would risk your sisters' and brother's lives,
perhaps, as well as your own. Never mention it again: the time will
come when it will be necessary, perhaps; if so, it can not be helped.
At present you would be known immediately. No, Edward, I tell you what
I mean to do: I have a little money left, and I intend to buy you a
gun, that you may learn to stalk deer yourself without me; for,
recollect, if any accident should happen to me, who is there but you to
provide for your brother and sisters? At Lymington I am known to many;
but out of all who know me, there is not one who knows where my cottage
is; they know that I live in the New Forest, and that I supply them
venison, and purchase other articles in return. That is all that they
know: and I may therefore go without fear. I shall sell the venison
to-morrow, and bring you back a good gun; and Humphrey shall have the
carpenters' tools which he wishes for, for I think, by what he does
with his knife, that he has a turn that way, and it may be useful. I
must also get some other tools for Humphrey and you, as we shall then
be able to work all together; and some threads and needles for Alice,
for she can sew a little, and practice will make her more perfect."

Jacob went off to Lymington as he had proposed, and returned late at
night with White Billy well loaded; he had a sack of oatmeal, some
spades and hoes, a saw and chisels, and other tools; two scythes and
two three-pronged forks; and when Edward came to meet him, he put into
his hand a gun with a very long barrel.

"I believe, Edward, that you will find that a good one, for I know
where it came from. It belonged to one of the rangers, who was reckoned
the best shot in the Forest. I know the gun, for I have seen it on his
arm, and have taken it in my hand to examine it more than once. He was
killed at Naseby, with your father, poor fellow! and his widow sold the
gun to meet her wants."

"Well," replied Edward, "I thank you much, Jacob, and I will try if I
can not kill as much venison as will pay you back the purchase-money--I
will, I assure you."

"I shall be glad if you do, Edward; not because I want the money back,
but because then I shall be more easy in my mind about you all, if any
thing happens to me. As soon as you are perfect in your woodcraft, I
shall take Humphrey in hand, for there is nothing like having two
strings to your bow. To-morrow we will not go out: we have meat enough
for three weeks or more; and now the frost has set in, it will keep
well. You shall practice at a mark with your gun, that you may be
accustomed to it; for all guns, even the best, require a little
humoring."

Edward, who had often fired a gun before, proved the next morning that
he had a very good eye; and, after two or three hours' practice, hit
the mark at a hundred yards almost every time.

"I wish you would let me go out by myself," said Edward, overjoyed at
his success.

"You would bring home nothing, boy," replied Jacob. "No, no, you have a
great deal to learn yet; but I tell you what you shall do: any time
that we are not in great want of venison, you shall have the first
fire."

"Well, that will do," replied Edward.

The winter now set in with great severity, and they remained almost
altogether within doors. Jacob and the boys went out to get firewood,
and dragged it home through the snow.

"I wish, Jacob," said Humphrey, "that I was able to build a cart, for
it would be very useful, and White Billy would then have something to
do; but I can't make the wheels, and there is no harness."

"That's not a bad idea of yours, Humphrey," replied Jacob; "we will
think about it. If you can't build a cart, perhaps I can buy one. It
would be useful if it were only to take the dung out of the yard on the
potato-ground, for I have hitherto carried it out in baskets, and it's
hard work."

"Yes, and we might saw the wood into billets, and carry it home in the
cart, instead of dragging it in this way; my shoulder is quite sore
with the rope, it cuts me so."

"Well, when the weather breaks up, I will see what I can do, Humphrey;
but just now the roads are so blocked up, that I do not think we could
get a cart from Lymington to the cottage, although we can a horse,
perhaps."

But if they remained in-doors during the inclement weather, they were
not idle. Jacob took this opportunity to instruct the children in every
thing. Alice learned how to wash and how to cook. It is true, that
sometimes she scalded herself a little, sometimes burned her fingers;
and other accidents did occur, from the articles employed being too
heavy for them to lift by themselves; but practice and dexterity
compensated for want of strength, and fewer accidents happened every
day. Humphrey had his carpenters' tools; and although at first he had
many failures, and wasted nails and wood, by degrees he learned to use
his tools with more dexterity, and made several little useful articles.
Little Edith could now do something, for she made and baked all the
oatmeal cakes, which saved Alice a good deal of time and trouble in
watching them. It was astonishing how much the children could do, now
that there was no one to do it for them; and they had daily instruction
from Jacob. In the evening Alice sat down with her needle and thread to
mend the clothes; at first they were not very well done, but she
improved every day. Edith and Humphrey learned to read while Alice
worked, and then Alice learned; and thus passed the winter away so
rapidly, that, although they had been five months at the cottage, it
did not appear as if they had been there as many weeks. All were happy
and contented, with the exception, perhaps, of Edward, who had fits of
gloominess, and occasionally showed signs of impatience as to what was
passing in the world, of which he remained in ignorance.

That Edward Beverley had fits of gloominess and impatience is not
surprising. Edward had been brought up as the heir of Arnwood; and a
boy at a very early age imbibes notions of his position, if it promises
to be a high one. He was not two miles from that property which by
right was his own. His own mansion had been reduced to ashes--he
himself was hidden in the forest; and he could but not feel his
position. He sighed for the time when the king's cause should be again
triumphant, and his arrival at that age when he could in person support
and uphold the cause. He longed to be in command, as his father had
been--to lead his men on to victory--to recover his property, and to
revenge himself on those who had acted so cruelly toward him. This was
human nature; and much as Jacob Armitage would expostulate with him,
and try to divert his feelings into other channels--long as he would
preach to him about forgiveness of injuries, and patience until better
times should come, Edward could not help brooding over these thoughts,
and if ever there was a breast animated with intense hatred against the
Puritans, it was that of Edward Beverley. Although this was to be
lamented, it could not create surprise or wonder in the old forester.
All he could do was, as much as possible to reason with him, to soothe
his irritated feelings, and by constant employment try to make him
forget for a time the feelings of ill-will which he had conceived.

One thing was, however, sufficiently plain to Edward, which was, that
whatever might be his wrongs, he had not the power at present to
redress them; and this feeling, perhaps, more than any other, held him
in some sort of check; and as the time when he might have an
opportunity appeared far distant, even to his own sanguine imagination,
so by degrees did he contrive to dismiss from his thoughts what it was
no use to think about at present.




CHAPTER V.


As we have before said, time passed rapidly; with the exception of one
or two excursions after venison, they remained in the cottage, and
Jacob never went to Lymington. The frost had broken up, the snow had
long disappeared, and the trees began to bud. The sun became powerful,
and in the month of May the forest began again to look green.

"And now, Edward," said Jacob Armitage, one day at breakfast, "we will
try for venison again to sell at Lymington, for I must purchase
Humphrey's cart and harness; so let us get our guns, and go out this
fine morning. The stags are mostly by themselves at this season, for
the does are with their young calves. We must find the slot of a deer,
and track him to his lair, and you shall have the first shot if you
like; but, that, however, depends more upon the deer than upon me."

They had walked four or five miles when they came upon the slot or
track of a deer, but Jacob's practiced eye pointed out to Edward that
it was the slot of a young one, and not worth following. He explained
to Edward the difference in the hoof-marks and other signs by which
this knowledge was gained, and they proceeded onward until they found
another slot, which Jacob declared to be that of a warrantable
stag--that is, one old enough to kill and to be good venison.

"We must now track him to his lair, Edward."

This took them about a mile farther, when they arrived at a small
thicket of thorns about an acre in extent.

"Here he is, you see, Edward; let me now see if he is harbored."

They walked round the thicket, and could not find any slot or track by
which the stag had left the covert, and Jacob pronounced that the
animal must be hid in it.

"Now, Edward, do you stay here while I go back to the lee side of the
covert: I will enter it with Smoker, and the stag will, in all
probability, when he is roused, come out to breast the wind. You will
then have a good shot at him; recollect to fire so as to hit him behind
the shoulder: if he is moving quick, fire a little before the
shoulders; if slow, take aim accurately; but recollect, if I come upon
him in the covert, I shall kill him if I can, for we want the venison,
and then we will go after another to give you a chance."

Jacob then left Edward, and went down to the lee side of the covert,
where he entered it with Smoker. Edward was stationed behind a
thorn-bush, which grew a few yards clear of the covert, and he soon
heard the creaking of the branches.

A short time elapsed, and a fine stag came out at a trot; he turned his
head, and was just bounding away when Edward fired, and the animal
fell. Remembering the advice of Jacob, Edward remained where he was, in
silence reloading his piece, and was soon afterward joined by Jacob and
the dog.

"Well done, Edward!" said the forester, in a low voice; and, covering
his forehead to keep off the glare of the sun, he looked earnestly at a
high brake between some thorn-trees, about a half a mile to the
windward. "I think I see something there--look Edward, your eyes are
younger than mine. Is that the branch of a tree in the fern, or is it
not?"

"I see what you mean," replied Edward. "It is not, it moves."

"I thought so, but my eyes are not so good as they once were. It's
another stag, depend upon it; but how are we to get near him? We never
can get across this patch of clear grass without being seen."

"No, we can not get at him from this spot," replied Edward; "but if we
were to fall back to leeward, and gain the forest again, I think that
there are thorns sufficient from the forest to where he lies, to creep
from behind one to the other, so as to get a shot at him, don't you?"

"It will require care and patience to manage that; but I think it might
be done. I will try it; it is my turn now, you know. You had better
stay here with the dog, for only one can hide from thorn to thorn."

Jacob, ordering Smoker to remain, then set off. He had to make a
circuit of three miles to get to the spot where the thorns extended
from the forest, and Edward saw no more of him, although he strained
his eyes, until the stag sprung out, and the gun was discharged. Edward
perceived that the stag was not killed, but severely wounded, running
toward the covert near which he was hid. "Down, Smoker," said he, as he
cocked his gun. The stag came within shot, and was coming nearer, when,
seeing Edward, it turned. Edward fired, and then cheered on the dog,
who sprung after the wounded animal, giving tongue, as he followed him.
Edward, perceiving Jacob hastening toward him, waited for him.

"He's hard hit, Edward," cried Jacob, "and Smoker will have him; but we
must follow as fast as we can."

They both caught up their guns and ran as fast as they could, when, as
they entered the wood, they heard the dog at bay.

"We shan't have far to go, Edward; the animal is done up: Smoker has
him at bay."

They hastened on another quarter of a mile, when they found that the
stag had fallen on his knees, and had been seized by the throat by
Smoker.

"Mind, Edward, now, how I go up to him, for the wound from the horn of
the deer is very dangerous."

Jacob advanced from behind the stag, and cut his throat with his
hunting-knife. "He is a fine beast, and we have done well to-day, but
we shall have two journeys to make to get all this venison home. I
could not get a fair shot at him--and see, I have hit him here in the
flank."

"And here is my ball in his throat," said Edward.

"So it is. Then it was a good shot that you made, and you are master of
the hunt this day, Edward. Now, I'll remain, and you go home for White
Billy. Humphrey is right about the cart. If we had one, we could have
carried all home at once; but I must go now and cut the throat of the
other stag which you killed so cleverly. You will be a good hunter one
of these days, Edward. A little more knowledge, and a little more
practice, and I will leave it all to you, and hang up my gun over the
chimney."

It was late in the evening before they had made their two trips and
taken all the venison home, and very tired were they before it was
safely housed. Edward was delighted with his success, but not more so
than was old Jacob. The next morning, Jacob set off for Lymington, with
the pony loaded with venison, which he sold, as well as two more loads
which he promised to bring the next day, and the day after. He then
looked out for a cart, and was fortunate in finding a small one, just
fitted to the size of the pony, who was not tall but very strong, as
all the New Forest ponies are. He also procured harness, and then put
Billy in the cart to draw him home; but Billy did not admire being put
in a cart, and for some time was very restive, and backed and reared,
and went every way but the right; but by dint of coaxing and leading,
he at last submitted, and went straight on; but then the noise of the
cart behind him frightened him, and he ran away. At last, having tired
himself out, he thought that he might as well go quietly in harness, as
he could not get out of it; and he did so, and arrived safe at the
cottage. Humphrey was delighted at the sight of the cart, and said that
now they should get on well. The next day, Jacob contrived to put all
the remainder of the venison in the cart, and White Billy made no more
difficulty; he dragged it all to Lymington, and returned with the cart
as quietly and cleverly as if he had been in harness all his life.

"Well, Edward, the venison paid for the cart at all events," said
Jacob, "and now, I will tell you all the news I collected while I was
at Lymington. Captain Burly, who attempted to incite the people to
rescue the king, has been hung, drawn, and quartered, as a traitor."

"They are traitors who condemned him," replied Edward, in wrath.

"Yes, so they are; but there is better news, which is, that the Duke of
York has escaped to Holland."

"Yes, that is good news; and the king?"

"He is still a prisoner in Carisbrook Castle. There are many rumors and
talks, but no one knows what is true and what is false; but depend upon
it, this can not last long, and the king will have his rights yet."

Edward remained very grave for some time.

"I trust in Heaven we all shall have our rights yet, Jacob," said he at
last. "I wish I was a man!"

Here the conversation ended, and they went to bed.

This was now a busy time at the cottage. The manure had to be got out
of the stable and pigsties, and carried out to the potato-ground and
garden; the crops had to be put in, and the cart was now found
valuable. After the manure had been carried out and spread, Edward and
Humphrey helped Jacob to dig the ground, and then to put in the seed.
The cabbage-plants of last year were then put out, and the turnips and
carrots sown. Before the month was over, the garden and potato-field
were cropped, and Humphrey took upon himself to weed and keep it clean.
Little Edith had also employment now, for the hens began to lay eggs,
and as soon as she heard them cackling, she ran for the eggs and
brought them in; and before the month was over, Jacob had set four hens
upon eggs. Billy, the pony, was now turned out to graze in the forest;
he came home every night of his own accord.

"I'll tell you what we want," said Humphrey, who took the command
altogether over the farm: "we want a cow."

"Oh yes, a cow," cried Alice, "I have plenty of time to milk her."
