
All night they searched, and when morning broke and they knew no more
than before what had become of the maiden, they grew weary, and said to
the mother: 'It is no use. Let us go home, nothing has happened to your
daughter, except that she has run away with a man.'

'Yes, I will come,' answered she, 'but I must first look in the river.
Perhaps some one has thrown her in there.' But the maiden was not in the
river.

For four days the father and mother waited and watched for their child
to come back; then they gave up hope, and said to each other: 'What
is to be done? What are we to say to the man to whom Dschemila is
betrothed? Let us kill a goat, and bury its head in the grave, and when
the man returns we must tell him Dschemila is dead.'

Very soon the bridegroom came back, bringing with him carpets and
soft cushions for the house of his bride. And as he entered the town
Dschemila's father met him, saying, 'Greeting to you. She is dead.'

At these words the young man broke into loud cries, and it was some
time before he could speak. Then he turned to one of the crowd who had
gathered round him, and asked: 'Where have they buried her?'

'Come to the churchyard with me,' answered he; and the young man went
with him, carrying with him some of the beautiful things he had brought.
These he laid on the grass and then began to weep afresh. All day he
stayed, and at nightfall he gathered up his stuffs and carried them
to his own house. But when the day dawned he took them in his arms
and returned to the grave, where he remained as long as it was light,
playing softly on his flute. And this he did daily for six months.

One morning, a man who was wandering through the desert, having lost his
way, came upon a lonely castle. The sun was very hot, and the man was
very tired, so he said to himself, 'I will rest a little in the shadow
of this castle.' He stretched himself out comfortably, and was almost
asleep, when he heard a voice calling to him softly:

'Are you a ghost,' it said, 'or a man?'

He looked up, and saw a girl leaning out of a window, and he answered:

'I am a man, and a better one, too, than your father or your
grandfather.'

'May all good luck be with you,' said she; 'but what has brought you
into this land of ogres and horrors?'

'Does an ogre really live in this castle?' asked he.

'Certainly he does,' replied the girl, 'and as night is not far off he
will be here soon. So, dear friend, depart quickly, lest he return and
snap you up for supper.'

'But I am so thirsty!' said the man. 'Be kind, and give me some drink,
or else I shall die! Surely, even in this desert there must be some
spring?'

'Well, I have noticed that whenever the ogre brings back water he always
comes from that side; so if you follow the same direction perhaps you
may find some.'

The man jumped up at once and was about to start, when the maiden spoke
again: 'Tell me, where are you going?'

'Why do you want to know?'

'I have an errand for you; but tell me first whether you go east or
west.'

'I travel to Damascus.'

'Then do this for me. As you pass through our village, ask for a man
called Dschemil, and say to him: "Dschemila greets you, from the castle,
which lies far away, and is rocked by the wind. In my grave lies only a
goat. So take heart."'

And the man promised, and went his way, till he came to a spring of
water. And he drank a great draught and then lay on the bank and slept
quietly. When he woke he said to himself, 'The maiden did a good deed
when she told me where to find water. A few hours more, and I should
have been dead. So I will do her bidding, and seek out her native town
and the man for whom the message was given.'

For a whole month he travelled, till at last he reached the town where
Dschemil dwelt, and as luck would have it, there was the young man
sitting before his door with his beard unshaven and his shaggy hair
hanging over his eyes.

'Welcome, stranger,' said Dschemil, as the man stopped. 'Where have you
come from?'

'I come from the west, and go towards the east,' he answered.

'Well, stop with us awhile, and rest and eat!' said Dschemil. And the
man entered; and food was set before him, and he sat down with the
father of the maiden and her brothers, and Dschemil. Only Dschemil
himself was absent, squatting on the threshold.

'Why do you not eat too?' asked the stranger. But one of the young men
whispered hastily: 'Leave him alone. Take no notice! It is only at night
that he ever eats.'

So the stranger went on silently with his food. Suddenly one of
Dschemil's brothers called out and said: 'Dschemil, bring us some water!'
And the stranger remembered his message and said:

'Is there a man here named "Dschemil"? I lost my way in the desert, and
came to a castle, and a maiden looked out of the window and...'

'Be quiet,' they cried, fearing that Dschemil might hear. But Dschemil
had heard, and came forward and said:

'What did you see? Tell me truly, or I will cut off your head this
instant!'

'My lord,' replied the stranger, 'as I was wandering, hot and tired,
through the desert, I saw near me a great castle, and I said aloud, "I
will rest a little in its shadow." And a maiden looked out of a window
and said, "Are you a ghost or a man?" And I answered, "I am a man, and
a better one, too, than your father or your grandfather." And I was
thirsty and asked for water, but she had none to give me, and I felt
like to die. Then she told me that the ogre, in whose castle she dwelt,
brought in water always from the same side, and that if I too went that
way most likely I should come to it. But before I started she begged me
to go to her native town, and if I met a man called Dschemil I was to
say to him, "Dschemila greets you, from the castle which lies far
away, and is rocked by the wind. In my grave lies only a goat. So take
heart."'

Then Dschemil turned to his family and said: 'Is this true? and is
Dschemila not dead at all, but simply stolen from her home?'

'No, no,' replied they, 'his story is a pack of lies. Dschemila is
really dead. Everybody knows it.'

'That I shall see for myself,' said Dschemil, and, snatching up a spade,
hastened off to the grave where the goat's head lay buried.

And they answered, 'Then hear what really happened. When you were away,
she went with the other maidens to the forest to gather wood. And there
she found an iron mortar, which she wished to bring home; but she
could not carry it, neither would she leave it. So the maidens returned
without her, and as night was come, we all set out to look for her, but
found nothing. And we said, "The bridegroom will be here to-morrow, and
when he learns that she is lost, he will set out to seek her, and we
shall lose him too. Let us kill a goat, and bury it in her grave, and
tell him she is dead." Now you know, so do as you will. Only, if you go
to seek her, take with you this man with whom she has spoken that he may
show you the way.' 'Yes; that is the best plan,' replied Dschemil; 'so
give me food, and hand me my sword, and we will set out directly.'

But the stranger answered: 'I am not going to waste a whole month in
leading you to the castle! If it were only a day or two's journey I
would not mind; but a month--no!'

'Come with me then for three days,' said Dschemil, 'and put me in the
right road, and I will reward you richly.'

'Very well,' replied the stranger, 'so let it be.'

For three days they travelled from sunrise to sunset, then the stranger
said: 'Dschemil?'

'Yes,' replied he.

'Go straight on till you reach a spring, then go on a little farther,
and soon you will see the castle standing before you.'

'So I will,' said Dschemil.

'Farewell, then,' said the stranger, and turned back the way he had
come.

It was six and twenty days before Dschemil caught sight of a green spot
rising out of the sandy desert, and knew that the spring was near at
last. He hastened his steps, and soon was kneeling by its side, drinking
thirstily of the bubbling water. Then he lay down on the cool grass,
and began to think. 'If the man was right, the castle must be somewhere
about. I had better sleep here to-night, and to-morrow I shall be able
to see where it is.' So he slept long and peacefully. When he awoke
the sun was high, and he jumped up and washed his face and hands in the
spring, before going on his journey. He had not walked far, when the
castle suddenly appeared before him, though a moment before not a trace
of it could be seen. 'How am I to get in?' he thought. 'I dare not
knock, lest the ogre should hear me. Perhaps it would be best for me
to climb up the wall, and wait to see what will happen. So he did, and
after sitting on the top for about an hour, a window above him opened,
and a voice said: 'Dschemil!' He looked up, and at the sight of
Dschemila, whom he had so long believed to be dead, he began to weep.

'Dear cousin,' she whispered, 'what has brought you here?'

'My grief at losing you.'

'Oh! go away at once. If the ogre comes back he will kill you.'

'I swear by your head, queen of my heart, that I have not found you only
to lose you again! If I must die, well, I must!'

'Oh, what can I do for you?'

'Anything you like!'

'If I let you down a cord, can you make it fast under your arms, and
climb up?'

'Of course I can,' said he.

So Dschemila lowered the cord, and Dschemil tied it round him, and
climbed up to her window. Then they embraced each other tenderly, and
burst into tears of joy.

'But what shall I do when the ogre returns?' asked she.

'Trust to me,' he said.

Now there was a chest in the room, where Dschemila kept her clothes. And
she made Dschemil get into it, and lie at the bottom, and told him to
keep very still.

He was only hidden just in time, for the lid was hardly closed when
the ogre's heavy tread was heard on the stairs. He flung open the door,
bringing men's flesh for himself and lamb's flesh for the maiden. 'I
smell the smell of a man!' he thundered. 'What is he doing here?'

'How could any one have come to this desert place?' asked the girl, and
burst into tears.

'Do not cry,' said the ogre; 'perhaps a raven has dropped some scraps
from his claws.'

'Ah, yes, I was forgetting,' answered she. 'One did drop some bones
about.'

'Well, burn them to powder,' replied the ogre, 'so that I may swallow
it.'

So the maiden took some bones and burned them, and gave them to the
ogre, saying, 'Here is the powder, swallow it.'

And when he had swallowed the powder the ogre stretched himself out and
went to sleep.

In a little while the man's flesh, which the maiden was cooking for the
ogre's supper, called out and said:

     'Hist! Hist!
     A man lies in the kist!'

And the lamb's flesh answered:

     'He is your brother,
     And cousin of the other.'

The ogre moved sleepily, and asked, 'What did the meat say, Dschemila?'

'Only that I must be sure to add salt.'

'Well, add salt.'

'Yes, I have done so,' said she.

The ogre was soon sound asleep again, when the man's flesh called out a
second time:

     'Hist! Hist!
     A man lies in the kist!'

And the lamb's flesh answered:

     'He is your brother,
     And cousin of the other.'

'What did it say, Dschemila?' asked the ogre.

'Only that I must add pepper.'

'Well, add pepper.'

'Yes, I have done so,' said she.

The ogre had had a long day's hunting, and could not keep himself awake.
In a moment his eyes were tight shut, and then the man's flesh called
out for the third time:

     'Hist! Hist
     A man lies in the kist,'

And the lamb's flesh answered:

     'He is your brother,
     And cousin of the other.'

'What did it say, Dschemila?' asked the ogre.

'Only that it was ready, and that I had better take it off the fire.'

'Then if it is ready, bring it to me, and I will eat it.'

So she brought it to him, and while he was eating she supped off the
lamb's flesh herself, and managed to put some aside for her cousin.

When the ogre had finished, and had washed his hands, he said to
Dschemila: 'Make my bed, for I am tired.'

So she made his bed, and put a nice soft pillow for his head, and tucked
him up.

'Father,' she said suddenly.

'Well, what is it?'

'Dear father, if you are really asleep, why are your eyes always open?'

'Why do you ask that, Dschemila? Do you want to deal treacherously with
me?'

'No, of course not, father. How could I, and what would be the use of
it?'

'Well, why do you want to know?'

'Because last night I woke up and saw the whole place shining in a red
light, which frightened me.'

'That happens when I am fast asleep.'

'And what is the good of the pin you always keep here so carefully?'

'If I throw that pin in front of me, it turns into an iron mountain.'

'And this darning needle?'

'That becomes a sea.'

'And this hatchet?'

'That becomes a thorn hedge, which no one can pass through. But why do
you ask all these questions? I am sure you have something in your head.'

'Oh, I just wanted to know; and how could anyone find me out here?' and
she began to cry.

'Oh, don't cry, I was only in fun,' said the ogre.

He was soon asleep again, and a yellow light shone through the castle.

'Come quick!' called Dschemil from the chest; 'we must fly now while the
ogre is asleep.'

'Not yet,' she said, 'there is a yellow light shining. I don't think he
is asleep.'

So they waited for an hour. Then Dschemil whispered again: 'Wake up!
There is no time to lose!'

'Let me see if he is asleep,' said she, and she peeped in, and saw a red
light shining. Then she stole back to her cousin, and asked, 'But how
are we to get out?'

'Get the rope, and I will let you down.'

So she fetched the rope, the hatchet, and the pin and the needles, and
said, 'Take them, and put them in the pocket of your cloak, and be sure
not to lose them.'

Dschemil put them carefully in his pocket, and tied the rope round her,
and let her down over the wall.

