
'I saw them,' he went on, 'as I came up; and I'm very glad I did. I
knew they were after somebody, but I couldn't see who it was. They
won't touch you so long as I'm with you.'

'Why, who are you?' asked the nurse, offended at the freedom with which
he spoke to them.

'I'm Peter's son.'

'Who's Peter?'

'Peter the miner.'

'I don't know him.' 'I'm his son, though.'

'And why should the goblins mind you, pray?'

'Because I don't mind them.  I'm used to them.'

'What difference does that make?'

'If you're not afraid of them, they're afraid of you.  I'm not afraid
of them.  That's all.  But it's all that's wanted--up here, that is.
It's a different thing down there.  They won't always mind that song
even, down there.  And if anyone sings it, they stand grinning at him
awfully; and if he gets frightened, and misses a word, or says a wrong
one, they--oh! don't they give it him!'

'What do they do to him?' asked Irene, with a trembling voice.

'Don't go frightening the princess,' said the nurse.

'The princess!' repeated the little miner, taking off his curious cap.
'I beg your pardon; but you oughtn't to be out so late. Everybody knows
that's against the law.'

'Yes, indeed it is!' said the nurse, beginning to cry again.  'And I
shall have to suffer for it.'

'What does that matter?' said the boy.  'It must be your fault.  It is
the princess who will suffer for it.  I hope they didn't hear you call
her the princess.  If they did, they're sure to know her again: they're
awfully sharp.'

'Lootie! Lootie!' cried the princess.  'Take me home.'

'Don't go on like that,' said the nurse to the boy, almost fiercely.
'How could I help it?  I lost my way.'

'You shouldn't have been out so late.  You wouldn't have lost your way
if you hadn't been frightened,' said the boy.  'Come along. I'll soon
set you right again.  Shall I carry your little Highness?'

'Impertinence!' murmured the nurse, but she did not say it aloud, for
she thought if she made him angry he might take his revenge by telling
someone belonging to the house, and then it would be sure to come to
the king's ears.  'No, thank you,' said Irene.  'I can walk very well,
though I can't run so fast as nursie.  If you will give me one hand,
Lootie will give me another, and then I shall get on famously.'

They soon had her between them, holding a hand of each.

'Now let's run,' said the nurse.

'No, no!' said the little miner.  'That's the worst thing you can do.
If you hadn't run before, you would not have lost your way. And if you
run now, they will be after you in a moment.'

'I don't want to run,' said Irene.

'You don't think of me,' said the nurse.

'Yes, I do, Lootie.  The boy says they won't touch us if we don't run.'

'Yes, but if they know at the house that I've kept you out so late I
shall be turned away, and that would break my heart.'

'Turned away, Lootie!  Who would turn you away?'

'Your papa, child.'

'But I'll tell him it was all my fault.  And you know it was, Lootie.'

'He won't mind that.  I'm sure he won't.'

'Then I'll cry, and go down on my knees to him, and beg him not to take
away my own dear Lootie.'

The nurse was comforted at hearing this, and said no more.  They went
on, walking pretty fast, but taking care not to run a step.

'I want to talk to you,' said Irene to the little miner; 'but it's so
awkward!  I don't know your name.'

'My name's Curdie, little princess.'

'What a funny name! Curdie!  What more?'

'Curdie Peterson.  What's your name, please?'

'Irene.'

'What more?'

'I don't know what more.  What more is my name, Lootie?'

'Princesses haven't got more than one name.  They don't want it.'

'Oh, then, Curdie, you must call me just Irene and no more.'

'No, indeed,' said the nurse indignantly.  'He shall do no such thing.'

'What shall he call me, then, Lootie?'

'Your Royal Highness.' 'My Royal Highness!  What's that?  No, no,
Lootie.  I won't be called names.  I don't like them.  You told me once
yourself it's only rude children that call names; and I'm sure Curdie
wouldn't be rude.  Curdie, my name's Irene.'

'Well, Irene,' said Curdie, with a glance at the nurse which showed he
enjoyed teasing her; 'it is very kind of you to let me call you
anything.  I like your name very much.'

He expected the nurse to interfere again; but he soon saw that she was
too frightened to speak.  She was staring at something a few yards
before them in the middle of the path, where it narrowed between rocks
so that only one could pass at a time.

'It is very much kinder of you to go out of your way to take us home,'
said Irene.

'I'm not going out of my way yet,' said Curdie.  'It's on the other
side of those rocks the path turns off to my father's.'

'You wouldn't think of leaving us till we're safe home, I'm sure,'
gasped the nurse.

'Of course not,' said Curdie.

'You dear, good, kind Curdie!  I'll give you a kiss when we get home,'
said the princess.

The nurse gave her a great pull by the hand she held.  But at that
instant the something in the middle of the way, which had looked like a
great lump of earth brought down by the rain, began to move. One after
another it shot out four long things, like two arms and two legs, but
it was now too dark to tell what they were.  The nurse began to tremble
from head to foot.  Irene clasped Curdie's hand yet faster, and Curdie
began to sing again:

  'One, two--
  Hit and hew!
  Three, four--
  Blast and bore!
  Five, six--
  There's a fix!
  Seven, eight--
  Hold it straight!
  Nine, ten--
  Hit again!
  Hurry! scurry!
  Bother! smother!
  There's a toad
  In the road!
  Smash it!
  Squash it!
  Fry it!
  Dry it!
  You're another!
  Up and off!
  There's enough!--
  Huuuuuh!'


As he uttered the last words, Curdie let go his hold of his companion,
and rushed at the thing in the road as if he would trample it under his
feet.  It gave a great spring, and ran straight up one of the rocks
like a huge spider.  Curdie turned back laughing, and took Irene's hand
again.  She grasped his very tight, but said nothing till they had
passed the rocks.  A few yards more and she found herself on a part of
the road she knew, and was able to speak again.

'Do you know, Curdie, I don't quite like your song: it sounds to me
rather rude,' she said.

'Well, perhaps it is,' answered Curdie.  'I never thought of that; it's
a way we have.  We do it because they don't like it.'

'Who don't like it?'

'The cobs, as we call them.'

'Don't!' said the nurse.

'Why not?' said Curdie.

'I beg you won't.  Please don't.'

'Oh! if you ask me that way, of course, I won't; though I don't a bit
know why.  Look! there are the lights of your great house down below.
You'll be at home in five minutes now.'

Nothing more happened.  They reached home in safety.  Nobody had missed
them, or even known they had gone out; and they arrived at the door
belonging to their part of the house without anyone seeing them.  The
nurse was rushing in with a hurried and not over-gracious good night to
Curdie; but the princess pulled her hand from hers, and was just
throwing her arms round Curdie's neck, when she caught her again and
dragged her away.

'Lootie! Lootie! I promised a kiss,' cried Irene.

'A princess mustn't give kisses.  It's not at all proper,' said Lootie.

'But I promised,' said the princess.

'There's no occasion; he's only a miner-boy.'

'He's a good boy, and a brave boy, and he has been very kind to us.
Lootie! Lootie! I promised.'

'Then you shouldn't have promised.'

'Lootie, I promised him a kiss.'

'Your Royal Highness,' said Lootie, suddenly grown very respectful,
'must come in directly.'

'Nurse, a princess must not break her word,' said Irene, drawing
herself up and standing stock-still.

Lootie did not know which the king might count the worst--to let the
princess be out after sunset, or to let her kiss a miner-boy. She did
not know that, being a gentleman, as many kings have been, he would
have counted neither of them the worse.  However much he might have
disliked his daughter to kiss the miner-boy, he would not have had her
break her word for all the goblins in creation. But, as I say, the
nurse was not lady enough to understand this, and so she was in a great
difficulty, for, if she insisted, someone might hear the princess cry
and run to see, and then all would come out.  But here Curdie came
again to the rescue.

'Never mind, Princess Irene,' he said.  'You mustn't kiss me tonight.
But you shan't break your word.  I will come another time.  You may be
sure I will.'

'Oh, thank you, Curdie!' said the princess, and stopped crying.

'Good night, Irene; good night, Lootie,' said Curdie, and turned and
was out of sight in a moment.

'I should like to see him!' muttered the nurse, as she carried the
princess to the nursery.

'You will see him,' said Irene.  'You may be sure Curdie will keep his
word.  He's sure to come again.'

'I should like to see him!' repeated the nurse, and said no more. She
did not want to open a new cause of strife with the princess by saying
more plainly what she meant.  Glad enough that she had succeeded both
in getting home unseen, and in keeping the princess from kissing the
miner's boy, she resolved to watch her far better in future.  Her
carelessness had already doubled the danger she was in.  Formerly the
goblins were her only fear; now she had to protect her charge from
Curdie as well.



CHAPTER 7

The Mines

Curdie went home whistling.  He resolved to say nothing about the
princess for fear of getting the nurse into trouble, for while he
enjoyed teasing her because of her absurdity, he was careful not to do
her any harm.  He saw no more of the goblins, and was soon fast asleep
in his bed.

He woke in the middle of the night, and thought he heard curious noises
outside.  He sat up and listened; then got up, and, opening the door
very quietly, went out.  When he peeped round the corner, he saw, under
his own window, a group of stumpy creatures, whom he at once recognized
by their shape.  Hardly, however, had he begun his 'One, two, three!'
when they broke asunder, scurried away, and were out of sight.  He
returned laughing, got into bed again, and was fast asleep in a moment.

Reflecting a little over the matter in the morning, he came to the
conclusion that, as nothing of the kind had ever happened before, they
must be annoyed with him for interfering to protect the princess.  By
the time he was dressed, however, he was thinking of something quite
different, for he did not value the enmity of the goblins in the least.
As soon as they had had breakfast, he set off with his father for the
mine.

They entered the hill by a natural opening under a huge rock, where a
little stream rushed out.  They followed its course for a few yards,
when the passage took a turn, and sloped steeply into the heart of the
hill.  With many angles and windings and branchings-off, and sometimes
with steps where it came upon a natural gulf, it led them deep into the
hill before they arrived at the place where they were at present
digging out the precious ore. This was of various kinds, for the
mountain was very rich in the better sorts of metals.  With flint and
steel, and tinder-box, they lighted their lamps, then fixed them on
their heads, and were soon hard at work with their pickaxes and shovels
and hammers.  Father and son were at work near each other, but not in
the same gang--the passages out of which the ore was dug, they called
gangs--for when the lode, or vein of ore, was small, one miner would
have to dig away alone in a passage no bigger than gave him just room
to work--sometimes in uncomfortable cramped positions.  If they stopped
for a moment they could hear everywhere around them, some nearer, some
farther off, the sounds of their companions burrowing away in all
directions in the inside of the great mountain--some boring holes in
the rock in order to blow it up with gunpowder, others shovelling the
broken ore into baskets to be carried to the mouth of the mine, others
hitting away with their pickaxes. Sometimes, if the miner was in a very
lonely part, he would hear only a tap-tapping, no louder than that of a
woodpecker, for the sound would come from a great distance off through
