gave a great leap. Her high spirits left her as if by magic; she felt a
lump in her throat, and during the rest of the drive hardly spoke.

The Squire, on the contrary, talked incessantly. He talked more than
ever after Nora had looked at him. He slapped his wife on the shoulder,
and complimented her on her bravery. Nora's driving was the very best in
all the world; she was a born whip; she had no fear in her; she was his
own colleen, the Light o' the Morning, the dearest, sweetest soul on
earth.

Mrs. O'Shanaghan replied very briefly and coldly to her husband's
excited words. She treated them with what she imagined the contempt they
deserved; but Nora was neither elated just then by her father's praise
nor chilled by her mother's demeanor. Every thought of her heart,
every nerve in her highly strung frame, was concentrated on one fact
alone--she had surprised a look, a look on the Squire's face, which told
her that his heart was broken.




CHAPTER V.


"I AM ASHAMED OF YOU."

It was late that same evening, and the household at the Castle had all
retired to rest. Nora was in her own room. This room was not furnished
according to an English girl's fancy. It was plain and bare, but,
compared to Biddy Murphy's chamber, it was a room of comfort and
even luxury. A neat carpet covered the floor, there were white dimity
curtains to the windows, and the little bed in its distant recess looked
neat and comfortable. It is true that the washhand-stand was wooden, and
the basin and jug of the plainest type; but Mrs. O'Shanaghgan herself
saw that Nora had at least what she considered the necessaries of life.
She had a neat hanging-press for her dresses, and a pretty chest of
drawers, which her mother herself had saved up her pin-money to buy for
her.

Nora now stood by one of the open windows, her thick and very long black
hair hanging in a rippling mass over her neck and shoulders. Suddenly,
as she bent out of the window, the faint, very faint perfume of a cigar
came up on the night air. She sniffed excitedly for a moment, and then,
bending a little more forward, said in a low tone:

"Is that you, Terry?"

"Yes--why don't you go to bed?" was the somewhat ungracious response.

"I am not sleepy. May I come down and join you?"

"No."

"Will you come up and join me?"

The answer was about to be "No"; there was a moment's hesitation,
then Nora's voice said pleadingly, "Ah, do now, Terry; I want to say
something so badly."

"But if anybody hears?"

"They can't hear. Father and mother's room is at the other end of the
house."

"All right; don't say any more; you'll wake people with that chatter of
yours. I'm coming."

In a couple of minutes there was a knock at Nora's door. She flew to
open it, and Terence came in.

"What do you want?" he said.

"To talk to you; I have got something to say. Come over and sit by the
window."

Terence obeyed.

"The first thing to do is to put out that light," said Nora. She ran
to the dressing table, and before her brother could prevent her had
extinguished the candle.

"Now, then, there is the dear old lady moon to look down upon us, and
nothing else can see us."

"Why don't you go to bed, Nora? Hannah would say that you are losing
your beauty-sleep sitting up at this, hour."

"As if anything about me mattered just now," said Nora.

"Why, what's up?"

"The old thing, Terry; you must know what's up."

"What old thing? I am sure I can't guess."

"Well, then, if you can't you ought. Father is in a peck of trouble--a
peck of trouble."

Nora's voice broke and trembled. Terence, who disliked a scene beyond
anything, fidgeted restlessly. He leaned out of the window, and dropped
his cigar ash on the ground beneath.

"And you are his only son and the heir to Castle O'Shanaghgan."

"The heir to a pack of ruins," said the boy impatiently.

"Terry, you don't deserve to be father's son. How dare you speak like
that of the--the beloved old place?"

"Come, come, Nora, if you are going into heroics I think I'll be off to
bed," said Terence, yawning.

"No, you won't; you must listen. I have got something most important to
say."

"Well, then, I will give you five minutes; not another moment. I know
you, Nora; you always exaggerate things. You are an Irishwoman to your
backbone."

"I am, and I glory in the fact."

"You ought to be ashamed to glory in it. Don't you want to have anything
to do with mother and her relations?"

"I love my mother, but I am glad I don't take after her," said Nora;
"yes, I am glad."

The moon shone on the two young faces, and Nora looked up at her
brother; he put on a supercilious smile, and folded his arms across his
broad chest.

"Yes," she replied; "and I should like to shake you for looking like
that. I am glad I am Irish through and through and _through_. Would
I give my warm heart and my enthusiasm for your coldness and
deliberation?"

"Good gracious, Nora, what a little ignorant thing you are! Do you
suppose no Englishman has enthusiasm?"

"We'll drop the subject," said Nora. "It is one I won't talk of; it puts
me into such a boiling rage to see you sitting like that."

Terence did not speak at all for a moment; then he said quietly:

"What is this thing that you have got to tell me? The five minutes are
nearly up, you know."

"Oh, bother your five minutes! I cannot tell you in five minutes.
When my heart is scalded with unshed tears, how can I measure time by
_minutes_? It has to do with father; it is worse than anything that has
ever gone before."

"What is it, Norrie?" Her brother's tone had suddenly become gentle. He
laid his hand for a moment on her arm; the gentleness of the tone, the
unexpected sweetness of the touch overcame Nora; she flung her arms
passionately round his neck.

"Oh, and you are the only brother I have got!" she sobbed; "and I could
love you--I could love you like anything. Can't you be sympathetic?
Can't you be sweet? Can't you be dear?"

"Oh, come, come!" said Terence, struggling to release himself from
Nora's entwining arms; "I am not made like you, you know; but I am not a
bad chap at heart. Now, what is it?"

"I will try and tell you."

"And for goodness' sake don't look so sorrowfully at me, Nora; we can
talk, and we can act and do good deeds, without giving ourselves away. I
hate girls who wear their hearts on their sleeves."

"Oh! you will _never_ understand," said Nora, starting back again; all
her burst of feeling turned in upon herself. "I can't imagine how you
are father's son," she began. But then she stopped, waited for a moment,
and then said quietly, "There is a fresh mortgage, and it is for a very
big sum."

"Oh, is that all?" said Terence. "I have heard of mortgages all my life;
it seems to be the fashion at O'Shanaghgan to mortgage to any extent.
There is nothing in that; father will give up a little more of the
land."

"How much land do you think is left?"

"I am sure I can't say; not much, I presume."

"It is my impression," said Nora--"I am not sure; but it is my
impression--that there is _nothing_ left to meet this big thing but
the--the--the land on which"--her voice broke--"Terry, the land on which
the house stands."

"Really, Nora, you are so melodramatic. I don't know how you can know
anything of this."

"I only guess. Mother is very unhappy."

"Mother? Is she?"

"Ah, I have touched you there! But anyhow, father is in worse trouble
than he has been yet; I never, _never_ saw him look as he did tonight."

"As if looks mattered."

"The look I saw tonight does matter," said Nora. "We were coming home
from Cronane, and I was driving."

"It is madness to let you drive Black Bess," interrupted Terence. "I
wonder my father risks spoiling one of his most valuable horses."

"Oh, nonsense, Terry; I can drive as well as you, and better, thanks,"
replied Nora, much nettled, for her excellent driving was one of the few
things she was proud of. "Well, I turned round, and I saw father's face,
and, oh! it was just as if someone had stabbed me through the heart.
You know, or perhaps you don't, that the last big loan came from Squire
Murphy."

"Old Dan Murphy; then we are as safe as we can be," said Terence, rising
and whistling. "You really did make me feel uncomfortable, you have such
a queer way; but if it is Dan Murphy, he will give father any amount of
time. Why, they are the best of friends."

"Well, father went to see him on the subject--I happen to know that--and
I don't think he has given him time. There is something wrong, anyhow--I
don't know what; but there _is_ something very wrong, and I mean to find
out tomorrow."

"Nora, if I were you I wouldn't interfere. You are only a young girl,
and these kind of things are quite out of your province. Father has
pulled along ever since you and I were born. Most Irish gentlemen are
poor in these days. How can they help it? The whole country is going to
ruin; there is no proper trade; there is no proper system anywhere. The
tenants are allowed to pay their rent just as they please----"

"As if we could harry them," said inconsistent Nora. "The poor dears,
with their tiny cots and their hard, hard times. I'd rather eat dry
bread all my days than press one of them."

"If these are your silly views, you must expect our father to be badly
off, and the property to go to the dogs, and everything to come to an
end," said the brother in a discontented tone. "But there, I say once
more that you have exaggerated in this matter; there is nothing more
wrong than there has been since I can remember. I am glad I am going to
England; I am glad I am going to be out of it all for a bit."

"You going to England--you, Terry?"

"Yes. Don't you know? Our Uncle George Hartrick has asked me to stay
with him, and I am going."

"And you can go? You can leave us just now?"

"Why, of course; there will be fewer mouths to feed. It's a good thing
every way."

"But Uncle George is a rich man?"

"What of that?"

"I mean he lives in a big place, and has heaps and heaps of money," said
Nora.

"So much the better."

"You cannot go to him _shabby_. What are you going to do for dress?"

"Mother will manage that."

"Mother!" Nora leaped up from the window-ledge and stood facing her
brother. "You have spoken to mother?"

"Of course I have. Dear me, Nora, you are getting to be quite an
unpleasant sort of girl."

"You have spoken to mother," repeated Nora, "and she has promised to
help you? How will she do it?"

Terence moved restlessly.

"I suppose she knows herself how she will do it."

"And you will let her?" said Nora--"you, a man, will let her? You know
she has no money; you know she has nothing but her little trinkets, and
you allow her to sell those to give you pleasure? Oh, I am ashamed of
you! I am sorry you are my brother. How can you do it?"

"Look here, Nora, I won't be scolded by you. After all, I am your elder,
and you are bound, at any rate, to show me decent outward respect. If
you only mean to talk humbug of this sort I am off to bed."

Terence rose from his place on the window-ledge, and, without glancing
at Nora, left the room. When he did so she clasped her hands high above
her head, and sat for a moment looking out into the night. Her face was
quivering, but no tears rose to her wide-open eyes. After a moment she
turned, and began very slowly to undress.

"I will see the Banshee tomorrow, if it is possible," she whispered
under her breath. "If ruin can be averted, it shall be. I don't mind
leaving the place; I don't mind starving. I don't mind _anything_ but
that look on father's face. But father's heart shall not be broken; not
while Nora O'Shanaghgan is in the world."




CHAPTER VI.


THE CAVE OF THE BANSHEE.

At ten o'clock on the following evening two eager excited girls might
have been seen stealing down a narrow path which led to Murphy's Cove.
Murphy's Cove was a charming little semicircular bay which ran rather
deeply into the land. The sand here was of that silvery sheen which,
at low tide, shone like burnished silver. The cove was noted for
its wonderful shells, producing many cowries and long shells called
pointers.

In the days of her early youth Nora had explored the treasures of this
cove, and had secured a valuable collection of shells, as well as very
rare seaweeds, which she had carefully dried. Her mother had shown her
how to make seaweeds and shells into baskets, and many of these amateur
productions adorned the walls of Nora's bedroom.

All the charm of these things had passed away, however; the time had
come when she no longer cared to gather shells or collect seaweeds. She
felt that she was turning very fast into a woman. She had all an Irish
girl's high spirits; but she had, added to these, a peculiarly warm
and sensitive heart. When those she loved were happy, no one in all the
world was happier than Nora O'Shanaghgan; but when any gloom fell on
the home-circle, then Nora suffered far more than anyone gave her credit
for.

She had passed an anxious day at home, watching her father intently,
afraid to question him, and only darting glances at him when she
thought he was not looking. The Squire, however, seemed cheerful enough,
plodding over his land, or arranging about the horses, or doing the
thousand-and-one small things which occupied his life.

Mrs. O'Shanaghgan seemed to have forgotten all about the mortgage, and
was eagerly discussing ways and means with Terence. Terence avoided
Nora's eyes, and rode off early in the evening to see the nearest
tailor. It was not likely that this individual could make a fitting suit
for the young heir to O'Shanaghgan; but the boy must have something
to travel in, and Mrs. O'Shanaghgan gave implicit directions as to the
London tailor whom he was to visit as soon as he reached the Metropolis.

"For you are to look your best, and never to forget that you are my
son," was her rejoinder; and Terence forgot all about Nora's words
on the previous evening. He was to start in two days' time. Even Nora
became excited over his trip and in her mother's account of her Uncle
Hartrick.

"I wish you were going, Nora," said the mother. "I should be proud of
you. Of course you are a little rough colt; but you could be trained;"
and then she looked with sudden admiration at her handsome daughter.

"She has a face in a thousand," she thought, "and she is absolutely
unconscious of her beauty."

At five o'clock Nora had started off in the pony-trap to visit her
friend Biddy. The trap had been brought back by one of the numerous
gossoons who abounded all over O'Shanaghgan, and Biddy and Nora had a
few hours before the great secret expedition was to take place. And now
the time had come. The girls had put on thick serge petticoats, short
jackets, and little tight-fitting caps on their heads. There was always
a breeze blowing round that extreme corner of the Atlantic. Never did
the finest summer day find the waves calm there. Nora and Biddy had been
