shops. In the next place we must each buy a saddle and saddlery. We
have agreed that we will not have any approach to uniform; because, as
we all speak Dutch, we shall be able to pass unobserved, if necessary,
among them. But I have been thinking it over, and it seems to me that
if we have nothing of the sort we shall run the risk of being shot by
our own men."

"What are we to do, then, Chris?"

"I think that we had better get flat caps, like the fatigue caps our
soldiers wear. They can be carried in our pockets inside our shirts
when we are in the neighbourhood of the Boers, and when we are riding
anywhere near our own troops we can put them on instead of our felt
hats. It would alter our appearance altogether when riding in groups,
and even at a distance we could hardly be taken for Boers."

All agreed that it would be an excellent plan.

"We shall, of course, have bandoliers for our cartridges, and
haversacks for our provisions and spare packets of ammunition. Not an
hour must be lost in getting these things. I hear that Captain
Brookfield, who came up to Johannesburg last year and stayed a
fortnight with us, has raised a corps, which he has named the
Maritzburg Scouts. I will call upon him this afternoon and tell him
that there are one-and-twenty of us, all somewhere about my age, and
that we mean fighting; and that as we all speak Dutch we think we can
do more good by scouting about on our own account than by joining any
regular corps; but that at the same time we should like, if there was
anything like regular fighting, to place ourselves under the orders of
an officer like himself. It is rather difficult to explain, you know,
but I think he will understand what we mean. We should be, in fact, a
section of his troop, acting generally on independent service, either
scouting, or going in among the Boers and getting intelligence, trying
to blow up bridges, and engaging looting parties--for we may be sure
that the Boers will be scattering all over the country plundering.

"Of course I shall say, if he won't accept us on those terms, we shall
do as we best can on our own account; but that as we don't require pay,
and will provide ourselves with all necessaries, we do not see that we
should be any burden when we join him. I propose that we meet here
again this afternoon, and I hope that by that time we shall all have
got our mounts and saddlery. I hear that many of the loyal farmers
north have driven their animals down here, and are only too glad to
sell the horses at the usual prices. Mind, the clothes we have now
won't do; we must get them of farmer fashion. Don't go together to any
shop, but let each choose for himself; we don't want anything like
uniformity of pattern. The stuff must be strong. We shall each want a
couple of blankets; one of these, with a slit cut in the middle to slip
over the head, will serve as a greatcoat. Now, let us be off! To save
trouble, I should say that we had each better put a certain sum, say
twenty pounds, to go into a fund for general expenditure--food and
ammunition, and that sort of thing--into one of the banks, and we can
draw upon that as we require it."

"I should say, Chris," Sankey said, "that we had better put all our
money into the fund. Our people are all going to pay for our outfit,
and you know they have agreed to give us a hundred pounds each to last
us through the war. It is of no use carrying money about with us. I
think we should agree to pay it all into the common fund, and that at
the end of the business what remains is to be divided among those of us
who go through it."

"I think that is a good plan, Sankey. Certainly we cannot all expect to
come out alive, and that arrangement will save all trouble about money."

On going back into the town they learned that a large farmer had
encamped two miles away, with a big drove of cattle and a couple of
hundred horses, many of which were fine animals, and it was agreed at
once that Sankey, Carmichael, and Peters should hire a buggy and drive
over there and choose twenty-one good horses. Harris and Field
undertook the purchase of the rifles, and Chris went to the office
which Captain Brookfield, who had been an officer in the English army
had taken. He had sent in his name, and was at once shown in.

"Well, Chris," he said cordially as he entered, "I am glad to see you.
You have grown and widened out a good deal since last year. I suppose
your father and mother have both come down with you?"

"My mother has come down, sir, but my father thought that he ought to
remain behind to look after the mines."

"Have you come here to enlist?"

"Not exactly, sir, and yet I have to a certain extent;" and he told the
officer of the little corps that had been formed among his companions
at Johannesburg.

"A very good idea. Speaking Dutch, as you say they all do, they ought
to do good service as scouts. But why have you come to me?"

This Chris explained.

The captain laughed. "I suppose the fact is, Chris, you think that you
will be able to see and do more if you are altogether independent of
other people's orders."

"Perhaps that is it, sir; but if there is any cavalry fighting we
should much rather be under orders. Such a small corps would look
ridiculous marching out by itself."

"Well, I don't see any reason why you should not carry out your plan.
It would certainly be better that you should have some--what I may
call--official sanction. All the men in our corps are paid five
shillings a day, and as your troop would serve under different
conditions, you can to a certain extent dictate your own terms. I will,
if you like, accept you as an independent corps, attached to my command
when with me, but at other times free to scout and to act as you
choose; but mind, I cannot be responsible for any scrape that you get
into. You might call yourselves the Johannesburg section of the
Maritzburg Scouts, maintaining yourselves at your own expense, and
drawing neither pay nor rations."

"Thank you very much, sir; that is just what we want."

"Then, if you will bring your companions here this evening, I will
swear you in. I shall administer a different oath to you from that
which the others take, and merely pledge you, when under my orders, to
obey them, with permission to withdraw from the corps when you choose.
And indeed, receiving no pay or assistance from government, you would
naturally be free to do so."

Leaving Captain Brookfield, Chris went and bought his clothes,
bandolier and belt, and saddlery, and then returned to the hotel and
told his mother how he had got on, and that a horse and rifle would, he
hoped, be obtained that afternoon.

"It seems to me a terribly dangerous business, Chris; but as your
father agreed to it, of course I need say no more. I have a cheque for
five hundred pounds for my expenses and yours."

"Father gave me a hundred before I started, mother; that will more than
pay for my outfit. I don't know what we shall do for the horses, but
there will certainly not be much over."

"Yes, I know, Chris; and he told me to hand you over another hundred
when I went to the bank, which I shall do this afternoon."




CHAPTER III

AT THE FRONT


At five o'clock the lads from Johannesburg again met and reported the
result of the afternoon's work. The nine Mauser rifles had been bought,
and six thousand rounds of ammunition had been purchased. This appeared
an excessive amount, but as there might be a difficulty in obtaining
this ammunition, they bought up all that could be found in the town.
Peters and his party had chosen the horses for the troop. The farmer
was a well-known breeder of good stock, and was glad to dispose of some
of them at a fair price in order to lessen their number. He had already
had several enquiries from corps that were being raised, but the prices
were higher than could be paid for ordinary troopers, though several
had been bought by officers. The lot the lads had picked out had been
put aside, and they had given the farmer fifty pounds earnest-money, to
hold them till the next morning.

"They are as good a looking lot of horses as I ever saw," Peters said,
"in fact, by a long way the best. I always heard that he was one of the
largest breeders of good horses in South Africa. He had eight or ten
extraordinarily good ones, but, of course, he wanted extra prices for
these; but from the rest--and he has some three hundred of them--he let
us choose any we liked at one price, and I think I can say that we
shall be as well mounted a corps as any out here. Of course we avoided
the showy-looking horses, and chose those specially suited to the
country and likely to be fast. Mr. Duncan had several thoroughbreds
from home, and there is no doubt that his stock has benefited by it;
they are all of the country type, sturdy and compact, and yet somewhat
finer in the limb than any I ever saw in the Transvaal. We were
delighted with them."

All the lads were accustomed from childhood to horses, but those Chris
had selected as the committee of inspection were admitted by their
friends to be the best judges of horseflesh in the party, their fathers
being wealthy men who always bought the finest horses money could
obtain.

"We will go over in a body to-morrow," Chris said, "and pay for them
and bring them back. We are lucky indeed to have got hold of such a
good lot. Are they pretty even animals, Peters?"

"Yes, I really don't think there is anything to choose between them."

"Well then, the fair way will be, to make one-and-twenty tickets with
as many numbers and fasten one to the mane of each horse, then we will
put another twenty-one numbers into a hat and draw them; in that way
everyone will be satisfied. Those of you who have not got their money
from their people had better ask them for it this evening, so that we
can settle up to-morrow for the horses and rifles and ammunition. The
hundred pounds we have each been promised will well cover all our
expenses up to the moment we start, and I should think leave us with
something like twenty pounds apiece in pocket, but all we have and the
other hundred for future expenses we had better put into the bank here
to-morrow. We must arrange for four of us to sign cheques, each cheque
to be signed by two, but we had better give them all our signatures so
that in case what we can call the finance committee of four are all
killed or taken prisoners there will be no bother about having fresh
signatures to arrange about."

"Well," Sankey said, "we might as well settle that at once. I propose
that Field, Carmichael, Capper, and, of course, you form the
committee." As no amendment was offered, this was at once agreed to.

"What time did you say that we would come over to fetch the horses?"

"About ten o'clock."

"Well, will you all be at my hotel to-morrow at half-past eight with
your money? Then we will all sign our names on paper the committee
first; afterwards they shall go with me to the bank and pay all the
money in, give them the list of signatures, and tell them that until
further notice two of the four first names will sign the cheques, but
that should circumstances prevent any two of them being able to do so,
others will sign instead. The account had better stand as the
Johannesburg Scouts. When we have arranged that we will hire a couple
of light waggons and start. Have you all got your saddlery?"

"Yes."

"Well, we will take it with us, and then we can ride the horses back. I
will get the tickets made out."

As soon as the bank opened in the morning, Chris and his three
companions presented themselves, and had an interview with the manager,
who was somewhat surprised when twenty-one cheques and cash to the
amount of three thousand five hundred pounds were handed in, each
member having deducted the amount paid for saddlery and clothes. "We
wish the account to stand in the name of the Johannesburg Scouts, and
cheques will be signed by two of the four names standing first on this
list; but as casualties may occur, you will please accept any of these
signatures. Our little corps will form part of the Maritzburg Scouts,
but in money matters we keep to ourselves, being all volunteers serving
without pay."

The manager ran his eye over the cheques. All the names were well known
to him as those of prominent men at Johannesburg, and the great
majority had already accounts at his bank, as all had some time
previously made arrangements for drawing money in case of necessity.

"I suppose, Mr. King," he said, "that as you and your friends represent
the corps, you are all young men?"

"We are all boys," Chris answered with a smile, "but we are old enough
to do men's work, and in the Transvaal the Boers are commandeering all
boys two or three years younger than we are."

"Well, I congratulate you all both on your patriotism and your pluck,
Mr. King, and I have no doubt that you will do good service."

Receiving a cheque-book, they drew two hundred pounds for current
expenses, and then going back to the hotel found the two Cape-carts and
their companions ready, and the saddlery already stowed away. On
arriving at the farm all were highly pleased with the horses their
comrades had selected. They had on the way agreed that it would be a
good plan to buy four others to act as pack-horses, and to furnish them
with remounts in case any of their own were shot. These were to be sent
into the town by two Kaffirs, whom they arranged to take into their
service, for the farmer said at once, when they asked him that he could
very well spare them, as he would be parting with a considerable number
of his horses and cattle, and would not require so many hands as he had
at present. The two men he chose for them were both active young
natives; they made no objection to the exchange of masters, and,
indeed, seemed pleased at the thought of going with them to fight the
Boers, who were universally hated by the natives.

A cheque was given to the farmer for their purchase, then the horses
were chosen by lot as agreed, and were at once saddled and mounted.
They had all been partially broken in, and as the boys were good
riders, they were after a little preliminary struggle soon at their
ease, and, taking a couple of hours' sharp ride through the country,
returned on good terms with their mounts. Two or three hours were spent
in teaching the horses to stand steady as soon as the reins were thrown
over their heads, this being a training to which all horses in the Cape
are subjected. Then they rode back to the town and arranged with a
farmer near it to picket their horses in one of his meadows, and for
their feed while they remained there. The rest of the day was spent in
laying in their supplies. The rifles and ammunition were paid for, pack
saddles bought for the four spare horses, a brace of revolvers
purchased for each member, haversacks ordered for the whole party, and
bags to carry a supply of grain for each horse. In the evening they
went out to the farm, and after discharging their rifles a few times
fed their horses.

This they repeated in the morning, so as to familiarize them with the
sound of firearms; then they saddled and mounted them, and after riding
for half an hour drew up in line, as Captain Brookfield, who had sworn
them in on the previous afternoon, was to inspect them at eight
o'clock. They had all put on their working clothes, bandoliers and
belts, and high boots, and the captain on his arrival, after closely
inspecting them, expressed his strongest approval of their appearance.

"I really congratulate you, Mr. King," he said, "on having command of
twenty such serviceable-looking young fellows. As they all can ride,
and, as you tell me, can all shoot, they ought to do really good
service, and I should be well pleased if all my troop were composed of
such good material. From the fact that you can all speak Dutch, and
most of you Kaffir, you will have great opportunities of obtaining
information, and can, in case of need, pass as young Boers. In fact, I
may say that there is some danger of your being mistaken for them by
our men. I should take you for them myself, except that you all look
brighter and more wide-awake than Boers generally do; but an
artilleryman could hardly be blamed if he plumped a shell among you at
a distance of two or three thousand yards."

"We thought of that, sir;" Chris turned to his band, "Change caps!" All
pulled field-service caps from their pockets, took off the soft felts,
rolled them up and forced them into their valises, and put on the caps.

"That is excellent!" Captain Brookfield exclaimed. "That certainly
alters your appearance altogether, and as far as your figures could be
made out through a glass, it could be seen that you are an irregular
body of some sort. And this can be still more plainly seen if, as I
should advise you, you always ride in fours when you are approaching
our lines; there will then be little chance of a mistake being made.
Where did you pick up all those horses?"

"We bought them yesterday from a farmer named Duncan, who has brought
them down from his place near Dundee."

"Ah! that accounts for it; he is one of the best-known horse-breeders
in the colony. I had not heard that he had come down."

"He only arrived two days ago, sir. We were fortunate to hear of it,
and some of us rode over early yesterday and were lucky enough to
secure them."

"You were lucky. There are several mounted corps being formed here and
at Durban, and horses will go up in price rapidly. Where is he
staying'?"

"About a mile and a half farther out, sir. If you want horses I should
think that you had better go on at once, for he told me that he had
sold sixty yesterday, but that very few of them were anything like as
good horses as these."

"No. People are subscribing handsomely, but we cannot afford to mount
our troopers on such horses as these. A good many gentlemen have found
their own horses, and of course will be well mounted; but a good,
sound, country horse is all we can afford for the others; they are
excellent for ordinary work, though, of course, not so fast as yours,
nor quite so big. Your horses have all a strain of English thoroughbred
blood, and if you should at any time have to ride for it there would be
little chance of the Boers overtaking you, though some of them are very
well mounted, for the two things a Boer will spend money on, are his
horse and his rifle. And when do you start?"

"We are going to-morrow morning. I went to the station-master yesterday
evening and arranged for trucks for the horses to be attached to an
early train to Dundee. We want to get up in time to see the first of
it, and we should lose three days if we were to travel by road."

"That is the right spirit, and I wish I could go with you; but my troop
will wear a sort of uniform, Norfolk jackets and riding-breeches, and
the outfitters are so overwhelmed with orders that it will be another
couple of days at least before they are ready. Then the men must have
two or three days' drill before they start; I am still short of horses,
so I will ride on and see Duncan. I want thirty-five more, and as yet,
although subscriptions are coming in well, we are still a good deal
short of our requirements. However, I dare say I shall be able to make
some arrangement with Duncan, as I shall probably have enough to pay
him in full by the end of the week. Altogether, I don't suppose I shall
be ready to start for another ten days, and unless the Boers delay
their advance I am afraid that I shall not get to Dundee."

"Do you not believe that we shall be able to hold the town?"

"I hardly think that there is a chance of it, and I am sure we made a
mistake in sending a portion of the force there. I know the premier was
most anxious that our troops should be posted as far north as possible,
in order to save the loyal farmers from plunder. If the position were
stronger and impossible to be turned, the case would be different; but
it is not strong, and can be turned on each flank. If the Boers march
to attack General Symons, who is in command there, he may possibly beat
them off; but as they can advance towards Ladysmith either from the
Free State on one side or the Transvaal on the other, he and his troops
would be cut off, and the loyal farmers would be plundered just as much
as if Symons had remained at Ladysmith. I fancy all the military men
think that a grave mistake has been made, and that General White should
not have exposed half his force to disaster. Besides, the position of
Ladysmith is no more defensible than that of Dundee. The Tugela would
be the natural line of defence, but even that could be turned by troops
from the Transvaal going through Zululand, and the line of the river
would be very difficult to defend by a force of less than twenty
thousand men. However, we shall see how the thing works out--how
enterprising the Boers are, and how warmly the Free Staters throw
themselves into the work."

"You think that we shall have a hard time, Captain Brookfield?"

"Yes, I think that is certain, even if Cape Colony keeps quiet, which I
am very much afraid it will not do. If it rises, it will take all the
