bare garret, where he was generally in bed long before his father
returned. He blamed himself sometimes during the first fortnight of
his stay here for the feeling of light-heartedness that at times came
over him. He had loved his father in spite of his faults, and should,
he told himself, have felt deeply depressed at his loss; but nature
was too strong for him. The pleasant evenings with Captain Dave and
his family were to him delightful; he was like a traveller who, after
a cold and cheerless journey, comes in to the warmth of a fire, and
feels a glow of comfort as the blood circulates briskly through his
veins. Sometimes, when he had no other engagements, he went out with
Nellie Dowsett, whose lively chatter was new and very amusing to him.
Sometimes they went up into Cheapside, and into St. Paul's, but more
often sallied out of the city at Aldgate, and walked into the fields.
On these occasions he carried a stout cane that had been his
father's, for Nellie tried in vain to persuade him to gird on a
sword.

"You are a gentleman, Cyril," she would argue, "and have a right to
carry one."

"I am for the present a sober citizen, Mistress Nellie, and do not
wish to assume to be of any other condition. Those one sees with
swords are either gentlemen of the Court, or common bullies, or maybe
highwaymen. After nightfall it is different; for then many citizens
carry their swords, which indeed are necessary to protect them from
the ruffians who, in spite of the city watch, oftentimes attack quiet
passers-by; and if at any time I escort you to the house of one of
your friends, I shall be ready to take my sword with me. But in the
daytime there is no occasion for a weapon, and, moreover, I am full
young to carry one, and this stout cane would, were it necessary, do
me good service, for I learned in France the exercise that they call
the _baton_, which differs little from our English singlestick."

While Cyril was received almost as a member of the family by Captain
Dave and his wife, and found himself on excellent terms with John
Wilkes, he saw that he was viewed with dislike by the two
apprentices. He was scarcely surprised at this. Before his coming,
Robert Ashford had been in the habit of escorting his young mistress
when she went out, and had no doubt liked these expeditions, as a
change from the measuring out of ropes and weighing of iron in the
store. Then, again, the apprentices did not join in the conversation
at table unless a remark was specially addressed to them; and as
Captain Dave was by no means fond of his elder apprentice, it was but
seldom that he spoke to him. Robert Ashford was between eighteen and
nineteen. He was no taller than Cyril, but it would have been
difficult to judge his age by his face, which had a wizened look;
and, as Nellie said one day, in his absence, he might pass very well
for sixty.

It was easy enough for Cyril to see that Robert Ashford heartily
disliked him; the covert scowls that he threw across the table at
meal-time, and the way in which he turned his head and feigned to be
too busy to notice him as he passed through the shop, were sufficient
indications of ill-will. The younger apprentice, Tom Frost, was but a
boy of fifteen; he gave Cyril the idea of being a timid lad. He did
not appear to share his comrade's hostility to him, but once or
twice, when Cyril came out from the office after making up the
accounts of the day, he fancied that the boy glanced at him with an
expression of anxiety, if not of terror.

"If it were not," Cyril said to himself, "that Tom is clearly too
nervous and timid to venture upon an act of dishonesty, I should say
that he had been pilfering something; but I feel sure that he would
not attempt such a thing as that, though I am by no means certain
that Robert Ashford, with his foxy face and cross eyes, would not
steal his master's goods or any one else's did he get the chance.
Unless he were caught in the act, he could do it with impunity, for
everything here is carried on in such a free-and-easy fashion that
any amount of goods might be carried off without their being missed."

After thinking the matter over, he said, one afternoon when his
employer came in while he was occupied at the accounts,--

"I have not seen anything of a stock-book, Captain Dave. Everything
else is now straight, and balanced up to to-day. Here is the book of
goods sold, the book of goods received, and the ledger with the
accounts; but there is no stock-book such as I find in almost all the
other places where I work."

"What do I want with a stock-book?" Captain Dave asked.

"You cannot know how you stand without it," Cyril replied. "You know
how much you have paid, and how much you have received during the
year; but unless you have a stock-book you do not know whether the
difference between the receipts and expenditure represents profit,
for the stock may have so fallen in value during the year that you
may really have made a loss while seeming to make a profit."

"How can that be?" Captain Dave asked. "I get a fair profit on every
article."

"There ought to be a profit, of course," Cyril said; "but sometimes
it is found not to be so. Moreover, if there is a stock-book you can
tell at any time, without the trouble of opening bins and weighing
metal, how much stock you have of each article you sell, and can
order your goods accordingly."

"How would you do that?"

"It is very simple, Captain Dave," Cyril said. "After taking stock of
the whole of the goods, I should have a ledger in which each article
would have a page or more to itself, and every day I should enter
from John Wilkes's sales-book a list of the goods that have gone out,
each under its own heading. Thus, at any moment, if you were to ask
how much chain you had got in stock I could tell you within a fathom.
When did you take stock last?"

"I should say it was about fifteen months since. It was only
yesterday John Wilkes was saying we had better have a thorough
overhauling."

"Quite time, too, I should think, Captain Dave. I suppose you have
got the account of your last stock-taking, with the date of it?"

"Oh, yes, I have got that;" and the Captain unlocked his desk and
took out an account-book. "It has been lying there ever since. It
took a wonderful lot of trouble to do, and I had a clerk and two men
in for a fortnight, for of course John and the boys were attending to
their usual duties. I have often wondered since why I should have had
all that trouble over a matter that has never been of the slightest
use to me."

"Well, I hope you will take it again, sir; it is a trouble, no doubt,
but you will find it a great advantage."

"Are you sure you think it needful, Cyril?"

"Most needful, Captain Dave. You will see the advantage of it
afterwards."

"Well, if you think so, I suppose it must be done," the Captain said,
with a sigh; "but it will be giving you a lot of trouble to keep this
new book of yours."

"That is nothing, sir. Now that I have got all the back work up it
will be a simple matter to keep the daily work straight. I shall find
ample time to do it without any need of lengthening my hours."

Cyril now set to work in earnest, and telling Mrs. Dowsett he had
some books that he wanted to make up in his room before going to bed,
he asked her to allow him to keep his light burning.

Mrs. Dowsett consented, but shook her head and said he would
assuredly injure his health if he worked by candle light.

Fortunately, John Wilkes had just opened a fresh sales-book, and
Cyril told him that he wished to refer to some particulars in the
back books. He first opened the ledger by inscribing under their
different heads the amount of each description of goods kept in stock
at the last stock-taking, and then entered under their respective
heads all the sales that had been made, while on an opposite page he
entered the amount purchased. It took him a month's hard work, and he
finished it on the very day that the new stock-taking concluded.




CHAPTER III

A THIEF SOMEWHERE


Two days after the conclusion of the stock-taking, Cyril said, after
breakfast was over,--

"Would it trouble you, Captain Dave, to give me an hour up here
before you go downstairs to the counting-house. I am free for two
hours now, and there is a matter upon which I should like to speak to
you privately."

"Certainly, lad," the old sailor said, somewhat surprised. "We shall
be quiet enough here, as soon as the table is cleared. My dame and
Nellie will be helping the maid do up the cabins, and will then be
sallying out marketing."

When the maid had cleared the table, Cyril went up to his room and
returned with a large ledger and several smaller books.

"I have, for the last month, Captain Dave, been making up this
stock-book for my own satisfaction."

"Bless me, lad, why have you taken all that trouble? This accounts,
then, for your writing so long at night, for which my dame has been
quarrelling with you!"

"It was interesting work," Cyril said quietly. "Now, you see, sir,"
he went on, opening the big ledger, "here are the separate accounts
under each head. These pages, you see, are for heavy cables for
hawsers; of these, at the date of the last stock-taking, there were,
according to the book you handed to me, five hundred fathoms in
stock. These are the amounts you have purchased since. Now, upon the
other side are all the sales of this cable entered in the sales-book.
Adding them together, and deducting them from the other side, you
will see there should remain in stock four hundred and fifty fathoms.
According to the new stock-taking there are four hundred and
thirty-eight. That is, I take it, as near as you could expect to get,
for, in the measuring out of so many thousand fathoms of cable during
the fifteen months between the two stock-takings, there may well have
been a loss of the twelve fathoms in giving good measurement."

"That is so," Captain Dave said. "I always say to John Wilkes, 'Give
good measurement, John--better a little over than a little under.'
Nothing can be clearer or more satisfactory."

Cyril closed the book.

"I am sorry to say, Captain Dave, all the items are not so
satisfactory, and that I greatly fear that you have been robbed to a
considerable amount."

"Robbed, lad!" the Captain said, starting up from his chair. "Who
should rob me? Not John Wilkes, I can be sworn! Not the two
apprentices for a surety, for they never go out during the day, and
John keeps a sharp look-out upon them, and the entrance to the shop
is always locked and barred after work is over, so that none can
enter without getting the key, which, as you know, John always brings
up and hands to me as soon as he has fastened the door! You are
mistaken, lad, and although I know that your intentions are good, you
should be careful how you make a charge that might bring ruin to
innocent men. Carelessness there may be; but robbery! No; assuredly
not."

"I have not brought the charge without warrant, Captain Dave," Cyril
said gravely, "and if you will bear with me for a few minutes, I
think you will see that there is at least something that wants
looking into."

"Well, it is only fair after the trouble you have taken, lad, that I
should hear what you have to say; but it will need strong evidence
indeed to make me believe that there has been foul play."

"Well, sir," Cyril said, opening the ledger again, "in the first
place, I would point out that in all the heavy articles, such as
could not conveniently be carried away, the tally of the stock-takers
corresponds closely with the figures in this book. In best bower
anchors the figures are absolutely the same and, as you have seen, in
heavy cables they closely correspond. In the large ship's compasses,
the ship's boilers, and ship's galleys, the numbers tally exactly. So
it is with all the heavy articles; the main blocks are correct, and
all other heavy gear. This shows that John Wilkes's book is carefully
kept, and it would be strange indeed if heavy goods had all been
properly entered, and light ones omitted; but yet when we turn to
small articles, we find that there is a great discrepancy between the
figures. Here is the account, for instance, of the half-inch rope.
According to my ledger, there should be eighteen hundred fathoms in
stock, whereas the stock-takers found but three hundred and eighty.
In two-inch rope there is a deficiency of two hundred and thirty
fathoms, in one-inch rope of six hundred and twenty. These sizes, as
you know, are always in requisition, and a thief would find ready
purchasers for a coil of any of them. But, as might be expected, it
is in copper that the deficiency is most serious. Of fourteen-inch
bolts, eighty-two are short, of twelve-inch bolts a hundred and
thirty, of eight-inch three hundred and nine; and so on throughout
almost all the copper stores. According to your expenditure and
receipt-book, Captain Dave, you have made, in the last fifteen
months, twelve hundred and thirty pounds; but according to this book
your stock is less in value, by two thousand and thirty-four pounds,
than it should have been. You are, therefore, a poorer man than you
were at the beginning of this fifteen months' trading, by eight
hundred and four pounds."

Captain Dave sat down in his chair, breathing hard. He took out his
handkerchief and wiped the drops of perspiration from his forehead.

"Are you sure of this, boy?" he said hoarsely. "Are you sure that you
have made no mistake in your figures?"

"Quite sure," Cyril said firmly. "In all cases in which I have found
deficiencies I have gone through the books three times and compared
the figures, and I am sure that if you put the books into the hands
of any city accountant, he will bear out my figures."

For a time Captain Dave sat silent.

"Hast any idea," he said at last, "how this has come about?"

"I have none," Cyril replied. "That John Wilkes is not concerned in
it I am as sure as you are; and, thinking the matter over, I see not
how the apprentices could have carried off so many articles, some
heavy and some bulky, when they left the shop in the evening, without
John Wilkes noticing them. So sure am I, that my advice would be that
you should take John Wilkes into your confidence, and tell him how
matters stand. My only objection to that is that he is a hasty man,
and that I fear he would not be able to keep his countenance, so that
the apprentices would remark that something was wrong. I am far from
saying that they have any hand in it; it would be a grievous wrong to
them to have suspicions when there is no shadow of evidence against
them; but at any rate, if this matter is to be stopped and the
thieves detected, it is most important that they should have, if they
are guilty, no suspicion that they are in any way being watched, or
that these deficiencies have been discovered. If they have had a hand
in the matter they most assuredly had accomplices, for such goods
could not be disposed of by an apprentice to any dealer without his
being sure that they must have been stolen."

"You are right there, lad--quite right. Did John Wilkes know that I
had been robbed in this way he would get into a fury, and no words
could restrain him from falling upon the apprentices and beating them
till he got some of the truth out of them."

"They may be quite innocent," Cyril said. "It may be that the thieves
have discovered some mode of entry into the store either by opening
the shutters at the back, or by loosening a board, or even by delving
up under the ground. It is surely easier to believe this than that
the boys can have contrived to carry off so large a quantity of goods
under John Wilkes's eye."

"That is so, lad. I have never liked Robert Ashford, but God forbid
that I should suspect him of such crime only because his forehead is
as wrinkled as an ape's, and Providence has set his eyes crossways in
his head. You cannot always judge a ship by her upper works; she may
be ugly to the eye and yet have a clear run under water. Still, you
can't help going by what you see. I agree with you that if we tell
John Wilkes about this, those boys will know five minutes afterwards
that the ship is on fire; but if we don't tell him, how are we to get
to the bottom of what is going on?"

"That is a difficult question, but a few days will not make much
difference, when we know that it has been going on for over a year,
and may, for aught we know, have been going on much longer. The first
thing, Captain Dave, is to send these books to an accountant, for him
to go through them and check my figures."

"There is no need for that, lad. I know how careful you are, and you
cannot have gone so far wrong as all this."

"No, sir, I am sure that there is no mistake; but, for your own sake
as well as mine, it were well that you should have the signature of
an accountant to the correctness of the books. If you have to lay the
matter before the magistrates, they would not take my testimony as to
your losses, and might even say that you were rash in acting upon the
word of a boy like myself, and you might then be obliged to have the
accounts made up anew, which would cost you more, and cause much
delay in the process; whereas, if you put in your books and say that
their correctness is vouched for by an accountant, no question would
arise on it; nor would there be any delay now, for while the books
are being gone into, we can be trying to get to the bottom of the
matter here."

"Ay, ay, it shall be done, Master Cyril, as you say. But for the life
of me I don't see how we are to get at the bottom of the ship to find
out where she is leaking!"

"It seems to me that the first thing, Captain Dave, is to see to the
warehouse. As we agreed that the apprentices cannot have carried out
all these goods under John Wilkes's eye, and cannot have come down
night after night through the house, the warehouse must have been
entered from without. As I never go in there, it would be best that
you should see to this matter yourself. There are the fastenings of
the shutters in the first place, then the boardings all round. As for
me, I will look round outside. The window of my room looks into the
street, but if you will take me to one of the rooms at the back we
can look at the surroundings of the yard, and may gather some idea
whether the goods can have been passed over into any of the houses
abutting on it, or, as is more likely, into the lane that runs up by
its side."

The Captain led the way into one of the rooms at the back of the
house, and opening the casement, he and Cyril leaned out. The store
occupied fully half the yard, the rest being occupied by anchors,
piles of iron, ballast, etc. There were two or three score of guns of
various sizes piled on each other. A large store of cannon-ball was
ranged in a great pyramid close by. A wall some ten feet high
separated the yard from the lane Cyril had spoken of. On the left,
adjoining the warehouse, was the yard of the next shop, which
belonged to a wool-stapler. Behind were the backs of a number of
small houses crowded in between Tower Street and Leadenhall Street.

"I suppose you do not know who lives in those houses, Captain Dave?"

"No, indeed. The land is not like the sea. Afloat, when one sees a
sail, one wonders what is her nationality, and whither she is bound,
and still more whether she is an honest trader or a rascally pirate;
but here on land, one scarcely gives a thought as to who may dwell in
the houses round."

"I will walk round presently," Cyril said, "and gather, as far as I
can, who they are that live there; but, as I have said, I fancy it is
over that wall and into the alley that your goods have departed. The
apprentices' room is this side of the house, is it not?"

"Yes; John Wilkes sleeps in the room next to yours, and the door
opposite to his is that of the lads' room."

"Do the windows of any of the rooms look into that lane?"

"No; it is a blank wall on that side."

"There is the clock striking nine," Cyril said, starting. "It is time
for me to be off. Then you will take the books to-day, Captain Dave?"

"I will carry them off at once, and when I return will look narrowly
into the fastenings of the two windows and door from the warehouse
into the yard; and will take care to do so when the boys are engaged
in the front shop."

When his work was done, Cyril went round to the houses behind the
yard, and he found that they stood in a small court, with three or
four trees growing in the centre, and were evidently inhabited by
respectable citizens. Over the door of one was painted, "Joshua
Heddings, Attorney"; next to him was Gilbert Gushing, who dealt in
jewels, silks, and other precious commodities from the East; next to
him was a doctor, and beyond a dealer in spices. This was enough to
assure him that it was not through such houses as these that the
goods had been carried.

Cyril had not been back at the mid-day meal, for his work that day
lay up by Holborn Bar, where he had two customers whom he attended
with but half an hour's interval between the visits, and on the days
on which he went there he was accustomed to get something to eat at a
tavern hard by.

Supper was an unusually quiet meal. Captain Dave now and then asked
John Wilkes a question as to the business matters of the day, but
evidently spoke with an effort. Nellie rattled on as usual; but the
burden of keeping up the conversation lay entirely on her shoulders
and those of Cyril. After the apprentices had left, and John Wilkes
had started for his usual resort, the Captain lit his pipe. Nellie
signed to Cyril to come and seat himself by her in the window that
projected out over the street, and enabled the occupants of the seats
at either side to have a view up and down it.

"What have you been doing to father, Cyril?" she asked, in low tones;
"he has been quite unlike himself all day. Generally when he is out
of temper he rates everyone heartily, as if we were a mutinous crew,
but to-day he has gone about scarcely speaking; he hasn't said a
cross word to any of us, but several times when I spoke to him I got
no answer, and it is easy to see that he is terribly put out about
something. He was in his usual spirits at breakfast; then, you know,
he was talking with you for an hour, and it does not take much
guessing to see that it must have been something that passed between
you that has put him out. Now what was it?"

"I don't see why you should say that, Mistress Nellie. It is true we
did have a talk together, and he examined some fresh books I have
been making out and said that he was mightily pleased with my work. I
went away at nine o'clock, and something may have occurred to upset
him between that and dinner."

"All which means that you don't mean to tell me anything about it,
Master Cyril. Well, then, you may consider yourself in my black books
altogether," she said petulantly.

"I am sorry that you should say so," he said. "If it were true that
anything that I had said to him had ruffled him, it would be for him
to tell you, and not for me."

"Methinks I have treated Robert Ashford scurvily, and I shall take
him for my escort to see His Majesty attend service at St. Paul's
to-morrow."

Cyril smiled.

"I think it would be fair to give him a turn, Mistress, and I am glad
to see that you have such a kind thought."

Nellie rose indignantly, and taking her work sat down by the side of
her mother.

"It is a fine evening," Cyril said to Captain Dave, "and I think I
shall take a walk round. I shall return in an hour."

The Captain understood, by a glance Cyril gave him, that he was going
out for some purpose connected with the matter they had in hand.

"Ay, ay, lad," he said. "It is not good for you to be sitting moping
at home every evening. I have often wondered before that you did not
take a walk on deck before you turned in. I always used to do so
myself."

"I don't think there is any moping in it, Captain Dave," Cyril said,
with a laugh. "If you knew how pleasant the evenings have been to me
after the life I lived before, you would not say so."

Cyril's only object in going out, however, was to avoid the necessity
of having to talk with Dame Dowsett and Nellie. His thoughts were
running on nothing but the robbery, and he had found it very
difficult to talk in his usual manner, and to answer Nellie's
sprightly sallies. It was dark already. A few oil lamps gave a feeble
light here and there. At present he had formed no plan whatever of
detecting the thieves; he was as much puzzled as the Captain himself
as to how the goods could have been removed. It would be necessary,
of course, to watch the apprentices, but he did not think that
anything was likely to come out of this. It was the warehouse itself
that must be watched, in order to discover how the thieves made an
entry. His own idea was that they got over the wall by means of a
rope, and in some way managed to effect an entry into the warehouse.
The apprentices could hardly aid them unless they came down through
the house.

If they had managed to get a duplicate key of the door leading from
the bottom of the stairs to the shop, they could, of course, unbar
the windows, and pass things out--that part of the business would be
easy; but he could not believe that they would venture frequently to
pass down through the house. It was an old one, and the stairs
