
'No go,' Cyril answered; 'the man said the thing was perfect. He said
it was a Roman lady's locket, and people shouldn't buy curios if they
didn't know anything about arky--something or other, and that he never
went back on a bargain, because it wasn't business, and he expected his
customers to act the same. He was simply nasty--that's what he was, and
I want my dinner.'

It was plain that Cyril was not pleased.

The unlikeliness of anything really interesting happening in that
parlour lay like a weight of lead on everyone's spirits. Cyril had his
dinner, and just as he was swallowing the last mouthful of apple-pudding
there was a scratch at the door. Anthea opened it and in walked the
Psammead.

'Well,' it said, when it had heard the news, 'things might be worse.
Only you won't be surprised if you have a few adventures before you get
the other half. You want to get it, of course.'

'Rather,' was the general reply. 'And we don't mind adventures.'

'No,' said the Psammead, 'I seem to remember that about you. Well, sit
down and listen with all your ears. Eight, are there? Right--I am glad
you know arithmetic. Now pay attention, because I don't intend to tell
you everything twice over.'

As the children settled themselves on the floor--it was far more
comfortable than the chairs, as well as more polite to the Psammead, who
was stroking its whiskers on the hearth-rug--a sudden cold pain caught
at Anthea's heart. Father--Mother--the darling Lamb--all far away. Then
a warm, comfortable feeling flowed through her. The Psammead was here,
and at least half a charm, and there were to be adventures. (If you
don't know what a cold pain is, I am glad for your sakes, and I hope you
never may.)

'Now,' said the Psammead cheerily, 'you are not particularly nice, nor
particularly clever, and you're not at all good-looking. Still, you've
saved my life--oh, when I think of that man and his pail of water!--so
I'll tell you all I know. At least, of course I can't do that, because I
know far too much. But I'll tell you all I know about this red thing.'

'Do! Do! Do! Do!' said everyone.

'Well, then,' said the Psammead. 'This thing is half of an Amulet that
can do all sorts of things; it can make the corn grow, and the waters
flow, and the trees bear fruit, and the little new beautiful babies
come. (Not that babies ARE beautiful, of course,' it broke off to say,
'but their mothers think they are--and as long as you think a thing's
true it IS true as far as you're concerned.)'

Robert yawned.

The Psammead went on.

'The complete Amulet can keep off all the things that make people
unhappy--jealousy, bad temper, pride, disagreeableness, greediness,
selfishness, laziness. Evil spirits, people called them when the Amulet
was made. Don't you think it would be nice to have it?'

'Very,' said the children, quite without enthusiasm.

'And it can give you strength and courage.'

'That's better,' said Cyril.

'And virtue.'

'I suppose it's nice to have that,' said Jane, but not with much
interest.

'And it can give you your heart's desire.'

'Now you're talking,' said Robert.

'Of course I am,' retorted the Psammead tartly, 'so there's no need for
you to.'

'Heart's desire is good enough for me,' said Cyril.

'Yes, but,' Anthea ventured, 'all that's what the WHOLE charm can do.
There's something that the half we've got can win off its own bat--isn't
there?' She appealed to the Psammead. It nodded.

'Yes,' it said; 'the half has the power to take you anywhere you like to
look for the other half.'

This seemed a brilliant prospect till Robert asked--

'Does it know where to look?'

The Psammead shook its head and answered, 'I don't think it's likely.'

'Do you?'

'No.'

'Then,' said Robert, 'we might as well look for a needle in a bottle of
hay. Yes--it IS bottle, and not bundle, Father said so.'

'Not at all,' said the Psammead briskly-, 'you think you know
everything, but you are quite mistaken. The first thing is to get the
thing to talk.'

'Can it?' Jane questioned. Jane's question did not mean that she thought
it couldn't, for in spite of the parlour furniture the feeling of magic
was growing deeper and thicker, and seemed to fill the room like a dream
of a scented fog.

'Of course it can. I suppose you can read.'

'Oh yes!' Everyone was rather hurt at the question.

'Well, then--all you've got to do is to read the name that's written on
the part of the charm that you've got. And as soon as you say the name
out loud the thing will have power to do--well, several things.'

There was a silence. The red charm was passed from hand to hand.

'There's no name on it,' said Cyril at last.

'Nonsense,' said the Psammead; 'what's that?'

'Oh, THAT!' said Cyril, 'it's not reading. It looks like pictures of
chickens and snakes and things.'

This was what was on the charm: [Hieroglyphics omitted.]

'I've no patience with you,' said the Psammead; 'if you can't read you
must find some one who can. A priest now?'

'We don't know any priests,' said Anthea; 'we know a clergyman--he's
called a priest in the prayer-book, you know--but he only knows Greek
and Latin and Hebrew, and this isn't any of those--I know.'

The Psammead stamped a furry foot angrily.

'I wish I'd never seen you,' it said; 'you aren't any more good than so
many stone images. Not so much, if I'm to tell the truth. Is there no
wise man in your Babylon who can pronounce the names of the Great Ones?'

'There's a poor learned gentleman upstairs,' said Anthea, 'we might try
him. He has a lot of stone images in his room, and iron-looking ones
too--we peeped in once when he was out. Old Nurse says he doesn't eat
enough to keep a canary alive. He spends it all on stones and things.'

'Try him,' said the Psammead, 'only be careful. If he knows a greater
name than this and uses it against you, your charm will be of no use.
Bind him first with the chains of honour and upright dealing. And then
ask his aid--oh, yes, you'd better all go; you can put me to sand as you
go upstairs. I must have a few minutes' peace and quietness.'

So the four children hastily washed their hands and brushed their
hair--this was Anthea's idea--and went up to knock at the door of the
'poor learned gentleman', and to 'bind him with the chains of honour and
upright dealing'.



CHAPTER 3. THE PAST

The learned gentleman had let his dinner get quite cold. It was mutton
chop, and as it lay on the plate it looked like a brown island in the
middle of a frozen pond, because the grease of the gravy had become
cold, and consequently white. It looked very nasty, and it was the first
thing the children saw when, after knocking three times and receiving
no reply, one of them ventured to turn the handle and softly to open the
door. The chop was on the end of a long table that ran down one side of
the room. The table had images on it and queer-shaped stones, and books.
And there were glass cases fixed against the wall behind, with little
strange things in them. The cases were rather like the ones you see in
jewellers' shops.

The 'poor learned gentleman' was sitting at a table in the window,
looking at something very small which he held in a pair of fine pincers.
He had a round spy-glass sort of thing in one eye--which reminded
the children of watchmakers, and also of the long snail's eyes of the
Psammead. The gentleman was very long and thin, and his long, thin boots
stuck out under the other side of his table. He did not hear the door
open, and the children stood hesitating. At last Robert gave the door a
push, and they all started back, for in the middle of the wall that the
door had hidden was a mummy-case--very, very, very big--painted in red
and yellow and green and black, and the face of it seemed to look at
them quite angrily.

You know what a mummy-case is like, of course? If you don't you had
better go to the British Museum at once and find out. Anyway, it is not
at all the sort of thing that you expect to meet in a top-floor front
in Bloomsbury, looking as though it would like to know what business YOU
had there.

So everyone said, 'Oh!' rather loud, and their boots clattered as they
stumbled back.

The learned gentleman took the glass out of his eye and said--'I beg
your pardon,' in a very soft, quiet pleasant voice--the voice of a
gentleman who has been to Oxford.

'It's us that beg yours,' said Cyril politely. 'We are sorry to disturb
you.'

'Come in,' said the gentleman, rising--with the most distinguished
courtesy, Anthea told herself. 'I am delighted to see you. Won't you sit
down? No, not there; allow me to move that papyrus.'

He cleared a chair, and stood smiling and looking kindly through his
large, round spectacles.

'He treats us like grown-ups,' whispered Robert, 'and he doesn't seem to
know how many of us there are.'

'Hush,' said Anthea, 'it isn't manners to whisper. You say, Cyril--go
ahead.'

'We're very sorry to disturb you,' said Cyril politely, 'but we did
knock three times, and you didn't say "Come in", or "Run away now", or
that you couldn't be bothered just now, or to come when you weren't so
busy, or any of the things people do say when you knock at doors, so we
opened it. We knew you were in because we heard you sneeze while we were
waiting.'

'Not at all,' said the gentleman; 'do sit down.'

'He has found out there are four of us,' said Robert, as the gentleman
cleared three more chairs. He put the things off them carefully on the
floor. The first chair had things like bricks that tiny, tiny birds'
feet have walked over when the bricks were soft, only the marks were in
regular lines. The second chair had round things on it like very large,
fat, long, pale beads. And the last chair had a pile of dusty papers on
it. The children sat down.

'We know you are very, very learned,' said Cyril, 'and we have got a
charm, and we want you to read the name on it, because it isn't in Latin
or Greek, or Hebrew, or any of the languages WE know--'

'A thorough knowledge of even those languages is a very fair foundation
on which to build an education,' said the gentleman politely.

'Oh!' said Cyril blushing, 'but we only know them to look at, except
Latin--and I'm only in Caesar with that.' The gentleman took off his
spectacles and laughed. His laugh sounded rusty, Cyril thought, as
though it wasn't often used.

'Of course!' he said. 'I'm sure I beg your pardon. I think I must have
been in a dream. You are the children who live downstairs, are you not?
Yes. I have seen you as I have passed in and out. And you have found
something that you think to be an antiquity, and you've brought it to
show me? That was very kind. I should like to inspect it.'

'I'm afraid we didn't think about your liking to inspect it,' said the
truthful Anthea. 'It was just for US because we wanted to know the name
on it--'

'Oh, yes--and, I say,' Robert interjected, 'you won't think it rude
of us if we ask you first, before we show it, to be bound in the
what-do-you-call-it of--'

'In the bonds of honour and upright dealing,' said Anthea.

'I'm afraid I don't quite follow you,' said the gentleman, with gentle
nervousness.

'Well, it's this way,' said Cyril. 'We've got part of a charm. And the
Sammy--I mean, something told us it would work, though it's only half a
one; but it won't work unless we can say the name that's on it. But, of
course, if you've got another name that can lick ours, our charm will
be no go; so we want you to give us your word of honour as a
gentleman--though I'm sure, now I've seen you, that it's not necessary;
but still I've promised to ask you, so we must. Will you please give us
your honourable word not to say any name stronger than the name on our
charm?'

The gentleman had put on his spectacles again and was looking at Cyril
through them. He now said: 'Bless me!' more than once, adding, 'Who told
you all this?'

'I can't tell you,' said Cyril. 'I'm very sorry, but I can't.'

Some faint memory of a far-off childhood must have come to the learned
gentleman just then, for he smiled. 'I see,' he said. 'It is some sort
of game that you are engaged in? Of course! Yes! Well, I will certainly
promise. Yet I wonder how you heard of the names of power?'

'We can't tell you that either,' said Cyril; and Anthea said, 'Here is
our charm,' and held it out.

With politeness, but without interest, the gentleman took it. But after
the first glance all his body suddenly stiffened, as a pointer's does
when he sees a partridge.

'Excuse me,' he said in quite a changed voice, and carried the charm to
the window. He looked at it; he turned it over. He fixed his spy-glass
in his eye and looked again. No one said anything. Only Robert made a
shuffling noise with his feet till Anthea nudged him to shut up. At last
the learned gentleman drew a long breath.

'Where did you find this?' he asked.

'We didn't find it. We bought it at a shop. Jacob Absalom the name
is--not far from Charing Cross,' said Cyril.

'We gave seven-and-sixpence for it,' added Jane.

'It is not for sale, I suppose? You do not wish to part with it?

I ought to tell you that it is extremely valuable--extraordinarily
valuable, I may say.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'we know that, so of course we want to keep it.'
