and at any rate it was great fun. So he made them all kneel down in
a row and he touched each on the shoulder with the poker and said:

"Rise up, Lady Meg and Lady Peg and Lady Kilmanskeg and Lady
Ridiklis of Racketty-Packetty House-and also the Right Honorable
Lord Gustibus Rags!" And they all jumped up at once and made bows
and curtsied to each other. But they made Peter Piper into a Duke,
and he was called the Duke of Tags. He knelt down on the big hole
in the carpet and each one of them gave him a little thump on the
shoulder with the poker, because it took more thumps to make a Duke
than a common or garden Lord.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture duke.jpg]

The day after this another much more exciting thing took place. The
nurse was in a bad temper and when she was tidying the nursery she
pushed the easy chair aside and saw Racketty-Packetty House.

"Oh!" she said, "there is that Racketty-Packetty old thing still. I
had forgotten it. It must be carried down-stairs and burned. I will
go and tell one of the footmen to come for it."

Meg and Peg and Kilmanskeg were in their attic and they all rushed
out in such a hurry to get down-stairs that they rolled all the way
down the staircase, and Peter Piper and Gustibus had to dart out of
the drawing-room and pick them up, Ridiklis came staggering up from
the kitchen quite out of breath.

"Oh! our house is going to be burned! Our house is going to be
burned!" cried Meg and Peg clutching their brothers.

"Let us go and throw ourselves out of the window!" cried
Kilmanskeg.

"I don't see how they can have the heart to burn a person's home!"
said Ridiklis, wiping her eyes with her kitchen duster.

Peter Piper was rather pale, but he was extremely brave and
remembered that he was the head of the family.

"Now, Lady Meg and Lady Peg and Lady Kilmanskeg," he said, "let us
all keep cool."

"We shan't keep cool when they set our house on fire," said
Gustibus. Peter Piper just snapped his fingers.

"Pooh!" he said. "We are only made of wood and it won't hurt a bit.
We shall just snap and crackle and go off almost like fireworks and
then we shall be ashes and fly away into the air and see all sorts
of things. Perhaps it may be more fun than anything we have done
yet."

"But our nice old house! Our nice old Racketty-Packetty House,"
said Ridiklis. "I do so love it. The kitchen is so convenient--even
though the oven won't bake any more."

And things looked most serious because the nurse really was
beginning to push the arm-chair away. But it would not move and I
will tell you why. One of my Fairies, who had come down the chimney
when they were talking, had called me and I had come in a second
with a whole army of my Workers, and though the nurse couldn't see
them, they were all holding the chair tight down on the carpet so
that it would not stir.

And I--Queen Crosspatch--myself--flew downstairs and made the
footman remember that minute that a box had come for Cynthia and
that he must take it upstairs to her nursery. If I had not been on
the spot he would have forgotten it until it was too late. But just
in the very nick of time up he came, and Cynthia sprang up as soon
as she saw him.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture footman.jpg]

"Oh!" she cried out, "It must be the doll who broke her little leg
and was sent to the hospital. It must be Lady Patsy."

And she opened the box and gave a little scream of joy for there
lay Lady Patsy (her whole name was Patricia) in a lace-frilled
nightgown, with her lovely leg in bandages and a pair of tiny
crutches and a trained nurse by her side.

That was how I saved them that time. There was such excitement over
Lady Patsy and her little crutches and her nurse that nothing else
was thought of and my Fairies pushed the arm-chair back and
Racketty-Packetty House was hidden and forgotten once more.

The whole Racketty-Packetty family gave a great gasp of joy and sat
down in a ring all at once, on the floor, mopping their foreheads
with anything they could get hold of. Peter Piper used an
antimacassar.

"Oh! we are obliged to you, Queen B-bell--Patch," he panted out,
"But these alarms of fire are upsetting."

"You leave them to me," I said, "and I'll attend to them. Tip!" I
commanded the Fairy nearest me. "You will have to stay about here
and be ready to give the alarm when anything threatens to happen."
And I flew away, feeling I had done a good morning's work.

Well, that was the beginning of a great many things, and many of
them were connected with Lady Patsy; and but for me there might
have been unpleasantness.

Of course the Racketty-Packetty dolls forgot about their fright
directly, and began to enjoy themselves again as usual. That was
their way. They never sat up all night with Trouble, Peter Piper
used to say. And I told him they were quite right. If you make a
fuss over trouble and put it to bed and nurse it and give it beef
tea and gruel, you can never get rid of it.

Their great delight now was Lady Patsy. They thought she was
prettier than any of the other Tidy Castle dolls. She neither
turned her nose up, nor looked down the bridge of it, nor laughed
mockingly. She had dimples in the corners of her mouth and long
curly lashes and her nose was saucy and her eyes were bright and
full of laughs.

[Transcriber's Note: See picture house.jpg]

"She's the clever one of the family," said Peter Piper. "I am sure
of that."

She was treated as an invalid at first, of course, and kept in her
room; but they could see her sitting up in her frilled nightgown.
After a few days she was carried to a soft chair lay the window and
there she used to sit and look out; and the Racketty-Packetty House
dolls crowded round their window and adored her.

After a few days, they noticed that Peter Piper was often missing
and one morning Ridiklis went up into the attic and found him
sitting at a window all by himself and staring and staring.

"Oh! Duke," she said (you see they always tried to remember each
other's titles). "Dear me, Duke, what are you doing here?"

"I am looking at her," he answered. "I'm in love. I fell in love
with her the minute Cynthia took her out of her box. I am going to
marry her."

"But she's a lady of high degree," said Ridiklis quite alarmed.

"That's why she'll have me," said Peter Piper in his most cheerful
manner. "Ladies of high degree always marry the good looking ones
in rags and tatters. If I had a whole suit of clothes on, she
wouldn't look at me. I'm very good-looking, you know," and he
