who had known and loved each other here, would hold communion in
eternity?  We were aware of each other's presence, not by sight, nor
sound, nor touch, but by an inward consciousness.  Would it not be so
among the dead?

The silence was interrupted by the consumptive daughter, addressing a
remark to some one in the circle, whom she called Rachel.  Her tremulous
and decayed accents were answered by a single word, but in a voice that
made me start, and bend towards the spot whence it had proceeded.  Had I
ever heard that sweet, low tone?  If not, why did it rouse up so many old
recollections, or mockeries of such, the shadows of things familiar, yet
unknown, and fill my mind with confused images of her features who had
spoken, though buried in the gloom of the parlor?  Whom had my heart
recognized, that it throbbed so?  I listened, to catch her gentle
breathing, and strove, by the intensity of my gaze, to picture forth a
shape where none was visible.

Suddenly, the dry pine caught; the fire blazed up with a ruddy glow; and
where the darkness had been, there was she,--the Vision of the Fountain!
A spirit of radiance only, she had vanished with the rainbow, and
appeared again in the firelight, perhaps to flicker with the blaze, and
be gone.  Yet, her cheek was rosy and life-like, and her features, in the
bright warmth of the room, were even sweeter and tenderer than my
recollection of them.  She knew me!  The mirthful expression that had
laughed in her eyes and dimpled over her countenance, when I beheld her
faint beauty in the fountain, was laughing and dimpling there now.  One
moment our glance mingled,--the next, down rolled the heap of tan upon
the kindled wood,--and darkness snatched away that Daughter of the Light,
and gave her back to me no more!

Fair ladies, there is nothing more to tell.  Must the simple mystery be
revealed, then, that Rachel was the daughter of the village squire, and
had left home for a boarding-school, the morning after I arrived, and
returned the day before my departure?  If I transformed her to an angel,
it is what every youthful lover does for his mistress.  Therein consists
the essence of my story.  But slight the change, sweet maids, to make
angels of yourselves!









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Vision of the Fountain (From
"Twice Told Tales"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VISION OF THE FOUNTAIN ***

***** This file should be named 9207.txt or 9207.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/0/9207/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
