whisper be it spoken--how pleasant in these night solitudes would be
the rise and fall of a softer breathing than your own, the slight
pressure of a tenderer bosom, the quiet throb of a purer heart,
imparting its peacefulness to your troubled one, as if the fond
sleeper were involving you in her dream.

Her influence is over you, though she have no existence but in that
momentary image.  You sink down in a flowery spot, on the borders of
sleep and wakefulness, while your thoughts rise before you in
pictures, all disconnected, yet all assimilated by a pervading
gladsomeness and beauty.  The wheeling of gorgeous squadrons, that
glitter in the sun, is succeeded by the merriment of children round
the door of a school-house, beneath the glimmering shadow of old
trees, at the corner of a rustic lane. You stand in the sunny rain of
a summer shower, and wander among the sunny trees of an autumnal wood,
and look upward at the brightest of all rainbows, overarching the
unbroken sheet of snow, on the American side of Niagara.  Your mind
struggles pleasantly between the dancing radiance round the hearth of
a young man and his recent bride, and the twittering flight of birds
in spring, about their new-made nest.  You feel the merry bounding of
a ship before the breeze; and watch the tuneful feet of rosy girls, as
they twine their last and merriest dance in a splendid ballroom; and
find yourself in the brilliant circle of a crowded theatre, as the
curtain falls over a light and airy scene.

With an involuntary start, you seize hold on consciousness, and prove
yourself but half awake, by running a doubtful parallel between human
life and the hour which has now elapsed.  In both you emerge from
mystery, pass through a vicissitude that you can but imperfectly
control, and are borne onward to another mystery. Now comes the peal
of the distant clock, with fainter and fainter strokes as you plunge
further into the wilderness of sleep.  It is the knell of a temporary
death.  Your spirit has departed, and strays like a free citizen,
among the people of a shadowy world, beholding strange sights, yet
without wonder or dismay.  So calm, perhaps, will be the final change;
so undisturbed, as if among familiar things, the entrance of the soul
to its Eternal home!








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Haunted Mind (From "Twice Told
Tales"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAUNTED MIND ***

***** This file should be named 9209.txt or 9209.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/0/9209/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
