took up her dwelling there, even in that chill and lonesome cavern
hung round with glittering icicles of fancy.  She gave me warmth of
feeling, while the influence of my mind made her contemplative.  I
taught her to love the moonlight hour, when the expanse of the
encircled bay was smooth as a great mirror and slept in a transparent
shadow; while beyond Nahant, the wind rippled the dim ocean into a
dreamy brightness, which grew faint afar off, without becoming
gloomier.  I held her hand and pointed to the long surf wave, as it
rolled calmly on the beach, in an unbroken line of silver; we were
silent together, till its deep and peaceful murmur had swept by us.
When the Sabbath sun shone down into the recesses of the cliffs, I led
the mermaid thither, and told her that those huge, gray, shattered
rocks, and her native sea, that raged forever like a storm against
them, and her own slender beauty, in so stern a scene, were all
combined into a strain of poetry.  But on the Sabbath eve, when her
mother had gone early to bed, and her gentle sister had smiled and
left us, as we sat alone by the quiet hearth, with household things
around, it was her turn to make me feel that here was a deeper poetry,
and that this was the dearest hour of all.  Thus went on our wooing,
till I had shot wild-fowl enough to feather our bridal bed, and the
Daughter of the Sea was mine.

I built a cottage for Susan and myself, and made a gateway in the form
of a Gothic arch, by setting up a whale's jaw-bones.  We bought a
heifer with her first calf, and had a little garden on the hillside,
to supply us with potatoes and green sauce for our fish.  Our parlor
small and neat, was ornamented with our two profiles in one gilt
frame, and with shells and pretty pebbles on the mantel-piece,
selected from the sea's treasury of such things, on Nahant Beach.  On
the desk, beneath the looking-glass, lay the Bible, which I had begun
to read aloud at the Book of Genesis, and the singing-book that Susan
used for her evening psalm.  Except the almanac, we had no other
literature.  All that I heard of books, was when an Indian history, or
tale of shipwreck, was sold by a peddler or wandering subscription-man,
to some one in the village, and read through its owner's nose to a
slumberous auditory.  Like my brother fishermen, I grew into the
belief that all human erudition was collected in our pedagogue, whose
green spectacles and solemn phiz, as he passed to his little schoolhouse,
amid a waste of sand, might have gained him a diploma from any
college in New England.  In truth I dreaded him.  When our children
were old enough to claim his care, you remember, Susan, how I frowned,
though you were pleased, at this learned man's encomiums on their
proficiency.  I feared to trust them even with the alphabet; it was
the key to a fatal treasure.

But I loved to lead them by their little hands along the beach, and
point to nature in the vast and the minute, the sky, the sea, the
green earth, the pebbles, and the shells.  Then did I discourse of the
mighty works and coextensive goodness of the Deity, with the simple
wisdom of a man whose mind had profited by lonely days upon the deep,
and his heart by the strong and pure affections of his evening home.
Sometimes my voice lost itself in a tremulous depth; for I felt His
eye upon me as I spoke. Once, while my wife and all of us were gazing
at ourselves, in the mirror left by the tide in a hollow of the sand,
I pointed to the pictured heaven below, and bade her observe how
religion was strewn everywhere in our path; since even a casual pool
of water recalled the idea of that home whither we were travelling, to
rest forever with our children.  Suddenly, your image, Susan, and all
the little faces made up of yours and mine, seemed to fade away and
vanish around me, leaving a pale visage like my own of former days
within the frame of a large looking-glass.  Strange illusion!

My life glided on, the past appearing to mingle with the present and
absorb the future, till the whole lies before me at a glance. My
manhood has long been waning with a stanch decay; my earlier
contemporaries, after lives of unbroken health, are all at rest,
without having known the weariness of later age; and now, with a
wrinkled forehead and thin white hair as badges of my dignity, I have
become the patriarch, the Uncle of the village.  I love that name; it
widens the circle of my sympathies; it joins all the youthful to my
household, in the kindred of affection.

Like Uncle Parker, whose rheumatic bones were dashed against Egg Rock,
full forty years ago, I am a spinner of long yarns.  Seated on the
gunwale of a dory, or on the sunny side of a boat-house, where the
warmth is grateful to my limbs, or by my own hearth, when a friend or
two are there, I overflow with talk, and yet am never tedious.  With a
broken voice I give utterance to much wisdom.  Such, Heaven be
praised! is the vigor of my faculties, that many a forgotten usage,
and traditions ancient in my youth, and early adventures of myself or
others, hitherto effaced by things more recent, acquire new
distinctness in my memory.  I remember the happy days when the haddock
