surprise?"

"Why," said the old man, deepening the grin of a death's-head, on
which his chisel was just then employed,  "I really felt for the poor
woman; it was one of my best pieces of marble,--and to be thrown away
on a living man!"

A comely woman, with a pretty rosebud of a daughter, came to select a
gravestone for a twin-daughter, who had died a month before.  I was
impressed with the different nature of their feelings for the dead;
the mother was calm and wofully resigned, fully conscious of her loss,
as of a treasure which she had not always possessed, and, therefore,
had been aware that it might be taken from her; but the daughter
evidently had no real knowledge of what death's doings were.  Her
thoughts knew, but not her heart.  It seemed to me, that by the print
and pressure which the dead sister had left upon the survivor's
spirit, her feelings were almost the same as if she still stood side
by side, and arm in arm, with the departed, looking at the slabs of
marble; and once or twice she glanced around with a sunny smile,
which, as its sister smile had faded forever, soon grew confusedly
overshadowed.  Perchance her consciousness was truer than her
reflection,--perchance her dead sister was a closer companion than in
life.  The mother and daughter talked a long while with Mr.
Wigglesworth about a suitable epitaph, and finally chose an ordinary
verse of ill-matched rhymes, which had already been inscribed upon
innumerable tombstones.  But, when we ridicule the triteness of
monumental verses, we forget that Sorrow reads far deeper in them than
we can, and finds a profound and individual purport in what seems so
vague and inexpressive, unless interpreted by her.  She makes the
epitaph anew, though the self-same words may have served for a
thousand graves.

"And yet," said I afterwards to Mr. Wigglesworth, "they might have
made a better choice than this.  While you were discussing the
subject, I was struck by at least a dozen simple and natural
expressions from the lips of both mother and daughter.  One of these
would have formed an inscription equally original and appropriate."

"No, no," replied the sculptor, shaking his head, "there is a good deal
of comfort to be gathered from these little old scraps of poetry; and
so I always recommend them in preference to any new-fangled ones.  And
somehow, they seem to stretch to suit a great grief, and shrink to fit
a small one."

It was not seldom that ludicrous images were excited by what took
place between Mr. Wigglesworth and his customers.  A shrewd
gentlewoman, who kept a tavern in the town, was anxious to obtain two
or three gravestones for the deceased members of her family, and to
pay for these solemn commodities by taking the sculptor to board.
Hereupon a fantasy arose in my mind, of good Mr. Wigglesworth sitting
down to dinner at a broad, flat tombstone, carving one of his own
plump little marble cherubs, gnawing a pair of cross-bones, and
drinking out of a hollow death's-head, or perhaps a lachrymatory vase,
or sepulchral urn; while his hostess's dead children waited on him at
the ghastly banquet.  On communicating this nonsensical picture to the
old man, he laughed heartily, and pronounced my humor to be of the
right sort.

"I have lived at such a table all my days," said he, "and eaten no
small quantity of slate and marble."

"Hard fare!" rejoined I, smiling; "but you seemed to have found it
excellent of digestion, too."

A man of fifty, or thereabouts, with a harsh, unpleasant countenance,
ordered a stone for the grave of his bitter enemy with whom he had
waged warfare half a lifetime, to their mutual misery and ruin.  The
secret of this phenomenon was, that hatred had become the sustenance
and enjoyment of the poor wretch's soul; it had supplied the place of
all kindly affections; it had been really a bond of sympathy between
himself and the man who shared the passion; and when its object died,
the unappeasable foe was the only mourner for the dead.  He expressed
a purpose of being buried side by side with his enemy.

"I doubt whether their dust will mingle," remarked the old sculptor to
me; for often there was an earthliness in his conceptions.

"O yes," replied I, who had mused long upon the incident; "and when
they rise again, these bitter foes may find themselves dear friends.
