
"Where in this world," exclaimed Adam Forrester, despondingly, "shall
we build our Temple of Happiness?"

"Where in this world, indeed!" repeated Lilias Fay; and being faint
and weary, the more so by the heaviness of her heart, the Lily drooped
her head and sat down on the summit of a knoll, repeating,  "Where in
this world shall we build our Temple?"

"Ah! have you already asked yourselves that question?"  said their
companion, his shaded features growing even gloomier with the smile
that dwelt on them; "yet there is a place, even in this world, where
ye may build it."

While the old man spoke, Adam Forrester and Lilias had carelessly
thrown their eyes around, and perceived that the spot where they had
chanced to pause possessed a quiet charm, which was well enough
adapted to their present mood of mind.  It was a small rise of ground,
with a certain regularity of shape, that had perhaps been bestowed by
art; and a group of trees, which almost surrounded it, threw their
pensive shadows across and far beyond, although some softened glory of
the sunshine found its way there. The ancestral mansion, wherein the
lovers would dwell together, appeared on one side, and the ivied
church, where they were to worship, on another.  Happening to cast
their eyes on the ground, they smiled, yet with a sense of wonder, to
see that a pale lily was growing at their feet.

"We will build our Temple here," said they, simultaneously, and with
an indescribable conviction, that they had at last found the very
spot.

Yet, while they uttered this exclamation, the young man and the Lily
turned an apprehensive glance at their dreary associate, deeming it
hardly possible, that some tale of earthly affliction should not make
those precincts loathsome, as in every former case.  The old man stood
just behind them, so as to form the chief figure in the group, with
his sable cloak muffling the lower part of his visage, and his sombre
list overshadowing his brows.  But he gave no word of dissent from
their purpose; and an inscrutable smile was accepted by the lovers as
a token that here had been no footprint of guilt or sorrow, to
desecrate the site of their Temple of Happiness.

In a little time longer, while summer was still in its prime, the
fairy structure of the Temple arose on the summit of the knoll, amid
the solemn shadows of the trees, yet often gladdened with bright
sunshine.  It was built of white marble, with slender and graceful
pillars, supporting a vaulted dome; and beneath the centre of this
dome, upon a pedestal, was a slab of dark-veined marble, on which
books and music might be strewn.  But there was a fantasy among the
people of the neighborhood, that the edifice was planned after an
ancient mausoleum, and was intended for a tomb, and that the central
slab of dark-veined marble was to be inscribed with the names of
buried ones.  They doubted, too, whether the form of Lilias Fay could
appertain to a creature of this earth, being so very delicate, and
growing every day more fragile, so that she looked as if the summer
breeze should snatch her up, and waft her heavenward.  But still she
watched the daily growth of the Temple; and so did old Walter
Gascoigne, who now made that spot his continual haunt, leaning whole
hours together on his staff, and giving as deep attention to the work
as though it had been indeed a tomb.  In due time it was finished, and
a day appointed for a simple rite of dedication.

On the preceding evening, after Adam Forrester had taken leave of his
mistress, he looked back towards the portal of her dwelling, and felt
a strange thrill of fear; for he imagined that, as the setting
sunbeams faded from her figure, she was exhaling away, and that
something of her ethereal substance was withdrawn, with each lessening
gleam of light.  With his farewell glance, a shadow had fallen over
