"These are merely a few trifles," replied the Old Year, "which I have
picked up in my rambles, and am going to deposit, in the receptacle of
things past and forgotten.  We sisterhood of Years never carry
anything really valuable out of the world with us. Here are patterns
of most of the fashions which I brought into vogue, and which have
already lived out their allotted term.  You will supply their place,
with others equally ephemeral.  Here, put up in little China pots,
like rouge, is a considerable lot of beautiful women's bloom, which
the disconsolate fair ones owe me a bitter grudge for stealing.  I
have likewise a quantity of men's dark hair, instead of which, I have
left gray locks, or none at all.  The tears of widows and other
afflicted mortals, who have received comfort during the last twelve
months, are preserved in some dozens of essence-bottles, well corked
and sealed.  I have several bundles of love-letters, eloquently
breathing an eternity of burning passion, which grew cold and
perished, almost before the ink was dry.  Moreover, here is an
assortment of many thousand broken promises, and other broken ware,
all very light and packed into little space.  The heaviest articles in
my possession are a large parcel of disappointed hopes, which, a
little while ago, were buoyant enough to have inflated Mr. Lauriat's
balloon."

"I have a fine lot of hopes here in my basket," remarked the New Year.
"They are a sweet-smelling flower,--a species of rose."

"They soon lose their perfume," replied the sombre Old Year. "What
else have you brought to insure a welcome from the discontented race
of mortals?"

"Why, to say the truth, little or nothing else," said her sister, with
a smile,--"save a few new Annuals and Almanacs, and some New Year's
gifts for the children.  But I heartily wish well to poor mortals, and
mean to do all I can for their improvement and happiness."

"It is a good resolution," rejoined the Old Year; "and, by the way, I
have a plentiful assortment of good resolutions, which have now grown
so stale and musty, that I am ashamed to carry them any farther.  Only
for fear that the City authorities would send Constable Mansfield,
with a warrant after me, I should toss them into the street at once.
Many other matters go to make up the contents of my bandbox; but the
whole lot would not fetch a single bid, even at an auction of worn-out
furniture; and as they are worth nothing either to you or anybody
else, I need not trouble you with a longer catalogue."

"And must I also pickup such worthless luggage in my travels?" asked
the New Year.

"Most certainly; and well, if you have no heavier load to bear,"
replied the other.  "And now, my dear sister, I must bid you farewell,
earnestly advising and exhorting you to expect no gratitude 'nor
goodwill from this peevish, unreasonable, inconsiderate, ill-intending,
and worse-behaving world.  However warmly its inhabitants may seen to
welcome you, yet, do what you may, and lavish on them what means of
happiness you please, they will still be complaining, still craving
what it is not in your power to give, still looking forward to some
other Year for the accomplishment of projects which ought never to
have been formed, and which, if successful, would only provide new
occasions of discontent.  If these ridiculous people ever see anything
tolerable in you, it will be after you are gone forever."

"But I," cried the fresh-hearted New Year,--"I shall try to leave men
wiser than I find them.  I will offer them freely whatever good gifts
Providence permits me to distribute, and will tell them to be thankful
for what they have, and humbly hopeful for more; and surely, if they
are not absolute fools, they will condescend to be happy, and will
allow me to be a happy Year. For my happiness must depend on them."

"Alas for you, then, my poor sister!" said the Old fear, sighing, as
