
He had already made the acquaintance of the three boys. They had shown
him below in front of the house how one of them could best throw down the
others, and had demonstrated all sorts of useful tricks. But as each
tried to outdo the others in showing off his knowledge, a struggle ensued
and the tricks were immediately applied; one threw another over the
third, Sami was knocked and thrown around by all three.

When he now came down from his room a voice from the barn called out:
"Come here and help pull."

Sami ran along. There stood the two younger boys, Michael and Uli, with
great hoes on their shoulders, and Stoeffi beside a cart which had to be
taken along. They waited for their father, and then all went out to the
field. Here Stoeffi and Sami had to rake together the grass, which the
father cut, and load it on the cart, and bring home to the cows. Michael
and Uli had to hoe the weeds in the next field near by. Now it appeared
that Sami did not know at all how to use the rake, for he had never done
such work.

"He shall weed with Uli, and Michael can do this work," said the farmer.

But when Sami tried to do this, the hoe was too heavy for him, and he
could do nothing.

"Then kneel on the ground and pull them up with your hands," said
the farmer.

Sami squatted down and pulled at the weeds with all his might. The ground
was hard and the work very tiresome. But Sami did not forget how his
grandmother had impressed it upon him to do all his work well and
willingly.

At noon the two weeders took their hoes on their shoulders and Sami had
to pull the cart, which was now much heavier than on the way there. The
boy had to use all his strength, for Stoeffi showed him plainly that he
would not take upon himself the larger part of the work.

Then when they passed by the field the father indicated to each one the
piece he would have to weed that afternoon; for he himself would be
obliged to go to the cattle market. They would find a smaller hoe at home
for Sami to take with him in the afternoon, for pulling up the weeds was
too slow work.

After the boys had worked several hours in the afternoon, they sat down
in the shade of an old apple-tree to eat their luncheon, and the piece of
black bread with pear juice tasted very good after the hot work.

"Have you ever seen a bear?" asked Stoeffi of Sami.

He said he had not.

"Then you would be fearfully frightened if you should suddenly see one,"
continued Stoeffi; "only those who know them are not afraid of them. This
evening there is to be one in the village, and, as I am almost through
with my piece in the field, you can finish it, so I can go early to see
the bear."

Sami agreed. When all four had begun to hoe again, Stoeffi soon exclaimed:

"Well, you won't have much more to do now, Sami, but keep your
promise, or--"

Stoeffi doubled up his fist, and Sami understood what that meant.

He had hardly gone when Michael said:

"See, Sami, there isn't much left of mine, you can do that too; I am
going to see the bear."

Whereupon Michael ran off.

"Me, too," cried Uli, throwing down his hoe. "You can finish that
also, Sami."

When the twilight came on and the family put the sour milk and the
steaming potatoes on the table, Sami was missing.

"I suppose he will keep us waiting," remarked the farmer's wife
sharply. When all had finished and the milk mugs were empty, the woman
cleared them away and placed the few potatoes left over on the kitchen
table and growled:

"He can eat here, if he wants anything."

It was quite dark, and Sami still had not come. Just as the other three
were being sent to bed, he came in, so tired he could hardly stand. The
woman asked him harshly, if he couldn't come home with the others. The
farmer assumed that the piece he had told Sami to weed had been too much
for him to do, and he said consolingly:

"It is right that you wanted to finish your work, but you must
work faster."

Sami understood the signs which Stoeffi made behind his father's back,
that he was to keep silent about the bear, and he was too much afraid of
the three boys' fists to say anything about it.

He preferred to go straight to bed, for he was too tired to eat. But he
couldn't go to sleep. He had received so many new impressions, he had
borne so much anguish, and had to do so much work besides, he could think
of nothing else. But now his grandmother came before his eyes again as
she had prayed with him at evening and had been so kind to him, and
everything she had told him. He wanted so much to pray, it seemed to him
as if his grandmother was near and told him the dear Lord would always
comfort him if he prayed, and that comfort he was so anxious to have.

He was so troubled, when he wondered if he could do his work the next
day, so that the farmer would not be cross, and how his wife would be,
for he was very much afraid of her, and how it would be with the boys,
who forced him to make everything appear contrary to the truth.

Then Sami began to pray and prayed for a long time, for he already began
to feel comforted, because he could take refuge with the dear Lord and
ask Him to help him, now that he had no one left in the world to whom he
could speak and who could assist him. When at last his eyes closed from
great weariness he dreamed he was sitting with his grandmother on the
wall and above them all the birds were singing so loud and so joyfully
that he had to sing with them: "Only trust the dear Lord!"




CHAPTER FOURTH

HARD TIMES


The following morning Sami was awakened by loud tones, but it was no
longer the birds singing; it was the farmer's wife ordering the boys
harshly to get up right away. She had already called them three times,
and if this time they didn't obey, their father would come. Then they
all sprang out of bed and in a few minutes were down-stairs, where
their father was already sitting at the table and would not have waited
much longer.

The day did not pass very differently from the one before, and thus
passed a long series of days. There was already a change in the work.

Sami, little by little, learned to do everything very well, for he took
pains and followed his grandmother's advice carefully. He always had
something to do for the other boys still, so that he never finished his
work a moment before supper-time. But he was no longer late. A change had
also come about in this. Stoeffi had learned that there was one thing Sami
could not or would not do which he himself could do very well: he could
not tell a lie.

He had been late again a couple of times, but had never told the reason.
Finally, however, the farmer had spoken harshly:

"Now speak out, and tell why you can't get through your work faster; you
are quick enough when anyone is watching you."

Then Sami had accordingly told all the truth, and the father had
threatened to beat the boys if they didn't do their work themselves.
Afterwards Stoeffi had thrashed Sami to punish him, and had warned him
that he would do it every time Sami complained of him.

Sami had replied that he had never complained and didn't want to do so,
but when his father questioned him he could only tell him the truth.
Stoeffi tried to explain to him that it didn't matter whether he told the
truth or not, but here he found Sami more obstinate than he had expected,
and no matter what fearful threats he hurled at him, he always said the
same thing in the end:

"But I shall do it."

This firmness was the result of Sami's sure conviction that the dear Lord
heard and knew everything and that lying was something wicked, which did
not please Him.

So Stoeffi had to find some other way to get off from his work early and
make Sami finish what he left. He found that all three could never dare
abandon their work and leave it for Sami, but one of them might do so
each evening, and he threatened to punish his brothers severely if they
would not agree to this. Then there would always be three or four
evenings in succession when Stoeffi wanted to go away early; then the
brothers had to stay and work, and this led to many a quarrel, with heavy
blows which regularly fell upon Sami.

So he never had any happy days. But every evening he could be alone with
his thoughts of his grandmother, of all the beautiful bygone days and all
the good words she had spoken to him. Nobody troubled him, or called to
him, or pulled him then, as usually happened all day long.

Thus the Summer and Autumn passed away, and a cold Winter had come. There
was no more work to be done in the fields and meadows, but there were all
sorts of things to be done to help the farmer in the barn and his wife in
the house and the kitchen. This Sami had to do.

Meanwhile their own three boys could go to school, which had now begun
again, for they had to get some education. Sami could get that by and by.
In the Summer he had acquired a good deal of quickness and now did his
work so skilfully that the farmer said a couple of times:

"I would not have believed it, for in the Summer he was always the last."

Sami now thought that everything would go easier than in the Summer, but
something came which was much harder to bear than the extra burden of
work, which was too much for the others.

Every day the boys fought in the field outside, and Sami, as the
smallest, always came off with the most blows. But that was the end of
it, and when the boys came home at night no one thought any more about
it. In the evening the three boys were assigned to the little room with
the feeble light of a low oil lamp, to do their arithmetic for school,
while Sami had to cut apples and pears for drying. From the first the
three were angry because Sami had no arithmetic to do, and then one would
accuse the other of taking the light away from him, and all three would
scream that Sami didn't need any at all for his work. Then one would pull
the lamp one way, and another the other way, until it was upset and the
oil would run over the table into Sami's apples. Then there would be a
really murderous tumult in the darkness; all hands would grope in the oil
and one would always outcry the others. Then the mother would come in
very cross and want to know who was always starting such mischief. Then
one would blame the other, and finally the blame would fall on Sami,
because he made the least noise. Usually the farmer too came in then, and
his angry wife would always reply that she had indeed said the boy would
be an apple of discord in the house, and a Winter like this they had
never experienced. Often Sami had to endure many hard words and
