new clothes fit him beautifully. All he really needs is a shirt, and
I'll give him one. Mine are getting too small."

Samantha's fingers fidgeted a little with the tidy they were holding;
but Mrs. Kinzer said composedly,--

"Well, Dabney, I've been thinking about it. You ought not to be tied
down all the while. Suppose you take next week pretty much to yourself:
Samantha won't want the ponies every day. The other horses have all got
to work, or I'd let you have one of them."

Dabney got up, for want of a better answer, and walked over to where his
mother was sitting, and gave the thoughtful matron a good sounding kiss.

At the same time he could not help thinking,--

"This comes of Ham Morris and my new rig."

"There, Dabney, that'll do," said his mother; "but how'll you spend
Saturday?"

"Guess I'll take Ford Foster out in the bay, a-crabbing, if he'll go,"
replied Dabney. "I'll run over and ask him."

It was not too late, and he was out of the house before there was any
chance for further remarks from the girls.

"Now," he muttered, as he walked along, "I'll have to see old lawyer
Foster, and Mrs. Foster, and I don't know who all besides. I don't like
that."

Just as he came to the north fence, however, he was hailed by a clear,
wide-awake voice,--

"Dab Kinzer, is that you?"

"Guess so," said Dab: "is that you, Ford?"

"I was just going over to your house," said Ford.

"Well, so was I just coming over to see you. I've been too busy all the
week, but they've let up on me at last."

"I've got our family nearly settled," replied Ford; "and I thought I'd
ask if you wouldn't like to go out on the bay with me to-morrow. Teach
you to catch crabs."

Dabney drew a long, astonished sort of whistle; but he finished it
with,--

"That's about what I was thinking of. There's plenty of crabs, and I've
got a tip-top boat. We won't want a heavy one for just us two."

"All right, then. We'll begin on crabs, but some other day we'll go for
bigger fish. What are you going to do next week?"

"Got it all to myself," said Dab. "We can have all sorts of a good time.
We can have the ponies, too, when we want them."

"That's about as good as it knows how to be," responded the young
gentleman from the city. "I'd like to explore the country. You're going
to have a nice place of it, over there, before you get through. Only, if
I'd had the planning of that house, I'd have set it back farther. Too
much room all round it. Not enough trees either."

Dab came stoutly to the defence of not only that house, but of
Long-Island architecture generally, and was fairly overwhelmed, for the
first time in his life, by a flood of big words from a boy of his own
age.

He could have eaten up Ford Foster, if properly cooked. He felt sure of
that. But he was no match for him on the building question. On his way
back to his new home, however, after the discussion had lasted long
enough, he found himself inquiring,--

"That's all very nice, but what can he teach me about crabs? We'll see
about that to-morrow."

Beyond a doubt, the crab question was of special importance; but one of
far greater consequence to Dab Kinzer's future was undergoing
discussion, at that very hour, hundreds of miles away.

Quite a little knot of people there was, in a hotel parlor; and while
the blooming Miranda, now Mrs. Morris, was taking her share of talk very
well with the ladies, Ham was every bit as busy with a couple of elderly
gentlemen.

"It's just as I say, Mr. Morris," said one of the latter, with a
superfluous show of energy: "there's no better institution of its kind
in the country than Grantley Academy. I send my own boys there; and I've
just written about it to my brother-in-law, Foster, the New-York lawyer.
He'll have his boy there this fall. No better place in the country,
sir."

"But how about the expenses, Mr. Hart?" asked Ham.

"Fees are just what I told you, sir, a mere nothing. As for board, all I
pay for my boys is three dollars a week. All they want to eat, sir, and
good accommodations. Happy as larks, sir, all the time. Cheap, sir,
cheap."

If Ham Morris had the slightest idea of going to school at a New-England
academy, Miranda's place in the improved house was likely to wait for
her; for he had a look on his face of being very nearly convinced.

She did not seem at all disturbed, however; and probably she knew that
her husband was not taking up the school question on his own account.

Nevertheless, that was the reason why it might have been interesting for
Dab Kinzer, and even for his knowing neighbor, to have added themselves
to the company Ham and Miranda had fallen in with on their wedding-tour.

Both of the boys had a different kind of thinking on hand; and that
night Dab dreamed that a gigantic crab was trying to pull Ford Foster
out of the boat, while the latter calmly remarked to him,--

"There, my young friend, did you ever see anything just like that
before?"





CHAPTER VI.

CRABS, BOYS, AND A BOAT-WRECK.


That Saturday morning was a sad one for poor Dick Lee.

His mother, the previous night, carefully locked up his elegant apparel,
the gift of Mr. Dabney Kinzer. It was done after Dick was in bed; and,
when daylight came again, he found only his old clothes by the bedside.

It was a hard thing to bear, no doubt; but Dick had been a bad boy on
Friday. He had sold his fish instead of bringing them home, and then had
gone and squandered the money on a brilliant new red necktie.

"Dat's good 'nuff for me to wear to meetin'," said Mrs. Lee, when her
eyes fell upon the gorgeous bit of cheap silk. "Reckon it won't be
wasted on any good-for-nuffin boy. I'll show ye wot to do wid yer fish.
You' a-gettin' too mighty fine, anyhow."

Dick was disconsolate for a while; but his humility took the form of a
determination to go for crabs that day, mainly because his mother had
long since set her face against that tribe of animals.

"Dey's a wasteful, 'stravagant sort ob fish," remarked Mrs. Lee, in
frequent explanation of her dislike. "Dey's all clo'es and no body, like
some w'ite folks I know on. I don't mean de Kinzers. Dey's all got body
nuff."

And yet that inlet had a name and reputation of its own for crabs. There
was a wide reach of shallow water, inside the southerly point at the
mouth, where, over several hundred acres of muddy flats, the depth
varied from three and a half to eight feet, with the ebb and flow of the
tides. That was a sort of perpetual crab-pasture; and there it was that
Dick Lee determined to expend his energies that Saturday.

Very likely there would be other crabbers on the flats; but Dick was not
the boy to object to that, provided none of them should notice the
change in his raiment. At an early hour, therefore, Dab and Ford were
preceded by their young colored friend, they themselves waiting for
later breakfasts than Mrs. Lee was in the habit of preparing.

Dick's ill fortune did not leave him when he got out of sight of his
mother. It followed him down to the shore of the inlet, and compelled
him to give up, for that day, all idea of borrowing a respectable boat.

There were several, belonging to the neighbors, from among which Dick
was accustomed to take his pick, in return for errands run and other
services rendered to their owners; but on this particular morning not
one of them all was available. Some were fastened with ugly chains and
padlocks. Two were hauled away above even high-water mark, and so Dick
could not have got either of them into the water even if he had dared to
try; and as for the rest, as Dick said,--

"Guess dar owners must hab come and borrered 'em."

The consequence was, that the dark-skinned young fisherman was for once
compelled to put up with his own boat, or rather his father's.

The three wise men of Gotham were not much worse off when they went to
sea in a bowl than was Dick Lee in that rickety little old flat-bottomed
punt.

Did it leak?

Well, not so very much, with no heavier weight than Dick's; but there
was reason in his remark that,--

"Dis yer's a mean boat to frow down a fish in, when you cotch 'im. He's
done suah to git drownded."

Yes, and the crabs would get their feet wet, and so would Dick; but he
resigned himself to his circumstances, and pushed away. To tell the
truth, he had not been able to free himself from a lingering fear lest
his mother might come after him, before he could get afloat, with orders
for some duty or other on shore; and that would have been worse than
going to sea in the little old scow, a good deal.

"Reckon it's all right," said Dick as he shoved off. "It'd be an awful
risk to trus' dem nice clo'es in de ole boat, suah."

Nice clothes, nice boats, a good many other nice things, were as yet
beyond the reach of Dick Lee; but he was quite likely to catch as many
crabs as his more aristocratic neighbors.

As for Dabney Kinzer and his friend from the city, they were on their
way to the water-side, after all, at an hour which indicated either
smaller appetites than usual or greater speed at the breakfast-table.

"Plenty of boats, I should say," remarked Ford, as he surveyed the
little "landing" and its vicinity with the air of a man who had a few
fleets of his own. "All sorts. Any of 'em fast?"

"Not many," said Dab. "The row-boats, big and little, have to be built
so they will stand pretty rough water."

"How are the sail-boats?"

"Same thing. There's Ham Morris's yacht."

"That? Why, she's as big as any in the lot."

"Bigger; but she don't show it."

"Can't we take a cruise in her?" asked Ford.

"Any time. Ham lets me use her whenever I like. She's fast enough, but
she's built so she'll stand 'most any thing. Safe as a house if she's
handled right."

"Handled!"

Ford Foster's expression of face would have done honor to the Secretary
of the Navy, or the Chairman of the Naval Affairs Committee in Congress,
or any other perfect seaman, Noah included. It seemed to say,--

"As if any boat could be otherwise than well sailed, with me on board!"

Dabney, however, even while he was talking, had been hauling in from its
"float and grapnel," about ten yards out at low water, the very
stanch-looking little yawl-boat that called him owner. She was just such
a boat as Mrs. Kinzer would naturally have provided for her boy,--stout,
well-made, and sensible,--without any bad habits of upsetting or the
like. Not too large for Dabney to manage all alone, "The Jenny," as he
called her, and as her name was painted on the stern, was all the better
for having two on board, and had room in her then for more.

"The inlet's pretty narrow for a long reach through the marsh," said
Dabney, "and as crooked as a ram's horn. I'll steer, and you pull, till
we're out o' that, and then I'll take the oars."

"I might as well row out to the crab-grounds," said Ford, as he pitched
his coat forward, and took his seat at the oars. "All ready?"

"Ready," said Dab; and "The Jenny" glided gracefully away from the
landing with the starting-push he gave her.

Ford Foster had had oars in his hands before, but his experience had
been limited to a class of vessels different in some respects from the
one he was in now.

He was short of something, at all events. It may have been skill, or it
may have been legs or discretion; but, whatever was lacking, at the
third or fourth stroke the oar-blades went a little too deeply below the
smooth surface of the water. There was a vain tug, a little out of
"time;" and then there was a boy on the bottom of the boat, and a pair
of well-polished shoes lifted high in the air.

"You've got it," shouted Dabney.

"Got what?" exclaimed an all-but angry voice from down there between the
seats.

"Caught the first 'crab,'" replied Dabney: "that's what we call it. Can
you steer? Guess I'd better row."

"No, you won't," was the very resolute reply, as Ford regained his seat
and his oars. "I sha'n't catch any more crabs of that sort. I'm a little
out of practice, that's all."

"I should say you were, a little. Well, it won't hurt you. 'Tisn't much
of a pull."

Ford would have pulled it now if he had blistered all the skin off his
hands in doing so; and he did very creditable work for some minutes,
among the turns and windings of the narrow inlet.

"Here we are," shouted Dabney at last. "We are in the inlet yet, but it
widens out into the bay."

"That's the bay, out yonder?"

"Yes; and the island between that and the ocean's no better'n a mere bar
of sand."

"How d'you get past it?"

"Right across there, almost in a straight line. We'll run it next week
in Ham's yacht. Splendid weak-fishing right in the mouth of that inlet,
on the ocean side."

"Hurrah!" exclaimed Ford, "I'm in for that. Is the bay deep?"

"Not very," replied Dabney; "but it gets pretty rough sometimes."

Ford was getting pretty red in the face just then, with his unaccustomed
exercise; and his friend added,--

"You needn't pull so hard: we're almost there. Hullo! if there isn't
Dick Lee, in his dry-goods box. That boat'll drown him some day, and his
dad too. But just see him pull in crabs!"

