
"No," said Erick, "I cannot play with you. I do not want to shout so
terribly."

"You need not scream, that does not belong to the game. Come along!"
Saying this, Kaetheli took Erick's hand firmly in hers and pulled him
along.

Erick played with the rest, and now he had begun he played with all his
might. They had stopped the game of "Catch" and were playing a circle
game. The children had formed a large circle and held each other's
hands. In the middle of the circle stood the excluded child. This child
had to strike someone's hand at random and then there was a race around
the circle to see who would first get in the open space inside. This
game was played with the greatest zeal; but suddenly Erick pulled his
hands away from his neighbors' and ran away, so that great confusion
arose.

"We will not let him play any more," cried Churi, much angered.

"Indeed we will," maintained Kaetheli firmly, "perhaps a wasp has stung
him, or perhaps they play the same game where he used to live. When he
returns he can take my hand. Now we will go on."

So it was done, and soon after they were playing again with great glee,
and Erick was forgotten.

Not far from their playground stood a blind man with a barrel-organ
playing his melodies. When Erick had heard the first notes, he had freed
himself and had run away. Now he stood at a little distance from the
organ grinder and listened with strained attention to all the melodies.
When the man left, the boy went quietly toward the cottage, and when
Marianne saw him come, she said to herself: "I had hoped that the
children would make him merry again, and now it seems to me that he is
sadder than he was before."

From that time on Kaetheli looked every evening, when the games began,
to see whether Erick was standing near the hedge, and when she saw him
there she ran to get him. Erick now played every day with the children
and when he was in the spirit of the game, he looked quite happy. But
almost every evening the same thing occurred as on the first. In the
midst of the game Erick stopped, ran away and did not return. Once a
number of wandering journeymen had passed by; they had sung loud and
joyously their wander-songs, one after the other. Away was Erick, and
one could see him far away, quietly following the singing men. Once
trumpet blasts sounded across the meadow to the playing children--for
one of Middle Lot was with the players in the army and was practising
his marches--at once Erick ran away in the direction of the sounds.
Another time a boy with a harmonica had approached the playing children;
it was Erick's turn just then to seek the hiders, but threatenings and
pleadings were of no avail, he did not seek any more. He placed himself
in front of the boy and listened to him; there he remained standing and
did not stir.

Churi in his hiding-place was about to burst with anger because Erick
stopped seeking. He had hoped that Erick would exhaust himself looking
for him, for Churi had climbed up the high pear-tree which stood in the
centre of their playground, and from there he could overlook Erick's
inactivity and his stubborn resistance to being moved. Kaetheli too had
become impatient, for in the farthest corner of the goat-shed, whither
she had crawled, she felt herself secure from being found, and now, all
at once, she discovered that there was no more seeking, and she could
easily guess the cause. With a good deal of trouble she crawled out
again, with many signs of her hiding-place on her dress for she had been
obliged to sit crouched. She ran to Erick, who was still in the same
spot, near the harmonica player.

"I should like to know what is the matter with you," she called out.
"Every evening, just when we have the greatest fun, all at once you run
away like a hare, or you stand there like a statue and let everything go
as it will. But that will not do! Come and seek us. But first I must
hide again."

The tones of the harmonica had just stopped and the boy had gone. Erick
took a deep breath and said: "I cannot play any more. I must go home."

He turned away and went; but that annoyed Kaetheli. She ran after him
and talked angrily at him. "That is not nice of you, Erick; you need not
have done that. You have spoiled the game now four or five times--that
is surely not kind of you, do you think it is?" They had by this time
arrived at Marianne's cottage. Erick stopped at the hedge and turned
round. He said, quite friendly: "Do not be angry, Kaetheli, you see I
have to act so."

"Yes, but why? Tell me now, what you do and why you have to spoil
everything?" demanded Kaetheli, rather huffed, for she could not yet get
over the fact that she had crawled all for nothing into the incomparable
hiding-place in the goat-shed.

"I will tell you, Kaetheli, for you must not think that I purposely
spoil everything for you. I did not think of that," said Erick, excusing
himself. "Do you see, there is a beautiful song which my mother sang
every day, and also on the last day, and I should so much like to hear
that song again. But no one sings it, and I may listen wherever I like,
I hear only other things. Oh, if I could only hear that song again, just
once!"

Now Kaetheli saw how Erick's eyes filled with big tears, and in an
instant her anger turned into pity. "You must not be sad on that
account, for I can help you," she said readily. "I know so many songs;
tell me what the name of yours is, then I will say it to you right
away."

"I try to remember it all the time, but I cannot get the words together;
but I remember well the melody. Do you think you could guess the words,
if I sing the melody?"

"Of course I can, you just sing on," encouraged Kaetheli, with
confidence.

Erick sang a line, and then another, and still a bit, then he could not
go further. Kaetheli, surprised, shook her head. "I never have heard
that song, but perhaps we sing it, only a little differently. I am sure
I shall find it. Tell me what it is about, about people or animals?"

"At the beginning about flowers, green trees, you know, with those
beautiful branches and--"

"Stop, I know all," Kaetheli interrupted him; "now I am going to sing it
to you." And with a firm voice and full tones Kaetheli began seriously:

     "'Three roses in the garden,
     Three birds are in the wood,
     In summer it is lovely
     In winter it is good.'

"Is that it?" she now asked, full of confidence that it must be it. But
Erick shook his head decidedly, and said:

"No, no, that is not my song, there is no similarity between it and what
you sing."

Kaetheli was much surprised. "But the flowers and the trees are in the
song," she said, "or perhaps, Erick, you have forgotten the song and do
not know how it goes?"

"Indeed, indeed I know," the latter assured her. "You see, first there
is a great feast, where they all come and throw down many flowers and
wreaths because a great lord is coming and--"

"Perhaps a count," Kaetheli interposed.

"Perhaps so."

"Oh! now I know it! If you only had spoke of the count right away; now
listen!" And again Kaetheli began with full tones:

     "'I stood on a high mountain
     And looked into a vale,
     A little ship came swimming
     Three counts did hoist the sail.'

"Well, Erick?"

But Erick shook his head even more and said sadly: "Not at all, not a
bit like it! Perhaps the song is lost and no one knows anything about
it."

"I know something else to help you," said helpful Kaetheli, whose tender
heart was filled with compassion. "To be sure, it is a little late, but
I can still do it."

Then she ran away, and Erick looked after her with great surprise, and
wondered where she was going to look for the song.

Running all the way, Kaetheli had reached the bottom of the hill in a
quarter of an hour. On the garden wall stood Ritz. "Get Sally, Ritz, but
be quick," Kaetheli called up to him. That just suited Ritz, for he
hoped that something particular was in store, and before Kaetheli
reached the wall, Sally was brought out.

Breathlessly Kaetheli told her what she wanted and now expected, since
Sally knew so many songs that she would bring out the desired one on the
spot. But it was not accomplished so quickly and there followed a long
explanation, for Sally must know all that was to be found in the song,
whether it was joyous or sad, and then she began to guess and to try
whether it could be this one or that, but none seemed to fit according
to the descriptions, and suddenly Kaetheli jumped up and exclaimed: "The
evening bells are ringing; I have to go home. I am afraid that father
will be at supper before me and then he'll scold. I thought you would
know it much quicker, Sally, such a simple song! Think it over and bring
it to me at school, but sure, for else Erick will be sad again. Good
night!"

Kaetheli was away like a shot, and Sally went thoughtfully back to the
house. Very soon the sitting-room was lighted up, where mother and aunt
were seated at the table, and now the father also sat down. Edi had long
since waited with his book to see whether the lamp would be lighted in
the room, for his mother had forbidden him to read in the twilight. Ritz
sat down to finish, with many a sigh, a delayed arithmetic lesson. Now
Sally entered the room; under each arm she carried four or five books of
different sizes and makeup. Panting under the heavy load she threw
them on the table.

"Oh, for heaven's sake," cried Auntie, frightened, "now Sally will turn
into a historical searcheress."

"No, no," cried Sally, "only give me a little room, I am obliged to look
for something." She sat down at once behind the heap of books and began
her work in earnest. But she did not remain undisturbed for long, for
the large amount of reading material which she had brought in attracted
the eyes of all, and all at once the father, who had looked at the books
from over his paper, said:

"Sally, I see a book which is little suited for you to read. Where did
you get the Niebelungen song?"

"I was just going to ask," said the mother, "what you intended to do
with A.M. Arndt's war songs?"

Sally had taken along from all tables and book-cases what seemed to her
a collection of songs. These two books she had found in her father's
study and now she explained that she had to find Erick's lost song, and
what Kaetheli had told her about what was in it.

"Aha," said Edi, and giggled a little, "on that account you took that
book from the piano. Erick will be pleased with the words you will get
from this."

He held the book before his sister and pointed with his finger to the
title: "Songs Without Words". Sally was not as thorough in her thinking
as her brother was. She had, in the zeal of her intention, thought that
these were some particular kind of songs, and she now looked with some
confusion at the book in which only black notes were to be found. Ritz,
too, was now roused to interest in the doings. He too had taken up a
book and read rather laboriously: "Battle Sonnets" from--

"What! You have also been to my table, Sally?" the aunt interrupted the
reader. "You children are really terrible! At any rate you ought to have
been in bed long ago; it is high time, pack together."

But this time Sally showed herself unusually obstinate. She assured them
that she could not sleep, not for the whole night, if she had not found
the song. She must bring it to Kaetheli, as she had promised to do so,
and from fear that she should not find the song Sally worked herself
into such a state of excitement that the mother interfered. She
explained to the child that they were not the kind of books where such a
song could be found, and that the descriptions which Kaetheli had given
were much too uncertain to find any song. Sally herself should speak
with Erick about what he still knew of his song, and then they would
search for it together, for she too would gladly help the poor boy to
keep in memory the song his mother had loved.

These words pacified Sally and so she willingly packed together her
books and put each in its place.



CHAPTER VII

Erick Enlists in the Fighting Army


Meanwhile the sunny September had approached and everywhere the apples
and pears were smiling down from the trees. Every morning one could see
the Mayor of Upper Wood walk toward the hillside, where he had started a
new vineyard where only reddish, sweet Alsatian grapes grew. The
hillside lay toward the valley about a half-hour's walk below Upper
Wood; but the walk was not too far for the Mayor to watch the growth of
his grapes, for they were of the most delicious kind.

The Justice of Peace, Kaetheli's father, had also a small vineyard on
that side, but of a much inferior kind, and when he sometimes went to
see whether his grapes would ripen this year, he always found the Mayor
there, and usually said, pointing to the latter's grapes: "A splendid
plant."

And the Mayor answered: "I should think so. And this year will not be
like last! Just let them come!" and with these words he held up his
finger threateningly.

"If one only could get hold of one of that crowd," remarked the Justice
of Peace, "so that one could make an example of him of what would happen
to all the wicked fellows."

"I have prepared for that, Justice of Peace," the other answered, full
of meaning. "The boldest of them will carry the reminder of the sweet
grapes for weeks about with him and will be plainly marked."

This conversation had already been repeated several times, for both men
had an especial interest in the topic. But they soon had to pass to more
important things, for in these communities all kinds of things happen.
At present all the inhabitants of the three places were in great tension
and expectation about something which caused so much talk that they
hardly found time to attend to their daily business. The Upper Wooders
had bought an organ for their church, which was to be dedicated the
following Sunday.

In the Middle Lot something was also taking place. Old Marianne was busy
packing up, for she could no longer keep her cottage. Her work was not
enough to pay the running expenses, so she was going down to Oakwood
where she had a cousin who was glad to have her live with him. Now the
question was, where the little stranger was to go, whom she had kept
with her up till now. She wanted to stay over Sunday and attend the
dedication, and on Monday she was going to lock up the house.

To the schoolchildren also the approaching festivity was an opportunity
for much loud discussion. Two parties had naturally formed themselves,
the church and the no-church party. For the one side wanted to attend
church on Organ-Sunday, as they called the day for short, and listen to
the organ; the other did not care anything about hearing the music, for
they said they could hear the organ in the afternoon when they were
obliged to go to Sunday school, and to attend church twice was too much.
The main thing was that women would be sitting about everywhere with
large baskets full of cake and unusually good cookies; these must be
secured. The Middle Lotters especially were against the morning church
service. To the surprise of all, big Churi voted for the church-going.
He had brought it about that the great, long-prepared battle day was
fixed for Organ-Sunday, although many voices voted against it, and there
were still some that did not agree with the arrangement, for they were
sure that on the feast-day much else was to be seen and heard. But Churi
grew quite wild if anyone said a word against his plan, and they did not
care to make him angry now, for no one could manage so many soldiers as
he had to look after, and only thus could the victory be won. The Middle
Lotters had naturally joined the Lower Wooders against the Upper Wooders
and so they were now a large army. The Upper Wooders therefore made a
new effort to get Edi for leader and to win the battle, for against such
a large army only a well prepared battle-plan and a general well versed
in war could save them, and Edi was the only one who knew how to do
both.

But he remained steadfast, although it almost choked him, for all the
brilliant examples of the small Greek army against the enormous hordes
of Persians stood before him, and he had to swallow them all down, for
he knew his father's aversion to such warlike doings and then--on
Organ-Sunday!

Churi had ordered that his whole army should come together on the Friday
before Organ-Sunday in the Middle Lot. So the whole crowd collected on
the evening fixed, and there was an indescribable noise. But big Churi
shouted the loudest and explained to them the arrangements of the day:
first, all would go to church, and during that time, he and his officers
would go to find out the best place for camping and for the battle.

"Ah, so, Churi!" a little fellow in the crowd shouted, "that is why you
voted for church, that you might do outside what you want to!"

Churi cried, much vexed: "That must be on account of discipline; if you
do not want to go, then don't, and the Upper Wooders will pay you for
it." This threat was effective, just as Churi wanted it to be.

The whole army should not come together until after the organ dedication
was over in the morning, and the midday meal which followed at once, was
finished; and in the morning only Churi with his officers should march
out to arrange all places and positions. So he had planned. The officers
whom he had chosen were all his good friends, the toughest Middle
Lotters that could be found.

About this time a year ago, he had, with the very same boys, broken into
the Mayor's vineyard and stolen all his very best, fine Alsatian grapes.
He intended to do this again with his confidential friends, for it had
never been found out who had stolen the grapes, although they had tried
in all the three communities to find the culprits, and this had greatly
encouraged Churi and his allies. But he knew how careful the Mayor had
been this year, and he knew very well of his daily walks and that in the
afternoon his wife also took a walk in the direction of the vineyard,
and in the evening they often took the same walk together; so that the
culprits had not any day been sure of them. But on Organ-Sunday no one
would be outside--of that Churi was convinced; therefore he had
arranged everything in view of that, for although there would be an
investigation, all the many Lower Wooders and Middle Lotters would be in
that region, and the culprits would never be found out from among such a
large crowd.

After Churi had told his army of his battle plans, they dispersed in all
directions. A number of spectators had gathered around the warriors,
every child in Middle Lot, down to the two-year-olds. Ahead of all was
Kaetheli, who was always on the spot when something was to be seen or
heard. When she left the meadow, she saw Erick standing near the hedge,
where he had stood for a long time watching the tumultuous crowd.
Kaetheli ran to him. "This will be such a fight as never before," she
called to him with admiration. "Don't you want to be in it, Erick?"

"No," he answered drily.

"Why not?"

"Because they act as I do not care to act."

"Not? You are a peculiar boy, you are always alone. Do you know where
you are going Monday when Marianne goes away from here?"

"No."

"You are going to be auctioned off. My father has said so."

"What is that?" asked Erick, who now listened more attentively to
Kaetheli.

"Oh, there are a crowd of people in the room and they bid on you, and
whoever bids the lowest gets you."

"That is stupid," said Erick.

"Why is it stupid?"

"Because they would get more money if they gave me to him who offers the
most."

"No, you did not understand. You are not going to be sold, quite the
reverse; he who gets you also gets the money--do you understand now?"

"Who gives him the money?"

"Well, that is not a person, as you think," Kaetheli explained. "Do you
see, there is a money box with money in it for the people who are poor
and miserable and homeless."

Erick grew purple.

"I am not going to be auctioned," he said defiantly.

"Yes, indeed, Erick, that cannot be helped. One has to obey before one
is confirmed. If you do not obey, then someone just puts you on his
shoulder and takes you to the auction room."

After Kaetheli had instructed Erick in what was coming to him, she bade
him good-night and went her way. Erick stayed on the same spot and did
not move. He had become deathly pale and his blue eyes flashed defiance
and indignation, which had never been seen in this sunny face. Thus
Erick stood on the same spot when Churi came by on his way home.

"Have they made you angry, velvet panty? I never have seen you so mad,"
he exclaimed and stopped near the hedge.

