ready for business. The handle of the pail will be convenient for
moving it about, and it can be set on three bricks or some more
elaborate support, as dictated by fancy and expense.

The temperature required for baking earthenware is 1250
degrees--1310 degrees, C.,; hotel china, 1330 degrees; hard
porcelain, 1390 degrees-1410 degrees. These temperatures can not
be obtained in the above kiln by means of the ordinary Bunsen
burner. If will be necessary either to buy the largest size
Bunsen, or make one yourself, if you have the materials. If you
can get a cone which can be screwed into an inch pipe, file the
opening of the cone to 1/16 in. diameter, and jacket the whole
with a 2-1/2-in. pipe. The flame end of this burner tube should be
about 4-1/2 in. above the cone opening and should be covered with
gauze to prevent flame from snapping back. When lighted, the point
of the blue flame, which is the hottest part, should be just in
the hole in the bottom of the kiln. Such a burner will be cheaply
made and will furnish a kiln temperature of 1400 degrees, but it
will burn a great deal of gas.

A plumber's torch of medium size will cost more in the beginning,
but will be cheaper in operation. Whatever burner is used, the
firing should be gradual, and with especial caution the first
time. By experiment you will find that a higher temperature is
obtained by placing a 1-in. pipe 2-ft. long over the lid hole as a
chimney. It would be still more effective to get another iron
pail, 2 in. wider than the kiln, and get a down draft by inverting
it over the kiln at whatever height proves most suitable. --G. L.
W.



** How to Make a Small Medical Induction Coil [63]

The coil to be described is 3-1/2 in., full length of iron core,
and 3/4 in. in diameter.

Procure a bundle of small iron wire, say 1/4 in. in diameter, and
cut it 3-1/2 in. long; bind neatly with coarse thread and file the
ends smooth (Fig. 1). This done, make two wood ends, 1-1/4 by
1-1/4 in. and 3/8 in. thick, and varnish. Bore holes in the center
of each so the core will fit in snugly and leave about 1/4 in.
projecting from each end (Fig. 1).

After finishing the core, shellac two layers of  thick paper over
it between the ends; let this dry thoroughly. Wind two layers of
bell magnet wire over this, allowing several inches of free wire
to come through a hole in the end. Cover with paper and shellac as
before. Wind about 1/8 in. of fine wire, such

[Illustration: Medical Induction Coil]

as used on telephone generators, around the coil, leaving long
terminals. Soak the whole in melted paraffin and let cool; bind
tightly with black silk.

The vibrator is made of a piece of thin tin to which is soldered
the head of an iron screw and on the other side a small piece of
platinum, which can be taken from an old electric bell (Fig. 2).

Of course, a regulator must be had for the vibrator; this can be
accomplished by bending a stout piece of copper wire as shown. The
connections and the base for setting up are shown in the figures.
--Contributed by J. T. R., Washington, D. C.



** Mechanical Trick With Cards [63]

The following mechanical card trick is easy to prepare and simple
to perform:

First, procure a new deck, and divide it into two piles, one
containing the red cards and the other the black ones, all cards
facing the same way. Take the red cards, square them up and place
in a vise. Then, with a plane, plane off the upper right hand
corner and lower left hand corner, as in Fig. 1, about 1/16 in.

Then take the black cards, square them up, and plane off about
1/16 in. on the upper left hand corner and lower right hand
corner, as in Fig. 2.

Next restore all the cards to one pack, taking care to have the
first card red, the next black, and so on, every alternate card
being the same color. Bend the pack so as to give some spring to
the cards, and by holding one thumb on the upper left-hand corner

[Illustration: Card Trick]

all the cards will appear red to the audience; place thumb in the
center at top of pack and they will appear mixed, red and black;
with thumb on upper right-hand corner all cards appear black. You
can display either color called for.
--Contributed by Ralph Gingrich, Chicago.



** How to Make a Rain Gauge [64]

An accurate rain gauge may be easily constructed from galvanized
iron, as shown in the sketch herewith. The funnel, A, overlaps and
rests on the body, B, and discharges into the tube, C, the area of
which is one-tenth that of the top of the funnel. The depth of the
water in C is thus ten times the actual rainfall, so that by
measuring it with a stick marked off in tenths of an inch, we
obtain the result in hundredths of an inch.

A good size to make the rain gauge is as follows: A, 8 in.
diameter; C, 2.53 in. ; length of C, about 20 in. It should be
placed in an exposed location, so that no inaccuracy will occur
from wind currents. To find the fall of snow, pour a known
quantity

[Illustration: Rain Gauge]

of warm water on the snow contained in the funnel and deduct the
quantity poured in from the total amount in the tube.
--Contributed by Thurston Hendrickson, Long Branch, N.J.



** How to Make an Aquarium [64]

In making an aquarium, the first thing to decide on is the size.
It is well not to attempt building a very large one, as the
difficulties increase with the size. A good size is 12 by 12 by 20
in., and this is inexpensive to build.

First buy one length of 3/4 by 1/8-in. angle iron for the frame,
F, Fig. 1. This can be obtained at any steel shop and should cost
about 20 cents. All the horizontal pieces, B, should be beveled 45
degrees at the ends and drilled for 3/16 in. stove bolts. The
beveling may be done by roughing out with a hacksaw and finishing
with a file. After all the pieces are cut and beveled they should
be drilled at the ends for the 3/16-in. stove bolts, C. Drill all
the horizontal pieces, B, first and then mark the holes on the
upright pieces, A, through the holes already drilled, thus making
all the holes coincide. Mark the ends of each piece with a figure
or letter, so that when they are assembled, the same ends will
come together again. The upright pieces, A, should be countersunk
as shown in the detail, and then the frame is ready to assemble.

After the frame has been assembled take it to glazier and have a
bottom made of skylight glass, and sides and ends of double-thick
window glass. The bottom glass should be a good fit, but the sides
and ends should be made slightly shorter to allow the cement, E,
to form a dovetail joint as shown. When the glass is put in the
frame a space, D, will be found between the glass and the
horizontal pieces, B, of the frame. If this were allowed to remain
the pressure of the water would spring the glass and cause a leak
at E; so it is filled up with plaster of paris.

The cement, E, is made as follows: Take 1 gill of plaster of
paris, 1 gill of litharge, 1 gill of fine white sand, and 1/3 of a
gill of finely powdered rosin. Mix well and add boiled linseed oil
and turpentine until as thick as putty. Let

[Illustration: Detail of Aquarium Frame]

the cement dry three or four days before putting any water in the
aquarium.

In choosing stock for the aquarium it should be remembered that a
sufficient quantity of vegetable life is required to furnish
oxygen for the fish. In a well balanced aquarium the water
requires renewal only two or three times a year. It is well to
have an excess of plants and a number of snails, as the snails
will devour all the decaying vegetable matter which would
otherwise poison the water and kill the fish.

[Illustration: Aquarium Finished]

If desired, a centerpiece (A, Fig. 2) can be made of colored
stones held together by cement, and an inverted jar can be
supported in the position shown at B. If the mouth of the jar is
below the surface of the water it will stay filled and allow the
fish to swim up inside as shown. Some washed pebbles or gravel
should be placed on the bottom, and, if desired, a few Chinese
lilies or other plants may be placed on the centerpiece.



** Homemade Pneumatic Lock [65]

Mount an old bicycle hand-pump, A, on the door by means of a metal
plate, B, having a swinging connection at C. Fasten the lever, D,
to the door knob, and make a hinge connection with the pump by
means of a piece of sheet

[Illustration: Pneumatic Door-Opener]

brass, E, soldered to the end of the cylinder. All this apparatus
is on the inside of the door and is connected by a small rubber
tube, F, to a secret mouthpiece placed at some convenient
location. A small piece of spring brass, screwed to the door
frame, will open the door about 1/2 in. when the operator blows in
the mouthpiece, or if the door is within reach of the mouthpiece,
the operator may push the door at the same time that he blows,
thus doing away with the spring, which is only used to keep the
door from relocking.

One way of making the air connection with the outside is to bend
the tube F around and stick it through the keyhole. Few burglars
would ever think to blow in the keyhole.
--Contributed by Orton E. White, Buffalo, N. Y.



** A Homemade Water Motor [66]
By MRS. PAUL S. WINTER

In these days of modern improvements, most houses are equipped
with a washing machine, and the question that arises in the mind
of the householder is how to furnish the power to run it
economically. I referred this question to my husband, with the
result that he built a motor which proved so very satisfactory
that I prevailed upon him to give the readers of Amateur Mechanics
a description of it, hoping it may solve the same question for
them.

A motor of this type will develop about 1/2 hp. with a water
pressure of 70 lb. The power developed is correspondingly
increased or decreased as the pressure exceeds or falls below
this. In the latter case the power may be increased by using a
smaller pulley. Fig. 1 is the motor with one side removed, showing
the paddle-wheel in position; Fig. 2 is an end view; Fig. 3 shows
one of the paddles, and Fig. 4 shows the method of shaping the
paddles. To make the frame, several lengths of scantling 3 in.
wide by 1 in. thick (preferably of hard wood) are required. Cut
two of them 4 ft. long, to form the main supports of the frame,
AA, Fig. 1 ; another, 2 ft. 6 in. long, for the top, B, Fig. 1;
another, 26 in. long, to form the slanting part, C, Fig. 1; and
another, D, approximately 1 ft., according to the slant given C.
After nailing these together as shown in the illustration, nail
two short strips on each side of the outlet, as at E, to keep the
frame from spreading.

Cut two pieces 30 in. long. Lay these on the sides of the frame
with their center lines along the line FF, which is 15 in. from
the outside top of the frame. They are shown in Fig. 2 at GG. Do
not fasten these boards now, but mark their position on the frame.
Two short boards 1 in. wide

[Illustration: Detail of Homemade Waterwheel]

by 1 in. thick (HH, Fig. 2) and another 1 in. by 1-1/2 in. (I,
Fig. 2) form a substantial base.

Cut the wheel from sheet iron 1/16 in. thick, 24 in. in diameter.
This can be done roughly with hammer and chisel and then smoothed
up on an emery wheel, after which cut 24 radial slots 3/4 in. deep
on its circumference by means of a hacksaw. On each side of the
wheel at the center fasten a rectangular piece of 1/4-in. iron 3
by 4 in. and secure it to the wheel by means of four rivets; after
which drill a 5/8 in. hole through the exact center of the wheel.

Cut 24 pieces of 1/32-in. iron, 1-1/2 by 2-1/2 in. These are the
paddles. Shape them by placing one end over a section of 1-in.
pipe, and hammer bowl shaped with the peen of a hammer, as shown
in Fig. 4. Then cut them into the shape shown in Fig. 3 and bend
the tapered end in along the lines JJ, after which place them in
the slots of the wheel and bend the sides over to clamp the wheel.
Drill 1/8-in. holes through the wheel and sides of the paddles and
rivet paddles in place. Next secure a 5/8-in. steel shaft 12 in.
long to the wheel about 8 in. from one end by means of a key. This
is done by cutting a groove in the shaft and a corresponding
groove in the wheel and fitting in a piece of metal in order to
secure the wheel from turning independently of the shaft. Procure
two collars or round pieces of brass (KK, Fig. 2) with a 5/8-in.
hole through them, and fasten these to the shaft by means of set
screws to prevent it from moving lengthwise.

Make the nozzle by taking a piece of 1/2-in. galvanized pipe 3-1/2
in. long and filling it with babbitt metal; then drill a 3/16-in.
hole through its center. Make this hole conical, tapering from
3/16 in. to a full 1/2 in. This is best done by using a square
taper reamer. Then place the nozzle in the position shown in Fig.
1, which allows the stream of water to strike the buckets full in
the center when they reach the position farthest to the right.
Take the side pieces, GG, and drill a 1-in. hole through their
sides centrally, and a 1/4-in. hole from the tops to the 1-in.
holes. Fasten them in their proper position, with the wheel and
shaft in place, the shaft projecting through the holes just
mentioned. Now block the wheel; that is, fasten it by means of
wedges or blocks of wood until the shaft is exactly in the center
of the inch holes in the side pieces. Cut four disks of cardboard
to slip over the shaft and large enough to cover the inch holes.
Two of these are to be inside and two outside of the frames (one
to bear against each side of each crosspiece). Fasten these to the
crosspieces by means of tacks to hold them securely. Pour melted
babbitt metal into the 1/4-in. hole to form the bearings. When it
has cooled, remove the cardboard, take down the crosspieces, and
drill a 1/8-in. hole from the top of the crosspieces through the
babbitt for an oil-hole.

Secure sufficient sheet zinc to cover the sides of the frame. Cut
the zinc to the same shape as the frame and let it extend down to
the crosspieces EE. Tack one side on. (It is well to tack strips
of heavy cloth--burlap will do--along the edges under the zinc to
form a water-tight joint.) Fasten the crosspiece over the zinc in
its proper position. Drill a hole through the zinc, using the hole
in the crosspiece as a guide. Then put the wheel in a central
position in the frame, tack the other side piece of zinc in place
and put the other crosspiece in place. Place the two collars
mentioned before on the shaft, and fasten so as to bear against
the crosspieces, in order to prevent the wheel and shaft from
moving sidewise. If the bearings are now oiled, the shaft should
turn easily and smoothly. Fasten a pulley 4 or 6 in. in diameter
to the longest arm of the shaft.

Connect the nozzle to a water faucet by means of a piece of hose;
place the outlet over a drain, and belt the motor direct to the
washing-machine, sewing machine, ice-cream freezer, drill press,
dynamo or any other machinery requiring not more than 1/2 hp.

This motor has been in use in our house for two years in all of
the above ways, and has never once failed to give perfect
satisfaction. It is obvious that, had the wheel and paddles been
made of brass, it would be more durable, but as it would have cost
several times as much, it is a question whether it would be more
economical in the end. If sheet-iron is used, a coat of heavy
paint would prevent rust and therefore prolong the life of the
motor. The motor will soon pay for itself in the saving of laundry
bills. We used to spend $1 a month to have just my husband's
overalls done at the laundry, but now I put them in the machine,
start the motor, and leave them for an hour or so. At the end of
this time they are perfectly clean, and I have noticed that they
wear twice as long as when I sent them to the laundry.



** How to Make Silhouettes [68]

Photography in all branches is truly a most absorbing occupation.
Each of us who has a camera is constantly experimenting, and
everyone of us is delighted when something new is suggested for
such experiments.

[Illustration: Making a Silhouette with the Camera]

To use a camera in making silhouettes select a window facing north
if possible, or if used only at times when the sun is not on it,
any window will do, says the Photographic Times. Raise the window
shade half way, remove any white curtains there may be, and in the
center of the lower pane of glass paste by the four corners a
sheet of tissue paper that is perfectly smooth and quite thick, as
shown in the sketch at B. Darken the rest of the window, shutting
out all light from above and the sides. Place a chair so that
after being seated the head of the subject will come before the
center of the tissue paper, and as near to it as possible, and
when looking straight before him his face will be in clear profile
to the camera.

Draw the shades of all other windows in the room. Focus the camera
carefully, getting a sharp outline of the profile on the screen.
Do not stop down the lens, as this makes long exposure necessary,
and the subject may move. Correct exposure depends, of course, on
the lens, light and the plate. But remember that a black and white
negative is wanted with as little detail in the features as
possible. The best plate to use is a very slow one, or what is
called a process plate.

[Illustration: Sample Silhouette]

In developing get all possible density in the high lights, without
detail in the face, and without fog. Printing is best done on
contrasty development paper with developer not too strong.

The ideal silhouette print is a perfectly black profile on a white
ground. With a piece of black paper, any shape in stopping off
print may be made as shown at C in the sketch.



** How to Make a Galvanoscope [68]

A galvanoscope for detecting small currents of electricity can be
made from a coil of wire, A; a glass tube, B, full of water; a
core, C; and a base, D, with binding posts as shown. The core C,
which is made of iron and cork, is a trifle lighter than the water
it displaces and will therefore normally remain in the top of the
tube; but as soon as a current of electricity passes through the
coil, the core is drawn down out of sight. The current required is
very small, as the core is so nearly balanced that the least
attraction will cause it to sink.

The glass tube may be a test tube, as shown in Fig. 2, or an empty
developer tube. If one has neither a test tube nor developer tube,
an empty pill bottle may be used. The washers at the ends of the
coil can be made of fiber, hard rubber, or wood; or can be taken
from an old magnet. The base may be made of wood or any other
insulating material and should have four short legs on the bottom.
Make the coil of single-covered wire about No. 18 and connect ends
to binding posts as shown in Fig. 2.

The core is made by pushing a small nail through a piece of cork.
It should be made so that it will rise slowly when placed under
water. Some filing may be necessary to get the weight just right,
but it should be remembered that the buoyancy of the core can be
adjusted after the parts are assembled, by pressing the cork in
the bottom of the test tube. This causes compression in the water
so that some is forced into the upper cork, reducing its
displacement and causing it to sink. The lower cork is then slowly
withdrawn, by twisting, until the core slowly rises.

[Illustration: Galvanoscope]

The instrument will then be adjusted ready for use. Connect the
binding posts to a single cell of battery--any kind will do, as a
slight current will answer. On completing

[Illustration: Interior View]

the circuit the core will descend; or put in a switch or push
button on one of the battery wires. If the button be concealed
where the operator can reach it, the core will obey his command to
rise or fall, according to his control of the current. This is a
mysterious looking instrument, the core being moved without
visible connection to any other part.



** Lubricating Sheet Metal [69]

To lubricate sheet metal mix 1 qt. whale oil, 1 lb. white lead, 1
pt. water and 3 oz. finest graphite. Apply with a brush before the
metal enters the dies.



** An Optical Top [69]

One of the latest optical delusions, and one not easy to explain,
is Benham's color top. Cut out the black and white disk shown in
the figure, and paste on a piece of stiff cardboard. Trim the
edges of the cardboard to match the shape of the disk, and make a
pinhole in the center. Cut the pin in half and push it through
from the under side until the head of the pin touches the
cardboard. Spin slowly in a strong light and some of the lines
will appear colored. The colors appear different to different
people, and are changed by reversing the rotation.

[Illustration: An Optical Top]



** Card Trick with a Tapered Deck [70]

Another simple trick to perform but one not easily detected, is
executed by using a tapered deck of cards as shown in Fig. 1. A
cheap deck of cards is evened up square, fastened in a vise and
planed along the edge in such a manner that all the pack will be
tapered about 1/16 in. This taper is exaggerated in the
illustration which shows

[Illustration: Cards from a Tapered Deck]

one card that has been turned end for end.

It is evident that any card reversed in this way can be easily
separated from the other cards in the pack, which makes it
possible to perform the following trick: The performer spreads the
cards out, fan-like, and asks an observer to withdraw a card,
which is then replaced in any part of the pack. After thoroughly
shuffling the cards the performer then holds the deck in both
hands behind his back and pronouncing a few magic words, produces
the card selected in one hand and the rest of the pack in the
other. This is accomplished by simply turning the deck end for end
while the observer is looking at his card, thus bringing the wide
end of the selected card at the narrow end of the pack when it is
replaced. The hands are placed behind the pack for a double
purpose, as the feat then seems more marvelous and the observers
are not allowed to see how it is done.

In prize games, players having the same score are frequently
called upon to cut for low to determine which shall be the winner,
but a fairer way is to cut for high as a person familiar with the
trick shown in Fig. 2 can cut the cards at the ace, deuce, or
three spot, nearly every time, especially if the deck is a new
one. This is done by simply pressing on the top of the deck as
shown, before cutting, thus causing the increased ink surface of
the high cards to adhere to the adjacent ones. A little practice
will soon enable one to cut low nearly every time, but the cards
must be grasped lightly and the experiment should be performed
with a new deck to obtain successful results.
--Contributed by D.B.L., Chicago.



** A Constant-Pressure Hydrogen Generator [70]

By fitting three bottles, A, B, C, with rubber stoppers and
connecting with glass tubes as shown in the sketch, hydrogen or
other gases produced in a similar manner may be generated under
constant pressure. In making hydrogen, bottle B is partly filled
with zinc nodules formed by slowly pouring melted zinc into water.
Hydrochloric acid is then poured in the small funnel, thus partly
filling bottles A and C. When the acid rising from C comes in
contact with the zinc, hydrogen gas is generated and fills bottle
B. The gas continues to generate until the pressure is sufficient
to force the acid back down the tube into bottle C, when the
action ceases. As fast as the gas is used the acid rises in the
tube and generates more, thus keeping the pressure nearly
constant, the pressure depending on the difference between the
levels of the acid in bottle A and bottle B. As this device is
easily upset, a ring-stand should be used to prevent its being
broken, or if it is to be a permanent apparatus it may be mounted
on a substantial wooden base. This apparatus may also be used for
preparing acetylene gas or almost any gas which requires a mixture
of a solid and liquid in its preparation.
--Contributed by C. S. J., Detroit.



** Restoring Tone to a Cracked Bell [71]

Many a bell with a deadened tone due to a cracked rim, can be
given its original clear ringing sound by sawing out the crack
with a common hacksaw. Make the saw cut along the line of the
crack. The opening caused by the saw will allow the free vibration
of the metal.
--Contributed by F. W. Bently, Jr., Huron, S. Dak.



** How to Make a Paper Phonograph Horn [71]

Secure a piece of tubing about 1-3/4 in. long that will fit the
connection to the reproducer, and wrap a quantity of heavy thread
around one end as shown in the enlarged sketch A, Fig. 1. Form a
cone of heavy paper, 9 in. long and 3 in. in diameter, at the
larger end with the smaller end to fit the diameter of the tube A,
making it three-ply thick and gluing the layers together. Attach
this cone on the tube A where the thread has been wrapped with
glue, as shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2 is also an enlarged sketch. Make
ten pieces about 1 ft. 10 in. in length and 3 in. wide from the
thin boards of a biscuit or cracker box. Cut an arc of a circle in
them on a radius of 2 ft. (Fig. 3). Make a 10-sided stick, 12 in.
long, that will fit loosely in the tube A, to which nail the 10
pieces as shown in Fig. 4, connecting the bottom by cross pieces,
using care to keep them at equal distances apart and in a circle
whose diameter is about 2 ft.

[Illustration: Detail of Phonograph Horn]

The cone is placed over the stick as shown by the dotted lines in
Fig. 4 and temporarily fastened in position. Cut out paper
sections (Fig. 5) that will cover each space between the 10
pieces, allowing 1 in. on one side and the top, in which to cut
slits that will form pieces to overlap the next section and to
attach with glue. Fasten the sections all around in like manner.
The next course is put on in strips overlapping as shown at B,
Fig. 6. Finish by putting on sections in the same way as the first
course, making it three-ply thick. Remove the form, trim to suit
and glue a piece of paper over the edge. When the glue is
thoroughly hardened, put on two coats of white and one of blue
paint, shading it to suit and striping it with gold bronze.



** How to Make a Hygrometer [71]

A homemade hygrometer, for determining the degree of moisture in
the atmosphere, is shown in the accompanying sketch and consists
of a board, A, with a nail at each end to hold the silk thread B.
A second piece of silk thread, C, is tied to the center of B and
connects with an indicating hand or pointer supported by the
bracket D. The axle on which the pointer revolves consists of a
piece of round wood, about the size of a lead-pencil, with a pin
driven in each end. A piece of tin, E, is cut V-shaped at each end
and bent up at the ends to form bearings for the pins. The silk
thread C is fastened to the wooden axle and is wrapped one or two
turns around it, so that when

[Illustration: The Hygrometer]

the thread is pulled the pointer will move on the scale. It will
be noticed that the thread B is not perfectly straight, but bends
toward D. For this reason a very small shrinkage of B, such as
occurs when the atmosphere is dry, will cause an increased
movement of C, which will be further increased in the movement of
the pointer. An instrument of this kind is very interesting and
costs nothing to make.
--Contributed by Reader, Denver.



** The Protection of a Spring Lock [72]

After shutting the front door and hearing the spring lock snap
into its socket, most people go off with a childlike faith in the
safety of their goods and chattels. But the cold fact is that
there is scarcely any locking device which affords less protection
than the ordinary spring lock. It is the simplest thing in the
world for a sneak thief to slip a thin knife between the
door-casing and the strip, push back the bolt, and walk in.

Fortunately, it is equally easy to block that trick. Take a narrow
piece of tin 3 or 4 in. long, bend it at right angles throughout
its length, and tack it firmly in the angle between the casing and
strip, so as to make it impossible to reach the bolt without
tearing off the strip.

Another way is to drive nails through the strip at intervals of
half an inch, enough to protect the bolt from being meddled with.



** A Controller and Reverse for a Battery Motor [72]

Secure a cigar or starch box and use to make the base, B. Two
wood-base switches, S S, are cut off a little past the center and
fastened to the base with a piece of wood between them. The upper
switch, S, is connected to different equal points on a coil of
wire, W, while the lower switch, S, is connected each point to a
battery, as shown. The reverse switch, R, is made from two brass
or copper strips fastened at the top to the base with screws and
joined together by a piece of hard rubber or wood with a small
handle attached. Connect wires A to the armature and wires F to
the field of the motor. By this arrangement one, two or three and
so on up until all the battery cells are used and different points
of resistance secured on the coil of wire. The reverse lever when
moved from right to left, or left to right, changes the direction
of the armature in the motor from one way to the other.
--Contributed by J. Fremont Hilscher, Jr., West St. Paul, Minn.

[Illustration: Motor Reverse and Controller]



** How to Build a Grape Arbor [73]

A grape arbor made of white pine, put together as shown in the
sketch, will last for several years. The 2 by

[Illustration: Grape-Arbor Trellis]

4-in. posts, A, are 7 ft. long. The feet, B, are made 2 by 4 in.,
4 ft. long, and rest on a brick placed under each end.



** How to Make a Toy Steam Engine [73]

A toy engine can be easily made from old implements which can be
found in nearly every house.

[Illustration: Toy Steam Engine Assembled]

The cylinder A, Fig. 1, is an old bicycle pump, cut in half. The
steam chest D, is part of the piston tube of the same pump, the
other parts being used for the bearing B, and the crank bearing C.
The flywheel Q can be any small-sized iron wheel; either an old
sewing-machine wheel, pulley wheel, or anything available. We used
a wheel from an old high chair for our engine. If the bore in the
wheel is too large for the shaft, it may be bushed with a piece of
hard wood. The shaft is made of heavy steel wire, the size of the
hole in the bearing B.

[Illustration: Valve Motion and Construction of Piston]

The base is made of wood, and has two wood blocks, H and K, 3/8
in. thick, to support bearing B, and valve crank S, which is made
of tin. The hose E connects to the boiler, which will be described
later. The clips FF are soldered to the cylinder and nailed to the
base, and the bearing B is fastened by staples.

The valve motion is shown in Figs. 2 and 3. In Fig. 2 the steam is
entering the cylinder, and in Fig. 3 the valve B has closed the
steam inlet and opened the exhaust, thus allowing the steam in the
cylinder to escape.

The piston is made of a stove bolt, E, Fig. 2, with two washers,
FF, and a cylindrical piece of hard wood, G. This is wound with
soft string, as shown in Fig. 3, and saturated with thick oil. A
slot is cut in the end of the bolt E, to receive the connecting
rod H. The valve B is made of an old bicycle spoke, C, with the
nut cut in half and filed down as shown, the space between the two
halves being filled with string and oiled.

The valve crank S, Fig. 1, is cut out of tin, or galvanized iron,
and is moved by a small crank on the shaft. This crank should be
at right angles to the main crank.

[Illustration: Engine in Operation]

The boiler, Fig. 4, can be an old oil can, powder can, or a syrup
can with a tube soldered to it, and is connected to the engine by
a piece of rubber tubing. The heat from a small gas stove will
furnish steam fast enough to run the engine at high speed. This
engine was built by W. G. Schuh and A. J. Eustice, of Cuba, Wis.



** Writing with Electricity [74]

Soak a piece of white paper in a solution of potassium iodide and
water for about a minute and then lay it on a piece of sheet
metal. Connect the sheet metal with the negative or zinc side of a
battery and then, using the positive wire as a pen, write your
name or other inscription on the wet paper.

[Illustration: Electrolytic Writing]

The result will be brown lines on a white background.
--Contributed by Geo. W. Fry, San Jose, Cal.



** To Photograph a Man in a Bottle [74]

Neither a huge bottle nor a dwarfed man is necessary for this
process, as it is merely a trick of photography, and a very
amusing trick, at that.

First, photograph the person to be enclosed in the bottle against
a dark plain background and mark the exact position on the ground
glass. Let the exposure be just long enough to show the figure
distinctly. Then place an empty bottle against a dark background
and focus so as to have the outlines of the bottle enclose those
of the man. Let this exposure be about twice the length of the
first, and the desired result is obtained.



** A Musical Windmill [74]

Make two wheels out of tin. They may be of any size, but wheel A
must be larger than wheel B. On wheel A fasten two pieces of wood,
C, to cross in the center, and place a bell on the four ends, as
shown. The smaller wheel, B, must be separated from the other with
a round piece of wood or an old spool. Tie four buttons with split
rings to the smaller wheel, B. The blades on the wheels should be
bent opposite on one wheel from the others so as to make the
wheels turn in different directions. When turning, the buttons
will strike the bells and make them ring constantly.

[Illustration: Musical Windmill]



** Optical Illusions [74]

By giving the page a revolving or rinsing motion the three
circular figures printed on the next page appear to rotate. The
best effect will be produced by laying the book down flat on the
desk or table and revolving, first

[Illustration: Move These Figures Rapidly with a Rinsing Motion]

in one direction and then in the opposite direction, in such a way
that any given point on the page will describe a circle of about
1/2 in. diameter. Fig. 1 then appears to rotate in the same
direction as the revolution; Fig. 2 appears to revolve in the
opposite direction, and Fig. 3 appears to revolve sometimes in the
same direction and at other times in the opposite direction.

A curious effect can be produced with Fig. 1 by covering up Figs.
2 and 3 with a piece of plain paper and laying a coin or other
small object on the paper. If the vision is then concentrated on
the coin or other object while same is being revolved, Fig. 1 will
be seen to rotate.



** Barrel-Stave Hammock  [75]

A hammock made of barrel staves is more comfortable than one would
think, considering the nature of the material employed in making
it. Good smooth staves should be selected for this purpose, and if
one cares to go to little trouble a thorough sandpapering will
make a great improvement. Cut half circles out of each stave, as
shown at AA, and pass ropes around

[Illustration: Cheap and Comfortable]

the ends as shown at B. When finished the weight will then be
supported by four ropes at each end, which allows the use of small
sized ropes, such as clothes lines. A hammock of this kind may be
left out in the rain without injury.
--Contributed by H.G.M., St. Louis, Mo.



** A Singing Telephone [75]

Those who have not already tried the experiment may be interested
to know that a telephone may be made to sing by holding the
receiver about 1/16 in. from the transmitter, as shown in the
illustration. The experiment will

[Illustration: To Make a Telephone Sing]

work well on most telephones, but not on all.

When the receiver is placed in the position shown it acts like an
ordinary buzzer, and the function of the transmitter will then be
that of an interrupter. The slightest movement of the transmitter
diaphragm will cause an increased movement of the receiver
diaphragm. This in turn will act on the transmitter, thus setting
up sympathetic vibrations between the two, which accounts for the
sound.



** A Microscope Without a Lens [76]
By E. W. DAVIS

Nearly everyone has heard of the pin-hole camera, but the fact
that the same principle can be used to make a microscope, having a
magnifying power of 8 diameters (64 times) will perhaps be new to
some readers. To make this lensless microscope, procure a wooden
spool, A (a short spool, say 1/2 or 3/4 in. long, produces a
higher magnifying power), and enlarge the bore a little at one
end. Then blacken the inside with india ink and allow to dry. From
a piece of thin

[Illustration: Detail of Lensless Microscope]

transparent celluloid or mica, cut out a small disk, B, and fasten
to the end having the enlarged bore, by means of brads. On the
other end glue a piece of thin black cardboard, C, and at the
center, D, make a small hole with the point of a fine needle. It
is very important that the hole D should be very small, otherwise
the image will be blurred.

To use this microscope, place a small object on the transparent
disk, which may be moistened to make the object adhere, and look
through the hole D. It is necessary to have a strong light to get
good results and, as in all microscopes of any power, the object
should be of a transparent nature.

The principle on which this instrument works is illustrated in
Fig. 2. The apparent diameter of an object is inversely
proportional to its distance from the eye, i. e., if the distance
is reduced to one-half, the diameter will appear twice as large;
if the distance is reduced to one-third, the diameter will appear
three times as large, and so on. As the nearest distance at which
the average person can see an object clearly is about 6 in., it
follows that the diameter of an object 3/4 in. from the eye would
appear 8 times the normal size. The object would then be magnified
8 diameters, or 64 times. (The area would appear 64 times as
large.) But an object 3/4-in. from the eye appears so blurred that
none of the details are discernible, and it is for this reason
that the pin-hole is employed.

Viewed through this microscope, a fly's wing appears as large as a
person's hand, held at arm's length, and has the general
appearance shown in Fig. 3. The mother of vinegar examined in the
same way is seen to be swarming with a mass of wriggling little
worms, and may possibly cause the observer to abstain from all
salads forever after. An innocent-looking drop of water, in which
hay has been soaking for several days, reveals hundreds of little
infusoria, darting across the field in every direction. These and
hundreds of other interesting objects may be observed in this
little instrument, which costs little or nothing to make.



** How to Make a Telegraph Key and Sounder [76]

The sounder, Fig. 1, is made from an old electric-bell magnet, D,
fastened to a wooden base. The lever, A, can be made of brass and
the armature, C, is made of iron. The pivot, E, is made from a
wire nail and is soldered to A. It should be filed to a point at
each end so as to move freely in the bearings, B, which are pieces
of hard wood. The spring, H, is fastened at each end by pins, bent
as shown, and should not be too strong or the magnet will be
unable to move the armature.

[Illustration: SOUNDER-A. brass: B. wood: C. soft iron; DD. coils
wound with No. 26 wire: E. nail soldered on A; FF. binding posts:
H spring]

The stop, K, is a wire nail driven deep enough in the base to
leave about 1/8 in. between the armature and the magnet. The
binding posts, F, may be taken from old dry batteries and are
connected to the two wires from the magnet by wires run in grooves
cut in the base.

The base of the key, Fig. 2, is also made of wood and has two
wooden bearings, E, which are made to receive a pivot, similar to
the one used in the sounder. The lever of the key is made of brass
and has a hardwood knob, A, fastened near the end. A switch, D,
connects with the pivot at F and can be either made from sheet
brass, or taken from a small one-point switch. The binding posts
are like those of the sounder, and are connected to the contacts,
K, by wires run in grooves cut in the wood.

[Illustration: KEY-A. wood; B. brass or iron soldered to nail; C.
brass; D. brass: E. wood: F. connection of D to nail; HH. binding
posts]



** How to Make a Music Cabinet [77]

A neat music cabinet can be made as shown in the accompanying
sketch. Each side, AA, Fig. 1, is cut from a board about 36 in. in
length and 16 in. wide. Both are alike and can be cut from the
same pattern. As the front legs curve out a little the main body
of the boards AA should be 15 in. wide. The back, B, should be
about 22 in. long by 16 in. wide and set in between sides AA. Cut
the top, C, 16 in. long and 14-1/2 in. wide. The bottom must be
the same length as the top and 13-1/2 in. wide.

The door, D, can be made panel as shown, or a single piece, 16 in.
wide and about 20 in. long. All material used is to be made from
boards that will dress to 3/4 in. thick.

[Illustration: How to Make a Music Cabinet]

Shelving may be put in as shown in Fig. 2 and made from 1/4-in.
material. Make 12 cleats, E, 13-1/2 in. long, from a strip of wood
1/2 by 3/4 in., with a groove 1/4 by 1/4 in. cut in them. Fasten 6
cleats evenly spaced on the inside of each of the sides, AA, with
3/4-in. brads. This will give seven spaces for music and as the
shelves are removable two places can be made into one.



** Easily Made Wireless Coherer [77]

A good wireless coherer may be made with very little expense, the
only materials necessary being a glass tube, two corks: a
magnetized needle and a quantity of iron and silver filings. Push
a piece of wire through one cork and place in the bottom of the
tube, as shown in the sketch.

Pour in the filings and insert the top cork with the needle pushed
through

[Illustration: Detail of Coherer]

from above. The point of the needle should barely touch the
filings and by slightly agitating the tube the iron filings will
separate from the silver and cling to the magnetized needle, as
shown.

In operation, the device must stand on end and should be connected
in the circuit as shown in the sketch. When the electrical waves
strike the needle, the conductivity of the filings is established
and a click is heard in the receiver.
--Contributed by Carl Formhals, Garfield, Ill.



** One-Wire Telegraph Line [78]

The accompanying wiring diagram shows a telegraph system that
requires no switches and may be operated with open-circuit
batteries on a one-wire

[Illustration: Diagram of One-Wire Line]

line with ground connections at each end. Any telegraph set in
which the key makes double contact can be connected up in this
way.
--Contributed by R. A. Brown, Fairport, N. Y.



** How to Make a Water Rheostat [78]

A water rheostat may be made by fitting a brass tube with a cork,
through which a piece of wire is passed. The brass tube may be an
old bicycle hand pump, A (see sketch), filled with water. Pushing
the wire, B, down into the water increases the surface in contact,
and thus decreases the resistance. An apparatus of this kind is
suitable for regulating the current from an induction coil, when
the coil is not provided with a regulator, and by using a piece of
pipe instead of the tube, it can be used to regulate the speed of
a motor.

When the pipe is used, a piece of brass or copper rod should be
substituted for the wire, in order to increase the surface. Adding
salt to the water will decrease the resistance, and, when used
with a motor, will give a greater speed.
--Contributed by John Koehler, Ridgewood, N. J.

[Illustration: Diagram of One-Wire Line Water Rheostat]



** Electric Door-Opener [78]

A very convenient and efficient device for unlocking any door
fitted with a spring lock is shown in the accompanying sketches. A
fairly stiff spring, A, is connected by a flexible wire cord to
the knob B. The cord is also fastened to a lever, C, which is
pivoted at D and is released by a magnetic trigger, E, made from
the armature and magnet of an old electric bell.

When the circuit is completed by means of a secret contact device
outside the door, the magnet, F, pulls down the armature, which
releases the trigger and allows the spring to open the lock. If
there are metal numbers on the outside of the door they may be
used for the secret contact, if desired,

[Illustration: Apparatus Placed on Inside of Door]

but if there are no numbers on the door, a small contact-board may
be constructed by driving about 12 brass headed tacks into a thin
piece of wood and making connections at the back as shown in the
wiring diagram.

In this particular diagram the tacks numbered 1 and 7 are used for
unlocking the door, the others being connected with the
