
"But I didn't see you catch him!" protested Peter, looking at Old Mr. Toad
as if he suspected him of joking.

"Anything wrong with your eyes?" inquired Old Mr. Toad.

"No," replied Peter just a wee bit crossly. "My eyes are just as good as
ever."

"Then watch me catch that fly over yonder," said Old Mr. Toad. He hopped
towards a fly which had lighted on a blade of grass just ahead. About two
inches from it he stopped, and so far as Peter could see, he sat perfectly
still. But the fly disappeared, and it wasn't because it flew away, either.
Peter was sure of that. As he told Mrs. Peter about it afterwards, "It was
there, and then it wasn't, and that was all there was to it."

Old Mr. Toad chuckled. "Didn't you see that one go, Peter?" he asked.

Peter shook his head. "I wish you Would stop fooling me," said Peter. "The
joke is on me, but now you've had your laugh at my expense, I wish you
would tell me how you do it. Please, Mr. Toad."

Now when Peter said please that way, of course Old Mr. Toad couldn't resist
him. Nobody could.

"Here comes an ant this way. Now you watch my mouth instead of the ant and
see what happens," said Old Mr. Toad.

Peter looked and saw a big black ant coming. Then he kept his eyes on Old
Mr. Toad's mouth. Suddenly there was a little flash of red from it, so tiny
and so quick that Peter couldn't be absolutely sure that he saw it. But
when he looked for the ant, it was nowhere to be seen. Peter looked at Old
Mr. Toad very hard.

"Do you mean to tell me, Mr. Toad, that you've got a tongue long enough to
reach way over to where that ant was?" he asked.

Old Mr. Toad chuckled again. With every insect swallowed he felt better
natured. "You've guessed it, Peter," said he. "Handy tongue, isn't it?"

"I think it's a very queer tongue," retorted Peter, "and I don't understand
it at all. If it's so long as all that, where do you keep it when it isn't
in use? I should think you'd have to swallow it to get it out of the way,
or else leave it hanging out of your mouth."

"Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!" laughed Old Mr. Toad. "My tongue never is in the way,
and it's the handiest tongue in the world. I'll show it to you."




XII


OLD MR. TOAD SHOWS HIS TONGUE

  To show one's tongue, as you well know,
    Is not considered nice to do;
  But if it were like Mr. Toad's
    I'd want to show it--wouldn't you?

I'm quite sure you would. You see, if it were like Old Mr. Toad's, it would
be such a wonderful tongue that I suspect you would want everybody to see
it. Old Mr. Toad thinks his tongue the most satisfactory tongue in the
world. In fact, he is quite sure that without it he couldn't get along at
all, and I don't know as he could. And yet very few of his neighbors know
anything about that tongue and how different it is from most other tongues.
Peter Rabbit didn't until Old Mr. Toad showed him after Peter had puzzled
and puzzled over the mysterious way in which bugs and flies disappeared
whenever they happened to come within two inches or less of Old Mr. Toad.

What Peter couldn't understand was what Old Mr. Toad did with a tongue that
would reach two inches beyond his mouth. He said as much.

"I'll show you my tongue, and then you'll wish you had one just like it,"
said Old Mr. Toad, with a twinkle in his eyes.

He opened his big mouth and slowly ran his tongue out its full length.
"Why! Why-ee!" exclaimed Peter. "It's fastened at the wrong end!"

"No such thing!" replied Old Mr. Toad indignantly. "If it was fastened at
the other end, how could I run it out so far?"

"But mine and all other tongues that I ever have seen are fastened way down
in the throat," protested Peter. "Yours is fastened at the other end, way
in the very front of your mouth. I never heard of such a thing."

"There are a great many things you have never heard of, Peter Rabbit,"
replied Old Mr. Toad drily. "Mine is the right way to have a tongue.
Because it is fastened way up in the front of my mouth that way, I can use
the whole of it. You see it goes out its full length. Then, when I draw it
in with a bug on the end of it, I just turn it over so that the end that
was out goes way back in my throat and takes the bug with it to just the
right place to swallow."

Peter thought this over for a few minutes before he ventured another
question. "I begin to understand," said he, "but how do you hold on to the
bug with your tongue?"

"My tongue is sticky, of course, Mr. Stupid," replied Old Mr. Toad, looking
very much disgusted. "Just let me touch a bug with it, and he's mine every
time."

Peter thought this over. Then he felt of his own tongue. "Mine isn't
sticky," said he very innocently.

Old Mr. Toad laughed right out. "Perhaps if it was, you couldn't ask so
many questions," said he. "Now watch me catch that fly." His funny little
tongue darted out, and the fly was gone.

[Illustration: His funny little tongue darted out, and the fly was gone.]

"It certainly is very handy," said Peter politely. "I think we are going to
have more rain, and I'd better be getting back to the dear Old Briarpatch.
Very much obliged to you, Mr. Toad. I think you are very wonderful."

"Not at all," replied Old Mr. Toad. "I've simply got the things I need in
order to live, just as you have the things you need. I couldn't get along
with your kind of a tongue, but no more could you get along with mine. If
you live long enough, you will learn that Old Mother Nature makes no
mistakes. She gives each of us what we need, and each one has different
needs."




XIII


PETER RABBIT IS IMPOLITE

Peter Rabbit couldn't get Old Mr. Toad off his mind. He had discovered so
many interesting things about Old Mr. Toad that he was almost on the point
of believing him to be the most interesting of all his neighbors. And his
respect for Old Mr. Toad had become very great indeed. Of course. Who
wouldn't respect any one with such beautiful eyes and such a sweet voice
and such a wonderful tongue? Yet at the same time Peter felt very foolish
whenever he remembered that all his life he had been acquainted with Old
Mr. Toad without really knowing him at all. There was one comforting
thought, and that was that most of his neighbors were just as ignorant
regarding Old Mr. Toad as Peter had been.

"Funny," mused Peter, "how we can live right beside people all our lives
and not really know them at all. I suppose that is why we should never
judge people hastily. I believe I will go hunt up Old Mr. Toad and see if I
can find out anything more."

Off started Peter, lipperty-lipperty-lip. He didn't know just where to go,
now that Old Mr. Toad had left the Smiling Pool, but he had an idea that he
would not be far from their meeting place of the day before, when Old Mr.
Toad had explained about his wonderful tongue. But when he got there, Peter
found no trace of Old Mr. Toad. You see, it had rained the day before, and
that is just the kind of weather that a Toad likes best for traveling.
Peter ought to have thought of that, but he didn't. He hunted for awhile
and finally gave it up and started up the Crooked Little Path with the idea
of running over for a call on Johnny Chuck in the Old Orchard.

Jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun was shining his brightest, and Peter soon
forgot all about Old Mr. Toad. He scampered along up the Crooked Little
Path, thinking of nothing in particular but how good it was to be alive,
and occasionally kicking up his heels for pure joy. He had just done this
when his ears caught the sound of a queer noise a little to one side of the
Crooked Little Path. Instantly Peter stopped and sat up to listen. There it
was again, and it seemed to come from under an old piece of board. It was
just a little, rustling sound, hardly to be heard.

"There's some one under that old board," thought Peter, and peeped under.
All he could see was that there was something moving. Instantly Peter was
all curiosity. Whoever was there was not very big. He was sure of that. Of
course that meant that he had nothing to fear. So what do you think Peter
did? Why, he just pulled that old board over. And when he did that, he saw,
whom do you think? Why, Old Mr. Toad, to be sure.

But such a sight as Old Mr. Toad was! Peter just stared. For a full minute
he couldn't find his voice. Old Mr. Toad was changing his clothes! Yes,
Sir, that is just what Old Mr. Toad was doing. He was taking off his old
suit, and under it was a brand new one. But such a time as he was having!
He was opening and shutting his big mouth, and drawing his hind legs under
him, and rubbing them against his body. Then Peter saw a strange thing. He
saw that Old Mr. Toad's old suit had split in several places, and he was
getting it off by sucking it into his mouth!

In a few minutes his hind legs were free of the old suit, and little by
little it began to be pulled free from his body. All the time Old Mr. Toad
was working very hard to suck it at the corners of his big mouth. He glared
angrily at Peter, but he couldn't say anything because his mouth was too
full. He looked so funny that Peter just threw himself on the ground and
rolled over and over with laughter. This made Old Mr. Toad glare more
angrily than ever, but he couldn't say anything, not a word.

When he had got his hands free by pulling the sleeves of his old coat off
inside out, he used his hands to pull the last of it over his head. Then he
gulped very hard two or three times to swallow his old suit, and when the
last of it had disappeared, he found his voice.

"Don't you know that it is the most impolite thing in the world to look at
people when they are changing their clothes?" he sputtered.




XIV


OLD MR. TOAD DISAPPEARS

  Admit your fault when you've done wrong,
  And don't postpone it over long.

Peter Rabbit didn't blame Old Mr. Toad a bit for being indignant because
Peter had watched him change his suit. It wasn't a nice thing to do. Old
Mr. Toad had looked very funny while he was struggling out of his old suit,
and Peter just couldn't help laughing at him. But he realized that he had
been very impolite, and he very meekly told Old Mr. Toad so.

"You see, it was this way," explained Peter. "I heard something under that
