shivered into fragments by the violence of the concussion. The ordinary
swell of the ocean also acts with tremendous power upon a large tract,
especially when it has been so thawed as to have become thin, and breaks
it up into a thousand smaller pieces in a very short period. The danger
of being entrapped between two ice-fields coming into contact with each
other is one of the perils which the navigator has frequently to
encounter in the northern seas; and fatal to his vessel and his life has
the occurrence often been, while in a vast number of instances escape
has seemed almost miraculous.

"At half-past six," says Captain Ross, relating to his first voyage of
discovery, in the Isabella, to the arctic regions, with Captain Parry,
in the Alexander, "the ice began to move, and, the wind increasing to a
gale, the only chance left for us was to endeavor to force the ship
through it to the north, where it partially opened; but the channel was
so much obstructed by heavy fragments, that our utmost efforts were
ineffectual; the ice closed in upon us, and at noon we felt its pressure
most severely. A large floe, which lay on one side of the Isabella,
appeared to be fixed; while, on the other side, another of considerable
bulk was passing along with a rapid motion, assuming a somewhat circular
direction, in consequence of one side having struck on the fixed field.
The pressure continuing to increase, it became doubtful whether the ship
would be able to sustain it; every support threatened to give way, the
beams in the hold began to bend, and the iron tanks settled together.

"At this critical moment, when it seemed impossible for us to bear the
accumulating pressure much longer, the hull rose several feet; while the
ice, which was more than six feet thick, broke against the sides,
curling back on itself. The great stress now fell upon our bow; and,
after being again lifted up, we were carried with great violence towards
the Alexander which had hitherto been, in a great measure, defended by
the Isabella. Every effort to avoid their getting foul of each other
failed; the ice-anchors and cables broke one after another; and the
sterns of the two ships came so violently into contact, as to crush to
pieces a boat that could not be removed in time. The collision was
tremendous, the anchors and chain-plates being broken, and nothing less
than the loss of the masts expected; but at this eventful instant, by
the interposition of Providence, the force of the ice seemed exhausted;
the two fields suddenly receded, and we passed the Alexander with
comparatively little damage. A clear channel soon after opened, and we
ran into a pool, thus escaping the immediate danger; but the fall of
snow being very heavy, our situation still remained doubtful, nor could
we conjecture whether we were yet in a place of safety. Neither the
masters, the mates, nor those men who had been all their lives in the
Greenland service, had ever experienced such imminent peril; and they
declared, that a common whaler must have been crushed to atoms."

Captain Scoresby relates a similar narrow escape from destruction owing
to the same cause. "In the year 1804," he observes, "I had an
opportunity of witnessing the effects produced by the lesser masses in
motion. Passing between two fields of ice newly formed, about a foot in
thickness, they were observed rapidly to approach each other, and,
before our ship could pass the strait, they met with a velocity of three
or four miles per hour. The one overlaid the other, and presently
covered many acres of surface. The ship proving an obstacle to the
course of the ice, it squeezed up on both sides, shaking her in a
dreadful manner, and producing a loud grinding or lengthened acute
trembling noise, according as the degree of pressure was diminished or
increased, until it had risen as high as the deck. After about two hours
the motion ceased, and soon afterwards the two sheets of ice receded
from each other nearly as rapidly as they had before advanced. The ship
in this case did not receive any injury; but, had the ice only been half
a foot thicker, she might have been wrecked." Other navigators have not
been so fortunate; and the annual loss of whaling vessels in the polar
seas is considerable, the Dutch having had as many as seventy-three sail
of ships wrecked in one season. Between the years 1669 and 1778, both
inclusive, or a period of one hundred and seven years, they sent to the
Greenland fishery fourteen thousand one hundred and sixty-seven ships,
of which five hundred and sixty-one, or about four in the hundred, were
lost.

Every one will remember the intense and mournful interest occasioned by
the loss of the President steamer which left New York in the year 1841
to cross the Atlantic, but perished in the passage, without leaving a
survivor to tell the story of her fate. It has been deemed highly
probable that this vessel got entangled in the ice, and was destroyed by
collision with its masses; for during that year, in the month of April,
the Great Western steamer encountered a field extending upwards of a
hundred miles in one direction, surrounded with an immense number of
floes and bergs, and had great difficulty in effecting its passage by
this floating continent in safety.

Another form under which the ice appears in the ocean is that of bergs,
which differ from the ice-fields in shape and origin. They are masses
projecting to a great height above the surface of the water, and have
the appearance of chalk or marble cliffs and mountains upon the deep.
They have been seen with an elevation of two hundred feet--a
circumference of two miles: and it has been shown by experiments on the
buoyancy of ice floating in sea water, that the proportion above the
surface is only about one-seventh of the thickness of the whole mass.
During the first expedition of Ross, he found an ice berg in Baffin's
Bay, at a distance of seven leagues from the land, which was measured by
a party under Lieutenant Parry. Considerable difficulty was experienced
in the attempt to land, as, in rowing round the berg, they found it
perpendicular in every place but one. When they had ascended to the
top, which was perfectly flat, they discovered a white bear in quiet
possession of the mass, who plunged into the sea without hesitation, and
effected his escape. The party found the ice berg to be four thousand
one hundred and sixty-nine yards long, three thousand eight hundred and
sixty-nine yards broad, and fifty-one feet high, being aground in
sixty-one fathoms. Its appearance was like that of the back of the Isle
of Wight, and the cliffs resembled those of the chalk range to the west
of Dover. The weight of this mass was calculated to amount to one
billion two hundred and ninety two millions three hundred and ninety
seven thousand six hundred and seventy-three tons.

[Illustration: A WHITE BEAR.]

An ice berg examined by Captain Graah, on the east coast of Greenland,
rose one hundred and twenty feet out of the water, had a circumference
of four thousand feet at the base, and its solid contents were estimated
to be upwards of nine hundred millions of cubic feet. When viewed at a
distance, nothing can be more interesting than the appearance of a
considerable number of these formations, exhibiting an infinite variety
of shape, and requiring no stretch of imagination to convert them into a
series of floating towers, castles, churches, obelisks, and pyramids, or
a snowy range of Alpine heights. No pencil, an observer has remarked,
has ever given any thing like the true effect of an ice berg. In a
picture they are huge, uncouth masses, stuck in the sea; while their
chief beauty and grandeur--their slow stately motion, the whirling of
the snow about their summits, and the fearful crackling of their
parts--they cannot give. The ice of the bergs is compact and solid, or
of a fine green tint verging to blue; and large pieces may be frequently
obtained, equal to the most beautiful crystal in transparency. It is
stated by Scoresby, that with a portion of this ice, of by no means
regular convexity, used as a burning lens, he has frequently burnt wood,
fired gunpowder, melted lead, and lit the sailors' pipes, to their no
small astonishment, the ice itself remaining in the mean while perfectly
fixed and pellucid.




MASSACRE OF THE CREW OF THE ATAHUALPA.


The Atahualpa, of Boston, left that port in August, 1803, bound to the
north-west coast of America, for the purpose of trading with the
natives. She arrived on the coast in the month of January, 1804; and,
after visiting the several islands, and purchasing skins, on the 5th of
June, 1805, weighed anchor from Chockokee, on the north-west coast, and
made sail. On the 8th, arrived at Millbank sound, and came to an anchor
within musket-shot of the village. Soon after her arrival, the chief of
the Indians, by the name of Keite, came off to the ship, with some of
his tribe, and informed the captain that the Caroline, Captain Sturgess,
had sailed from thence ten days before.

On the 11th, the chief came off again, with his tribe, and another tribe
that was there, and traded very briskly till towards night, when
becoming very insolent, they were all turned out of the ship.

On the 13th, Keite and his tribe came on board in the morning, and
seemed much more desirous to trade than before, which Captain Porter was
very glad to see. The chief mate and two of the ship's company, were
then engaged in ripping the main-sail in pieces, on the quarter-deck;
the second mate with two hands was repairing the top-sail; two on the
starboard side of the main-deck, spinning spun yarn; two more on the
forecastle, making sinnet; two more on the larboard side of the
main-deck, running shot in the armorer's forge; the cooper was making
tubs; the cook, and captain's steward in the galley, at their duty; and
all hands, as usual, employed on the ship's duty; the armorer was in the
steerage, and the boatswain in the cabin; Captain Porter, Mr. Ratstraw,
his clerk, and Mr. Lyman Plummer, (nephew of Theodore Lyman, Esq. of
Boston, ship owner,) were standing on the larboard side of the
quarter-deck, abreast of the cabin hatchway.

The chief, Keite, stood leaning on the rail, and called Captain Porter
to look at the skins that were in the canoe, alongside the ship; the
captain accordingly went to look over the side, when the chief, with
some more Indians, laid hold of him, and gave a shout. Immediately all
the Indians alongside of the canoe, and those on board, armed with
daggers, pistols, pikes, and other weapons, seized every man on deck,
who were totally unprepared for so sudden an attack. A most dreadful and
sanguinary contest immediately took place; when, after a short but
bloody engagement of about five minutes, the deck was immediately
cleared of them.

There were about two hundred Indians, it is supposed, on board at this
time; they first daggered Captain Porter several times in the back, put
him in a canoe alongside, and carried him on shore; and, as we were
afterwards informed by Captain Smith, of the ship Mary, of Boston, who
was informed by the New Hecta tribe, was by them tied to a tree, in
which unhappy and miserable situation he languished fifteen days,
refusing every species of nourishment offered him by these savages,
occasioned by his grief at this unfortunate accident.

Previous to this fatal business, there were twenty-three hands on board;
ten of whom were barbarously killed, and nine wounded. Among the killed
were, Captain Oliver Porter, Mr. John Hill, chief mate; Daniel Gooding,
second mate; John D. Katstraw, captain's clerk; Mr. Lyman Plummer, Peter
Shooner, Luther Lapham, Samuel Lapham, seamen; Isaac Lammes, cooper; and
John Williams, cook. Mr. Lyman Plummer survived about two hours after
he was wounded. The cook, who was most shockingly cut and mangled,
languished till about six o'clock the next morning.

Among the wounded were, Ebenezer Baker, seaman, most dangerously, with
daggers, he having two stabs in his left thigh, one in his groin, one in
his back, one in his breast, and one in his neck; Henry Thompson,
seaman, very dangerously, with daggers, having one wound on the right
side, one on the left shoulder, another on the left arm, and two or
three smaller ones on the same arm, one on the right temple, and another
on the left cheek; Ebenezer Williams, seaman, had three wounds in his
thigh, with daggers,--two on his back, and one on the right shoulder
with a boarding-pike; Luke Bates, seamen, one wound on the right
shoulder with a boarding-pike; Joseph Robinson, carpenter, wounded on
the left breast; Thomas Edwards, steward, stabbed on the left shoulder;
W. Walker had two stabs, with daggers, in his back.

After the deck was cleared of these sanguinary savages, several guns
were fired at the village, the sails were loosened, stream-cable cut,
and the ship put to sea. The same night they got under weigh, seven
large war-canoes hove in sight, with about thirty Indians in each. In
this deplorable condition, with only four or five hands on board capable
of duty, the Atahualpa shaped her course for New Heita; but the wind
chopping round, put about, and stood to the westward.

On the 17th, it was thought time to bury the dead, when, after having
sewed them up, and got them ready for interment, prayers were read. They
were then buried in Queen Charlotte's Sound.

It cannot be ascertained with any degree of accuracy, how many of the
Indians were killed in this dreadful contest. It is supposed, however,
that the number must have exceeded forty; for a large canoe being under
the ship's bow, with about twenty Indians in her, who were cutting a
cable, a swivel and several muskets were fired into her, and but one of
the Indians reached the shore in safety.

During the conflict with the savages, there were two barrels of powder
unheaded, and a loaded pistol prepared and given to a person who stood
ready, should they get into the cabin, and secure to themselves the
ship, to fire into it, and blow the whole up, preferring to die in that
manner rather than fall into the hands of such merciless wretches.

[Illustration: SHIPWRECK OF THE BLENDENHALL.]




SHIPWRECK OF THE BLENDENHALL.


In the year 1821, the Blendenhall, free trader, bound from England for
Bombay, partly laden with broad-cloths, was proceeding on her voyage
with every prospect of a successful issue. While thus pursuing her way
through the Atlantic, she was unfortunately driven from her course, by
adverse winds and currents, more to the southward and westward than was
required, and it became desirable to reach the island of Tristan
d'Acunha, in order to ascertain and rectify the reckoning. This island,
which is called after the Portuguese admiral who first discovered it, is
one of a group of three, the others being the Inaccessible and
Nightingale Islands, situated many hundreds of miles from any land, and
in a south-westerly direction from the Cape of Good Hope. The shores are
rugged and precipitous in the extreme, and form, perhaps, the most
dangerous coast upon which any vessel could be driven.

It was while steering to reach this group of islands, that, one morning,
a passenger on board the Blendenhall, who chanced to be upon deck
earlier than usual, observed great quantities of sea-weed occasionally
floating alongside. This excited some alarm, and a man was immediately
sent aloft to keep a good look-out. The weather was then extremely hazy,
though moderate; the weeds continued; all were on the alert; they
shortened sail, and the boatswain piped for breakfast. In less than ten
minutes, "breakers ahead!" startled every soul, and in a moment all were
on deck. "Breakers starboard! breakers larboard! breakers all around,"
was the ominous cry a moment afterwards, and all was confusion. The
words were scarcely uttered, when, and before the helm was up, the
ill-fated ship struck, and after a few tremendous shocks against the
sunken reef, she parted about mid-ship. Ropes and stays were cut
away--all rushed forward, as if instinctively, and had barely reached
the forecastle, when the stern and quarter-deck broke asunder with a
violent crash, and sunk to rise no more. Two of the seamen miserably
perished--the rest, including officers, passengers and crew, held on
about the head and bows--the struggle was for life!

At this moment, the Inaccessible Island, which till then had been veiled
in thick clouds and mist, appeared frowning above the haze. The wreck
was more than two miles from the frightful shore. The base of the
island was still buried in impenetrable gloom. In this perilous
extremity, one was for cutting away the anchor, which had been got up to
the cat-head in time of need; another was for cutting down the foremast
(the foretop-mast being already by the board.) The fog totally
disappeared, and the black rocky island stood in all its rugged
deformity before their eyes. Suddenly the sun broke out in full
splendor, as if to expose more clearly to the view of the sufferers
their dreadful predicament. Despair was in every bosom--death, arrayed
in all its terrors, seemed to hover over the wreck. But exertion was
required, and every thing that human energy could devise was effected.
The wreck, on which all eagerly clung, was fortunately drifted by the
tide and wind between ledges of sunken rocks and thundering breakers,
until, after the lapse of several hours, it entered the only spot on the
island where a landing was possibly practicable, for all the other parts
of the coast consisted of perpendicular cliffs of granite, rising from
amidst the deafening surf to the height of twenty, forty, and sixty
feet. As the shore was neared, a raft was prepared, and on this a few
paddled for the cove. At last the wreck drove right in: ropes were
instantly thrown out, and the crew and passengers, (except two who had
been crushed in the wreck,) including three ladies and a female
attendant, were snatched from the watery grave, which a few short hours
before had appeared inevitable, and safely landed on the beach. Evening
had now set in, and every effort was made to secure whatever could be
saved from the wreck. Bales of cloth, cases of wine, a few boxes of
cheese, some hams, the carcass of a milch cow that had been washed on
shore, buckets, tubs, butts, a seaman's chest, (containing a tinder-box
and needles and thread,) with a number of elegant mahogany turned
bed-posts, and part of an investment for the India market, were got on
shore. The rain poured down in torrents--all hands were busily at work
to procure shelter from the weather; and with the bed-posts and
broad-cloths, and part of the foresail, as many tents were soon pitched
as there were individuals on the island.

Drenched with the sea and with the rain, hungry, cold, and comfortless,
thousands of miles from their native land, almost beyond expectation of
human succor, hope nearly annihilated,--the shipwrecked voyagers retired
to their tents. In the morning the wreck had gone to pieces; and planks,
and spars, and whatever had floated in, were eagerly dragged on shore.
No sooner was the unfortunate ship broken up, than deeming themselves
freed from the bonds of authority, many began to secure whatever came to
land: and the captain, officers, passengers, and crew, were now reduced
to the same level, and obliged to take their turn to fetch water, and
explore the island for food. The work of exploring was soon over--there
was not a bird, nor a quadruped, nor a single tree to be seen. All was
barren and desolate. The low parts were scattered over with stones and
sand, and a few stunted weeds, rocks, ferns, and other plants. The top
of the mountain was found to consist of a fragment of original
table-land, very marshy, and full of deep sloughs, intersected with
small rills of water, pure and pellucid as crystal, and a profusion of
wild parsley and celery. The prospect was one dreary scene of
destitution, without a single ray of hope to relieve the misery of the
desponding crew. After some days, the dead cow, hams, and cheese, were
consumed; and from one end of the island to the other, not a morsel of
food could be seen. Even the celery began to fail. A few bottles of
wine, which, for security had been secreted under ground, only remained.
Famine now began to threaten. Every stone near the sea was examined for
shell-fish, but in vain.

In this dreadful extremity, and while the half-famished seamen were at
night squatting in sullen dejection round their fires, a large lot of
sea-birds, allured by the flames, rushed into the midst of them, and
were greedily laid hold of as fast as they could be seized. For several
nights in succession, similar flocks came in; and by multiplying their
fires a considerable supply was secured. These visits, however, ceased
at length, and the wretched party were exposed again to the most severe
privation. When their stock of wild fowl had been exhausted for more
than two days, each began to fear they were now approaching that sad
point of necessity, when, between death and casting lots who should be
sacrificed to serve for food for the rest, no alternative remained.
While horror at the bare contemplation of an extremity so repulsive
occupied the thoughts of all, the horizon was observed to be suddenly
obscured, and presently clouds of penguin alighted on the island. The
low grounds were actually covered; and before the evening was dark, the
sand could not be seen for the number of eggs, which, like a sheet of
snow, lay on the surface of the earth. The penguins continued on the
island four or five days, when, as if by signal, the whole took their
flight, and were never seen again. A few were killed, but the flesh was
so extremely rank and nauseous that it could not be eaten. The eggs
were collected and dressed in all manner of ways, and supplied abundance
of food for upwards of three weeks. At the expiration of that period,
famine once more seemed inevitable; the third morning began to dawn upon
the unfortunate company after their stock of eggs were exhausted; they
had now been without food for more than forty hours, and were fainting
and dejected; when, as though this desolate rock were really a land of
miracles, a man came running up to the encampment with the unexpected
and joyful tidings that "millions of sea-cows had come on shore." The
crew climbed over the ledge of rocks that flanked their tents, and the
sight of a shoal of manatees immediately beneath them gladdened their
hearts. These came in with the flood, and were left in the puddles
between the broken rocks of the cove. This supply continued for two or
three weeks. The flesh was mere blubber, and quite unfit for food, for
not a man could retain it on his stomach; but the liver was excellent,
and on this they subsisted. In the meantime, the carpenter with his
gang had constructed a boat, and four of the men had adventured in her
for Tristan d'Acunha, in hopes of ultimately extricating their
fellow-sufferers from their perilous situation. Unfortunately the boat
was lost--whether carried away by the violence of the currents that set
in between the islands, or dashed to pieces against the breakers, was
never known, for no vestige of the boat or crew was ever seen. Before
the manatees, however, began to quit the shore, a second boat was
launched; and in this an officer and some seamen made a second attempt,
and happily succeeded in effecting a landing, after much labor, on the
island, where they were received with much cordiality and humanity by
Governor Glass--a personage whom it will be necessary to describe.

Tristan d'Acunha is believed to have been uninhabited until 1811, when
three Americans took up their residence upon it, for the purpose of
cultivating vegetables, and selling the produce, particularly potatoes,
to vessels which might touch there on their way to India, the Cape, or
other parts in the southern ocean. These Americans remained its only
inhabitants till 1816, when, on Bonaparte being sent to St. Helena, the
British government deemed it expedient to garrison the island, and sent
the Falmouth man-of-war with a colony of forty persons, which arrived in
the month of August. At this time the chief of the American settlers was
dead, and two only survived; but what finally became of these we are not
informed. The British garrison was soon given up, the colony abandoned,
and all returned to the Cape of Good Hope, except a person named Glass,
a Scotchman, who had been corporal of artillery, and his wife, a Cape
Creole. One or two other families afterwards joined them, and thus the
foundation of a nation on a small scale was formed; Mr. Glass, with the
title and character of governor, like a second Robinson Crusoe, being
the undisputed chief and lawgiver of the whole. On being visited in
1825, by Mr. Augustus Earle, the little colony was found to be on the
increase, a considerable number of children having been born since the
period of settlement. The different families inhabited a small village,
consisting of cottages covered with thatch made of the long grass of the
island, and exhibiting an air of comfort, cleanliness, and plenty, truly
English.

It was to this island that the boat's crew of the Blendenhall had bent
their course, and its principal inhabitant, Governor Glass, showed them
every mark of attention, not only on the score of humanity, but because
they were fellow-subjects of the same power--for, be it known, Glass did
not lay claim to independent monarchy, but always prayed publicly for
King George as his lawful sovereign. On learning the situation of the
crew, on Inaccessible Island, he instantly launched his boat, and unawed
by considerations of personal danger, hastened, at the risk of his life,
to deliver his shipwrecked countrymen from the calamities they had so
long endured. He made repeated trips, surmounted all difficulties, and
fortunately succeeded in safely landing them on his own island, after
they had been exposed for nearly three months to the horrors of a
situation almost unparalleled in the recorded sufferings of seafaring
men.

After being hospitably treated by Glass and his company for three
