asked her to fetch some water from a stream flowing close by.  "For,"
he said, "if you will bring me drink, sister, I will find means to
provide myself with meat."

"Yes," said the Sheep, "but if I should bring you the draught, you
would doubtless make me provide the meat also."



Jupiter's Two Wallets

When Jupiter made Man, he gave him two Wallets; one for his neighbour's
faults, the other for his own.  He threw them over the Man's shoulder,
so that one hung in front and the other behind.

The Man kept the one in front for his neighbour's faults, and the one
behind for his own; so that, while the first was always under his nose,
it took some pains to see the latter.

This custom, which began thus early, is not quite unknown at the
present day.



The Satyr and the Traveller

A Satyr, ranging in the forest in winter, came across a Traveller, half
starved with the cold.  He took pity on him and invited him to go to
his cave.  On their way the Man kept blowing upon his fingers.

"Why do you do that?" said the Satyr, who had seen little of the world.

"To warm my hands, they are nearly frozen," replied the Man.

Arrived at the cave, the Satyr poured out a mess of smoking pottage and
laid it before the Traveller, who at once commenced blowing at it with
all his might.

"What, blowing again!" cried the Satyr.  "Is it not hot enough?"

"Yes, faith," answered the Man, "it is hot enough in all conscience,
and that is just the reason why I blow it."

"Be off with you!" cried the Satyr, in alarm; "I will have no part with
a man who can blow hot and cold from the same mouth."



The Two Travellers and the Oyster

As two men were walking by the seaside at low water they saw an Oyster,
and they both stooped at the same time to pick it up.  Immediately, one
pushed the other away, and a dispute ensued.

A third Traveller coming along at the time, they determined to refer
the matter to him, as to which of the two had the better right to the
Oyster.

While they were each telling his story the Arbitrator gravely took out
his knife, opened the shell and loosened the Oyster.

When they had finished, and were listening for his decision, he just as
gravely swallowed the Oyster, and offered them the two halves of the
shell.  "The Court," said he, "awards you each a Shell.  The Oyster
will cover the costs."



The Young Mouse, the Cock, and the Cat

A young Mouse, on his return to his hole after leaving it for the first
time, thus recounted his adventures to his mother: "Mother," said he,
"quitting this narrow place where you have brought me up, I was
rambling about to-day like a Young Mouse of spirit, who wished to see
and to be seen, when two such notable creatures came in my way!  One
was so gracious, so gentle and benign; the other, who was just as noisy
and forbidding, had on his head and under his chin pieces of raw meat,
which shook at every step he took; and then, all at once, beating his
sides with the utmost fury, he uttered such a harsh and piercing cry
that I fled in terror; and this, too, just as I was about to introduce
myself to the other stranger, who was covered with fur like our own,
only richer looking and much more beautiful, and who seemed so modest
and benevolent that it did my heart good to look at her."

"Ah, my son," replied the Old Mouse, "learn while you live to distrust
appearances.  The first strange creature was nothing but a Fowl, that
will ere long be killed, and, when put on a dish in the pantry, we may
make a delicious supper of his bones, while the other was a nasty, sly,
and bloodthirsty hypocrite of a Cat, to whom no food is so welcome as a
young and juicy Mouse like yourself."



The Wolf and the Mastiff

A Wolf, who was almost skin and bone, so well did the Dogs of the
neighbourhood keep guard over their masters' property, met, one
moonshiny night, a sleek Mastiff, who was, moreover, as strong as he
was fat.  The Wolf would gladly have supped off him, but saw that there
would first be a great fight, for which, in his condition, he was not
prepared; so, bidding the Dog good-evening very humbly, he praised his
prosperous looks.

"It would be easy for you," replied the Mastiff, "to get as fat as I am
if you liked.  Quit this forest, where you and your fellows live so
wretchedly, and often die with hunger.  Follow me, and you will fare
much better.'

"What shall I have to do?" asked the Wolf.

"Almost nothing," answered the Dog; "only chase away the beggars and
fawn upon the folks of the house.  You will, in return, be paid with
all sorts of nice things--bones of fowls and pigeons--to say nothing of
many a friendly pat on the head."

The Wolf, at the picture of so much comfort, nearly shed tears of joy.
They trotted off together, but, as they went along, the Wolf noticed a
bare spot on the Dog's neck.

"What is that mark?" said he.  "Oh, nothing," said the Dog.

"How nothing?" urged the Wolf.  "Oh, the merest trifle," answered the
Dog; "the collar which I wear when I am tied up is the cause of it."

"Tied up!" exclaimed the Wolf, with a sudden stop; "tied up?  Can you
not always run where you please, then?"

"Well, not quite always," said the Mastiff; "but what can that matter?"

"It matters so much to me," rejoined the Wolf, "that your lot shall not
be mine at any price"; and, leaping away, he ran once more to his
native forest.



The Tail of the Serpent

The Tail of a Serpent once rebelled against the Head, and said that it
was a great shame that one end of any animal should always have its
way, and drag the other after it, whether it was willing or no.  It was
in vain that the Head urged that the Tail had neither brains nor eyes,
and that it was in no way made to lead.

Wearied by the Tail's importunity, the Head one day let him have his
will.  The Serpent now went backward for a long time quite gayly, until
he came to the edge of a high cliff, over which both Head and Tail went
flying, and came with a heavy thump on the shore beneath.

The Head, it may be supposed, was never again troubled by the Tail with
a word about leading.



The Falcon and the Capon

A Capon, who had strong reasons for thinking that the time of his
sacrifice was near at hand, carefully avoided coming into close
quarters with any of the farm servants or domestics of the estate on
which he lived.  A glimpse that he had once caught of the kitchen, with
its blazing fire, and the head cook, like an executioner, with a
formidable knife chopping off the heads of some of his companions, had
been sufficient to keep him ever after in dread.

Hence, one day when he was wanted for roasting, all calling, clucking,
and coaxing of the cook's assistants were in vain.

"How deaf and dull you must be," said a Falcon to the Capon, "not to
hear when you are called, or to see when you are wanted!  You should
take pattern by me.  I never let my master call me twice."

"Ah," answered the Capon, "if Falcons were called like Capons, to be
run upon a spit and set before the kitchen fire, they would be just as
slow to come and just as hard of hearing as I am now."



The Crow and the Pitcher

A Crow, ready to die with thirst, flew with joy to a Pitcher, hoping to
find some water in it.

He found some there, to be sure, but only a little drop at the bottom
which he was quite unable to reach.

He then tried to overturn the Pitcher, but it was too heavy.  So he
gathered up some pebbles, with which the ground near was covered and,
taking them one by one in his beak, dropped them into the Pitcher.

By this means the water gradually reached the top, and he was enabled
to drink at his ease.



The Eagle and the Owl

The Eagle and the Owl, after many quarrels, swore that they would be
fast friends forever, and that they would never harm each other's
children.

"But do you know my little ones?" said the Owl.  "If you do not, I fear
it will go hard with them when you find them."

"Nay, then, I do not," replied the Eagle.

"The greater your loss," said the Owl; "They are the sweetest prettiest
things in the world.  Such bright eyes! such charming plumage! such
winning little ways!  You'll know them now from my description."

A short time after the Eagle found the owlets in a hollow tree.

"These hideous little staring frights, at any rate, cannot be neighbour
Owl's delicious pets," said the Eagle; "so I may make away with them
without the least misgiving."

The Owl, finding her young ones gone, loaded the Eagle with reproaches.

"Nay," answered the Eagle, "blame yourself rather than me.  If you
paint with such flattering colours, it is not my fault if I do not
recognize your portraits."



The Buffoon and the Countryman

On the occasion of some festivities that were given by a Roman
nobleman, a Merry-Andrew of a fellow caused much laughter by his tricks
upon the stage, and, more than all, by his imitation of the squeaking
of a Pig, which seemed to the hearers so real that they called for it
again and again.

A Countryman, however, in the audience, thought the imitation was not
perfect; and he made his way to the stage and said that, if he were
permitted, he to-morrow would enter the lists and squeak against the
Merry-Andrew for a wager.

The mob, anticipating great fun, shouted their consent, and
accordingly, when the next day came, the two rival jokers were in their
places.

The hero of the previous day went first, and the hearers, more pleased
than ever, fairly roared with delight.

Then came the turn of the Countryman, who having a Pig carefully
concealed under his cloak, so that no one would have suspected its
existence, vigorously pinched its ear with his thumbnail, and made it
squeak with a vengeance.

"Not half as good--not half as good!" cried the audience, and many
among them even began to hiss.

"Fine judges you!" replied the Countryman, rushing to the front of the
stage, drawing the Pig from under his cloak, and holding the animal up
on high.  "Behold the performer that you condemn!"



The Old Man, His Son, and the Ass

An Old Man and his Little Boy were once driving an Ass before them to
the next market-town, where it was to be sold.

"Have you no more wit," said a passerby, "than for you and your Son to
trudge on foot and let your Ass go light?"  So the Man put his Boy on
the Ass, and they went on again.

"You lazy young rascal!" cried the next person they met; "are you not
ashamed to ride and let your poor old Father go on foot?"  The Man then
lifted off the Boy and got up himself.

Two women passed soon after, and one said to the other, "Look at that
selfish old fellow, riding along while his little Son follows after on
foot!"  The Old Man thereupon took up the Boy behind him.

The next traveller they met asked the Old Man whether or not the Ass
was his own.  Being answered that it was: "No one would think so," said
he, "from the way in which you use it.  Why, you are better able to
carry the poor animal than he is to carry both of you."

So the Old Man tied the Ass's legs to a long pole, and he and his Son
shouldered the pole and staggered along under the weight.  In that
fashion they entered the town, and their appearance caused so much
laughter that the Old Man, mad with vexation at the result of his
endeavours to give satisfaction to everybody, threw the Ass into the
river and seizing his Son by the arm went his way home again.



The Lion, the Bear, the Monkey, and the Fox

The Tyrant of the Forest issued a proclamation commanding all his
subjects to repair immediately to his royal den.

Among the rest, the Bear made his appearance, but pretending to be
offended with the odour which issued from the Monarch's apartments, be
was imprudent enough to hold his nose in his Majesty's presence.

This insolence was so highly resented that the Lion in a rage laid him
dead at his feet.

The Monkey, observing what had passed, trembled for his skin, and
attempted to conciliate favour by the most abject flattery.  He began
with protesting that, for his part, he thought the apartments were
perfumed with Arabian spices; and, exclaiming against the rudeness of
the Bear, admired the beauty of his Majesty's paws, so happily formed,
he said, to correct the insolence of clowns.

This adulation, instead of being received as he expected, proved no
less offensive than the rudeness of the Bear, and the courtly Monkey
was in like manner extended by the side of Sir Bruin.

And now his Majesty cast his eye upon the Fox.

"Well, Reynard," Said he, "and what scent do you discover here?"

"Great Prince," replied the cautious Fox, "my nose was never esteemed
my most distinguishing sense; and at present I would by no means
venture to give my opinion, as I have unfortunately caught a terrible
cold."



The Wolf and the Lamb

A flock of Sheep was feeding in the meadow while the Dogs were asleep,
and the Shepherd at a distance playing on his pipe beneath the shade of
a spreading elm.

A young, inexperienced Lamb, observing a half-starved Wolf peering
through the pales of the fence, began to talk with him.

"Pray, what are you seeking for here?" said the Lamb.

"I am looking," replied the Wolf, "for some tender grass; for nothing,
you know, is more pleasant than to feed in a fresh pasture, and to
slake one's thirst at a crystal stream, both which I perceive you enjoy
within these pales in their utmost perfection.  Happy creature,"
continued he, "how much I envy you who have everything which I desire,
for philosophy has long taught me to be satisfied with a little!"

"It seems, then," returned the Lamb, "those who say you feed on flesh
accuse you falsely, since a little grass will easily content you.  If
this be true, let us for the future live like brethren, and feed
together."  So saying, the simple Lamb crept through the fence, and at
once became a prey to the pretended philosopher, and a sacrifice to his
own inexperience and credulity.


