employed."

"But you were to go to college, Mr. Frank."

"I know it, Richard, but I am not sure whether it would be for the best.
My tastes are for an active business life, and I don't care for a
profession."

"Do you think your stepfather will give you a start?"

"In the way of money?"

"Yes."

"I don't know. If he won't, I have still fifty dollars in the savings
bank, which I have saved from my pocket money. I will take that."

"Mr. Frank, will you promise not to be offended at what I'm going to
say?"

"I don't think you would say anything that ought to offend me, Richard."

"Then I want you to take the money that comes to me by the will--Mr.
Manning is to pay it to me on Monday. I don't need it, and you may."

Frank shook his head.

"You are very kind, Richard, but I will get along with fifty dollars,
unless Mr. Manning supplies me with more. If I really need money at any
time, I will think of your offer."

"That's something, at any rate," said Richard. partly reconciled. "You
won't forget it now, Mr. Frank?"

"No, Richard, I promise you."

Frank left the stable and went thoughtfully into the house.




CHAPTER IX

THE NEW OWNER OF AJAX


Frank and Mark took supper alone, Mr. Manning having left word that he
would not return till later in the evening.

After supper, Frank decided to go over to call upon Col. Vincent, the
new owner of Ajax. His estate was distant about three-quarters of a mile
from the Cedars.

As Frank started, Mark inquired:

"Where are you going, Frank?"

"To see Ajax," answered our hero.

"Do you mean to make any fuss about him? I wouldn't advise you to."

"Thank you for your advice."

"I wonder what he is going to do?" thought Mark. "Of course he can't do
anything now."

He did not venture to propose to accompany Frank, knowing that his
company would not be acceptable.

"Is Col. Vincent at home?" asked Frank, at the door of a handsome house.

"Yes, Mr. Courtney," replied the colored servant, pleasantly, for Frank
was a favorite among all classes in the neighborhood. "Come right in,
sir. De colonel am smoking a cigar on de back piazza."

Frank followed the servant through the hall which intersected the house,
and stepped out on the back piazza.

A stout, elderly gentleman was taking his ease in a large rustic
rocking chair.

"Good-evening, Col. Vincent," our hero said.

"Good-evening, Frank, my boy," said the colonel, heartily. "Glad to see
you. Haven't you gone back to school?"

"Yes, sir; but I came home to spend Sunday. It doesn't seem much like
home now," he added, as his lip quivered.

"You have suffered a great loss, my dear boy," said the colonel,
feelingly.

"The greatest, sir. My mother was all I had."

"I suppose Mr. Manning will keep up the establishment?"

"I suppose so, sir; but it is no longer home to me."

"Don't take it too hard, Frank. I was sorry about the will."

"So was I, sir; because it makes me dependent on a man whom I dislike."

"Don't be too prejudiced, Frank. I never took any fancy to your
stepfather myself; but then we don't need to like everybody we associate
with."

"I hear you have bought my horse, Col. Vincent," said Frank, desiring to
change the subject.

"Was Ajax your horse?"

"Yes. It was given to me as a birthday present by my mother."

"I had some such idea, and expressly asked Mr. Manning whether the horse
was not yours."

"What did he answer?"

"That it was only nominally yours, and that he thought it best to sell
it, as both you and Mark were absent at school, and had no time to use
it."

"I am not surprised at anything Mr. Manning may say," said Frank.

"It's too bad! I'll tell you what I will do, Frank. I haven't paid for
the horse yet. I will return it to Mr. Manning, and tell him that I
bought it under a misapprehension of the ownership. I don't think he
will make any fuss."

"I would rather have you keep it, sir."

"You would!" exclaimed the colonel, in surprise.

"Yes, sir. If you should return Ajax, Mr. Manning would sell him to some
one else, and you, I know, will treat him well."

"But you will lose the use of him. No, you won't, though. Come over to
my stable when you like, and, if he is not in use, you can take him
out."

"Thank you, sir! You are very kind. While I am in the neighborhood, I
won't forget your kind offer. But I mean to go away."

"You mean to go away! Where?"

"Out into the world. Anywhere, where I can find work and make a living."

"But surely this is not necessary. Your stepfather will provide for you
without your working."

"I have no reason to doubt it, Col. Vincent; but I shall be happier in
the world outside."

"Of course you will let Mr. Manning know of your intention to leave
home?"

"I shall ask his permission to go at the end of my school term. That
comes in a couple of weeks."

"Where will you go?"

"A cousin of my father is at Newark, New Jersey. I think I shall go to
him first, and ask his advice about getting a place either there or in
New York."

"You will need some money to start with. Do you think Mr. Manning will
give you any?"

"I don't know, sir! That won't prevent my going. I have fifty dollars in
a savings bank, saved up from my allowance, and that will be all I shall
need."

"If you have any difficulty on that score, Frank, remember that I was
your father's friend, and mean to be yours. Apply to me at any time when
you are in a strait."

"I will, sir, and thank you heartily."

"That was a strange will, Frank. I don't want to put any ideas into your
head to disturb you, but had your mother ever led you to suspect that
she intended to leave you dependent on your stepfather?"

"Never, sir!"

"Don't you think she would have done so, had she had such a plan in
view?"

"I do," said Frank, quickly.

The colonel's eye met his, and each knew what the other suspected.

"There is nothing for me to do at present, sir," said Frank. "If Mr.
Manning does not interfere with my plans, I shall not trouble him."

"I will hint as much when I see him. It may clear the way for you."

"I wish you would, sir."

"Come and see me again, Frank," said the colonel, as Frank rose to go.

"I certainly will, sir."

"Your father's son will always be welcome at my house. When did you say
your school term closes?"

"In a fortnight."

"I will see your stepfather within a few days. By the way, Frank,
wouldn't you like a gallop on Ajax to-night?"

"Yes, sir; I should enjoy it."

"Come out to the stable with me, then."

Ajax whinnied with delight when he saw his old, or rather his young
master, and evinced satisfaction when Frank stroked him caressingly.

"Sam," said Col. Vincent, "Frank is to ride Ajax whenever he pleases.
Saddle him for his use whenever he asks you."

"That I will, sir" answered Sam. "Often and often I've seen Mr. Frank on
his back. Doesn't he ride well, though?"

"Don't flatter me, Sam," said Frank, laughing.

Five minutes later he was on the back of his favorite horse, galloping
down the road.

"I hope I shall meet Mark," thought Frank. "I would like to give him a
sensation."

Considering the manner in which Mark had treated his stepbrother, Frank
may be excused for the wish to puzzle him a little.

Finding himself lonely, Mark decided to take a walk not long after
Frank's departure. He was sauntering along the road, when he heard the
sound of hoofs, and, to his surprise, saw his stepbrother on the back of
Ajax.

His first thought was that Frank had gone to Col. Vincent's stable and
brought away Ajax without permission, in defiance of Mr. Manning's will.
He resolved to take him to task for it immediately. Frank purposely
slackened the speed of his horse in order to give Mark the chance he
sought.

"Why are you riding Ajax?" asked Mark.

"It is a pleasant evening," answered Frank, "and I thought I should
enjoy it."

"Where did you get him?"

"From Col. Vincent's stable, where he never ought to have been carried,"
answered Frank, with spirit.

"You seem to think you can do anything you like, Frank Courtney," said
Mark, provoked, deciding that his suspicions were well founded.

"Is there any particular reason why I should not ride Ajax?" demanded
Frank.

"You have made yourself liable to arrest for horse stealing," said Mark.
"It would serve you right if Col. Vincent should have you arrested and
tried."

"I don't think he will gratify your kind wishes, Mark."

"Just wait and see what my father has to say to you."

"I have only done what I had a perfect right to do; but I can't stop to
dispute with you. I must finish my ride. Hey, Ajax!"

As he spoke the horse dashed into a gallop, and Mark was left looking
after him in a disturbed frame of mind.

"I'll tell my father as soon as he gets home," he decided; and he kept
his word.

In consequence, Frank, by that time returned, was summoned into Mr.
Manning's presence.

"What is this I hear?" he began. "Did you ride Ajax this evening?"

"Yes, sir."

"Where did you find him?"

"In Col. Vincent's stable."

"This is a high-handed proceeding, Frank Courtney. Have you any excuse
to offer?"

"None is needed sir. Col. Vincent has given me permission to ride him
whenever I please."

"It appears to me, Mark," said Mr. Manning, sharply, "that you have made
a fool of yourself."

"How should I know?" replied Mark, mortified by the collapse of his
sensation. "Frank didn't tell me he had leave to use the horse."

And he left the room, looking foolish.




CHAPTER X

MARK YIELDS TO TEMPTATION


There are some boys, as well as men, who cannot stand prosperity.

It appeared that Mark Manning was one of these.

While his stepmother was living and his father's prospects--and
consequently his own--were uncertain, he had been circumspect in his
behavior and indulged in nothing that could be considered seriously
wrong.

When his father came into possession of a large fortune, and his pocket
money was doubled, Mark began to throw off some of the restraint which,
from motives of prudence, he had put upon himself.

About the middle of the week, as Frank was taking a walk after school
hours, he was considerably surprised to see Mark come out of a
well-known liquor saloon frequented by men and boys of intemperate
habits.

The students of Bridgeville Academy were strictly forbidden this or any
other saloon, and I am sure that my boy readers will agree with mo that
this rule was a very proper one.

Mark Manning appeared to have been drinking. His face was flushed, and
his breath, if one came near enough to him, was redolent of the fumes of
alcohol. With him was James Carson, one of the poorest scholars and most
unprincipled boys in the academy. It was rather surprising that he had
managed for so long to retain his position in the institution, but he
was crafty and took good care not to be caught.

To go back a little, it was chiefly owing to James Carson's influence
that Mark had entered the saloon.

When he learned that Mark's worldly prospects had improved, and that he
had a large supply of pocket money, he determined to cultivate his
acquaintance--though privately he thought Mark a disagreeable boy--with
the intention of obtaining for himself a portion of Mark's surplus
means.

At the first of the term he had made similar advances to Frank, but they
were coldly received, so much so that he did not think it worth while to
persevere in courting our hero's intimacy.

He succeeded better with Mark, his crafty nature teaching him how to
approach him.

"Mark," he said, with a great show of cordiality, "I am delighted to
hear of your good fortune. I always liked you, and I think you deserve
to be rich."

"Thank you!" said Mark, much gratified, for he liked flattery. "I am
sure I am very much obliged to you."

"Oh, not at all! I only say what I think. Shall I tell you why I am
particularly glad?"

"Yes, if you like," returned Mark, in some curiosity.

"Because I like you better than that young muff, your stepbrother. I
