


III. THE GENTLE HAND.

Timothy S. Arthur (b. 1809, d. 1885) was born near Newburgh, N.Y., but
passed most of his life at Baltimore and Philadelphia. His opportunities
for good schooling were quite limited, and he may be considered a
self-educated man. He was the author of more than a hundred volumes,
principally novels of a domestic and moral tone, and of many shorter
tales--magazine articles, etc. "Ten Nights in a Barroom," and "Three Years
in a Mantrap," are among his best known works.

1. When and where it matters not now to relate--but once upon a time, as I
was passing through a thinly peopled district of country, night came down
upon me almost unawares. Being on foot, I could not hope to gain the
village toward which my steps were directed, until a late hour; and I
therefore preferred seeking shelter and a night's lodging at the first
humble dwelling that presented itself.

2. Dusky twilight was giving place to deeper shadows, when I found myself
in the vicinity of a dwelling, from the small uncurtained windows of which
the light shone with a pleasant promise of good cheer and comfort. The
house stood within an inclosure, and a short distance from the road along
which I was moving with wearied feet.

3. Turning aside, and passing through the ill-hung gate, I approached the
dwelling. Slowly the gate swung on its wooden hinges, and the rattle of
its latch, in closing, did not disturb the air until I had nearly reached
the porch in front of the house, in which a slender girl, who had noticed
my entrance, stood awaiting my arrival.

4. A deep, quick bark answered, almost like an echo, the sound of the
shutting gate, and, sudden as an apparition, the form of an immense dog
loomed in the doorway. At the instant when he was about to spring, a light
hand was laid upon his shaggy neck, and a low word spoken.

5. "Go in, Tiger," said the girl, not in a voice of authority, yet in her
gentle tones was the consciousness that she would be obeyed; and, as she
spoke, she lightly bore upon the animal with her hand, and he turned away
and disappeared within the dwelling.

6. "Who's that?" A rough voice asked the question; and now a heavy-looking
man took the dog's place in the door.

7. "How far is it to G--?" I asked, not deeming it best to say, in the
beginning, that I sought a resting place for the night.

8. "To G--!" growled the man, but not so harshly as at first. "It's good
six miles from here."

9. "A long distance; and I'm a stranger and on foot," said I. "If you can
make room for me until morning, I will be very thankful."

10. I saw the girl's hand move quickly up his arm, until it rested on his
shoulder, and now she leaned to him still closer.

11. "Come in. We'll try what can be done for you." There was a change in
the man's voice that made me wonder. I entered a large room, in which
blazed a brisk fire. Before the fire sat two stout lads, who turned upon
me their heavy eyes, with no very welcome greeting. A middle-aged woman
was standing at a table, and two children were amusing themselves with a
kitten on the floor.

12. "A stranger, mother," said the man who had given me so rude a greeting
at the door; "and he wants us to let him stay all night."

13. The woman looked at me doubtingly for a few moments, and then replied
coldly, "We don't keep a public house."

14. "I'm aware of that, ma'am," said I; "but night has overtaken me, and
it's a long way yet to G--."

15. "Too far for a tired man to go on foot," said the master of the house,
kindly, "so it's no use talking about it, mother; we must give him a bed."


16. So unobtrusively that I scarce noticed the movement, the girl had
drawn to her mother's side. What she said to her I did not hear, for the
brief words were uttered in a low voice; but I noticed, as she spoke, one
small, fair hand rested on the woman's hand.

17. Was there magic in that touch? The woman's repulsive aspect changed
into one of kindly welcome, and she said, "Yes, it's a long way to G--. I
guess we can find a place for him."

18. Many times more during that evening, did I observe the magic power of
that hand and voice--the one gentle yet potent as the other. On the next
morning, breakfast being over, I was preparing to take my departure when
my host informed me that if I would wait for half an hour he would give me
a ride in his wagon to G--, as business required him to go there. I was
very well pleased to accept of the invitation.

19. In due time, the farmer's wagon was driven into the road before the
house, and I was invited to get in. I noticed the horse as a rough-looking
Canadian pony, with a certain air of stubborn endurance. As the farmer
took his seat by my side, the family came to the door to see us off.

20. "Dick!" said the farmer in a peremptory voice, giving the rein a quick
jerk as he spoke. But Dick moved not a step. "Dick! you vagabond! get up."
And the farmer's whip cracked sharply by the pony's ear.

21. It availed not, however, this second appeal. Dick stood firmly
disobedient. Next the whip was brought down upon him with an impatient
hand; but the pony only reared up a little. Fast and sharp the strokes
were next dealt to the number of half a dozen. The man might as well have
beaten the wagon, for all his end was gained.

22. A stout lad now came out into the road, and, catching Dick by the
bridle, jerked him forward, using, at the same time, the customary
language on such occasions, but Dick met this new ally with increased
stubbornness, planting his fore feet more firmly and at a sharper angle
with the ground.

23. The impatient boy now struck the pony on the side of the head with his
clinched hand, and jerked cruelly at his bridle. It availed nothing,
however; Dick was not to be wrought upon by any such arguments.

24. "Don't do so, John!" I turned my head as the maiden's sweet voice
reached my ear. She was passing through the gate into the road, and in the
next moment had taken hold of the lad and drawn him away from the animal.
No strength was exerted in this; she took hold of his arm, and he obeyed
her wish as readily as if he had no thought beyond her gratification.

25. And now that soft hand was laid gently on the pony's neck, and a
single low word spoken. How instantly were the tense muscles relaxed--how
quickly the stubborn air vanished!

26. "Poor Dick!" said the maiden, as she stroked his neck lightly, or
softly patted it with a childlike hand. "Now, go along, you provoking
fellow!" she added, in a half-chiding, yet affectionate voice, as she drew
up the bridle.

27. The pony turned toward her, and rubbed his head against her arm for an
instant or two; then, pricking up his ears, he started off at a light,
cheerful trot, and went on his way as freely as if no silly crotchet had
ever entered his stubborn brain.

28. "What a wonderful power that hand possesses!" said I, speaking to my
companion, as we rode away.

29. He looked at me for a moment, as if my remark had occasioned surprise.
Then a light came into his countenance, and he said briefly, "She's good!
Everybody and everything loves her."

30. Was that, indeed, the secret of her power? Was the quality of her soul
perceived in the impression of her hand, even by brute beasts! The
father's explanation was doubtless the true one. Yet have I ever since
wondered, and still do wonder, at the potency which lay in that maiden's
magic touch. I have seen something of the same power, showing itself in
the loving and the good, but never to the extent as instanced in her,
whom, for want of a better name, I must still call "Gentle Hand."


DEFINITIONS.--2. Vi-cin'i-ty, neighborhood. 16. Un-ob-tru'-sive-ly, not
noticeably, modestly. 17. Re-pul'sive, repelling, forbid-ding. 18.
Po'tent, powerful, effective. Host, one from whom another receives food,
lodging, or entertainment. 20. Per'emp-to-ry, commanding, decisive. 21.
A-vailed', was of use, had effect. 22. Al-ly', a confederate, one who
unites with another in some purpose. 25. Tense, strained to stiffness,
rigid. Re-laxed', loosened. 20. Chid'ing, scolding, rebuking. 27.
Crotch'et, a perverse fancy, a whim. 30. In'stanced, mentioned as an
example.



IV. THE GRANDFATHER.

Charles G. Eastman (b. 1816, d.1861) was born in Maine, but removed at an
early age to Vermont, where he was connected with the press at Burlington,
Woodstock, and Montpelier. He published a volume of poems in 1848, written
in a happy lyric and ballad style, and faithfully portraying rural life in
New England.

1. The farmer sat in his easy-chair
     Smoking his pipe of clay,
   While his hale old wife with busy care,
     Was clearing the dinner away;
   A sweet little girl with fine blue eyes,
   On her grandfather's knee, was catching flies.

2. The old man laid his hand on her head,
     With a tear on his wrinkled face,
   He thought how often her mother, dead,
     Had sat in the selfsame place;
   As the tear stole down from his half-shut eye,
   "Don't smoke!" said the child, "how it makes you cry!"

3. The house dog lay stretched out on the floor,
     Where the shade, afternoons, used to steal;
   The busy old wife by the open door
     Was turning the spinning wheel,
   And the old brass clock on the manteltree
   Had plodded along to almost three.

4. Still the farmer sat in his easy-chair,
     While close to his heaving breast
   The moistened brow and the cheek so fair
     Of his sweet grandchild were pressed;
   His head bent down, all her soft hair lay;
   Fast asleep were they both on that summer day.

DEFINITIONS.--1. Hale, healthy. 3. Man'tel-tree, shelf over a fireplace.
Plod'ded, went slowly. 4. Heaving, rising and falling.



V. A BOY ON A FARM.

Charles Dudley Warner (b. 1829,--) was born at Plainfield, Mass. In 1851
he graduated at Hamilton College, and in 1856 was admitted to the bar at
Philadelphia, but moved to Chicago to practice his profession. There he
remained until 1860, when he became connected with the press at Hartford,
Conn., and has ever since devoted himself to literature. "My Summer in a
Garden," "Saunterings," and "Backlog Studies" are his best known works.
The following extract is from "Being a Boy."

1. Say what you will about the general usefulness of boys, it is my
impression that a farm without a boy would very soon come to grief. What
the boy does is the life of the farm. He is the factotum, always in
demand, always expected to do the thousand indispensable things that
nobody else will do. Upon him fall all the odds and ends, the most
difficult things.

2. After everybody else is through, he has to finish up. His work is like
a woman's,--perpetually waiting on others. Everybody knows how much easier
it is to eat a good dinner than it is to wash the dishes afterwards.
Consider what a boy on a farm is required to do,--things that must be
done, or life would actually stop.

3. It is understood, in the first place, that he is to do all the errands,
to go to the store, to the post office, and to carry all sorts of
messages. If he had as many legs as a centiped, they would tire before
night. His two short limbs seem to him entirely inadequate to the task. He
would like to have as many legs as a wheel has spokes, and rotate about in
the same way.

4. This he sometimes tries to do; and the people who have seen him
"turning cart wheels" along the side of the road, have supposed that he
was amusing himself and idling his time; he was only trying to invent a
new mode of locomotion, so that he could economize his legs, and do his
errands with greater dispatch.

5. He practices standing on his head, in order to accustom himself to any
position. Leapfrog is one of his methods of getting over the ground
quickly. He would willingly go an errand any distance if he could leapfrog
it with a few other boys.

6. He has a natural genius for combining pleasure with business. This is
the reason why, when he is sent to the spring for a pitcher of water, he
is absent so long; for he stops to poke the frog that sits on the stone,
or, if there is a penstock, to put his hand over the spout, and squirt the
water a little while.

7. He is the one who spreads the grass when the men have cut it; he mows
it away in the barn; he rides the horse, to cultivate the corn, up and
down the hot, weary rows; he picks up the potatoes when they are dug; he
drives the cows night and morning; he brings wood and water, and splits
kindling; he gets up the horse, and puts out the horse; whether he is in
the house or out of it, there is always something for him to do.

8. Just before the school in winter he shovels paths; in summer he turns
the grindstone. He knows where there are lots of wintergreens and sweet
flags, but instead of going for them, he is to stay indoors and pare
apples, and stone raisins, and pound something in a mortar. And yet, with
his mind full of schemes of what he would like to do, and his hands full
of occupations, he is an idle boy, who has nothing to busy himself with
but school and chores!

9. He would gladly do all the work if somebody else would do the chores,
he thinks; and yet I doubt if any boy ever amounted to anything in the
world, or was of much use as a man, who did not enjoy the advantages of a
liberal education in the way of chores.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Fac-to'tum, a person employed to do all kinds of work.
In-dis-pen'sa-ble, absolutely necessary. 2. Per-pet'u-al-ly, continually.
3. Cen'ti-ped, an insect with a great number of feet. 4. E-con'o-mize, to
save. Dis-patch', diligence, haste. 6. Pen'-stock, a wooden tube for
conducting water. 8. Chores, the light work of the household either within
or without doors.



VI. THE SINGING LESSON.

Jean Ingelow (b. 1830, d.1897) was born at Boston, Lincolnshire, England.
Her fame as a poetess was at once established upon the publication of her
"Poems" in 1863; since which time several other volumes have appeared. The
most generally admired of her poems are "Songs of Seven" and "The High
Tide on the Coast of Lincolnshire," She has also written several
successful novels, of which, "Off the Skelligs" is the most popular.
"Stories Told to a Child," "The Cumberers," "Poor Mat," "Studies for
Stories," and "Mopsa, the Fairy" are also well known. Miss Ingelow resided
in London, England, and spent much of her time in deeds of charity.

1. A nightingale made a mistake;
     She sang a few notes out of tune:
   Her heart was ready to break,
     And she hid away from the moon.
   She wrung her claws, poor thing,
     But was far too proud to weep;
   She tucked her head under her wing,
     And pretended to be asleep.

2. A lark, arm in arm with a thrush,
     Came sauntering up to the place;
   The nightingale felt herself blush,
     Though feathers hid her face;
   She knew they had heard her song,
     She felt them snicker and sneer;
   She thought that life was too long,
     And wished she could skip a year.

3. "O nightingale!" cooed a dove;
     "O nightingale! what's the use?
   You bird of beauty and love,
     Why behave like a goose?
   Don't sulk away from our sight,
     Like a common, contemptible fowl;
   You bird of joy and delight,
     Why behave like an owl?

4. "Only think of all you have done;
     Only think of all you can do;
   A false note is really fun
     From such a bird as you!
   Lift up your proud little crest,
     Open your musical beak;
   Other birds have to do their best,
     You need only to speak!"

6. The nightingale shyly took
     Her head from under her wing,
   And, giving the dove a look,
     Straightway began to sing.
   There was never a bird could pass;
     The night was divinely calm;
   And the people stood on the grass
     To hear that wonderful psalm.

6. The nightingale did not care,
     She only sang to the skies;
   Her song ascended there,
     And there she fixed her eyes.
   The people that stood below
     She knew but little about;
   And this tale has a moral, I know,
     If you'll try and find it out.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Saun'ter-ing, wandering idly, strolling. Snick'er, to
laugh in a half-suppressed manner. 4. Crest, a tuft growing on an animal's
head. 5. Di-vine'ly, in a supreme degree. 6. Mor'al, the practical lesson
which anything is fitted to teach.

NOTE.--The nightingale is a small bird, about six inches in length, with a
coat of dark-brown feathers above and of grayish, white beneath. Its voice
is astonishingly strong and sweet, and, when wild, it usually sings
throughout the evening and night from April to the middle of summer. The
bird is common in Europe, but is not found in America.



VII. DO NOT MEDDLE.

1. About twenty years ago there lived a singular gentleman in the Old Hall
among the elm trees. He was about three-score years of age, very rich, and
somewhat odd in many of his habits, but for generosity and benevolence he
had no equal.

2. No poor cottager stood in need of comforts, which he was not ready to
supply; no sick man or woman languished for want of his assistance; and
not even a beggar, unless a known impostor, went empty-handed from the
Hall. Like the village pastor described in Goldsmith's poem of "The
Deserted Village,"

  "His house was known to all the vagrant train;
  He chid their wand'rings, but relieved their pain;
  The long-remembered beggar was his guest,
  Whose beard descending swept his aged breast."

3. Now it happened that the old gentleman wanted a boy to wait upon him at
table, and to attend him in different ways, for he was very fond of young
people. But much as he liked the society of the young, he had a great
aversion to that curiosity in which many young people are apt to indulge.
He used to say, "The boy who will peep into a drawer will be tempted to
take something out of it; and he who will steal a penny in his youth will
steal a pound in his manhood."

4. No sooner was it known that the old gentleman was in want of a boy than
twenty applications were made for the situation; but he determined not to
engage anyone until he had in some way ascertained that he did not possess
a curious, prying disposition.

5. On Monday morning seven lads, dressed in their Sunday clothes, with
bright and happy faces, made their appearance at the Hall, each of them
desiring to obtain the situation. Now the old gentleman, being of a
singular disposition had prepared a room in such a way that he might
easily know if any of the young people who applied were given to meddle
unnecessarily with things around them, or to peep into cupboards and
drawers. He took care that the lads who were then at Elm Tree Hall should
be shown into this room one after another.

6. And first, Charles Brown was sent into the room, and told that he would
have to wait a little. So Charles sat down on a chair near the door. For
some time he was very quiet, and looked about him; but there seemed to be
so many curious things in the room that at last he got up to peep at
them.

7. On the table was placed a dish cover, and Charles wanted sadly to know
what was under it, but he felt afraid of lifting it up. Bad habits are
strong things; and, as Charles was of a curious disposition, he could not
withstand the temptation of taking one peep. So he lifted up the cover.

8. This turned out to be a sad affair; for under the dish cover was a heap
of very light feathers; part of the feathers, drawn up by a current of
air, flew about the room, and Charles, in his fright, putting the cover
down hastily, puffed the rest of them off the table.

9. What was to be done? Charles began to pick up the feathers one by one;
but the old gentleman, who was in an adjoining room, hearing a scuffle,
and guessing the cause of it, entered the room, to the consternation of
Charles Brown, who was very soon dismissed as a boy who had not principle
enough to resist even a slight temptation.

10. When the room was once more arranged, Henry Wilkins was placed there
until such time as he should be sent for. No sooner was he left to himself
than his attention was attracted by a plate of fine, ripe cherries. Now
Henry was uncommonly fond of cherries, and he thought it would be
impossible to miss one cherry among so many. He looked and longed, and
longed and looked, for some time, and just as he had got off his seat to
take one, he heard, as he thought, a foot coming to the door; but no, it
was a false alarm.

11. Taking fresh courage, he went cautiously and took a very fine cherry,
for he was determined to take but one, and put it into his mouth. It was
excellent; and then he persuaded himself that he ran no risk in taking
another; this he did, and hastily popped it into his mouth.

12. Now, the old gentleman had placed a few artificial cherries at the top
of the others, filled with Cayenne pepper; one of these Henry had
unfortunately taken, and it made his month smart and burn most
intolerably. The old gentleman heard him coughing, and knew very well what
