
"She shall not get on my back," said Clover, straightening her small
figure; "but doesn't it seem _unnecessary_ that I should have an old woman
of the sea to grapple with as well as Phil?"

"Provoking things are apt to seem unnecessary, I fancy. You mustn't let
yourself get worried, dear Clovy. The old lady means kindly enough, I
think, only she's naturally tiresome, and has become helpless from habit.
Be nice to her, but hold your own. Self-preservation is the first law of
Nature."

Just at dusk the train reached Denver, and the dreaded moment of parting
came. There were kisses and tearful good-byes, but not much time was
allowed for either. The last glimpse that Clover had of Katy was as the
train moved away, when she put her head far out of the window of Car
Forty-seven to kiss her hand once more, and call back, in a tone oracular
and solemn enough to suit King Charles the First, his own admonitory word,
"Remember!"




CHAPTER VI.

ST. HELEN'S.


Never in her life had Clover felt so small and incompetent and so very,
very young as when the train with Car Forty-seven attached vanished from
sight, and left her on the platform of the Denver station with her two
companions. There they stood, Phil on one side tired and drooping, Mrs.
Watson on the other blinking anxiously about, both evidently depending on
her for guidance and direction. For one moment a sort of pale
consternation swept over her. Then the sense of the inevitable and the
nobler sense of responsibility came to her aid. She rallied herself; the
color returned to her cheeks, and she said bravely to Mrs. Watson,--

"Now, if you and Phil will just sit down on that settee over there and
make yourselves comfortable, I will find out about the trains for St.
Helen's, and where we had better go for the night."

Mrs. Watson and Phil seated themselves accordingly, and Clover stood for a
moment considering what she should do. Outside was a wilderness of tracks
up and down which trains were puffing, in obedience, doubtless, to some
law understood by themselves, but which looked to the uninitiated like the
direst confusion. Inside the station the scene was equally confused.
Travellers just arrived and just going away were rushing in and out;
porters and baggage-agents with their hands full hurried to and fro. No
one seemed at leisure to answer a question or even to listen to one.

Just then she caught sight of a shrewd, yet good-natured face looking at
her from the window of the ticket-office; and without hesitation she went
up to the enclosure. It was the ticket-agent whose eye she had caught. He
was at liberty at the moment, and his answers to her inquiries, though
brief, were polite and kind. People generally did soften to Clover. There
was such an odd and pretty contrast between her girlish appealing look and
her dignified little manner, like a child trying to be stately but only
succeeding in being primly sweet.

The next train for St. Helen's left at nine in the morning, it seemed, and
the ticket-agent recommended the Sherman House as a hotel where they would
be very comfortable for the night.

"The omnibus is just outside," he said encouragingly. "You'll find it a
first-class house,--best there is west of Chicago. From the East? Just so.
You've not seen our opera-house yet, I suppose. Denver folks are rather
proud of it. Biggest in the country except the new one in New York. Hope
you'll find time to visit it."

"I should like to," said Clover; "but we are here for only one night. My
brother's been ill, and we are going directly on to St. Helen's. I'm very
much obliged to you."

Her look of pretty honest gratitude seemed to touch the heart of the
ticket-man. He opened the door of his fastness, and came out--actually
came out!--and with a long shrill whistle summoned a porter whom he
addressed as, "Here, you Pat," and bade, "Take this lady's things, and put
them into the 'bus for the Sherman; look sharp now, and see that she's all
right." Then to Clover,--

"You'll find it very comfortable at the Sherman, Miss, and I hope you'll
have a good night. If you'll come to me in the morning, I'll explain about
the baggage transfer."

Clover thanked this obliging being again, and rejoined her party, who were
patiently sitting where she had left them.

"Dear me!" said Mrs. Watson as the omnibus rolled off, "I had no idea that
Denver was such a large place. Street cars too! Well, I declare!"

"And what nice shops!" said Clover, equally surprised.

Her ideas had been rather vague as to what was to be expected in the close
neighborhood of the Rocky Mountains; but she knew that Denver had only
existed a few years, and was prepared to find everything looking rough and
unfinished.

"Why, they have restaurants here and jewellers' shops!" she cried. "Look,
Phil, what a nice grocery! We needn't have packed all those oatmeal
biscuits if only we had known. And electric lights! How wonderful! But of
course St. Helen's is quite different."

Their amazement increased when they reached the hotel, and were taken in a
large dining-room to order dinner from a bill of fare which seemed to
include every known luxury, from Oregon salmon and Lake Superior
white-fish to frozen sherbets and California peaches and apricots. But
wonderment yielded to fatigue, and again as Clover fell asleep she was
conscious of a deep depression. What had she undertaken to do? How could
she do it?

But a night of sound sleep followed by such a morning of unclouded
brilliance as is seldom seen east of Colorado banished these misgivings.
Courage rose under the stimulus of such air and sunshine.

"I must just live for each day as it comes," said little Clover to
herself, "do my best as things turn up, keep Phil happy, and satisfy Mrs.
Watson,--if I can,--and not worry about to-morrows or yesterdays. That is
the only safe way, and I won't forget if I can help it."

With these wise resolves she ran down stairs, looking so blithe and bright
that Phil cheered at the sight of her, and lost the long morning face he
had got up with, while even Mrs. Watson caught the contagion, and became
fairly hopeful and content. A little leaven of good-will and good heart in
one often avails to lighten the heaviness of many.

The distance between Denver and St. Helen's is less than a hundred miles,
but as the railroad has to climb and cross a range of hills between two
and three thousand feet high, the journey occupies several hours. As the
train gradually rose higher and higher, the travellers began to get wide
views, first of the magnificent panorama of mountains which lies to the
northwest of Denver, sixty miles away, with Long's Peak in the middle, and
after crossing the crest of the "Divide," where a blue little lake rimmed
with wild-flowers sparkled in the sun, of the more southern ranges. After
a while they found themselves running parallel to a mountain chain of
strange and beautiful forms, green almost to the top, and intersected with
deep ravines and cliffs which the conductor informed them were "canyons."
They seemed quite near at hand, for their bases sank into low rounded
hills covered with woods, these melted into undulating table-lands, and
those again into a narrow strip of park-like plain across which ran the
track. Flowers innumerable grew on this plain, mixed with grass of a tawny
brown-green. There were cactuses, red and yellow, scarlet and white
gillias, tall spikes of yucca in full bloom, and masses of a superb white
poppy with an orange-brown centre, whose blue-green foliage was prickly
like that of the thistle. Here and there on the higher uplands appeared
strange rock shapes of red and pink and pale yellow, which looked like
castles with towers and pinnacles, or like primitive fortifications.
Clover thought it all strangely beautiful, but Mrs. Watson found fault
with it as "queer."

"It looks unnatural, somehow," she objected; "not a bit like the East. Red
never was a favorite color of mine. Ellen had a magenta bonnet once, and
it always worried--But Henry liked it, so of course--People can't see
things the same way. Now the green hat she had winter before last
was--Don't you think those mountains are dreadfully bright and distinct? I
don't like such high-colored rocks. Even the green looks red, somehow. I
like soft, hazy mountains like Blue Hill and Wachusett. Ellen spent a
summer up at Princeton once. It was when little Cynthia had
diphtheria--she's named after me, you know, and Henry he thought--But I
don't like the staring kind like these; and somehow those buildings, which
the conductor says are not buildings but rocks, make my flesh creep."

"They'd be scrumptious places to repel attacks of Indians from," observed
Phil; "two or three scouts with breech-loaders up on that scarlet wall
there could keep off a hundred Piutes."

"I don't feel that way a bit," Clover was saying to Mrs. Watson. "I like
the color, it's so rich; and I think the mountains are perfectly
beautiful. If St. Helen's is like this I am going to like it, I know."

St. Helen's, when they reached it, proved to be very much "like this,"
only more so, as Phil remarked. The little settlement was built on a low
plateau facing the mountains, and here the plain narrowed, and the
beautiful range, seen through the clear atmosphere, seemed only a mile or
two away, though in reality it was eight or ten. To the east the plain
widened again into great upland sweeps like the Kentish Downs, with here
and there a belt of black woodland, and here and there a line of low
bluffs. Viewed from a height, with the cloud-shadows sweeping across it,
it had the extent and splendor of the sea, and looked very much like it.

The town, seen from below, seemed a larger place than Clover had expected,
and again she felt the creeping, nervous feeling come over her. But before
the train had fairly stopped, a brisk, active little man jumped on board,
and walking into the car, began to look about him with keen, observant
eyes. After one sweeping glance, he came straight to where Clover was
collecting her bags and parcels, held out his hand, and said in a pleasant
voice, "I think this must be Miss Carr."

"I am Dr. Hope," he went on; "your father telegraphed when you were to
leave Chicago, and I have come down to two or three trains in the hope of
meeting you."

"Have you, indeed?" said Clover, with a rush of relief. "How very kind of
you! And so papa telegraphed! I never thought of that. Phil, here is Dr.
Hope, papa's friend; Dr. Hope, Mrs. Watson."

"This is really a very agreeable attention,--your coming to meet us,"
said Mrs. Watson; "a very agreeable attention indeed. Well, I shall write
Ellen--that's my daughter, Mrs. Phillips, you know--that before we had got
out of the cars, a gentleman--And though I've always been in the habit of
going about a good deal, it's always been in the East, of course, and
things are--What are we going to do first, Dr. Hope? Miss Carr has a great
deal of energy for a girl, but naturally--I suppose there's an hotel at
St. Helen's. Ellen is rather particular where I stay. 'At your age,
Mother, you must be made comfortable, whatever it costs,' she says; and so
I--An only daughter, you know--but you'll attend to all those things for
us now, Doctor."

"There's quite a good hotel," said Dr. Hope, his eyes twinkling a little;
"I'll show it to you as we drive up. You'll find it very comfortable if
you prefer to go there. But for these young people I've taken rooms at a
boarding-house, a quieter and less expensive place. I thought it was what
your father would prefer," he added in a lower tone to Clover.

"I am sure he would," she replied; but Mrs. Watson broke in,--

"Oh, I shall go wherever Miss Carr goes. She's under my care, you
know--Though at the same time I must say that in the long run I have
generally found that the most expensive places turn out the cheapest. As
Ellen often says, get the best and--What do they charge at this hotel that
you speak of, Dr. Hope?"

"The Shoshone House? About twenty-five dollars a week, I think, if you
make a permanent arrangement."

"That _is_ a good deal," remarked Mrs. Watson, meditatively, while Clover
hastened to say,--

"It is a great deal more than Phil and I can spend, Dr. Hope; I am glad
you have chosen the other place for us."

"I suppose it _is_ better," admitted Mm Watson; but when they gained the
top of the hill, and a picturesque, many-gabled, many-balconied structure
was pointed out as the Shoshone, her regrets returned, and she began again
to murmur that very often the most expensive places turned out the
cheapest in the end, and that it stood to reason that they must be the
best. Dr. Hope rather encouraged this view, and proposed that she should
stop and look at some rooms; but no, she could not desert her young
charges and would go on, though at the same time she must say that her
opinion as an older person who had seen more of the world was--She was
used to being consulted. Why, Addy Phillips wouldn't order that crushed
strawberry bengaline of hers till Mrs. Watson saw the sample, and--But
girls had their own ideas, and were bound to carry them out, Ellen always
said so, and for her part she knew her duty and meant to do it!

Dr. Hope flashed one rapid, comical look at Clover. Western life sharpens
the wits, if it does nothing else, and Westerners as a general thing
become pretty good judges of character. It had not taken ten minutes for
the keen-witted little doctor to fathom the peculiarities of Clover's
"chaperone," and he would most willingly have planted her in the congenial
soil of the Shoshone House, which would have provided a wider field for
her restlessness and self-occupation, and many more people to listen to
her narratives and sympathize with her complaints. But it was no use. She
was resolved to abide by the fortunes of her "young friends."

While this discussion was proceeding, the carriage had been rolling down a
wide street running along the edge of the plateau, opposite the mountain
range. Pretty houses stood on either side in green, shaded door-yards,
with roses and vine-hung piazzas and nicely-cut grass.

"Why, it looks like a New England town," said Clover, amazed; "I thought
there were no trees here."

"Yes, I know," said Dr. Hope smiling. "You came, like most Eastern people,
prepared to find us sitting in the middle of a sandy waste, on cactus
pincushions, picking our teeth with bowie-knives, and with no neighbors
but Indians and grizzly bears. Well; sixteen years ago we could have
filled the bill pretty well. Then there was not a single house in St.
Helen's,--not even a tent, and not one of the trees that you see here had
been planted. Now we have three railroads meeting at our depot, a
population of nearly seven thousand, electric lights, telephones, a good
opera-house, a system of works which brings first-rate spring water into
the town from six miles away,--in short, pretty much all the modern
conveniences."

"But what _has_ made the place grow so fast?" asked Clover.

"If I may be allowed a professional pun, it is built up on coughings. It
is a town for invalids. Half the people here came out for the benefit of
their lungs."

"Isn't that rather depressing?"

"It would be more so if most of them did not look so well that no one
would suspect them of being ill. Here we are."

Clover looked out eagerly. There was nothing picturesque about the house
at whose gate the carriage had stopped. It was a large shabby structure,
with a piazza above as well as below, and on these piazzas various people
were sitting who looked unmistakably ill. The front of the house, however,
commanded the fine mountain view.

"You see," explained Dr. Hope, drawing Clover aside, "boarding-places that
are both comfortable and reasonable are rather scarce at St. Helen's. I
know all about the table here and the drainage; and the view is desirable,
and Mrs. Marsh, who keeps the house, is one of the best women we have.
She's from down your way too,--Barnstable, Mass., I think."

Clover privately wondered how Barnstable, Mass., could be classed as
"down" the same way with Burnet, not having learned as yet that to the
soaring Western mind that insignificant fraction of the whole country
known as "the East," means anywhere from Maine to Michigan, and that such
trivial geographical differences as exist between the different sections
seem scarcely worth consideration when compared with the vast spaces
which lie beyond toward the setting sun. But perhaps Dr. Hope was only
trying to tease her, for he twinkled amusedly at her puzzled face as he
went on,--

"I think you can make yourselves comfortable here. It was the best I could
do. But your old lady would be much better suited at the Shoshone, and I
wish she'd go there."

Clover could not help laughing. "I wish that people wouldn't persist in
calling Mrs. Watson my old lady," she thought.

Mrs. Marsh, a pleasant-looking person, came to meet them as they entered.
She showed Clover and Phil their rooms, which had been secured for them,
and then carried Mrs. Watson off to look at another which she could have
if she liked.

The rooms were on the third floor. A big front one for Phil, with a sunny
south window and two others looking towards the west and the mountains,
and, opening from it, a smaller room for Clover.

"Your brother ought to live in fresh air both in doors and out," said Dr.
Hope; "and I thought this large room would answer as a sort of sitting
place for both of you."

"It's ever so nice; and we are both more obliged to you than we can say,"
replied Clover, holding out her hand as the doctor rose to go. He gave a
pleased little laugh as he shook it.

"That's all right," he said. "I owe your father's children any good turn
in my power, for he was a good friend to me when I was a poor boy just
beginning, and needed friends. That's my house with the red roof, Miss
Clover. You see how near it is; and please remember that besides the care
of this boy here, I'm in charge of you too, and have the inside track of
the rest of the friends you are going to make in Colorado. I expect to be
called on whenever you want anything, or feel lonesome, or are at a loss
in any way. My wife is coming to see you as soon as you have had your
dinner and got settled a little. She sent those to you," indicating a vase
on the table, filled with flowers. They were of a sort which Clover had
never seen before,--deep cup-shaped blossoms of beautiful pale purple and
white.

"Oh, what are they?" she called after the doctor.

"Anemones," he answered, and was gone.

"What a dear, nice, kind man!" cried Clover. "Isn't it delightful to have
a friend right off who knows papa, and does things for us because we are
papa's children? You like him, don't you, Phil; and don't you like your
room?"

"Yes; only it doesn't seem fair that I should have the largest."

"Oh, yes; it is perfectly fair. I never shall want to be in mine except
when I am dressing or asleep. I shall sit here with you all the time; and
isn't it lovely that we have those enchanting mountains just before our
eyes? I never saw anything in my life that I liked so much as I do that
one."

It was Cheyenne Mountain at which she pointed, the last of the chain, and
set a little apart, as it were, from the others. There is as much
difference between mountains as between people, as mountain-lovers know,
and like people they present characters and individualities of their own.
The noble lines of Mount Cheyenne are full of a strange dignity; but it is
dignity mixed with an indefinable charm. The canyons nestle about its
base, as children at a parent's knee; its cedar forests clothe it like
drapery; it lifts its head to the dawn and the sunset; and the sun seems
to love it best of all, and lies longer on it than on the other peaks.

Clover did not analyze her impressions, but she fell in love with it at
first sight, and loved it better and better all the time that she stayed
at St. Helen's. "Dr. Hope and Mount Cheyenne were our first friends in the
place," she used to say in after-days.

"How nice it is to be by ourselves!" said Phil, as he lay comfortably on
the sofa watching Clover unpack. "I get so tired of being all the time
with people. Dear me! the room looks quite homelike already."

Clover had spread a pretty towel over the bare table, laid some books and
her writing-case upon it, and was now pinning up a photograph over the
mantel-piece.

"We'll make it nice by-and-by," she said cheerfully; "and now that I've
tidied up a little, I think I'll go and see what has become of Mrs.
Watson. She'll think I have quite forgotten her. You'll lie quiet and rest
till dinner, won't you?"

"Yes," said Phil, who looked very sleepy; "I'm all right for an hour to
come. Don't hurry back if the ancient female wants you."

Clover spread a shawl over him before she went and shut one of the
windows.


[Illustration: "Clover spread a shawl over him before she left, and shut
one of the windows."]


"We won't have you catching cold the very first morning," she said. "That
would be a bad story to send back to papa."

She found Mrs. Watson in very low spirits about her room.

"It's not that it's small," she said. "I don't need a very big room; but I
don't like being poked away at the back so. I've always had a front room
all my life. And at Ellen's in the summer, I have a corner chamber, and
see the sea and everything--It's an elegant room, solid black walnut with
marble tops, and--Lighthouses too; I have three of them in view, and they
are really company for me on dark nights. I don't want to be fussy, but
really to look out on nothing but a side yard with some trees--and they
aren't elms or anything that I'm used to, but a new kind. There's a thing
out there, too, that I never saw before, which looks like one of the giant
ants' nests of Africa in 'Morse's Geography' that I used to read about
when I was--It makes me really nervous."

Clover went to the window to look at the mysterious object. It was a
cone-shaped thing of white unburned clay, whose use she could not guess.
She found later that it was a receptacle for ashes.

"I suppose _your_ rooms are front ones?" went on Mrs. Watson, querulously.

"Mine isn't. It's quite a little one at the side. I think it must be just
under this. Phil's is in front, and is a nice large one with a view of
the mountains. I wish there were one just like it for you. The doctor says
that it's very important for him to have a great deal of air in his room."

"Doctors always say that; and of course Dr. Hope, being a friend of yours
and all--It's quite natural he should give you the preference. Though the
Phillips's are accustomed--but there, it's no use; only, as I tell Ellen,
Boston is the place for me, where my family is known, and people realize
what I'm used to."

"I'm so sorry," Clover said again. "Perhaps somebody will go away, and
Mrs. Marsh have a front room for you before long."

"She did say that she might. I suppose she thinks some of her boarders
will be dying off. In fact, there is one--that tall man in gray in the
reclining-chair--who didn't seem to me likely to last long. Well, we will
hope for the best. I'm not one who likes to make difficulties."

This prospect, together with dinner, which was presently announced, raised
Mrs. Watson's spirits a little, and Clover left her in the parlor,
exchanging experiences and discussing symptoms with some ladies who had
sat opposite them at table. Mrs. Hope came for a call; a pretty little
woman, as friendly and kind as her husband. Then Clover and Phil went out
for a stroll about the town. Their wonder increased at every turn; that a
place so well equipped and complete in its appointments could have been
created out of nothing in fifteen years was a marvel!

After two or three turns they found themselves among shops, whose
plate-glass windows revealed all manner of wares,--confectionery, new
books, pretty glass and china, bonnets of the latest fashion. One or two
large pharmacies glittered with jars--purple and otherwise--enough to
tempt any number of Rosamonds. Handsome carriages drawn by fine horses
rolled past them, with well-dressed people inside. In short, St. Helen's
was exactly like a thriving Eastern town of double its size, with the
difference that here a great many more people seemed to ride than to
drive. Some one cantered past every moment,--a lady alone, two or three
girls together, or a party of rough-looking men in long boots, or a single
ranchman sitting loose in his stirrups, and swinging a stock whip.

Clover and Phil were standing on a corner, looking at some "Rocky Mountain
Curiosities" displayed for sale,--minerals, Pueblo pottery, stuffed
animals, and Indian blankets; and Phil had just commented on the beauty of
a black horse which was tied to a post close by, when its rider emerged
from a shop, and prepared to mount.

He was a rather good-looking young fellow, sunburnt and not very tall, but
with a lithe active figure, red-brown eyes and a long mustache of tawny
chestnut. He wore spurs and a broad-brimmed sombrero, and carried in his
hand a whip which seemed two-thirds lash. As he put his foot into the
stirrup, he turned for another look at Clover, whom he had rather stared
at while passing, and then changing his intention, took it out again, and
came toward them.

"I beg your pardon," he said; "but aren't you--isn't it--Clover Carr?"

"Yes," said Clover, wondering, but still without the least notion as to
whom the stranger might be.

"You've forgotten me?" went on the young man, with a smile which made his
face very bright. "That's rather hard too; for I knew you at once. I
suppose I'm a good deal changed, though, and perhaps I shouldn't have made
you out except for your eyes; they're just the same. Why, Clover, I'm your
cousin, Clarence Page!"

"Clarence Page!" cried Clover, joyfully; "not really! Why, Clarence, I
never should have known you in the world, and I can't think how you came
to know me. I was only fourteen when I saw you last, and you were quite a
little boy. What good luck that we should meet, and on our first day too!
Some one wrote that you were in Colorado, but I had no idea that you lived
at St. Helen's."

"I don't; not much. I'm living on a ranch out that way," jerking his
elbow toward the northwest, "but I ride in often to get the mail. Have you
just come? You said the first day."

"Yes; we only got here this morning. And this is my brother Phil. Don't
you recollect how I used to tell you about him at Ashburn?"

"I should think you did," shaking hands cordially; "she used to talk about
you all the time, so that I felt intimately acquainted with all the
family. Well, I call this first rate luck. It's two years since I saw any
one from home."

"Home?"

"Well; the East, you know. It all seems like home when you're out here.
And I mean any one that I know, of course. People from the East come out
all the while. They are as thick as bumblebees at St. Helen's, but they
don't amount to much unless you know them. Have you seen anything of
mother and Lilly since they got back from Europe, Clover?"

"No, indeed. I haven't seen them since we left Hillsover. Katy has,
though. She met them in Nice when she was there, and they sent her a
wedding present. You knew that she was married, didn't you?"

"Yes, I got her cards. Pa sent them. He writes oftener than the others do;
and he came out once and stayed a month on the ranch with me. That was
while mother was in Europe. Where are you stopping? The Shoshone, I
suppose."

"No, at a quieter place,--Mrs. Marsh's, on the same street."

"Oh, I know Mother Marsh. I went there when I first came out, and had
caught the mountain fever, and she was ever so kind to me. I'm glad you
are there. She's a nice woman."

"How far away is your ranch?"

"About sixteen miles. Oh, I say, Clover, you and Phil must come out and
stay with us sometime this summer. We'll have a round-up for you if you
will."

"What is a 'round-up' and who is 'us'?" said Clover, smiling.

"Well, a round-up is a kind of general muster of the stock. All the
animals are driven in and counted, and the young ones branded. It's pretty
exciting sometimes, I can tell you, for the cattle get wild, and it's all
we can do to manage them. You should see some of our boys ride; it's
splendid, and there's one half-breed that's the best hand with the lasso I
ever saw. Phil will like it, I know. And 'us' is me and my partner."

"Have you a partner?"

"Yes, two, in fact; but one of them lives in New Mexico just now, so he
does not count. That's Bert Talcott. He's a New York fellow. The other's
English, a Devonshire man. Geoff Templestowe is his name."

"Is he nice?"

"You can just bet your pile that he is," said Clarence, who seemed to have
assimilated Western slang with the rest of the West. "Wait till I bring
him to see you. We'll come in on purpose some day soon. Well, I must be
going. Good-by, Clover; good-by, Phil. It's awfully jolly to have you
here."

"I never should have guessed who it was," remarked Clover, as they watched
the active figure canter down the street and turn for a last flourish of
the hat. "He was the roughest, scrubbiest boy when we last met. What a
fine-looking fellow he has grown to be, and how well he rides!"

"No wonder; a fellow who can have a horse whenever he has a mind to," said
Phil, enviously. "Life on a ranch must be great fun, I think."

"Yes; in one way, but pretty rough and lonely too, sometimes. It will be
nice to go out and see Clarence's, if we can get some lady to go with us,
won't it?"

"Well, just don't let it be Mrs. Watson, whoever else it is. She would
spoil it all if she went."

"Now, Philly, don't. We're supposed to be leaning on her for support."

"Oh, come now, lean on that old thing! Why she couldn't support a postage
stamp standing edgewise, as the man says in the play. Do you suppose I
don't know how you have to look out for her and do everything? She's not a
bit of use."

"Yes; but you and I have got to be polite to her, Philly. We mustn't
forget that."

"Oh, I'll be polite enough, if she will just leave us alone," retorted
Phil.

Promising!




CHAPTER VII.

