room; I am very grateful to him for remembering me, but I don't know
what on earth to do with it.  Sallie and Julia won't let me hang it up;
our room this year is furnished in red, and you can imagine what an
effect we'd have if I added orange and black.  But it's such nice,
warm, thick felt, I hate to waste it.  Would it be very improper to
have it made into a bath robe?  My old one shrank when it was washed.

I've entirely omitted of late telling you what I am learning, but
though you might not imagine it from my letters, my time is exclusively
occupied with study.  It's a very bewildering matter to get educated in
five branches at once.

'The test of true scholarship,' says Chemistry Professor, 'is a
painstaking passion for detail.'

'Be careful not to keep your eyes glued to detail,' says History
Professor.  'Stand far enough away to get a perspective of the whole.'

You can see with what nicety we have to trim our sails between
chemistry and history.  I like the historical method best.  If I say
that William the Conqueror came over in 1492, and Columbus discovered
America in 1100 or 1066 or whenever it was, that's a mere detail that
the Professor overlooks.  It gives a feeling of security and
restfulness to the history recitation, that is entirely lacking in
chemistry.

Sixth-hour bell--I must go to the laboratory and look into a little
matter of acids and salts and alkalis.  I've burned a hole as big as a
plate in the front of my chemistry apron, with hydrochloric acid.  If
the theory worked, I ought to be able to neutralize that hole with good
strong ammonia, oughtn't I?

Examinations next week, but who's afraid?

                               Yours ever,
                                           Judy




                                               5th March

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

There is a March wind blowing, and the sky is filled with heavy, black
moving clouds.  The crows in the pine trees are making such a clamour!
It's an intoxicating, exhilarating, CALLING noise.  You want to close
your books and be off over the hills to race with the wind.

We had a paper chase last Saturday over five miles of squashy 'cross
country.  The fox (composed of three girls and a bushel or so of
confetti) started half an hour before the twenty-seven hunters.  I was
one of the twenty-seven; eight dropped by the wayside; we ended
nineteen.  The trail led over a hill, through a cornfield, and into a
swamp where we had to leap lightly from hummock to hummock.  of course
half of us went in ankle deep.  We kept losing the trail, and we wasted
twenty-five minutes over that swamp.  Then up a hill through some woods
and in at a barn window!  The barn doors were all locked and the window
was up high and pretty small.  I don't call that fair, do you?

But we didn't go through; we circumnavigated the barn and picked up the
trail where it issued by way of a low shed roof on to the top of a
fence.  The fox thought he had us there, but we fooled him.  Then
straight away over two miles of rolling meadow, and awfully hard to
follow, for the confetti was getting sparse.  The rule is that it must
be at the most six feet apart, but they were the longest six feet I
ever saw.  Finally, after two hours of steady trotting, we tracked
Monsieur Fox into the kitchen of Crystal Spring (that's a farm where
the girls go in bob sleighs and hay wagons for chicken and waffle
suppers) and we found the three foxes placidly eating milk and honey
and biscuits.  They hadn't thought we would get that far; they were
expecting us to stick in the barn window.

Both sides insist that they won.  I think we did, don't you?  Because
we caught them before they got back to the campus.  Anyway, all
nineteen of us settled like locusts over the furniture and clamoured
for honey.  There wasn't enough to go round, but Mrs. Crystal Spring
(that's our pet name for her; she's by rights a Johnson) brought up a
jar of strawberry jam and a can of maple syrup--just made last
week--and three loaves of brown bread.

We didn't get back to college till half-past six--half an hour late for
dinner--and we went straight in without dressing, and with perfectly
unimpaired appetites!  Then we all cut evening chapel, the state of our
boots being enough of an excuse.

I never told you about examinations.  I passed everything with the
utmost ease--I know the secret now, and am never going to fail again.
I shan't be able to graduate with honours though, because of that
beastly Latin prose and geometry Freshman year.  But I don't care.
Wot's the hodds so long as you're 'appy?  (That's a quotation.  I've
been reading the English classics.)

Speaking of classics, have you ever read Hamlet?  If you haven't, do it
right off.  It's PERFECTLY CORKING.  I've been hearing about
Shakespeare all my life, but I had no idea he really wrote so well; I
always suspected him of going largely on his reputation.

I have a beautiful play that I invented a long time ago when I first
learned to read.  I put myself to sleep every night by pretending I'm
the person (the most important person) in the book I'm reading at the
moment.

At present I'm Ophelia--and such a sensible Ophelia!  I keep Hamlet
amused all the time, and pet him and scold him and make him wrap up his
throat when he has a cold.  I've entirely cured him of being
melancholy.  The King and Queen are both dead--an accident at sea; no
funeral necessary--so Hamlet and I are ruling in Denmark without any
bother.  We have the kingdom working beautifully.  He takes care of the
governing, and I look after the charities.  I have just founded some
first-class orphan asylums.  If you or any of the other Trustees would
like to visit them, I shall be pleased to show you through.  I think
you might find a great many helpful suggestions.

                       I remain, sir,
                           Yours most graciously,
                               OPHELIA,
                                   Queen of Denmark.




                                           24th March,
                                           maybe the 25th

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I don't believe I can be going to Heaven--I am getting such a lot of
good things here; it wouldn't be fair to get them hereafter too.
Listen to what has happened.

Jerusha Abbott has won the short-story contest (a twenty-five dollar
prize) that the Monthly holds every year.  And she's a Sophomore!  The
contestants are mostly Seniors.  When I saw my name posted, I couldn't
quite believe it was true.  Maybe I am going to be an author after all.
I wish Mrs. Lippett hadn't given me such a silly name--it sounds like
an author-ess, doesn't it?

Also I have been chosen for the spring dramatics--As You Like It out of
doors.  I am going to be Celia, own cousin to Rosalind.

And lastly:  Julia and Sallie and I are going to New York next Friday
to do some spring shopping and stay all night and go to the theatre the
next day with 'Master Jervie.'  He invited us.  Julia is going to stay
at home with her family, but Sallie and I are going to stop at the
Martha Washington Hotel.  Did you ever hear of anything so exciting?
I've never been in a hotel in my life, nor in a theatre; except once
when the Catholic Church had a festival and invited the orphans, but
that wasn't a real play and it doesn't count.

And what do you think we're going to see?  Hamlet.  Think of that!  We
studied it for four weeks in Shakespeare class and I know it by heart.

I am so excited over all these prospects that I can scarcely sleep.

Goodbye, Daddy.

This is a very entertaining world.

                                       Yours ever,
                                                       Judy


PS.  I've just looked at the calendar.  It's the 28th.

Another postscript.

I saw a street car conductor today with one brown eye and one blue.
Wouldn't he make a nice villain for a detective story?




                                                   7th April

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Mercy!  Isn't New York big?  Worcester is nothing to it.  Do you mean
to tell me that you actually live in all that confusion?  I don't
believe that I shall recover for months from the bewildering effect of
two days of it.  I can't begin to tell you all the amazing things I've
seen; I suppose you know, though, since you live there yourself.

But aren't the streets entertaining?  And the people?  And the shops?
I never saw such lovely things as there are in the windows.  It makes
you want to devote your life to wearing clothes.

Sallie and Julia and I went shopping together Saturday morning.  Julia
went into the very most gorgeous place I ever saw, white and gold walls
and blue carpets and blue silk curtains and gilt chairs.  A perfectly
beautiful lady with yellow hair and a long black silk trailing gown
came to meet us with a welcoming smile.  I thought we were paying a
social call, and started to shake hands, but it seems we were only
buying hats--at least Julia was.  She sat down in front of a mirror and
tried on a dozen, each lovelier than the last, and bought the two
loveliest of all.

I can't imagine any joy in life greater than sitting down in front of a
mirror and buying any hat you choose without having first to consider
the price!  There's no doubt about it, Daddy; New York would rapidly
undermine this fine stoical character which the John Grier Home so
patiently built up.

And after we'd finished our shopping, we met Master Jervie at Sherry's.
I suppose you've been in Sherry's? Picture that, then picture the
dining-room of the John Grier Home with its oilcloth-covered tables,
and white crockery that you CAN'T break, and wooden-handled knives and
forks; and fancy the way I felt!

I ate my fish with the wrong fork, but the waiter very kindly gave me
another so that nobody noticed.

And after luncheon we went to the theatre--it was dazzling, marvellous,
unbelievable--I dream about it every night.

Isn't Shakespeare wonderful?

Hamlet is so much better on the stage than when we analyze it in class;
I appreciated it before, but now, dear me!

I think, if you don't mind, that I'd rather be an actress than a
writer.  Wouldn't you like me to leave college and go into a dramatic
school?  And then I'll send you a box for all my performances, and
smile at you across the footlights.  Only wear a red rose in your
buttonhole, please, so I'll surely smile at the right man.  It would be
an awfully embarrassing mistake if I picked out the wrong one.

We came back Saturday night and had our dinner in the train, at little
tables with pink lamps and negro waiters.  I never heard of meals being
served in trains before, and I inadvertently said so.

'Where on earth were you brought up?' said Julia to me.

'In a village,' said I meekly, to Julia.

'But didn't you ever travel?' said she to me.

'Not till I came to college, and then it was only a hundred and sixty
miles and we didn't eat,' said I to her.

She's getting quite interested in me, because I say such funny things.
I try hard not to, but they do pop out when I'm surprised--and I'm
surprised most of the time.  It's a dizzying experience, Daddy, to pass
eighteen years in the John Grier Home, and then suddenly to be plunged
into the WORLD.

But I'm getting acclimated.  I don't make such awful mistakes as I did;
and I don't feel uncomfortable any more with the other girls.  I used
to squirm whenever people looked at me.  I felt as though they saw
right through my sham new clothes to the checked ginghams underneath.
But I'm not letting the ginghams bother me any more.  Sufficient unto
yesterday is the evil thereof.

I forgot to tell you about our flowers.  Master Jervie gave us each a
big bunch of violets and lilies-of-the-valley. Wasn't that sweet of
him?  I never used to care much for men--judging by Trustees--but I'm
changing my mind.

Eleven pages--this is a letter!  Have courage.  I'm going to stop.

                           Yours always,
                                           Judy




                                                   10th April

Dear Mr. Rich-Man,

Here's your cheque for fifty dollars.  Thank you very much, but I do
not feel that I can keep it.  My allowance is sufficient to afford all
of the hats that I need.  I am sorry that I wrote all that silly stuff
about the millinery shop; it's just that I had never seen anything like
it before.

However, I wasn't begging!  And I would rather not accept any more
charity than I have to.

                   Sincerely yours,
                                     Jerusha Abbott




                                           11th April

Dearest Daddy,

Will you please forgive me for the letter I wrote you yesterday?  After
I posted it I was sorry, and tried to get it back, but that beastly
mail clerk wouldn't give it back to me.

It's the middle of the night now; I've been awake for hours thinking
what a Worm I am--what a Thousand-legged Worm--and that's the worst I
can say!  I've closed the door very softly into the study so as not to
wake Julia and Sallie, and am sitting up in bed writing to you on paper
torn out of my history note-book.

I just wanted to tell you that I am sorry I was so impolite about your
cheque.  I know you meant it kindly, and I think you're an old dear to
take so much trouble for such a silly thing as a hat.  I ought to have
returned it very much more graciously.

But in any case, I had to return it.  It's different with me than with
other girls.  They can take things naturally from people.  They have
fathers and brothers and aunts and uncles; but I can't be on any such
relations with any one.  I like to pretend that you belong to me, just
to play with the idea, but of course I know you don't. I'm alone,
really--with my back to the wall fighting the world--and I get sort of
gaspy when I think about it.  I put it out of my mind, and keep on
pretending; but don't you see, Daddy?  I can't accept any more money
than I have to, because some day I shall be wanting to pay it back, and
even as great an author as I intend to be won't be able to face a
PERFECTLY TREMENDOUS debt.

I'd love pretty hats and things, but I mustn't mortgage the future to
pay for them.

You'll forgive me, won't you, for being so rude?  I have an awful habit
of writing impulsively when I first think things, and then posting the
letter beyond recall.  But if I sometimes seem thoughtless and
ungrateful, I never mean it.  In my heart I thank you always for the
life and freedom and independence that you have given me.  My childhood
was just a long, sullen stretch of revolt, and now I am so happy every
moment of the day that I can't believe it's true.  I feel like a
made-up heroine in a story-book.

It's a quarter past two.  I'm going to tiptoe out to post this off now.
You'll receive it in the next mail after the other; so you won't have a
very long time to think bad of me.

                       Good night, Daddy,
                           I love you always,
                                               Judy




                                                   4th May

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Field Day last Saturday.  It was a very spectacular occasion.  First we
had a parade of all the classes, with everybody dressed in white linen,
the Seniors carrying blue and gold Japanese umbrellas, and the juniors
white and yellow banners.  Our class had crimson balloons--very
fetching, especially as they were always getting loose and floating
off--and the Freshmen wore green tissue-paper hats with long streamers.
Also we had a band in blue uniforms hired from town.  Also about a
dozen funny people, like clowns in a circus, to keep the spectators
entertained between events.

Julia was dressed as a fat country man with a linen duster and whiskers
and baggy umbrella.  Patsy Moriarty (Patrici really.  Did you ever hear
such a name?  Mrs. Lippett couldn't have done better) who is tall and
thin was Julia's wife in a absurd green bonnet over one ear.  Waves of
laughter followed them the whole length of the course.  Julia played
the part extremely well.  I never dreamed that a Pendleton could
display so much comedy spirit--begging Master Jervie's pardon; I don't
consider him a true Pendleton though, any more than I consider you a
true Trustee.

Sallie and I weren't in the parade because we were entered for the
events.  And what do you think?  We both won!  At least in something.
We tried for the running broad jump and lost; but Sallie won the
pole-vaulting (seven feet three inches) and I won the fifty-yard sprint
(eight seconds).

I was pretty panting at the end, but it was great fun, with the whole
class waving balloons and cheering and yelling:

               What's the matter with Judy Abbott?
               She's all right.
               Who's all right?
               Judy Ab-bott!


That, Daddy, is true fame.  Then trotting back to the dressing tent and
being rubbed down with alcohol and having a lemon to suck.  You see
we're very professional.  It's a fine thing to win an event for your
class, because the class that wins the most gets the athletic cup for
the year.  The Seniors won it this year, with seven events to their
credit.  The athletic association gave a dinner in the gymnasium to all
of the winners.  We had fried soft-shell crabs, and chocolate ice-cream
moulded in the shape of basket balls.

I sat up half of last night reading Jane Eyre.  Are you old enough,
Daddy, to remember sixty years ago?  And, if so, did people talk that
way?

The haughty Lady Blanche says to the footman, 'Stop your chattering,
knave, and do my bidding.'  Mr. Rochester talks about the metal welkin
when he means the sky; and as for the mad woman who laughs like a hyena
and sets fire to bed curtains and tears up wedding veils and
BITES--it's melodrama of the purest, but just the same, you read and
read and read.  I can't see how any girl could have written such a
book, especially any girl who was brought up in a churchyard.  There's
something about those Brontes that fascinates me.  Their books, their
lives, their spirit.  Where did they get it?  When I was reading about
little Jane's troubles in the charity school, I got so angry that I had
to go out and take a walk.  I understood exactly how she felt.  Having
known Mrs. Lippett, I could see Mr. Brocklehurst.

Don't be outraged, Daddy.  I am not intimating that the John Grier Home
was like the Lowood Institute.  We had plenty to eat and plenty to
wear, sufficient water to wash in, and a furnace in the cellar.  But
there was one deadly likeness.  Our lives were absolutely monotonous
and uneventful.  Nothing nice ever happened, except ice-cream on
Sundays, and even that was regular.  In all the eighteen years I was
there I only had one adventure--when the woodshed burned.  We had to
get up in the night and dress so as to be ready in case the house
should catch.  But it didn't catch and we went back to bed.

Everybody likes a few surprises; it's a perfectly natural human
craving.  But I never had one until Mrs. Lippett called me to the
office to tell me that Mr. John Smith was going to send me to college.
And then she broke the news so gradually that it just barely shocked me.

You know, Daddy, I think that the most necessary quality for any person
to have is imagination.  It makes people able to put themselves in
other people's places.  It makes them kind and sympathetic and
understanding.  It ought to be cultivated in children.  But the John
Grier Home instantly stamped out the slightest flicker that appeared.
Duty was the one quality that was encouraged.  I don't think children
ought to know the meaning of the word; it's odious, detestable.  They
ought to do everything from love.

Wait until you see the orphan asylum that I am going to be the head of!
It's my favourite play at night before I go to sleep.  I plan it out to
the littlest detail--the meals and clothes and study and amusements and
punishments; for even my superior orphans are sometimes bad.

But anyway, they are going to be happy.  I think that every one, no
matter how many troubles he may have when he grows up, ought to have a
happy childhood to look back upon.  And if I ever have any children of
my own, no matter how unhappy I may be, I am not going to let them have
any cares until they grow up.

(There goes the chapel bell--I'll finish this letter sometime).


                                               Thursday

When I came in from laboratory this afternoon, I found a squirrel
sitting on the tea table helping himself to almonds.  These are the
kind of callers we entertain now that warm weather has come and the
windows stay open--


                                             Saturday morning

Perhaps you think, last night being Friday, with no classes today, that
I passed a nice quiet, readable evening with the set of Stevenson that
I bought with my prize money?  But if so, you've never attended a
girls' college, Daddy dear.  Six friends dropped in to make fudge, and
one of them dropped the fudge--while it was still liquid--right in the
middle of our best rug.  We shall never be able to clean up the mess.

I haven't mentioned any lessons of late; but we are still having them
every day.  It's sort of a relief though, to get away from them and
discuss life in the large--rather one-sided discussions that you and I
hold, but that's your own fault.  You are welcome to answer back any
time you choose.

I've been writing this letter off and on for three days, and I fear by
now vous etes bien bored!

                   Goodbye, nice Mr. Man,
                                               Judy




Mr. Daddy-Long-Legs Smith,

SIR:  Having completed the study of argumentation and the science of
dividing a thesis into heads, I have decided to adopt the following
form for letter-writing. It contains all necessary facts, but no
unnecessary verbiage.

I. We had written examinations this week in:
       A. Chemistry.
       B. History.

II.  A new dormitory is being built.
       A. Its material is:
           (a) red brick.
           (b) grey stone.
       B. Its capacity will be:
           (a) one dean, five instructors.
           (b) two hundred girls.
           (c) one housekeeper, three cooks, twenty waitresses,
               twenty chambermaids.

III.  We had junket for dessert tonight.

IV.  I am writing a special topic upon the Sources of Shakespeare's
Plays.

V. Lou McMahon slipped and fell this afternoon at basket ball, and she:
       A. Dislocated her shoulder.
       B. Bruised her knee.

VI.  I have a new hat trimmed with:
       A. Blue velvet ribbon.
       B. Two blue quills.
       C. Three red pompoms.

VII.  It is half past nine.

VIII.  Good night.

                                           Judy




                                               2nd June

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

You will never guess the nice thing that has happened.

The McBrides have asked me to spend the summer at their camp in the
Adirondacks!  They belong to a sort of club on a lovely little lake in
the middle of the woods.  The different members have houses made of
logs dotted about among the trees, and they go canoeing on the lake,
and take long walks through trails to other camps, and have dances once
a week in the club house--Jimmie McBride is going to have a college
friend visiting him part of the summer, so you see we shall have plenty
