completely surrounded.

"Presently one of the natives spied a lion sitting on a piece of rock,
and fired at him, the ball missing the beast and striking the rock.

"The lion turned, bit like a dog at the spot where the bullet had
struck, and then bounded off to the shelter of the brushwood.

"Soon I saw another lion in much the same situation as the former, and,
being not more than thirty yards from it, let fly with both barrels.

"As the lion was still on its legs, I hastened to reload my gun; but
hearing a sudden and frightful cry from the natives, I looked up and
saw the wounded lion springing upon me.

"I was caught by the shoulder and hurled to the ground. Growling
terribly in my ear, the lion shook me as a dog does a rat.

"The shock produced a stupor, similar to that which seems to be felt by
a mouse after the first shake of a cat.

"The lion then leaped upon one of the natives who had tried to shoot at
him, and then sprang at the neck of a second native who, armed with a
spear, was rushing to the rescue.

[Illustration]

"The exertion was too much for the wounded beast, and so, with his claws
bedded in the spearman's shoulder, he rolled over and died.

"I had escaped, but with a shoulder so broken as to need an artificial
joint, and with eleven teeth wounds in my arm.

"These wounds were less severe than they would have been, had not a
heavy jacket which I had on, cleansed the teeth of the lion in their
passage. As it was, they were soon cured and gave me no trouble
afterward."


      *      *      *      *      *


Directions for Reading.--Read this lesson in a full and clear
conversational tone of voice.

Those parts of the lesson to which we wish to call attention, should be
read slowly.

Example.--"The men edged in closer and closer, so that the lions might
be completely surrounded."

Should the slow and clear reading be kept up throughout pages 51 and 52,
or should those pages be read more rapidly?[04]


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark sounds of letters in the
following words: _Livingstone, bullet, growling, jacket, offered,
advice, severe_.

_Edged in closer and closer_ means went slowly nearer and nearer.

_Let fly with both barrels_ means fired both barrels of his gun at the
same time.

_Still on its legs_ means not so badly wounded but that it was able to
stand up.

Tell the story in your own words.


[04] See this lesson.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XI.


en riched', _made rich_.

de tec'tion, _being found out_.

dis mount'ed, _got down from_.

sat' is fied, _supplied with all one wants_.

sum'mit, _top; highest point_.

en trust'ed, _gave the care of_.

em ployed', _used; made use of_.

im por'tant, _worthy of attention_.

ad dressed', _spoke to_.

di' a mond, _a very valuable stone_.

in clud' ed, _put in as a part_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE NOBLEST DEED OF ALL.


A rich Persian, feeling himself growing old, and finding that the cares
of business were too great for him, resolved, to divide his goods among
his three sons, keeping a very small part to protect him from want in
his old age.

The sons were all well satisfied, and each took his share with thanks,
and promised that it should be well and properly employed. When this
important business was thus finished, the father addressed the sons in
the following words:

"My sons, there is one thing which I have not included in the share of
any one of you. It is this costly diamond which you see in my hand. I
will give it to that one of you who shall earn it by the noblest deed.

"Go, therefore, and travel for three months; at the end of that time,
we will meet here again, and you shall tell me what you have done."

The sons thereupon departed, and traveled for three months, each in a
different direction. At the end of that time they returned; and all came
together to their father to give an account of their journey. The eldest
son spoke first.

"Father, on my journey a stranger entrusted to me a great number of
valuable jewels, without taking any account of them. Indeed, I was well
aware that he did not know how many the package contained.

"One or two of them would never have been missed, and I might easily
have enriched myself without fear of detection. But I gave back the
package exactly as I had received it. Was not this a noble deed?"

"My son," replied the father, "simple honesty cannot be called noble.
You did what was right, and nothing more. If you had acted otherwise,
you would have been dishonest, and your deed would have shamed you. You
have done well, but not nobly."

The second son now spoke. He said: "As I was riding along on my
journey, I one day saw a poor child playing by the shore of a lake; and
just as I rode by, it fell into the water, and was in danger of being
drowned.

"I at once dismounted from my horse, and plunging into the water,
brought it safe to land. All the people of the village where this
happened will tell you that what I say is true. Was it not a noble
action?"

"My son," replied the old man, "you did only what was your duty. You
could hardly have left the child to die without exerting yourself to
save it. You, too, have acted well, but not nobly."

Then the third son came forward to tell his tale. He said: "Father, I
had an enemy, who for years had done me much harm and tried to take my
life.

"One evening during my journey, I was passing along a dangerous road
which ran beside the summit of a cliff. As I rode along, my horse
started at sight of something in the road.

"I dismounted to see what it was, and found my enemy lying fast asleep
on the very edge of the cliff. The least movement in his sleep and he
must have rolled over and been dashed to pieces on the rocks below.

"His life was in my hands. I drew him away from the edge and then woke
him, and told him to go on his way in peace."

Then the old Persian cried out with great joy, "Dear son, the diamond is
yours, for it is a noble and godlike thing to help an enemy and return
good for evil."


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Read this lesson in a conversational tone of
voice, and somewhat more slowly than Lesson III.

Read what is said by each one of the four different persons, as you
think each one of them would speak.

How would you read the third and fourth paragraphs?--the last paragraph?

Point out the _emphatic words_ in the last paragraph.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark sounds of letters in the
following words: _Persian, therefore, valuable, account, jewels, aware,
contained, dishonest, duty, enemy_.

Let pupils use other words, to express the following:

     To go on his way in peace.       Return good for evil.


Tell the story in your own words, using the points in the following

Analysis.--1. The father divides his goods. 2. What he said to his
sons. 3. What the eldest son did. 4. What the second son did. 5. What
the third son did. 6. What the father said.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XII.


a new', _over again_.

al'ma nac, _a book giving days, weeks, and months of the year_.

rus'tling, _shaking with a gentle sound_.

scents, _smells_.

drow'sy, _sleepy; making sleepy_.

larch, _a kind of tree_.

flue, _an opening for air or smoke to pass through_.

haunt'ing, _staying in; returning often_.

mur'mur, _a low sound_.

fra' grant, _sweet smelling_.


       *       *       *       *       *




MARJORIE'S ALMANAC.


  Robins in the tree-top,
    Blossoms in the grass,
  Green things a-growing
    Every-where you pass;
  Sudden fragrant breezes,
    Showers of silver dew,
  Black bough and bent twig
    Budding out anew;
  Pine-tree and willow-tree,
    Fringed elm and larch,--
  Don't you think that May-time's
    Pleasanter than March?

  Apples in the orchard
    Mellowing one by one;
  Strawberries upturning
    Soft cheeks to the sun;
  Roses faint with sweetness,
    Lilies fair of face,
  Drowsy scents and murmurs
    Haunting every place;
  Lengths of golden sunshine,
    Moonlight bright as day,--
  Don't you think that summer's
    Pleasanter than May?

  Roger in the corn-patch
    Whistling negro songs;
  Pussy by the hearth-side
    Romping with the tongs;
  Chestnuts in the ashes
    Bursting through the rind;
  Red leaf and gold leaf
    Rustling down the wind;
  Mother "doin' peaches"
    All the afternoon,--
  Don't you think that autumn's
    Pleasanter than June?

  Little fairy snow-flakes
    Dancing in the flue;
  Old Mr. Santa Claus,
    What is keeping you?
  Twilight and firelight,
    Shadows come and go;
  Merry chime of sleigh-bells
    Tinkling through the snow;
  Mother knitting stockings
    (Pussy's got the ball!)--
  Don't you think that winter's
   Pleasanter than all?


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Read the lesson with spirit, and avoid
anything like sing-song.

Do not make the last word of each line _emphatic_, unless it is really
an _emphatic word_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark sounds of letters in the
following words; _Marjorie's, chestnuts, peaches, afternoon_.

What part of the year is described in each stanza?

What two words can be used for each of the following: _May-time's,
summer's_.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XIII.


col'o ny, _a number of people living together in one place_.

set'tlers, _those people who form a colony_.

shy, _easily frightened; timid_.

es tab'lished, _formed; settled_.

war'rior,  _a soldier; one who fights in war_.

fur'ni ture, _articles used in a house_.

dread'ed, _feared very much_.

pros' per ous, _successful; rich_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE STORY OF INDIAN SPRING.

PART I.


"You want to know why this is called Indian Spring, Robbie? I will tell
you.

"When Mary and I were little girls, father moved away from our pleasant
home on the bank of the Delaware River, and came to this part of the
country. There were five of us: father, mother, Mary, our dear nurse
Lizzie, and I.

"Lizzie was a colored woman, who had lived with us a long time. She was
very handsome, and straight as an arrow. She was a few years older than
mother.

"Grandfather Thorpe, your great grandfather, boys, gave her to mother
when she was married. Your grandfather was a miller. The old mill that
I went to see to-day, was his. It was the first mill built in this part
of Pennsylvania.

"O, this was a beautiful country! my eyes never were tired of looking
out over these mountains and valleys. But I saw that mother's face was
getting thinner and whiter every day; they said she was homesick, and
before we had been in the colony a year, a grave was made under an
elm-tree close by, and that grave was mother's.

"I thought my heart was broken then, but I soon forgot my sorrow: I
still had father, sister Mary, and Lizzie.

"In this part of Pennsylvania at that time there were very few white
people, and besides our own, there was no other colony within ten
miles. But our people being so near together, and well armed, felt
quite safe.

"Ten miles away on the Susquehanna, was a small village established by a
colony from the north, which was used as a trading-post. There the
friendly Indians often came to trade.

"Father went twice a year to this village to get supplies that came up
the river. He often spoke of Red Feather, an old Indian warrior. Father
liked Red Feather, and he learned to trust him almost as he would have
trusted a white man.

"Time passed on until I was thirteen years old, a tall, strong girl, and
very brave for a girl. I could shoot almost as well as father.

"Little Mary was very quiet and shy, not like me at all. I loved
fishing, and often went out hunting with father, but she staid at home
with Lizzie, or sat down under the trees by the spring, watching the
shadow of the trees moving in it.

"Our colony had by this time become quite prosperous. A good many of the
settlers had built houses for themselves more like those they had left
behind on the Delaware.

"The spring that I was fourteen, father built this house. The mill had
already been grinding away for two years. We were very happy when we
moved out of our little log cabin into this pleasant house.

"We had but little furniture, but we had plenty of room. Up to this
time, there had not been much trouble with the Indians, and though we
had often dreaded it, and lived in fear many days at a time, only four
of our men had been killed by them.

"We had trusted many of the friendly Indians, and Red Feather had
frequently spent days at our settlement. He seemed to like the mill.

"I became quite attached to the old man; but Mary was always afraid of
him, and Lizzie kept her sharp eyes on him whenever he came into the
house. She hated him, and he knew it.

"One beautiful clear morning in August of that year, father went down to
the mill as usual. Lizzie was busy with her work, and little Mary was
playing with some tame doves, when looking up, I saw Lizzie start
