"Well," said the Hoopoe, "at Mecca I met a Hoopoe of my acquaintance who
told me so wonderful a tale of the marvelous Kingdom of Sheba in Arabia
that I could not resist the temptation to visit that country of gold and
precious stones. And there, indeed, I saw the most prodigious treasures;
but best of all, O King, more glorious than gold, more precious than
rare jewels, I saw Queen Balkis, the most beautiful of queens."

"Tell me of this Queen," said Solomon, loosening his rough grasp upon
the Hoopoe. So it was, say the Mussulmans, that a bird told Solomon of
the great Queen whose journey to Jerusalem is described in the Bible.

The Hoopoe told of her power and glory, her riches, her wisdom, and her
beauty, until Solomon sighed a great sigh and said, "It seems too good
to be true! But we shall see."

So the King wrote a letter to Balkis, bidding her follow the guidance of
fate and come to the court of the wise King. This note he sealed with
musk, stamped with his great signet, and gave to the Hoopoe, saying,--

"If now you have spoken truth, take this letter to Queen Balkis; then
come away."

The Hoopoe did as he was bid, darting off towards the south like an
arrow. And the next day he came to the palace of the Queen of Sheba,
where she sat in all her splendor among her counselors. He hopped into
the hall and dropped the letter into her lap, then flew away.

Queen Balkis stared and stared at the great King's seal upon the
mysterious letter, and when she had read the brief invitation she stared
and stared again. But she had heard the fame of Solomon and was eager to
ask him some of her clever questions to prove his wisdom. So she decided
to accept his invitation and come to Jerusalem.

She came with a great train of attendants, with camels that bore spices
and treasures of gold and precious stones, gifts for the most wise King.
And she asked him more questions than any woman had ever asked him
before, though he knew a great many ladies, and they were all
inquisitive.

But Solomon was so wise that he answered all her questions without any
trouble.

And she said to him, "It was a true report that I heard of you in my own
land, of your wisdom and of your glory. Only that which now I know and
see is greater than what I heard. Happy are thy men and happy are thy
servants who stand continually before thee and hear thy wisdom."

And she gave the King a hundred and twenty talents of gold, which was a
very rich treasure, besides great store of spices, and the most precious
gifts; no one had ever seen such gifts as the Queen of Sheba gave to
Solomon.

But he in turn was even more generous. For he gave to the fair Balkis
all that she desired and everything she asked, because he admired so
much this splendid Queen of whom the Hoopoe had first told him.

And so, the Bible says, the Queen of Sheba turned and went to her own
country, she and her servants. But the Mussulmans' tales say that in
later days she married Solomon and they lived happily ever after. And it
was all the work of that little Hoopoe with a yellow crown, whom after
that we may be sure Solomon loved better than ever.




THE PIOUS ROBIN


    "Art thou the bird whom man loves best,
    The pious bird with the scarlet breast,
         Our little English Robin?"
                                      WORDSWORTH.

The English Robin is not precisely like our little American friend whom
we call by that name, although, as the lines of poetry quoted above will
show, in two ways he is the same as ours: he has a red breast, and he is
the bird whom every one loves. Of all the little brothers of the air, in
every land and clime, the pretty, jolly, neighborly Robin Redbreast is
the favorite.

There are many stories about him: some which tell how he came by his
scarlet breast, others which explain why he has always been best beloved
of the birds. I have already told how he helped the Wren to bring fire
to men. Every one knows how tenderly he covered with leaves the poor
Babes in the Wood, when they had been deserted even by their nearest of
kin. Some have heard about Saint Kentigern, and how he restored to life
the pious Robin of his master Servan,--the dear little bird who used to
sing psalms every morning in the Saint's company. Some also know about
the Robin who brought the wheat-ear in his bill to the poor brothers in
Brittany who had no grain to plant for their future harvest. All these
tales show the Robin's generous heart, cheerful nature, and pious
devotion, which make him beloved by men. But perhaps you do not know why
he is called God's own bird.

    "The Robin and the Wren
    Are God's cock and hen,"

sing the little English children, and they think it is very wicked to
injure one of the holy birds or make her unhappy by robbing her nest of
its pretty eggs.

This is why the Robin is called the good bird, God's bird. The oldest
stories say that the little Christ-child used to feed most tenderly the
Robins who hopped about the door of His mother's house, for they were
dearest of all to His baby heart. Perhaps He thus early learned to love
them because His mother had told Him of the service which the dear
little birds had once performed for her.

For it is said that once upon a time, when Mary was a little girl, as
she was going along the gusty road a bit of straw blew into her eye and
pained her terribly. She sat down upon a stone and began to cry. Now a
Robin was sitting on a branch close by, singing with all the power of
his little throat when the maiden passed, for she was very sweet to see
and the Robin loved her looks. But when he saw the blessed Mary begin to
cry and rub her eye with her chubby hand, he stopped his gay song and
became very sad, wondering what he could do to help her.

What he did was to fly away and tell his friend the Swallow all about
it, asking her aid. After that he fluttered to a little fountain which
bubbled up close by and brought thence in his bill a drop of water.
Then, perching on Mary's forehead, he gently dropped this into the
suffering eye. At the same time the Swallow softly brushed her long
tail-feathers under the maiden's eyelid, and the hateful straw was wiped
away. Thus the little Mary was relieved, and when once more she could
look up happily with her pretty eyes she smiled upon the two kind birds
and blessed them for their aid.

Of course, if the little Christ heard His mother tell this pretty story
He would have been sure to love the Robin, just as she did. And so these
little birds became His boyhood friends.

Those were happy times. But in the after years, in the dreadful day
when the Saviour was so cruelly done to death by His enemies, the little
Robin once more proved his generous and pious heart, so the legends say.

The Saviour hung upon the cross, suffering and sad, while the world was
veiled with darkness and all good creatures mourned. Two birds perched
upon the cross beside His weary, drooping head. One was the faithful
Robin, who was then a plain and dark-colored bird with the scorched
feathers of a fire-bringer upon his breast. The other was the Magpie,
who at that time was among the most gorgeous and beautiful of all the
birds. She had a tuft of bright feathers on her head, and her plumage
outshone even that of the Peacock, who has the hundred gleaming eyes of
Argus set in his fan-like tail. But the Magpie, in spite of her beauty,
was at heart a wicked bird. Think of it! She mocked the dying Saviour in
His agony and seemed to rejoice in His suffering!

But the Robin fluttered about the holy figure, timidly uttering chirps
of sorrow and longing to help the Master who had fed him tenderly for so
many years. With his soft wings he wiped away the tears which flowed
from the Lord's eyes, while with his beak he tugged at the cruel thorns
which pierced His brow, trying to relieve Him.

Suddenly a drop of blood fell from Christ's forehead upon the Robin's
breast and tinged with bright crimson the rusty reddish feathers.

"Blessed be thou," said the Lord, "thou sharer of my suffering. Wherever
thou goest happiness and joy shall follow thee. Blue as the heaven shall
be thy eggs, and from henceforth thou shalt be the Bird of God, the
bearer of good tidings. But thou," He added, addressing the Magpie
sorrowfully, "thou art accursed. No longer shall the brilliant tuft and
bright feathers of which thou art so proud and so unworthy adorn thee.
Thy color shall be the streaked black and white of shadows, thy life a
hard one. And thy nest, however well builded, shall be open to the
storm."

These were almost the last words which the Saviour spoke. After that,
when the Lord was laid in the sepulchre, the faithful Robin still
watched beside Him for those three dread days until He rose on Easter
morning, when the little bird rejoiced with all nature at the wondrous
happening. And again on Ascension Day he paid his last tribute to the
risen Master, joining his little song with the chorus of the angels
themselves in the gladdest Hosanna which the universe had ever heard.

This explains how the Magpie became a restless, noisy, black-and-white
bird as we know her to this day, having lost all her brilliant beauty
through the wickedness of her heart. But the pious Robin still wears
upon his breast the beautiful feathers stained red with his Master's
blood. And all that the Saviour foretold of him has come true. He is the
blessed bird whom children everywhere love and of whom they still repeat
these old verses:--

    "The Robin and the Redbreast,
       The Robin and the Wren,
    If ye take out of the nest
       Ye'll never thrive again.
    The Robin and the Redbreast,
       The Martin and the Swallow,
    If ye touch one of their eggs
       Bad luck is sure to follow."




THE ROBIN WHO WAS AN INDIAN


The name of Robin makes us think at once of the jolliest and most
sociable of all our little brother birds. In every land the name is a
favorite, and wherever he goes he brings happiness and kind feeling.

The American Robin is not the same bird as his English cousin, though
both have red breasts.

It was in a different manner that our little American friend came to
have the ruddy waistcoat which we know so well.

There was a time, so the Indians say, a very early time, long, long
before Columbus discovered America,--even before histories began to be
written,--when there were no Robins.

In those days in the land of the Ojibways, which is far in the north of
the cold country, there lived an old Indian chief who had one son, named
Iadilla. Now among the Ojibways, when a boy was almost big enough to
become a warrior, before he could go out with the other braves to the
hunt or to war, there was a great trial which he must undergo. Other
lands and peoples have known similar customs. You remember how, in
early Christian times, long, long ago, Galahad and other boys had to
fast and watch by their armor during the long night hours before they
could become knights, to wear spurs and shield and sword? In just the
same way a brown Ojibway lad had to make a long fast in order to win the
love of his Guardian Spirit, who would after that watch over him to make
him brave and strong. It was a very important event in a boy's life,
like graduation from school or college nowadays. For this meant the
graduation from boyhood into manhood, the winning of a warrior's
diploma.

The father of Iadilla was a brave warrior, a famous chief. But he wished
his son to become even better, wiser, greater than he had been. He
resolved that the boy should fast longer and harder than ever a lad had
fasted before. For he believed that this was the way to make him the
noblest of his race. Iadilla was a fine handsome lad, but he was the
youngest one who had ever made the trial, and there were many bigger
boys than he who were not yet warriors. The other chiefs said that he
was not yet old and strong enough.

But Iadilla's father declared that it was time, and bade his son gather
courage and pride for the ordeal. "For," he said, "it will be no easy
matter, my son, to become the greatest chief of the Ojibways."

"My father," replied Iadilla, humbly, "I will do as you wish. I will do
what I can. But my strength is not the strength of the bigger boys; and
I think it is yet early to talk of my becoming greatest of the Ojibways.
Yet make trial of me, if you wish."

The father of Iadilla had made a little tent of skins where the boy was
to live during his fasting time; where he was to lie without food or
drink for twelve long days, waiting for a message from the Guardian
Spirit whose love was to be the reward of such a trial.

When the time came, the old man led Iadilla to the lodge and bade him
lie down on the bed of skins which had been prepared for him. And
Iadilla did as he was bid, for he was a brave and obedient lad.

The days crept by, the long, long days of waiting, while Iadilla lay in
the lodge bearing hunger and thirst such as no Ojibway lad had ever
before known. All day and all night he lay still and spoke never a word.
But a dreadful fear was in his heart lest he should not be able to
endure the fast for the twelve days which his father had set.

Every morning his father came to the lodge to praise and to encourage
him, and to rejoice in one more day checked from the long time of
fasting. So eight days passed, and the old man was proud and happy.
Already his dear son had done more than any Ojibway lad, and the whole
tribe was praising Iadilla, saying what a great chief he would be in the
days to come.

But on the ninth morning, when the father peeped into the lodge to see
how bravely his son was faring, the boy turned his head toward the door
and spoke for the first time in all those long days. He was very thin
and pale, and his voice sounded weak.

"My father," he said, "I have slept, and my dreams were sad. I have
slept, and my dreams were of failure and weakness. The time does not
please my Guardian Spirit. It is not now that I can become a warrior. I
am not yet strong and old enough. O my father, I cannot bear the fast
longer! I am so hungry, so thirsty, so faint! Let me break my fast, and
try again in another year."

But the father sternly refused, for he was ambitious. "Nay, lad," he
cried, frowningly. "Would you fail me now? Think of the glory, think of
being the greatest of Ojibways. It is but a few short days now. Courage,
Iadilla, be a man in strength and patience."

Iadilla said no more. He wrapped himself closer in his blanket and drew
his belt tighter about his slender waist, trying to stifle the hunger
gnawing there. So he lay silently until the eleventh day. That morning
his father came to the lodge, beaming proudly.

"Bravo, my Iadilla!" he cried. "Only one day more, and you will be
released from your fast." But Iadilla clasped his hands beseechingly.

"My father," gasped the poor boy. "I cannot bear it another day. I am
not fit to be a great chief. I have failed. Give me food, or I die!"

But again the father refused. "It is but a day now," he said, "but a few
short hours. Bear a little longer, Iadilla. To-morrow I myself will
bring you the finest breakfast that ever a lad ate. Courage, boy, for
the few hours that remain."

Iadilla was too weak to answer. He lay motionless, with only a gentle
heaving of his breast to show that he still lived. His father left him
for the last time, and went to prepare the morrow's goodly breakfast,
while the tribe planned a fine festival in honor of the young hero.

Early on the morrow came Iadilla's father to the tent, proudly bearing
the breakfast for his brave boy, and smiling to think how gladly he
would be received. But he stopped outside the tent door surprised to
hear some one talking within. Stooping to a little hole in the skin of
the tent he peeped in to find who the speaker might be. Imagine his
surprise to find Iadilla standing upright in the middle of the tent
painting his breast a brilliant red, as Indians do in war time. And as
he daubed on the colors he talked to himself. He spoke softly, yet not
with the weak voice of a starving lad; and his face was very beautiful
to see, despite its pale thinness.

"My father has ended my Indian life," he said. "My father, too
ambitious, has put upon me more than my strength could bear. He would
not listen to my prayer of weakness. But I knew, I knew! And my kind
Guardian Spirit knew also that it was more than I could bear. He has
shown pity, seeing that I was obedient to my father and did my best to
please him. Now I am to be no longer an Indian boy. I must take the
shape which the Spirit has given me, and go away."

At these strange words the father broke into the tent, exclaiming in
terror,--

"My son, my dear son! Do not leave me!"

But, even as he spoke, Iadilla changed into a beautiful Robin Redbreast
with soft feathers and strong, firm wings. And, fluttering up to the
ridgepole of the tent, he looked down with pity and tenderness upon the
heart-broken chief.

"Do not grieve, father," he sang. "I shall be so much happier as a bird,
free from human pain and sorrow. I will cheer you with my merry songs.
Oh, I have been hungry; but now I shall get my food so easily, so
pleasantly on mountains and in the fields. Oh, once I was thirsty; but
now the dew is mine and the little springs. Once I traced my way
painfully by forest paths through bog and brake and tangled brier. But
now my pathways are in the bright, clear air, where never thorn can tear
nor beast can follow. Farewell, dear father! I am so happy!"

He stretched his brown wings as easily as if he had worn them all his
life, and, singing a sweet song, fluttered away to the neighboring
woods, where he built his nest, and lived happily ever after.

And since that day the glad little Robins have lived as that first one
promised, close by the homes of men, and have done all they could to
cheer us and make us happy. For they remember how, once upon a time,
their ancestor was a human boy.




THE INQUISITIVE WOMAN


There was once a woman who was so very inquisitive that she wished to
know everything. She was never happy unless she was poking her nose into
some mystery, and the less a matter concerned her the more curious she
was about it.

One day the Lord gathered together all the insects in the world, all the
beetles, bugs, bees, mosquitoes, ants, locusts, grasshoppers, and other
creatures who fly or hop or crawl, and shut them up in a huge sack well
tied at the end. What a queer, squirming, muffled-buzzing bundle it
made, to be sure!

Then the Lord called the woman to him and said, "Woman, I would have you
take this sack and throw it into the sea. But be sure and do not untie
the end of it to look inside; for the sack must on no account be opened,
even for a single minute."

The woman took the sack, wondering very much at the queer size and shape
and feeling of it, and especially at the strange noises which came from
the inside.

"What can be in the sack?" she said to herself. "Oh, I wish I knew! Oh,
_how_ I wish I knew! Oh, how very, _very_ much I wish I knew!" Her
curiosity increased every minute as she went step by step towards the
sea, until when she had gone scarcely a hundred paces she stopped short
and said, "I must know what is inside this sack before I go any farther.
I will take just one tiny little peep, and He will never know it."

Very carefully she untied the neck of the sack. Buzz! Whirr! Hum! Zim!
She had opened it but a tiny little crack when out crawled and hopped
and flew the millions and swarms and colonies of all kinds of insects,
and away they scattered in every direction. Such a noise as filled the
air about the astonished woman's head! Such a wriggling and squirming
and hopping in the grass about her feet!

"Oh, now I know what was in the sack!" she cried. "But I wish I had not
looked. Oh, whatever shall I do? He told me to throw the bag into the
ocean without looking in. But now the horrid creatures have escaped
everywhere and He will know what I have done. Oh, what will He do to
punish me?"

She began to run hither and yon like a crazy woman, picking up the bugs
and jumping for the fluttering insects, trying to put them back into the
bag. They stung her and bit her and got into her eyes until she screamed
with pain. As fast as she caught one another escaped, and she soon saw
that it was a hopeless task. She could never catch the millions of
creatures who had scattered away to their homes in every corner of the
world.

Then the Lord came to her and said very sternly, "O Woman, you have
disobeyed me, just as did the very first woman of all. And you must be
punished both for your disobedience and for your inquisitiveness which
has led you into the worse sin. Not until you have gathered up every one
of these insects which you have permitted to escape back into the world
shall you be happy. But I will give you wings to help you in the task.
You shall become a Woodpecker, and it shall be your task to hunt, hunt
for the insects which hide away so slyly at your approach. Not till the
last one of these is gobbled up from the earth shall you return to your
own shape and be a woman once more."

Then the Lord changed the inquisitive woman into a restless Woodpecker,
and with a "tut-tut!" she darted away in pursuit of the insects which
had brought her into such trouble.

And that is why to this day one sees the Woodpecker pecking so
frantically on the tree trunks, anxious lest a single insect should
escape. For she is very tired of being a bird, and is longing to become
a woman once more. But it will be a very long time, I fear, before she
gathers up all the wriggling, squirming, hopping, buzzing, stinging,
biting things that make life in the country so varied, exciting, and
musical.




WHY THE NIGHTINGALE WAKES


When the other birds are sound asleep in their nests, with their little
heads tucked comfortably under their feathers, Sister Nightingale, they
say, may not rest, but still sounds the notes of her beautiful song in
grove and thicket.

Why does she sing thus, all night long as well as through the day? It is
because she dares not go to sleep on account of the Blindworm, who is
waiting to catch her with her eyes closed.

Once upon a time, when the world was very new, the Blindworm was not
quite blind, but had one good eye. Moreover, in those days the
Nightingale also had but one eye. As for the Blindworm, it mattered very
little; for he was a homely creature, content to crawl about in the dark
underground, or under wood and leaves, where nobody saw him and nobody
cared. But the Nightingale's case was really quite too pitiful! Fancy
the sweetest singer among all the birds, the favorite chorister, going
about with but one eye, while every one else, even the tiniest little
Humming Bird of all, had two.

The Nightingale felt very sore about this matter, and tried to conceal
her misfortune from the other birds. She managed to cock her head the
other way whenever she met a friend, and she always flew past any
stranger so fast that he never saw the empty socket where her other
pretty eye should be.

But one day there was great excitement among the birds. Miss Jenny Wren
was going to be married to young Cock Robin. There was to be a grand
wedding; every one was invited, and of course the Nightingale was needed
to lead the bridal chorus of feathered songsters. But the poor
Nightingale was set in a flutter of anxiety by the news.

"Oh, dear me!" she said, "I do want to go to Jenny's wedding, oh, of
course I do! But how can I go? If I do, the other birds will discover
that I have but one eye, and then how the disagreeable creatures will
laugh at me. Oh dear, oh dear! What shall I do? I cannot go, no, I
