or ugly, exist in the all-comprising view of the Creator of the
universe: in his eyes, the toad is as pleasing an object as the
canary-bird, or the bulfinch.




LESSON XXIII.

_Maida, the Scotch Greyhound._--Altered from BINGLEY.


[Illustration]

1. A hound is a dog with long, smooth, hanging ears, and long limbs,
that enable him to run very swiftly. The greyhound is not so called on
account of his color, but from a word which denotes his Grecian origin.

2. The Scotch greyhound is a larger and more powerful animal than the
common greyhound; and its hair, instead of being sleek and smooth, is
long, stiff and bristly. It can endure great fatigue.

3. It was this dog that the Highland chieftains, in Scotland, used in
former times, in their grand hunting-parties.

4. Sir Walter Scott had a very fine dog of this kind, which was given to
him by his friend Macdonnel of Glengarry, the chief of one of the
Highland clans. His name was Maida.

5. He was one of the finest dogs of the kind ever seen in Scotland, not
only on account of his beauty and dignified appearance, but also from
his extraordinary size and strength.

6. He was so remarkable in his appearance, that whenever his master
brought him to the city of Edinburgh, great crowds of people collected
together to see him.

7. When Sir Walter happened to travel through a strange town, Maida was
usually surrounded by crowds of people, whose curiosity he indulged with
great patience, until it began to be troublesome, and then he gave a
single short bark, as a signal that they must trouble him no more.

8. Nothing could exceed the fidelity, obedience and attachment, of this
dog to his master, whom he seldom quitted, and on whom he was a
constant attendant, when traveling.

9. Maida was a remarkably high-spirited and beautiful dog, with long
black ears, cheeks, back, and sides. The tip of his tail was white. His
muzzle, neck, throat, breast, belly and legs, were also white.

10. The hair on his whole body and limbs was rough and shaggy, and
particularly so on the neck, throat, and breast: that on the ridge of
the neck he used to raise, like a lion's mane, when excited to anger.

11. His disposition was gentle and peaceable, both to men and animals;
but he showed marked symptoms of anger to ill-dressed or
blackguard-looking people, whom he always regarded with a suspicious
eye, and whose motions he watched with the most scrupulous jealousy.

12. This fine dog probably brought on himself premature old age, by the
excessive fatigue and exercise to which his natural ardor incited him;
for he had the greatest pleasure in accompanying the common greyhounds;
and although, from his great size and strength, he was not at all
adapted for coursing, he not unfrequently turned and even ran down
hares.

13. Sir Walter used to give an amusing account of an incident which
befell Maida in one of his chases. "I was once riding over a field on
which the reapers were at work, the stooks, or bundles of grain, being
placed behind them, as is usual.

14. "Maida, having found a hare, began to chase her, to the great
amusement of the spectators, as the hare turned very often and very
swiftly among the stooks. At length, being hard pressed, she fairly
bolted into one of them.

15. "Maida went in headlong after her, and the stook began to be much
agitated in various directions; at length the sheaves tumbled down, and
the hare and the dog, terrified alike at their overthrow, ran different
ways, to the great amusement of the spectators."

16. Among several peculiarities which Maida possessed, one was a strong
aversion to artists, arising from the frequent restraints he was
subjected to in having his portrait taken, on account of his majestic
appearance.

17. The instant he saw a pencil and paper produced, he prepared to beat
a retreat; and, if forced to remain, he exhibited the strongest marks of
displeasure.

18. Maida's bark was deep and hollow. Sometimes he amused himself with
howling in a very tiresome way. When he was very fond of his friends,
he used to grin, tucking up his whole lips and showing all his teeth;
but this was only when he was particularly disposed to recommend
himself.

19. Maida lies buried at the gate of Abbotsford, Sir Walter's country
seat, which he long protected; a grave-stone is placed over him, on
which is carved the figure of a dog. It bears the following inscription,
as it was translated by Sir Walter:

    "Beneath the sculptured form which late you wore,
     Sleep soundly, Maida, at your master's door."




LESSON XXIV.

_Gelert._--BINGLEY, altered.


1. I have one more story to tell you about the Highland greyhound. It is
an old Welsh story, and shows how extremely dangerous it is to indulge
in anger and resentment.

2. In a village at the foot of Snowden, a mountain in Wales, there is a
tradition that Llewellyn (_pronounced_ Lewel'lin), son-in-law to King
John, had a residence in that neighborhood.

3. The king, it is said, had presented him with one of the finest
greyhounds in England, named Gelert. In the year 1205, Llewellyn, one
day, on going out to hunt, called all his dogs together; but his
favorite greyhound was missing, and nowhere to be found.

4. He blew his horn as a signal for the chase, and still Gelert came
not. Llewellyn was much disconcerted at the heedlessness of his
favorite, but at length pursued the chase without him. For want of
Gelert, the sport was limited; and getting tired, Llewellyn returned
home at an early hour, when the first object that presented itself to
him, at his castle gate, was Gelert, who bounded, with his usual
transport, to meet his master, having his lips besmeared with blood.

5. Llewellyn gazed with surprise at the unusual appearance of his dog.
On going into the apartment where he had left his infant son and heir
asleep, he found the bed-clothes all in confusion, the cover rent, and
stained with blood.

6. He called on his child, but no answer was made, from which he hastily
concluded that the dog must have devoured him; and, giving vent to his
rage, plunged his sword to the hilt in Gelert's side.

7. The noble animal fell at his feet, uttering a dying yell, which
awoke the infant, who was sleeping beneath a mingled heap of the
bed-clothes, while beneath the bed lay a great wolf covered with gore,
which the faithful and gallant hound had destroyed.

8. Llewellyn, smitten with sorrow and remorse for the rash and frantic
deed which had deprived him of so faithful an animal, caused an elegant
marble monument, with an appropriate inscription, to be erected over the
spot where Gelert was buried, to commemorate his fidelity and unhappy
fate. The place, to this day, is called Beth-Gelert, or The Grave of the
Greyhound.




LESSON XXV.

_Knock Again._--CHILD'S COMPANION.


1. I remember having been sent, when I was a very little boy, with a
message from my father to a particular friend of his, who resided in the
suburbs of the town in which my parents then lived.

2. This gentleman occupied an old-fashioned house, the door of which was
approached by a broad flight of stone steps of a semi-circular form. The
brass knocker was an object of much interest to me, in those days; for
the whim of the maker had led him to give it the shape of an elephant's
head, the trunk of the animal being the movable portion.

3. Away, then, I scampered, in great haste; and having reached the
house, ran up the stone steps as usual; and, seizing the elephant's
trunk, made the house reecho to my knocking. No answer was returned.

4. At this my astonishment was considerable, as the servants, in the
times I write of, were more alert and attentive than they are at
present. However, I knocked a second time. Still no one came.

5. At this I was much more surprised. I looked at the house. It
presented no appearance of a desertion. Some of the windows were open to
admit the fresh air, for it was summer; others of them were closed. But
all had the aspect of an inhabited dwelling.

6. I was greatly perplexed; and looked around, to see if any one was
near who could advise me how to act. Immediately a venerable old
gentleman, whom I had never seen before, came across the way, and,
looking kindly in my face, advised me to knock again.

7. I did so without a moment's hesitation, and presently the door was
opened, so that I had an opportunity of delivering my message. I
afterward learned that the servants had been engaged in removing a heavy
piece of furniture from one part of the house to the other; an operation
which required their united strength, and prevented them from opening
the door.




LESSON XXVI.

_The same subject, continued._


1. As I was tripping lightly homeward, I passed the kind old gentleman,
about half way down the street. He took me gently by the arm; and,
retaining his hold, began to address me thus, as we walked on together:

2. "The incident, my little friend, which has just occurred, may be of
some use to you in after life, if it be suitably improved. Young people
are usually very enthusiastic in all their undertakings, and in the same
proportion are very easily discouraged.

3. "Learn, then, from what has taken place this morning, to persevere in
the business which you have commenced, provided it be laudable in
itself; and, ten to one, you will succeed. If you do not at first
obtain what you aim at, _knock again_. A door may be opened when you
least expect it.

4. "In entering on the practice of a profession, engaging in trade, or
what is usually called settling in the world, young people often meet
with great disappointments.

5. "Friends, whom they naturally expected to employ them, not
unfrequently prefer others in the same line; and even professors of
religion do not seem to consider it a duty to promote the temporal
interest of their brethren in the Lord.

6. "Nevertheless, industry, sobriety, and patience, are usually
accompanied by the Divine blessing. Should you therefore, my little
friend, ever experience disappointments of this kind, think of the brass
knocker; _knock again_; be sober, be diligent, and your labors will be
blessed.

7. "In the pursuit of philosophy many difficulties are encountered.
These the student must expect to meet; but he must not relinquish the
investigation of truth, because it seems to elude his search. He may
knock at the gate of science, and apparently without being heard. But
let him _knock again_, and he will find an entrance."




LESSON XXVII.

_The same subject, concluded._


1. "Do you ever pray to God? I hope and trust you do. God commands and
encourages us to pray to him. But he does not always answer our prayers
at the time, or in the way, we expect.

2. "What then? We know that he hears them. We know that he is a gracious
God, a reconciled Father in Christ. Let us _knock again_. Let us ask in
faith, and, if what we ask be pleasing in his sight, he will grant it in
his own good time.

3. "You know who it was that said, 'Ask, and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; _knock_, and it shall be opened unto you: for
every one that asketh, receiveth; and he that seeketh, findeth; and to
him that _knocketh_, it shall be opened.'

4. "Once more: our progress in the Divine life, even after we have
wholly given ourselves to the Lord, does not always equal our wishes or
expectations. We find much indwelling sin, much remaining corruption, to
struggle with.

5. "But let us not despond. The grace of our Lord is sufficient for us,
and his strength is made perfect in our weakness. Let us _knock again_.

6. "Let us continue, with humble confidence, to do what we know to be
pleasing in our Master's sight. Let us work out our own salvation, with
fear and trembling; for it is God that worketh in us both to will and to
do of his good pleasure."

7. We had now reached the gate of my father's garden; and the good old
gentleman, taking me kindly by the hand, bid me try to remember what he
had said. He then went his way, and I saw him no more.

8. I afterward endeavored to find out who he was; but I did not succeed.
His advice, however, sunk deep into my mind, and has often been of
singular value to me since.

9. My disposition is naturally sanguine, and my disappointments
proportionably acute. But, upon calling to mind the old mansion, the
brass knocker, and my venerable counselor, I have frequently been led to
_knock again_, when I might otherwise have sat down in despondency.

10. I hope that many of my readers will derive similar benefit from the
perusal of this little history; for the sole end of its publication will
be answered, if the young persons under whose eyes it may come be
induced, at every season of doubt and perplexity, in the exercise of
simple confidence in God, to _knock again_.




LESSON XXVIII

_Make Good Use of your Time._--EMMA C. EMBURY.


[Illustration: "To everything there is a season, and a time for every
purpose under heaven."]

1. "My dear Anna," said Mrs. Elmore, as she bade her little girl
farewell, "I shall be absent ten days; and as you have already had so
many lessons from me respecting the manner of distributing your hours of
amusement and study, I will only say to you, now, '_Make good use of
your time_.'"

2. Anna's eyes filled with tears as the carriage drove off, and she felt
very lonely when she returned to the parlor without her mother. She
thought over her mother's parting words, until she felt quite proud of
the confidence reposed in her, and resolved not to abuse it by neglect.

3. She accordingly took her books and sat down to her studies, as
attentively as if her mother had been waiting to hear her recitation.

4. Anna was an affectionate, intelligent child. She would have made any
sacrifices to please her mother, and she really loved her studies; but
her one great fault was a disposition to loiter away time.

5. This her mother well knew; and after trying admonition, until she
almost feared she was increasing the evil by allowing Anna to depend too
much upon her guidance, she determined to test the effect of leaving her
to her own responsibility.

6. For an hour after her mother's departure, Anna sat in close attention
to her studies. All at once, she started up. "I am so hungry," said she,
"I must go to Betty for some luncheon;--but stop--I will finish my
exercise first."

7. She wrote a line or two; then throwing down her pen, petulantly
exclaimed, "There! I have made two mistakes, because I was in such a
hurry;--I will not finish it till I come back."

8. So away ran the little girl to her old nurse, and the next half-hour
was spent in satisfying her hunger. As she was returning, with laggard
step, she happened to spy, from the window, a beautiful butterfly
fluttering about the rose-bushes in the garden; and, quite forgetting
her unfinished exercise, away she flew in chase of the butterfly.

9. But, agile as were her movements, the insect was too nimble for her;
and after an hour's race beneath the burning sun, she returned, flushed
and overheated, without having succeeded in its capture.

10. Again she applied herself to her books; but study was not so easy
now as it would have been a little earlier. Anna was too tired to apply
her mind to her lessons; and after loitering a while over her desk, she
threw herself on the sofa, and fell into a sound sleep, from which she
was only awakened by a summons to dinner.

11. After dinner, Betty proposed taking her out to walk; and though
conscious that she had not performed half her duties, she had not
resolution enough to refuse to go. Tying on her bonnet, she took a
little basket on her arm, and set out with Betty to gather
wild-flowers.

12. When they reached the woods, Betty sought out a mossy seat under an
old tree, and, taking her work from her pocket, began to sew as
industriously as if she had been at home.

13. "O Betty!" exclaimed Anna, "how can you sit and sew, when there are
so many pleasant sights and sounds around you?"

14. "I can hear the pleasant sounds, my child, without looking round to
see where they come from," replied Betty; "and as for the pretty sights,
though I can enjoy them as much as any one, I cannot neglect my work for
them.

15. "I promised your mother to have these shirts finished when she came
home, and I mean to do so."--"Dear me!" said the little girl, "I wish I
had brought my book, and I might have studied my lesson here."

16. "No, no, Anna," said the old woman; "little girls can't study in the
woods, with the birds singing and the grasshoppers chirping around them.
Better attend to your books in-doors."

17. Betty continued her sewing; and towards sunset, when they arose to
return, she had stitched a collar and a pair of wristbands, while Anna
had filled her basket with flowers.

18. As they approached the village, Betty called at a poor cottage, to
inquire after a sick child, and Anna was shocked at the poverty and
wretchedness of the inmates. The little children were only half clothed,
their faces were covered with dirt, and their rough locks seemed to bid
defiance to the comb.

19. Pitying the condition of the poor little girls, Anna determined to
provide them with some better clothing; and she returned home full of
benevolent projects.

20. The next morning, as soon as she rose, she began to look over her
wardrobe; and selecting three frocks which she had outgrown, she carried
them to Betty, to alter for Mrs. Wilson's children.

21. "I shall do no such thing," said Betty; "Mrs. Wilson's children are
not suffering for clothes; the weather is warm, and they are as well
clad as they will be the day after they are dressed up in your finery.

22. "Mrs. Wilson is an untidy, slovenly woman; and though your mother
charged me to look after her sick baby, she did not tell me to furnish
new clothes for the other dirty little brats!"

23. "Well, Betty, if you don't choose to do it, I'll try it
myself."--"Pretty work you'll make of it, to be sure! you will just cut
the frocks to pieces, and then they will fit nobody."

24. "Well, I am determined to fix them for those poor little ragged
children," said Anna; "and if you will not help me, I will get Kitty the
chambermaid to do it."




LESSON XXIX.

_The same subject, continued._


1. Anna found a very good assistant in the warm-hearted, thoughtless
Irish girl. Kitty cut out the frocks, and Anna sat herself down to make
them.

2. She found it rather tedious work, and, if she had not been afraid of
Betty's ridicule, she would have been tempted to throw her task aside;
but as Kitty promised to help her, as soon as her household duties were
completed, Anna determined to persevere.

3. When night came, she had finished one frock, and begun another; so
she went to bed quite happy, forgetting that, in her benevolent zeal,
she had neglected her studies and her music, as well as her mother's
plants and her own Canary-bird.

4. The next day, she again went to work at the frocks, and, with Kitty's
assistance, they were completed before tea-time. Never was a child
happier than Anna, when she saw the three little frocks spread out upon
the bed.

5. A degree of self-satisfaction was mingled with her benevolence, and
she began to think how pleased her mother would be to learn how hard she
had worked in the cause of charity. She ran off for Betty to take her
down to Mrs. Wilson's cottage; but she found Betty in no humor to
gratify her.

6. "I'll have nothing to do with it!" said the old woman. "Kitty helped
you to spoil your pretty frocks, and she may help you dress the dirty
children;--they will look fine, to be sure, in your French calico
dresses!"

7. Anna was too happy to mind Betty's scolding; so away she flew to find
Kitty, and they set off together for Mrs. Wilson's cottage. When they
arrived there, they found the children by the edge of the pond making
dirt pies, while their faces and hands bore testimony to their industry.

8. Kitty stripped and washed them, though nothing but the bribe of a new
frock could have induced them to submit to so unusual an operation. Anna
almost danced with pleasure, when she beheld their clean faces,
well-combed locks, and new dresses.

[Illustration]

9. Her mother had now been three days gone, and Anna felt that she had
not quite fulfilled her trust. But she satisfied herself with the
thought that two days had been devoted to a charitable purpose, and she
was sure her mother would think that she had made good use of that
portion of her time.

10. The fourth day, she determined to make amends for past neglect, by
studying double lessons. She went to her room and locked the door,
resolving to perform all her duties on that day, at least.

11. She had scarcely commenced her studies, however, when she
recollected that she had not watered her mother's plants since she had
been gone. She threw down her books, and running into the garden, sought
her little watering-pot; but it was not to be found.

12. She was sure she had put it either in the summer-house, or the
tool-house, or under the piazza, or somewhere. After spending half an
hour in search of it, she remembered that she had left it under the
great elm-tree, in the field.

13. By this time, the sun was shining with full vigor upon the delicate
plants; and, forgetting her mother's caution to water them only in the
shade, she overwhelmed the parched leaves with a deluge of water, and
went off quite content.

14. She then thought of her bird; and on examining his cage, found that
he could reach neither the seed nor the water. So she replenished his
cups, decorated his cage with fresh chickweed, treated him to a lump of
sugar, and played with him until she had loitered away the best part of
the morning.

15. Immediately after dinner, a little friend came to see her, and the
rest of the day was consumed in dressing dolls, or arranging her
baby-house.




LESSON XXX.

_The same subject, concluded._


1. On the fifth day, she summoned courage enough to persevere, and
actually performed every task with attention.

2. In the afternoon, Betty took her out to walk, and Anna coaxed her
into a visit to Mrs. Wilson's cottage. What was her indignation, as she
approached the house, to see the children again playing on the margin of
the duck-pond!

3. As soon as they saw her, they ran to hide themselves, but not until
she had observed that their new frocks were as dirty, and almost as
ragged, as the old ones. Betty did not fail to make Anna fully sensible
of her own superior wisdom.

4. "I told you so, child," said she; "I told you it was all nonsense to
try to dress up those dirty creatures; much good you have done, to be
sure!" Anna almost cried with vexation, as she thought of all the time
and labor she had wasted upon her benevolent task, and she walked home
with a heavy heart.

5. The next morning, she had scarcely risen from the breakfast-table,
when Kitty came to show her a beautiful little ship, which, her
brother, who was a sailor, had made for her, as a token of remembrance.

[Illustration]

6. Anna was delighted with it; nothing could be more beautiful than its
graceful form, its delicate rigging and snowy sails. She begged to have
it set on her table, that she might see it while she was studying, and
the good-natured Kitty left it with her.

7. But in vain the heedless child tried to study; her eyes and thoughts
wandered perpetually to the pretty toy before her. "How I should like to
see it sail!" said she to herself. The more she looked at it, the more
anxious she became to see it in the water.

8. At length, taking it carefully up, she stole down stairs, and hurried
across the garden to a little brook in the adjacent field. Here she
launched her tiny bark; but it had scarcely touched the water, when it
turned over on its side. She then recollected that she had once heard
her father speak of the manner of ballasting a ship; so she hastened to
gather a quantity of small stones, with which she filled the little
cabin.

9. Again she intrusted her ship to the crystal streamlet; but, alas! the
weight of the stones carried it straight to the bottom. There it lay in
the pebbly channel, with the clear waters rippling above it, and the
little girl stood aghast upon the brink.

10. She bared her arm, and attempted to reach it, but without success.
At length, while making a desperate effort to regain it, she lost her
