
"Ha! you dare to talk back to me, Ditmore! Go to your room at once, and
stay there until to-morrow morning."

"But, Mr. Crabtree----"

"Not another word. Go to your room. And you, Ruddy and Ritter, report to
me and to Captain Putnam at the private office at once."

There was no help for it, and with an angry look on his face, Pepper
left the gymnasium and walked over to the school building.

"I'll report as soon as I have washed up, Mr. Crabtree," said Ritter,
sullenly.

"So will I," added Jack.

"I'll give you both ten minutes, no more!" snapped the teacher, and then
he strode from the gymnasium as swiftly as he had entered it.

As soon as Josiah Crabtree had departed a lively discussion commenced
between the followers of the young major and of Reff Ritter. Only a few
had seen the start of the quarrel and knew that it had been provoked
entirely by the bully.

"I'm afraid I am in for it," said Jack, dismally, to Fred. "Ritter will
do his best to make out that it was all my fault."

"Well, I can testify that Ritter hit you first, and Pepper and Brown can
do so, too," answered Fred.

"Reff will get Coulter and Paxton to back him up."

"But they weren't on hand when the quarrel started."

"That is true--but they'll stick up for Reff, see if they don't."

"I sincerely trust that Captain Putnam doesn't take away your majorship,
Jack."

"If he does that, I'll--well, never mind what I'll do."

"If he did it to me, I'd feel like leaving."

"I was going to say that. But I'll not do anything hastily," answered
the young major, and heaved a deep sigh.

"Want me to go along?"

"No, since Crabtree didn't ask any one. But I wish you'd hang around, so
I can call on you."

"I'll go to the library."

"All right--and take Brown, if he'll go."

Jack washed up and brushed his uniform, and then made his way to Captain
Putnam's private office. He found that Reff Ritter had hurried and
gotten ahead of him, and was telling his story, both to the head of the
school and to the first assistant teacher. Ritter's mouth, nose and one
eye were swollen, and he looked anything but happy.

"You may remain in the hallway until I call you, Major Ruddy," said
Captain Putnam, when Jack appeared, and the young major had to go
outside, closing the door after him.

The telling of Reff Ritter's story took some time, and he was asked
several questions by Captain Putnam and Josiah Crabtree. He said that he
had just been getting ready to take some gymnastic exercise when Jack
and some of his chums had come in and begun to talk about his father,
saying that they had heard he was dishonest.

"Ruddy said he knew my father was dishonest," went on Reff Ritter. "That
made me mad and I ran out of the dressing-room and told him he ought to
be ashamed of himself, that my father was as honest as anybody. Then he
got on his high-horse and told me to shut up or he would knock me down.
I told him it was a shame for him to speak so of my father. Then he got
mad and all of a sudden he jumped at me and hit me in the mouth and the
eye and then in the nose. Then I went for him, and we had it hot and
heavy, until we bumped into one of the wooden horses and I went down. He
tried to hit me after I was down, but Coulter and Paxton hauled him
back. Then Mr. Crabtree came in."

"A most disgraceful proceeding!" cried Josiah Crabtree. "And evidently
Major Ruddy's fault entirely."

"You are quite sure Ruddy started the quarrel?" questioned Captain
Putnam, gravely.

"Yes, sir."

"And he told the other cadets that your father was dishonest?"

"Yes, sir. That is what made me so mad. But I didn't hit him until he
attacked me," added Ritter, hastily.

"Who was present at the time?"

"Pepper Ditmore and Fred Century were with Ruddy, and Gus Coulter and
Nick Paxton were With me."

"Anybody else?"

"I didn't see anybody."

"You got the worst of the fight."

"Yes, sir. You see, he took me unawares. I guess I could whip him if we
were to meet on equal terms," added Ritter.

"You may retire to the next room, Ritter, while I question Major Ruddy."

"Don't you believe me?" cried the bully, in alarm.

"One side of a story is only one side," answered Captain Putnam,
non-committally.

"I believe Ritter tells the truth," put in Josiah Crabtree. "When I
appeared Ruddy was very insolent and so was Ditmore. I sent Ditmore to
his room as a punishment."

"You may call Ruddy in," answered the head of the school, briefly. He
understood Josiah Crabtree's dictatorial manner perfectly, and he only
retained the man because of his unusual ability as a teacher.

Jack came in and was told to sit down in the chair Ritter had just
vacated. Then Captain Putnam asked him to tell his story, and he related
everything just as it had occurred.

"Are you quite sure that you have told the plain truth, Major Ruddy?"
asked Captain Putnam, after he had finished.

"Yes, sir," answered Jack, and looked the head of the school fairly and
squarely in the face.

"Your story does not agree with that told by Ritter."

"I believe Ritter," broke in Josiah Crabtree. "It was an outrage to drag
in the boy's father simply because he has made some--er--unfortunate
speculations. If I were you, Captain Putnam----"

"Wait a moment, Mr. Crabtree," interrupted the owner of the Hall. "I am
conducting this investigation. Now that we have heard the stories of the
principals we'll hear what the witnesses have to say."

"Fred Century was there, and he is in the library now," said Jack.
"Pepper Ditmore was there, too, but Mr. Crabtree sent him to his room."

"I will question Century and Ditmore, and also Coulter and Paxton,"
answered Captain Putnam. "You may retire to Classroom Three, Major
Ruddy, until called."

Jack bowed and withdrew and walked to the classroom named. It was empty
and he threw himself down on a seat and gave himself up to his
reflections.

Fred was next called, and he was followed by Pepper. Both told
practically the story related by Jack. In the meantime George Strong,
the second assistant teacher, was sent off to summon Coulter and Paxton.
He was gone the best part of a quarter of an hour, and when he came back
his face was a study.

"Captain Putnam, I have just made a discovery," he said. "I would like
to speak to you alone."

"Alone?" queried the head of the school, somewhat astonished.

"Yes, sir, alone."

"Very well, then, come into the next room," answered Captain Putnam.




CHAPTER VII

PEPPER MAKES A DISCOVERY


"You do not--er--wish me present?" came rather awkwardly from Josiah
Crabtree.

"Oh, that won't matter, Mr. Crabtree," answered George Strong. "I did
not desire any of the cadets present, that was all."

"I do not care to intrude----" commenced the dictatorial teacher.

"As you please," answered Mr. Strong, with a shrug of his shoulders.

At first Josiah Crabtree was inclined to stand on his dignity and walk
off, but his curiosity got the better of him and he followed Captain
Putnam and George Strong into another office.

"I went after Coulter and Paxton, as you directed me," said the second
assistant teacher, when they were alone, and the door had been closed.
"At first I could not find them, but at last I located Paxton and then
Coulter. Where do you suppose they were?"

"I have no idea," answered Captain Putnam.

"Paxton was under the window of the office, listening to all that was
going on. He was partly hidden behind a bush, so that nobody might see
him."

"Indeed! That is not to his credit. And Coulter?"

"Coulter was at another window, talking to Ritter. Ritter was giving him
some instructions, and as I came up unnoticed I heard Ritter say, 'Now,
don't make a mess of it. Tell the story just as I told it, and be sure
to stick to it that Ruddy hit me first, and tell Nick to stick to that,
too.' Those were his very words."

"Is it possible! And what did Coulter say?"

"He promised to tell the story as Ritter wanted it, and said he would
tell Paxton also to say that Ruddy struck the first blow."

"Then he virtually admitted that he struck the first blow himself."

"I should judge so, from his talk."

"Major Ruddy said he did."

"But Ruddy insulted him by talking of Mr. Ritter's losses----" began
Josiah Crabtree.

"We'll look into that, Mr. Crabtree. Is that all, Mr. Strong?"

"No, I waited until Coulter joined Paxton. The two walked out on the
campus, so I didn't catch what they said. I told them to follow me, and
they are now out in the hall."

"I will listen to what each of them has to say--and then I will examine
Century and Ditmore again."

Coulter was called into the main office and asked a great number of
questions. Captain Putnam was very stern, and soon had the cadet badly
twisted in his statements. Then Paxton was told to come in, and on being
questioned he became more confused even than Coulter. Then both were
confronted by George Strong, and at last they virtually admitted that
Ritter had struck the first blow, and that they knew nothing of the
quarrel previous to that time.

"You may go," said Captain Putnam, at length. "Your efforts to shield
Ritter do you no credit." And Coulter and Paxton slunk out of the office
silently and much worried over the thought of what punishment they might
receive for trying to deceive the master of the Hall.

After that Pepper and Fred were again interviewed and cross-questioned.
But they stuck to their original story, and as that was the story told
by Jack, Captain Putnam felt that it must be true.

"You may go," said the captain, presently.

"Have I got to go back to the dormitory?" queried Pepper.

"No, you may join the other cadets," answered the head of the school.

"But, sir----" commenced Josiah Crabtree.

"I do not see as he merits punishment, Mr. Crabtree," said the captain,
coldly. "We will let it pass." And he spoke so firmly that the
dictatorial teacher said no more on the subject.

When Jack was again called into the presence of the teachers it must be
admitted that he was a good deal worried. There was a strict rule at
Putnam Hall against fighting, and that rule had been violated by him.
Yet he felt he had been justified.

"Major Ruddy, I have examined several witnesses to this affair and I
find that your story of the occurrence is substantially correct," began
the head of the school. "Ritter struck the first blow."

"He did. He slapped me in the face. That angered me so greatly that I
pitched into him without thinking twice. It was all done in a few
seconds. But I guess I'd do it again," added Jack. "I wouldn't let
anybody slap me without getting back at him. I guess if I did that I'd
make a mighty poor soldier."

At these words Captain Putnam's face became a study. He had been on the
point of reading Jack a stern lecture on the disgrace of breaking the
school rules, but now he paused. When at West Point a certain upper
classman had once pulled his nose and, regardless of consequences, he
had knocked the fellow down and dragged him by the heels through the
dirt of the road. He had considered himself justified in his actions,
and his whole class has stood by him. That being so, he did not have it
in his heart to punish Jack, or even to find fault with him. Yet the
discipline of the school must be maintained.

"Major Ruddy, do you know what the first duty of a soldier is?" he
asked, but his voice was soft and easy.

"Yes, sir; to obey orders."

"Exactly."

"But there is no rule about what to do if a fellow slaps your face,"
added Jack, quickly.

"That is true." Captain Putnam had to turn away to conceal a sudden
smile. "And, in one way, let me say I do not blame you for what you did,
especially as you acted on the spur of the moment. But fighting must
stop. If I dismiss this case against you, will you promise to leave
Ritter alone in the future?"

"I will if he leaves me alone. If he attacks me, I'll defend myself to
the best of my ability."

"He won't attack you--I'll see to that," answered the captain, grimly.
"You may go. But remember, no more fighting."

"Thank you, sir," answered Jack, and lost no time in leaving the office.

"Well, how did you make out?" questioned Pepper, eagerly, when Jack
joined him on the campus.

"Case dismissed, Pep."

"Really?"

"Yes."

"Hurrah! That's the best news yet. I was in fear that you would at least
be cut off from your holidays."

"What about Ritter?" asked Fred.

"I don't know what Captain Putnam is going to do with him."

The fight and the doings in the office had put Jack out of the notion of
taking a sail, and the crowd of boys took a walk instead, that lasted
until it was time for the evening parade.

"Wonder if Ritter will show up for drill?" came from Dale.

"We'll know soon," answered Jack.

In a few minutes the drums commenced to roll and out on the parade
ground poured the cadets and their officers. Jack had buckled on his
sword, and so had Henry Lee and Bart Conners. The cadets had their guns,
that is all but the band, who carried their drums and fifes, and the
color sergeants, who carried Old Glory and the Putnam Hall banner.

"Battalion, attention!" came firmly from Major Jack Ruddy, and all the
young soldiers stiffened up in their places.

He ran his eyes over the two companies, to see that every cadet was
"toeing the mark." He did not see Reff Ritter.

"Present arms! Carry arms! Shoulder arms!" came the various commands,
and the cadets made the movements with their guns. The drilling was so
well done that Captain Putnam, who always looked on, nodded in approval.

"By column of fours, forward march!" came the next command, and then the
drums struck up once more, the fifes joined in, and four abreast the
cadets moved off, down the parade ground. They marched up and down
several times, and executed various movements, and then marched into the
mess-hall, or dining-room, put away their guns, and took their seats.

"Ritter isn't here," whispered Pepper to Jack.

"So I see," was the reply.

"I'll bet he caught it from Captain Putnam," put in Dale.

"Silence at the table!" came harshly from Josiah Crabtree. "I want less
talking at meals!"

"My, but he's a cheerful beggar!" muttered Dale.

"Imagine him at the head of the school," observed Pepper.

"Ditmore, did you hear me?" snarled the teacher. "I want you to keep
quiet."

"All right, Mr. Crabtree; sorry I spoke," answered The Imp, cheerfully.

"Then remember to keep your mouth closed after this."

"Ahem! how am I to eat if I keep my mouth closed?" asked Pepper,
innocently.

"Ha! I want none of your jokes, Ditmore! Leave the table!" thundered
Josiah Crabtree.

"I'm not through yet."

"Never mind, leave the table at once!" And the teacher glared at Pepper
as if to eat him up.

"Just my luck!" muttered The Imp, and got up.

"Here's a sandwich for you," whispered Dale, who sat near, and he passed
over two slices of bread with some cold meat between.

"And here's a piece of cake," added Jack, and slid it along, under the
edge of the table. Then Pepper got up and left the room. He did not know
where to go and so walked slowly in the direction of the boathouse.

As he neared the building, he saw a boy come out of the structure and
hurry across the float to where the _Alice_ and the _Ajax_ were tied
up. The boy was Reff Ritter.

The bully of the school was in a great rage. Captain Putnam had given
him a stern lecture and told him if he did not behave in the future he
would be dismissed from the school. The captain had also cut him off
from all holidays up to Christmas, and added that he must expect to take
no part in Putnam Hall athletics. The latter was the hardest blow of
all, for Ritter had hoped that Fall to make the football team.

"Now, what is he up to?" Pepper asked himself, and stuffing the napkin
that held the cake and sandwich into his pocket, he moved forward on a
run.

Reff Ritter had crossed the float and now he stood beside the sloop that
was Jack's property. As Pepper came closer he saw that the bully held an
ax in his hand, the handle shoved up the sleeve of his jacket.

"He is up to no good," thought Pepper. "I'll watch him and see what he
does."

Pepper stepped out of sight behind the boathouse. Looking through a
window and a door, he saw Ritter walk up and down the float. Evidently
the bully wanted to make certain that he was not being observed. Then,
with a swift movement, he leaped aboard the sloop and crouched down out
of sight.

"Guess it's time I got busy!" muttered Pepper to himself, and ran around
the boathouse and out on the float. He was soon at the side of the
_Alice_. He heard a blow sound out. Ritter was using the ax, apparently
in an endeavor to chop a hole in the bottom of the sloop!
