"Prithee, be not so venturesome, lest she send thee after him," said the
blacksmith, in some consternation.

Maud thought this would not be so much of a calamity, perhaps, until the
man added, "Nobody will ever hear aught of Master Harry again, and if
thou dost go to the witch, thou wilt disappear too."

The young lady looked undecided when she heard this, but she could
hardly restrain Cavalier from turning down a narrow lane close by, which
the blacksmith observing, said, "Now, you may be sure mistress, that the
old witch has worked her spells; for Cavalier there is under them, and
is bidden by her to take thee to be bewitched too."

It seemed that the horse was determined to take her somewhere, whether
she would or no, and the next minute was trotting down the lane, Maud
scarcely knowing what to make of the proceeding. After trotting about
half a mile he paused, and then turned in at a broken-down gateway, and
walked up to the window of a cottage, where he stopped and looked round,
as if telling Maud to dismount.

"The horse certainly is bewitched," said Maud, half aloud, determined
not to move from her seat, and trying to turn Cavalier's head in the
opposite direction.

But Cavalier seemed obstinately bent on looking in at the window, and
would not move; and Maud's consternation was complete when the door
slowly opened, and an old woman, leaning on a crutched stick, came
hobbling out. She was in the presence of the witch herself, and, with a
cry of horror, Maud dropped the reins and covered her face with her
hands. Finding the witch did not attempt to drag her into the house, now
that she had her in her power, Maud ventured to look up in a minute or
two, and saw a venerable-looking old woman standing on the threshold,
looking very pale and ill, and quite as frightened as she herself did.

[Illustration: DAME COPPINS.]

But the old woman was the first to recover herself, and she said, "You
have come to tell me about Master Harry Drury? The Lord reward you for
your kindness to a poor old woman."

Maud hardly knew what to say. She felt ashamed of her fright now, and
yet an idea had entered her head that Cavalier could see Harry in the
cottage, and she said, "Nay, but I have come to ask _you_ about Harry."

The poor old woman trembled visibly when she heard this. "Prithee, but I
cannot tell you that," she said, speaking as calmly as she could. "I
have not seen him these three days," she went on, "and sorely have I
missed him, for not a word of the Book can I read now. He's been eyes to
me ever since my own boy went away to fight for the King."

"What book did he read to you?" asked Maud.

"Marry, and what should it be but God's word?" said Dame Coppins. "It's
been open at the place where he left off these three days, for it is
sore hard to believe I sha'n't hear his voice again." Tears choked the
old woman here, and Maud, quite forgetting her reputation as a witch,
jumped off her horse, saying, "Shall I read a chapter for you, as Harry
used?"

"Then it is true he's gone away?" said the old woman.

Maud nodded. The tears were in her eyes now. "We don't know where he has
gone," she said.

"Poor lamb, it is a sore trial for you; but it will be worse for me, I
trow," and the old woman sighed heavily.

"Why?" asked Maud, entering the cottage, where, on a little table lay a
Bible open at the Gospel of St. John. There was nothing remarkable in
this book, she knew, for she recognised it as an old one of Harry's,
which they had read from together many times, until she gave him a new
one on his birthday once, when the old one disappeared.

After she had read part of the sixth chapter, the old woman begged for a
few verses more about the "mansions," and Maud read part of the
fourteenth.

"I'll keep that in mind when the time comes," murmured the old woman;
"and if I never see you again, Mistress Harcourt----"

"But I will come and see you again," interrupted Maud.

The old woman shook her head. "It'll be all over soon; I couldn't bear
it again," she said.

"What will be all over?" asked Maud. "You are not ill, are--at least,
not very ill--not likely to die yet," she added, hastily.

"If I waited till the Lord called me by disease I'd may be wait a good
while yet, for I'm strong when I'm well; but the people hereabout say I
am a witch, and but for Master Harry I should have been tried before
last night."

"Last night!" uttered Maud. "What did they do to you?" for she had lost
all fear of her as a witch now.

The poor old creature looked round fearfully. "They did it," she said,
"tried me for a witch. They took me to the horse-pond and ducked me, but
there was not enough water to drown me. They'd have done it before if
Master Harry had not been my protector, but now he is gone nothing will
save me, for they say I've sent him away; as if I should want to lose my
best friend," and the old woman burst into tears again.

Maud was indignant. "Prithee, do not be afraid," she said. "I will
protect you, they shall not hurt you!"

For a minute the old woman looked up glad and grateful, but then she
shook her head sadly. "You can't do it, they are coming again to-night,"
she said, "and the ill-usage will kill me;" and she pushed up the sleeve
of her gown and showed how her arms were cut and bruised.

"You must be protected," said Maud, "it will be murder. I will go to
Master Drury at once and tell him about it," and without waiting another
minute, Maud mounted Cavalier and cantered up the lane.

At the top, clustered round the blacksmith's shed, were a group of
soldiers, who made way for her to pass, but the blacksmith sprang
forward and stopped her horse.

"These soldiers have seen Master Harry Drury Mistress Harcourt," he
said.

"Then you will not repeat the cowardly attack on Dame Coppins, I trow!"
said the young lady, burning with anger still.

The blacksmith drew back somewhat ashamed, and Maud, forgetting all
else, turned to the soldiers and said, "Tell me where you met Master
Harry Drury."

The man doffed his cap respectfully, for he could see Maud was a lady.
"It was near by the gate of London," he said. "Our leader, Captain
Stanhope, has now gone to the Grange, bearing tidings of it."

Maud urged Cavalier into a sharp canter when she left the soldiers, for
she wished to be in time to hear the Captain's account of his meeting
with Harry, which she was likely to lose for ever if not in time to hear
it given to Master Drury. Captain Stanhope and his troopers had been to
Hayslope before, and the Captain knowing the importance of his meeting
with Harry, would be most likely to speak of it at supper time, when
they were all assembled in the dining-hall.

Before supper, however, she wanted to consult Master Drury about
protecting Dame Coppins from the village mob, and as soon as Cavalier
had been left to Roger she went in search of that gentleman. But he was
not in the study or the keeping-room, and thinking he must have gone out
with Captain Stanhope, she went into the garden to watch for his return.

Walking noiselessly over the velvet turf, she was close to the
quaintly-cut leafy screen that sheltered the arbour from the garden,
when she heard voices close by, and some one say, "Then we are to arrest
him as a traitor, wherever he may be found?"

"Yes," faintly answered Master Drury's voice.

Maud felt as though she were rooted to the spot. Could it be Harry they
were talking of? All uncertainty about this was set aside by Master
Drury's next words. "He has disgraced the family name by this, and I
would you had taken him prisoner ere he entered London to finish his
rebellion."

"That might not be, Master Drury, seeing I knew not wherefore he was
journeying there," said Captain Stanhope.

Maud disdained to listen to what was not intended for her ears, and
rapidly walked away in a tumult of passion against her guardian for his
cruelty to his son.

When she entered the keeping-room Mistress Mabel and Mary looked up from
their work of spinning, but she did not heed the command to come and sit
down at her wheel with them. Passing up to her own room, she took out
some warm wraps, and then went round to the stable in search of Roger,
to whom she gave some directions about coming to the village with a
basket of provisions a little later in the evening.

She then set out on her walk back to Dame Coppins' cottage, determined
to stay there all night, and protect the old woman by her presence. She
was likewise anxious to tell her of this fresh danger threatening Harry,
for she was the only one to whom she could speak about it, and she knew
the old woman would sympathise with her in her sorrow.

The poor old woman could give more than sympathy, she found she could
give strength and comfort by her apt quotations from God's Word, for she
herself had tasted sorrow and learned their power. Then they fell into a
conversation about Harry, which lasted until Roger arrived with the
basket, and a message from Master Drury that he and Captain Stanhope
were coming to the cottage shortly.

Maud was not in a humour to thank either her guardian or the soldier for
anything they might do now, but when they arrived she told them what had
taken place the night before; and on the gentlemen promising to ride
back to the village and make inquiries into the matter, to prevent its
recurrence, she was obliged to promise to return to the Grange, upon
Roger being sent down as a guard for Dame Coppins for this night. But
she was very ungracious in her bearing towards the young soldier,
although it was evident that he greatly wished to please her.

It was Captain Stanhope's business just now to get fresh men to recruit
his Majesty's army, and he readily consented to Master Drury's
proposition that he should make Hayslope Grange his head-quarters for
the present. His men could be lodged in the village, and they could make
short expeditions into the surrounding country in search of recruits,
and thus business could be combined with pleasure on the part of the
Captain, while it would afford the Royalist leaders a proof that Master
Drury of the Grange was still a staunch Cavalier, should they hear of
the defection of his son; and thus the matter was settled to the
satisfaction of all parties--at least, all but Maud, and the arrangement
vexed her exceedingly.




CHAPTER VII.

THE REVEL.


May-day had not been kept with its usual festivity at Hayslope this
year, and so in this month of June it was proposed to have a junketing
on the village green in honour of Captain Stanhope and his soldiers.
Maud, and many another as sad-hearted as she, were in no humour for
revelry when their dear ones were away at the war, and Bertram was quite
indignant that Mary should wish it if Captain Stanhope did, and loudly
declared he would not join in the fun. The horns of ale passed freely
from hand to hand that day, and the soldiers kept up the excitement
among the villagers by occasionally giving them a fanfare from their
trumpets, drinking with them, and telling them stories of "glorious
war." It had the desired effect. Before the night closed in half-a-dozen
lads had enlisted, and among them Master Drury's trusty groom, Roger.

This was rather more than the gentleman had bargained for, and he was
very angry when he heard it, but he could not say much to Captain
Stanhope, lest the sincerity of his principles should be doubted. But it
seemed that Roger was not the only prize the young soldier coveted, for
the day following the revel he asked the hand of Mary Drury in marriage.
Master Drury knew not what to say to this, for all the household had
seen the marked attentions he paid to Maud--attentions which she
repelled with cold disdain.

It had been remarked by many in the village that Mistress Harcourt had
kept aloof as much as possible from the revelry. She had been obliged to
come down with the family, but instead of joining in the sport, she went
about among those who were on the outskirts of the crowd--the mothers
with babies in their arms, widows, whose lives this civil war had made
desolate, and sad-eyed maidens widowed already in heart and affection
through the intolerance of King Charles. Among these, Maud had already
made herself known, and now her rich robes of cherry-colour flowered
satin might be seen in close neighbourhood with the blue serge and
linsey-woolsey petticoats and linen jackets of her poorer neighbours.
The children liked to look at her pretty dress--that of itself was a
show to them--but the sad and sorrowful had began to love her for the
kindly words and sympathy she gave them.

From these she heard that it was whispered she was likely to become
Mistress Stanhope shortly--a rumour that annoyed her exceedingly.
Captain Stanhope, it seems, had heard the same. Some one had ventured to
remark that the bride-elect did not join the dancers, and he resolved to
speak to Maud that very night, and ask her to become his wife, although
he had received so little encouragement to hope for a favourable answer.

On his way back to the Grange, therefore, he contrived to join her, and
in a few words begged her to favour his suit. Maud hardly knew whether
to be angry or sorry, but she contrived to make him understand most
clearly that it was useless to press her on that subject, and begged him
not to allow any one else to know that he had asked her hand.

She need not have feared this. Captain Stanhope was too proud to let any
one know of his rejection, and his chief annoyance arose from the fact
that many had already seen and remarked his preference. Musing on this,
he saw Mary and Bertram at a little distance, and the idea at once
entered his head that this annoyance could be got over by at once
proposing to Mary, when it would be thought he was only playing with
Maud, while in reality he was attached to Mary. So he contrived to
dismiss Bertram from his sister's side, and in a gentle tone begged her
to walk in the garden with him; and then when they reached the arbour he
made the same proposal as he had made to Maud but a few minutes before.

Mary was surprised, but pleased; not that she loved the young soldier,
she had not thought of such a thing. But he was handsome, and could be a
pleasant companion; and then she had felt herself so disgraced since
Harry had gone away, that she would gladly exchange the name of Drury
for Stanhope. She did not tell her lover this, she only said something
about thinking he liked Maud best, on which he muttered that Maud was
too proud and cold for him, when she shyly said he must speak to her
father, when, if he gave his consent, she was willing to ratify it.

Master Drury hardly knew what to say when asked for his permission. In
reality he felt the loss of his son more than he chose to own even to
himself, and did not care to part with his eldest daughter just now, but
he resolved to let Mary decide the matter; and so, telling Captain
Stanhope that he should receive his answer in the evening, he sent for
Mary.

The young lady blushed as she entered her father's presence, for she
guessed what he wished to speak to her about.

"Prithee now, tell me truly Mary of this business with Captain Stanhope.
Dost thou wish to leave the old Grange, my child?" he asked.

"I wish to change my name, father," said Mary, with a deep blush.

"And wherefore art thou so anxious about this?"

"Canst thou ask, when it has been so deeply disgraced?" said Mary.

The old man bowed his head. Truly his family pride was bearing bitter
fruit, if he were to lose his children through it in this way. He saw
that his daughter did not love the man that had sought her hand in
marriage, and he did not believe that he loved her; but he was powerless
to withhold his consent if Mary wished it, which she evidently did. "It
will be better so, my father," she said. "The Stanhopes have ever been
true and loyal, I have heard you say, and this marriage may help to wipe
the traitor stain from our escutcheon."

"True, my daughter," said the old man, but it was said very sadly, for
he knew it was not thus he had chosen her mother, or been accepted by
her. But the matter seemed to have been settled by Mary without his
interference, and he yielded rather than gave his consent when Captain
Stanhope came again in the evening.

After leaving her father Mary went to inform Maud of what had taken
place. She had expected some surprise, but not the look of blank
astonishment with which her news was received.

"Mary, you cannot mean to do it," she uttered, as soon as she was able
to speak.

"By my troth, I know not what you mean, Maud," said Mary, indignantly.

"Prithee, tell me it is not true, dear; that it is all a fable about
your marrying Captain Stanhope," said Maud, soothingly.

"Marry, but it is true--true as that your name is Maud Harcourt,"
replied Mary.

Maud rose from her seat and paced up and down the room, and Mary,
looking at her, could only think that she was disappointed. "Tell me,
when did this take place?" said Maud, pausing in her walk and looking
earnestly in Mary's face.

"Marry, but I know not why you should ask this question," said Mary,
indignantly. "Did he propose to you?" she asked, in a tone of bitter
sarcasm.

Maud blushed crimson and turned away, but only for a minute. "Tell me
