stigma of engaging in an unprovoked and ambitious war; for the
court of Austria had hitherto, positively and categorically,
declared to Frederick's ambassador and envoys the non-existence of
any such treaty or agreement between the powers.

As the queen had remained in the palace, Frederick took up his
abode in another royal building, Marshal Keith and a large number
of officers being also quartered there. In order to prevent any
broils with the citizens, orders were issued that certain places of
refreshment were to be used only by officers, while the soldiers
were only to frequent wine and beer shops selected in the
neighbourhood of the barracks, and were strictly forbidden to enter
any others. Any soldier caught in an act of theft or pillage was to
be hung, forthwith, and all were enjoined to observe a friendly
demeanour to the people.

One evening, Fergus had been sent with a message to the camp, two
miles from the town. It was nearly ten o'clock when he started to
ride back. When within half a mile of the town he heard a pistol
shot, in the direction of a large house, a quarter of a mile from
the road.

Without hesitation he turned his horse's head in that direction. In
a couple of minutes he arrived at a pair of large gates. They were
closed, but he dismounted, fastened the bridle chain to them and,
snatching the pistols from his holsters, ran along by the side of a
high wall, until he came to a tree growing close to it.

With some difficulty, for his high boots were ill adapted to such
work, he climbed the tree, got on to the wall, and dropped down. He
was in large park-like grounds. Guided by a light in a window, he
ran to the house. The door was closed. After hesitating for a
moment he ran along and, soon coming, as he expected, to an open
window, he at once climbed through it. A door was open and, passing
on, he entered a large hall in which a light was burning.

Pausing to listen now, he heard voices upstairs and, holding a
pistol in each hand and his drawn sword in his teeth, he lightly
ascended the stairs. On the landing two men lay dead. Light was
issuing from a half-closed door and, noiselessly approaching it, he
looked in.

It was a small room. At the end stood eight or ten scared women,
huddled together; while a soldier, with a pistol in one hand and a
sword in the other, stood sentry over them. These were evidently
the servants of the chateau, who had been unceremoniously hauled
from their beds and gathered there, under a guard, to prevent them
from screaming or giving any alarm. As Fergus was equally anxious
that no alarm should be given, at present, he retired quietly.

A pair of double doors faced the top of the staircase. This was
evidently the grand reception room and, listening intently, he
could hear a murmur of voices inside. Turning the handle and
throwing them suddenly open, he entered.

Upon the floor lay the body of a gentleman. A lady, pale as death
and in a half-fainting condition, leant back in a settee; while a
girl of thirteen or fourteen lay on a couch, with bound hands and a
handkerchief fastened across her mouth.

Three soldiers were engaged in examining the contents of a large
coffer of jewels. As the door opened they turned round and, on
seeing a solitary officer, sprang forward with terrible oaths.
Fergus shot one of them as they did so, dropped the pistol, and
seized his sword. Both men fired. Fergus felt a stinging sensation
in his left arm, and the pistol held in that hand dropped to the
ground.

Confident in his swordsmanship, he awaited the onslaught of the two
marauders. The swords clashed, and at the second pass one of them
fell back, run through the body. The other, shouting for aid, stood
on the defensive. Fergus heard the rush of heavy steps coming down
the staircase and, just as three other men rushed into the room, he
almost clove his opponent's head in two, with a tremendous blow
from his claymore.


[Illustration: Two of the newcomers fired hastily--and both missed]


Two of the newcomers fired their pistols hastily--both missed--then
rushed at him with their swords; and as he was hotly engaged with
them the third, who was the sentry who had been placed over the
women, advanced slowly, with his pistol pointed, with the intention
of making sure of his aim. He paused close to the combatants,
waiting for an opportunity to fire between the shifting figures of
his comrades; when a white figure, after peering in at the door,
ran swiftly forward and threw herself on his back, hurling him
forward to the ground, his pistol exploding as he fell.

One of the others started back at the sound, and as he did so
Fergus ran him through the body. He then attacked his remaining
opponent, and after a few passes laid him dead beside his comrade.
Picking up his own fallen pistol, Fergus blew out the brains of the
soldier, who was struggling to free himself from the girl's weight,
and then helped her to her feet.

"Well done, my brave girl!" he said. "You have saved my life. Now
run and tell those wenches to stop screaming, and to come and help
their mistress. These scoundrels are all killed, and there is
nothing more for them to be alarmed at."

Then he ran to the girl on the sofa, cut her cords with a dagger,
and freed her from the gag. As he did so, she leapt up and ran to
her mother's side; while Fergus, kneeling by the gentleman who had
fallen before he had entered, turned him over and, laying his ear
over his heart, listened intently.

"He is alive," he said. "His heart beats, but faintly. Tell the
maids to fetch some cordial."

The women were coming in now, some crying hysterically, some
shrieking afresh at the sight of the bodies that were strewn about
the room.

"Silence!" Fergus shouted sternly. "Now, while one runs to fetch
some cordial, do three others come here, and aid me to lift your
master gently on to this couch."

The maid who had overthrown the soldier at once came forward to his
assistance.

"Now, Truchen and Lisa," the young girl said, stamping her foot,
"come at once.

"Do you, Caroline, run and fetch the stand of cordials from the
dining room."

The two women approached timidly.

"Now," Fergus said, "get your arm under his shoulders, on your
side, and I will do the same. One of you others support his head
when we lift, the other take his feet."

So, gently he was raised and laid on the couch. By the time this
was done, the woman returned with a bottle of spirits.

"Now," he said, "water and a glass."

The young girl ran and fetched a carafe of water and a tumbler,
standing on a table by the wall. Her hands shook as she handed it
to Fergus.

"Are you sure that he is not dead, sir?" she asked, in a hushed
voice.

"Quite sure. I fear that he is grievously wounded, but he certainly
lives. Now, get another glass and put some spirits in and fill it
up with water, and make your mother drink it, as soon as you have
roused her from her faint."

Fergus now gave all his attention to the wounded man, poured two or
three spoonfuls of strong spirits and water between his lips, and
then proceeded to examine his wounds. He had three. One was a very
severe cut upon the shoulder. His left arm had been broken by a
pistol bullet, and he had a dangerous sword thrust in the body.

Under Fergus' direction the servant had cut off the doublet and,
after pouring some more spirits down the wounded man's throat, he
bade one of the other women fetch him some soft linen, and a sheet.
When these arrived he made a pad of the linen, and bound it over
the wounded man's shoulder with some strips torn from the sheet.
Then he sent for some straight strips of wood, cut them to the
right length, wrapped some linen round them and, straightening the
arm, applied them to it and, with the assistance of the girl,
bandaged it firmly. Then he placed a pad of linen over the wound in
the body, and passed bandages round and round.

"Well done!" he said to his assistant. "You are a stout girl, and a
brave one."

Then he turned to the others, who were crowded round their
mistress.

"Stand back," he said, "and throw open the window and let the air
come to her. That will do.

"The young lady and this girl will be enough, now. Do the rest of
you run off and get some clothes on."

"She has opened her eyes once, sir."

"She will come round directly, young lady. Pour a spoonful or two
from this glass between her lips. It is stronger than that you have
in your hand. She has had a terrible shock, but as soon as she
hears that your father is alive, it will do more for her than all
our services."

"Will he live, sir?"

"That I cannot say for certain, but I have great hopes that he will
do so. However, I will send a surgeon out, as soon as I get to the
city."

The lady was longer in her swoon than Fergus had expected, and the
servants had returned before she opened her eyes.

"Now," he said, "do four of you lend me your assistance. It would
be well to carry this sofa with your master into the next room; and
then we will take your mistress in there, too, so that she will be
spared seeing these ruffians scattered about, when she comes to
herself."

The doors leading to the adjoining apartment were opened, candles
lighted there, and the wounded man carried in on his sofa.

"And now for your mistress. It will be easier to lift her out of
the chair, and carry her in bodily."

This he did, with the assistance of two of the servants.

"Now," he said to the young girl, "do you stay by her, my brave
maid. I think she will recover in a minute or two. Her eyelids
moved as I brought her in. I will look round and see about things.

"Were these the only two men in the house?" he asked the other
women, as he joined them on the landing.

"No, sir. There were six men. The other four have gone to bed, but
the two outside always waited up till the count and countess
retired."

"Where are their rooms?" he asked, taking a candle.

One of the women led him upstairs. As he expected, he found the
four men lying dead. One had apparently leapt up as the door was
opened, and the other three had been killed in their beds.

"Where can I get help from?"

"There are the men at the stables. It is at the back of the house,
three or four hundred yards away."

"Well, take one of the other women with you, and go and rouse them.
Tell them to dress and come here, at once."

He now went down to the gate, undid the fastening, and then led his
horse up to the house. In a few minutes the stablemen arrived. He
ordered them to carry the bodies of the six marauders out, and lay
them in front of the house. When they had done so, they were to
take those of the servants and place them in an outhouse. Then he
went upstairs again.

"The countess has recovered, sir," one of the women said.

"Tell her that I will send one of the army surgeons down, at once.
But first, bandage my arm. It is but a flesh wound, I know; but I
am feeling faint, and am sure that it is keeping on bleeding.

"Here, my girl," he said to the one who had before assisted, "I can
trust to you not to faint."

With her assistance he took off his coat, the arm of which was
saturated with blood.

"You had better cut off the sleeve of the shirt," he said.

This was done, and the nature of the wound was seen. A ball had
ploughed through the flesh three inches below the shoulder,
inflicting a gaping but not serious wound.

"It is lucky that it was not the inside of the arm," he said to the
girl, as she bandaged it up; "for had it been, I should have bled
to death in a very few minutes.

"Has the count opened his eyes yet?"

"No, sir. He is lying just as he was."

"What is the gentleman's name?"

"Count Eulenfurst."

"You had better give me a draught of wine, before I start. I feel
shaken, and it is possible that riding may set my wound bleeding
again."

Having drunk a goblet of wine, Fergus went down and mounted his
horse. As he did so, he said to one of the men:

"Take a lantern, and go down to the spot where the road hither
turns off from the main road. A surgeon will be here in half an
hour, or perhaps in twenty minutes. He will be on the lookout for
you and your lantern."

Events had passed quickly, and the church bell chimed a quarter to
eleven as he rode through the streets of Dresden. In three minutes
he drew up at the entrance to the royal quarters. As he dismounted,
Karl came out.

"Keep the horse here, Karl," he said. "It may be wanted in a minute
or two again."

"Are you hurt, sir?" the man asked as he dismounted, for he saw his
face by the light of the torches on each side of the gateway.

"It is only a flesh wound, and of no consequence; but I have lost a
good deal of blood."

He made his way up the staircase to the marshal's quarters. He was
feeling dizzy and faint, now.

"Is the marshal in his room?" he asked.

"He is in, sir, but--"

"I would speak to him immediately. 'Tis a most urgent matter."

The servant went in, a moment later held the door open, and said:

"Will you enter, sir?"

Fergus entered, and made the usual formal salute to the marshal.
Two or three other officers were in the room, but he did not heed
who they were, nor hear the exclamations of surprise that broke out
at his appearance.

"I beg to report, sir, that the house of the Count Eulenfurst has
been attacked by marauders, belonging to one of the Pomeranian
regiments. The count is desperately wounded, and I pray that a
surgeon may be sent instantly to his aid. The house stands back
from the road, about half a mile from the north gate. A man with a
lantern will be standing in the road to guide him to it. My horse
is at the door below, in readiness to take him. I pray you to allow
me to retire."

He swayed and would have fallen, had not the marshal and one of the
others present caught him, and laid him down on a couch.

"He is wounded, marshal," the other officer said. "This sleeve is
saturated with blood."

The marshal raised his voice, and called an attendant:

"Run to the quarters of staff surgeon Schmidt, and ask him to come
here immediately, and to bring another of his staff with him, if
there is one in."

In two minutes the king's chief surgeon entered, followed by
another of his staff.

"First look to the wound of Cornet Drummond," the marshal said. "It
is in the arm, and I trust that he has only fainted from loss of
blood."

The surgeons examined the wound.

"It is in no way serious, marshal. As you say, he has fainted from
loss of blood. He must have neglected it for some time. Had it been
bandaged at once, it would only have had the consequence of
disabling his arm for a fortnight or so."

The assistant had already hurried away to get lint and bandages.
Another voice now spoke.

"Surgeon Schmidt, you will please at once mount Mr. Drummond's
horse, which is standing at the door. Ride out through the north
gate. When you have gone about half a mile you will see a man with
a lantern. He will lead you to the house of Count Eulenfurst, who
has been grievously wounded by some marauders. Surgeon Morfen will
follow you, as soon as he has bandaged Mr. Drummond's wounds. There
may be more wounded there who may need your care.

"Major Armfeldt, will you order a horse to be brought round at once
for the surgeon, then hurry to the barracks. Order the colonel to
turn out a troop of horse instantly, and let him scour the country
between the north gate and the camp, and arrest every straggler he
comes across."



Chapter 4: Promotion.


As soon as the bandage was applied and the flow of blood ceased, a
few spoonfuls of wine were poured down the patient's throat. It was
not long before he opened his eyes and struggled into a sitting
position.

"I beg pardon, sir," he said faintly, as his eyes fell on the
marshal, who was standing just in front of him. "I am sorry that I
came into your apartments in this state, but it seemed to me--"

"You did quite right, sir," said a sharp voice that he at once
recognized, while the speaker put his hand upon his shoulder, to
prevent him from trying to rise. "You were quite right to bring the
news here at once of this outrage; which, by heavens, shall be
punished as it deserves. Now drink a cup of wine, and then perhaps
you will be able to tell us a little more about it. Now don't be in
a hurry, but obey my orders."

Fergus drank off the wine; then, after waiting a minute or two,
said:

"Count Eulenfurst is sorely wounded, sire, but I cannot say whether
mortally or not. When I came away, he was still lying insensible.
His wife and daughter are, happily, uninjured."

"Was anyone else hurt?"

"Yes, sire, the six menservants who were sleeping in the house were
all killed--four in their beds, two while hastening from below to
assist their master."

The king gave an exclamation of fury.

"You said these men belonged to a Pomeranian regiment. Had they
left before you got there? But I suppose not, or else you would not
have been wounded. How was it that you heard of the attack?"

"I had carried a despatch from the marshal to the camp, sire, and
was on my way back when I heard a pistol shot. The sound was faint,
for it came from a house a quarter of a mile away, and was fired
indoors; but the night was still, and fortunately some of the
windows were open. Thinking that some evil work was being done, I
rode straight for it, climbed the wall and, making my way on foot
to the house, happily arrived in time."

"You saw the fellows, then? How was it that they suffered you to
escape with your life? They must have known that your evidence
would hang them all."

"There were but six of them, sire; and they will need no hanging,
for they are all disposed of. Though had it not been for the
assistance of a brave servant maid, who threw herself upon the back
of one of them, my career would certainly have been terminated."

"But who had you with you to help you?" the king asked.

"I had no one but the maid, sire."

"Do you mean to say, Mr. Drummond, that with your own hand you slew
the whole of the six villains?"

"That was so, sire; but in respect to the one thrown down by the
girl, I had but to blow out his brains before he could gain his
feet."

"Can you give us the particulars?" the king asked quietly. "If you
do not feel equal to it, we will wait till morning."

"I can tell you now, sire. I am feeling better and stronger."

And he related the incidents of the fight.

"One with his pistol, Keith," the king said. "Four with his sword,
after his left hand was disabled, to say nothing of the sixth.

"That is not a bad beginning for this aide-de-camp, gentlemen."

"No, indeed, sire. It is a most gallant deed, though it was well
for him that he was able to dispose of the first three before the
others appeared on the scene."

"It was a most gallant action, indeed," the king repeated; and a
hearty assent was given by the general officers standing round.

"I congratulate you on your aide-de-camp, Keith," he went on. "A
man capable of killing, single handed, six of my Pomeranians is a
treasure. Do you see that his commission as lieutenant is given me
tomorrow to sign.

"No, sit still, young sir. It is I who have to thank you, for so
promptly punishing these marauders, who would have brought disgrace
upon my army; and not you who have to thank me. Now, be off to your
bed."

Two of the attendants were called in, and these assisted Fergus,
who was almost too weak to stand, to the apartment that he shared
with Lindsay. Keith himself accompanied them. Lindsay leapt out of
bed as they entered.

"Don't ask any questions, Lindsay," the marshal said. "Drummond has
performed a very gallant action, and has been wounded and, as you
see, can scarce stand from loss of blood. He will be asleep as soon
as he lies down. You will hear all about it, in the morning."

The marshal then returned to his apartment. The king was on the
point of leaving.

"I have left orders," he said, "that as soon as either of the
