
    Grasping the bridegroom's hand, he said with emotion, "Forgive me!
    I have been angry and hurt,--too long have I cherished the feeling;
    I have been cruel and hard, but now, thank God! it is ended.
    Mine is the same hot blood that leaped in the veins of Hugh Standish,
    Sensitive, swift to resent, but as swift in atoning for error.
    Never so much as now was Miles Standish the friend of John Alden."
    Thereupon answered the bridegroom: "Let all be forgotten between us,--
    All save the dear old friendship, and that shall grow older and
        dearer!"
    Then the Captain advanced, and, bowing, saluted Priscilla,
    Wishing her joy of her wedding, and loudly lauding her husband.
    Then he said with a smile: "I should have remembered the adage,--
    If you would be well served, you must serve yourself; and, moreover,
    No man can gather cherries in Kent at the season of Christmas!"

    Great was the people's amazement, and greater yet their rejoicing,
    Thus to behold once more the sunburnt face of their Captain,
    Whom they had mourned as dead; and they gathered and crowded about him,
    Eager to see him and hear him, forgetful of bride and of bridegroom,
    Questioning, answering, laughing, and each interrupting the other,
    Till the good Captain declared, being quite overpowered and bewildered,
    He had rather by far break into an Indian encampment,
    Than come again to a wedding to which he had not been invited.
    Meanwhile the bridegroom went forth and stood with the bride at the
        doorway,
    Breathing the perfumed air of that warm and beautiful morning.
    Touched with autumnal tints, but lonely and sad in the sunshine,
    Lay extended before them the land of toil and privation;
    But to their eyes transfigured, it seemed as the Garden of Eden,
    Filled with the presence of God, whose voice was the sound of the
        ocean.
    Soon was their vision disturbed by the noise and stir of departure,
    Friends coming forth from the house, and impatient of longer delaying.
    Then from a stall near at hand, amid exclamations of wonder,
    Alden the thoughtful, the careful, so happy, so proud of Priscilla,
    Brought out his snow-white bull, obeying the hand of its master,
    Led by a cord that was tied to an iron ring in its nostrils,
    Covered with crimson cloth, and a cushion placed for a saddle.
    She should not walk, he said, through the dust and heat of the noonday;
    Nay, she should ride like a queen, not plod along like a peasant.
    Somewhat alarmed at first, but reassured by the others,
    Placing her hand on the cushion, her foot in the hand of her husband,
    Gayly, with joyous laugh, Priscilla mounted her palfrey.
    Onward the bridal procession now moved to the new habitation,
    Happy husband and wife, and friends conversing together.
    Down through the golden leaves the sun was pouring his splendors,
    Gleaming on purple grapes, that, from branches above them suspended,
    Mingled their odorous breath with the balm of the pine and the
        fir-tree,
    Wild and sweet as the clusters that grew in the valley of [v]Eshcol.
    Like a picture it seemed of the primitive, pastoral ages,
    Fresh with the youth of the world, and recalling Rebecca and Isaac,
    Old and yet ever new, and simple and beautiful always,
    Love immortal and young in the endless succession of lovers,
    So through the Plymouth woods passed onward the bridal procession.

HENRY W. LONGFELLOW.


=HELPS TO STUDY=

Miles Standish was one of the early settlers of Plymouth colony. He came
over soon after the landing of the _Mayflower_ and was made captain of
the colony because of his military experience. The feeble settlement was
in danger from the Indians, and Standish's services were of great
importance. He was one of the leaders of Plymouth for a number of years.
Longfellow shaped the legend of his courtship into one of the most
beautiful poems of American literature, vividly describing the hardships
and perils of the early life of New England.

     I. Where is the scene of the story laid? At what time did it begin?
     What is the first impression you get of Miles Standish? of John
     Alden? Read the lines that bring out the soldierly qualities of the
     one and the studious nature of the other. What lines show that
     Standish had fought on foreign soil? Read the lines that show John
     Alden's interest in Priscilla. What request did Standish make of
     Alden? How was it received? Why did Alden accept the task?

     II. What time of the year was it? How do you know? Contrast Alden's
     feelings with the scene around him. What were Priscilla's feelings
     toward Alden? Quote lines that show this. How did he fulfill his
     task? With what question did Priscilla finally meet his eloquent
     appeal in behalf of his friend? How did Standish receive Alden's
     report? What interruption occurred?

     III. What report brought about the marriage of John Alden and
     Priscilla? Read the lines that describe the beauty of their
     wedding-day. What time of year was it? How do you know? What custom
     was followed in the marriage ceremony? Look in the Bible for a
     description of the marriage of Ruth and Boaz. Find other biblical
     references in the poem. Who appeared at the end of the ceremony?
     How was he received? Contrast his mood now with the mood when he
     left to fight the Indians. What adage did he use to show the
     difference between his age and Priscilla's? Describe the final
     scene of the wedding--the procession to the new home. Tell what you
     know of early life in Massachusetts.


SUPPLEMENTARY READING

     Gareth and Lynette--Alfred Tennyson.
     The Courtin'--James Russell Lowell.
     Evangeline--Henry W. Longfellow.




THE FRIENDSHIP OF NANTAQUAS


     This story is taken from Mary Johnston's novel, _To Have and to
     Hold_, which describes the early settlement of Virginia. The most
     important event of this period was the Indian massacre of 1622. For
     some years the whites and Indians had lived in peace, and it was
     believed that there would be no further trouble from the savages.
     However, Opechancanough, the head chief of the Powhatan
     confederacy, formed a plot against the white men and suddenly
     attacked them with great fury. Hundreds of the English settlers
     were slain. The author of the novel, taking the bare outline of the
     massacre as given in the early histories, has woven around it the
     graphic story of Captain Ralph Percy and his saving of the colony.
     Percy, unlike Miles Standish, is not a historical character.


I.

A man who hath been a soldier and adventurer into far and strange
countries must needs have faced Death many times and in many guises. I
had learned to know that grim countenance, and to have no great fear of
it. The surprise of our sudden capture by the Indians had now worn away,
and I no longer struggled to loose my bonds, Indian-tied and not to be
loosened.

Another slow hour and I bethought me of Diccon, my servant and companion
in captivity, and spoke to him, asking him how he did. He answered from
the other side of the lodge that was our prison, but the words were
scarcely out of his mouth before our guard broke in upon us, commanding
silence.

It was now moonlight without the lodge and very quiet. The night was far
gone; already we could smell the morning, and it would come apace.
Knowing the swiftness of that approach and what the early light would
bring, I strove for a courage which should be the steadfastness of the
Christian and not the vainglorious pride of the heathen.

Suddenly, in the first gray dawn, as at a trumpet's call, the village
awoke. From the long communal houses poured forth men, women, and
children; fires sprang up, dispersing the mist, and a commotion arose
through the length and breadth of the place. The women made haste with
their cooking and bore maize cakes and broiled fish to the warriors, who
sat on the ground in front of the royal lodge. Diccon and I were loosed,
brought without, and allotted our share of the food. We ate sitting side
by side with our captors, and Diccon, with a great cut across his head,
even made merry.

In the usual order of things in an Indian village, the meal over,
tobacco should have followed. But now not a pipe was lit, and the women
made haste to take away the platters and to get all things in readiness
for what was to follow. The [v]werowance of the [v]Paspaheghs rose to
his feet, cast aside his mantle, and began to speak. He was a man in the
prime of life, of a great figure, strong as a [v]Susquehannock, and a
savage cruel and crafty beyond measure. Over his breast, stained with
strange figures, hung a chain of small bones, and the scalp locks of his
enemies fringed his moccasins. No player could be more skillful in
gesture and expression, no poet more nice in the choice of words, no
general more quick to raise a wild enthusiasm in the soldiers to whom he
called. All Indians are eloquent, but this savage was a leader among
them.

He spoke now to some effect. Commencing with a day in the moon of
blossoms when for the first time winged canoes brought white men into
the [v]Powhatan, he came down through year after year to the present
hour, ceased, and stood in silence, regarding his triumph. It was
complete. In its wild excitement the village was ready then and there to
make an end of us, who had sprung to our feet and stood with our backs
against a great bay tree, facing the maddened throng. Much the best
would it be for us if the tomahawks left the hands that were drawn back
to throw, if the knives that were flourished in our faces should be
buried to the haft in our hearts; and so we courted death, striving with
word and look to infuriate our executioners to the point of forgetting
their former purpose in the passion for instant vengeance. It was not to
be. The werowance spoke again, pointing to the hills which were dimly
seen through the mist. A moment, and the hands clenched upon the weapons
fell; another, and we were upon the march.

As one man, the village swept through the forest toward the rising
ground that was but a few bowshots away. The young men bounded ahead to
make the preparation; but the approved warriors and the old men went
more sedately, and with them walked Diccon and I, as steady of step as
they. The women and children for the most part brought up the rear,
though a few impatient hags ran past us. One of these women bore a great
burning torch, the flame and smoke streaming over her shoulder as she
ran. Others carried pieces of bark heaped with the [v]slivers of pine of
which every wigwam has store.

The sun was yet to rise when we reached a hollow amongst the low red
hills. The place was a natural amphitheater, well fitted for a
spectacle. Those Indians who could not crowd into the narrow level
spread themselves over the rising ground and looked down with fierce
laughter upon the driving of the stakes which the young men had brought.
The women and children scattered into the woods beyond the cleft between
the hills and returned bearing great armfuls of dry branches. Taunting
laughter, cries of savage triumph, the shaking of rattles, and the
furious beating of two great drums combined to make a clamor deafening
me to stupor. Above the horizon was the angry reddening of the heavens
and the white mist curling up like smoke.

I sat down beside Diccon on the log. I did not speak to him, nor he to
me; there seemed no need of speech. In the [v]pandemonium to which the
world had narrowed, the one familiar, matter-of-course thing was that he
and I were to die together.

The stakes were in the ground and painted red, the wood was properly
fixed. The Indian woman who held the torch that was to light the pile
ran past us, whirling the wood around her head to make it blaze more
fiercely. As she went by she lowered the brand and slowly dragged it
across my wrists. The beating of the drums suddenly ceased, and the loud
voices died away.

Seeing that they were coming for us, Diccon and I rose to await them.
When they were nearly upon us, I turned to him and held out my hand.

He made no motion to take it. Instead, he stood with fixed eyes looking
past me and slightly upward. A sudden pallor had overspread the bronze
of his face.

"There's a verse somewhere," he said in a quiet voice,--"it's in the
Bible, I think--I heard it once long ago: 'I will look unto the hills
from whence cometh my help.' Look, sir!"

I turned and followed with my eyes the pointing of his finger. In front
of us the bank rose steeply, bare to the summit,--no trees, only the red
earth, with here and there a low growth of leafless bushes. Behind it
was the eastern sky. Upon the crest, against the sunrise, stood the
figure of a man--an Indian. From one shoulder hung an otterskin, and a
great bow was in his hand. His limbs were bare, and as he stood
motionless, bathed in the rosy light, he looked like some bronze god,
perfect from the beaded moccasins to the calm, uneager face below the
feathered head-dress. He had but just risen above the brow of the hill;
the Indians in the hollow saw him not.

While Diccon and I stared, our tormentors were upon us. They came a
dozen or more at once, and we had no weapons. Two hung on my arms, while
a third laid hold of my doublet to rend it from me. An arrow whistled
over our heads and stuck into a tree behind us. The hands that clutched
me dropped, and with a yell the busy throng turned their faces in the
direction whence had come the arrow.

The Indian who had sent that dart before him was descending the bank. An
instant's breathless hush while they stared at the solitary figure; then
the dark forms bent forward for the rush straightened, and there arose a
cry of recognition. "The son of Powhatan! The son of Powhatan!"

He came down the hillside to the level of the hollow, the authority of
his look and gesture making way for him through the crowd that surged
this way and that, and walked up to us where we stood, hemmed round but
no longer in the clutch of our enemies.

"You were never more welcome, Nantaquas," I said to him, heartily.

Taking my hand in his, the chief turned to his frowning countrymen. "Men
of the [v]Pamunkeys!" he cried, "this is Nantaquas' friend, and so the
friend of all the tribes that called Powhatan 'father.' The fire is not
for him nor for his servant; keep it for the [v]Monacans and for the
dogs of the [v]Long House! The calumet is for the friend of Nantaquas,
and the dance of the maidens, the noblest buck and the best of the
fish-weirs."

There was a surging forward of the Indians and a fierce murmur of
dissent. The werowance, standing out from the throng, lifted his voice.
"There was a time," he cried, "when Nantaquas was the panther crouched
upon the bough above the leader of the herd; now Nantaquas is a tame
panther and rolls at the white men's feet! There was a time when the
word of the son of Powhatan weighed more than the lives of many dogs
such as these, but I know not why we should put out the fire at his
command! He is war chief no longer, for [v]Opechancanough will have no
tame panther to lead the tribes. Opechancanough is our head, and he
kindleth a fire indeed. We will give to this man what fuel we choose,
and to-night Nantaquas may look for his bones!"

He ended, and a great clamor arose. The Paspaheghs would have cast
themselves upon us again but for a sudden action of the young chief, who
had stood motionless, with raised hand and unmoved face, during the
werowance's bitter speech. Now he flung up his hand, and in it was a
bracelet of gold, carved and twisted like a coiled snake and set with a
green stone. I had never seen the toy before, but evidently others had.
The excited voices fell, and the Indians, Pamunkeys and Paspaheghs
alike, stood as though turned to stone.

Nantaquas smiled coldly. "This day hath Opechancanough made me war chief
again. We have smoked the peace pipe together--my father's brother and
I--in the starlight, sitting before his lodge, with the wide marshes and
the river dark at our feet. Singing birds in the forest have been many;
evil tales have they told; Opechancanough has stopped his ears against
their false singing. My friends are his friends, my brother is his
brother, my word is his word: witness the armlet that hath no like.
Opechancanough is at hand; he comes through the forest with his two
hundred warriors. Will you, when you lie at his feet, have him ask you,
'Where is the friend of my friend, of my war chief?'"

There came a long, deep breath from the Indians, then a silence in which
they fell back, slowly and sullenly--whipped hounds but with the will to
break that leash of fear.

"Hark!" said Nantaquas, smiling. "I hear Opechancanough and his warriors
coming over the leaves."

The noise of many footsteps was indeed audible, coming toward the hollow
from the woods beyond. With a burst of cries, the priests and the
conjurer whirled away to bear the welcome of Okee to the royal
worshipper, and at their heels went the chief men of the Pamunkeys. The
werowance of the Paspaheghs was one that sailed with the wind; he
listened to the deepening sound and glanced at the son of Powhatan where
he stood, calm and confident, then smoothed his own countenance and made
a most pacific speech, in which all the blame of the late proceedings
was laid upon the singing birds. When he had done speaking, the young
men tore the stakes from the earth and threw them into a thicket, while
the women plucked apart the newly kindled fire and flung the brands into
a little nearby stream, where they went out in a cloud of hissing steam.

I turned to the Indian who had wrought this miracle. "Art sure it is not
a dream, Nantaquas? I think that Opechancanough would not lift a finger
to save me from all the deaths the tribes could invent."

"Opechancanough is very wise," he answered quietly. "He says that now
the English will believe in his love indeed when they see that he holds
dear even one who might be called his enemy, who hath spoken against him
at the Englishmen's council fire. He says that for five suns Captain
Percy shall feast with him, and then shall go back free to Jamestown. He
thinks that then Captain Percy will not speak against him any more,
calling his love to the white men only words with no good deeds
behind."

He spoke simply, out of the nobility of his nature, believing his own
speech. I that was older, and had more knowledge of men and the masks
they wear, was but half deceived. My belief in the hatred of the dark
emperor was not shaken, and I looked yet to find the drop of poison
within this honey flower. How poisoned was that bloom, God knows I could
not guess!

By this time we three were alone in the hollow, for all the savages, men
and women, had gone forth to meet the Indian whose word was law from the
falls of the far west to the Chesapeake. The sun now rode above the low
hills, pouring its gold into the hollow and brightening all the world
besides. A chant raised by the Indians grew nearer, and the rustling of
the leaves beneath many feet more loud and deep; then all noise ceased
and Opechancanough entered the hollow alone. An eagle feather was thrust
through his scalp lock; over his naked breast, which was neither painted
nor pricked into strange figures, hung a triple row of pearls; his
mantle was woven of bluebird feathers, as soft and sleek as satin. The
face of this barbarian was as dark, cold, and impassive as death. Behind
that changeless mask, as in a safe retreat, the subtle devil that was
the man might plot destruction and plan the laying of dreadful mines.

I stepped forward and met him on the spot where the fire had been. For a
minute neither spoke. It was true that I had striven against him many a
time, and I knew that he knew it. It was also true that without his aid
Nantaquas could not have rescued us from that dire peril. And it was
again the truth that an Indian neither forgives nor forgets. He was my
saviour, and I knew that mercy had been shown for some dark reason which
I could not divine. Yet I owed him thanks and gave them as shortly and
simply as I could.

He heard me out with neither liking nor disliking nor any other emotion
written upon his face; but when I had finished, as though he had
suddenly bethought himself, he smiled and held out his hand, white-man
fashion.

"Singing birds have lied to Captain Percy," he said. "Opechancanough
thinks that Captain Percy will never listen to them again. The chief of
the Powhatans is a lover of the white men, of the English, and of other
white men. He would call the Englishmen his brothers and be taught of
them how to rule and to whom to pray"--

"Let Opechancanough go with me to Jamestown," I replied. "He hath the
wisdom of the woods; let him come and gain that of the town."

The emperor smiled again. "I will come to Jamestown soon, but not to-day
or to-morrow or the next day. And Captain Percy must smoke the peace
pipe in my lodge above the Pamunkey and watch my young men and maidens
dance, and eat with me five days. Then he may go back to Jamestown with
presents for the great white father there and with a message from me
that I am coming soon to learn of the white man."

For five days I tarried in the great chief's lodge in his own village
above the marshes of the Pamunkey. I will allow that the dark emperor to
whom we were so much beholden gave us courteous keeping. The best of the
hunt was ours, the noblest fish, the most delicate roots. We were alive
and sound of limb, well treated and with the promise of release; we
might have waited, seeing that wait we must, in some measure of content.
We did not so. There was a horror in the air. From the marshes that were
growing green, from the sluggish river, from the rotting leaves and cold
black earth and naked forest, it rose like an [v]exhalation. We knew not
what it was, but we breathed it in, and it went to the marrow of our
bones.

The savage emperor we rarely saw, though we were bestowed so near to him
that his sentinels served for ours. Like some god, he kept within his
lodge, the hanging mats between him and the world without. At other
times, issuing from that retirement, he would stride away into the
forest. Picked men went with him, and they were gone for hours; but when
they returned they bore no trophies, brute or human. What they did we
could not guess. If escape had been possible, we would not have awaited
the doubtful fulfillment of the promise made us. But the vigilance of
the Indians never slept; they watched us like hawks, night and day.

In the early morning of the fifth day, when we came from our wigwam, it
was to find Nantaquas sitting by the fire, magnificent in the paint and
trappings of the ambassador, motionless as a piece of bronze and
apparently quite unmindful of the admiring glances of the women who
knelt about the fire preparing our breakfast. When he saw us he rose and
came to meet us, and I embraced him, I was so glad to see him.

"The Rappahannocks feasted me long," he said. "I was afraid that Captain
Percy would be gone to Jamestown before I was back on the Pamunkey."

"Shall I ever see Jamestown again, Nantaquas?" I demanded. "I have my
doubts."

He looked me full in the eyes, and there was no doubting the candor of
his own. "You go with the next sunrise," he answered. "Opechancanough
