paused. The lane, as he knew, only led to some fields a short
distance away. What could a horse be doing there? And who could be
the man who spoke to it? There had, lately, been several burglaries
on lonely houses, in that part of the country; and the general
belief was that these had been perpetrated by men from London.

"I daresay it's nothing," Reuben said to himself. "Still, it is
certainly curious and, at any rate, there can be no harm in having
a look."

Walking upon the grass at the side of the road, he retraced his
steps to the end of the lane, and then stood and listened. He heard
a murmur of voices, and determined to follow the matter up. He
walked quietly down the lane. After going about a hundred yards, he
saw something dark in the road and, approaching it very cautiously,
found that it was a horse harnessed to a gig. As he was standing
wondering what to do next he started, for the silence was broken by
some voices near him.

"It was a stupid thing to get here so early, and to have to wait
about for four hours in this ditch."

"It was the best plan though," another voice replied. "The trap
might have been noticed, if we had been driving about the roads
after dark; while in the daylight no one would give it a second
thought."

"That's right enough," the first speaker said, "but it's precious
cold here. Hand me that flask again. I am blest if the wind does
not come through the hedge like a knife."

The voices came from the other side of the hedge, on the opposite
side of the lane. Reuben crossed noiselessly. There was a gate just
where the cart had stopped, and the men had evidently got over it,
to obtain the shelter of the hedge from the wind. Reuben felt the
gate, which was old and rickety; then cautiously he placed his feet
on the lower bar, and leaned forward so as to look round the hedge.

"What time are the others to be here, Tom?"

"They said they would be here at nine o'clock. We passed them about
six miles on the road, so they ought to be here to time."

"I suppose there's no doubt about this here being a good business?"

"I will answer for that," the other said. "I don't suppose as
there's much money in the house, but there's no end of silver
plate, and their watches, and plenty of sparklers. I have heard say
as there's no one in the county as has more jewels than the
squire's wife."

"You know the house well, don't you?"

"I never was inside," the other said, "but I have heard enough,
from them that has, to know where the rooms lie. The plate chest is
in the butler's pantry and, as we are going to get in by the
kitchen window, we are safe to be able to clear that out without
being heard. I shall go on, directly the others come, and chuck
this meat to the dogs--that will silence them. I know the way
there, for I tried that on once before."

Reuben had thought that the voice was familiar to him, and the
words gave him the clue--the speaker was Tom Thorne--and he, and
those with him, were going to commit a burglary at the squire's. He
was hesitating whether to make off at once, to warn the squire of
what was intended; or to listen and learn a little more of their
plan, when suddenly a light shone behind him, and a voice exclaimed
with an oath:

"Who have we here?"

He leapt down, and was in the act of turning round to defend
himself, when a heavy blow with a cudgel struck him on the head,
and felled him insensible to the ground. While he had been
listening to the conversation, two men had come quietly up the
lane, walking on the grass as he had done; and their footsteps had
been unheard by him, for the horse continued, at times, impatiently
to paw the ground. The sound of their comrades' voices had told
them where they were sitting and, turning on a bull's-eye lantern
to show them the gate, they had seen Reuben leaning over it, in the
act of listening.

When Reuben recovered consciousness, he found that he was lying in
the ditch, his hands tightly bound to his sides, and a handkerchief
stuffed into his mouth. The four men were gathered close by,
talking in low tones.

"I ain't going to give up the job, now we come so far to do it,"
one said, with an oath. "Besides, it's not only the swag, but the
grudge I owe the squire. If I am ready to go on, I suppose you
needn't be afraid; besides, he don't know us."

"Best cut his throat and a done with it," a voice, which Reuben
recognized as that of his old enemy, said. "I owe him one, and it
will be safest to stop his mouth."

"No, no," a third voice protested; "I ain't going to have nothing
to do with cutting throats. I don't mind running the risk of Botany
Bay, but I ain't going to run the chance of being scragged. But
let's move a bit away from here, while we settle it. You hit him
pretty hard, but he will be coming round presently. I thought at
first that you had killed him, but he's bleeding too free for
that."

The men moved some little distance away, and for some time Reuben
could hear a murmured talk, but could make out nothing of what had
been said. It was, he judged, a quarter of an hour before the
conversation ceased. They did not return to him but remained at
some distance off, and Reuben thought that he heard the footsteps
of one of them going down the lane. He could feel, by a warm
sensation across his cheek, that the blood was flowing freely from
the wound he had received on his temple. A dull torpid feeling came
over him, and after a time he again lost consciousness.

How long he remained in this state he did not know, but he was at
last aroused by being lifted and thrown into the bottom of the
cart. Four men then climbed up into it and the horse was started.
They drove at a quick pace, and Reuben wondered why they were
taking him away with them. His head ached terribly, and he suffered
much from the tightness of the cords which bound his arms. The men
seemed in high good humour, and talked and laughed in low tones;
but the noise of the vehicle prevented Reuben hearing what was
said.

It was, as far as he could judge, full two hours before the vehicle
stopped. He was roughly taken out of the cart, his arms were
unbound; and the men, leaping up, drove away at full speed. The
spot where he had been left was very dark, for trees overshadowed
it on both sides. Where he was he had no idea, but he judged that
he must be fully twenty miles from the village.

His first impulse was to take the handkerchief from his mouth, and
he then walked slowly along the road, in the direction from which
he had come. It was, he felt sure, no use shouting; for they would
have been certain to have selected some lonely spot to set him
down, and there would be no chance of awakening the inhabitants of
any distant cottage. He walked slowly, for he was faint with loss
of blood.

After proceeding about a quarter of a mile, he emerged from the
wood and came upon a spot where the road forked. Having no clue
whatever as to the direction in which Lewes lay, he sat down upon a
heap of stones and waited patiently for morning. He had no doubt
that the burglary had been a successful one, and he bitterly
regretted his neglect to keep a watch down the lane, to see that he
was not surprised by the men he had heard were coming. At any rate,
he hoped that he should be able to give such information as would
set the constables upon the track.

It seemed to him that some three hours passed before a faint light
began to dawn in the sky. By this he knew that it must be about
half-past six, and calculated, therefore, he must have set out in
the trap about half-past one. He now started to walk along the
road, hoping that he should soon meet some labourer going to work.
Stopping by a small stream which ran across the road, he washed his
head and face; as he had lain on the ground after being struck, the
blood had not flowed on to his clothes.

After the wash he proceeded with a brisker step. Half an hour later
he met a ploughman, riding one of his team to the fields.

"Is this the road to Lewes?" Reuben asked.

"Lewes? Noa, this baint the road to Lewes. I don't know nothing
about the road to Lewes. This bee the road to Hastings, if you goes
further. So they tell me; I ain't never been there."

"Is there a village anywhere about here?" Reuben asked.

"Ay, half a mile or so on."

Reuben walked on till he got to the village; and then, going to a
public house, obtained some refreshment and learned, from the
landlord, the direction he should take to get to the main road
leading to Lewes; which was, as he expected, some twenty miles
away. He found that the cart had not followed the main road towards
London, but had driven by crossroads for a considerable distance,
before turning north.

It was late in the afternoon before Reuben arrived at Lewes, for he
had been obliged to rest often by the way, and had made but slow
progress. When within a few doors of his mother's house, one of the
constables of the town came up to him and touched him on the
shoulder.

"I arrest you in the king's name!"

"Arrest me! What for?" Reuben exclaimed.

"For breaking into the house of Squire Ellison, of Tipping, that's
what it's for."

Reuben laughed.

"You have got the wrong man this time. I have no more to do with
the burglary than a child."

"It's no laughing matter," the constable said. "If you are innocent
you have got to prove it; that ain't no business of mine. All I
have got to do is to arrest you."

So saying, and before Reuben knew what he was about, he slipped a
pair of handcuffs over his wrists. Reuben flushed up. Hitherto he
had scarcely taken the matter seriously, but to be marched
handcuffed through the streets of Lewes was an indignity which
enraged him.

"Take these off," he said angrily. "I will go quietly with you."

"You may or you may not," the man said doggedly. "You are younger
than I am, and maybe can run faster. I ain't agoing to chance it."

Reuben saw that it was of no use to argue and, silent and pale, he
walked along by the side of the constable, who retained a tight
hold of his collar. A little crowd gathered speedily round, for
such a sight was unusual in Lewes; and Reuben felt thankful when
they reached the cells, and he was sheltered from the gaze of the
public. A minute later the head constable came in.

"Now, my lad, don't say anything to criminate yourself," he began;
"the less you talk, the better for you. I am sorry to see you here,
for I knew your father, and I have a good character of you from
your employer; so I give you my advice--keep your mouth shut."

"But I am not going to keep my mouth shut," Reuben said
indignantly. "Here am I, arrested in the public streets, marched
handcuffed through the town upon a most monstrous charge, which has
been brought against me without a shadow of evidence."

"Don't be talking, don't be talking," the constable said testily;
"you will hear the evidence in time enough."

"But I will talk. I want to tell you what's happened, and you will
see that I am innocent, at once."

"Very well, if you will you will; but mind, don't blame me
afterwards."

Reuben told the story of his adventures from the time of leaving.

"There," he said when he finished, "isn't that enough to show that
I am innocent?"

"No," the chief constable said gravely, "it's not enough to prove
anything, one way or the other. I am bound to say the story looks a
likely one; and if it weren't for two or three matters which I
heard of, from the constable who came over from Tipping, I should
have no doubt about it. However, all that is for the magistrate to
decide. There will be a meeting tomorrow."

"But can't I be taken before a magistrate at once? There's Captain
Fidler, within a mile."

"What would be the good?" the chief constable said. "You don't
suppose anyone would let you out, only on the strength of the story
you have told me. He could only remand you, and you could gain
nothing by it."

"Can I see my mother?" Reuben asked next.

"Yes," the constable said, "I will send her down a message, at
once."

Mrs. Whitney soon came up. A neighbour had brought her in the news
when Reuben had been arrested, and she was on the point of starting
to inquire about it when the message arrived. She was more
indignant than grieved, when she heard the charge which had been
brought against Reuben.

"The idea of such a thing!" she exclaimed. "These constables don't
seem to have natural sense. The idea of charging anyone who is
known as a respectable young man with such a thing as that, and
shutting him up without a question. Why, there can't be any
evidence against you."

"There's no saying, mother," Reuben replied. "You mustn't be too
sure of that. Don't you remember that affair of the dog? Well, the
same hand is at work now. Before, I only suspected who had done it;
but I am sure now. However, whatever evidence they may have got, we
know it isn't true. I have four years' good character here to speak
for me. Still, it is hard that I should get into positions of this
sort, without any fault of mine."

"It's better that it is without any fault of yours, Reuben."

"That is right enough, mother, so we will both keep up our
spirits."



Chapter 4: The Trial.


There were three magistrates on the bench on the following morning,
when Reuben was brought up. The justice room was crowded, for the
series of burglaries had caused some excitement; and the news that
the house of Mr. Ellison had been broken into, and that one of the
men who had been taken turned out to belong to Lewes, had created
quite a sensation.

Mr. Ellison was the first to give his evidence. He testified that,
on waking on the previous morning, he found that someone had been
in his room during the night. He was not in the habit of locking
his door, and had not been awakened. He found that a box which
stood on the dressing table, containing some valuable jewelry, was
gone; that his watch and that of Mrs. Ellison had been taken; that
the drawers had been opened, and a case containing the more
valuable jewels of his wife had also been abstracted. This was not
discovered till afterwards. He first missed his watch.

He rang the servants up, for it was still early; and it was then
discovered that the lower premises had been broken into, the plate
chest in the butler's pantry broken open, and a large quantity of
plate stolen.

"What do you estimate the value of the articles stolen, Mr.
Ellison?"

"The value of my wife's jewels I should put down, roughly, at two
thousand pounds; the silver plate might have been worth three
hundred more; the watches and other articles, so far as I yet miss
them, say another hundred."

The servants proved that they found the kitchen window open, on
going downstairs. It had been opened by the catch being forced
back. It was not the custom to put up shutters. The pantry door,
which was a strong one, had been cut with a saw round the lock. The
butler testified to the plate having been safe, the night before,
and the strong chest in which it was kept having been forced open.

Directly it was discovered, the constable of the village was placed
in charge of the room, with orders to admit no one; and a man on
horseback was sent off to Lewes, to the chief constable. The
village constable gave evidence as to the state of the place, when
he was put in charge.

The constable who had been sent over from Lewes then stepped into
the witness box. He testified to the marks of entry of the thieves,
and said that the manner in which they had gone to work, and in
which the door had been sawn through, and the chest forced open,
seemed to show that it was the work of practised hands. On
examining closely the butler's pantry, he found a powerful
screwdriver and a heavy chisel. These corresponded to marks in the
lid, and had evidently been used for the purpose of forcing it
open. They had the initials "R W." burnt in the handles. The
inmates of the house all denied any knowledge of these tools.

Mr. Ellison had been present when he showed them to Mrs. Ellison.
On looking at them she said at once:

"R. W. Why, that must be Reuben Whitney, that wicked boy, again."

Upon making inquiries, he found that the man named worked at Mr.
Penfold's, the mill wright at Lewes. He returned there at once and,
going to Mr. Penfold, found the prisoner was absent from work. The
men identified the brand on the tools as that of the prisoner.
Another constable proved the arrest.

The chief constable then read the statement that the prisoner had
made to him. The magistrates conferred together for a few minutes,
in an undertone.

"Mrs. Ellison," the senior of them said, addressing that lady, who
was sitting on a chair placed at the upper end of the court, "we
are sorry to trouble you, but we must ask you to go into the
witness box.

"I wish to ask you," he went on, when she had taken her stand in
the box, "how it was you at once connected the initials with the
prisoner?"

"Because he had at one time lived in the village, and was employed
assisting our gardener. He was discharged on suspicion of having
poisoned a watchdog which had bit him; and as the three dogs about
the place had all been poisoned, on the night when the house was
broken into, his name had been in my mind and, on seeing the
initials, I naturally recognized them at once."

There was a deep silence in the court, when Mrs. Ellison gave her
evidence. Hitherto the impression had been rather favourable to the
prisoner. His story, though strange, had been by no means
impossible and, if true, would have completely accounted for the
finding of the tools, which were the only evidence against him. The
evidence of Mrs. Ellison, however, entirely altered the complexion
of the case.

Reuben had stood, quiet and composed, during the hearing. His
countenance had evinced no surprise or emotion, when the tools were
produced. He had, indeed, upon thinking the matter over before
coming into court, come to the conclusion that the tools, which he
had in a small basket at the time he was attacked, had been found
in or near the house; having been left there purposely, by Tom
Thorne, in order to throw suspicion upon him. Their production,
therefore, was no surprise to him.

A slight shade had passed over his face when Mrs. Ellison entered
