whispered, "There, now it's all right, come along and forget all about
it."

But that was just what Kate could not do; and the longer she thought
about it, the more miserable she grew.  They went for a walk in the
grand old park, which Kate would have enjoyed immensely at any other
time, but conscience was reproving her for this misspent Sabbath, and
then the loss of her money almost distracted her, for she was to
receive her salary from Mrs. Maple by the quarter, and so it would be
nearly three months before she had another penny she could call her own.

"Oh, dear, I wish I had never come," sighed Kate.

"It's no use crying over spilt milk," said Marion; "so cheer up for a
little while, and let us be jolly."  And she took her cousin and led
her on to the rest of the party, for Kate had preferred to drop behind
and indulge her gloomy thoughts alone.

"Here, William!" she said, "try and cheer her up a bit, she feels dull
about losing her purse."

The young man tried to "cheer her," as he had been directed, but it was
not any easy task.  He was not the sort of companion Kate had been used
to, and could talk of little but music-halls, and theatres, and the
last popular song, and singers--things which Kate knew nothing about,
and could not interest her just now; so that the afternoon passed
slowly away.

They were leaving the Park now, and Bella was declaring that she must
have some tea before she went home.

"Well, then, I'll sit down on this seat," said Kate, "and you can come
for me when you are ready to go home," and Kate went over to the seat,
but was closely followed by the rest.

"Come, come, we can't allow this, you know," said her self-constituted
guardian, William; "you are under my charge, and you must come and have
some tea."

"Oh, do please leave me alone; I shall feel better here," pleaded Kate.

"Nonsense, Kate, a cup of tea will do you good," said Bella impatiently.

"But you forget I have lost my purse, and have no money to pay for it,"
replied Kate, a little bitterly.

"But I told you that did not matter," interposed the young man again;
"my purse is at your service.  I will give it you, if you like--if you
will only laugh and chat as you did on board the steamer."

Kate smiled, and thanked him, but declined to accept either purse or
tea from him.

"You are almost a stranger to me, and I feel vexed that you should have
had to pay for my steamboat ticket," she said.

"Oh, Kate, how rude you are," said Marion, crossly; "there, come along
to tea, and I will pay for it, if you will not accept William's
kindness."

"I cannot," said Kate; "and I would much rather stay here than go to a
tea I cannot pay for."

"Well, you shall pay me back, if you like--if that will satisfy you,"
said Marion, impatiently; and Kate reluctantly rose from her seat, and
followed the rest, who had already turned in the direction of the park
gates.

Marion and the rest seemed to enjoy their tea, and laughed and chatted,
and tried to rouse Kate into something like merriment too, but Kate
felt too anxious and unhappy to laugh at anything--even the poor jokes
and witticisms of William although they were made for her special
benefit and which afforded her so much amusement when they first
started.

"Really, Kate, it is too bad of you to let your loss spoil the fun for
everybody," said Marion, reproachfully, as they turned towards the
steam-boat pier once more.

"I don't want to spoil your fun, I only want you to leave me alone,"
said Kate, crossly.  And Marion did leave her alone for the rest of the
evening, but her self-appointed friend would not.  He paid her
steamboat fare back, and talked to her assiduously as he had done
during the afternoon, but with little better success, and Kate was
thankful when the miserable day came to an end, and she was once more
in the little bedroom she shared with Marion.

"And do you really mean to say, Kate, that you took out all the money
you possessed?" said her cousin, as she began to undress.

"Yes.  I know it was very foolish," sighed Kate.

"How much was there altogether?" asked her cousin.

"Nearly six shillings."

"Oh, well, that wasn't much," said Marion, rather contemptuously, "and
I daresay you will be able to manage until your mother sends you some
more."

"I shall not ask mother--I'll wait until Mrs. Maple pays me my wages."

"Say salary, my dear, that is more genteel," said Marion.  "But how are
you going to manage for your letters; and you'll want new neck-ribbons,
and that bonnet will never last you three months."

"It must, and I shall have to do without neck-ribbons.  There, don't
bother me to-night," concluded Kate.

"I don't want to bother you, and you are a goose to bother and worry
yourself as you do about trifles.  Most girls would have forgotten the
loss of a paltry purse when they had a nice-looking young man like
William so kind to them.  You must make it up to him, you know; he will
expect it," said Marion.

Kate lifted her head, and looked at her cousin but Marion turned her
head aside.

"Make it up to him.  What do you mean, Marion?  Of course I shall pay
the shilling I owe him for my steamboat fare, I told him so when I said
'good-night.'"

"You did!  How can you be so rude or so stupid, which is it?  Don't you
know they like to pay for us, if they can get the chance.  I let them
do it sometimes; it pleases them, and don't hurt me."

"What, when you have the money in your pocket, and can pay for
yourself?" exclaimed Kate, in astonishment.

"Yes; why shouldn't they spend their money if they like it; and
besides, I make it up to them," added Marion.

"How do you do that?" asked Kate.

But Marion did not answer.  She began to feel half sorry she had told
her cousin as much as she had.

"How do you make it up to them?" repeated Kate.

"Oh, don't bother me to-night, I'm tired.  Keep your eyes open, and
you'll see for yourself," concluded Marion, as she got into bed.

Kate kneeled down, as she always did, for the habit of prayer was too
strong to be broken all at once.  She felt ashamed and unhappy as she
kneeled down, and she wished she could pray as her mother and teacher
had often told her--pouring out her whole heart before God.  Poor,
foolish Kate, she had read often enough those words, "Be careful for
nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication, let your
requests be made known unto God;" and yet she was afraid to bring this
trouble to Him.

Her thoughts were also running on her cousin's last words, and after
she got into bed, she said again:

"I wish you would tell me how I can make it up to William--about that
shilling, I mean; it will be such a long time for him to wait before I
can pay it."

"I should think it would, if you mean to wait until you take your
salary," said Marion, impatiently.

"Well, then, tell me what I can do besides.  How do you make it up when
they pay shillings for you?"

"Keep your eyes open, and you'll see for yourself some day.  But you'd
better shut them now and go to sleep, or you won't be able to keep them
open at the right time," concluded Marion, as she turned round to put
an end to the talk.

But after a minute or two, Kate said, "You might tell me when it is the
right time to keep them open, Marion."

"Oh, don't bother; go to sleep.  Haven't you heard 'there's tricks in
every trade'?"

"I don't know; perhaps I have."

"Well, then, keep a sharp look-out, and you'll soon learn the tricks of
ours."  And Marion was soon fast asleep; but it was a long time before
Kate could close her eyes, for conscience was at work again, urging her
to tell her mother of her loss, and all that led to it.  But Kate was
afraid.  She could not bear to forfeit her mother's good opinion, and
make her anxious.  She might even send for her to come home, and Kate
did not like the idea of that at all.  She was very comfortable in this
"old-fashioned place," as everybody called it, and not at all inclined
to go back to a quiet country life.




CHAPTER V.

DISCLOSURE.

"Can you oblige me by putting this bill in the window Miss?" asked a
pleasant-looking young woman, who often came into the shop for a loaf
or a few buns.

"I daresay we can," said Kate, taking the bill and reading it.  It was
the announcement of a tea-meeting at a Sunday school in the
neighbourhood, and Kate forthwith determined to speak to this young
woman when she came in again, and ask her if there was a Bible-class
there for elder girls and young women.

"Look here, Marion," she said, holding up the bill to her cousin, "I
suppose I can put this into the window?"

"I suppose you can, but I shouldn't; I should throw it under the
counter!" said Marion in a tone of contempt.

"But why?" asked Kate.

"Well, we can't put in all the bills that are brought, and so I never
put that Sunday-school rubbish anywhere but under the counter."

"Well, I shall put it in the window," said Kate, decidedly, and as she
had charge of the one where the piles of loaves where placed, she put
it in the most conspicuous corner.  "I did not know there was a
Sunday-school so near," she went on; "I shall ask that young person
when she comes in again if they have got a nice Bible-class there.
Perhaps she goes to it herself, and would take me with her for the
first time."

"You seem to forget Mrs. Maple's rule about making friends of the
customers," said Marion quickly.

"So do you, I should think," retorted Kate.

"I am not a new hand: I have been here some months, and know the ways
of London better than a country girl," replied Marion.

"Well, I don't believe Mrs. Maple would mind me speaking to this young
woman about a Bible-class; you don't know anything about it, and I must
ask someone.  She would not mind it so much as our talking to those
young men as we do."

"Well, ask her and see!" said Marion, scornfully.

"I've a great mind to," said Kate.

"Do; go now!  Kate, you are the greatest simpleton that ever came to
London, I think.  I do believe you would go and ask this, as though you
were afraid your tongue was not your own.  Talk to her if you like,
only don't grumble any more about me talking to my friends, as you do
sometimes."

If Kate had only known it, Mrs. Maple would readily have granted a
breaking of her rule in favour of this customer, for she knew her to be
a good, industrious young woman, who would influence her aright; for
although not a Christian herself she had a great respect for those who
were, and knew they were the most trustworthy and reliable in business.

But Kate was laughed out of her intention of speaking to Mrs. Maple
