
Wouldn't do again.  She'd get Ladislaw to help her out.

"Tie up Ladislaw and Hashford too."

We weren't numerous or strong enough to do it.

"Let's all bolt," suggested Flanagan.

They'd send the police after us.  Or if they didn't, how were we to get
on, without money or shelter or anywhere to go?

"Suppose," said I, "we shut them out of the schoolroom and barricade the
door, and don't let them in till they accept our terms."

"That's more like it," said some one; "but then what about food?  We
can't store enough, even if we emptied the larder, to stand a long
siege."

"Well, then," said Smith, "suppose we screw them up, and don't let them
out till they give in."

"That's it," said every one, "the very thing."

"What do you say, Hawkesbury?" inquired I.

"Well," said he, smiling pleasantly, "it's not a nice thing to turn
against one's master and mistress; but really Miss Henniker has been
very vexing lately."

"Hurrah! then you agree?"  And the question was put all round, every one
assenting.  At least so I thought.  But Smith as usual was doubtful of
Hawkesbury.

"You agree, Hawkesbury?" said he.

"Really," said the other, with a smile, "it isn't nice to be suspected,
Smith.  Isn't it enough to say a thing once?"

"Oh yes, yes," cried out every one, impatiently, and most anxious to
keep the meeting harmonious.  "He said he did, Smith; what more do you
want?  Do let's pull all together."

"Just what I want," said Smith.

"Well," said Philpot, "I propose we lock them up in the big schoolroom."

"Wouldn't it be better," said Flanagan, "to lock the Henniker up in her
own room, and let Ladislaw and Hashford have the parlour?  It will be
more comfortable for them.  There's a sofa there and a carpet.  Besides,
the window's a worse one to get out of."

"How about feeding them?" some one asked.

"That'll be easy enough," said Smith.  "There's a ventilator over all
the doors, you know.  We can hand the things in there."

"I vote the old Hen gets precious little," interposed Rathbone.  "I
wouldn't give her any."

This idea was scouted, and it was resolved that all the prisoners should
have a sufficient, though, at the same time, a limited amount of
provisions.  That being arranged, the next question was, when should we
begin?  We had to take a good many things into account in fixing the
important date.  To-day was Friday.  The butcher, some one said, always
brought the meat for the week on Monday; but the baker never came till
the Wednesday.  So if we began operations on Monday we should have a
good supply of meat but very little bread to start with; and it was
possible, of course, the baker might smell a rat, and get up a rescue.
It would be better, on that account, to defer action till after the
baker's visit on Wednesday.  But then the washerwoman generally came on
the Thursday.  We all voted the washerwoman a nuisance.  We must either
take her a prisoner and keep her in the house, or run the risk of her
finding out that something was wrong and going back to the village and
telling of us.

"If we could only keep it up a week," said Smith, "I think we could
bring them to terms."

"Suppose we drop a line to the washerwoman the day before not to call,"
suggested I.

The motion met with universal applause, and I was deputed to carry it
out at the proper time.  The good lady's address I knew was on a slate
in Miss Henniker's pantry.

"And I tell you what," said Smith, starting up with the brilliancy of
the suggestion; "let's hide away all the bread we can find, except just
what will last over to-morrow.  Then most likely she'll tell the baker
to call on Monday, and we can begin then!"

It was a brilliant suggestion.  Two of the company departed forthwith to
the larder, and unobserved hid away a few loaves in one of the empty
trunks in the box-room.

Our plans were ripening wonderfully.  But the most difficult business
was yet to come.  What terms should we require of our prisoners as the
price of their release?  And on this point, after long discussion, we
found we could not agree.  Some were for the immediate dismissal of the
Henniker; others demanded that she should not be allowed to speak
without special permission; and others that she should remain in her
parlour all day long, and come out only for prayers and to give orders
to the tradesmen.

These proposals were too absurd to take seriously; and as presently the
company began to grow a little quarrelsome over the matter, it was
decided for peace' sake that the question should be deferred, and terms
arranged when the prisoners themselves offered to give in.

"If I may make a suggestion," said Hawkesbury, who had taken no part in
the previous discussion, "it is that you should appoint one fellow
captain, and agree to obey his orders.  You'll never manage it if you
don't."

"Not at all a bad idea," said one or two.  "You be the captain,
Hawkesbury."

"No, thank you," said he, smiling gratefully.  "I really am not used to
this sort of thing; but I think Smith, now, would be just the fellow."

I considered this beautiful of Hawkesbury, coming so soon after Smith's
rather uncomplimentary behaviour to him.

The proposition was generally approved.  Smith was not a favourite, but
he had made the only suggestions of any real use in the present case,
and appeared to have entered into the scheme so warmly that it was
evident no one would make a better captain.

He received his new dignity with great complacency.

"I'll do my best," said he, "if you fellows will back me up and stick to
the engagement."

Our time was now getting brief, so after a few more hurried suggestions
and discussions we separated and returned to our ordinary duties.

That evening the Henniker was no better than she had been during the
day.  Her brief sojourn in society that afternoon had not improved her a
bit, Flanagan, as usual, suggested a plausible reason.

"I expect," whispered he, "she went after a new pupil and didn't hook
him; that's why she's in such a precious tantrum."

"Flanagan!" cried the well-known voice--"Flanagan, come here!"

Flanagan obeyed, and stood meekly before the tyrant.

"This is the eighth time to-day, Flanagan, I have rebuked you for
talking.  You are detained for the rest of the term.  Hold out your
hand, Flanagan!"

It was not often the Henniker inflicted corporal punishment herself;
when she did it was pretty smart, as Flanagan found.  In the absence of
a cane she had used the ruler, and as Flanagan--who unsuspectingly
supposed she was merely seized with a desire to inspect his nails--held
out his hand knuckles upwards, the ruler descended on his knuckles with
such force that the luckless youth howled for astonishment, and
performed a dance _solo_ in the middle of the floor.

We were sorry for him, yet we inwardly smiled to think how soon the
tables would be turned.

That night, just before we went to bed, as I was in the shoe-room
looking for my slippers, I had the satisfaction of hearing the Henniker
say to the kitchen-maid, "Matilda, we're getting short of bread.  Let
the baker know to call on Monday next week."

Things could not have promised better for our desperate scheme!



CHAPTER SEVEN.

HOW THERE AROSE A NOTABLE REBELLION AT STONEBRIDGE HOUSE.

Of course we were wrong; of course we were foolish.

But then, reader, please remember we were only boys goaded up to the
last pitch, and quite unable, as I have narrated, to stand the Henniker
any longer.

It was no game we were embarked on.  If you had seen the seriousness of
our faces as we inspected the parlour and reconnoitred the Henniker's
future prison, that Saturday; if you had heard the seriousness of our
voices as we solemnly deliberated whether nails or screws would be best
to use in fastening up the doors--you would have found out that,
"backward and troublesome" boys as we were, we could be in earnest
sometimes.

"Screwing's quieter," said Rathbone.

"Nailing's quicker," said Philpot.

"Isn't that a thing the captain had better decide?" softly suggested
Hawkesbury, turning to Smith.

I always got fidgety when the senior boy and my chum got near each
other.  Smith had such a way of firing up instinctively at whatever the
other might say, even when it meant no harm.

He flared up now with his eyes, and then turning to the two boys, said,
shortly, "Screws of course; that's been settled long ago."

Hawkesbury smiled gratefully, and said he was sure a matter like that
would not be overlooked.

Well, the Henniker went on having her fling that Saturday and Sunday.
We caught it right and left, and took it all meekly.  Nay, some of us
took it so meekly that I was once or twice afraid our secret would be
suspected.

The regulation-reading in the parlour on Sunday evening was a shocking
time for me.  I had no intention of being bad, but somehow, what with
the excitement of our scheme, and the dreariness of the reader's voice,
and the closeness of the room, I fell asleep and nearly rolled off my
form.

The Henniker put down her book.

"Batchelor," said she, "you shall be punished.  Stand on the form and
read aloud."

And so saying, she handed me the book and pointed to the place.

This was the very refinement of torture, and I draw a veil over the sad
spectacle which followed.  Nor was I the only victim standing there
struggling and perspiring through the long sentences, turned back
whenever I made a mistake, to begin the page over again, till the end of
the chapter seemed to get farther and farther away; the other boys, too,
came in for part of the tragedy, for the Henniker, being now free of her
book, had no occupation for her eyes but to glare at them, and no
occupation for her tongue but to level bad marks and rebukes and
punishments at the head of every offender.

"Reading" lasted that evening until ten o'clock, and to this day I
cannot imagine how it ever came to an end even then.  I know I never got
to the end.  This sad experience gave a considerable additional zest to
our hopes of freedom on the following day.

Smith was not the sort of fellow to undertake what he did not mean to
carry through, and I was astonished to see how carefully his plans were
laid, and how precisely he had allotted to every one of us our
respective duties.

Monday dawned at length, and we rose from our beds like patriots on the
morning of a battle which is to decide their freedom or slavery.

I had two minutes' whisper with Smith as we went down to breakfast.

"Tell the fellows," said he, "that the signal to begin will be just when
morning school is over.  The Hen goes to get ready for dinner, and
Shankley and Philpot are to follow and screw her up.  The holes are
already bored, so it won't take long."

"Suppose she yells," suggested I.

"Not likely, but if she does--her room's far enough away.  Oh! by the
way, I've screwed her window already.  I thought we can one of us easily
smash a pane for her if she wants more ventilation."

"And how about Ladislaw and Hashford?"

"I'm going down, when the Henniker's safe, to ask them both to step up
into the parlour.  They'll probably think something's wrong, and hurry
up.  (I've screwed that window, too, by the way.)  Then you and Rathbone
are to screw their door when they are safe in--I've put the key outside,
too--and I've told the other fellows to be ready to bring a lot of desks
and things out of the schoolroom and pile them up, in case they kick too
hard."

"Upon my word, Jack, you're a regular general.  But I say, we've
forgotten the two servants."

"No, we haven't.  I've told them what's up, and they won't interfere;
but--shut up now."

During the morning we continued to pass round word what the arrangements
were, and waited feverishly for the close of morning school.  As we sat
in the class-room we had the satisfaction of seeing first the butcher's
pony and then the baker's cart drive up the front garden and drive back
again.  We were all right for the "sinews of war" for a day or two,
anyhow!

The Henniker kept it up till the last, and distributed her favours
lavishly and impartially all round.  But we heeded it not; we even
enjoyed it, for were not we to have our innings next?

It seemed as if morning school would never end.  At last a fluttering at
our hearts, more convincing even than the clock, told us the hour was
come.  We rose from our seats.  The rebellion at Stonebridge House had
begun.

The Henniker marched with stately tread from the room, and up the stairs
to her own apartment.  It seemed a long journey to us, who sat listening
in breathless silence, and at last the closing of her door seemed to
resound all over the house.

"Now then," said Smith to Shankley and Philpot, who, with their shoes
off and their tools in their hands, stood ready, like two trained
assassins, for the word of command.  "Now then, and keep quiet, whatever
you do!"

They went.  There was nothing stately about their march.  They darted up
the stairs two steps at a time, and the last we saw of them was as they
turned the corner into the passage, at the end of which was situate the
enemy's fortress.

It seemed a year before they returned!

At last Shankley, with beaming face, burst into our midst.

"It's all right!" said he, in an excited whisper.  "She sounded a little
like kicking, so Philpot's keeping guard.  We had one screw half in
before she even heard us."

"What did she say then?" asked three or four eager questioners.

"She wanted to know who was there, and if we wanted to speak to her we
must wait till she came down, and a bad mark to whoever it was for
coming and disturbing her."

There was a general laugh at this, which Smith hurriedly checked.

"The thing's only half done yet," he said.  "Time enough to laugh when
the other two are safe."

This was a wise rebuke, and we became serious in an instant.

"Now," said Smith, "have you got the screwdriver and screws all right,
Batchelor?  The rest of you be ready if I call;" and off he went to
summon the two masters to the parlour.

It was a critical moment, for every thing depended on our getting both
into the room together.

Smith, so he told us afterwards, found both Mr Ladislaw and Mr
Hashford talking together in the study of the former.  He entered the
room suddenly, and crying, in an agitated voice, "Oh, will you both
please step up to Miss Henniker's parlour at once?  Please be quick!" as
suddenly vanished.

Of course both the masters, making sure Miss Henniker must be in a fit,
or else that the house must be on fire, rushed upstairs, gallantly side
by side, to the rescue.  Rathbone and I, who were in hiding behind the
door next to that of the parlour, could hear them scuttling towards us
along the passage, and making straight for their trap.  They rushed
wildly into the room.  In a moment we were out after them, the door was
slammed to, the key was turned, and the first screw was well on its way
home before they even found out that the beloved Henniker was not there!

Then, after a moment's pause (during which screw number two had started
on its way), the handle of the door was shaken, and Mr Hashford's voice
cried out, "Who is there?  What are you doing there, you boys?"

His only answer was a mighty cheer from the assembled pupils of
Stonebridge House, which must have been quite as explicit as the longest
explanation.

"Now then," cried Smith, as once more the handle of the door was
violently agitated; "look sharp, you fellows, with the desks--"

"Smith," cried the voice of Mr Ladislaw, from within; "you shall answer
for this, Smith.  Undo the door at once, sir."

But it had been agreed no parley should be held with the besieged, and
Smith's only answer was to help to drag up the first desk and plant it
firmly against the door.  The blockade was soon made, but until it was,
the fellows kept steadily and seriously to work.

Then ensued a scene I shall never forget, and which told significantly
as the most thrilling story what had been our privations and
persecutions and unhappiness at Stonebridge House.

The fellows yelled and rushed through the school as if they were mad.
They shouted, and sung, and halloed, and laughed.  They flung books and
rulers and ink-pots to the four winds of heaven.  They put the cane in
the fire, and one of the Henniker's reading books, which was lying in
the study, they tore into a thousand pieces.  They burst into every
forbidden nook and cranny of the house.  They rushed down to the kitchen
and up to the attics.  They bawled down the speaking-tube, and danced on
the dining-room table.  Nothing was omitted which could testify to their
glee at the new emancipation, or their hatred of the old _regime_.  They
held a mock school outside the Henniker's door, and gave one another bad
marks and canings with infinite laughter, by way of cheering up their
prisoner.

Finally the calls of hunger put an end to this strange demonstration,
and with a mighty stampede we made for the kitchen.  To our surprise, it
was empty.

"Why, where's the cook and housemaid?" cried one and another to Smith.

"Oh," said Smith, who with the cares of generalship upon him had taken
only a small part in the jubilation which had just been celebrated, "the
servants have gone home.  They both live at Felwick, so I said they
might take a week's holiday."

The coolness of this announcement was received with much laughter, in
the midst of which, however, Hawkesbury was heard to say, "I hope Smith
is a good cook, for really I can't eat my food raw."

This was certainly a matter we had not reckoned on, and the idea of raw
meat did cast a temporary shadow on our happiness.  But Smith replied,
"Oh, of course we do the cooking by turns.  By the way, Hawkesbury, you
and Flanagan have to see to that to-day."

Hawkesbury's smile left him for an instant.

"Nonsense; I'm not going to do anything of the sort."

"Then you'd better be the captain," said Smith glumly, "if you aren't
going to obey orders."

Hawkesbury's smile returned.

"Oh, if it's the captain's orders, of course.  Come along, Flanagan."

"Come along," said the jovial Flanagan; "I think we'll make a hash of it
with a vengeance!"

Whereat this little breeze blew over.  As a matter of fact, we all
assisted at the cooking of this celebrated meal, and made a terrific
hash of it, which, nevertheless, we relished greatly, and declared we
had never tasted such a dinner since we came to Stonebridge House.  No
more we had!

But amid our own feasting it would never do to forget our prisoners.
Three parcels were made, containing each a liberal helping of bread and
meat, with little parcels of salt and butter thoughtfully added.

"Write on them `For two days,'" said Smith, "and bring them up."

"How about water?" asked some one.

"There's enough in each room for a day or two," said Smith, who seemed
to have taken note of everything.

"I don't see the fun of feeding them up this way," said Rathbone.
"You'll never get them to give in as long as you make them so jolly
comfortable."

"I'd like to see how you liked it for two days," said Smith.  "I don't
suppose you'd think yourself overfed or jolly comfortable either.  But
come on; have you got the string?"

Each parcel was attached to a long piece of string, and conveyed in
state by the entire school to its respective destination.  The Henniker
was first fed.  Amid shouts of "Cheer, boys, cheer," and "Rule
Britannia," we marched up to her door and halted, while Smith, with the
aid of a rake, lifted the parcel on to the small ventilator above the
door, and gave it a little shove over the other side.

"Now lower away," said he to the boy who held the string.

"Smith, I hear your voice," cried the Henniker.  "Smith, open my door,
_please_."

Except for the last extraordinary expression the Henniker's voice
sounded much as usual.  No answer, of course, was given, and we waited
until the parcel should be detached from the string.

For about five minutes it remained untouched, during which period the
holder tried to attract the attention of the prisoner by sundry
spasmodic jerkings of the string.  At length the fish did bite.  Without
a word the parcel was detached from the string.  We turned to go.

"Plate, knife, and fork in the cupboard," cried out Smith, as we did so.

"You don't mean to say," said Rathbone, as we went along, "that you've
put a knife and fork for her?"

"Yes, I have," said Smith, in a manner which did not encourage the
truculent Rathbone to pursue the subject.

The feeding of the two masters was a longer process.  For to reach their
door it was necessary to climb over a perfect jungle of desks and chairs
piled up against it; and when reached it was discovered that the glass
ventilator, which usually stood open, had been shut and fastened inside.
But Smith was not to be baulked by a trifle.  He coolly broke the glass
with his rake, till he had made a hole big enough to admit the parcels,
which, one after the other, were lifted over the opening, and lowered
within reach of their respective owners.  In the present case the string
to which they were attached was double, so, when it was found that
neither was taken, Smith gave the order to "run" the string, and let
them drop the parcels off on to the floor.  This was done, and we were
turning to go, when Mr Ladislaw's voice rose in angry tones.

"Listen to me, boys," he cried, authoritatively.

A general yell was the only answer to this, mingled with loud laughter,
as Mr Hashford's head suddenly appeared at the broken ventilator.  The
apparition was the signal for a general fusillade of paper balls, in the
midst of which the usher modestly retired from observation.

The evening was spent in the same rollicking manner as the afternoon.
We held mock school in Mr Ladislaw's study, and got Flanagan to dress
up in an old gown of the Henniker's, which was found in the boot-room,
and enact that favourite character's part, which he did to the life.  We
also made out our own "reports" for home, and played a most spirited
game of croquet in the hall, with potatoes for balls and brooms for
mallets, besides treating our prisoners to a ravishing concert by an
orchestra of one dinner-bell, two dish-covers, two combs and paper, and
one iron tray.

We kept it up till rather late, and, indeed, it was not till Smith
summoned us to a council of war that the problem of how and where to
spend the night occurred to us.

"Some of us ought to stay up as sentinels," said our captain.

"Well, I can't, for one," said Philpot, "for I was never so sleepy in my
life."

"I should think," said Hawkesbury, sweetly, "if the captain stayed up we
should be quite safe."

Why _should_ Smith glare so whenever Hawkesbury spoke?  I wondered.  I'm
sure there did not seem to be anything offensive in this.

"I'll stay up, Jack," said I, more with a desire to avert a row than
because I felt particularly "spry."

"So will I," said Shankley, "if you'll dig me in the ribs when I get
sleepy."

"I'll tell you what," said Smith, after having recovered himself.
"Suppose we bring all the beds down and camp out on the landing."

This was carried with acclamation, and every one forthwith proceeded to
his dormitory, and reappeared staggering under the weight of his
bedclothes.  One monstrous bed was made in which we all "camped out" in
turn, one fellow only remaining awake as sentinel for an hour at a time.

"We shall have to settle to-morrow," said Smith, when he had returned to
"camp," after having gone the round and seen that all lights were out,
and all doors and bolts fastened--"we shall have to settle to-morrow
what to say to them about coming out, you fellows."

"I thought that was left to the captain," said Hawkesbury.

"I vote we stick out against the Henniker having anything to do with
us," said Philpot, "in or out of school."

"Yes, and do away with afternoon school and preparation too," said
Rathbone; "they are both nuisances."

"And get a holiday to go out of bounds once a week," said Flanagan in
the act of dropping asleep.

These sweeping schemes of reform, however, agreeable as they sounded,
seemed none of them likely to receive the assent of our prisoners.

Smith's idea was a good deal more moderate.  "I don't see that we can
stick out for more than leave to talk when we are not in class, and do
away with `detentions.'"

"That really seems hardly worth all the trouble," said Hawkesbury, "does
it?"

"It's left to the captain," said Smith, shortly, "and that's my idea, if
you agree."

"We ought to bargain they don't take any more notice of this affair, or
write home about it," suggested Shankley.

"Who cares what they write home?" scornfully inquired Smith.

"Ah, it may not matter to _you_," said Hawkesbury, smiling very sweetly,
"but to all the rest of us it does."

Smith glared at the speaker, and looked as if he was about to fly at his
throat; but he controlled himself, and merely replied, "Very well, then,
they are to promise not to say anything about it at home, as well as
give in on the other things.  Is that settled?"

Everybody said "yes," and shortly afterwards most of the mutineers were
peacefully asleep.

