"No, no!  Father wanted to come, but I begged not.  Everything is
arranged, and I don't want people looking on.  It will be a _hidjus_
ordeal!"

"Oh, my dear, come!  Don't exaggerate.  It's not so tragic as all that."

"Isn't it, then?  Don't be so grown-up and horrid!  How would _you_ like
it yourself, if anyone made the best of your having to teach Maud?"

That one trenchant question was sufficient to reduce Rowena to the
depths of silent despair, and the two sisters descended the staircase
with aspects equally lugubrious and mournful.

It was not a cheerful send-off, despite all the efforts of the family,
who stood shivering in the porch to wave farewells, and call out
encouraging prognostications so long as the motor remained in sight.
Dreda drew a big sigh of relief as they turned out of the drive, and
spun rapidly along the highway.  The necessity for keeping up a part was
over, and involuntarily she began softly whistling beneath her breath,
for in truth she was by no means so miserable as she had striven to
appear.

Novelty was the breath of Dreda's nostrils.  Any novelty to her was
better than none, and if the chance of returning to the house had at
that moment been vouchsafed, it is doubtful if she would have accepted
it at the cost of missing the excitements of the next few hours.

The car spun along strongly, so that the twenty miles' distance was
speedily covered, and before Etheldreda was half-way through her dreams
it had turned in at a gate, and there before her eyes lay Grey House, a
square, pretentious-looking building, with a door in the middle and a
stretch of three windows on either side.  There, also--oh! thrilling and
exciting moment--pressed against the panes of an upper window were a
number of round white discs, which must obviously be the faces of pupils
watching the advent of the new girl!

Dreda sat up, and throwing back her golden mane, tossed a laughing
remark to her mother--the first she had volunteered since leaving home,
and showed her white teeth in a determined smile.  If she were fated to
arrive at all, she would arrive as a conqueror who would be regarded
with envy and admiration.  Privately, she might consider herself a
martyr, but that was not a role in which she chose to appear before
other people.  She was smiling as she entered the drawing-room after her
mother, smiling as Miss Bretherton came forward to greet them, smiling
still, a forced, fixed smile, as she listened to the conversation
between the two ladies.

"Hope we shall be very happy together--"

("I shan't.  I don't like you a bit!  Scraggy, cross-looking thing!
Your nose looks as if it would cut!")

"...Dreda is fond of society.  She will enjoy working with other girls!"

("Shan't, then!  I shall hate it.  I should have enjoyed it in Paris.")

"...Beginnings always are a little difficult; but young people _soon_
adapt themselves!"

("It's easy to talk!")

After a few minutes passed in the exchange of these and similar
commonplaces, Mrs Saxon rose to depart.  On a previous visit she had
been shown over the house, and had seen the room where her daughter was
to sleep, and now her presence would only prolong the agony.  She cast a
look at her daughter, full of yearning mother love and sympathy; but
Dreda was smiling still, her grey eyes wide open, her very gums showing
in the unnatural stretching of her lips.  She submitted to be kissed,
but offered no caress in return, and turned with a nonchalant air to
examine the photographs on the mantelshelf, while Miss Bretherton
escorted her mother to the door.

They were all photographs of girls--old girls who had left school and
could afford to be amiable and forgiving.  One wore a cap and gown and
was evidently a crack pupil who had won honours at college; another held
a baby on her knee--she was pretty, and had married young; a third
supported her head on her hand and stared dreamily into space; another
posed against a screen.  Dreda stared at them with eyes that grew misty
and unseeing, as the motor puffed down the drive.  Now she was alone--
away from home for the first time in her life!  Miss Bretherton was
coming back--Miss Bretherton with the thin face and the sharply pointed
nose.

The door opened; the photographs looked mistier than ever; Miss
Bretherton's voice sounded from an immense distance, saying in cheery
tones:

"Now I am going to take you upstairs to see your room, Etheldreda.
Susan Webster and Nancy West will share it with you.  Susan you know
already--a delightful girl; and Nancy is equally charming.  Most of the
girls returned last night, but we have not yet settled into regular
work: it takes a little time to arrange the classes.  Are your boots
quite clean?  Better rub them once more on the mat!  Pupils are not
allowed to ascend the staircase in outdoor shoes."

She led the way forward, while Dreda followed, looking about with
curious eyes.  The carpet lasted only so long as the stair could be seen
from the hall beneath, and was then replaced by oil-cloth, worn to a
colourless drab by the tramp of many feet.  On the first storey a narrow
passage ran the whole length of the house, and innumerable doors seemed
to open on each side.  The murmur of voices could be heard from within,
as one passed these closed portals; but one of the number, labelled
Number 5, was not quite shut, and Dreda had a shrewd suspicion that it
opened an inch or two wide as she passed by.  Probably it gave entrance
to the room from which faces had stared out on the drive; probably the
same curious faces were peering forth through that crack at this very
moment.

The bedroom bore a bleak look, despite the fact that the furniture was
all in threes--three narrow beds, three washstands, three chests of
drawers--topped by miniature mirrors--and three small cane-seated
chairs.  Each of the three inmates had a portion of the room to herself,
and against the wall stood two folding screens, evidently designed to
insure privacy.  Dreda noted with dismay that the two ends of the room,
the one next the window and the one next the door, already bore signs of
occupation.  Her brow clouded, and instead of the usual polite remarks
of approval, out shot an impetuous question:

"Have I to take the middle?  I'd rather have an end!"

"Susan and Nancy have occupied the same beds for the last year.  All are
equally comfortable."

"There ought to be three screens.  I want two to shut myself in.
Suppose one of the others didn't want hers up!"

"Why suppose disagreeables, my dear?  It is a great mistake.  I feel
sure your companions will consider your comfort as thoughtfully as their
own.  Hang your jacket on the pegs; then you can come to your classroom,
to be introduced to your companions.  Take off your hat."

Dreda pulled a face in the mirror.  She felt cross and ill-used.  At
home she was accustomed to a big, beautiful room all to herself; she did
not at all enjoy the prospect of owning a third of this chill grey
dormitory.  She took off her hat--conscious that Miss Bretherton's eyes
were regarding the tomato-topped pin with silent disapproval--wriggled
out of her coat, and bestowed a series of pats and pulls to hair,
necktie, and blouse.  Being one of the happy people who feel cheered
rather than depressed by the sight of her own reflection in the glass,
she followed the head mistress downstairs without any of the
trepidations of nervousness which afflict most new girls, and was by no
means surprised when that lady made straight for the doorway of Number
5.

It opened, and six girls were discovered seated before a table, wearing
expressions of preternatural solemnity.  One of the number wore
spectacles; a second had a broad band of metal over her front teeth; a
third had red hair and a thick powdering of freckles; "The Currant Buns"
wore dresses of yellowy-brown tweed, which in Dreda's eyes made them
appear "bunnier" than ever.  So much was taken in by the first lightning
glance, as at the appearance of Miss Bretherton the girls leapt
mechanically to their feet and stood stolidly at attention.

"Girls, this is your new companion, Etheldreda Saxon.  She is to share
Number 20 with Susan and Nancy, and I expect will be in the fourth form.
You had better leave your books and have a little chat beside the fire,
until Miss Drake is ready.  You may tell her that I gave you
permission."

She left the room and shut the door behind her, and Dreda was left face
to face with her new companions.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

For a moment the six girls retained their former positions, staring with
blank, expressionless faces at the new comer.  Then Mary Webster, the
eldest of the "Currant Buns," advanced with outstretched hand, followed
by her two younger sisters.

"How do you do?"

"How do you do?"

"How do you do?"

"So glad to see you."

"So glad--"

"Very glad--"

The murmurs died into silence, while Dreda smiled a radiant
encouragement.

"Quite well, thank you.  But rather cold.  May we poke the fire?  My
feet--"

She tapped expressively on the floor, whereupon Mary Webster poked
discreetly at the fire and Susan, the youngest of the sisters, pushed a
chair into the cosiest corner.  The other three girls had come forward
by this time, and introduced themselves in due form.

"How do you do?  I'm Barbara Moore.  It's hateful to be a new girl!"

"How do you do?  I'm Norah Grey.  Sorry you're cold."

"How do you do?  I'm Nancy.  Tell me truthfully--_Do you snore_?"

Dreda laughed gaily.

"Sometimes--when I lie on my back.  I do it on purpose, because you
dream such thrilling dreams.  And I yell horribly when I come to the bad
bits."

"Something will have to be done!" said Nancy, darkly.  She was the girl
with the band over her front teeth.  It was ugly, but fascinating; one
felt constrained to look at it, and looking at it could not help
noticing how curved and red were the lips, how darkly lashed the long
grey eyes.  Nancy was evidently a person to be reckoned with.  She sat
herself down by the fire, stretched out her feet to the blaze, and
appeared to be lost in thought.  Dreda longed to talk to her, to inquire
what she meant by that mysterious "something," but the "Currant Buns"
were clustering round her, regarding her with anxiously proprietary airs
as if, having the honour of a personal acquaintance, it was their due to
receive the first attention.  Dreda felt quite like a celebrity, on the
point of being interviewed by a trio of reporters; but as usual she
preferred to play the part of questioner herself.

"Were you doing prep when I came in?  What classes are you taking to-
day?  I feel as if I've forgotten everything.  One always does in the
holidays, doesn't one?  Such a bore having to grind through it all
again.  Seems such a waste of time."

"Have you a bad memory?  Miss Drake, our English governess, is
especially clever at developing the powers of memory.  And holiday tasks
are so useful, too; don't you find them so?  It is impossible to forget,
if one has to study for an elaborate thesis."

"The--what?" questioned Dreda blankly.  "But whoever _does_ study in the
holidays?  I don't!  If you did, they wouldn't be holidays.  So stupid!
Holidays are for rest and fun.  Bad enough to have lessons for two-
thirds of the year.  One's brain must have _some_ rest!"

She ended on quite an indignant note, and her companions stared at her
with a mingling of admiration and dismay.  Such a vivid bit of colouring
had not been seen for many a long day in that neutral-tinted room.
Yellow hair, pink cheeks, red lips, blue dress--she was positively
dazzling to behold.  The two younger Miss Websters appeared absorbed in
admiration, but the eldest and cleverest-looking of the three pursed up
her lips with an air of disapproval and said primly:

"It depends upon one's _idea_ of rest, doesn't it?  Leisure may mean
only a time of amusement, but it's a rather poor conception of the word.
The ancient Greeks understood by it a time of _congenial_ work, as
distinguished from work which they were obliged to do.  Their necessary
work was undertaken in order that they might obtain a time of leisure,
but when it came, instead of wasting it in foolish and passing
amusement, they used it to strengthen their intellect and to store up
ennobling thoughts."

"How did they do that, pray?"  Dreda put the question with the air of
one launching a poser, but Mary Webster showed no signs of discomfiture.

"They used to meet together in little companies, and discuss the deepest
and most important topics of the day--"

"I expect they gossiped horribly!"

"And they watched the dramas--"

"I call that amusement!  I wouldn't mind doing that myself."

"But the Greek dramas were not light and vapid like modern plays.  They
dealt with serious subjects, and the audience often used to commit the
words to memory as a mental exercise."

Dreda yawned.

"Ah, well," she conceded indulgently, "it's a long while ago!  One
mustn't be hard on them, poor dears, for they knew no better.  I don't
approve of girls bothering their heads about ancient Greeks.  Boys have
to, for examinations, but if we want to grow up nice, domesticated women
it's better to learn modern things, and leave those old fusties alone.
They do one no good."

The girls stared at her in stunned surprise.  Agnes, the second Webster,
dropped her chin to an abnormal length; the youngest, Susan, bit
nervously at her lips; Mary cleared her throat and showed signs of
returning to the attack, but Dreda was already tired of the subject, and
made a diversion by leaping from her seat and approaching the table
where piles of blue-covered exercise books were neatly arranged at
intervals of about a yard apart.

"Let me look at your books, and see what you are doing!  I didn't bring
any books till I saw what you used.  I expect they will be the same.
All school books are.  I've got the ones Rowena used."  She broke off,
staring with dismay at the underlined questions which met her eye in one
of Agnes's neatly written books:

"_Characterise the work of Praxiteles, comparing it with that of
Phidias_."

"_Describe the Caryatids of the Erectheum_."

"_More_ Greeks!  How awful!  You seem saturated in Greece."  She threw
down the book impatiently and took up another.  "Write a short essay on
Chaucer (I know Chaucer!) and his times (When did he live?  Ages ago, I
know, for he couldn't spell), dwelling on (1) the state of society as
shown by the attitude of Wycliffe to the Pope, and the higher clergy;
(2) the peasants' revolt"--Dreda looked round with horrified eyes.
"_What_ a thing!  Do you often have essays like that?  Your governess
must be a man in disguise!"

"She is exceedingly clever and well read, and a most interesting and
original teacher."

"Humph!--I prefer the old school!  Our governess gives us essays on
Spring, and Happiness, and quotations from poetry.  They are far better,
for if you don't know anything, you can make it up.  You know the sort
of thing.  `One has often felt--' `Should we not all--' `At this season
of the year our hearts overflow--' I assure you I have often sat down
not knowing what on earth I was going to say, and have written _pages_!
That's far better for you than learning dull facts about people who were
dead and buried hundreds of years ago, because it exercises your
imagination and resource, and they are so useful for a woman.  Now, just
suppose you were married, and a lot of dull people were coming to
dinner--it would help you awfully if you'd been trained to make
conversation out of nothing!  And supposing you suddenly found that
there was nothing to eat, and you had to make a dinner out of scraps--
what would be most useful to you then, Greek history or a good,
resourceful brain?"

Mary and Agnes stared aghast, but the sound of a snigger came from the
fireplace where Susan stood meekly in the background, and a moment later
a ringing laugh drew all eyes to the doorway where stood a tall, bright-
haired girl, whose white teeth gleamed pleasantly through her parted
lips.

"Bravo!" she cried gaily.  "Bravo, my new pupil!  Very adroitly argued.
But suppose now that one of your dull diners happened to be an
enthusiast about Greece, and that its glories were the only subject on
which he was prepared to talk!  Suppose he spoke of the `Caryatids,' for
example, and you had no idea what the word meant--how would you keep up
your share of the conversation?"

"Quite easily.  I'd say--`Really!  How very interesting!  _Pray_ do go
on!'  Then he'd be charmed.  People always are charmed to go on
talking," declared Dreda smiling back with the utmost frankness into the
face of this bright, friendly stranger.

So this was the English governess of whose cleverness and
accomplishments she had heard so much!  She looked quite young--
ridiculously young; not many years older than Rowena herself.  Dreda had
expected to see an elderly, spectacled dame, thin and spare, with scant
locks dragged tightly back from her face.  In the dark depression of her
spirits she had thought it possible that she might even wear knitted
mittens, and have cotton wool in her ears.  Never for a moment had it
occurred to her that an accomplished finishing governess could be young
and pretty!

To judge from Miss Drake's expression she was experiencing very much the
