When the guns of the fleet were loaded, a pause ensued. The town
was evidently incapable of offering resistance, and it was hoped
that it would capitulate. The Burmese were seen standing at their
guns, but they also remained inactive, apparently paralysed at the
appearance of this great fleet of vessels--of a size hitherto
undreamt of by them--and the threatening guns pointed towards them.
However, they were at last goaded, by the orders and threats of
their officers, to open fire upon the ships.

The frigate at once replied with a broadside. In a very few
minutes, every gun on shore was silenced, and the Burmese fled in
confusion from their works. As soon as they did so, the signal for
disembarkation was made. The troops crowded into the boats, which
rowed for the shore; and the soldiers entered the town without
resistance, and found it completely deserted.

The whole of the population had been driven out by the governor on
the previous day and, according to Burmese custom, the men had all
been formed into a levy, while the women and children were held
under guard, as hostages for their husbands and fathers--their
lives being forfeited in case of desertion, or cowardice, by their
male relations.

The foreigners in the town had all been seized. They were few in
number, consisting of some eight or ten British traders and
American missionaries. These, after being fettered, were taken to
the Custom House prison. They were brought up and tried, early on
the morning of the attack, and were accused of having arranged the
assault on the town. They naturally urged that, if they had had the
least knowledge that it was going to be made, they would have left
the place in time. But the Burmese at once condemned them to death,
and they were taken back to the prison to be executed.

The sentence was not carried out. The Burmese had intended to
execute them on the walls, in sight of their countrymen; and the
authorities had all assembled at the prison for the purpose when,
fortunately, a shot from the first broadside fired passed through
the building, causing an instant stampede. The chiefs at once left
the city; and the prisoners, heavily chained, were marched some
distance into the country. A party of British troops were, however,
pushed forward in advance of the town, as soon as it was occupied;
and the guard, in alarm for their own safety, placed the prisoners
in a house and made off; and a patrol found them there, on the
following morning, and brought them into the town.

The great pagoda, standing two miles and a half from the town, was
at once occupied as an advanced position by the British. It stood
upon a conical hill, rising seventy-five feet above the plain. The
area on the top was somewhat over two acres; and in the centre rose
the pagoda, three hundred and thirty-eight feet high.

Every boat on the river was found to have been removed. In spite of
proclamations promising good treatment, none of the inhabitants
returned to the town, being prevented from doing so by the Burmese
authorities and troops. No stores whatever had been found and, till
the end of the wet season, the army had to depend entirely upon the
fleet for provisions; and remained cooped up in the wretched and
unhealthy town, suffering severely from fever and malaria.

The boat in which Stanley and the other prisoners were conveyed was
changed at every village going up the river, as the officer was
carrying the despatches from Bandoola to the court. A flag was
hoisted as the boat came in sight of a village. This was the signal
that another was required and, within two or three minutes of their
arrival, the prisoners, their guard and officer were on their way
again.

Thus they proceeded, night and day and, in four days, arrived at
Ava. Leaving the prisoners in charge of the guard, the officer at
once proceeded to the palace. In an hour guns were fired, drums
beat, and the bells of the pagodas rung, to give notice to the
population that a great victory had been won over the English, and
their army annihilated, by Bandoola and his valiant troops. This
obliterated the impression produced by the news that had arrived, a
few days previously, of the landing at Rangoon; and there were
great rejoicings among the population.

An officer from the palace presently came down to the boat, and the
prisoners were marched through the streets to a jail, amid the
jeers of the mob. Stanley was surprised at the meanness of the
town; the great majority of the houses being built of bamboo, and
thatched with grass, and having a very poor appearance. The public
buildings and the houses of the great officers were constructed of
planks, and tiled; but were heavy and tasteless, and it was only
upon the innumerable pagodas, in and around the town, that any care
seemed to have been bestowed.

He had wondered much at the numerous pagodas that they had seen,
near every town and village, as they passed up; but the officer had
informed him that these were all private property, and that it was
considered the most meritorious of actions to erect one;
consequently every man who had means to do so built a pagoda, large
or small in proportion to the sum that he could bestow upon it. On
Stanley's remarking upon the great number that were in ruins, the
officer replied that it was considered so much more meritorious an
action to build a pagoda than to repair one that, after the death
of the founder, they were generally suffered to fall into decay.

For some days the prisoners were taken out, every day, and marched
about the town for some time, so as to afford the population ocular
proof of the victory gained by Bandoola. The place in which they
were confined was small and filthy but, at the end of a week,
Stanley was taken out and placed in a room by himself; and here the
officer who had had charge of him paid him a visit, an hour or two
later.

"I have expressed to the court," he said, "the wishes of the
general, and have had permission accorded for you to receive
different treatment from the others; partly because you are an
officer, but principally because the general thinks that you may be
made useful to him. I have informed the officer of the prison that
you are to be at liberty to walk about in the city, when you
please; but that to protect you from violence, an officer and two
soldiers are to accompany you, so long as you may think such a
precaution necessary. I have ordered a dress of our fashion to be
brought to you as, otherwise, you could not go into the streets
without being mobbed."

Stanley expressed his gratitude to the officer for obtaining these
indulgences, and the latter replied:

"I acted upon the orders of the general, but it has been a pleasure
to me; for I see that you are a young man of merit, and I have
learned much from you about your people during the journey; and
have seen that, foolish as they have been to undertake to match
themselves against us, there are yet some things that might be
learned from them; and that, if they had remained in their island,
many months' journey away from here, they might have been worthy of
our friendship."

A short time after the officer had left, a soldier brought up some
food of a very much better nature than that with which Stanley had
been hitherto supplied. Half an hour later, the dress arrived. It
was that of a Burmese officer of inferior grade; and consisted of a
tunic of thick cloth, coming down to the knees; leathern sword
belt; a sort of tippet resembling that of an English coachman, with
three layers of cloth thickly quilted; and a leathern helmet going
up to a point in the centre, with a flap to protect the neck and
ears. With it were worn tight-fitting stockings of cloth, and low
shoes.

Presently an officer came in.

"I am ordered to go out with you, once a day, at whatever hour you
may desire. I am a relative of the officer who brought you here,
and he has requested me to look after your safety."

"I am much obliged to you, sir," Stanley said, "and shall be glad,
indeed, to go out to see the city. Your kinsman has kindly sent me
a dress; but if I am not to be noticed, it will be necessary for me
to stain my face and hands, somewhat."

"That I have thought of," the officer said, "and have brought with
me some dye which will darken your skin. It would be worse than
useless for you to dress as a Burman, unless you did so; for it
would seem even more singular, to the people in the streets, that a
white man should be seen walking about dressed as an officer, than
that a white prisoner should be taken through the streets under a
guard.

"I am ready to go out with you now, if you wish it."

"I shall be ready in a few minutes," Stanley replied and, on being
left alone, at once changed his attire and stained his face and
hands.

He had just finished when the officer returned. He smiled and said:

"There is no fear of your being suspected, now; and you might
really go about safely without a guard, unless you were to enter
into conversation with anyone. You speak the language very well,
but your accent is not quite the same as ours, here, though in
Aracan it would pass unremarked."

As they went out from the prison, the officer told two soldiers who
were waiting there to follow, at a distance.

"Do not approach us," he said, "unless I call you up."

The houses were not constructed in continuous rows, but were very
scattered, each house having its inclosure or garden. The
population was very small, in comparison to the area occupied by
the town. This was divided into two parts--the inner and outer
town. The whole was surrounded by a brick wall, five miles and a
half in circumference, some sixteen feet high and ten feet in
thickness, strengthened on the inside by a great bank of earth. The
inner town was inclosed by a separate wall, with a deep ditch on
two sides, the river Irrawaddy on the third, and a tributary river
on the fourth.

A considerable portion of the inclosed area was occupied by the
royal quarter; containing the palace, the court of justice, the
council chamber, arsenal, and the houses of the ministers and chief
officials. This was cut off from the rest by a strong and
well-built wall, twenty feet high, outside which was a stockade of
the same height. The total population of Ava was but 25,000.

The officer did not take Stanley to the royal quarter, observing
that it was better not to go there as, although he had leave to
walk in the town, it might give offence were he to show himself
near the palace; but after going through the wall, they visited two
or three of the markets, of which there were eleven in the town.

The markets consisted of thatched huts and sheds, and were well
supplied with the products of the country. Here were rice, maize,
wheat, and various other grains; sticks of sugar cane, tobacco,
cotton, and indigo; mangoes, oranges, pineapples, custard apples,
and plantains were in abundance; also peacocks, jungle fowl,
pigeons, partridges, geese, ducks, and snipes--but little meat was
on sale, as the Burman religion forbids the killing of animals for
food. Venison was the only meat allowed to be sold in the markets;
but there were lizards, iguanas, and snakes, which were exposed
freely for sale; and there were large quantities of turtle and
tortoise eggs, which had been brought up from the delta.

Stanley saw that there had really been no great occasion for him to
stain his skin, as the people were, for the most part, lighter in
colour than the Hindoos. Many of the men had, however, stained
their faces to a darker colour; and all were tattooed, more or
less. Men, women, and children were all smoking; and frequently,
when both hands were required for any purpose, thrust their cigars
into the large holes bored in the lobes of their ears. Both men and
women were somewhat short in stature, but squarely built and
muscular and, in the majority of cases, inclined to be fat.

The men wore a sort of kilt, consisting of a double piece of cloth,
wrapped round the body and falling to the knee. Over this was a
loose tunic, with sleeves open in front. The headdress was a scanty
white turban.

The dress of the women was somewhat similar to that of the Hindoos,
consisting of a single garment like a sheet wrapped round the body,
fastening under the arms and falling to the ankles. Those of the
upper classes were more elaborate. The rank among the women was
distinguished, so Stanley's guide pointed out to him, by the manner
in which the hair was plaited and twisted, and by the ornaments in
it.

The men, like the women, wore their hair long but, while the men
wore theirs in a knot at the top of the head, the women gathered it
in at the back. Their faces were broad at the cheekbones, but
narrowed in sharply, both at the forehead and chin. The narrow and
oblique eyes showed the relationship between the Burmese and their
Chinese neighbours. They seemed to Stanley a light-hearted, merry
people, going about their business with much chatter and laughter;
and the sound of musical instruments could often be heard, inside
the houses. Several men, in bright yellow garments, mingled with
the crowds in the market. These were priests, the officer told him;
and it would be a mortal act of sacrilege, were anyone else to wear
that colour.

Stanley remarked upon seeing so few soldiers, and the officer told
him that there was no regular army in Burma. Every man capable of
carrying arms was obliged to serve in case of war but, with the
exception of the king's bodyguard, and a very small body of men who
were police, rather than soldiers, there was no force permanently
kept up. Every man was expected to know something of military duty,
and all were able to build stockades. From the fact that the flesh
of wild fowl formed one of the principal articles of food, the
peasantry throughout the country were all accustomed to the use of
the gun, and were fair marksmen.

"But you yourself are an officer," Stanley said.

"At present, yes; but tomorrow I may return to my land. It is the
same with the highest minister. One day he may be a trader but, if
recommended to the king as one possessing ability, straightway he
is chosen to be a high official. If he does not please the king, or
fails in his duties, then the next day he may be selling cloth in
the bazaar again.

"Everything is at the will of the king. Nobody is born with fortune
or rank, for everything belongs to the king and, at a man's death,
all goes back to him. Thus everyone in the land has an equal
chance. In war the bravest becomes a general, in peace the
cleverest is chosen as a councillor."

Walking about, Stanley soon found that there were a great variety
of dialects talked in the streets, and that the language of the
Burmese of the coast, of the natives of Pegu and the central
province, and of those from districts bordering on the Shan states
or the frontiers of China, differed as widely as those of the most
remote parts of Great Britain did from each other. This being so,
he was convinced that there would be no difficulty, whatever, in
passing as a native, without attracting any observation or inquiry,
so far as the language went.

His features and, still more, the shape of his face might, however,
be noticed by the first comer, in the daytime. He thought, indeed,
that a little tinge of colour in the corner of the eyes, so as to
lengthen their appearance and give an oblique cast to them, would
make a difference. The general shape of the head was unalterable,
but the Burmese nose and mouth did not differ very greatly from the
European; except that the nostrils were smaller and, in shape, were
round rather than oval.

For three weeks he continued the same life, and then the Burmese
officer, with whom he had now become very friendly, said when he
entered one morning:

"You must not go out today. There is news that your people have
made two forward marches. The first was against a stockade, which
they took, and killed many of our men; the other time they marched
out four or five miles, had a fight with our troops, and again
killed many. These things have angered the king and the people. Of
course it is nothing, for our troops are only beginning to
assemble; but it is considered insolent in the extreme, and the
king's face is darkened against your countrymen. Four of the
prisoners have been taken out this morning and publicly executed
and, if the news of another defeat comes, I fear that it will be
very dangerous, even for you."

"What had I best do, my friend?"

"I would fain save you, for we have come to know each other; and I
see that there is much good in your ways, though they differ
greatly from ours. Were I to take you out, as usual, you might be
killed in the streets; were you to slip away and escape, I should
assuredly be put to death; but if in any way I can help you, I
would fain do so. My relation who brought you up here left, a
fortnight since, to rejoin Bandoola; so his influence cannot serve
you.

"I do not say that you might not escape from this prison--since you
are not, like the others, confined in a dungeon--but I see not what
you could do, or where you could go. Were you to disappear, orders
would be sent down the river to every village, and every passing
craft would be examined, and you would be sure to be detected;
while it would be well-nigh impossible to travel the country on
foot, for it is but thinly inhabited. There are often very long
distances between the villages, and much of the country is swamp
and forest, without paths; for the village trade goes by the river,
and they have little communication with each other.

"I know that, from what you say, you think that your troops will
beat ours, even when we assemble in large numbers. Were this so, I
fear that there would be little chance of your life being spared.
Were it not for that, I should say that, Bandoola having
recommended you, you would be in no danger here, and had better
remain until peace is made.

"What think you, yourself?"

"It is very difficult to reply, at once," Stanley said, "but I
thank you greatly for your offer to befriend me, in any way you
can. I do not say that I had not thought of escape, for I have of
course done so. But it seemed to me a thing in the distance; and
that, at any rate until the rains were over and the rivers had
sunk, it would be useless to attempt it. I see, now, that it will
be safest for me to try without delay. If you will come in again,
this afternoon, I will tell you what I have thought of."

"I will do so; and I, myself, will try to think how best the matter
can be managed. We must remember that the great thing is for you to
find concealment, for the present. After the search for you has
been made for some time, it will die away; and it will then be the
easiest plan for you to make your way down the river."



Chapter 4: A Ruined Temple.


After the officer left him, Stanley sat thinking for a long time.
He himself inclined strongly towards the river; but he saw that, at
present, the difficulties would be very great. The war boats were
passing up and down, and bodies of troops were being carried down
in large craft. In every village the men, he knew, were assembling
and drilling. Even in Ava he could see the difference in the
population, the proportion of men to women having markedly
decreased since his arrival.

As to the journey by land, it appeared to him impossible. He was,
too, altogether without money and, whether by water or land, it
would be necessary to go into the villages to buy provisions.
Indeed, money would have been almost useless, for there was no
coined money in Burma; payments being made in lead, for small
amounts, or in silver for large ones--the quantity necessary being
cut off from small sticks or bars, or paid in filings.

It seemed to him that the best thing would be to take to the
forest, for a time; and endeavour to subsist upon wild fruits or,
if these were not to be found there, to go out into the fields and
orchards at night, and so manage to hold on for a few weeks. His
friend told him that, in the forests along the principal lines of
route to the capital, were many bad characters--persons who had
committed crime and fled from justice. Some were cultivators who,
having been unable to pay their taxes, had deserted their land and
taken to the woods. All committed depredations, and traders coming
into the town from the Shan states, or from the country where
rubies and emeralds were found, always travelled in caravans for
mutual protection. At times levies were called out, and many of
these marauders were killed.

Stanley, then, had hit upon nothing definite when the officer
