farther and farther out into the cricket-field, and then headed a
cluster of the first-form boys who, unknown to the Doctor, were making
for the broken fence.  The fact that they soon saw the elephant's
pursuers pass through, and with them the bald-headed man, with their
fellow-pupils Glyn and Singh on each side leading, had doubtless
something to do with the forward movement.

Slegge, too, was the biggest and loudest there.  He was looking very
white, almost as white as Ramball's bald head, but he said it was all a
"jolly lark;" and then for want of something else to say to express how
he was enjoying himself, he made the same remark again, and then laughed
aloud.  But it was the same sort of laugh as would be uttered by the
victim of a practical joke who has suddenly sat down upon a tin-tack or
a pin.

Mr Morris, too, grew braver and braver, and he smiled a ghastly smile
which rather distorted his features as he addressed his pupils.

"Come along, boys," he said.  "This is a holiday indeed.  We are going
to search for the unknown quantity.  An elephant hunt in the Doctor's
grounds!  It is quite a novelty."

"But it isn't in the Doctor's grounds now, sir," said Burney.

This was meant to be facetious; but it turned Mr Morris's smile into a
glare, and brought down upon the boy's head a rebuke from Slegge.

"Here, don't you be so fast, youngster," cried the latter, with the
wisdom of a sage in his stern look.  "Just remember whom you are talking
to, if you please."  Then, to curry favour with the master, "I beg your
pardon, Mr Morris, would this be an Indian or an African elephant?"

"Well, Mr Slegge," said the mathematical master, with his ghastly smile
coming back, "now if this were a question of a surd in a compound
equation I should be happy to tell you; but as soon as the captive is
taken again, and the `lark,' as you call it, is over, I should recommend
you to ask Mr Rampson.  He'll tell you, and give you some information
as well respecting the Carthaginian army and the elephants with their
towers that they marched against the Romans.  My mathematical studies
take up all my brain-power, and I never venture upon another master's
ground.  By the way, who are those boys that we just saw walk through
that fence with the show-people?  Trespassers, of course.  We don't want
any of the town boys here.  No violence, mind; but I think you might
give them a lesson and turn them out."

"But they were the two new pupils, sir."

"What!  Severn and the Prince?"

"Yes, sir," came in chorus.

"Dear me!  The Doctor would be very angry if he knew.  He strongly
objects to his young gentlemen making friends with strangers."

"Yes, sir," said Burney; "and they have gone out of bounds."

"Will you keep your mouth shut?" whispered Slegge; and, dropping a pace
behind the master, he clenched and held up one fist very close to
Burney's nose as if it were a curiosity that the boy might like to see.

"Ah, well," said Mr Morris, "perhaps they thought that it would be the
safest place behind the elephant's keepers.  These tamed animals have a
great dread of the whip."

All was beautifully calm now out in the field.  The grass seemed greener
than ever.  There was an excited crowd in the main road by the damaged
hedge, and quite a cluster of pupils, masters, and servants up by the
house; but Morris and his little party were alone, and all seemed so
safe that they grew thoroughly brave, and quite nonchalantly edged their
way on towards the broken panel which looked temptingly clear.

All was still, and there was no suggestion of danger, while as they
slowly went close up there was no sound of voice.  It was perfectly
evident that the elephant must have been followed far away, and had
probably gone right on through the neighbouring grounds and made his way
somewhere out at the back.

They were approaching diagonally, and as they came very near to the
opening a curious electric kind of feeling such as is called by old
women "the creeps," manifested itself in what doctors term the "lumbar
regions" of every one's back.

But they were all very brave, and Morris suddenly became conscious of
the fact that the boys were all looking at him in a very questioning
way, so he could not help feeling that there were drawbacks to being the
leader of a party when there is possible danger somewhere ahead, and it
is impossible for the sake of one's credit to retreat.

This is especially the case in connection with dogs that are supposed to
be mad and have to be driven away, or in haunted rooms, and the walking
of ghosts and other vapours of that kind which a puff of the wind of
common-sense would always blow away.

Somehow or other, Morris began to talk very loudly to his young
companions as he screwed his courage up to the sticking-point, feeling
as he did that at all hazards he must go right up to that opening and
just look through.  And with this intent, followed not quite closely by
the boys, he went so near that he had but to take one more step to be
able to look through into the next field; in fact, he was in the act of
stretching out his hand to lay it upon one of the big oaken splints that
hung from its copper nail, when there was a sharp report as if a pistol
had been fired just on the other side, and in an instant the whole party
were in retreat.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Morris.  At least it was supposed to be a laugh;
but the sounds were very peculiar, and he looked strangely white as he
shouted, "Stop, boys, stop!  What are you afraid of?  It was only one of
those carter fellows who cracked his whip.--Well, my man," he continued,
in a husky voice that did not seem like his own, to one of the
van-drivers who now appeared in the opening, "have you caught the
elephant?"

As the man replied the boys began to collect again from their
ignominious flight, and it was observable that they were all laughing at
one another in an accusatory manner, each feeling full of contempt for
the pusillanimous behaviour of the others, while the looks of Morris
might have given the whole party a conscious sting.

But there was the van-driver answering as the boys clustered hurriedly
up.

"No, sir, and I've had enough of it," said the man.  "It aren't my
business.  I'm monkeys, I am; and got enough to do to keep they
mischievous imps in their cage.  I don't hold with elephants; they are
too big for me, and I know that chap of old."

"Indeed!" said Morris, eager to cover his last retreat by drawing the
man into conversation.

"Yes, sir, he's a treacherous beggar.  Pretends to be fond of a man, and
gets him up against a wall or the side of a tree, and then plays pussy
cat."

"Plays what?" cried Slegge.

"Pussy cat, sir.  You know: rubs hisself up again' a man same as a
kitten does against your leg.  But it aren't the same, because if the
pore chap don't dodge him he gets rubbed out like a nought on the
slate."

"Dear me!  Extraordinary!" said Morris.  "But--er--er--where is the
fugitive beast now?"

"Ah, you may well call him a fugity beast, sir.  I don't quite know what
it means; but that's a good name for him, and he desarves it.  Oh, he's
over yonder now, right in the middle of yon orchard, and nobody durst go
near him.  Every time any one makes a start he begins to roosh, and then
goes back in amongst the trees, and when I come away I never see
anything like it in my life.  It was bushels then."

"Bushels--bushels, my man?"

"Yes, sir, he was a-picking the apples with that trunk of his, and
tucking them in as fast as ever they'd go.  A beast! he'll fill hisself
before he's done.  He won't leave off now he's got the chance, and he'll
kill anybody who goes nigh him.  You see, the master keeps him pretty
short to tame him down and keep him from going on the rampage.  It's all
a mistake having a thing like that in a show.  You take my word for it,
sir.  If you goes in for a mennar-gerry you take to monkeys.  They don't
take nothing to keep, for the public feeds them on nuts and buns, and if
it warn't for their catching cold and going on the sick-list they'd be
profit every ounce."

"Er--thank you, my man," said Morris haughtily; "but I don't think it
probable that I shall venture upon a peripatetic zoo--eh, young
gentlemen?"

"Oh no, sir!" came in chorus.

"Can we see the huge pachyderm from here?"

"Packing apples, sir?  No, no, don't you alter that there, sir.  You
called him fugity beast just now, and you can't beat that.--No, you
can't see him.  He's in there among them apple-trees."

"Why, he's got into old Bunton's orchard, sir," cried Slegge, and he
stepped forward to the opening.  "Yes, you can't see the elephant, sir,
but you can see the men all round.  I think they are tying him up to a
tree, sir."

"Yes, that's likely," said the man grimly.  "I dare say they've all got
a bit of string in their pockets as will just hold him."

"Er--do you think we could go up a little closer, my man, without the
young gentlemen getting into danger?" said Morris, in the full
expectation that he would be told it would be dangerous in the extreme.

"Go closer, sir?  Yes, of course you can.  He won't hurt none of you so
long as you don't try to take his apples away.  If yer did I shouldn't
like to be you."

"Let's go, then, sir," cried Burney eagerly, and the desire seemed to be
growing in the other boys' breasts.

"Well, I don't know," said Morris; "that is, if you will promise not to
go too close."

"Oh, we won't go too close, sir," cried Slegge warmly, and he looked as
if he were speaking the truth.

The result was that the master, trying very hard to carry off his
disinclination to go with the remark, "We don't often have such an
opportunity as this, boys," led the way across the park-like field of
the Doctor's neighbour towards an extensive orchard, in which, nearly
hidden by the trees, the escaped monster was having his banquet of
apples, and turning a deaf ear, or rather two deaf ears of the largest
size, to all orders to come out.



CHAPTER SIX.

GLYN AND SINGH TO THE RESCUE.

As the party from the school drew nearer they could hear the occasional
crack of a whip and a loud order given in a rather highly pitched tone
to the beast, bidding him come out.

Then followed the snapping of twigs and a peculiarly dull grumbling
sound as if the elephant were muttering his objections to the orders of
his master, the bald-headed man, who still held his hat in one hand, his
yellow handkerchief in the other, and dabbed the big white
billiard-ball-like expanse as if he felt that it was very warm work.

Then there was a _crunch, crunch, crunch_, as if pippins were being
reduced to pulp, and more twigs were heard to snap.

"Let him hear the whip again, Jem," shouted Mr Ramball.

"Oh, he won't come for that, sir," growled the man addressed; but he
made the long cart-whip he carried crack loudly three times in obedience
to the order; and as the fresh party drew as near to the orchard as they
cared to go, after all had given a furtive glance round for a way to
escape, the low grumbling muttering grew louder; while as the animal
moved right into sight so did those who were watching him, and Slegge
and his companions saw Glyn and Singh approach.

There was another movement on the part of the elephant, whose towering
form came through the thickly growing orchard trees to one whose burden
was of a deep rich-red, and here it stood bowing its head up and down,
and slowly shaking it from side to side, while the trunk swung and
turned and turned and swung here and there, till its owner had selected
the fruit most pleasing to its little pig-like eye, when with
serpent-like motion it rose in the air, and the end curled round the
selected fruit, which was lowered and tucked out of sight on the
instant.

"Now, look here, my lads," cried the proprietor of the menagerie to his
men, "I can't have you all standing here gaping like a set of idiots as
if you had never seen the brute before.  Go in round behind him with
your whips and drive him out."

There was a murmur of grumbles from the men, that seemed to be echoed by
the elephant, which went on swinging its head up and down as if it were
balanced on a spring.  But no one stirred.

"Do you hear me?" cried the proprietor, his highly pitched voice growing
quite shrill.  "Here, I shall have no end of damages to pay for what
he's doing.  They'll be putting it in the lawyers' hands, and they'll be
charging me a shilling for every apple he eats.--Eh! what's that?  Not
safe?"

"No; he's got one of his nasty fits o' temper on," said the driver of
the great van which had come to grief.

"Tchah!  Nonsense!  You are a coward, Jem."

"Mebbe I am," grumbled the man; "but, coward or no, he knocked me flat
over on my back, and once is quite enough for one day."

"Yah!" shouted his master.  "You are ready enough to come on Saturday
night for your pay; but if I want anything a little extra done, where am
I?--Here, give me the whip."  And he snatched it from the man's hand and
walked towards the great beast, half-hidden among the trees.

"Say, you boys," growled the driver, "if I was you I'd just be ready to
run.  You've only just got to dodge him.  Stop and make sure which way
he's going, and then get in among the trees."

"Yes, quick: in amongst the trees," cried Morris, and he set the
example.

"Nay," growled the man.  "Not yet.  Wait and see first which way he
means to go."

Morris set the example of running in another direction, followed by his
boys and by the voice of the driver.

"Why, that's worse," he cried.  "That's about the way he'd go."

"Then which--what--why--Here, what are you two laughing at?"  This to
Glyn, who was stamping about with delight.

"Oh, I couldn't help it, sir," cried the boy, and before he could say
more there was another loud crack of the whip as Ramball made his way
round behind his rebellious beast and shouted at him to "Come out of
that."

He had hardly uttered the words when there was a crashing and breaking
of wood as if the elephant were making its way quickly through the trees
in obedience to the command; and as the sounds ceased, the menagerie
proprietor came staggering out without his handkerchief or whip, to
stand in the middle of his men looking half-stunned and confused.

"Did he ketch you, sir?" said the driver, with a laugh of satisfaction
in his twinkling eyes.

"Brought down his trunk across my back," panted the proprietor.  "My
word, he can hit hard!"

"Yes, sir; I know.  Knocked me flat on my back, he did."

"Knocked me on my face," cried the proprietor angrily.  "Look here," he
said, "is there any skin off my nose?  I fell against a tree."

"Took a little bit of the bark off," grumbled the man, who did not seem
at all sympathetic.  "Hadn't you better let him fill hisself full, sir,
and have a rest?  He'll come easy, perhaps, then."

"Do you want me to stand still here and see a devouring elephant go on
eating till he ruins me?  We must all join together and drive him out."

"But he'll drive us out, sir," said the man in a tone full of
remonstrance.

"Then we must try again.  I am not going to be beaten by a beast like
that."

"Look here, my man," said Morris, "hadn't you better tie him up to one
of the trees and leave him till to-morrow?  They do this sort of thing
abroad, I hear, by tying the elephant's legs or ankles to the trunks of
trees."

"What!" shouted Ramball.  "Why, he'd take them all up by the roots and
go cantering through the town, doing no end of mischief, with them
hanging to his legs.  Think I want to have to pay for the trees as well
as the apples?"

"Then--er--lasso him and lead him home."

"Lass which, sir?"

"Lasso him, my man, with ropes."

"Why, he ain't a wild ostrich of the desert, sir.  Look at him!--Here,
one on yer run off and fetch the longest cart-rope.  This 'ere gentleman
would like to have a try."

The boys were roaring with laughter by this time, the mathematical
master's parasites joining in as heartily as Glyn and Singh.

"Don't be rude, fellow," said Morris.

"Don't be rude?" cried Ramball, who was fuming with disappointment and
rage.  "Rude yourself.  If you give me much more of your sarce I'll set
the animile at you."

As this was proceeding, the elephant, whose taste for apples had been
satiated, came slowly out into the open, to stand bending and bowing his
massive head, which he swayed slowly from side to side and blinked and
flapped his ears, as he watched the assembly with his little reddish
eyes in a way which made the mathematical master grip Slegge by the arm.

"I am getting uneasy," he whispered, "about you boys.  Don't run, but
follow me slowly back to the fence.  Tell the other boys, and we will go
at once."

"Can't you coax him out, sir?" said Glyn, as he approached the
proprietor.
