plans by attracting the attention of the savage warriors.  High above
the rest, in one prolonged note, the voice of Brighteyes rang out like a
silver flute.

"There's the signal," said Little Tim, as the sweet note fell on his
listening ear.

Rising as he spoke, the trapper glided in a stooping posture down the
side of the hillock, and round the base of it, until he got immediately
behind the youthful sentinel.  Then lying down, and creeping towards him
with the utmost caution, he succeeded in getting so near that he could
almost touch him.  With one cat-like bound, Little Tim was on the
Indian's back, and had him in his arms, while his broad horny hand
covered his mouth, and his powerful forefinger and thumb grasped him
viciously by the nose.

It was a somewhat curious struggle that ensued.  The savage was much
bigger than the trapper, but the trapper was much stronger than the
savage.  Hence the latter made fearful and violent efforts to shake the
former off; while the former made not less fearful, though seemingly not
quite so violent, efforts to hold on.  The red man tried to bite, but
Tim's hand was too broad and hard to be bitten.  He tried to shake his
nose free, but unfortunately his nose was large, and Tim's grip of it
was perfect.  The savage managed to get just enough of breath through
his mouth to prevent absolute suffocation, but nothing more.  He had
dropped his tomahawk at the first onset, and tried to draw his knife,
but Tim's arms were so tight round him that he could not get his hand to
his back, where the knife reposed in his belt.  In desperation he
stooped forward, and tried to throw his enemy over his head; but Tim's
legs were wound round him, and no limpet ever embraced a rock with
greater tenacity than did Little Tim embrace that Blackfoot brave.  Half
choking and wholly maddened, the savage suddenly turned heels over head,
and fell on Tim with a force that ought to have burst him.  But Tim
didn't burst!  He was much too tough for that.  He did not even
complain!

Rising again, a sudden thought seemed to strike the Indian, for he began
to run towards the camp with his foe on his back.  But Tim was prepared
for that.  He untwined one leg, lowered it, and with an adroit twist
tripped up the savage, causing him to fall on his face with tremendous
violence.  Before he could recover, Tim, still covering the mouth and
holding tight to the nose, got a knee on the small of the savage's back
and squeezed it smaller.  At the same time he slid his left hand up to
the savage's windpipe, and compressed it.  With a violent heave, the
Blackfoot sprang up.  With a still more violent heave, the trapper flung
him down, bumped his head against a convenient stone, and brought the
combat to a sudden close.  Without a moment's loss of time, Tim gagged
and bound his adversary.  Then he rose up with a deep inspiration, and
wiped his forehead, as he contemplated him.

"All this comes o' your desire not to shed human blood, Whitewing," he
muttered.  "Well, p'raps you're right--what would ha' bin the use o'
killin' the poor critturs.  But it was a tough job!"--saying which, he
lifted the Indian on his broad shoulders, and carried him away.

While this fight was thus silently going on, hidden from view of the
camp by the hillock, Whitewing crept forward to meet Brighteyes and the
two girls, and these, with Lightheart, were eagerly awaiting the
trapper.  "My brother is strong," said Whitewing, allowing the faintest
possible smile to play for a moment on his usually grave face.

"Your brother is tough," returned Little Tim, rubbing the back of his
head with a rueful look; "an' he's bin bumped about an' tumbled on to
that extent that it's a miracle a whole bone is left in his carcass.
But lend a hand, lad; we've got no time to waste."

Taking the young Blackfoot between them, and followed by the silent
girls, they soon reached the thicket where the horses had been left.
Here they bound their captive securely to a tree, and gave him a drink
of water with a knife pointed at his heart to keep him quiet, after
which they re-gagged him.  Then Whitewing led Lightheart through the
thicket towards his horse, and took her up behind him.  Little Tim took
charge of Brighteyes.  The young sister and the bosom friend mounted the
third horse, and thus paired, they all galloped away.

But the work that our young chief had cut out for himself that night was
only half accomplished.  On reaching the rendezvous which he had
appointed, he found the braves of his tribe impatiently awaiting him.

"My father sees that we have been successful," he said to Bald Eagle,
who had been unable to resist the desire to ride out to the rendezvous
with the fighting men.  "The great Manitou has given us the victory thus
far, as the white preacher said he would."

"My son is right.  Whitewing will be a great warrior when Bald Eagle is
in the grave.  Go and conquer; I will return to camp with the women."

Thus relieved of his charge, Whitewing, who, however, had little desire
to achieve the fame prophesied for him, proceeded to fulfil the prophecy
to some extent.  He divided his force into four bands, with which he
galloped off towards the Blackfoot camp.  On nearing it, he so arranged
that they should attack the camp simultaneously at four opposite points.
Little Tim commanded one of the bands, and he resolved in his own mind
that his band should be the last to fall on the foe.

"Bloodshed _may_ be avoided," he muttered to himself; "an' I hope it
will, as Whitewing is so anxious about it.  Anyhow, I'll do my best to
please him."

Accordingly, on reaching his allotted position, Tim halted his men, and
bided his time.

The moon still shone over prairie and hill, and not a breath of air
stirred blade or leaf.  All in nature was peace, save in the hearts of
savage man.  The Blackfoot camp was buried in slumber.  Only the
sentinels were on the alert.  Suddenly one of these--like the war-horse,
who is said to scent the battle from afar--pricked his ears, distended
his nostrils, and listened.  A low, muffled, thunderous sort of
pattering on the plain in front.  It might be a herd of buffaloes.  The
sentinel stood transfixed.  The humps of buffaloes are large, but they
do not usually attain to the size of men!  The sentinel clapped his hand
to his mouth, and gave vent to a yell which sent the blood spirting
through the veins of all, and froze the very marrow in the bones of
some!  Prompt was the reply and turn-out of the Blackfoot warriors.
Well used to war's alarms, there was no quaking in their bosoms.  They
were well named "braves."

But the noise in the camp prevented them from hearing or observing the
approach of the enemy on the other side till almost too late.  A whoop
apprised the chief of the danger.  He divided his forces, and lost some
of his self-confidence.

"Here comes number three," muttered Little Tim, as he observed the third
band emerge from a hollow on the left.

The Blackfoot chief observed it too, divided his forces again, and lost
more of his self-confidence.

None of the three bands had as yet reached the camp, but they all came
thundering down on it at the same time, and at the same whirlwind pace.

"Now for number four," muttered Little Tim.  "Come boys, an' at 'em!" he
cried, unconsciously paraphrasing the Duke of Wellington's Waterloo
speech.

At the some time he gave utterance to what he styled a Rocky Mountain
trapper's roar, and dashed forward in advance of his men, who, in trying
to imitate the roar, intensified and rather complicated their own yell.

It was the last touch to the Blackfoot chief, who, losing the small
remnant of his self-confidence, literally "sloped" into the long grass,
and vanished, leaving his men to still further divide themselves, which
they did effectually by scattering right and left like small-shot from a
blunderbuss.

Great was the terror of the poor captives while this brief but decisive
action lasted, for although they knew that the assailants were their
friends, they could not be certain of the issue of the combat.
Naturally, they crowded round their only male friend, the missionary.

"Do not fear," he said, in attempting to calm them; "the good Manitou
has sent deliverance.  We will trust in Him."

The dispersion of their foes and the arrival of friends almost
immediately followed these words.  But the friends who arrived were few
in number at first, for Whitewing had given strict orders as to the
treatment of the enemy.  In compliance therewith, his men chased them
about the prairie in a state of gasping terror; but no weapon was used,
and not a man was killed, though they were scattered beyond the
possibility of reunion for at least some days to come.

Before that eventful night was over the victors were far from the scene
of victory on their way home.

"It's not a bad style o' fightin'," remarked Little Tim to his friend as
they rode away; "lots o' fun and fuss without much damage.  Pity we
can't do all our fightin' in that fashion."

"Waugh!" exclaimed Whitewing; but as he never explained what he meant by
"waugh," we must leave it to conjecture.  It is probable, however, that
he meant assent, for he turned aside in passing to set free the
Blackfoot who had been bound to a tree.  That red man, having expected
death, went off with a lively feeling of surprise, and at top speed, his
pace being slightly accelerated by a shot--wide of the mark and at long
range--from Little Tim.

Three weeks after these events a number of Indians were baptised by our
missionary.  Among them were the young chief Whitewing and Lightheart,
and these two were immediately afterwards united in marriage.  Next day
the trapper, with much awkwardness and hesitation, requested the
missionary to unite him and Brighteyes.  The request was complied with,
and thenceforward the white man and the red became more inseparable than
ever.  They hunted and dwelt together--to the ineffable joy of
Whitewing's wrinkled old mother, whose youth seemed absolutely to revive
under the influence of the high-pressure affection brought to bear on a
colony of brown and whitey-brown grand-children by whom she was at last
surrounded.

The doubts and difficulties of Whitewing were finally cleared away.  He
not only accepted fully the Gospel for himself, but became anxious to
commend it to others as the only real and perfect guide in life and
comfort in death.  In the prosecution of his plans, he imitated the
example of his "white father," roaming the prairie and the mountains far
and wide with his friend the trapper, and even venturing to visit some
of the lodges of his old foes the Blackfoot Indians, in his desire to
run earnestly, yet with patience, the race that had been set before
him--"looking unto Jesus."

Full twenty years rolled by, during which no record, was kept of the
sayings or doings of those whose fortunes we have followed thus far.  At
the end of that period, however, striking incidents in their career
brought the most prominent among them again to the front--as the
following chapters will show.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE MOUNTAIN FORTRESS.

In one of those numerous narrow ravines of the Rocky Mountains which
open out into the rolling prairies of the Saskatchewan there stood some
years ago a log hut, or block-house, such as the roving hunters of the
Far West sometimes erected as temporary homes during the inclement
winter of those regions.

With a view to render the hut a castle of refuge as well as a home, its
builder had perched it close to the edge of a nearly inaccessible cliff
overhanging one of those brawling torrents which carry the melting snows
of the great rocky range into one of the tributaries of the Saskatchewan
river.  On what may be called the land side of the hut there was a
slight breastwork of logs.  It seemed a weak defence truly, yet a
resolute man with several guns and ammunition might have easily held it
against a considerable band of savages.

One fine morning about the time when the leaves of the forest were
beginning to put on their gorgeous autumnal tints, a woman might have
been seen ascending the zigzag path that led to the hut or fortress.

She was young, well formed, and pretty, and wore the Indian costume, yet
there was something in her air and carriage, as well as the nut-brown
colour of her hair, which told that either her father or her mother had
been what the red men term a "pale-face."

With a light, bounding step, very different from that of the ordinary
Indian squaw, she sprang from rock to rock as if in haste, and, climbing
over the breastwork before mentioned, entered the hut.

The interior of the little fortress was naturally characteristic of its
owner.  A leathern capote and leggings hung from a nail in one corner;
in another lay a pile of buffalo robes.  The rough walls were adorned
with antlers of the moose and other deer, from the various branches of
which hung several powder-horns, fire-bags, and bullet-pouches.  Near
the rude fireplace, the chimney of which was plastered outside and in
with mud, was a range of six guns, of various patterns and ages, all of
which, being well polished and oiled, were evidently quite ready for
instant service.  Beside them hung an old cavalry sabre.  Neither table
nor chairs graced the simple mansion; but a large chest at one side
served for the former, and doubtless contained the owner's treasures,
whatever these might be, while three rough stools, with only nine legs
among them, did service for the latter.

The action of the young woman on entering was somewhat suggestive of the
cause of her haste.  Without a moment's delay, she seized a powder-horn
and bullet-pouch, and began to charge the guns, some with ball, others
with slugs, as fast as she could.  There was a cool, quiet celerity in
her proceedings which proved that she was accustomed to the handling of
such weapons.

No one looking upon the scene would have guessed that Softswan, as she
was poetically named, was a bride, at that time in the midst of the
honeymoon.

Yet such was the case.  Her husband being the kindliest, stoutest and
handsomest fellow in all that region had won her heart and hand, had
obtained her parents' consent, had been married in the nearest
settlement by a travelling missionary, and had carried off his pretty
bride to spend the honeymoon in his mountain fortress.  We can scarcely
call it his home, however, for it was only, as we have said, a temporary
residence--the Rocky Mountains, from the Gulf of Mexico to the Arctic
Circle, being his home.

While the Indian bride was engaged in charging the firearms, a
rifle-shot was heard to echo among the surrounding cliffs.  It was
followed by a cry, as if some one had been wounded, and then there arose
that terrible war-whoop of the red men which, once heard, can never be
forgotten, and which inspires even the bravest with feelings of at least
anxiety.

That Softswan was not free from alarm was pretty evident from the
peculiar curl of her pretty eyebrows, but that the sounds did not
unnerve her was also obvious from the quiet though prompt way in which
she gathered up all the loaded firearms, and bore them swiftly to the
breastwork in front of the cabin.  Arranging the guns in a row at her
side, so as to be handy, the girl selected one, laid it on the parapet,
and carefully examined the priming.  Having satisfied herself that it
was all right, she cocked the piece, and quietly awaited the issue of
events.

The weapon that Softswan had selected was not picked up at haphazard.
It was deliberately chosen as being less deadly than the others, the
charge being a few slugs or clippings of lead, which were not so apt to
kill as rifle bullets; for Softswan, as her name might suggest was
gentle of spirit, and was influenced by none of that thirst for blood
and revenge which characterised some of her Indian relatives.

After a time the poor girl's anxiety increased, for well she knew that a
whoop and a cry such as she had heard were the sure precursors of
something worse.  Besides, she had seen the footprints of Blackfoot
Indians in the valley below, and she knew from their appearance that
those who had made them were on the war-path, in which circumstances
savages usually dismiss any small amount of tender mercies with which
they may have been naturally endowed.

"Oh why, why you's not come home, Big Tim?" she exclaimed at last, in
broken English.

It may be well to explain at once that Big Tim, who was the only son of
Little Tim, had such a decided preference for the tongue of his white
father, that he had taught it to his bride, and refused to converse with
her in any other, though he understood the language of his mother
Brighteyes quite as well as English.
