India house, I believe, with which Sir James Clubley is connected, and
Sir James was an old friend of George's father, and was very kind to him
in his last days, but they say he's a proud and touchy old fellow."

As Phil spoke, the door, which had a tendency to burst that evening,
opened quickly, though not so violently as before, and May Maylands
stood before them, radiant with a glow of expectation.

Phil sprang to meet her.  After the first effusions were over, the
brother and sister sat down to chat of home in the Irish far-west, while
Miss Lillycrop retired to a small kitchen, there to hold solemn converse
with the smallest domestic that ever handled broom or scrubbing-brush.

"Now, Tottie, you must run round to the baker directly, and fetch
another loaf."

"What! a whole one, ma'am?" asked the small domestic--in comparison with
whom Dollops was a giantess.

"Yes, a whole one.  You see there's a young gentleman coming to tea whom
I did not expect--a grand tall gentleman too, and a hero, who has saved
people from wrecks, and swims in the sea in storms like a duck, and all
that sort of thing, so he's sure to have a tremendous appetite.  You
will also buy another pennyworth of brown sugar, and two more pats of
butter."

Tottie opened her large blue eyes in amazement at the extent of what she
deemed a reckless order, but went off instantly to execute it, wondering
that any hero, however regardless of the sea or storms, could induce her
poor mistress to go in for such extravagance, after having already
provided a luxurious meal for three.

It might have seemed unfair to send such a child even to bed without an
attendant.  To send her into the crowded streets alone in the dusk of
evening, burdened with a vast commission, and weighted with coppers,
appeared little short of inhumanity.  Nevertheless Miss Lillycrop did it
with an air of perfect confidence, and the result proved that her trust
was not misplaced.

Tottie had been gone only a few seconds when George Aspel appeared at
the door and was admitted by Miss Lillycrop, who apologised for the
absence of her maid.

Great was the surprise and not slight the embarrassment of May Maylands
when young Aspel was ushered into the little room, for Phil had not
recovered sufficiently from the first greetings to mention him.  Perhaps
greater was the surprise of Miss Lillycrop when these two, whom she had
expected to meet as old playmates, shook hands rather stiffly.

"Sure, I forgot, May, to tell you that George was coming--"

"I am very glad to see him," interrupted May, recovering herself,
"though I confess to some surprise that he should have forsaken Ireland
so soon, after saying to me that it was a perfect paradise."

Aspel, whose curly flaxen hair almost brushed the ceiling, brought
himself down to a lower region by taking a chair, while he said with a
meaning smile--

"Ah!  Miss Maylands, the circumstances are entirely altered now--
besides," he added with a sudden change of tone and manner, "that
inexorable man-made demon, Business, calls me to London."

"I hope Business intends to keep you here," said Miss Lillycrop, busying
herself at the tea-table.

"That remains to be seen," returned Aspel.  "If I find that--"

"The loaf and butter, ma'am," said Tottie, announcing these articles at
the door as if they were visitors.

"Hush, child; leave them in the kitchen till I ask for them," said Miss
Lillycrop with a quiet laugh.  "My little maid is _such_ an original,
Mr Aspel."

"She's a very beautiful, though perhaps somewhat dishevelled, original,"
returned Aspel, "of which one might be thankful to possess even an
inferior copy."

"Indeed you are right," rejoined Miss Lillycrop with enthusiasm; "she's
a perfect little angel--come, draw in your chairs; closer this way,
Phil, so--a perfect little angel--you take sugar I think?  Yes.  Well,
as I was saying, the strange thing about her was that she was born and
bred--thus far--in one of the worst of the back slums of London, and her
father is an idle drunkard.  I fear, also, a criminal."

"How strange and sad," said Aspel, whose heart was easily touched and
sympathies roused by tales of sorrow.  "But how comes it that she has
escaped contamination?"

"Because she has a good--by which I mean a Christian--mother.  Ah!  Mr
Aspel, you have no idea how many unknown and unnoticed gems there are
half smothered in the moral mud and filth of London.  It is a
wonderful--a tremendous city;--tremendous because of the mighty
influences for good as well as evil which are constantly at work in it.
There is an army of moral navvies labouring here, who are continually
unearthing these gems, and there are others who polish them.  I have the
honour to be a member of this army.  Dear little Tottie is one of the
gems, and I mean, with God's blessing, to polish her.  Of course, I
can't get her all to myself," continued Miss Lillycrop with a sigh, "for
her mother, who is a washer-woman, won't part with her, but she has
agreed to come and work for me every morning for a few hours, and I can
get her now and then of an evening.  My chief regret is that the poor
thing has a long long way to walk from her miserable home to reach me.
I don't know how she will stand it.  She has been only a few days in my
service."

As the unpolished diamond entered at this moment with a large plate of
buttered toast, Miss Lillycrop changed the subject abruptly by
expressing a hope that May Maylands had not to go on late duty that
evening.

"Oh, no; it's not my turn for a week yet," said May.

"It seems to me very hard that they should work you night and day," said
Phil, who had been quietly drinking in new ideas with his tea while his
cousin discoursed.

"But they don't work us night and day, Phil," returned May, "it is only
the telegraphs that do that.  We of the female staff work in relays.  If
we commence at 8 a.m. we work till 4 p.m.  If we begin at nine we work
till five, and so on--eight p.m. being our latest hour.  Night duty is
performed by men, who are divided into two sections, and it is so
arranged that each man has an alternate long and short duty--working
three hours one night and thirteen hours the next.  We are allowed
half-an-hour for dinner, which we eat in a dining-hall in the place.  Of
course we dine in relays also, as there are above twelve hundred of us,
male and female."

"How many?" asked George Aspel in surprise.

"Above twelve hundred."

"Why, that would make two pretty fair regiments of soldiers," said
Aspel.

"No, George," said Phil, "it's two regiments of pretty fair soldiers
that they'd make."

"Can't you hold your tongue, man, an' let May talk?" retorted Aspel.

"So, you see," continued May, "that amongst us we manage to have the
telegraphic communication of the kingdom well attended to."

"But tell me, May," said Phil, "do they really suck messages through
tubes two miles long?"

"Indeed they do, Phil.  You see, the General Post-Office in London is in
direct communication with all the chief centres of the kingdom, such as
Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Dublin, Cork,
etcetera, so that all messages sent from London must pass through the
great hall at St. Martin's-le-Grand.  But there are many offices in
London for receiving telegrams besides the General Post-Office.  Suppose
that one of these offices in the city receives numerous telegrams every
hour all day long,--instead of transmitting these by wire to the General
Post-Office, to be re-distributed to their various destinations, they
are collected and put bodily into cylindrical leather cases, which are
inserted into pneumatic metal tubes.  These extend to our central
office, and through them the telegrams are sucked just as they are
written.  The longest tube, from the West Strand, is about two miles,
and each bundle or cylinder of telegrams takes about three minutes to
travel.  There are upwards of thirty such tubes, and the suction
business is done by two enormous fifty-horse-power steam-engines in the
basement of our splendid building.  There is a third engine, which is
kept ready to work in case of a break-down, or while one of the others
is being repaired."

"Ah!  May, wouldn't there be the grand blow-up if you were to burst your
boilers in the basement?" said Phil.

"No doubt there would.  But steam is not the only terrible agent at work
in that same basement.  If you only saw the electric batteries there
that generate the electricity which enables us up-stairs to send our
messages flying from London to the Land's End or John o' Groat's, or the
heart of Ireland!  You must know that a far stronger battery is required
to send messages a long way than a short.  Our Battery Inspector told me
the other day that he could not tell exactly the power of all the
batteries united, but he had no doubt it was sufficient to blow the
entire building into the middle of next week.  Now you know, Phil, it
would require a pretty severe shock to do that, wouldn't it?
Fortunately the accidental union of all the batteries is impossible.
But you'll see it for yourself soon.  And it will make you open your
eyes when you see a room with three miles of shelving, on which are
ranged twenty-two thousand battery-jars."

"My dear," said Miss Lillycrop, with a mild smile, "you will no doubt
wonder at my ignorance, but I don't understand what you mean by a
battery-jar."

"It is a jar, cousin, which contains the substances which produce
electricity."

"Well, well," rejoined Miss Lillycrop, dipping the sugar-spoon into the
slop-bowl in her abstraction, "this world and its affairs is to me a
standing miracle.  Of course I must believe that what you say is true,
yet I can no more understand how electricity is made in a jar and sent
flying along a wire for some hundreds of miles with messages to our
friends than I can comprehend how a fly walks on the ceiling without
tumbling off."

"I'm afraid," returned May, "that you would require to study a treatise
on Telegraphy to comprehend that, but no doubt Phil will soon get it so
clearly into his head as to be able to communicate it to you.--You'll go
to the office with me on Monday, won't you, Phil?"

"Of course I will--only too glad to begin at once."

"My poor boy," said May, putting her hand on her brother's arm, "it's
not a very great beginning of life to become a telegraph-messenger."

"Ah! now, May, that's not like yourself," said Phil, who unconsciously
dropped--perhaps we should say rose--to a more decided brogue when he
became tender or facetious.  "Is it rousin' the pride of me you'd be
afther?  Don't they say that any ould fiddle is good enough to learn
upon?  Mustn't I put my foot on the first round o' the ladder if I want
to go up higher?  If I'm to be Postmaster-General mustn't I get a
general knowledge of the post from the bottom to the top by goin'
through it?  It's only men like George there that can go slap over
everything at a bound."

"Come, Phil, don't be impertinent," said George, "it's a bad sign in one
so young.  Will you convoy me a short way?  I must go now."

He rose as he spoke and bade Miss Lillycrop good-evening.  That lady
expressed an earnest hope that he would come to see her frequently, and
he promised to do so as often as he could find time.  He also bade May
good-evening because she was to spend the night with her cousin, but May
parted from him with the same touch of reserve that marked their
meeting.  He resented this by drawing himself up and turning away
somewhat coldly.

"Now, Phil," he said, almost sternly, on reaching the street, "here's a
letter to Sir James Clubley which I want to read to you.--Listen."

By the light of a lamp he read:--

  "DEAR SIR,--I appreciate your kindness in offering me the situation
  mentioned in your letter of the 4th, and especially your remarks in
  reference to my late father, who was indeed worthy of esteem.  I shall
  have pleasure in calling on you on hearing that you are satisfied with
  the testimonials herewith enclosed.--I am, etcetera."

"Now, Phil, will that do?"

"Do? of course it will.  Nothing could be better.  Only--"

"Well, what?"

"Don't you think that you might call without waiting to hear his opinion
of your testimonials?"

"No, Phil, I don't," replied the other in a slightly petulant tone; "I
don't feel quite sure of the spirit in which he referred to my dear
father.  Of course it was kind and all that, but it was slightly
patronising, and my father was an infinitely superior man to himself."

"Well, I don't know," said Phil; "if you're going to accept a favour of
him you had better try to feel and act in a friendly way, but of course
it would never do to encourage him in pride."

"Well then, I'll send it," said Aspel, closing the letter; "do you know
where I can post it?"

"Not I.  Never was here before.  I've only a vague idea of how I got
here, and mustn't go far with you lest I lose myself."

At that moment Miss Lillycrop's door opened and little Tottie issued
forth.

"Ah! she will help us.--D'you know where the Post-Office is, Tottie?"

"Yes, sir, it's at the corner of the street, Miss Lillycrop says."

"Which direction?"

"That one, I think."

"Here, I'm going the other way: will you post this letter for me?"

"Yes, sir," said Tottie.

"That's a good girl; here's a penny for you."

"Please, sir, that's not a penny," said the child, holding out the
half-crown which Aspel had put in her hand.

"Never mind; keep it."

Tottie stood bereft of speech at the youth's munificence, as he turned
away from her with a laugh.

Now, when Tottie Bones said that she knew where the post was, she did so
because her mistress had told her, among other pieces of local
information, that the pillar letter-box stood at the corner of the
street and was painted red; but as no occasion had occurred since her
arrival for the posting of a letter, she had not yet seen the pillar
with her own eyes.  The corner of the street, however, was so plain a
direction that no one except an idiot could fail to find it.
Accordingly Tottie started off to execute her mission.

Unfortunately--or the reverse, as the case may be--streets have usually
two corners.  The child went, almost as a matter of course, to the wrong
one, and there she found no pillar.  But she was a faithful messenger,
and not to be easily balked.  She sought diligently at that corner until
she really did find a pillar, in a retired angle.  Living, as she did,
chiefly in the back slums of London, where literary correspondence is
not much in vogue, Tottie had never seen a pillar letter-box, or, if she
had, had not realised its nature.  Miss Lillycrop had told her it was
red, with a slit in it.  The pillar she had found was red to some extent
with rust, and it unquestionably had a slit in it where, in days gone
by, a handle had projected.  It also had a spout in front.  Tottie had
some vague idea that this letter-box must have been made in imitation of
a pump, and that the spout was a convenient step to enable small people
like herself to reach the slit.  Only, she thought it queer that they
should not have put the spout in front of the pillar under the slit,
instead of behind it.  She was still more impressed with this when,
after having twice got on the spout, she twice fell off in futile
efforts to reach round the pump with her small arms.

Baffled, but not defeated, Tottie waited till some one should pass who
could put the letter in for her, but in that retired angle no one
passed.  Suddenly her sharp eyes espied a brickbat.  She set it up on
end beside the pump, mounted it, stood on tip-toe, and, stretching her
little body to the very uttermost, tipped the letter safely in.  The
brickbat tipped over at the same instant and sent her headlong to the
ground.  But this was no novelty to Tottie.  Regardless of the fall, she
gathered herself up, and, with the light heart of one who has gained a
victory in the performance of duty, ran off to her miserable home in the
back slums.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

PHIL BEGINS LIFE, AND MAKES A FRIEND.

Some time after the small tea-party described in our last chapter,
Philip Maylands was invested with all the dignity, privileges, and
emoluments of an "Out-door Boy Telegraph Messenger" in the General
Post-Office.  He rejoiced in the conscious independence of one who earns
his own livelihood, is a burden to nobody, and has something to spare.
He enjoyed the privilege of wearing a grey uniform, of sitting in a
comfortable room with a huge fire in the basement of the office, and of
walking over a portion of London as the bearer of urgent and no doubt
all-important news.  He also enjoyed a salary of seven shillings
sterling a week, and was further buoyed up with the hope of an increase
to eight shillings at the end of a year.  His duties, as a rule, began
at eight each morning, and averaged nine hours.

We have said that out of his vast income he had something to spare.
This, of course, was not much, but owing to the very moderate charge for
lodging made by Solomon Flint--with whom and his sister he took up his
abode--the sum was sufficient to enable him, after a few months, to send
home part of his first year's earnings to his mother.  He did this by
means of that most valuable institution of modern days a Post-Office
order, which enables one to send small sums of money, at a moderate
charge, and with perfect security, not only all over the kingdom, but
over the greater part of the known world.
