Accordingly, they huddled together and spent the remaining hour of
gloom in anything but comfort.

At the earliest streakings of light all were astir. Springing from the
ground, Tim McCabe hurriedly walked a short way to the northward. The
others had risen to their feet and were watching him. As the gray light
rapidly overspread the scene, they saw the lake, still tossing with
whitecaps, stretching to the south and west, with the shore faintly
visible. On the east, north, south, and west towered the snow-capped
mountains, with Mount Lotne and other peaks piercing the very clouds.
The sun was still hidden, with the air damp, cold, and penetrating.

Tim McCabe was seen to stand motionless for some minutes, when he
slowly turned about on his heels and attentively studied the landmarks.
Then he suddenly flung his cap high in air, and, catching it as it came
down, began dancing a jig with furious vigor. He acted as if he had
bidden good-by to his senses.

"Whoop! hurrah!" he shouted, as he replaced his cap and hurried to his
friends. "We're at the fut of the lake!"

[Illustration: "WE'RE AT THE FUT OF THE LAKE," SHOUTED TIM.]

Such was the fact. A steamer guided by pilot and compass could not have
come more directly to the termination of the sheet of water. Tim had
cause for rejoicing, and all congratulated themselves upon their good
fortune.

"There's only one bad thing about the same," he added more seriously.

"What's that?" asked Jeff.

"We're no longer in the United States."

"That's the fact," said Hardman, "we're in British Columbia."

After all, this was a small matter. Inasmuch as the signs indicated a
severe storm, it was decided to stay where they were until its chief
fury was spent. The snow was shovelled aside to allow them to reach the
frozen earth, into which the stakes were securely driven, and the tent
set up, with the stove in position.

Beyond Chilkoot Pass plenty of timber is to be found, consisting of
pine, spruce, cottonwood, and birch. Thus far not the first sign of
game had been seen. The whole country, after leaving Dyea, is
mountainous.

Most of the goods were left on the raft, where they were protected by
the rubber sheathing and the secure manner in which they were packed
and bound.

Three dreary days of waiting followed, and the hours became so
monotonous at times, especially after the hard, active toil that had
preceded them, that in some respects it was the most trying period of
the memorable journey of our friends from Dyea to Dawson City. The men
found consolation in their pipes, which frequently made the air within
the tent intolerable to the youngsters. Like most smokers, however, the
men never suspected the annoyance they caused, and the boys were too
considerate to hint anything of the kind. When their young limbs
yearned for exercise, they bolted out of doors, in the face of the
driving sleet and fine snow which cut the face like bird-shot. Locking
arms, they wrestled and rolled and tumbled in the snow, washed each
other's faces, flung the snow about--for it was too dry to admit of
being wrought into balls--and when tired out, they came back panting
and with red cheeks, showing that their lungs had been filled with the
life-giving ozone.

It was necessary now and then to cut fuel from the adjacent wood, and
this was done by Tim and Jeff. The boys asked to be allowed to try
their hand, but they were too unskilful in wielding an axe, and their
request was denied. Now and then the howling gale drove the smoke back
into the tent, where it was almost as bad as the odor from the pipes.

The four slept at intervals through the day and most of the long night;
but now and then the men laid aside their pipes, the stove "drew," and
the atmosphere within was agreeable. The only books in the company were
the two pocket Bibles furnished by the mothers of Roswell and Frank.
Neither boy forgot his promise to read the volume whenever suitable
opportunity presented. Seeing Frank reclining on his blanket, with his
little Bible in hand, Jeff asked him to read it aloud, and the boy
gladly complied. It was a striking sight, as the men inclined their
heads and reverently listened to the impressive words from the Book of
Life. There was no jesting or badinage, for that chord which the
Creator has placed in every human heart was touched, and responded with
sweet music. Many an hour was thus passed--let us hope with profit to
every one of the little party.

Finally the longed-for lull in the storm came, and the voyage was
renewed. The trip through Caribou Crossing was made without mishap, the
distance being about four miles, when they entered Marsh Lake, often
known as Mud Lake, though no apparent cause exists for the title. No
difficulty was experienced in making their way for the twenty-four
miles of its length, at the end of which they debouched into Lynx
River, where twenty-seven more miles were passed without incident or
trouble worth recording.




CHAPTER X.

AT WHITE HORSE RAPIDS.


"We're doing well," observed Tim McCabe, when the raft with its load
and party of gold-seekers reached the end of Lynx River, "but be the
same token, we're drawing nigh the worst part of the voyage, and we'll
be lucky if we git through the same without mishap."

"What have we ahead?" asked Jeff.

"Miles Canon; it's a little more than half a mile long, and if this
raft isn't as strong as it should be it'll be torn to pieces."

Fortunately Jeff had given attention from the first to the stability of
the structure, upon which everything depended. He was continually
examining it from stem to stern, and where there was a suspicion of the
necessity, he drove nails and strengthened the craft in every way
possible.

The sail was used whenever possible; but since they were really among
the network of lakes which form the headwaters of the Yukon, the
current carried them steadily toward their destination, and there were
hours when they scarcely lifted their hands except to keep the raft in
proper position by means of the poles. The weather grew steadily
milder, for summer was approaching. The snow and ice rapidly melted,
and now and then, when the sun shone, the thick clothing felt
uncomfortable during the middle of the day. Our friends were in advance
of the great multitude that were pushing toward the Klondike from the
south, from Canada and to St. Michael's, whence they would start on the
two-thousand-mile climb of the Yukon, as soon as it shook off its icy
bounds.

It was impossible that the party should not view with solicitude their
entrance into Miles Canon, though Tim assured his friends that much
more dangerous rapids would remain to be passed. The canon is
five-eighths of a mile long, with an angry and swift current. Although
the raft was tossed about like a cockleshell, it went through without
injury, and none of the goods were displaced or harmed.

Following this came the severest kind of work. For three miles it
seemed as if the river could be no worse, and the raft must be wrenched
asunder. The current was not only very swift, but the channel was
filled with rocks. Each man grasped one of the strong poles with which
the craft was provided, and wrought with might and main to steer clear
of the treacherous masses of stone which thrust up their heads
everywhere. There were many narrow escapes, and despite the utmost they
could do, the raft struck repeatedly. Sometimes it was a bump and sheer
to one side so suddenly that the party were almost knocked off their
feet. Once, owing to unintentional contrary work the raft banged
against the head of a rock and stood still. While the men were
desperately plying their poles the current slewed the craft around, and
the voyage was resumed.

[Illustration: THE CURRENT WAS NOT ONLY VERY SWIFT, BUT THE CHANNEL
WAS FILLED WITH ROCKS.]

"Look out!" shouted Jeff; "there's another rock right ahead!"

Unfortunately it was just below the surface, and there were so many
ripples and eddies in the current that neither Tim nor Hardman was sure
of its exact location, but taking their cue from the leader, they
pushed with all their strength to clear the obstruction.

They failed, and the flinty head swept directly under the logs and
gouged its course for the entire length of the craft. All felt the jar,
and those who could look beneath the upper deck saw the lower timbers
rise from the impact, which was so severe that when the raft at last
swung free it was barely moving, but, like a wounded horse, it shook
itself clear, and the next moment was plunging forward as impetuously
as ever. The fears of the party were intensified by sight of wreckage
along the banks, proving that more than one of their predecessors had
come to grief in trying to make the passage.

While all were on edge with the danger, however, they found themselves
at the end of the perilous passage and floating in comparatively smooth
water again. Men and boys drew sighs of relief, the former mopping
their perspiring brows and looking their mutual congratulations.

"The fun is only just begun," said Tim McCabe; "we had matters purty
lively fur a time, but they'll soon be a good deal livelier."

"What is next due?" asked Frank.

"I belave," said Tim, "that some folks spake of death as riding on a
pale horse, don't they?"

"Yes."

"That must be the raison they call the nixt plisure thramp White Horse
Canon, or White Horse Rapids."

"Where are they?"

"But a little way ahid; many men have been drowned in thrying to sail
through the same; and him as doesn't know how to swim in a whirlpool
hasn't ony business to thry it."

"What, then, do you mean to do?"

"Thry it," was the imperturbable response.

Such talk was not calculated to cheer the listeners, but knowing the
Irishman as they did, they received his statement with less seriousness
than they should have done, for he had by no means overrated the peril
in their front. Jeff made another examination of the raft while he had
the opportunity, and strengthened it in every possible way. He was
pleased that it stood the test so well, though it had been severely
wrenched, and when it crawled over the sunken rock it had narrowly
missed being torn asunder. The fastenings of the goods were examined
and everything prepared, so far as it could be done, for the crucial
trial at hand.

The party were seated in various positions about the raft, looking
anxiously ahead, when Tim pointed a little way in advance, with the
question:

"Do ye all obsarve that?"

He indicated a high bank of sand on the right which had been cut out by
the erosion of the violent current. Near by some philanthropist had put
up a sign, "Keep a Good Look Out."

"You have larned what other people think of the same," he added;
"there's been more than twinty men drowned in there."

"Because they could not swim?" asked Frank.

"'Cause the best swimmer in the world can't swim in there; you and
mesilf, boys, will soon be on the same futting, for the raison that we
won't have any futting at all."

"How long is the canon?"

"Not quite half a mile. Miles Canon, that we've just passed through, is
like a duck-pond alongside the rapids in front of us."

"Can a boat go through?"

"The thing has been done, but only about one in fifty that starts into
them rapids ever raiches the outlet, excipt in bits the size of yer
hand."

Frank and Roswell looked at each other in consternation. Was it
possible that Jeff would allow the criminal recklessness Tim
contemplated? Where the chances were so overwhelmingly against success,
it was throwing away their lives to trust themselves to the fearful
rapids that had already caused so many deaths.

"If you want to try," said Roswell, excitedly, "you may do so, but
neither Frank nor I will. Put us ashore!"

He addressed himself to Jeff, who was seated on the edge of the upper
deck, calmly smoking his pipe. He did not look around nor seem to hear
the appeal.

"Never mind," interposed Frank; "if they are willing, we are not the
ones to back out. I know of no law that prevents a man making a fool of
himself."

"Very well," replied his cousin, more composedly, "I am ready."




CHAPTER XI.

ON THE YUKON.


Jeff Graham looked inquiringly at Tim McCabe, who nodded his head by
way of reply. At the same time he said something to Hardman, and all
three rose to their feet. Then the poles were plied with an effect that
speedily drove the raft against the bank, where Tim sprang ashore and
secured it. Brave and reckless as was the fellow, he had no intention
of trying to take the boat through the exceedingly dangerous White
Horse Rapids, but he could not refuse the chance for a little amusement
at the expense of his young friends.

In truth, no one should ever attempt to take a boat through White Horse
Rapids. The best course, perhaps, is to let it drift down the rapids,
guided by a rope one hundred and fifty feet in length. If it passes
through without material injury, the craft is still at command below.
Another plan is to portage. At this writing there are roller-ways on
the western side, over which the boats can be rolled with a windlass to
help pull them to the top of the hill. In lining a craft, it must be
done on the right-hand side. Three miles farther down comes the Box
Canon, one hundred yards in length and fifty feet wide, with a chute of
terrific velocity. Repeated attempts have been made by reckless miners
to take a boat through, but it is much the same as trying to shoot the
rapids below Niagara, and the place has well earned its title of "The
Miners' Grave." Still, the feat has been performed in safety.

Progress was so effectually barred at White Horse that our friends gave
up their raft as of no further use. It was certain to be shattered, and
where there was so much timber it was comparatively easy to build
another, with which to make the remaining two hundred and twenty miles,
particularly as there was no need of constructing a double-decker, for
the rough voyaging was at an end.

The goods were, therefore, packed upon the Yukon sleds, and then the
raft set adrift. It was never seen again, though an occasional stray
log afterward observed bobbing in the current below the rapids may have
formed a part of the structure that had served the travellers so well.
There was enough snow for the sleds, but the work was exhausting, and
was not completed until late in the afternoon, when the tent was set up
and camp made.

By the close of the following day the raft was finished. It contained
enough pine lumber to float a much heavier load than formed its burden,
but, as we have stated, it lacked the double deck, since the necessity
for one no longer existed.

The raft was no more than fairly completed when a storm that had been
threatening broke upon the party. Since it was expected, and there was
no saying how long it would last, the tent was set up and secured in
place. Considerable fuel had been gathered, and every preparation was
made for a prolonged stay, though it need not be said that each one
hoped it would prove otherwise. In a country where for four-fifths of
the days the sun does not show itself, such weather must be expected,
and, on the whole, our friends counted themselves fortunate that they
had been able to make such good progress.

The tent was hardly in position, and all within, huddling around the
stove, in which Tim had just started a fire, when they were startled by
a hail:

"Halloa, the house!"

The four hurried outside, where a striking sight met them. Eight men,
each with a heavy pack strapped over his shoulders, and bending over
with his load, thickly clad, but with their faces, so far as they could
be seen through the wrappings, wet and red, had halted in front of the
tent, which they scrutinized with wonder.

"Are you going to begin digging here?" called one of the men, whose
eyes, nose, and mouth were all that was visible behind his muffler.

"Not while the storm lasts," replied Tim. "If we had room, we'd ask ye
to come inside and enj'y yoursilves till the weather clears. At any
rate, we'll be glad to give ye something warm to ate and drink."

"Oh, that's it!" exclaimed another of the men. "You're afraid of the
storm, are you?"

"We're not much afraid, but we ain't in love with the same. Won't ye
come in--that is, one or two at a time?"

"Thanks for your invitation, but we haven't the time to spare. We're
afeared they'll get all the gold in the Klondike country if we don't
hurry. You're foolish to loiter along the road like this."

"We're willing to lose a bit of the goold for sake of the comfort. If
ye are bound to go on, we wish ye good luck."

"The same to yourselves," the plucky and hopeful miners called as they
plodded forward.

For two dreary days the party was storm-stayed in camp.

"Here," said Jeff Graham, when making ready to resume their voyage, "we
leave our Yukon sleds."

"Shall we not need them on our return?" asked Roswell.

"We should if we returned by this route, but I wouldn't work my way
against these streams and through the passes again for all the gold in
the Klondike country. We shall take the steamer down the Yukon to St.
Michael's, and so on to Seattle."

"That is a long voyage," suggested Hardman.

"Yes, four thousand miles; but it will be easy enough for us when we
are on a steamer."

"The Yukon is closed for eight months or more each year."

"We don't intend to go down it when it's closed, for I didn't bring
skates along, and I don't know how to skate, anyway."

"You do not expect to stay long in the Klondike country?" was the
inquiring remark of Hardman, who showed little interest in the
intentions of their leader.

"That depends; we shall come back in two months, or six, or a year,
according as to how rich we strike it."

"S'pose you don't strike it at all."

Jeff shrugged his shoulders.

"We'll make a good try for it. If we slip up altogether, these folks I
have brought with me won't be any worse off than before; but I don't
intend to slip up--that ain't what I came into this part of the world
for."

"No, I reckon few people come for that," was the comment of Hardman,
who seemed to be in a cheerful mood again.

Nothing could have offered a stronger contrast to their previous rough
experience than that which now came to them. Fourteen miles down the
river brought them to Lake Labarge, where they had nothing to do but to
sit down and float with the current, using the poles occasionally to
keep the raft in the best position. Thirty-one miles brought them to
Lewis River, down which they passed to the Hootalinqua; then to the Big
Salmon, and forty-five miles farther to the Little Salmon, the current
running five miles an hour, and much swifter in the narrow canon-like
passages. Then beyond the Little Salmon the craft and its hopeful
passengers floated smoothly with the current for a distance of one
hundred and twenty miles, when the boys were startled to see four giant
buttes of stone towering above the water, which rushed violently among
them.

"What place is that?" asked Frank, who with his cousin surveyed the
immense towers with deep interest.

"Five-Finger Rapids," was the reply.

"They look dangerous."

"So they be, unless ye happens to know which two to pass between; now,
which would ye selict as a guess?"

Roswell and Frank studied them awhile, and the latter answered:

"It doesn't seem to me that it makes much difference which one you
take."

"Ah, but it makes a mighty difference. We should have big trouble if we
neglicted to folly the right side of the river."

[Illustration: TIM AND JEFF LIT THEIR PIPES; HARDMAN SAT APART.]

Jeff and Hardman were already working the raft in that direction, and
Tim now gave his aid. It looked perilous, but, knowing the right
course, the craft made the passage without any mishap. All settled down
to enjoy the smooth sailing that was before them once more. Tim and
Jeff lit their pipes, Hardman sat apart, while the boys were together
near the front of the raft. The weather was clearer than it had been
for several days, and much more moderate. May was well advanced, and
the short, hot summer was at hand. If all went well, they would reach
the gold country at the right season, and as they neared the goal the
spirits of all rose, and a longing to get forward manifested itself in
many ways. They waited until night had fairly come before they went
ashore and encamped, and they were off again at daybreak, despite the
uncannily early hour at which it comes in that part of the world.

Six miles down the Lewis River took them to the Rink Rapids, through
which they passed without difficulty. Just beyond are the ruins of Fort
Selkirk, where the Pelly and Lewis rivers unite. Tim McCabe studied the
mouth of the Pelly, as it poured into the Lewis, and soon as the point
was fairly passed, he turned to his friends, his round face aglow.

"I offer me congratulations," he said, doffing his cap and bowing low.

"On what?" asked Frank Mansley.

"The stream over which ye are now floating takes the name of the Yukon,
and doesn't give up the same till it tumbles into the Pacific siveral
miles to the west of us."

"Several miles!" repeated Frank; "it must be three thousand."

"Something like that, I belave. The worst part of our journey is behind
us."

"How far are we from Juneau?"

"To be exact, which I loikes to be, it is five hundred and tin miles."




CHAPTER XII.

AT DAWSON CITY.


Naturally the route over which the little party of gold-seekers were
journeying steadily improved. The Yukon, like many other great rivers
of the world, comes into being a lusty, vigorous infant, the junction
of the Lewis and Pelly making it a stream of considerable proportions
from the moment it takes its name.

Other gold-hunters were seen from time to time, and there were pleasant
exchanges and greetings with most of them. It was the custom of Jeff
Graham to keep going so long as daylight lasted, when the raft was
worked into shore and an encampment made. For a time the old miner kept
his Winchester within immediate reach, hoping to gain sight of some
deer or wild game, but as day after day and night after night passed
without the first glimpse of anything of the kind, he gave up in
disgust.

"It's the most villainous country on the face of the earth," he said,
as he lit his pipe at the evening fire. "If it wasn't for the gold that
we know is here, no decent man would stay over night in it. Frank, tell
me something about the confounded country."

"Me!" replied the boy, with a laugh. "I don't know half as much as you
and Tim."
