quicksilver, and lines of light gleamed on the burnished edge of the
shield, or sparkled on the ornamental points of the more precious metals
with which the various parts of his armour were decorated.  Above all
hung a loose mantle or cloak of dark-blue cloth, which was fastened on
the right shoulder with a large circular brooch of silver.

The weight of this panoply was enormous, but long habit had so inured
the young Norseman to the burthen of his armour that he moved under it
as lightly as if it had been no heavier than his ordinary habiliments.
Indeed, so little did it impede his movements that he could spring over
chasms and mountain streams almost as well with as without it; and it
was one of the boasts of his admiring friends that "he could leap his
own height with all his war gear on!"

We have already referred to Erling's partiality for the axe as an
offensive weapon.  This preference was in truth--strange though the
assertion may appear--owing to the peculiar adaptation of that
instrument to the preservation of life as well as the taking of it!

There are exceptions to all rules.  The rule among the Northmen in
former years was to slay and spare not.  Erling's tendency, and
occasionally his practice, was to spare and not to slay, if he could do
so with propriety.  From experience he found that, by a slight motion of
his wrist, the edge of his axe could be turned aside, and the blow which
was delivered by its flat side was invariably sufficient, without
killing, to render the recipient utterly incapable of continuing or
renewing the combat--at least for a few days.  With the sword this
delicate manoeuvre could not be so easily accomplished, for a blow from
the flat of a sword was not sufficiently crushing, and if delivered with
great force the weapon was apt to break.  Besides, Erling was a blunt,
downright, straightforward man, and it harmonised more with his
feelings, and the energy of his character, to beat down sword and shield
and headpiece with one tremendous blow, than to waste time in fencing
with a lighter weapon.

Having completed his toilet and concluded his meditations--which latter
filled him with much perplexity, if one might judge from the frequency
with which he shook his head--Erling the Bold hung Glumm's long sword at
his back, laid his huge axe on his shoulder, and, emerging from the
smithy, strode rapidly along the bridle path that led to the residence
of Ulf of Romsdal.

Suddenly it occurred to him that he had not yet tried the temper of his
new weapon, so he stopped abruptly before a small pine tree, about as
thick as a man's arm.  It stood on the edge of a precipice along the
margin of which the track skirted.  Swaying the axe once round his head,
he brought it forcibly down on the stem, through which it passed as if
it had been a willow wand, and the tree went crashing into the ravine
below.  The youth looked earnestly at his weapon, and nodded his head
once or twice as if the result were satisfactory.  A benignant smile
played on his countenance as he replaced it on his shoulder and
continued on his way.

A brisk walk of half an hour brought him to Ulfstede, where he found the
men of the family making active preparations for the impending journey
to the Thing.  In the great hall of the house, his father held earnest
discussion with Ulf.  The house-carles busied themselves in burnishing
their mail and sharpening their weapons, while Ada and Hilda assisted
Dame Astrid, Ulf's wife, to spread the board for the evening meal.

Everything in the hall was suggestive of rude wealth and barbarous
warlike times.  The hall itself was unusually large--capable of feasting
at least two hundred men.  At one end a raised hearth sustained a fire
of wood that was large enough to have roasted an ox.  The smoke from
this, in default of a chimney, found an exit through a hole in the roof.
The rafters were, of course, smoked to a deep rich coffee colour, and
from the same cause the walls also partook not a little of that hue.
All round these walls hung, in great profusion, shields, spears, swords,
bows, skins, horns, and such like implements and trophies of war and the
chase.  The centre of the hall was open, but down each side ran two long
tables, which were at this time groaning with great haunches of venison,
legs of mutton, and trenchers of salmon, interspersed with platters of
wild fowl, and flanked by tankards and horns of mead and ale.  Most of
the drinking cups were of horn, but many of these were edged with a rim
of silver, and, opposite the raised seats of honour, in the centre of
each table, the tankards were of solid silver, richly though rudely
chased--square, sturdy, and massive, like the stout warriors who were
wont to quaff their foaming contents.

"I tell thee, Ulf," said Haldor, "thou wilt do wrong to fare to the
Thing with men fully armed when the token was one of peace.  The King is
in no mood just now to brook opposition.  If we would save our
independence we must speak him smoothly."

"I care not," replied Ulf gruffly; "this is no time to go about
unarmed."

"Nay, I did not advise thee to go unarmed, but surely a short sword
might suffice, and--"

At this moment Erling entered, and Ulf burst into a loud laugh as he
interrupted his friend: "Aye, a short sword--something like that," he
said, pointing to the huge hilt which rose over the youth's shoulder.

"Hey! lad," exclaimed his father, "art going to fight with an axe in one
hand and a sword in the other?"

"The sword is for Glumm, father.  I owe him one after this morning's
work.  Here, friend Glumm, buckle it on thy shoulder.  The best wish
that thou and I can exchange is, that thy sword and my axe may never
kiss each other."

"Truly, if they ever do, I know which will fare worst," said Haldor,
taking the axe and examining it, "Thou art fond of a weary arm, my lad,
else ye would not have forged so weighty a weapon.  Take my advice and
leave it behind thee."

"Come, come," interrupted Ulf; "see, the tables are spread; let us use
our jaws on food and drink, and not on words, for we shall need both to
fit us for the work before us, and perchance we may have no longer need
of either before many days go by.  We can talk our fill at the Thing, an
it so please us."

"That will depend on the King's pleasure," replied Haldor, laughing.

"So much the more reason for taking our arms with us, in order that we
may have the means of talking the King's pleasure," retorted Ulf with a
frown; "but sit ye down at my right hand, Haldor, and Hilda will wait
upon thee.  Come, my men all--let us fall to."

It is scarcely necessary to say that this invitation was accepted with
alacrity.  In a few minutes about fifty pairs of jaws were actively
employed in the manner which Ulf recommended.

Meanwhile Erling the Bold seated himself at the lower end of one of the
tables, in such a position that he could keep his eye on the outer door,
and, if need be, steal away unobserved.  He calculated that his little
brother must soon return from his flying journey, and he expected to
hear from him some news of the vikings.  In this expectation he was
right; but when Alric did come, Erling saw and heard more than he looked
for.

The meal was about half concluded, and Ulf was in the act of pledging,
not absent, but defunct, friends, when the door opened slowly, and Alric
thrust his head cautiously in.  His hair, dripping and tangled, bore
evidence that his head at least had been recently immersed in water.

He caught sight of Erling, and the head was at once withdrawn.  Next
moment Erling stood outside of the house.

"How now, Alric, what has befallen thee?  Hey! thou art soaking all
over!"

"Come here; I'll show you a fellow who will tell you all about it."

In great excitement the boy seized his brother's hand and dragged rather
than led him round the end of the house, where the first object that met
his view was a man whose face was covered with blood, which oozed from a
wound in his forehead, while the heaving of his chest, and an occasional
gasp, seemed to indicate that he had run far and swiftly.



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE VIKING RAID--ALRIC'S ADVENTURE WITH THE DANE--ERLING'S CUTTER, AND
THE BATTLE IN THE PASS.

"Whom have we here?" exclaimed Erling, looking close into the face of
the wounded man.  "What!  Swart of the Springs!"

Erling said this sternly, for he had no liking for Swart, who was a
notorious character, belonging to one of the neighbouring fiords--a wild
reckless fellow, and, if report said truly, a thief.

"That recent mischief has cost thee a cracked crown?" asked Erling, a
little more gently, as he observed the exhausted condition of the man.

"Mischief enough," said Swart, rising from the stone on which he had
seated himself, and wiping the blood, dust, and sweat from his haggard
face, while his eyes gleamed like coals of fire; "Skarpedin the Dane has
landed in the fiord, my house is a smoking pile, my children and most of
the people in the stede are burned, and the Springs run blood!"

There was something terrible in the hoarse whisper in which this was
hissed out between the man's teeth.  Erling's tone changed instantly as
he laid his hand on Swart's shoulder.

"Can this be true?" he answered anxiously; "are we too late? are _all_
gone?"

"_All_," answered Swart, "save the few fighting men that gained the
fells."  The man then proceeded to give a confused and disjointed
account of the raid, of which the following is the substance.

Skarpedin, a Danish viking, noted for his daring, cruelty, and success,
had taken it into his head to visit the neighbourhood of Horlingdal, and
repay in kind a visit which he had received in Denmark the previous
summer from a party of Norsemen, on which occasion his crops had been
burned, his cattle slaughtered, and his lands "herried", while he
chanced to be absent from home.

It must be observed that this deed of the Northmen was not deemed
unusually wicked.  It was their custom, and the custom also of their
enemies, to go out every summer on viking cruise to plunder and ravage
the coasts of Denmark, Sweden, Britain, and France, carrying off all the
booty they could lay hold of, and as many prisoners as they wanted or
could obtain.  Then, returning home, they made slaves or "thralls" of
their prisoners, often married the women, and spent the winter in the
enjoyment of their plunder.

Among many other simple little habits peculiar to the times was that
called "Strandhug".  It consisted in a viking, when in want of
provisions, landing with his men on any coast--whether that of an enemy
or a countryman--and driving as many cattle as he required to the shore,
where they were immediately slaughtered and put on board without leave
asked or received!

Skarpedin was influenced both by cupidity and revenge.  Swart had been
one of the chief leaders of the expedition which had done him so much
damage.  To the Springs therefore he directed his course with six
"longships", or ships of war, and about five hundred men.

In the afternoon of a calm day he reached the fiord at the head of which
were the Springs and Swart's dwelling.  There was a small hamlet at the
place, and upon this the vikings descended.  So prompt and silent were
they, that the men of the place had barely time to seize their arms and
defend their homes.  They fought like lions, for well they knew that
there was no hope of mercy if they should be beaten.  But the odds
against them were overwhelming.  They fell in heaps, with many of their
foes underneath them.  The few who remained to the last retreated
fighting, step by step, each man towards his own dwelling, where he fell
dead on its threshold.  Swart himself, with a few of the bravest, had
driven back that part of the enemy's line which they attacked.  Thus
they were separated for a time from their less successful comrades, and
it was not till the smoke of their burning homesteads rose up in dense
clouds that they became aware of the true state of the fight.  At once
they turned and ran to the rescue of their families, but their retreat
was cut off by a party of the enemy, and the roar of the conflagration
told them that they were too late.  They drew together, therefore, and,
making a last desperate onset, hewed their way right through the ranks
of their enemies, and made for the mountains.  All were more or less
wounded in the _melee_, and only one or two succeeded in effecting their
escape.  Swart dashed past his own dwelling in his flight, and found it
already down on the ground in a blazing ruin.  He killed several of the
men who were about it, and then, bounding up the mountain side, sought
refuge in a ravine.

Here he lay down to rest a few moments.  During the brief period of his
stay he saw several of his captured friends have their hands and feet
chopped off by the marauders, while a terrible shriek that arose once or
twice told him all too plainly that on a few of them had been
perpetrated the not uncommon cruelty of putting out the eyes.

Swart did not remain many moments inactive.  He descended by a
circuitous path to the shore, and, keeping carefully out of sight, set
off in the direction of Horlingdal.  The distance between the two places
was little more than nine or ten miles, but being separated from each
other by a ridge of almost inaccessible mountains, that rose to a height
of above five thousand feet, neither sight nor sound of the terrible
tragedy enacted at the Springs could reach the eyes or ears of the
inhabitants of Ulfstede.  Swart ran round by the coast, and made such
good use of his legs that he reached the valley in little more than an
hour.  Before arriving at Ulfstede his attention was attracted and his
step arrested by the sight of a warship creeping along the fiord close
under the shadow of the precipitous cliffs.  He at once conjectured that
this was one of the Danish vessels which had been dispatched to
reconnoitre Horlingdal.  He knew by its small size (having only about
twenty oars) that it could not be there for the purpose of attack.  He
crouched, therefore, among the rocks to escape observation.

Now, it happened at this very time that Erling's brother Alric, having
executed his commission by handing the war-token to the next messenger,
whose duty it was to pass it on, came whistling gaily down a
neighbouring gorge, slashing the bushes as he went with a stout stick,
which in the lad's eyes represented the broadsword or battle-axe he
hoped one day to wield, in similar fashion, on the heads of his foes.
Those who knew Erling well could have traced his likeness in every act
and gesture of the boy.  The vikings happened to observe Alric before he
saw them, as was not to be wondered at, considering the noise he made.
They therefore rowed close in to the rocks, and their leader, a stout
red-haired fellow, leaped on shore, ascended the cliffs by a narrow
ledge or natural footpath, and came to a spot which overhung the sea,
and round which the boy must needs pass.  Here the man paused, and
leaning on the haft of his battle-axe, awaited his coming up.

It is no disparagement to Alric to say that, when he found himself
suddenly face to face with this man, his mouth opened as wide as did his
eyes, that the colour fled from his cheeks, that his heart fluttered
like a bird in a cage, and that his lips and tongue became uncommonly
dry!  Well did the little fellow know that one of the Danish vikings was
before him, for many a time had he heard the men in Haldorstede describe
their dress and arms minutely; and well did he know also that mercy was
only to be purchased at the price of becoming an informer as to the
state of affairs in Horlingdal--perhaps a guide to his father's house.
Besides this, Alric had never up to that time beheld a _real_ foe, even
at a distance!  He would have been more than mortal, therefore, had he
shown no sign of trepidation.

"Thou art light of heart, lad," said the Dane with a grim smile.

Alric would perhaps have replied that his heart was the reverse of light
at that moment, but his tongue refused to fulfil its office, so he
sighed deeply, and tried to lick his parched lips instead.

"Thou art on thy way to Ulfstede or Haldorstede, I suppose?" said the
man.

Alric nodded by way of reply.

"To which?" demanded the Dane sternly.

"T-to--to Ulf--"

"Ha!" interrupted the man.  "I see.  I am in want of a guide thither.
Wilt guide me, lad?"

At this the truant blood rushed back to Alric's cheeks.  He attempted to
say no, and to shake his head, but the tongue was still rebellious, and
the head would not move--at least not in that way--so the poor boy
glanced slightly aside, as if meditating flight.  The Dane, without
altering his position, just moved his foot on the stones, which act had
the effect of causing the boy's eyes to turn full on him again with that
species of activity which cats are wont to display when expecting an
immediate assault.

"Escape is impossible," said the Dane, with another grim smile.

Alric glanced at the precipice on his left, full thirty feet deep, with
the sea below; at the precipice on his right, which rose an unknown
height above; at the steep rugged path behind, and at the wild rugged
man in front, who could have clutched him with one bound; and admitted
in his heart that escape _was_ impossible.

"Now, lad," continued the viking, "thou wilt go with me and point out
the way to Ulfstede and Haldorstede; if not with a good will, torture
shall cause thee to do it against thy will; and after we have plundered
and burnt both, we will give thee a cruise to Denmark, and teach thee
the use of the pitchfork and reaping-hook."

This remark touched a chord in Alric's breast which at once turned his
thoughts from himself, and allowed his native courage to rise.  During
the foregoing dialogue his left hand had been nervously twitching the
little elm bow which it carried.  It now grasped the bow firmly as he
replied:

"Ulfstede and Haldorstede may burn, but thou shalt not live to see it."

With that he plucked an arrow from his quiver, fitted it to the string,
and discharged it full at the Dane's throat.  Quick as thought the man
of war sprang aside, but the shaft had been well and quickly aimed.  It
passed through his neck between the skin and the flesh.

A cry of anger burst from him as he leaped on the boy and caught him by
the throat.  He hastily felt for the hilt of his dagger, and in the heat
of his rage would assuredly have ended the career of poor Alric then and
there; but, missing the hilt at the first grasp, he suddenly changed his
mind, lifted the boy as if he had been a little dog, and flung him over
the precipice into the sea.

A fall of thirty feet, even though water should be the recipient of the
shock, is not a trifle by any means, but Alric was one of those vigorous
little fellows--of whom there are fortunately many in this world--who
train themselves to feats of strength and daring.  Many a time had he,
when bathing, leaped off that identical cliff into the sea for his own
amusement, and to the admiration and envy of many of his companions,
and, now that he felt himself tumbling in the air against his will, the
sensation, although modified, was nothing new.  He straightened himself
out after the manner of a bad child that does not wish to sit on nurse's
knee, and went into the blue fiord, head foremost, like a javelin.

He struck the water close to the vessel of his enemies, and on rising to
the surface one of them made a plunge at him with an oar, which, had it
taken effect, would have killed him on the spot; but he missed his aim,
