forgot everything since I came here."

"Never mind the rest, deary; try and think about that. It's just the
song for a sailor and a sailor's lass."

"That's just what my mother used to say--that I was a sailor's lass!"
exclaimed Tiny.

"And she taught you just the right kind of a song. Now try a bit more,
deary," he added, coaxingly.

    "Star of Faith, when winds are mocking
      All his toil, he flies to Thee;
    Save him, on the billows rocking,
      Far, far at sea."

"I don't think I know any more," said the child, as she finished this
verse.

"Well, you've done first-rate, deary; and mind, you must sing that song
to me every night," he added.

For a little while they went on in silence, and nothing could be heard
but the gentle lap, lap of the waves at the side of the boat, until
Coomber said: "Come, sing to us again about that sailor's star. Bob, you
try and pick it up as she sings," he added.

So the verses were sung through again, and without a break this time;
and Tiny was able to recall the last verse, too, and sang--

    "Star Divine, oh! safely guide him,
      Bring the wanderer back to Thee;
    Sore temptations long have tried him,
      Far, far at sea."

"Bravo, little 'un," exclaimed Bob, who was completely charmed out of
his sulky mood by the singing.

"I say, Bob," suddenly exclaimed Coomber, "is the bottle up there?"

"I ain't seen the bottle," sulkily responded the lad, his ill-humour
returning at once.

"I--I took it up, and told 'em to fill it," exclaimed Coomber; and as he
spoke he drew in his oars, and felt under the seat, and all round the
boat. "I must ha' forgot it, thinking about the little 'un and her
picture," he said, after searching round the boat in vain.

"It's too late to go back," said Bob; "it'll be dark soon."

"Ye-es, it's too late to go back with the child," said Coomber, slowly
and regretfully; though what he should do without his nightly dose of
whisky he did not know.

"Sing again," whispered Bob to Tiny; and the next minute the little
voice rang out once more its "Star of Peace."

It brought peace to the angry fisherman--the more angry, perhaps,
because he had nobody but himself to blame that the bottle had been left
behind. Before they landed the singing had worked its mysterious charm,
and the fisherman had almost forgotten his anger, and his bottle, too.

"You tie up the boat, and make haste in, Bob," he said, as he took the
little girl in his arms, and stepped out upon the shore. A light was
shining in the window of the old boat-house, and Tiny was all impatience
to get home and show her treasure to Dick.

"Take it out of your pocket, daddy, and give it to me," she said, as
they were crossing the sands; and the moment the door was opened she ran
in, exclaiming, "I've got it! I've got it, Dick!"

"Hush, hush, deary; Dick and Tom have gone to bed, and both are fast
asleep. Come in and get your supper; it's been waiting ever so long for
you." As she spoke, the poor woman cast several furtive glances at her
husband, fearing that he was more than usually morose, as he had not
spoken; but, to her surprise, he said, in a merry tone:

"Bless you, mother, the little 'un has got something better than supper.
Dame Peters wanted her to stay and have some hot potatoes; but she was
in such a hurry to be off with her prize that she wouldn't look at the
potatoes."

"I've got some reading," said Tiny, in a delighted whisper, holding up
her sheet of paper.

"Why, what's the good of that?" exclaimed Mrs. Coomber, in a
disappointed tone. "Nobody at the Point can read, unless it's the Hayes'
at the farm."

"And she'd better not let me catch her with any of them," put in
Coomber, sharply.

"Dick and me are going to learn to read by ourselves," announced Tiny,
spreading out her picture on the table. This would enhance its value to
everybody, she thought, since Dame Peters set such store by it solely
because of the picture. And so she did not venture to turn it over to
con the letters on the other side until after Bob had come in, and they
had all looked at it.

"What's it all about?" asked Bob, turning to the smoking plate of fish
which his mother had just placed on the table.

"Don't you see it's a kind man putting his hand on the boys' heads?"
said Tiny, rather scornfully.

"Oh, anybody can see that," said Bob. "But what does it mean? That's
what I want to know."

But Tiny could only shake her head as she gazed earnestly at the print.
"I dunno what it is," she said, with a sigh.

"Come, come, you must put that away for to-night," said Mrs. Coomber;
"you ought to have been in bed an hour ago;" and she would have taken
the picture away, but Tiny hastily snatched it up, and, carefully
folding it, wrapped it in another piece of paper, and then begged that
it might be put away in a drawer for fear it should be lost before the
morning.

Mrs. Coomber smiled as she took it from her hand. "I'll take care of
it," she said, "and you go and get your supper."

It was not often that the fisherman's family were up so late as this,
but no one seemed in a hurry to go to bed. Coomber himself was so
good-tempered that his wife and Bob forgot their habitual fear of him in
listening to his account of how brave Tiny had been, and how Dame Peters
thought she was growing very fast. Then Tiny had to sing one verse of
"Star of Peace," after she had finished her supper--Mrs. Coomber would
not let her sing more than that, for she was looking very sleepy and
tired--and then they all went to bed, with a strange, new feeling of
peace and content, Mrs. Coomber vaguely wondering what had become of the
whisky bottle, and wishing every night could be like this.

As soon as her eyes were open the next morning Tiny thought of her
treasure, and crept into the boys' room to tell Dick the wonderful news.
But to her surprise she found the bed was empty; and, peeping into the
kitchen, saw Mrs. Coomber washing up the breakfast things.

"Oh, mammy, what is the time?" she exclaimed, but yawning as she spoke.

"Oh, you're awake at last. Make haste and put your clothes on, and come
and have your breakfast," said Mrs. Coomber.

"Where's Dick?" asked Tiny.

"He's helping daddy and Bob with the net; and you can go, too, when
you've had your breakfast. Daddy wouldn't let the boys come and wake you
'cos you was so tired last night."

"What are they doing to the net?" asked Tiny, as she came to the table.

"Mending it, of course. Daddy's going shrimping to-day."

"What a bother that net is," said Tiny. "Daddy's always mending it."

"Yes, so he is, deary. It's old, you see, and we can't afford to get a
new one."

"I've got to get a lot of samphire to-day, and I promised Dick I'd make
some more letters for him in the sand," said Tiny, meditatively.

"But daddy wants you to help him with the net," suggested Mrs. Coomber.
The little girl had always been so pliant, so amenable to control, that
Mrs. Coomber was surprised to hear her say passionately--

"I won't do that nasty net. I must pick the samphire for Dame Peters,
and show Dick my picture, first;" and then she snatched up a basket, and
ran out, not to the sands, where the fisherman and his boys sat mending
the torn net, but away to the salt-marsh, where the seaweed grew
thickest, and she could fill her basket most quickly. In an hour or two
she came home, looking tired and cross.

"Ain't Dick come home yet?" she asked, throwing herself on the floor.

"They ain't done the net yet. Tom came to fetch you a little while ago."

"I don't want Tom, I want Dick. We're going to make some letters, and
learn to read," said Tiny.

"You'd better leave the reading alone, if it makes you so cross," said
Mrs. Coomber.

"No, it don't make me cross; it's that nasty net."

"But you always liked to help daddy wind the string and mend the net
before. Why don't you go to them now?"

But Tiny would not move. She lay on the floor, kicking and grumbling,
because Dick could not leave the net and come and see her picture.

"You're a very naughty girl, Tiny," said Mrs. Coomber at last; "and I
don't see how you can think God will love you if you don't try to be
good."

The little girl sat up instantly, and looked earnestly into her face.
"My other mammy used to say something like that," she said, slowly. And
then she burst into tears, and ran and shut herself in the boys'
bedroom.

What passed there, Mrs. Coomber did not know; but, half an hour
afterwards, as she glanced out of the little kitchen window, she saw her
running across the sands to where the group of boys sat mending the old
net; and she smiled as she thought of what her words had done. She did
not know what a hard fight Tiny had had with herself before she could
make up her mind to give up her own way; she only thought how pleased
her husband would be when he saw the child come running towards him, and
that a fit of ill-humour, from which they would probably all have
suffered, had been warded off by the little girl's conquest of herself.

But neither Tiny nor Mrs. Coomber ever forgot that day. A new element
was introduced into the lives of the fisherman's family. The little girl
learned her first lesson in self-control, and Dick and Tom began to
master the difficulties of the alphabet; for, when the net was finished,
and Bob and his father waded out into the sea on their shrimping
expedition, Tiny ran and fetched her pretty picture to show the boys,
and then they all set to work with bits of stick to make the letters in
the sand.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER V.

ON THE SANDS.


Tiny was somewhat disappointed as the days went on to find that her
pupils, Tom and Dick, took less and less interest in learning the
letters she marked in the sand, or pointed out on the paper. They teased
her to know how to put the letters together and make them into words
which they could understand. But, alas! labour as she would, Tiny could
not get over this difficulty even for herself. She had a dim idea that
G O D spelt God, but she could not be quite sure--not sure enough to tell
Dick that it was so. It was enough, however, to quicken her own interest
in what the lines of letters might be able to tell her if only she could
solve the mystery of putting them into words, for doubtless they would
clear up her anxiety as to whether God loved boys as well as girls.

She did not spend her whole time poring over her picture. She gathered
samphire, helped to sort the fish when it was brought in, or mend the
much-despised net; but every day she spent some time diligently tracing
out the letters she knew and spelling over G O D.

She might have mastered the difficulty with very little trouble if the
fisherman had been less obstinate in his quarrel with the farm people,
for Harry Hayes and his sisters were often down on the sands, sometimes
bringing their books with them, and Dick, who longed to join them in
their play, tried to persuade Tiny to go and ask them to help her with
the reading difficulty.

"Dad won't say anything to you, even if he should see you talking; but
he won't see, and I won't tell," urged Dick, one day, when the children
from the farm were at play among the sandhills, and occasionally casting
sidelong glances towards Dick and Tiny.

But the little girl only shook her head. "I can't, Dick," she said; "God
wouldn't like it; mother told me that long ago."

"But how is He to know if you don't tell Him?" said the boy, in an
impatient tone.

"Don't you know that God can see us all the time; that He's taking care
of us always?" said Tiny, slowly.

"Oh, come! what'll you tell us next?" said Dick, looking over his
shoulder with a gesture of fear. "He ain't here now, you know," he
added.

"Yes he is," said the little girl, confidently; "mother said God was a
Spirit. I dunno what that is, but it's just as real as the wind. We
can't see that you know, but it's real; and we can't see God, but He's
close to us all the time."

The boy crept closer to her while she was speaking. "What makes you talk
like that?" he said, in a half-frightened tone.

"What's a matter, Dick?" she asked, not understanding his fear. "Don't
you like to think God is close to you, and all round you," she suddenly
added, in surprise.

Dick shook his head. "Nobody never thinks about God at Bermuda Point, so
p'r'aps He don't come here," he said, at last, in a tone of relief. "Oh,
I say, Tiny, look! Harry Hayes has got a book! Let's go and see what
it's about!"

"Well, we'll ask dad when he come home to-night, and p'r'aps he'll let
us," said the little girl, turning resolutely to her own paper again.

"Oh, then, it's dad you're afraid of, and not God?" said Dick.

"Afraid! What do you mean?" asked Tiny. "God loves me, and takes care of
me, and so does daddy; and if I was to talk to Harry Hayes, it would
make him cross, and God doesn't like us to make people cross; and little
gals has to do as they are told, you know."
