Dutchman, and pounced upon him, but the old man had his wits about him.
At first sight of his enemy he let himself go limp as if dead.  Lions
are particular.  They don't like dead meals; they prefer to kill their
own dinners.  After pouncing on his prey the lion put his mouth to the
old fellow's ear and roared.  If he was not deaf for life after that he
ought to have been!  At all events he was deaf at the time to the
remark, for he paid no attention to it whatever.  Then the lion pawed
him a little, lay down on him, rolled him about as a cat plays with a
mouse, and ultimately couched a few yards off to watch jealously for the
slightest sign of life.  But the Dutchman was a splendid actor.  Even in
breathing he managed to remain motionless, and at last the lion sneaked
away overwhelmed with disappointment.  Then the old man slowly lifted
his head, rose, congratulated himself, and returned home in a thankful
state of mind.

Although lions had finally taken themselves off, and retired to safer
and more distant retreats, the mountain glens of the neighbourhood were,
as I have already said, still inhabited by leopards of large size and
dangerous temper.

"They are powerful and savage fellows," said my friend, as he rose to
inspan, "and few men like to face them unless assisted by a party, and
with good dogs.  One friend of mine, a doctor, used to boast that he
could stare a leopard out of countenance.  At last one was caught in a
trap, and the doctor tried the experiment, but only got knocked over and
his nose scratched for his pains.  There was a curious instance, once,
of a Fingo going mad in consequence of being bitten by a leopard.  The
madness took the form of his feigning to be a leopard, and there was no
doubt as to his insanity, for he continually growled and scratched and
snapped with his teeth, and finished off by jumping through a glass
door.--Now then, the cart's ready; in you go."

I jumped in, and off we went again over the sweet-scented plain,--now on
a good bit of road, now on a bad; often forsaking the track altogether,
and occasionally plunging into holes that knocked our heads against the
hood, and tried our springs to the uttermost, till evening at last found
us among the hills, where a rough-and-ready inn afforded us shelter for
the night.

Passing through Somerset we came to a place named Cookhouse Drift, where
there is a bridge over the Great Fish River.

We also met here with seven troopers of the frontier, armed and mounted
police, as tight and serviceable a set of young fellows as one could
wish to see--clad in corduroy, thorough-going, rough-and-ready colonial
cavalry--and well-trained to bush fighting.  They were out after seven
escaped convicts, and had caught one, a big Kafir, who was handcuffed,
and seemed sulky when I looked at him.

At another place, where the prickly pear was very prolific, and the bush
so dense that it formed a pretty safe retreat to escaped convicts, as
well as baboons and tigers, we discovered a band of Kafirs celebrating a
wedding.

The prickly pears, which were ripe at this time, we found to be very
pleasant and refreshing, but we had to handle them with care, as they
were covered with prickles so fine that they pierced the skin and broke
off the pear with the least touch.  The great evil of prickly pear
thorns is that it is almost impossible to extract them, and although it
can scarcely be said that they cause pain, the irritation they produce
is great and prolonged.  The monkeys know this well!

I was greatly amused once, while delayed at a road-side inn, by the
antics of a monkey with a prickly pear.  I had fed him with part of one,
of which he seemed passionately fond.  Wishing to know whether monkeys
as well as men were cautious in handling the fruit, I pulled another by
means of a couple of sticks.  The usual mode of proceeding is to rub the
pear on the ground with a bunch of grass, and thus remove the prickles,
when it may be handled with impunity.  Without doing this, however, I
lifted the pear with my sticks and handed it to Jacko.  He looked at it
earnestly for a few seconds, then at me with a round mouth and
reproachful eyes, as though to say, "You don't mean _that_, do you?"

I smiled and nodded.

Jacko looked again at the pear and put one finger towards it with great
caution, but drew back and looked up at me again, as if to say, "_Won't_
you help me?"

I smiled again and shook my head, whereupon he went to work with the
most gingerly and delicate touches, as if he were handling red-hot iron.
At last he managed to tear a hole in the skin, into which he inserted
his black nose, and greedily devoured the contents.  Despite his
caution, however, I noticed that Jacko kept scratching his hands pretty
steadily for some time afterwards.

As we advanced into the hills the roads became unimaginably bad.  In one
place our track had been carried away by a flood, and the
boulder-covered bed of the torrent was our only road.

At last we got up into the mountain region of Glen Lynden, the place to
which the Scotch settlers were sent by Government in 1820, under the
care of Thomas Pringle, the "African poet," who, among other pieces,
wrote the beautiful poem which begins:

  "Afar in the desert I love to ride,
  With the silent bushboy alone by my side."

The descendants of the 1820 men now occupy these valleys.  Both in
physique and character they do credit to their sires.

Here I met one of the few survivors of the original settlers, Mr Dodds
Pringle, and brother to the poet.  [This happened about 1876.] Although
upwards of seventy, and a large, stout man, I saw him mount his horse
with the activity of a man of thirty.  At his house in Glen Lynedock,
where I spent a night, they showed me an assagai, or Kafir spear, which
had been bent into the form of a half-moon against his, (Mr Pringle's),
stomach!  It happened thus:

He was out fighting with the rest of the farmers in the war of 1851, and
one day was attacked by Kafirs, one of whom flung his assagai at him
with tremendous force.  Mr Pringle had just fired his rifle, and was
reloading when the assagai struck him.  It was arrested, however, in its
deadly flight by his belt and bullet-pouch.  The savage rushed forward,
intending to finish his adversary by a thrust from a short spear, but
old Pringle guarded the thrust with one hand, while, with the other, he
drew a pistol and shot the Kafir through the heart.  At that moment
another savage ran at him, but a comrade of Pringle suddenly came on the
scene and the savage turned to fly.  The comrade took aim at him.

"Be cool, and take him low," said Pringle, undoing his belt to examine
his wound.

The comrade fired, and the savage fell.

"Are you killed?" asked the comrade, turning to Pringle and glancing at
the bent assagai.

"I don't know," replied the other, with a serious look, as he thrust his
hand under his waist-belt, "there's no hole that I can find, anyhow."

The hand, when withdrawn, was covered with blood, but it was found on
examination that the wound was slight, thanks to the providential
interposition of the thick bullet-pouch.  The old gentleman is now
naturally fond of showing the weapon which had so nearly proved fatal.

Advancing into the Baviaans River District we passed through many places
of historic interest, and scenery that must have reminded the Scottish
settlers of the rugged glens to which they had bidden farewell for ever.

Among other places, Hobson pointed out a small cavern, high up on the
cliffs, which was the scene of a cruel affray not many years before the
arrival of the Scotch settlers in the district.

As it illustrates the wild frontier life of those times, and bears on
the subject of the grievances of early colonists, I shall relate it.

There was a Dutch Boer, a farmer named Bezuidenhout, who, in the year
1815, dwelt in the lonely and wild recesses of the Baviaans River
District.  He seems to have been a passionate, headstrong man.  The
Dutch Boers were generally honest, sterling men, though at that time
very ignorant, being far removed from the means of instruction.  But the
Dutchmen, not less than others, had wild and foolish men amongst them
who were easily misled by unprincipled adventurers.

Bezuidenhout seems to have been one of these; at all events he was
savage enough to treat one of his Hottentot servants so ill that he was
cited to appear before the Court of his district, and was foolish enough
to resist the summons.  A messenger was therefore sent to arrest him,
and as he was known to be a daring character, and had threatened to
shoot any limb of the law who should dare to approach his residence,
twenty men of the Cape Corps, under Lieutenant Rousseau accompanied the
messenger.

On reaching the mountain home of Bezuidenhout they found him prepared.
He and a powerful half-caste in his employment were found sheltered
behind the high wall of a cattle enclosure, well armed.  The Dutchman
called to the soldiers to stop, else he would shoot the first man.
Disregarding the threat, the lieutenant extended his men in skirmishing
order, and attacked.  Bezuidenhout fired, happily missed, and retreated
into his house, whence he passed by a back-door into the thick jungle in
rear.  They lost him for a time, but finally traced him to a steep
krantz, or precipice, up the almost inaccessible face of which he and
his follower had taken refuge in a small cavern.  The muzzles of their
rifles were seen protruding from the entrance.  Lieutenant Rousseau
therefore crept up warily, until he reached a ledge above the aperture,
from which point he challenged the farmer to surrender, telling him the
reason of his being there, and assuring him of personal safety.

The man replied he would die rather than submit.  The Lieutenant
endeavoured to persuade him to surrender, but he was obdurate.  Night
was approaching.  The officer was anxious to get his men out of these
dark kloofs in daylight.  He therefore ordered them to ascend in two
bodies.  They did so, reached the cave, and rushed to the entrance, from
which Bezuidenhout fired, but without effect, the muzzle of his rifle
having been thrown up.  At the same moment one of the soldiers fired
into the cavern, and shot the farmer dead on the spot.  The servant
surrendered, and on entering the place it was found that a large
quantity of ammunition had been collected there, evidently with a view
to standing a siege.

After the departure of the military, the relations and friends of the
unfortunate and misguided man assembled to bury him, and, over his
grave, they vowed to avenge his death.  A brother of Bezuidenhout spoke
to them, and so wrought on their feelings that a great number of the
farmers of that and the neighbouring districts ultimately assembled
under arms, with the avowed intention of ridding themselves altogether
of British interference!  They went still further, and took a step which
might have been much more serious.  They sent Cornelius Faber, a
brother-in-law of the Bezuidenhouts, to the Kafir chief Gaika for the
purpose of rousing that savage and his hordes to attack the Colony.

Of course the Government was obliged to frustrate such an attempt with
all possible speed.  Troops were immediately sent against the rebels,
under Colonel Cuyler.  One of the rebel leaders, named Prinsloo, was
captured at a critical moment, and the main body, amounting to between
three and four hundred, was finally met with.  But before proceeding to
extremities, a field-commandant, William Nel, volunteered to go alone
among the rebels, and reason with them.  He did so, and was so far
successful as to shake the resolution of some, for, although
disaffected, many of these men were by no means so foolish as their
leaders.  Indeed, many of them had been threatened and coerced into
rebellion.  Seeing the effect of Nel's remonstrances, Faber,
Bezuidenhout, and other leaders, assembled their forces at a place
called Slachters Nek, and exacted from them an oath to remain faithful
to each other until they had expelled the tyrants from the frontier.

Next morning Colonel Cuyler proceeded to attack them.  On his approach
thirty or more of them threw down their arms in token of surrender; the
remainder, seeing that resistance would be hopeless, retired into the
fastnesses of Baviaans River.  There they were followed and surrounded,
and an attempt was made to bring them to submission, but during the
night most of them managed to escape by familiar mountain passes.

The principal leaders, rejecting all terms, escaped with their wagons,
families, and goods to the Winterberg Mountains, bordering on Kafirland,
where they hoped to be safe; but, being followed up hotly by a body of
troops under Major Fraser, they were eventually overtaken and surrounded
in a deep kloof.  Here six of them were brought to bay, among whom were
Faber, with his wife, his son--a lad of fourteen years,--and John
Bezuidenhout.  These, retiring behind the wagons, a skirmish began,
which was not concluded until one of the soldiers was killed, another
wounded, Bezuidenhout shot, and Faber and his wife and son severely
wounded.  Then the party were taken prisoners.

Subsequently fifty or sixty of the other rebels were captured and taken
to Capetown.  Of these, thirty-nine of the most culpable were tried on
the charge of high treason.  Six were condemned to death; the others,
after being compelled to witness the execution of their leaders, were to
undergo various degrees of punishment, according to their proved guilt.
One of the six had the capital sentence commuted to transportation for
life, and the remaining five ringleaders were executed.



LETTER SEVEN.

LION-HUNTING, ETCETERA, IN THE EARLY DAYS--BUSHMEN AND THEIR TROUBLES.

It is deeply interesting to tread in the footsteps of bold adventurous
men, and visit the scenes which have been rendered classic by their
deeds of heroic daring or of patient endurance.  So I found it during my
brief sojourn in the regions of Baviaans River, where, upwards of fifty
years before, my countrymen had faced, fought, and subdued the savage,
the wilderness, and the wild-beast.

The every-day life of the early settlers of this region cannot be better
illustrated than by a brief quotation from the diary of one of them.

  "_October 1st_.--Arrival of the Somerset wagon with flour, seed-corn,
  etcetera.  I discharged the servant Sandy from the party, gave him a
  pass, countersigned by the Deputy-Landdrost, and sent him off with the
  Somerset wagon towards Grahamstown.  This lad has turned out to be at
  once a fool and a blackguard, and quite beyond hope of reform.

  "_4th_.--A sharp frost last night blighted all our early potatoes,
  pumpkins, melons, kidney-beans, etcetera.  It appears we had sown some
  of our seed too early.

  "_8th, Sunday_.--A troop of about twenty quaggas galloped through the
  corner of our gardens during divine service.

  "_9th_.--A herd of hartebeests passed close to our huts, pursued by a
  pack of six wild dogs (_Hyaena venatica_).  Fired at the latter, but
  without effect.  This day Mr John Rennie, being out hunting on
  Hyndhope Fells, fell in with two wild Bushmen, dressed in sheepskins.
  They ran off on his approach, but made no demonstration of hostility.
  He came upon six hyenas devouring a hartebeest, and brought me its
  skull and horns.

  "_11th_.--Visited by three Boers from the Tarka--desirous of
  exchanging horses and cattle for guns and ammunition.  Completed my
  map of the location.

  "_16th_.--Surprised by a slight fall of snow; weather chill and
  cloudy.  The laughing hyena heard near the folds last night.  The
  sound truly horrible.

  "_21st_.--Fine weather.  Killed a large yellow snake.

  "_23rd_.--Received a visit from our district clergyman, the Reverend
  J. Evans of Cradock.  He brought a packet from the Landdrost conveying
  letters from the Colonial Secretary, assuring me of the continued
  support of the Government, and giving us the agreeable intelligence
  that a party of emigrants from the West of Scotland were speedily
  expected out, who would be located close beside us.  Received also
  very pleasant letters from Scotland, from Dr Philip, and from our
  parted comrade Mr Elliott.  Religious service in the evening by Mr
  Evans.  All much pleased and comforted.

  "_24th_.--Mr G. Rennie, who at my request had gone with a party of
  Hottentots to explore the country beyond the mountains towards the
  Koonap River, returned with a very favourable report of it.  Abundance
  of wood, water, and rich pasturage.  He saw a great deal of large
  game, and the recent traces of elephants.  Shot a gnu and hartebeest.

  "_November 1st_.--The weather warm and serene, like the finest summer
  weather in England.  Two snakes and a large scorpion killed.
  Turtle-doves, touracoos, thrushes, finches, and other birds of
  beautiful plumage become numerous.

  "_6th_.--Violent storm of thunder.  The peals fearfully loud.
  Magnificent clouds at sunset.

  "_15th_.--A tiger-wolf broke into the kraal last night, and killed
  several sheep.

  "_22nd_.--A wolf-trap constructed, with the aid of the Hottentots, of
  large stones and timber.

  "_29th_.--A wolf caught in the trap.

  "_December 4th_.--A heavy rain for three days swells the river to an
  unfordable size.  All the dry beds of torrents filled with furious
  floods.

  "_7th_.--Weather again warm and serene.  Mr G. Rennie kills another
  wild-boar at Glen Vair.

  "_19th_.--My brother John finds stone fit for millstones, and with the
  aid of one of the Hottentots begins to construct a small mill.

  "_29th_.--My father narrowly escapes being gored by a furious ox.
  Blight appears in the wheat.

  "_30th_.--Receive a large packet of letters and newspapers from
  Scotland.  All deeply interested.  This is the first packet of British
  newspapers that has reached us."

How all the Robinson-Crusoe blood in one's veins is stirred by such a
diary!  Truly I sometimes almost regret that I was not born to become a
pioneer settler in the African wilds!

However, it is some comfort to have the privilege of paying a flying
visit to these same wilds, which in many respects are quite as wild now
as they were then.  The lions, elephants, quaggas, and some others of
the large game, it is true, have taken themselves off to remoter wilds,
but the leopards, hyenas, baboons, antelopes, still inhabit these
kloofs, while snakes, scorpions, and the like are as plentiful as ever.

Talking of baboons reminds me that these creatures are said to sleep
sometimes on a ledge of rock on the face of a precipice for security
against lurking foes.  I was assured that sometimes a row of them may be
seen in such a situation sitting sound asleep, with their faces in their
hands, against the precipice, and their tails hanging over the ledge.
Of course I do not vouch for the truth of such reports.  I am answerable
only for what I profess to have seen.

The highest type of monkey suggests the lowest type of man in Africa.
This is the Bushman, or, as the Dutch have it, Bosjesman.  He is a
branch of the Hottentot race, and a very miserable, stunted branch;
nevertheless he is very far indeed removed from the baboon.  He has no
tail, for certain; at least if he has, he conceals it effectually.  He
wears garments, which no monkey does, and he speaks, which no monkey
ever did.

No thanks to the white man, however, if the poor Bushman is not a baboon
with the spirit of a tiger, for he has been most shamefully treated in
time past.  It is true the Bushmen were arrant thieves, and committed
great havoc among the frontier farmers at various times, and it was both
natural and right that these farmers should defend their homes and
property.  But it was neither right nor natural that these unfortunate
natives should have been so cruelly dealt with.

When the Scotch party settled at Glen Lynden, their troubles with
wild-beast pilferers were augmented occasionally by the appearance of
Bosjesman-thieves.

"In the beginning of October," writes Mr Pringle, "we were somewhat
alarmed by the discovery of a band of predatory Bushmen, lurking among
the rocks and caverns of the wild mountains between us and the valley of
the Tarka.  Lieutenant Pettingal, an officer of engineers, who was then
in our valley, engaged in the Government survey of the country,
discovered this horde in searching for some of his horses that were
missing.  Suspecting, from the traces, that they had been carried off by
Bushmen, he went out with an armed troop in pursuit, and came upon a
party of these wild marauders in one of the most savage recesses of the
neighbouring mountains.  They were at breakfast, on a grey horse which
they had slaughtered, and had steaks roasting on the fire cut out of the
flank, with the hide still upon them.  Pettingal, enraged by the
supposed loss of his best blood-horse, poured in a volley upon them;
but, apparently, without effect, for they all scrambled off with
inconceivable agility among the rocks and bushes.  He recovered,
however, some of his own horses, and eight belonging to our neighbour
which were tied up under an overhanging cliff near the top of a
mountain."

There were no Bushmen running wild among the beautiful hills and valleys
of Glen Lynden when Hobson and I entered it, but the region was not
free, as I have related, from naked Kafirs, and it is still noted for
its population of hairy baboons.



LETTER EIGHT.

RAIN!  RAIN!  RAIN!--BABOONS RIVER--SEAHORSE KLOOF--WE HUNT THE HILLS ON
HORSEBACK IN SPITE OF RAIN--FLOODS AND ACCIDENTS--PART FROM HOBSON--
MAIL-CARTS AND DIAMOND-DIGGERS.

Rain is a blessed refreshment to the thirsty land; it is a life-giving
cordial to the thirsty soul; but when rain descends in torrents and
without cessation during the greater part of one's brief holiday, or at
any other very unseasonable period, and when one is _not_ thirsty, it
becomes depressing, to say the least.

Thus was I treated by rain during my week in Baviaans River.  Hobson and
I had at last pushed up into the very heart of that wild mountain
region,--the allotted home of the Scottish settlers of 1820, the scene
of many Kafir raids and battles.

For months before we had lived in perpetual sunshine.  Hobson had sighed
for a drop of rain.  Sometimes South Africans have to sigh for a
twelve-month before relief is sent.  Even while I write, the colony is
suffering excessively from drought, and many farmers have been ruined.
On the Karroo I had almost come to forget the sensation of being rained
upon, and an umbrella there would have appeared as great an impropriety
as a muslin overcoat in Nova Zembla.  Nevertheless, no sooner did we
arrive at Seahorse Kloof than the windows of heaven were opened, and the
rain came down steadily night and day, while the sky presented a
universal grey that would have done credit to the Scottish Highlands.
It was too bad!

My main object in penetrating to these rugged wilds was to visit one of
the Pringles, a relative of personal friends on the borders of my own
land.  Finding that Mr Pringle was absent from home, we turned aside to
visit a cousin of Hobson's, a Mr John Edwards, who dwelt in what
appeared to me the fag-end of the world,--a lonely farmhouse, at the
head of the mountain gorge named Seahorse Kloof.

"It's a splendid country," said Hobson, "with lots of game, and Edwards
is a noted hunter, besides being a capital fellow."

What more could man desire?  We arrived full of hope and spirits,
received a hearty welcome, and awoke next day to find the sky grey, as I
have said, and the rain descending steadily.
