What a Babel of sounds and chaos of indescribable material!

That little boy whom you observe standing under the shadow of yonder
hull--his hands in his pockets (of course), his mouth open (probably),
and his eyes gazing up fixedly at the workmen, who cluster like bees on
the ribs and timbers of yonder infant ship has stood there for more than
an hour, and he will stand there, or thereabout, for many hours to come;
for it happens to be a holiday with him, and he dotes on harbours and
dockyards.  His whole being is wrapped up in them.

And this is natural enough.  Most boys delight to gaze on
incomprehensible and stupendous works.  Let us--you and I, reader--
follow this urchin's example, keeping our mouths shut, however, save
when we mean to speak, and our eyes open.

There are ships here of every shape and size--from the little
coasting-vessel to the great East Indiaman, which, in its unfinished
condition, looks like the skeleton of some dire megatherium of the
antediluvian world.  Some of these infant ships have an enormous shed
over them to protect them from the weather; others are destitute of such
protection: for ships, like men, it would seem, are liable to
vicissitudes of fortune.  While the "great ones" of the dockyard world
are comfortably housed, the small ones are not unfrequently exposed to
the fitful buffeting of the rude elements even from their birth.

There are ships here, too, in every state of progression.  There, just
beside you, is a "little one" that was born yesterday.  The keel has
just been laid on the blocks; and it will take many a long day of
clinching and sawing and hammering ere that infant assumes the bristling
appearance of an antediluvian skeleton.  Yonder is the hull of a ship
almost completed.  It is a gigantic infant, and has the aspect of a very
thriving child.  It evidently has a robust constitution and a sturdy
frame.  Perhaps we may re-visit the dockyard to-morrow, and see this
vessel launched.

Besides these two, there are ships with their ribs partially up, and
ships with their planking partially on; and in a more distant part of
the yard there are one or two old ships hauled up, high and dry, to have
their bottoms repaired and their seams re-pitched, after many a rough
and bravely-fought battle with the ocean waves.

Now that we have gazed our fill at the general aspect of the dockyard,
let us descend a little more to particulars.  We shall first tell of
the:--

NATURE AND USE OF DOCKS.

There are two kinds of docks--dry and wet.  A dry-dock is usually
constructed with gates, to admit or shut out the tide.  When a ship
arrives from a long voyage, and needs repair to the lower part of her
hull, she must be got out of the water somehow or other.

This object is frequently attained in regard to small vessels by simply
running them gently on the flat sand or mud beach of a bay or harbour,
so that, when the tide retires, they shall be left dry.  But it would be
dangerous as well as inconvenient to do this with large ships, therefore
dry-docks have been constructed for this purpose.  They are so built
that when the tide is full the dry-docks are also full.  When thus full
of water, the gates of a dry-dock are opened, and the large ship is
dragged slowly in, after which the gates are shut.  The tide then
retires, leaving it in this basin of water.  The ship is then propped up
on all sides with timbers, in such a way that she stands upright, "upon
an even keel," and thus, the pressure on her hull being equally
distributed, she is not damaged.  Then the water is let out by means of
sluices in the gates, or it is pumped out, and the ship left dry.  When
the tide returns, the gates and sluices are all shut, and its entrance
into the dock prevented, until such time as the ship is repaired, when
water is let slowly in.  As the vessel floats, the props and supports
fall away, the gates of her hospital are opened, and off she goes again,
in all the vigour of recruited health, to wing her way over the billows
of the great deep.

A wet-dock is somewhat similar to a dry-dock, the chief difference being
that ships while in it are kept floating in water.

Docks are not only used, however, for repairing and building ships.
They are also used for loading and unloading them; and as ships are
entering and departing from them almost constantly, the busy, bustling,
active scene they present is always agreeable.

The principal docks in the United Kingdom are as follows:--

DOCKS ON THE THAMES--namely, East and West India Docks, London Docks,
Saint Katherine's Docks, Commercial Docks, Victoria Docks.

SOUTHAMPTON DOCKS.

LIVERPOOL AND BRISTOL DOCKS.

HULL DOCKS.

GLASGOW DOCKS.

DUNDEE DOCKS.

LEITH DOCKS.

BIRKENHEAD DOCKS.

So much for docks in passing.  Let us now turn our attention to the
process of:--

BUILDING A SHIP.

As we think it highly improbable that any of our readers intend to
become either ship-carpenters or ship-architects, we will not worry them
with technical explanations.  To give an easily understood and general
idea of the manner of building a ship is all we shall attempt.  The
names of those parts only that are frequently or occasionally referred
to in general literature shall be given.

The term _ship_ is employed in two significations.  In familiar language
it denotes any large or small vessel that navigates the ocean with
sails.  In nautical language it refers solely to a vessel having three
masts, each consisting of a lower-mast, a top-mast, and a
top-gallant-mast.  At present we use the term _ship_ in the familiar
sense.

Elaborate and complicated drawings having been prepared, the shipbuilder
begins his work.

The _keel_ is the first part of a ship that is laid.  It is the beam
which runs along the bottom of a boat or ship from one end to the other.
In large ships the keel consists of several pieces joined together.
Its uses are, to cause the ship to preserve a direct course in its
passage through the water; to check the leeway which every vessel has a
tendency to make; and to moderate the rolling motion.  The keel is also
the ground-work, or foundation, on which the whole superstructure is
reared, and is, therefore, immensely strong and solid.  The best wood
for keels is teak, as it is not liable to split.

Having laid the keel firmly on a bed of wooden blocks, in such a
position that the ship when finished may slide into the water stern
foremost, the shipbuilder proceeds next to erect the stem and stern
posts.

The _stem-post_ rises from the _front_ end of the keel, not quite
perpendicularly from it, but sloping a little outwards.  It is formed of
one or more pieces of wood, according to the size of the ship; but no
matter how many pieces may be used, it is always a uniform single beam
in appearance.  To this the ends of the planks of the ship are
afterwards fastened.  Its outer edge is called the _cut-water_, and the
part of the ship around it is named the _bow_.

The _stern-post_ rises from the opposite end of the keel, and also
slopes a little outwards.  To it are fastened the ends of the planking
and the framework of the stern part of the ship.  To it also is attached
that little but most important part of a vessel, the _rudder_.  The
rudder, or helm, is a small piece of timber extending along the back of
the stern-post, and hung movably upon it by means of what may be called
large iron hooks-and-eyes.  By means of the rudder the mariner guides
the ship in whatever direction he pleases.  The contrast between the
insignificant size of the rudder and its immense importance is very
striking.  Its power over the ship is thus referred to in
Scripture,--"Behold also the ships, which, though they be so great, and
are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very small
helm, whithersoever the governor listeth."  The rudder is moved from
side to side by a huge handle or lever on deck, called the _tiller_; but
as in large ships the rudder is difficult to move by so simple a
contrivance, several ropes or chains and pulleys are attached to it, and
connected with the drum of a _wheel_, at which the steersman stands.  In
the largest ships two, and in rough weather four men are often stationed
at the wheel.

The _ribs_ of the ship next rise to view.  These are curved wooden
beams, which rise on each side of the keel, and are bolted firmly to it.
They serve the same purpose to a ship that bones do to the human
frame--they support and give strength to it as well as form.

The _planks_ follow the ribs.  These are broad, and vary in thickness
from two to four inches.  They form the outer skin of the ship, and are
fastened to the ribs, keel, stem-post, and stern-post by means of
innumerable pins of wood or iron, called _tree-nails_.  The spaces
between the planks are caulked--that is, _stuffed_ with oakum; which
substance is simply the untwisted tow of old and tarry ropes.  A
figure-head of some ornamental kind having been placed on the top and
front of the stem-post, just above the cutwater, and a flat, ornamental
stern, with windows in it to light the cabin, the hull of our ship is
complete.  But the interior arrangements have yet to be described,
although, of course, they have been progressing at the same time with
the rest.

The _beams_ of a ship are massive wooden timbers, which extend across
from side to side in a series of tiers.  They serve the purpose of
binding the sides together, of preventing them from collapsing, and of
supporting the decks, as well as of giving compactness and great
strength to the whole structure.

The _decks_ are simply plank floors nailed to the beams, and serve very
much the same purposes as the floors of a house.  They also help to
strengthen the ship longitudinally.  All ships have at least one
complete deck; most have two, with a half-deck at the stern, called the
_quarter-deck_, and another at the bow, called the _forecastle_.  But
the decks of large ships are still more numerous.  Those of a first-rate
man-of-war are as follows--we begin with the lowest, which is
considerably under the surface of the sea:--

The Orlop-deck, the Gun-deck, the Middle-deck, the Upper-deck, the
Quarter-deck, and the Poop--the latter deck being the highest deck of
all, a very small one, at the stern.

Thus a man-of-war is a floating house with six stories--the poop being
the garret, and the orlop-deck the cellars.  The upper decks are lighted
by sky-lights; those farther down by port-holes (or gun-holes) and
windows; the lowest of all by candles or lamps, daylight being for ever
banished from those gloomy submarine regions!

The _bulwarks_ rise above the upper-deck, all round the ship, and serve
the purposes of protecting the upper-deck from the waves, and supporting
the _belaying-pins_, to which the ropes are fastened.  In ships of war
the top of the bulwarks forms a sort of trough all round the ship, in
which the hammocks (the swinging-beds) of the men are stowed away every
morning.  This trough is termed the _hammock-nettings_, and the hammocks
are placed there to be well aired.  In action the bulwarks serve to
protect the crew from musketry.

The _wheel_, which has been already referred to, stands usually at the
stern of the ship, on the quarter-deck; but it is sometimes placed on an
elevated platform amid-ships, so that the steersman may see more clearly
where he is going.

The _binnacle_ stands directly in front of the wheel.  It is a species
of box, firmly fixed to the deck, in which is placed the compass.  It is
completely covered in, having a glass window, through which the man at
the wheel can observe the course he is steering.

The _capstan_ stands on the main-deck, sometimes near the centre of the
vessel, at other times near the bow or the stern.  It is a massive block
of timber moving on a pivot, which is turned round by wooden levers,
called capstan bars, or _hand-spikes_, and is used for any purpose that
requires great _tractive_ power--the drawing in of the cable, for
instance, or warping the ship; which means that a rope is fixed on
shore, or by an anchor to the bottom of the sea, and the other end of it
is coiled round the capstan, so that when the capstan is forced round by
the handspikes, the rope coils on to it, and the ship is slowly dragged
forward.

The _windlass_ is simply a horizontal, instead of a perpendicular
capstan.  Its sole purpose is for heaving up the anchor, and it is
placed close to the bow of the ship.

The _galley_, or cooking-house, is usually near to the windlass, in the
front part of the vessel.  Here the cook reigns supreme; but this
nautical kitchen is wonderfully small.  It is just big enough to hold
the fireplace and "coppers," with a small shelf, on which the cook
(always a man, and often a negro) performs the duties of his office.

The various decks below are partitioned off by means of plank walls,
which are called _bulk-heads_, into a variety of berths and apartments;
and the greater part of the centre of the vessel (in merchantmen) is
called the _hold_, and is reserved for cargo.

The _hull_ of the ship being finished, now gets a coat of tar all over
it, which preserves the wood from the action of the weather, and helps
to render the seams water-tight.  Some vessels are sheathed from the
keel to a short way above their water-line with thin sheets of copper,
to preserve them more effectually from tear and wear, and especially to
defend them against those barnacles and marine insects that would
otherwise fasten to them.

Being now ready to be launched from her cradle into the sea--her future
home--we will proceed in our next chapter to describe the process of
launching.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE LAUNCH, ETCETERA.

Ships begin life with a retrograde movement; they imitate the crabs: in
other words, they are launched stern foremost.  Whether great or small,
long or short, whether clothed in patrician copper or smeared with
plebeian tar, they all start on their first voyage with their
stern-posts acting the part of cut-water, and, also, without masts or
sails.  These necessary adjuncts, and a host of others, are added after
they have been clasped to the bosom of their native sea.  One notable
exception there is to this rule, the launch of the far-famed _Great
Eastern_, which monster of the deep was forced into her element
_sidewise_, of which a full account will be found in another part of
this volume.

The _cradles_ on which ships are launched are wooden frameworks, so
constructed as to slide down an inclined plane, called the _ways_,
bearing their burdens along with them into the water.  When a ship is
ready for launching, the _shores_, or supports, that have kept her so
long in position are knocked away one by one, until the entire weight of
the ship rests on the cradle.  The _ways_ are then well greased, and it
only remains to knock away one or two remaining checks to allow the
vessel to seek her future home by means of her own weight.

But before this last act is done, a day must be fixed for the launch;
friends of the owners must be invited to go on board during this her
first voyage; a fair maiden must be asked to go through the ceremony of
giving the ship her name; and paragraphs must go the round of the
newspapers.  As the hour draws near, crowds of human beings, young and
old, male and female, must hurry to the spot to witness the great event,
and hundreds of little boys must beg leave from school (if they can); in
short, a great stir must be made, and a great day must dawn, before the
last shores are knocked away, and the noble structure be permitted to
rush down that inclined plane, and for the first time cleave the waves.

And now, having shown how the launching of our ship is accomplished, let
us turn to consider the next step towards completion; for there is yet
much to be done ere she is able to brave the tempest.

RIGGING A SHIP.

Although fitting-in the lower-masts of a ship cannot well be deemed a
part of the rigging, we will nevertheless describe the operation here.

As the lower-masts of a large ship are from five to six feet in
circumference, it is manifest that some powerful mechanical contrivance
is required to raise them over the bulwarks, and put them in an upright
position, into their appointed places.  Such contrivances, in the form
of enormous cranes, are fixed in some of the larger docks; but the most
useful method is to have the masts put in by means of:

_The Shear Hulk_.  This is a strongly built hull of a ship, moored in a
part of a river or harbour that will afford depth of water to float
vessels of any size alongside.  It has one stout mast, with two immense
beams attached to it near the deck, and sloping outwards over the
bulwarks in such a way that their ends overhang the deck of the vessel
into which masts are to be placed.  These sloping beams are prevented
from falling overboard altogether, and their slope is regulated, by
blocks and tackles from the mast of the hulk.  By means of this
contrivance, which is just a gigantic floating crane, the ponderous
lower-masts of large ships are raised and lowered into their places.

When these are fixed, the rigging of the ship commences.  The method of
putting it up cannot prove interesting to general readers; not even to
boys, for when they take to rigging model ships, they do not require the
mechanical contrivances that are necessary in rigging large vessels.
But all readers of sea stories and nautical history will find it of the
utmost advantage to their clear understanding of what they read, to have
a general idea of the names and uses of the principal parts of a ship's
rigging.

We shall, therefore, devote a small space to the explanation of this
subject.  And, first, let us examine the _Masts_.

These vary in size, form, and number in different ships, but in all they
serve the same purpose--to support the sails.  Lower masts of large
vessels are never formed out of one tree.  They are found to be stronger
when built up of several pieces, which are fastened together by strong
iron hoops.  Masts sometimes consist of three distinct parts.  The
_lower_-mast, _top_-mast, and _top-gallant_-mast.  In most large ships
there are three masts, each having three parts.  The centre mast, being
the largest, is the _main-mast_; the front one, which is next in size,
is the _fore-mast_; and the one next the stern, the smallest, is called
the _mizzen_.

Although we have spoken of _lower-masts_ for the sake of clearness, the
name is never used.  The name of the mast itself designates the lower
part of it.  To name the masts in order, we have the Fore-mast.
Main-mast.  Mizzen-mast.  Fore-top-mast.  Main-top-mast.
Mizzen-top-mast.  Fore-topgallant-mast.  Main-topgallant-mast.
Mizzen-topgallant-mast.

The parts of the different masts are connected and secured by means of
_cross-trees_ and _caps_, which are named after the mast and part of the
mast to which they belong.  Thus we have the _fore-top_, the
_fore-top-mast cross-trees_, the _main-top_, and _main-top-mast
cross-trees_, etcetera.  Observe, particularly, that the _fore-top_,
_main-top_, and _mizzen-top_, are the platforms, or cross-trees, at the
tops of the _lower_-masts, and not--as might well be supposed by
landsmen--the extreme tops of these masts.  The button-like objects on
the summits of the masts are called the _trucks_; which, besides forming
a sort of finish to them, are fitted with small _pulleys_, through which
_signal-halyards_, or cords for hoisting the flags, are rove.

In first-rate men-of-war the _tops_ are so large that a number of men
can be stationed on them.  Besides their other purposes, they are very
frequently used as a place of punishment for the midshipmen, or
"middies" (the boy officers), who are often sent there to air
themselves, and profit, if they can, by calm reflection in exalted
solitude.

_Shrouds_ and _stays_ are the thick ropes that keep the masts firmly in
position.  They form part of what is termed the "standing gear" of a
ship--in other words, the ropes that are fixtures--to distinguish them
from the "running gear"--those movable ropes, by means of which the
sails, boats, flags, etcetera, are hoisted.  Nearly all the ropes of a
ship are named after the mast, or yard, or sail with which they are
connected.  Thus we have the _main shrouds_, the _main-top-mast
shrouds_, and the _main-topgallant shrouds_; the _main back-stay_, the
_main-topgallant back-stay_, and so on--those of the other masts being
similarly named, with the exception of the first word, which, of course,
indicates the particular mast referred to.  The shrouds rise from the
_chains_, which are a series of blocks called "dead eyes," fixed to the
sides of the ship.  To these the shrouds are fixed, and also to the
masts near the tops; they serve the purpose of preventing the masts from
falling _sideways_.  Backstays prevent them from falling _forward_, and
_forestays_ prevent them from falling _backward_, or "aft."  Besides
this, shrouds have little cross ropes called _ratlines_ attached to
them, by means of which rope-ladders the sailors ascend and descend the
rigging to _furl_, that is, tie up, or _unfurl_, that is, to untie or
shake out, the sails.

Our cut represents a sailor-boy ascending the mizzen-top-mast shrouds.
He grasps the _shrouds_, and stands on the _ratlines_.

_Yards_ are the heavy wooden cross-poles or beams to which the sails are
attached.

_Reef-points_ are the little ropes which may be observed hanging in
successive rows on all sails, by means of which _parts_ of the sails are
gathered in and tied round the yards, thus reducing their size in stormy
weather.  Hence such nautical expressions as "taking in a reef," or a
"double reef," and "close reefing,"--which last implies that a sail is
to be reduced to its smallest possible dimensions.  The only further
reduction possible would be folding it up altogether, close to the yard,
which would be called "furling" it, and which would render it altogether
ineffective.  In order to furl or reef sails, the men have to ascend the
masts, and _lay-out_ upon the yards.  It is very dangerous work in
stormy weather.  Many a poor fellow, while reefing sails in a dark
tempestuous night, has been blown from the yard into the sea, and never
heard of more.  All the yards of a ship, except the three largest, can
be hoisted and lowered by means of _halyards_.  The top-gallant masts
can also be lowered, but the lower-masts, of course, are fixtures.

The _bowsprit_ of a ship is a mast which projects out horizontally, or
at an angle, from the bow.  It is sometimes in two or three pieces,
sometimes only in one.  To it are attached the _jib-sail_ and the
_flying-jib_, besides a variety of ropes and stays which are connected
with and support the fore-mast.

The _cat heads_ are two short beams which project from the bows on
either side, and support the ship's anchors.

_Miscellaneous_.--The openings in the decks are called _hatches_; the
stair-cases which descend to the cabins are called _companions_.  The
pulleys by which sails, etcetera, are hoisted, are named _blocks_.
_Braces_ are the ropes by which sails are fixed tightly in any position.
Hauling a rope _taut_, means hauling it tight.  The _weather_ side of a
ship means the side which happens to be presented to the wind; the _lee_
side, that which is away from the wind, and, therefore, sheltered.  The
_starboard_ side means the right side, the _larboard_ signifies the
left; but as the two words resemble each other, the word _port_ is
always used for larboard to prevent mistakes in shouting orders.
_Heaving the lead_ is the act of throwing a heavy leaden plummet, with a
line attached, into the sea to ascertain its depth.  It is thrown from
the _chains_ as far as possible ahead of the ship, so that it may reach
the bottom and be perpendicularly beneath the man who heaves it when the
ship comes up to the spot where it entered the water.  A peculiar and
musical cry is given forth by the heaver of the lead each time he throws
it.  The forecastle is the habitat of the ordinary sailors, and is
usually in nautical parlance termed the _foge-s'l_.

Most of what we have just described applies more or less to every ship;
but this will be seen in future chapters.  Meanwhile, we would seriously
recommend all those who have found this chapter a dry one to turn back
to the heading entitled "Rigging a Ship," and from that point read it
all over again with earnest attention.



CHAPTER TEN.

COASTING VESSELS.

The coasting-trade of the British Islands is replete with danger, yet it
is carried on with the utmost vigour; and there are always plenty of
"hands," as seamen are called when spoken of in connection with ships,
to man the vessels.  The traffic in which they are engaged is the
transporting of the goods peculiar to one part of our island, to another
part where they are in demand.

In describing these vessels, we shall begin with the smallest.

SLOOPS.

Like all other vessels, sloops vary in size, but none of them attain to
great magnitude.  As a class, they are the smallest decked vessels we
have.  From 40 to 100 tons burden is a very common size.  A sloop of 40
tons burden is what we ordinarily call a _little_ ship, and one of 100
tons is by no means a big one.  The hull of such a vessel being intended
exclusively to carry cargo, very little space is allowed for the crew.
The cabins of the smaller-sized sloops are seldom high enough to permit
of an ordinary man standing erect.  They are usually capable of
affording accommodation to two in the cabin, and three or four in the
forecastle,--and such accommodation is by no means ample.  The class to
which vessels belong is determined chiefly by the number of their masts
and by the arrangement and the form of their sails.

The distinctive peculiarity of the sloop is, that it has but one mast;
and its rig is, nautically speaking, _fore-and-aft_--that is to say, the
sails are spread with their surfaces parallel to the sides of the
vessel, _not_ stretched upon yards _across_ the vessel.  The term
"fore-and-aft" is derived from the _forward_ part and the _after_ part
of the ship.  _Fore-and-aft_ sails, then, are such as are spread upon
yards which point fore and aft, not across the ship.  We conceive this
elaborate explanation to be necessary for some readers, and, therefore,
don't apologise for making it.  A ship whose sails are spread across the
hull is said to be _square-rigged_.  Sometimes, however, a sloop carries
one and even two square sails.

The masts, yards, and sails of a sloop are as follows:--As has been
already said, one of the distinctive peculiarities of a sloop is, that
it has only _one_ mast.  This mast is sometimes formed of one _stick_,
sometimes of two; the second, or top-mast, being fastened to the top of
the lower mast by _cross-trees_ and _cap_, in such a way that it may be
hoisted or lowered at pleasure.  A sloop has usually four sails,--a
mainsail, fore-sail, gaff, and jib.  The _main-sail_ is behind the lower
mast.  It reaches from within a few feet of the deck to the top of the
lower mast, and spreads out upon two yards towards the stern or after
part of the ship, over which it projects a few feet.  The lower yard of
the main-sail is called the boom, and the upper the main-sail yard.
This is by far the largest sail in the sloop.  Above it is spread the
_gaff_, which is comparatively a small sail, and is used when the wind
is not very strong.  The _fore-sail_ is a triangular sheet, which
traverses on the _fore-stay_; that is, the strong rope which runs from
the lower mast-head to the bow, or front part of the sloop.  On the
bowsprit is stretched the _jib_, another triangular sail, which reaches
nearly to the top of the lower mast.  The only sail that rises above the
lower mast is the gaff.  In stormy weather this sail is always taken
down.  If the wind increases to a gale, the jib is lowered and lashed to
the bowsprit.

Should the gale increase, a reef is taken in the main-sail.  One, two,
three, and sometimes four reefs are taken in, according to the violence
of the storm; when the last reef is taken in, the sloop is under
_close-reefed_ main-sail.  Increased violence in the storm necessitates
the taking in of the main-sail and _lying-to_ under the fore-sail, or a
part of it.  Lying-to is putting the sloop's head to the wind, and
placing the helm in such a position that it tends to turn the vessel in
one direction, while the gale acting on the fore-sail tends to force it
in another, and thus it remains stationary between the two opposing
forces.  Many vessels thus _lie-to_, and ride out the severest storm.
Sometimes, however, a dreadful hurricane arises, and compels vessels to
take in all sails and "_scud under_ _bare poles_"--that is, _drive
before_ the wind without any sails at all; and it is at such seasons
that man is forced to feel his utter helplessness, and his absolute
dependence on the Almighty.  Of course, there are slight variations in
the rig of sloops--some have a _square-sail_, and some have a
_flying-jib_; but these are not distinctive sails, and they are seldom
used in small craft.

Doubtless, those of our readers who have dwelt on the sea-coast must
have observed that boats and vessels frequently sail in precisely
opposite directions, although acted upon by the same wind.  This
apparent paradox may be explained thus:--

Suppose a vessel with the bow and stern sharp and precisely alike, so
that it might sail backwards or forwards with equal facility.  Suppose,
also, that it has two masts exactly the same in all respects--one near
the bow, the other near the stern.  Suppose, further, a square sail
stretched between the two masts quite flat; and remember that this would
be a _fore-and-aft_ sail--namely, one extending along the length, not
across the breadth of the vessel.

Well, now, were a breeze to blow straight against the side of such a
vessel, it would either blow it over, flat on its side, or urge it
slowly _sideways_ over the water, after the fashion of a crab.  Now
remove one of these masts--say the stern one--and erect it close to the
lee-side of the vessel (that is, away from the windward-side), still
keeping the sail extended.  The immediate effect would be that the sail
would no longer present itself _flatly_ against the wind, but
diagonally.  The wind, therefore, after dashing against it would slide
violently off in the direction of the mast that had been removed, that
is, towards the stern.  In doing so it would, of course, give the vessel
a shove in the opposite direction; on the very same principle that a
