enough?"

"Quite: Samson was a mere infant compared to me."

"Oh, don't talk nonsense, Charley dear, and keep your hands quiet, and
don't lift the clothes with your knees in that way, else I'll go away
and leave you."

"Very well, my pet, if you do I'll get up and dress and follow you,
that's all!  But come, Kate, tell me first of all how it was that I got
pitched off that long-legged rhinoceros, and who it was that picked me
up, and why wasn't I killed, and how did I come here; for my head is
sadly confused, and I scarcely recollect anything that has happened.
And before commencing your discourse, Kate, please hand me a glass of
water, for my mouth is as dry as a whistle."

Kate handed him a glass of water, smoothed his pillow, brushed the curls
gently off his forehead, and sat down on the bedside.

"Thank you, Kate; now go on."

"Well, you see--" she began.

"Pardon me, dearest," interrupted Charley, "if you would please to look
at me you would observe that my two eyes are tightly closed, so that I
don't _see_ at all."

"Well, then, you must understand--"

"Must I? oh!--"

"That after that wicked horse leaped with you over the stable fence, you
were thrown high into the air, and turning completely round, fell head
foremost into the snow, and your poor head went through the top of an
old cask that had been buried there all winter."

"Dear me!" ejaculated Charley; "did any one see me, Kate?"

"Oh yes."

"Who?" asked Charley, somewhat anxiously; "not Mrs Grant, I hope? for
if she did she'd never let me hear the last of it."

"No; only our father, who was chasing you at the time," replied Kate,
with a merry laugh.

"And no one else?"

"No--oh yes, by-the-bye, Tom Whyte was there too."

"Oh, he's nobody!  Go on."

"But tell me, Charley, why do you care about Mrs Grant seeing you?"

"Oh! no reason at all, only she's such an abominable quiz."

We must guard the reader here against the supposition that Mrs Grant
was a quiz of the ordinary kind.  She was by no means a sprightly,
clever woman, rather fond of a joke than otherwise, as the term might
lead you to suppose.  Her corporeal frame was very large, excessively
fat, and remarkably unwieldy; being an appropriate casket in which to
enshrine a mind of the heaviest and most sluggish nature.  She spoke
little, ate largely, and slept much--the latter recreation being very
frequently enjoyed in a large arm-chair of a peculiar kind.  It had been
a water-butt, which her ingenious husband had cut half-way down the
middle, then half-way across, and in the angle thus formed fixed a
bottom, which, together with the back, he padded with tow, and covered
the whole with a mantle of glaring bed-curtain chintz, whose pattern
alternated in stripes of sky-blue and china roses, with broken fragments
of rainbow between.  Notwithstanding her excessive slowness, however,
Mrs Grant was fond of taking a firm hold of anything or any
circumstance in the character or affairs of her friends, and twitting
them thereupon in a grave but persevering manner that was exceedingly
irritating.  No one could ever ascertain whether Mrs Grant did this in
a sly way or not, as her visage never expressed anything except
unalterable good-humour.  She was a good wife and an affectionate
mother, had a family of ten children, and could boast of never having
had more than one quarrel with her husband.  This disagreement was
occasioned by a rather awkward mischance.  One day, not long after her
last baby was born, Mrs Grant waddled towards her tub with the
intention of enjoying her accustomed siesta.  A few minutes previously
her seventh child, which was just able to walk, had scrambled up into
the seat and fallen fast asleep there.  As has been already said, Mrs
Grant's intellect was never very bright, and at this particular time she
was rather drowsy, so that she did not observe the child, and on
reaching her chair, turned round preparatory to letting herself plump
into it.  She always _plumped_ into her chair.  Her muscles were too
soft to lower her gently down into it.  Invariably on reaching a certain
point they ceased to act, and let her down with a crash.  She had just
reached this point, and her baby's hopes and prospects were on the eve
of being cruelly crushed for ever, when Mr Grant noticed the impending
calamity.  He had no time to warn her, for she had already passed the
point at which her powers of muscular endurance terminated; so grasping
the chair, he suddenly withdrew it with such force that the baby rolled
off upon the floor like a hedgehog, straightened out flat, and gave vent
to an outrageous roar, while its horror-struck mother came to the ground
with a sound resembling the fall of an enormous sack of wool.  Although
the old lady could not see exactly that there was anything very
blameworthy in her husband's conduct upon this occasion, yet her nerves
had received so severe a shock that she refused to be comforted for two
entire days.

But to return from this digression.  After Charley had two or three
times recommended Kate (who was a little inclined to be quizzical) to
proceed, she continued--

"Well, then, you were carried up here by father and Tom Whyte, and put
to bed, and after a good deal of rubbing and rough treatment you were
got round.  Then Peter Mactavish nearly poisoned you; but fortunately he
was such a goose that he did not think of reading the label of the
phial, and so gave you a dose of tincture of rhubarb instead of
laudanum, as he had intended; and then father flew into a passion, and
Tom Whyte was sent to fetch the doctor, and couldn't find him; but
fortunately he found me, which was much better, I think, and brought me
up here.  And so here I am, and here I intend to remain."

"And so that's the end of it.  Well, Kate, I'm very glad it was no
worse."

"And I am very _thankful_," said Kate, with emphasis on the word, "that
it's no worse."

"Oh, well, you know, Kate, I _meant_ that, of course."

"But you did not _say_ it," replied his sister earnestly.

"To be sure not," said Charley gaily; "it would be absurd to be always
making solemn speeches, and things of that sort, every time one has a
little accident."

"True, Charley; but when one has a very serious accident, and escapes
unhurt, don't you think that _then_ it would be--"

"Oh yes, to be sure," interrupted Charley, who still strove to turn Kate
from her serious frame of mind; "but, sister dear, how could I possibly
_say_ I was thankful, with my head crammed into an old cask and my feet
pointing up to the blue sky, eh?"

Kate smiled at this, and laid her hand on his arm, while she bent over
the pillow and looked tenderly into his eyes.

"O my darling Charley, you are disposed to jest about it; but I cannot
tell you how my heart trembled this morning when I heard from Tom Whyte
of what had happened.  As we drove up to the fort, I thought how
terrible it would have been if you had been killed; and then the happy
days we have spent together rushed into my mind, and I thought of the
willow creek where we used to fish for gold-eyes, and the spot in the
woods where we have so often chased the little birds, and the lake in
the prairies where we used to go in spring to watch the water-fowl
sporting in the sunshine.  When I recalled these things, Charley, and
thought of you as dead, I felt as if I should die too.  And when I came
here and found that my fears were needless, that you were alive and
safe, and almost well, I felt thankful--yes, very, very thankful--to God
for sparing your life, my dear, dear Charley."  And Kate laid her head
on his bosom and sobbed, when she thought of what might have been, as if
her very heart would break.

Charley's disposition to levity entirely vanished while his sister
spoke; and twining his tough little arm round her neck, he pressed her
fervently to his heart.

"Bless you, Kate," he said at length.  "I am indeed thankful to God, not
only for sparing my life, but for giving me such a darling sister to
live for.  But now, Kate, tell me, what do you think of father's
determination to have me placed in the office here?"

"Indeed, I think it's very hard.  Oh, I do wish _so_ much that I could
do it for you," said Kate, with a sigh.

"Do _what_ for me?" asked Charley.

"Why, the office work," said Kate.

"Tuts! fiddlesticks!  But isn't it, now, really a _very_ hard case?"

"Indeed it is; but then, what can you do?"

"Do?" said Charley impatiently; "run away, to be sure."

"Oh, don't speak of that!" said Kate anxiously.  "You know it will kill
our beloved mother; and then it would grieve father very much."

"Well, father don't care much about grieving me, when he hunted me down
like a wolf till I nearly broke my neck."

"Now, Charley, you must not speak so.  Father loves you tenderly,
although he _is_ a little rough at times.  If you only heard how kindly
he speaks of you to our mother when you are away, you could not think of
giving him so much pain.  And then the Bible says, `Honour thy father
and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy
God giveth thee;' and as God speaks in the Bible, _surely_ we should pay
attention to it!"

Charley was silent for a few seconds; then heaving a deep sigh, he
said,--"Well, I believe you're right, Kate; but then, what am I to do?
If I don't run away, I must live, like poor Harry Somerville, on a
long--legged stool; and if I do _that_, I'll--I'll--"

As Charley spoke, the door opened, and his father entered.

"Well, my boy," said he, seating himself on the bedside and taking his
son's hand, "how goes it now?  Head getting all right again?  I fear
that Kate has been talking too much to you.--Is it so, you little
chatterbox?"

Mr Kennedy parted Kate's clustering ringlets and kissed her forehead.

Charley assured his father that he was almost well, and much the better
of having Kate to tend him.  In fact, he felt so much revived that he
said he would get up and go out for a walk.

"Had I not better tell Tom Whyte to saddle the young horse for you?"
said his father, half ironically.  "No, no, boy; lie still where you are
to-day, and get up if you feel better to-morrow.  In the meantime, I've
come to say goodbye, as I intend to go home to relieve your mother's
anxiety about you.  I'll see you again, probably, the day after
to-morrow.  Hark you, boy; I've been talking your affairs over again
with Mr Grant, and we've come to the conclusion to give you a run in
the woods for a time.  You'll have to be ready to start early in spring
with the first brigades for the north.  So adieu!"

Mr Kennedy patted him on the head, and hastily left the room.

A burning blush of shame arose on Charley's cheek as he recollected his
late remarks about his father; and then, recalling the purport of his
last words, he sent forth an exulting shout as he thought of the coming
spring.

"Well now, Charley," said Kate, with an arch smile, "let us talk
seriously over your arrangements for running away."

Charley replied by seizing the pillow and throwing it at his sister's
head; but being accustomed to such eccentricities, she anticipated the
movement, and evaded the blow.

"Ah, Charley," cried Kate, laughing, "you mustn't let your hand get out
of practice!  That was a shockingly bad shot for a man thirsting to
become a bear and buffalo hunter!"

"I'll make my fortune at once," cried Charley, as Kate replaced the
pillow, "build a wooden castle on the shores of Great Bear Lake, take
you to keep house for me, and when I'm out hunting you'll fish for
whales in the lake, and we'll live there to a good old age; so
good-night, Kate dear, and go to bed."

Kate laughed, gave her brother a parting kiss, and left him.



CHAPTER SIX.

SPRING AND THE VOYAGEURS.

Winter, with its snow and its ice; winter, with its sharp winds and
white drifts; winter, with its various characteristic occupations and
employments, is past, and it is spring now.

The sun no longer glitters on fields of white; the wood-man's axe is no
longer heard hacking the oaken billets, to keep alive the roaring fires.
That inexpressibly cheerful sound the merry chime of sleigh-bells, that
tells more of winter than all other sounds together, is no longer heard
on the bosom of Red River; for the sleighs are thrown aside as useless--
lumber-carts and gigs have supplanted them.  The old Canadian, who used
to drive the ox with its water-barrel to the ice-hole for his daily
supply, has substituted a small cart with wheels for the old sleigh that
used to glide so smoothly over the snow, and grit so sharply on it in
the more than usually frosty mornings in the days gone by.  The trees
have lost their white patches, and the clump of willows, that used to
look like islands in the prairie, have disappeared, as the carpeting
that gave them prominence has dissolved.  The aspect of everything in
the isolated settlement has changed.  The winter is gone, and spring--
bright, beautiful, hilarious spring--has come again.

By those who have never known an arctic winter, the delights of an
arctic spring can never, we fear, be fully appreciated or understood.
Contrast is one of its strongest elements; indeed, we might say, _the_
element which gives to all the others peculiar zest.  Life in the arctic
regions is like one of Turner's pictures, in which the lights are
strong, the shadows deep, and the _tout ensemble_ hazy and romantic.  So
cold and prolonged is the winter, that the first mild breath of spring
breaks on the senses like a zephyr from the plains of paradise.
Everything bursts suddenly into vigorous life, after the long death-like
sleep of Nature, as little children burst into the romping gaieties of a
new day after the deep repose of a long and tranquil night.  The snow
melts, the ice breaks up, and rushes in broken masses, heaving and
tossing in the rising flood, that grind and whirl them into the ocean,
or into those great fresh-water lakes that vie with ocean itself in
magnitude and grandeur.  The buds come out and the leaves appear,
clothing all nature with a bright, refreshing green, which derives
additional brilliancy from sundry patches of snow that fill the deep
creeks and hollows everywhere, and form ephemeral fountains whose waters
continue to supply a thousand rills for many a long day, until the
fierce glare of the summer sun prevails at last and melts them all away.

Red River flows on now to mix its long-pent-up waters with Lake
Winnipeg.  Boats are seen rowing about upon its waters, as the settlers
travel from place to place; and wooden canoes, made of the hollowed-out
trunks of large trees, shoot across from shore to shore--these canoes
being a substitute for bridges, of which there are none, although the
settlement lies on both sides of the river.  Birds have now entered upon
the scene, their wild cries and ceaseless flight adding to it a cheerful
activity.  Ground squirrels pop up out of their holes to bask their
round, fat, beautifully-striped little bodies in the sun, or to gaze in
admiration at the farmer, as he urges a pair of _very_ slow-going oxen,
that drag the plough at a pace which induces one to believe that the
wide field _may_ possibly be ploughed up by the end of next year.  Frogs
whistle in the marshy ground so loudly that men new to the country
believe they are being regaled by the songs of millions of birds.  There
is no mistake about their _whistle_.  It is not merely _like_ a whistle,
but it _is_ a whistle, shrill and continuous; and as the swamps swarm
with these creatures, the song never ceases for a moment, although each
individual frog creates only one little gush of music, composed of half
a dozen trills, and then stops a moment for breath before commencing the
second bar.  Bull-frogs, too, though not so numerous, help to vary the
sound by croaking vociferously, as if they understood the value of bass,
and were glad of having an opportunity to join in the universal hum of
life and joy which rises everywhere, from the river and the swamp, the
forest and the prairie, to welcome back the spring.

Such was the state of things in Red River one beautiful morning in
April, when a band of voyageurs lounged in scattered groups about the
front gate of Fort Garry.  They were as fine a set of picturesque, manly
fellows as one could desire to see.  Their mode of life rendered them
healthy, hardy, and good-humoured, with a strong dash of recklessness--
perhaps too much of it--in some of the younger men.  Being descended,
generally, from French-Canadian sires and Indian mothers, they united
some of the good and not a few of the bad qualities of both, mentally as
well as physically--combining the light, gay-hearted spirit and full,
muscular frame of the Canadian with the fierce passions and active
habits of the Indian.  And this wildness of disposition was not a little
fostered by the nature of their usual occupations.  They were employed
during a great part of the year in navigating the Hudson's Bay Company's
boats, laden with furs and goods, through the labyrinth of rivers and
lakes that stud and intersect the whole continent, or they were engaged
in pursuit of the bisons, [these animals are always called buffaloes by
American hunters and fur-traders] which roam the prairies in vast herds.

They were dressed in the costume of the country: most of them wore
light-blue cloth capotes, girded tightly round them by scarlet or
crimson worsted belts.  Some of them had blue, and others scarlet, cloth
leggings, ornamented more or less with stained porcupine quills,
coloured silk, or variegated beads; while some might be seen clad in the
leathern coats of winter-deer-skin dressed like chamois leather, fringed
all round with little tails, and ornamented much in the same way as
those already described.  The heavy winter moccasins and duffel socks,
which gave to their feet the appearance of being afflicted with gout,
were now replaced by moccasins of a lighter and more elegant character,
having no socks below, and fitting tightly to the feet like gloves.
Some wore hats similar to those made of silk or beaver which are worn by
ourselves in Britain, but so bedizened with scarlet cock-tail feathers,
and silver cords and tassels, as to leave the original form of the
head-dress a matter of great uncertainty.  These hats, however, are only
used on high occasions, and chiefly by the fops.  Most of the men wore
coarse blue cloth caps with peaks, and not a few discarded head-pieces
altogether, under the impression, apparently, that nature had supplied a
covering which was in itself sufficient.  These costumes varied not only
in character but in quality, according to the circumstances of the
wearer; some being highly ornamental and mended--evincing the felicity
of the owner in the possession of a good wife--while others were soiled
and torn, or but slightly ornamented.  The voyageurs were collected, as
we have said, in groups.  Here stood a dozen of the youngest--
consequently the most noisy and showily dressed--laughing loudly,
gesticulating violently, and bragging tremendously.  Near to them were
collected a number of sterner spirits--men of middle age, with all the
energy, and muscle, and bone of youth, but without its swaggering
hilarity; men whose powers and nerves had been tried over and over again
amid the stirring scenes of a voyageur's life; men whose heads were
cool, and eyes sharp, and hands ready and powerful, in the mad whirl of
boiling rapids, in the sudden attack of wild beast and hostile man, or
in the unexpected approach of any danger; men who, having been well
tried, needed not to boast, and who, having carried off triumphantly
their respective brides many years ago, needed not to decorate their
persons with the absurd finery that characterised their younger
brethren.  They were comparatively few in number, but they composed a
sterling band, of which every man was a hero.  Among them were those who
occupied the high positions of bowman and steersman, and when we tell
the reader that on these two men frequently hangs the safety of a boat,
with all its crew and lading, it will be easily understood how needful
it is that they should be men of iron nerve and strength of mind.

Boat-travelling in those regions is conducted in a way that would
astonish most people who dwell in the civilised quarters of the globe.
The country being intersected in all directions by great lakes and
rivers, these have been adopted as the most convenient highways along
which to convey the supplies and bring back the furs from outposts.
Rivers in America, however, as in other parts of the world, are
distinguished by sudden ebullitions and turbulent points of character,
in the shape of rapids, falls, and cataracts, up and down which neither
men nor boats can by any possibility go with impunity; consequently, on
arriving at such obstructions, the cargoes are carried overland to
navigable water above or below the falls (as the case may be), then the
boats are dragged over and launched, again reloaded, and the travellers
proceed.  This operation is called "making a portage;" and as these
portages vary from twelve yards to twelve miles in length, it may be
readily conceived that a voyageur's life is not an easy one by any
means.

This, however, is only one of his difficulties.  Rapids occur which are
not so dangerous as to make a "portage" necessary, but are sufficiently
turbulent to render the descent of them perilous.  In such cases, the
boats, being lightened of part of their cargo, are ran down, and
frequently they descend with full cargoes and crews.  It is then that
the whole management of each boat devolves upon its bowman and
steersman.  The rest of the crew, or _middlemen_ as they are called,
merely sit still and look on, or give a stroke with their oars if
required; while the steersman, with powerful sweeps of his heavy oar,
directs the flying boat as it bounds from surge to surge like a thing of
life; and the bowman stands erect in front to assist in directing his
comrade at the stern, having a strong and long pole in his hands, with
which, ever and anon, he violently forces the boat's head away from
sunken rocks, against which it might otherwise strike and be stove in,
capsized, or seriously damaged.

Besides the groups already enumerated, there were one or two others,
composed of grave, elderly men, whose wrinkled brows, grey hairs, and
slow, quiet step showed that the strength of their days was past;
although their upright figures and warm, brown complexions gave promise
of their living to see many summers still.  These were the principal
steersmen and old guides--men of renown, to whom the others bowed as
oracles or looked up to as fathers; men whose youth and manhood had been
spent in roaming the trackless wilderness, and who were, therefore,
eminently qualified to guide brigades through the length and breadth of
the land; men whose power of threading their way among the perplexing
intricacies of the forest had become a second nature, a kind of
instinct, that was as sure of attaining its end as the instinct of the
feathered tribes, which brings the swallow, after a long absence, with
unerring certainty back to its former haunts again in spring.


