my comrade and I agree to go with you,--tell us honestly if you are
engaged in the slave-trade."

A slight smile curled the Arab's thin lip as he replied--"If I be a
slave-trader, I cannot speak honestly, so you Engleesh think.  But I do
tell you--yes, I am."

"Then, I tell _you_ honestly," said Harold, "that I won't go with you.
I'll have nothing to do with slavers."

"Them's my sentiments to a tee," said Disco, with emphasis, thumping his
left palm as usual with his right fist, by way of sheating his remark
home--to use his own words.

"But you will both perish on this uninhabited coast," said Yoosoof.

"So be it," replied Harold; "I had rather run the risk of starving than
travel in company with slave-traders.  Besides, I doubt the truth of
what you say.  There must be several villages not very far off, if my
information in regard to the coast be not altogether wrong."

Yoosoof waited for no more.  He nodded to Moosa, who instantly threw a
noose round Harold's arms, and drew it tight.  The same operation was
performed for Disco, by a stout fellow who stood behind him, and almost
before they realised what had occurred, they were seized by a number of
men.

It must not be supposed that two able-bodied Englishmen quietly
submitted at once to this sort of treatment.  On the contrary, a
struggle ensued that shook the walls of the little hut so violently as
almost to bring it down upon the heads of the combatants.  The instant
that Harold felt the rough clasp of Moosa's arms, he bent himself
forward with such force as to fling that worthy completely over his
head, and lay him flat on the floor, but two of the other slavers seized
Harold's arms, a third grasped him round the waist, and a fourth rapidly
secured the ropes that had been thrown around him.  Disco's mode of
action, although somewhat different was quite as vigorous.  On being
grasped he uttered a deep roar of surprise and rage, and, raising his
foot, struck out therewith at a man who advanced to seize him in front.
The kick not only tumbled the man over a low bench and drove his head
against the wall, but it caused the kicker himself to recoil on his foes
behind with such force that they all fell on the floor together, when by
their united weight the slavers managed to crush the unfortunate Disco,
not, indeed, into submission, but into inaction.

His tongue, however, not being tied, continued to pour forth somewhat
powerful epithets, until Harold very strongly advised him to cease.

"If you want to retain a whole skin," he said, "you had better keep a
quiet tongue."

"P'raps you're right sir," said Disco, after a moment's consideration,
"but it ain't easy to shut up in the succumstances."

After they had thoroughly secured the Englishmen, the traders led them
down the bank of the creek to the spot where the dhow was moored.  In
the dark it appeared to Harold and his companion to be the same dhow,
but this was not so.  The boat by which they had crossed the creek had
been removed up the water, and its place was now occupied by the dhow
into which had been put the maimed and worn-out slaves of the band whose
arrival we have described.  The hold of the little vessel was very dark,
nevertheless there was light enough to enable the Englishmen to guess
that the rows of black objects just perceptible within it were slaves.
If they had entertained any uncertainty on this point, the odour that
saluted them as they passed to the stern would have quickly dispelled
their doubts.

It was evident from the manner of the slavers that they did not now fear
discovery, because they talked loudly as they pushed off and rowed away.
Soon they were out of the creek, and the roar of breakers was heard.
Much caution was displayed in guiding the dhow through these, for the
channel was narrow, and darkness rendered its position almost
indiscernible.  At last the sail was hoisted, the boat bent over to a
smart breeze, and held away in a north-easterly direction.  As the night
wore on this breeze became lighter, and, most of the crew being asleep,
deep silence prevailed on board the slave-dhow, save that, ever and
anon, a pitiful wail, as of a sick child, or a convulsive sob, issued
from the hold.

Harold and Disco sat beside each other in the stern, with an armed
half-caste on each side, and Yoosoof in front.  Their thoughts were busy
enough at first, but neither spoke to the other.  As the night advanced
both fell into an uneasy slumber.

When Harold awoke, the grey dawn was beginning to break in the east and
there was sufficient light to render objects dimly visible.  At first he
scarcely recollected where he was, but the pain caused by the ropes that
bound him soon refreshed his memory.  Casting his eyes quickly towards
the hold, his heart sank within him at the sight he there beheld.
Yoosoof's Black Ivory was not of the best quality, but there was a good
deal of it, which rendered judicious packing necessary.  So many of his
gang had become worthless as an article of trade, through suffering on
the way down to the coast, that the boat could scarce contain them all.
They were packed sitting on their haunches in rows each with his knees
close to his chin, and all jammed so tightly together that none could
rise up or lie down.  Men, women, and little children sat in this
position with an expression of indescribable hopelessness and apathy on
their faces.  The infants, of which there were several, lay motionless
on their mothers' shrunken breasts.  God help them! they were indeed
utterly worthless as pieces of merchandise.  The long journey and hard
treatment had worn all of them to mere skin and bone, and many were
suffering from bad sores caused by the slave-irons and the unmerciful
application of the lash.  No one knew better than Yoosoof that this was
his "damaged stock"--hopelessly damaged, and he meant to make the best
use he could of it.

The sun arose in all its splendour, and revealed more clearly to the
horrified Englishmen all the wretchedness of the hold, but for a
considerable time they did not speak.  The circumstances in which they
found themselves seemed to have bereft them of the faculty of speech.
The morning advanced, and Yoosoof with his men, took a frugal breakfast,
but they did not offer any to Harold or Disco.  As these unfortunates
had, however, supped heartily, they did not mind that.  So much could
not have been said for the slaves.  They had received their last meal of
uncooked rice and water, a very insufficient one, about thirty-six hours
before, and as they watched the traders at breakfast, their glaring eyes
told eloquently of their sufferings.

Had these been Yoosoof's valuable stock, his undamaged goods, he would
have given them a sufficiency of food to have kept them up to condition
as long as he possessed them; but being what they were, a very little
drop of water and a few grains of raw rice at noon was deemed sufficient
to prevent absolute starvation.

"How can you have the heart," said Harold at last turning to Yoosoof,
"to treat these poor creatures so cruelly?"

Yoosoof shrugged his shoulders.

"My fader treat them so; I follow my fader's footsteps."

"But have you no pity for them?  Don't you think they have hearts and
feelings like ourselves?" returned Harold earnestly.

"No," replied the Arab coldly.  "They have no feelings.  Hard as the
stone.  They care not for mother, or child, or husband.  Only brutes--
cattle."

Harold was so disgusted with this reply that he relapsed into silence.

Towards the afternoon, while the dhow was running close in-shore, a
vessel hove in sight on the horizon.  A few minutes sufficed to show
that it was a steamer.  It was of course observed and closely watched by
the slave-dealers as well as by Harold Seadrift and Disco Lillihammer,
who became sanguinely hopeful that it might turn out to be a British
man-of-war.  Had they known that Yoosoof was equally anxious and hopeful
on that point they would have been much surprised; but the wily Arab
pretended to be greatly alarmed, and when the Union Jack became clearly
visible his excitement increased.  He gave some hurried orders to his
men, who laughed sarcastically as they obeyed them.

"Yoosoof," said Harold, with a slight feeling of exultation, "your plans
seem about to miscarry!"

"No, they not miscarry yet," replied the Arab, with a grim smile.

"Tell me, Yoosoof," resumed Harold, prompted by strong curiosity, "why
have you carried us off bound in this fashion?"

Another smile, more grim than the former, crossed the Arab's visage as
he replied--"Me carry you off 'cause that sheep," pointing to the
steamer, "lie not two mile off, near to town of Governor Letotti, when I
first met you.  We not want you to let thems know 'bout us, so I carry
you off, and I bind you 'cause you strong."

"Ha! that's plain and reasonable," returned Harold, scarce able to
restrain a laugh at the man's cool impudence.  "But it would appear that
some one else has carried the news; so, you see, you have been outwitted
after all."

"Perhaps.  We shall see," replied the Arab, with something approaching
to a chuckle.

Altering the course of the boat, Yoosoof now ran her somewhat off the
shore, as if with a view to get round a headland that lay to the
northward.  This evidently drew the attention of the steamer--which was
none other than the "Firefly"--for she at once altered her course and
ran in-shore, so as to intercept the dhow.  Seeing this, Yoosoof turned
back and made for the land at a place where there was a long line of
breakers close to the shore.  To run amongst these seemed to be
equivalent to running on certain destruction, nevertheless the Arab held
on, with compressed lips and a frowning brow.  Yoosoof looked quite like
a man who would rather throw away his life than gratify his enemy, and
the Englishmen, who were fully alive to their danger, began to feel
rather uneasy--which was a very pardonable sensation, when it is
remembered that their arms being fast bound, rendered them utterly
unable to help themselves in case of the boat capsizing.

The "Firefly" was by this time near enough to hold converse with the
dhow through the medium of artillery.  Soon a puff of white smoke burst
from her bow, and a round-shot dropped a few yards astern of the boat.

"That's a broad hint, my lad, so you'd better give in," said
Lillihammer, scarce able to suppress a look of triumph.

Yoosoof paid not the slightest attention to the remark, but held on his
course.

"Surely you don't intend to risk the lives of these poor creatures in
such a surf?" said Harold anxiously; "weak and worn as they are, their
doom is sealed if we capsize."

Still the Arab paid no attention, but continued to gaze steadily at the
breakers.

Harold, turning his eyes in the same direction, observed something like
a narrow channel running through them.  He was enough of a seaman to
understand that only one who was skilled in such navigation could pass
in safety.

"They're lowering a boat," said Disco, whose attention was engrossed by
the manoeuvres of the "Firefly."

Soon the boat left the side of the vessel, which was compelled to check
her speed for fear of running on the reef.  Another gun was fired as she
came round, and the shot dropped right in front of the dhow, sending a
column of water high into the air.  Still Yoosoof held on until close to
the breakers, when, to the surprise of the Englishmen, he suddenly threw
the boat's head into the wind.

"You can steer," he said sternly to Disco.  "Come, take the helm an' go
to your ship; or, if you choose, go on the breakers."

He laughed fiercely as he said this, and next moment plunged into the
sea, followed by his crew.

Disco, speechless with amazement, rose up and sprang to the helm.  Of
course he could not use his bound hands, but one of his legs answered
almost as well.  He allowed the boat to come round until the sail filled
on the other tack, and then looking back, saw the heads of the Arabs as
they swam through the channel and made for the shore.  In a few minutes
they gained it, and, after uttering a shout of defiance, ran up into the
bushes and disappeared.

Meanwhile the "Firefly's" boat made straight for the dhow, and was soon
near enough to hail.

"Heave-to," cried an interpreter in Arabic.

"Speak your own mother tongue and I'll answer ye," replied Disco.

"Heave-to, or I'll sink you," shouted Mr Small, who was in charge.

"I'm just agoin' to do it, sir," replied Disco, running the dhow into
the wind until the sail shook.

Another moment and the boat was alongside.  "Jump aboard and handle the
sail, lads; I can't help 'ee no further," said Disco.

The invitation was unnecessary.  The moment the two boats touched, the
blue-jackets swarmed on board, cutlass in hand, and took possession.

"Why, what!--where did _you_ come from?" asked the lieutenant, looking
in profound astonishment at Harold and his companion.

"We are Englishmen, as you see," replied Harold, unable to restrain a
smile; "we have been wrecked and caught by the villains who have just
escaped you."

"I see--well, no time for talking just now; cut them loose, Jackson.
Make fast the sheet--now then."

In a few minutes the dhow ranged up alongside the "Firefly," and our
heroes, with the poor slaves, were quickly transferred to the
man-of-war's deck, where Harold told his tale to Captain Romer.

As we have already stated, there were a number of slaves on board the
"Firefly," which had been rescued from various Arab dhows.  The gang now
received on board made their numbers so great that it became absolutely
necessary to run to the nearest port to discharge them.

We have already remarked on the necessity that lies on our cruisers,
when overladen with rescued slaves, to run to a distant port of
discharge to land them; and on the readiness of the slave-traders to
take advantage of their opportunity, and run north with full cargoes
with impunity when some of the cruisers are absent; for it is not
possible for a small fleet to guard upwards of a thousand miles of coast
effectually, or even, in any degree, usefully.  If we possessed a port
of discharge--a British station and settlement--on the mainland of the
east coast of Africa, this difficulty would not exist.  As it is,
although we place several men-of-war on a station, the evil will not be
cured, for just in proportion as these are successful in making
captures, will arise the necessity of their leaving the station for
weeks at a time unguarded.

Thus it fell out on the occasion of which we write.  The presence of the
large slave-freight on board the man-of-war was intolerable.  Captain
Romer was compelled to hurry off to the Seychelles Islands.  He sailed
with the monsoon, but had to steam back against it.  During this period
another vessel, similarly freighted, had to run to discharge at Aden.
The seas were thus comparatively clear of cruisers.  The Arabs seized
their opportunity, and a stream of dhows and larger vessels swept out
from the various creeks and ports all along the East African coast,
filled to overflowing with slaves.

Among these were the four large dhows of our friend Yoosoof.  Having, as
we have seen, made a slight sacrifice of damaged and unsaleable goods
and chattels, in order to clear the way, he proceeded north, touching at
various ports where he filled up his living cargo, and finally got clear
off, not with goods damaged beyond repair, but with thousands of the
sons and daughters of Africa in their youthful prime.

In the interior each man cost him about four yards of cotton cloth,
worth a few pence; each woman three yards, and each child two yards, and
of course in cases where he stole them, they cost him nothing.  On the
coast these would sell at from 8 pounds to 12 pounds each, and in Arabia
at from 20 pounds to 40 pounds.

We mention this to show what strong inducement there was for Yoosoof to
run a good deal of risk in carrying on this profitable and accursed
traffic.

But you must not fancy, good reader, that what we have described is
given as a specimen of the _extent_ to which the slave-trade on that
coast is carried.  It is but as a specimen of the _manner_ thereof.  It
is certainly within the mark to say that at least thirty thousand
natives are annually carried away as slaves from the east coast of
Africa.

Sir Bartle Frere, in addressing a meeting of the chief native
inhabitants of Bombay in April 1873, said,--"Let me assure you, in
conclusion, that what you have heard of the horrors of the slave-trade
is in no way exaggerated.  We have seen so much of the horrors which
were going on that we can have no doubt that what you read in books,
which are so often spoken of as containing exaggerations, is exaggerated
in no respect.  The evil is much greater than anything you can conceive.
Among the poorer class of Africans there is nothing like security from
fathers and mothers being put to death in order that their children may
be captured;"--and, referring to the _east coast alone_, he says
that--"thirty thousand, or more, human beings, are exported every year
from Africa."

Dr Livingstone tells us that, on the average, about one out of every
five captured human beings reaches the coast alive.  The other four
perish or are murdered on the way, so that the thirty thousand annually
exported, as stated by Sir Bartle Frere, represents a loss of 150,000
human beings _annually_ from the east coast alone, altogether
irrespective of the enormous and constant flow of slaves to the north by
way of the White Nile and Egypt.

Yoosoof's venture was therefore but a drop in the vast river of blood
which is drained annually from poor Africa's veins--blood which flows at
the present time as copiously and constantly as it ever did in the days
of old--blood which cries aloud to God for vengeance, and for the flow
of which _we_, as a nation, are far from blameless.



CHAPTER FOUR.

IN WHICH OUR HEROES SEE STRANGE SIGHTS AT ZANZIBAR, AND RESOLVE UPON
