
"Sleigh-bells!" exclaimed Spooner, with a catch of his breath.

"Nothing new in that," said Lumley: "we hear them every day."

"Nothing new," I retorted, "to your unmusical ear, but these bells are
not _our_ bells--listen!"

I started up as I spoke, flung open the outer door, and we all listened
intently.

Clear and pleasant they rang, like the music of a sweet new song.  We
all gave a shout, clapped on our caps, and ran out to the fort gate.
There an almost new sensation thrilled us, for we beheld a team of dogs
coming up weary and worn out of the wilderness, preceded by a gaunt yet
majestic Indian, whose whole aspect--haggard expression of countenance,
soiled and somewhat tattered garments, and weary gait--betokened severe
exhaustion.  On the sled, drawn by four lanky dogs, we could see the
figure of a man wrapped in blankets and strapped to the conveyance.

"Who _can_ it be?" exclaimed Lumley, as he hastened out to meet the new
arrivals.

"A sick man from somewhere," suggested Spooner.

"Perhaps the governor," said I, "on an unexpected tour of inspection."

As we drew near we could see that the recumbent figure waved a hand and
cheered.

"Macnab," said I, as the familiar voice struck my ear.

"Ill--dying!" gasped the anxious Spooner.

"No dying man ever cheered like that!" cried Lumley, "except a hero of
romance in the hour of death and victory!"

A few seconds more and the matter was put at rest, while we warmly shook
the hearty and genial Highlander by both hands.

"Help me out, boys," he said; "I'm tired o' this sled, and think I can
do the little remaining bit o' the journey on foot with your help."

We disentangled him from the sledge and set him on his feet.

"Hold on, Lumley," he said, with a smile on his haggard and unshaven
face, "I want to embrace you, like the Frenchmen.  There--my arm round
your neck--so.  Now, Max, I want to embrace you likewise wi' the other
arm.  I've grown awful affectionate in my old age.  You are rather
short, Max, for a good crutch, but you're better than nothing.  You see,
I've only got one good leg."

"But what has happened to the other--when, how, and where?" we exclaimed
in chorus.

Macnab answered the questions to our chief, who came forward at the
moment with welcome in his visage and extended hands.

"It's only a cut, sir, stupidly done with my own hatchet when we had
been but a few days out.  But rest will soon put me to rights.  My poor
man, Big Otter, is more to be pitied than I.  But for him I should have
perished in the snow."

"What cheer? what cheer?" said our chief, grasping the Indian's hand on
hearing this.

"What cheer?" we all exclaimed, following his example.

"Watchee! watchee!" echoed Big Otter, returning the hearty salutation as
well as his tongue could manage it, and giving us each a powerful
squeeze with his huge bony hand, which temporary exhaustion had not
appreciably reduced in strength.

The native was obviously a sociable, well-disposed man, for his eyes
glittered and his white teeth gleamed and his bronzed visage shone with
pleasure when Macnab explained the cause of our sudden burst of
affection for him.

Thus chatting and limping we got the Highlander slowly up to the hall,
set him down in our only armchair--a wooden one without stuffing--and
fetched him a basin of hot soup, that being a liquid which our cook had
always more or less frequently on hand.

"Ha! boys!" cried Macnab, smacking his lips, "that's the thing to put
life into a man!  I've not had anything like it for many a day.  You
see, we had a small misfortune soon after my accident, which cost us our
kettle, and rendered soup or tea impossible."

"How was that?" inquired our chief, sitting down, while we gathered
round the stove to listen.

"Well, you see, sir, not long after my accident, there came a sharp
frost which made the surface of the snow hard after the thaw, so the
dogs could run on the top of the crust without breaking it, but Big
Otter, bein' heavy, broke through--by the way, I hope he's bein' looked
after."

"You may be sure of that," said Spooner.  "I saw him safely placed in
the men's house, and Salamander, who, it turns out, is a sort of
relation of his, set to work to stuff him with the same sort of soup you
think so much of.  I only hope they've enough to keep him going, for
before I left the house he had drunk off two bowls of it almost without
taking breath, though it was scalding hot."

"Good.  He'll do it ample justice," returned Macnab, taking another pull
at his own bowl.  "I hope you're well provisioned, for Big Otter's an
awful consumer of victuals.  Well, as I was saying, the surface of the
snow got frozen thinly, and the work o' tramping after the sled and
holding on to the tail-line was uncommonly hard, as I could see, for I
lay with my head to the front, looping back on the poor man.  But it was
on the exposed places and going down the slopes that the greatest
difficulty lay, for there the dogs were keen to run away.  Once or twice
they did fairly get off, and gave me some rough as well as long runs
before my man could catch them up.  At last we came one afternoon to an
open plain where the snow had felt the thaw and been frozen again pretty
hard.  The moment we got on it away went the dogs.  Big Otter tried to
run, but one of his shoes went through the crust and the other didn't,
so down he came, and had to let go the line.  I felt easy enough at
first, for the plain was level, but after a time it became lumpy, and I
got some ugly bumps.  `Never mind,' thought I, `they'll be sure to come
to some bushes, and that'll pull them up.'  Just as I thought so, we
came to a slope, and the team went slap over a bank.  The sled and I
threw a complete somersault.  Fortunately we came down on the dogs,
which broke our fall, though it half killed them!

"When Big Otter came and turned me right side up, I found that I had
sustained no damage whatever, but, woe's me! our tin kettle was almost
knocked flat.  The worst of it was that in trying to put it right we
drove a big hole in the bottom of it, so we had to bid farewell to hot
food, except what we roasted.  We could also melt snow by plastering up
the hole so as to get enough to drink, but boiling water was quite out
of the question."

"Well, Macnab," said our chief, rising, "since you have got the soup
over at last, come along with me and let's hear about your Indian
friend's proposals."

We assisted our visitor into the mess-room, which was also our principal
council-chamber, and there left him to talk business with Mr Strang
while we returned to Bachelors' Hall to let off our effervescing spirits
by indulging in a running commentary on the unexpected visit, and a
minute analysis of the characters of Macnab and Big Otter, which, I must
add, was decidedly favourable.

"It seems to me a piece of good luck that he has got here at all," said
Lumley, after we had finished the analysis.

"Why so?" asked Spooner.

"Because there are some unmistakable symptoms that winter is about over,
and that snow-shoe and dog-sleigh travelling will soon be impossible."

That Lumley was right, the change of weather during the next few days
clearly proved, for a thaw set in with steady power.  The sun became at
last warm enough to melt ice and snow visibly.  We no longer listened
with interest to the sounds of dropping water from eaves and trees, for
these had become once more familiar, and soon our ears were greeted with
the gurgling of rills away in mysterious depths beneath the snow.  The
gurgling ere long gave place to gushing, and it seemed as if all nature
were dissolving into liquid.

While this pleasant change was going on we awoke with song and laugh and
story the echoes of Bachelors' Hall--at no time very restful echoes,
save perhaps in the dead hours of early morning; and even then they were
more or less disturbed by snoring.  For our sociable Highlander, besides
having roused our spirits by his mere presence to the effervescing
point, was himself much elated by the mighty change from prolonged
solitude to joyous companionship.

"My spirit feels inclined," he remarked one day, "to jump clean out of
my body."

"You'd better not let it then," said Lumley, "for you know it might
catch cold or freeze."

"Not in this weather, surely," retorted Macnab, "and if I did feel
coldish in the circumstances, couldn't I borrow Spooner's
blanket-capote? it might fit me then, for I'd probably be a few sizes
smaller."

"Come, Mac," said I, "give us a song.  You know I'm wildly fond of
music; and, most unfortunately, not one of us three can sing a note."

Our visitor was quite willing, and began at once to sing a wild ditty,
in the wilder language of his native land.

He had a sweet, tuneful, sympathetic voice, which was at the same time
powerful, so that we listened to him, sometimes with enthusiasm swelling
our hearts, at other times with tears dimming our eyes.  No one, save he
who has been banished to a wilderness and long bereft of music, can
understand the nature of our feelings--of mine, at least.

One evening, after our wounded man had charmed us with several songs,
and we all of us had done what we could, despite our incapacity, to pay
him back in kind, he pulled a sheet of crumpled paper out of his pocket.

"Come," said he, unfolding it, "I've got a poet among the men of Muskrat
House, who has produced a song, which, if not marked by sublimity, is at
least distinguished by much truth.  He said he composed it at the rate
of about one line a week during the winter, and his comrades said that
it was quite a picture to see him agonising over the rhymes.  Before
they found out what was the matter with him they thought he was becoming
subject to fits of some sort.  Now, then, let's have a good chorus.
It's to the tune of `The British Grenadiers.'"

THE WORLD OF ICE AND SNOW.

  Come listen all good people who dwell at home at ease,
  I'll tell you of the sorrows of them that cross the seas
  And penetrate the wilderness,
  Where arctic tempests blow--
  Where your toes are froze,
  An' the pint o' your nose,
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  You've eight long months of winter an' solitude profound,
  The snow at your feet is ten feet deep and frozen hard the ground.
  And all the lakes are solid cakes,
  And the rivers all cease to flow--
  Where your toes are froze,
  An' the pint o' your nose,
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  No comrade to enliven; no friendly foe to fight;
  No female near to love or cheer with pure domestic light;
  No books to read; no cause to plead;
  No music, fun, nor go--
  Ne'er a shillin', nor a stiver,
  Nor nothin' whatsomediver,
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  Your feelin's take to freezin', so likewise takes your brain;
  You go about grump-and-wheezin', like a wretched dog in pain;
  You long for wings, or some such things,
  But they're not to be had--oh! no--
  For there you are,
  Like a _fixed_ star,
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  If you wished you could--you would not, for the very wish
  would die.
  If you thought you would--you could not, for you wouldn't
  have heart to try.
  Confusion worse confounded,
  Would aggravate you so--
  That you'd tumble down
  On the frozen ground
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  But "never-give-in" our part is--let British pluck have sway
  And "never-say-die," my hearties--it's that what wins the day.
  To face our fate in every state,
  Is what we've got to do,
  An' laugh at our trouble
  Till we're all bent double--
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

  Now all ye sympathisers, and all ye tender souls;
  Ye kind philanthropisers, who dwell between the poles,
  Embrace in your affections
  Those merry merry men who go--
  Where your toes are froze,
  An' the pint o' your nose,
  In the world of Ice and Snow.

It almost seemed as though the world of ice and snow itself had taken
umbrage at Macnab's song, for, while we were yet in the act of
enthusiastically prolonging the last "sno-o-ow," there sounded in our
ears a loud report, as if of heavy artillery close at hand.

We all leaped up in excitement, as if an enemy were at our doors.

"There it goes at last!" cried Lumley, rushing out of the house followed
by Spooner.

I was about to follow when Macnab stopped me.

"Don't get excited, Max, there's no hurry!"

"It's the river going to break up," said I, looking back impatiently.

"Yes, I know that, but it won't break up to-night, depend on it."

I was too eager to wait for more, but ran to the banks of the river,
which at that place was fully a mile wide.  The moon was bright, and we
could see the familiar sheet of ice as still and cold as we had seen it
every day for many months past.

"Macnab's right," said I, "there will be no breakup to-night."

"Not so sure of that," returned Lumley; "the weather has been very warm
of late; melting snow has been gushing into it in thousands of streams,
and the strain on the ice--six feet thick though it is--must be
tremendous."

He was checked by another crashing report; but again silence ensued, and
we heard no more till next morning.  Of course we were all up and away
to the river bank long before breakfast, but it was not till after that
meal that the final burst-up occurred.  It was preceded by many
reports--towards the end by what seemed quite a smart artillery fire.
The whole sheet of ice on the great river seemed to be rising bodily
upwards from the tremendous hydraulic pressure underneath.  But though
the thaws of spring had converted much snow into floods of water, they
had not greatly affected the surface of the ice, which still lay hard
and solid in all its wintry strength.

A greater Power, however, was present.  If the ice had been made of
cast-iron six feet in thickness, it must have succumbed sooner or later.

At last, as Macnab said, "She went!" but who shall describe _how_ she
went?  It seemed as if the mighty cake had been suddenly struck from
below and shattered.  Then the turmoil that ensued was grand and
terrible beyond conception.  It was but an insignificant portion of
God's waters at which we gazed, but how overwhelming it seemed to us!
Mass rose upon mass of ice, the cold grey water bursting through and
over all, hurling morsels as large as the side of a house violently on
each other, till a mighty pile was raised which next moment fell with a
crash into the boiling foam.  Then, in one direction there was a rush
which seemed about to carry all before it, but instead of being piled
upwards, some of the masses were driven below, were thrust deep into the
mud, and a jam took place.  In a few minutes the ice burst upwards
again, and the masses were swept on to join the battalions that were
already on their way towards the distant lake amid noise and crash and
devastation.  It seemed as if ice and snow and water had combined to
revive the picture if not the reality of ancient chaos!

Thus the drapery of winter was rudely swept away, and next morning we
had the joy of seeing our river sweeping grandly on in all the liquid
beauty of early and welcome spring.



CHAPTER SIX.

AN EXPRESS AND ITS RESULTS.

Some weeks after the breaking up of the ice, as we were standing at the
front gate of Fort Dunregan, we experienced a pleasant surprise at the
sight of an Indian canoe sweeping round the point above the fort.  Two
men paddled the canoe, one in the bow and one in the stern.

It conveyed a message from headquarters directing that two of the clerks
should be sent to establish an outpost in the regions of the far north,
the very region from which Macnab's friend Big Otter had come.  One of
the two canoe-men was a clerk sent to undertake, at Dunregan, the work
of those who should be selected for the expedition, and he said that
another clerk was to follow in the spring-brigade of boats.

"That's marching orders for _you_, Lumley," said Macnab, who was beside
us when the canoe arrived.

"You cannot tell that," returned Lumley.  "It may be that our chief will
select Max or Spooner.  Did you hear any mention of names?" he asked of
the new clerk, as we all walked up to the house.

"No, our governor does not tell us much of his intentions.  Perhaps your
chief may be the man."

"He's too useful where he is," suggested Macnab.  "But we shall know
when the letters are opened."

Having delivered his despatches, the new arrival returned to us in
Batchelors' Hall, where we soon began to make the most of him, and were
