"Well, then, you cannot speak from _experience_ about what I propose,"
said the Captain, turning away.  "Come, lads, I have no wish to
constrain you, I merely give one of you the chance."

Still no one came forward.  Every man of the crew of the _Whitebear_ had
had more or less personal acquaintance with arctic travel and danger.
They would have followed Captain Vane anywhere in the yacht, but
evidently they had no taste for what he was about to undertake.

At last one stepped to the front.  It was Butterface, the steward.  This
intensely black negro was a bulky, powerful man, with a modest spirit
and a strange disbelief in his own capacities, though, in truth, these
were very considerable.  He came forward, stooping slightly, and rubbing
his hands in a deprecating manner.

"'Scuse me, massa Capting.  P'r'aps it bery presumsheeous in dis yer
chile for to speak afore his betters, but as no oder man 'pears to want
to volunteer, I's willin' to go in an' win.  Ob course I ain't a man--
on'y a nigger, but I's a willin' nigger, an' kin do a few small tings--
cook de grub, wash up de cups an' sarsers, pull a oar, clean yer boots,
fight de Eskimos if you wants me to, an' ginrally to scrimmage around
a'most anything.  Moreover, I eats no more dan a babby--'sep wen I's
hungry--an' I'll foller you, massa, troo tick and tin--to de Nort Pole,
or de Sout Pole, or de East Pole, or de West Pole--or any oder pole
wotsomediver--all de same to Butterface, s'long's you'll let 'im stick
by you."

The crew could not help giving the negro a cheer as he finished this
loyal speech, and the Captain, although he would have preferred one of
the other men, gladly accepted his services.

A few days later the boats were ready and provisioned; adieus were said,
hats and handkerchiefs waved, and soon after Captain Vane and his son
and two nephews, with Anders and Butterface, were left to fight their
battles alone, on the margin of an unexplored, mysterious Polar sea.



CHAPTER FIVE.

LEFT TO THEIR FATE.

There are times, probably, in all conditions of life, when men feel a
species of desolate sadness creeping over their spirits, which they find
it hard to shake off or subdue.  Such a time arrived to our Arctic
adventurers the night after they had parted from the crew of the wrecked
_Whitebear_.  Nearly everything around, and much within, them was
calculated to foster that feeling.

They were seated on the rocky point on the extremity of which their
yacht had been driven.  Behind them were the deep ravines, broad
valleys, black beetling cliffs, grand mountains, stupendous glaciers,
and dreary desolation of Greenland.  To right and left, and in front of
them, lay the chaotic ice-pack of the Arctic sea, with lanes and pools
of water visible here and there like lines and spots of ink.  Icebergs
innumerable rose against the sky, which at the time was entirely covered
with grey and gloomy clouds.  Gusts of wind swept over the frozen waste
now and then, as if a squall which had recently passed, were sighing at
the thought of leaving anything undestroyed behind it.  When we add to
this, that the wanderers were thinking of the comrades who had just left
them--the last link, as it were, with the civilised world from which
they were self-exiled, of the unknown dangers and difficulties that lay
before them, and of the all but forlorn hope they had undertaken, there
need be little wonder that for some time they all looked rather grave,
and were disposed to silence.

But life is made up of opposites, light and shade, hard and soft, hot
and cold, sweet and sour, for the purpose, no doubt, of placing man
between two moral battledores so as to drive the weak and erring
shuttlecock of his will right and left, and thus keep it in the middle
course of rectitude.  No sooner had our adventurers sunk to the
profoundest depths of gloom, than the battledore of brighter influences
began to play upon them.  It did not, however, achieve the end at once.

"I'm in the lowest, bluest, dreariest, grumpiest, and most utterly
miserable state of mind I ever was in in all my life," said poor little
Benjy Vane, thrusting his hands into his pockets, sitting down on a
rock, and gazing round on the waste wilderness, which had only just
ceased howling, the very personification of despair.

"So's I, massa," said Butterface, looking up from a compound of wet coal
and driftwood which he had been vainly trying to coax into a flame for
cooking purposes; "I's most 'orribly miserable!"

There was a beaming grin on the negro's visage that gave the lie direct
to his words.

"That's always the way with you, Benjy," said the Captain, "either
bubblin' over with jollity an' mischief, or down in the deepest blues."

"Blues! father," cried the boy, "don't talk of blues--it's the blacks
I'm in, the very blackest of blacks."

"Ha! jus' like me," muttered Butterface, sticking out his thick lips at
the unwilling fire, and giving a blow that any grampus might have
envied.

The result was that a column of almost solid smoke, which had been for
some time rising thicker and thicker from the coals, burst into a bright
flame.  This was the first of the sweet influences before referred to.

"Mind your wool, Flatnose," cried Benjy, as the negro drew quickly back.

It may be remarked here that the mysterious bond of sympathy which
united the spirits of Benjy Vane and the black steward found expression
in kindly respect on the part of the man, and in various eccentric
courses on the part of the boy--among others, in a habit of patting him
on the back, and giving him a choice selection of impromptu names, such
as Black-mug, Yellow-eyes, Square-jaws, and the like.

"What have you got in the kettle?" asked Leo Vandervell, who came up
with some dry driftwood at the moment.

"Bubble-um-squeak," replied the cook.

"What sort o' squeak is that?" asked Leo, as he bent his tall strong
frame over the fire to investigate the contents of the kettle.

"What am it, massa?  Why, it am a bit o' salt pork, an' a bit o' dat
bear you shooted troo de nose yes'rday, an' a junk o' walrus, an' two
puffins, an' some injin corn, a leetil pepper, an' a leetil salt."

"Good, that sounds well," said Leo.  "I'll go fetch you some more
driftwood, for it'll take a deal of boiling, that will, to make it
eatable."

The driftwood referred to was merely some pieces of the yacht which had
been cast ashore by the hurly-burly of ice and water that had occurred
during the last tide.  No other species of driftwood was to be found on
that coast, for the neighbouring region was utterly destitute of trees.

"Where has Alf gone to?" asked the Captain, as Leo was moving away.

"Oh, he's looking for plants and shells, as usual," answered Leo, with a
smile.  "You know his heart is set upon these things."

"He'll have to set his heart on helping wi' the cargo after supper,"
said the Captain, drawing a small notebook and pencil from his pocket.

A few more of the sweet and reviving influences of life now began to
circle round the wanderers.  Among them was the savoury odour that arose
from the pot of bubble-um-squeak, also the improved appearance of the
sky.

It was night, almost midnight, nevertheless the sun was blazing in the
heavens, and as the storm-clouds had rolled away like a dark curtain,
his cheering rays were by that time gilding the icebergs, and rendering
the land-cliffs ruddily.  The travellers had enjoyed perpetual daylight
for several weeks already, and at that high latitude they could count on
many more to come.  By the time supper was ready, the depressing
influences were gone, and the spirits of all had recovered their wonted
tone.  Indeed it was not to the discredit of the party that they were so
much cast down on that occasion, for the parting, perhaps for ever, from
the friends with whom they had hitherto voyaged, had much more to do
with their sadness than surrounding circumstances or future trials.

"What plan do you intend to follow out, uncle?" asked Alphonse
Vandervell, as they sat at supper that night round the kettle.

"That depends on many things, lad," replied the Captain, laying down his
spoon, and leaning his back against a convenient rock.  "If the ice
moves off, I shall adopt one course; if it holds fast I shall try
another.  Then, if you insist on gathering and carrying along with you
such pocket-loads of specimens, plants, rocks, etcetera, as you've
brought in this evening, I'll have to build a sort of Noah's ark, or
omnibus on sledge-runners, to carry them."

"And suppose I don't insist on carrying these things, what then?"

"Well," replied the Captain, "in that case I would--well, let me see--a
little more of the bubble, Benjy."

"Wouldn't you rather some of the squeak?" asked the boy.

"Both, lad, both--some of everything.  Well, as I was saying--and you've
a right to know what's running in my head, seeing that you have to help
me carry out the plans--I'll give you a rough notion of 'em."

The Captain became more serious as he explained his plans.  "The
Eskimos, you know," he continued, "have gone by what I may call the
shore ice, two days' journey in advance of this spot, taking our dogs
along with them.  It was my intention to have proceeded to the same
point in our yacht, and there, if the sea was open, to have taken on
board that magnificent Eskimo giant, Chingatok, with his family, and
steered away due north.  In the event of the pack being impassable, I
had intended to have laid the yacht up in some safe harbour; hunted and
fished until we had a stock of dried and salted provisions, enough to
last us two years, and then to have started northward in sledges, under
the guidance of Chingatok, with a few picked men, leaving the rest and
the yacht in charge of the mate.  The wreck of the _Whitebear_ has,
however, forced me to modify these plans.  I shall now secure as much of
our cargo as we have been able to save, and leave it here _en cache_--"

"What sort of cash is that, father?" asked Benjy.

"You are the best linguist among us, Leo, tell him," said the Captain,
turning to his nephew.

"`_En cache_' is French for `in hiding,'" returned Leo, with a laugh.

"Why do you speak French to Englishmen, father?" said Benjy in a
pathetic tone, but with a pert look.

"'Cause the expression is a common one on this side the Atlantic, lad,
and you ought to know it.  Now, don't interrupt me again.  Well, having
placed the cargo in security," ("_En cache_," muttered Benjy with a
glance at Butterface.) "I shall rig up the sledges brought from England,
load them with what we require, and follow up the Eskimos.  You're sure,
Anders, that you understood Chingatok's description of the place?"

The interpreter declared that he was quite sure.

"After that," resumed the Captain, "I'll act according to the
information the said Eskimos can give me.  D'ye know, I have a strong
suspicion that our Arctic giant Chingatok is a philosopher, if I may
judge from one or two questions he put and observations he made when we
first met.  He says he has come from a fine country which lies far--very
far--to the north of this; so far that I feel quite interested and
hopeful about it.  I expect to have more talk with him soon on the
subject.  A little more o' the bubble, lad; really, Butterface, your
powers in the way of cookery are wonderful."

"Chingatok seems to me quite a remarkable fellow for an Eskimo,"
observed Leo, scraping the bottom of the kettle with his spoon, and
looking inquiringly into it.  "I, too, had some talk with him--through
Anders--when we first met, and from what he said I can't help thinking
that he has come from the remote north solely on a voyage of discovery
into what must be to him the unknown regions of the south.  Evidently he
has an inquiring mind."

"Much like yourself, Leo, to judge from the way you peer into that
kettle," said Benjy; "please don't scrape the bottom out of it.  There's
not much tin to mend it with, you know, in these regions."

"Brass will do quite as well," retorted Leo, "and there can be no lack
of that while you are here."

"Come now, Benjy," said Alf, "that insolent remark should put you on
your mettle."

"So it does, but I won't open my lips, because I feel that I should
speak ironically if I were to reply," returned the boy, gazing dreamily
into the quiet countenance of the steward.  "What are _you_ thinking of,
you lump of charcoal?"

"Me, massa? me tink dere 'pears to be room for more wittles inside ob
me; but as all de grub's eated up, p'r'aps it would be as well to be
goin' an' tacklin' suffin' else now."

"You're right, Butterface," cried the Captain, rousing himself from a
reverie.  "What say you, comrades?  Shall we turn in an' have a nap?
It's past midnight."

"I'm not inclined for sleep," said Alf, looking up from some of the
botanical specimens he had collected.

"No more am I," said Leo, lifting up his arms and stretching his
stalwart frame, which, notwithstanding his youth, had already developed
to almost the full proportions of a powerful man.

"I vote that we sit up all night," said Benjy, "the sun does it, and why
shouldn't we?"

"Well, I've no objection," rejoined the Captain, "but we must work if we
don't sleep--so, come along."

Setting the example, Captain Vane began to shoulder the bags and boxes
which lay scattered around with the energy of an enthusiastic railway
porter.  The other members of the party were not a whit behind him in
diligence and energy.  Even Benjy, delicate-looking though he was, did
the work of an average man, besides enlivening the proceedings with
snatches of song and a flow of small talk of a humorous and slightly
insolent nature.



CHAPTER SIX.

FUTURE PLANS DISCUSSED AND DECIDED.

Away to the northward of the spot where the _Whitebear_ had been wrecked
there stretched a point of land far out into the Arctic Ocean.  It was
about thirty miles distant, and loomed hugely bluff and grand against
the brilliant sky, as if it were the forefront of the northern world.
No civilised eyes had ever beheld that land before.  Captain Vane knew
that, because it lay in latitude 83 north, which was a little beyond the
furthest point yet reached by Arctic navigators.  He therefore named it
Cape Newhope.  Benjy thought that it should have been named
Butterface-beak, because the steward had been the first to observe it,
but his father thought otherwise.

About three miles to the northward of this point of land the Eskimos
were encamped.  According to arrangement with the white men they had
gone there, as we have said, in charge of the dogs brought by Captain
Vane from Upernavik, as these animals, it was thought, stood much in
need of exercise.

Here the natives had found and taken possession of a number of deserted
Eskimo huts.

These rude buildings were the abodes to which the good people migrated
when summer heat became so great as to render their snow-huts sloppily
disagreeable.

In one of the huts sat Chingatok, his arms resting on his knees, his
huge hands clasped, and his intelligent eyes fixed dreamily on the
lamp-flame, over which his culinary mother was bending in busy
sincerity.  There were many points of character in which this remarkable
mother and son resembled each other.  Both were earnest--intensely so--
and each was enthusiastically eager about small matters as well as
great.  In short, they both possessed great though uncultivated minds.

The hut they occupied was in some respects as remarkable as themselves.
It measured about six feet in height and ten in diameter.  The walls
were made of flattish stones, moss, and the bones of seals, whales,
narwhals, and other Arctic creatures.  The stones were laid so that each
overlapped the one below it, a very little inwards, and thus the walls
approached each other gradually as they rose from the foundation; the
top being finally closed by slabs of slate-stone.  Similar stones
covered the floor--one half of which floor was raised a foot or so above
the other, and this raised half served for a seat by day as well as a
couch by night.  On it were spread a thick layer of dried moss, and
several seal, dog, and bear skins.  Smaller elevations in the corners
near the entrance served for seats.  The door was a curtain of sealskin.
Above it was a small window, glazed, so to speak, with strips of
semi-transparent dried intestines sewed together.

Toolooha's cooking-lamp was made of soapstone, formed like a clam-shell,
and about eight inches in diameter; the fuel was seal-oil, and the wick
was of moss.  It smoked considerably, but Eskimos are smoke-proof.  The
pot above it, suspended from the roof, was also made of soapstone.
Sealskins hung about the walls drying; oily mittens, socks and boots
were suspended about on pegs and racks of rib-bones.  Lumps of blubber
hung and lay about miscellaneously.  Odours, not savoury, were therefore
prevalent--but Eskimos are smell-proof.

"Mother," said the giant, raising his eyes from the flame to his
parent's smoke-encircled visage, "they are a most wonderful people,
these Kablunets.  Blackbeard is a great man--a grand man--but I think he
is--"

Chingatok paused, shook his head, and touched his forehead with a look
of significance worthy of a white man.

"Why think you so, my son?" asked the old woman, sneezing, as a denser
cloud than usual went up her nose.

"Because he has come here to search for _nothing_."

"Nothing, my son?"

"Yes--at least that is what he tried to explain to me.  Perhaps the
interpreter could not explain.  He is not a smart man, that interpreter.
He resembles a walrus with his brain scooped out.  He spoke much, but I
could not understand."

"Could not understand?" repeated Toolooha, with an incredulous look,
"let not Chingatok say so.  Is there _anything_ that passes the lips of
man which he cannot understand?"

"Truly, mother, I once thought there was not," replied the giant, with a
modest look, "but I am mistaken.  The Kablunets make me stare and feel
foolish."

"But it is not possible to search for _nothing_," urged Toolooha.

"So I said," replied her son, "but Blackbeard only laughed at me."

"Did he?" cried the mother, with a much relieved expression, "then let
your mind rest, my son, for Blackbeard must be a fool if he laughed at
_you_."

"Blackbeard is no fool," replied Chingatok.

"Has he not come to search for new lands _here_, as you went to search
for them _there_?" asked Toolooha, pointing alternately north and south.

