"By Jove!  I respect you," said Dick, with the greatest sincerity; "but I
don't think, with me on your side, you will need to make many marches.  It
will all be plain sailing."

"Pray explain your plan," said Prince Charles.  "The task of conquering
back the throne of my fathers is not so simple as you seem to suppose."

"I've done a good many difficult things," said Dick, modestly.

"The conqueror of the magician, Gorgonzola, and the Giant Who never Knew
when he had Enough, need not tell me that," said Prince Charles, with a
courteous allusion to two of Ricardo's most prodigious adventures.

"Oh!  I've very little to be proud of, really," said Dick, blushing;
"anyone could do as much with my fairy things, of which, no doubt, you
have heard.  With a Sword of Sharpness and a Cap of Darkness, and so
forth, you have a great pull over almost anything."

"And you really possess those talismans?" said the prince.

"Certainly I do.  You see how short a time I took in coming to your call
from Pantouflia."

"And has Holy Church," asked the Duke of York, with anxiety, "given her
sanction and her blessing to those instruments of an art, usually, in her
wisdom, forbidden?"

"Oh, never mind Holy Church, Harry!" said Prince Charles.  "This is
_business_.  Besides, the English are Protestants."

"I pray for their conversion daily," said the Duke of York.

"The end justifies the means, you know," answered Prince Charles.  "All's
fair in love and war."

"I should think so," said Ricardo, "especially against those brutes of
Electors; they give trouble at home sometimes."

"You, too, are plagued with an Elector?" asked Prince Charles.

"_An_ Elector? thousands of them!" answered Dick, who never could
understand anything about politics.

Prince Charles looked puzzled, but requested Dick to explain his great
plan.

They sat down on the grass, and Ricardo showed them how he meant to
manage it, just as he had told Jaqueline.  As he said, nothing could be
simpler.

"Let's start at once," he said, and, inducing Prince Charles to sit down
on the magic carpet, he cried:

"England!  St. James's Palace!"

But nothing happened!

The carpet was not the right magic carpet, but the one which King Prigio
had put in its place.

"Get on!  England, I said!" cried Dick.

But there they remained, under the chestnut tree, sitting on the carpet
above the flowery grass.

{But there they remained: p99.jpg}

Prince Charles leaped to his feet; his face like fire, his eyes glowing.

"Enough of this fooling, sir!" he said.  "It is easy, but cowardly, to
mock at an unfortunate prince.  Take your carpet and be off with you, out
of the gardens, or your shoulders shall taste my club."

"There has been some mistake," Ricardo said; "the wrong carpet has been
brought by accident, or the carpet has lost its power."

"In this sacred city, blessed by the presence of his Holiness the Pope,
and the relics of so many martyrs and saints, magic may well cease to be
potent," said the Duke of York.

"Nonsense!  You are an impostor, sir!  Leave my presence!" cried Prince
Charles, lifting his golf-club.

Dick caught it out of his hand, and broke across his knee as fine a
driver as ever came from Robertson's shop at St. Andrew's.

"The quarrels of princes are not settled with clubs, sir!  Draw and
defend yourself!" he said, kicking off his boots and standing in his
socks on the grass.

Think of the horror of poor Jaqueline, who witnessed this terrible scene
of passion from a fold in Prince Ricardo's dress!  What could the girl do
to save the life of two princes, the hopes of one nation, and of a
respectable minority in another?

In a moment Prince Charles's rapier was shining in the sunlight, and he
fell on guard in the most elegant attitude, his left hand gracefully
raised and curved.

Dick drew his sword, but, as suddenly, threw it down again.

"Hang it!" he exclaimed, "I can't hit you with _this_!  This is the Sword
of Sharpness; it would cut through your steel and your neck at a touch."

He paused, and thought.

"Let me beseech your Royal Highness," he said to the Duke of York, who
was in a terrible taking, "to lend your blade to a hand not less royal
than your own."

"Give him it, Hal!" said Prince Charles, who was standing with the point
of his sword on the ground, and the blade bent.  "He seems to believe in
his own nonsense."

The duke yielded his sword; Dick took it, made a nourish, and rushed at
Prince Charles.

Now Ricardo had always neglected his fencing lessons.  "Where's the good
of it," he used to ask, "all that stamping, and posture-making, and ha-
haing?  The Sword of Sharpness is enough for _me_."

But now he could not, in honour, use the Sword of Sharpness; so on he
came, waving the rapier like a claymore, and made a slice at Prince
Charles's head.

The prince, very much surprised, parried in prime, riposted, and touched
Dick on the hand.

At this moment the Princess Jaqueline did what she should have thought of
sooner.  She flew out of Dick's coat, and stung old King James on his
royal nose.  The king wakened, nearly crushed the princess (so dangerous
is the practice of magic to the artist), and then leaped up, and saw
Dick's blade flying through the air, glittering in the sun.  The prince
had disarmed him.

"Hullo! what's all this?  _A moi_, _mes gardes_!" cried the old king, in
French and English; and then he ran up, just in time to hear Prince
Charles say:

"Sir, take your life!  I cannot strike an unarmed man.  A prince you may
be, but you have not learned the exercises of gentlemen."

"What is all this, Carluccio?" asked the old king.  "Swords out! brawling
in my very presence! blood drawn!" for Dick's hand was bleeding a good
deal.

Prince Charles, as briefly as possible, explained the unusual nature of
the circumstances.

"A king must hear both sides," said King James.  "What reply have you,
sir, to make to his Royal Highness's statements?"

"The carpet would not work, sir," said Dick.  "It never happened before.
Had I used my own sword," and he explained its properties, "the Prince of
Wales would not be alive to tell his story.  I can say no more, beyond
offering my apology for a disappointment which I could not have foreseen.
A gentleman can only say that he is sorry.  But wait!" he added; "I can
at least prove that my confidence in some of my resources is not
misplaced.  Bid me bring you something--anything--from the ends of the
earth, and it shall be in your hands.  I can't say fairer."

King James reflected, while Prince Ricardo was pulling on the
Seven-league Boots, which he had kicked off to fight more freely, and
while the Duke of York bandaged Dick's hand with a kerchief.

"Bring me," said his Majesty, "Lord Lovat's snuff-mull."

"Where does he live?" said Dick.

"At Gortuleg, in Scotland," answered King James.

Dick was out of sight before the words were fairly spoken, and in ten
minutes was back, bearing a large ram's-horn snuff-box, with a big
cairngorm set in the top, and the Frazer arms.

"Most astonishing!" said King James.

"A miracle!" said the Duke of York.

"You have entirely cleared your character," said the king.  "Your honour
is without a stain, though it is a pity about the carpet.  Your nobility
in not using your magical sword, under the greatest provocation,
reconciles me to this fresh blighting of my hopes.  All my allies fail
me," said the poor king with a sigh; "you alone have failed with honour.
Carluccio, embrace the prince!"

They fell into each other's arms.

"Prince," said Dick, "you have taught me a lesson for which I shall not
be ungrateful.  With any blade a gentleman should be able to hold his own
in fair fight.  I shall no longer neglect my fencing lessons."

"With any blade," said Prince Charles, "I shall be happy to find Prince
Ricardo by my side in a stricken field.  We shall not part till I have
induced you to accept a sword which I can never hope to draw against
another adversary so noble.  In war, my weapon is the claymore."

Here the prince offered to Ricardo the ruby-studded hilt of his rapier,
which had a beautiful white shark-skin sheath.

"You must accept it, sir," said King James; "the hilt holds the rubies of
John Sobieski."

"Thank you, prince," said Ricardo, "for the weapon, which I shall learn
to wield; and I entreat you to honour me by receiving this fairy
gift--which _you_ do not need--a ring which makes all men faithful to the
wearer."

The Prince of Wales bowed, and placed the talisman on his finger.

Ricardo then, after a few words of courtesy on both parts, picked up his
useless carpet, took his farewell of the royal party, and, with Jaqueline
still hidden under his collar, returned at full speed, but with a heavy
heart, to Pantouflia, where the palace gong was just sounding for
luncheon.

Ricardo never interfered in foreign affairs again, but his ring proved
very useful to Prince Charles, as you may have read in history.




CHAPTER VI.
Ricardo's Repentance.


{Bottle of weapon salve: p109.jpg}

The queen, as it happened fortunately, was lunching with one of the
ladies of her Court.  Ricardo did not come down to luncheon, and
Jaqueline ate hers alone; and very mournful she felt.  The prince had
certainly not come well out of the adventure.  He had failed (as all
attempts to restore the Stuarts always did); he had been wounded, though
he had never received a scratch in any of his earlier exploits; and if
his honour was safe, and his good intentions fully understood, that was
chiefly due to Jaqueline, and to the generosity of King James and Prince
Charles.

"I wonder what he's doing?" she said to herself, and at last she went up
and knocked at Ricardo's door.

"Go away," he said; "I don't want to see anybody.  Who is it?"

"It's only me--Jaqueline."

{"It's only me": p111.jpg}

"Go away!  I want nobody."

"Do let me in, dear Dick; I have good news for you," said the princess.

"What is it?" said Ricardo, unlocking the door.  "Why do you bother a
fellow so?"

He had been crying--his hand obviously hurt him badly; he looked, and
indeed he was, very sulky.

"How did you get on in England, Dick?" asked the princess, taking no
notice of his bandaged hand.

"Oh, don't ask me!" said Ricardo.  "I've not been to England at all."

"Why, what happened?"

"Everything that is horrid happened," said Dick; and then, unable to keep
it any longer to himself, he said: "I've failed to keep my promise; I've
been insulted, I've been beaten by a fellow younger than myself; and, oh!
how my hand does hurt, and I've got such a headache!  And what am I to
say to my mother when she asks why my arm is in a sling? and what will my
father say?  I'm quite broken down and desperate.  I think I'll run away
to sea;" and indeed he looked very wild and miserable.

"Tell me how it all happened, Dick," said the princess; "I'm sure it's
not so bad as you make out.  Perhaps I can help you."

"How can a girl help a man?" cried Dick, angrily; and poor Jaqueline,
remembering how she _had_ helped him, at the risk of her own life, when
King James nearly crushed her in the shape of a mosquito, turned her head
away, and cried silently.

"I'm a beast," said Dick.  "I beg your pardon, Jack dear.  You are always
a trump, I will say; but I don't see what you can do."

Then he told her all the story (which, of course, she knew perfectly well
already), except the part played by the mosquito, of which he could not
be aware.

"I was sure it was not so bad as you made it out, Dick," she said.  "You
see, the old king, who is not very wise, but is a perfectly honourable
gentleman, gave you the highest praise."  She thought of lecturing him a
little about disobeying his father, but it did not seem a good
opportunity.  Besides, Jaqueline had been lectured herself lately, and
had not enjoyed it.

"What am I to say to my mother?" Dick repeated.

"We must think of something to say," said Jaqueline.

"I can't tell my mother anything but the truth," Ricardo went on.  "Here's
my hand, how it does sting! and she must find out."

"I think I can cure it," said Jaqueline.  "Didn't you say Prince Charles
gave you his own sword?"

"Yes, there it is; but what has that to do with it?"

"Everything in the world to do with it, my dear Dick.  How lucky it is
that he gave it to you!"

And she ran to her own room, and brought a beautiful golden casket, which
contained her medicines.

Taking out a small phial, marked (in letters of emerald):

"WEAPON SALVE,"

the princess drew the bright sword, extracted a little of the ointment
from the phial, and spread it on a soft silk handkerchief.

"What are you going to do with the sword?" asked Ricardo.

"Polish it a little," said Jaqueline, smiling, and she began gently to
rub, with the salve, the point of the rapier.

As she did so, Ricardo's arm ceased to hurt, and the look of pain passed
from his mouth.

"Why, I feel quite better!" he said.  "I can use my hand as well as
ever."

