
'I'll tell you what,' said Flossy suddenly, raising her bright
half-humorous face to Peter's, 'let's take baby to the lady what cried.'

'The lady who cried?' repeated Peter.  'I don't know nothing about her,
Floss.'

'O Peter, you do know; it was that day our Uncle David took us a long
walk, and we went to the cemetery with him, you know, the place with the
flowers and the trees, and where they put the pretty little children when
they die--there was a little baby being put there, and there was a lady
crying very, very bitter.  I never saw no one cry so dreadful bitter as
that lady, and they said she was putting her baby in the ground.  I'm
sure she must want another baby, and I think perhaps it would be right
for us to give her Dickory.'

Peter's face became very sad.  'I don't know,' he said; 'I don't want to
give Dickory away.  I'm quite dreadfully fond of her; it seems to me she
makes a lot of difference in the house, and you know, Floss, it used to
be very dull before she came.'

'Yes,' said Flossy, 'I love her more than anything; she's a dear baby,
and I never find the days long when I'm playing with her and talking to
her: but you see, Peter, she's not to be kept at home; she's to go to the
workhouse to-morrow morning, unless we can find a nice hiding-place for
her.  We can't find a hiding-place, Peter, for though you are a rich boy
and have got a lot of pennies, yet you haven't enough for us to get a
room for ourselves and Dickory, and the night air don't agree with
her--oh, there, she's sneezing again--bless her, the pet!  Peter, I hope
you always say "bless her!" when Dickory sneezes.  Martha says it isn't
lucky if you don't.  O Peter, I do think if we must part with the baby it
would be better to give her to the lady who cried than to send her to the
workhouse.'

'But we don't know where the lady lives,' said Peter.  'We might do it if
we knew where the lady lived; but we can't, however much we wish to, if
we don't.'

'But I do know,' answered Flossy, 'I know quite well, 'cause last week I
saw the lady.  I was out with mother, and mother went to the
greengrocer's, and while she was there the lady comed in.  She was all in
black, and I am sure she had been crying a lot, for she looked so sad;
and I knew it was her.  Afterwards mother and I walked behind her as she
went home, and she turned into a great big house in the square near us.
You know the square, Peter, the square that begins with a big B; Bev---
something, I can't say it all.'

'Bevington Square,' said Peter, in a gloomy voice.

'Yes, yes, that was it, and 10 was the number of the house.  I don't
forget the number 'cause I asked mother, and she said it was 10.  O
Peter, that's where our lady lives, and I do think it would be better to
give her Dickory.  There, Peter, bless her! she's sneezing again.  I'm
sure we had better take her to the lady.'

'All right,' answered Peter, 'I'll be a termagant again when she's gone;
see if I won't.  I'll get up an awful racking cough at night, and I'll
worry that nasty Mr Martin much more than Dickory has worried him, see if
I don't; and I'll sing on the stairs, and I'll whistle awful loud, and
I'll buy a Jew's-harp with one of my pennies.  I'll turn into a horrid
boy! but I suppose you are right about Dickory, Flossy.  Here, let's go
back as fast as we can to that house you were so 'cute as to take the
number of.  I'm mis'rible, and I mean to be mis'rible, so don't you
expect nothing cheerful from me, Flossy.'

'Very well, Peter,' said Flossy meekly.

And then the little party, slowly and painfully, for Flossy was very,
very tired, and poor Peter's arms ached fearfully, retraced their steps.
The baby had ceased crying and was asleep, and after about two hours'
patient walking and asking their way, the children found themselves in
Bevington Square.

'I'd better go up first to the door,' said Flossy, 'and ask her if she'd
like a baby.  You might stand round there, Peter, and you might keep Snip-
snap with you.'

'You needn't press her about it,' said Peter; 'if she don't seem quite
delighted we won't give up Dickory on no account; and kiss her before you
go, Flossy, for of course the lady will take her; and in a few minutes
she won't be our Dickory no more.'

Peter unfastened a corner of the old tartan shawl, and Flossy imprinted a
grave kiss on the baby's forehead.  Then, with great solemnity, and with
the air of one engaged on an important mission, she went up the steps of
the great house and rang the bell.  Flossy was an attractive little
child, her hair was really beautiful, and she had a very wistful and
taking manner.

'Please,' she said now to the tall, powdered footman, 'I know the lady
what cried is here; please can I see her?  I've brought her a little
baby, and I want to see her about it.'

Flossy did not look quite like a common child, and her face wore a very
sweet expression when she spoke of the baby; nevertheless the footman
only stared at her, and would have certainly shut the door in her face,
had not the lady of the house at that moment come into the hall.  Flossy
saw her, and quick as thought she darted past the servant and up to the
lady.

'Please, lady,' she said, 'I've often thought of you, and I'm so very
sorry for you.  Please, I've brought you another little baby instead of
the one you put into the ground in the pretty place where the flowers and
trees are.  She's a dear little baby, and when you have her you won't cry
no more.'

Flossy's voice was very earnest, and her eyes looking up full into the
lady's face were full of the most intense sympathy.  Those pretty eyes of
hers were too much for the poor bereaved mother: she put her handkerchief
to her own eyes, and there and then burst into fits of fresh weeping.

'Come away, little girl, at once,' said the indignant footman; but the
lady put out one of her hands and took Flossy's.

'Leave the child with me,' she said to the man.  'I'll be better in a
moment, little girl,' she continued, 'and then you shall tell me what you
mean; but you have upset me talking about babies: it is not long since I
buried my child, my only child.'

'I saw you,' said Flossy, nodding her bright head.  'I was in the
cemetery and I saw you.  Oh, didn't you cry bitter! but you needn't cry
no more now, for God has sent you another little baby.'

'No, my little girl,' said the lady, 'He has not.  I have asked Him, but
it is not His will.'

'I guessed you'd want another baby,' said Flossy.  'I knew quite well you
would, and she's waiting for you round the corner with Peter and Snip-
snap.  You put on your bonnet and come and look at her; she's a real
beauty; she's got a dimple, and her name is Dickory.'

'I'll come,' said the lady in an excited voice.  'It's the very strangest
thing I ever heard.  A child coming to me like that.  We'll slip out,
little girl.  James need not open the door for us.'

Flossy wondered who James was.

