
John Miles looked around him. Just ahead was a large tree, under whose
broad branches it would be pleasant to recline. Not far away was a
slender mountain-stream trickling over the rocks. Nothing could have
been better.

Miles slid from his horse and made preparations to encamp for the night,
first leading his faithful steed to the stream, where he quenched his
thirst. Then he brought out his slender stock of provisions and partook
of supper.

"It's pleasant to rest after a long day's ride," soliloquized Miles. "I
must have made forty miles to-day. I could easily have gone farther, had
it been on the prairies at home, but these mountain-roads are hard upon
man and beast."

After supper Miles threw himself upon the ground, and his mind became
busy with his plans and prospects.

"I shall reach Frisco in three days, according to my calculations," he
reflected; "and then, first of all, I must attend to Tom's commission.
That's a good boy, Tom. I wish he were here with me to-night. Why didn't
I urge him to come with me? He is not doing very well where he is, and
there are plenty of chances for a smart boy in the city. If I find any
opening for him, I will send for him. I don't know what gives me such an
interest in that boy, but I'd sooner do him a good turn than any man I
know. I hope that thief Crane won't play any trick upon him. If he does,
I swear I'll get even with him."

John Miles little suspected that he himself stood in more peril from the
man he denounced than our hero. Had he known that Bill Crane was lurking
in the vicinity, he would scarcely have courted slumber so fearlessly.

Physical fatigue and the stillness of outward nature speedily brought
on a feeling of drowsiness that was not long in bringing sleep. Twilight
had hardly given place to night when our traveller had become "to dumb
forgetfulness a prey."

This was what Bill Crane had been waiting for. He rightly calculated
that Miles would soon be asleep. He inferred this from his own feelings.
He, too, had travelled many miles, and felt drowsy; but, with the object
he had in view near accomplishment, he was able to resist the promptings
of nature.

Crane rode till he was but a few rods from Miles, then dismounted and
tethered his horse. With stealthy step he approached the sleeper. With
satisfaction he regarded the upturned face of the man whom, if waking,
he would have feared, and noted his deep, regular breathing.

"You wouldn't sleep so sound, John Miles," he said to himself, "if you
knew I was standing over you. How easily I could put a bullet into you!
But then I wouldn't have the satisfaction of anticipating your
disappointment when you wake up and find your treasure gone! No, you
may live. I have no use for your life, that is, if you don't wake up. In
that case, I may have to kill you."

The bag of gold-dust lay under the head of Miles. He knew of no better
place for it, calculating that any attempt at removal would arouse him.
So it might under ordinary circumstances, but unusual fatigue made him
sleep like a log. Bill Crane kneeled down, and by delicate manipulation
succeeded in drawing the bag from beneath the sleeper's head. Lest the
removal of the pillow might awaken Miles, he replaced it by a coat,
which he folded up so as to produce about the same elevation above the
ground.

The transfer was made, without in the least interfering with the
slumbers of the tired traveller.

Bill Crane rose to his feet, triumphant. Not only was he possessed of a
sum of which he stood sorely in need, but he had the satisfaction of
outwitting his adversary. Moreover, he had obtained Tom's money in
addition, and thus revenged himself upon the boy who had once thwarted
him.

"Good-by, John Miles!" he said, lifting his hat mockingly. "Sorry to
inconvenience you, but can't help it. A long sleep, and pleasant
dreams!"

Thus speaking, he turned away, unconscious that he had been observed by
a third party.




CHAPTER VII.

THE HEATHEN CHINEE.


This third party belonged to that peculiar race immortalized by Bret
Harte. He was a heathen Chinee! His face was smooth and bland, and wore
an expression of childlike innocence which was well calculated to
deceive. Ah Sin possessed the usual craft of his countrymen, and
understood very well how to advance his worldly fortunes. He belonged to
the advance guard of immigrants from the Central Flowery Kingdom, and
with a companion, Ah Jim, was engaged in mining in the immediate
neighborhood. His gains had not been great thus far, but then his
expenses had amounted to little or nothing. He and his friend had
brought two bags of rice from San Francisco, and they were well
satisfied with this solitary article of diet.

Ah Sin, from a distance, had seen John Miles encamp for the night, and,
impelled by curiosity or a more questionable motive, had approached to
take a view of the stranger. Before reaching him he caught sight of Bill
Crane, and his almond eyes straightway watched the movements of that
gentleman, while he himself kept sufficiently in the background to
escape observation.

When he saw Crane stealthily remove the bag from under the sleeper's
head, he became very much interested, and a bland smile overspread his
face, while his cue vibrated gently with approval.

"'Melican man very smart," he murmured to himself. "He steal his
friend's money while he sleep."

My readers are probably aware that our Mongolian visitors find a
difficulty in pronouncing the letter _r_, and invariably replace it by
_l_.

"Suppose other 'Melican man wake up, he make a low," continued Ah Sin,
softly.

But the other 'Melican man did not wake up, and Bill Crane got away with
his booty, as we already know. Cautiously the Chinaman followed him,
and ascertained where he intended to pass the night. It was at a
moderate distance from the cabin which the two Chinamen had selected for
their mining camp.

Bill Crane jumped from his horse, stretched his limbs, and gaped.

"I'm powerful sleepy," he soliloquized. "I can't go any farther
to-night. I don't like to rest so near Miles, but I can be on the road
before he wakes up. I guess it will be safe enough."

Crane, having made up his mind to rest, rolled himself up in his
blanket, and stretched himself out, first tying his horse to a sapling.
The place was retired, and he felt moderately confident that, even if he
overslept himself, he would not be discovered.

"I'd like to see Miles when he discovers his loss," he said to himself,
smiling at the thought. "He'll be ready to tear his hair, and won't have
the least idea how the gold-dust was spirited away. You excel me in
brute strength, John Miles, but one thing I am pretty sure of, you
haven't got my brains," and he complacently tapped his forehead.

"There must be at least two hundred dollars' worth in that bag," he
reflected. "It isn't a great haul, but it will do. It will last me some
time, and perhaps start me in something in Frisco. Bill Crane, you've
done a good stroke of business to-day. You are entitled to a good
night's rest, and you shall have it."

First, however, he concealed the bag. He did not think it safe to place
it under his head as Miles had done. He scooped a hole in the earth near
by, deposited the bag, replaced the dirt, and spread a few leaves over
the top.

"No one will think of searching there," thought Crane. "Even if Miles
himself surprises me here, he won't suspect anything."

Bill Crane felt that he was unusually sharp and crafty, and felt great
contempt for the stupidity of the man whom he had overreached. The time
was not far off when he had occasion to doubt whether he had not
overrated his own artfulness.

A pair of almond eyes, lighted up with mild wonder, followed closely
all the movements of William Crane. When the bag was concealed, and
Crane lay down to sleep, the Chinaman nodded blandly, and remarked
softly, "All light! Me go find Ah Jim."

Ah Sin had to walk but half a mile to find the partner of his toils. Ah
Sin and Ah Jim, though not related to each other, were as like as two
peas. The same smooth face, the same air of childlike confidence, the
same almond eyes, a pigtail of the same length, a blouse and loose pants
of the same coarse cloth, were characteristic of both.

When the two met, they straightway plunged into a conversation in which
Ah Sin had most to say.

Ah Jim listened attentively, and was evidently well pleased with what
his companion said. I am afraid my young friends are not well up in the
Chinese tongue, and would not understand the conversation, however
faithfully reported. They must infer what it was from what followed.

The two Chinamen bent their steps towards the resting-place of Bill
Crane. Ah Sin carried a bag of about the same size as the one Crane had
stolen, which he carefully filled with sandy earth. With stealthy steps
these two innocent heathen drew near the spot, and looked searchingly at
the recumbent form of the eminent representative of American
civilization.

Ah Sin turned to Ah Jim with a pleased smile.

"All light!" he said. "'Melican man asleep."

A similar smile lighted up the face of Ah Jim. "'Melican man sleep
sound," he said; "no wake up."

Quite unaware of the honor done him by the special Chinese embassy which
had taken this early opportunity to call upon him, Bill Crane slept on.
There was a smile upon his upturned face as if he were dreaming of
something pleasant. He should have been a prey to remorse, if his
conscience had done its duty, but Bill's conscience had grown callous,
and gave him very little trouble. It was only when he was found out that
he became sensible of a kind of mental discomfort which came as near to
remorse as he was capable of feeling.

Reassured by the deep, regular breathing of the sleeper, Ah Sin and his
friend proceeded to their work. The former drew a slender stiletto-like
knife from a fan which protruded above the collar of his blouse, and,
stooping down, began skilfully to remove the dirt which covered the bag
of gold-dust. From time to time he stole a glance at the sleeper to mark
the first indications of returning consciousness. It was well for Crane
that his sleep continued. A Chinaman does not set a high value upon
human life, and the long stiletto would have been plunged into the
'Melican man before he was well aware of what was going on. Bill Crane's
good genius saved him from this sudden exit by continuing the profound
slumber in which he was repairing the ravages of fatigue.

The Chinamen therefore met with no interruption in their work. They drew
out from its place of concealment the buried bag, and emptying the
contents of their own poured into it the combined treasures of Miles and
poor Tom. Then they filled the first bag with the worthless dust which
they had brought with them, and carefully reburied it in the ground.

They did their work so carefully and well that no one was likely to
suspect that the bag had been tampered with.

Having done their work, Ah Sin and his friend smiled upon each other in
bland satisfaction, which was further expressed by a low guttural
chuckle.

"All light," said Ah Sin, with a nod.

"All light," chimed in Ah Jim, nodding in return.

A consciousness of lofty virtue could not have produced a happier
expression upon any face than appeared on the mild countenance of the
Chinamen.

"'Melican man much supplised when he wake up," remarked Ah Jim.

"Chinamen make much money," returned his friend.

The two enterprising visitors returned to their quarters, and concealed
their booty in a safe place. Then they too lay down and slept the sleep
of confiding innocence.

Bret Harte has not told us whether the heathen Chinee has a conscience;
but if he has, neither Ah Sin nor Ah Jim experienced any inconvenience
from its possession. Neither they nor Bill perhaps can fairly be taken
as fair representatives of the different religious systems under which
they were trained. Bill Crane could hardly claim any superiority over
the heathen Chinee in point of honesty.




CHAPTER VIII.

BILL CRANE'S DISAGREEABLE DISCOVERY.


It was five o'clock in the morning when Bill Crane opened his eyes. He
felt refreshed by his night's sleep, yet under ordinary circumstances
would have deferred getting up for at least an hour. But the
consciousness that he had a treasure to guard, and the knowledge that he
was at any moment liable to be called to account by the real owner,
whose camp was scarcely more than a mile distant, aroused him to
exertion.

"I must get away while John Miles is still asleep," he bethought
himself. "Let me get to Frisco first, and I can at once dispose of it,
and he will never find me out."

Crane did not wait to prepare breakfast. That he could take on the road
an hour or two later, when he felt safe from interruption. He rose and
shook himself. This was his scanty toilet. Next he must take the bag
from its place of concealment, and then he could commence his journey.

While uncovering the bag, Crane did not discover that it had been
tampered with, partly because it was still there. It was natural to
suppose that, if discovered by a third party, it would be carried away.
He did not even open the bag, not thinking it necessary.

"John Miles hasn't waked up yet," he said to himself with a smile. "When
he does, there'll be some swearing, I'll be bound. You're a good boy,
John Miles, but you ain't so smart as you think you are. I think I have
got the start of you this time."

Bill Crane rode off smiling.

His course led him by the camp of the Chinamen. Early as it was they
were astir. Ah Sin saw the rider, and at once recognized him as the man
he had robbed. How could Crane know that those pleasant-faced barbarians
had served him such a trick?

"Hallo, Chinamen!" he said aloud. "Have they got out here already? I'll
speak to them. Hallo, John!" he said, halting his horse, for even then
every Chinaman was John.

"How do, John?" replied Ah Sin, smiling blandly.

"My name isn't John, but no matter. What are you two doing?"

"Looking for gold," was the reply.

"Do you find any?"

"Velly little. Bad place."

"Have you been in San Francisco?"

"Yes, John."

"Why didn't you stay there?"

"Too many Chinamen--too little washee,--washee."

"What have you got in the way of provisions? Mine are stale. I'd like to
buy some of you."

"We have got a little lice, John."

"Got a little what? Oh, I know: you mean rice. Why don't you pronounce
your English better?"

"Because Chinamen not 'Melican men."

"Then I suppose I may as well be moving on, as I can't get anything out
of you. Oh, have you got any tea, John?"

"Yes, John."

"Got any made?"

Ah Sin produced a cup, for he and his friend had just prepared their
