
(2) Exactness in the use of words requires an exact knowledge of their
meanings and differences. This is a study by itself, and cannot be
discussed here.[17]


FOOTNOTES:

[17] See _English Lessons for English People_, pp. 1-53.




EXERCISES


_For an explanation of the manner in which these Exercises are
intended to be used, see the Preface._

_A number in brackets by itself, or followed by a letter,_ e.g. _(43),
(40 a), refers to the Rules._

_Letters_ by themselves _in brackets_, e.g. _(b), refer to the
explanations or hints appended to each sentence._

_N.B..--(10 a) refers to the first section of Rule (10); (10 a') to
the Rule following Rule (10)._

1. "Pleasure and excitement had more attractions for him _than_ (_a_)
(36) (37 _a_) _his friend_, and the two companions became estranged
(15 _a_) _gradually_."

     (_a_) Write (1) "than for his friend," or (2) "than had his
     friend," "had more attractions than his friend."

2. "(_a_) He soon grew tired of solitude even in that beautiful
scenery, (36) the pleasures of the retirement (8) _which_ he had once
pined for, and (36) leisure which he could use to no good purpose,
(_a_) (30) _being_ (15) _restless by nature_."

     (_a_) This sentence naturally stops at "purpose." Also "being
     restless" seems (wrongly) to give the reason why "leisure" could
     not be employed. Begin "Restless by nature...."

3. "The opponents of the Government are naturally, and not (_a_) (40
_a_) _without justification_, elated at the failure of the bold
attempt to return two supporters of the Government at the recent
election, (_b_) (10 _a'_) _which_ is certainly to be regretted."

     (_a_) "unjustifiably." (_b_) Write, for "which," either (1) "an
     attempt that &c.," or (2) "a failure that &c."

4. "Carelessness in the Admiralty departments has co-operated with
Nature to weaken the moral power of a Government that particularly
needs to be thought efficient in (_a_) (5) _this_ _respect_, (_b_)
(29) _to_ counterbalance a general distrust of its excessive _desire_
(_c_) (47 _a_) _to please everybody_ in Foreign Affairs."

     (_a_) Write "the Navy." (_b_) Instead of "to" write "in order
     to," so as to distinguish the different infinitives, (_c_)
     "obsequiousness."

5. "(_a_) He was sometimes supported by Austria, who, oddly enough,
appears under Count Beust to have been more friendly to Italy _than_
(37 _a_) _France_, (30) _in this line of action_."

     (_a_) Begin with "In this line of action." Why? (_b_) Write "than
     was France" or "than France was."

6. "There was something so startling in (_a_) (5) _this_ assertion,
(_a_) (4) _that_ the discoveries of previous investigators were to be
(_b_) (47 _a_) _treated as though they had never been made_, and (4)
_that one who had not yet_ (47 _a_) _attained the age of manhood_ had
superseded the grey-headed philosophers (8) _who_ had for centuries
patiently sought after the truth, (4) _that_ (_a_) (5) _it_ naturally
provoked derision."

     (_a_) "This," "that," and "it," cause a little perplexity. Write
     "The startling assertion that the discoveries...." (_b_)
     "ignored." (_c_) "a mere youth," "a mere stripling."

7. "One of the recommendations (_on which very_ (_a_) (26) (47, _a_)
_much depended_) of the Commission was that a council in each province
should establish smaller councils, each to have the oversight of a
small district, and (_b_) (37) report to a central council on the
state of Education in (_c_) (5) it."

     (_a_) Write "cardinal recommendations." Derive "cardinal." (_b_)
     Write, either (1) "and should report," or (2) "and to report."
     (_c_) Write "in its province," or "district."

8. "At this (_a_) (1) _period_ an (_b_) (11) _event_ (_c_) (1)
_transpired_ that destroyed the last hopes of peace. The king fell
from his horse and died two hours after the fall (_d_) (30), _which
was occasioned by his horse's stumbling on a mole-hill, while he was
on his return from reviewing his soldiers_."

     (_a_) What is a "period"? (_b_) Express the particular kind of
     event ("accident"). (_c_) What is the meaning of "transpired"?
     (_d_) Transpose thus: "While the king was on his return ... his
     horse ...; the king fell and &c." The cause should precede the
     effect.

9. "He determined (_c_) on selling all his estates, and, as soon as
this was done (40 _a_), _to_ (_c_) _quit_ the country, (_a_) (33)
believing that his honour demanded this sacrifice and (40) (40 _a_)
_in_ (_b_) _the_ hope of satisfying his creditors."

     (_a_) Begin with "Believing that &c." (_b_) "hoping thereby to
     satisfy &c." (_c_) "to sell" or "on quitting.".

10. "He read patiently on, Leading Articles, Foreign Correspondence,
Money Article and all; (_a_) (43) during which his father fell asleep,
and he (_b_) went in search of his sister."

     Point out the absurdity of "during which" applied to the last
     part of the sentence. (_a_) "Meanwhile." (_b_) Insert "then."

11. "The general was quite (_a_) (1) _conscious_ (40 _a_) _how_
treacherous were the intentions of _those who were_ (_b_) (49)
_entertaining_ him, and (40 _a_) _of the_ dangers from which he had
_escaped_ (15) _lately_."

     (_a_) Distinguish between "conscious" and "aware." _(b_)
     "entertainers."

12. "If _certain_ (_a_) (11) _books_ had been published a hundred
years ago, there can be no doubt that _certain recent_ (_b_) (11)
_historians_ would have made great use of them. But it _would_ (_c_)
(15 _b_) _not_, on that account, be judicious in a writer of our own
times to publish an edition of the works of _one of these_ (_b_) (11)
_historians_, in which large extracts from these books should be
incorporated with the original text."

     (_a_) "Mrs. Hutchinson's Memoirs." (_b_) "Mr. Hume." (_c_) Add at
     the end of the sentence, "Surely not."

13. "He made no attempt to get up a petition, (32) though he did not
like the new representative quite so well _as_ (_a_) (37 _a_) _his
colleagues_."

     (_a_) "as did his colleagues" or "as he liked his colleagues."

14. "Though he was (_a_) (15) _obstinate_ and (15) _unprincipled_, yet
he could not face an angered father (15 _a_) _in spite of his
effrontery_."

     (_a_) Begin with "Obstinate."

15. "He was known to his country neighbours (_a_) (15) _during more
than forty years_ as a gentleman of cultivated mind, (40 _a_) _whose
principles were high_, (40 _a_) _with polished address_, happy in his
family, and (_b_) (40 _a_) _actively_ discharging local duties; and
(40 _a_) _among_ political men, as an honest, industrious, and
sensible member of Parliament, (40 a) _without_ (_c_) _eagerness_ to
display his talents, (40 _a_) _who_ (10 _g_) _was_ stanch to his
party, and attentive to the interests of _those whose_ (_d_) (47 _a_)
_representative he was_."

     (_a_) "During more &c.," is emphatic, and affects the latter as
     well as the former half of the sentence: hence it should stand
     first. (_b_) "in the discharge of." (_c_) "not eager." (_d_)
     Condense into one word.

16. "The poor think themselves no more disgraced by taking bribes at
elections _than_ (_a_) (37 _a_) _the rich_ by offering them."

     (_a_) Write (1) "Than the rich think themselves disgraced," or
     (2) "Than they think the rich disgraced."

17. "We are told that the Sultan Mahmoud, by his perpetual wars, (_a_)
(41) and his tyranny, (_a_) (41) had filled his dominions with (_b_)
(1) _misfortune and_ (_c_) (11) _calamity_, and _greatly_ (_d_) (11)
_diminished_ the population of the Persian Empire. _This great Sultan
had_ (_e_) (50) _a Vizier_. _We are not_ (_f_) (55) (15) _informed_
whether he was a humorist or an enthusiast, (_g_) _but he_ pretended
(_h_) that he had learned from (_i_) (11) _some one_ how to understand
the language of birds, so that _he_ (_j_) (5) knew what was said by
any bird that opened its mouth. (_k_) (44) One evening he was with the
Sultan, returning from hunting. They saw a couple of owls _which_ (10
_g_) _were_ sitting upon a tree (_l_) (8) _which_ grew near an old
wall out of a heap of rubbish. The Sultan said (6) he should like to
know what the two owls were saying to one another, _and asked the_
(_m_) _Vizier to_ listen to their discourse and give him an account of
it. The Vizier, (_n_) (31) pretending to be very attentive to the
owls, approached the tree. He (_o_) returned to the Sultan and said
that (6) he had heard part of their conversation, but did not wish to
tell him what it was. (_p_) (5) _He_, not (_q_) (31) being satisfied
with this answer, forced him to repeat everything the owls had said
(20) _exactly_. (_r_) (44) (5) (6) _He_ told (5) _him_ that the owls
were arranging a treaty of marriage between their children, and that
one of them, after agreeing to settle five hundred villages upon the
female owl, had prayed (6) that God would grant a long life to Sultan
Mahmoud, because as long as he reigned over them they would never want
ruined villages. The story says (_s_) _that_ (_t_) (5) _he_ was
touched with the fable, (30) and (_s_) _that_ he (_a_) (39) from that
time forward _consulted_ (15) _the good of his people_, and that he
rebuilt the towns and villages (_v_) _which_ had been destroyed."

     (_a_) "abroad ... at home." (_b_) "ruin." (_c_) "desolation."
     (_d_) "half unpeopled." (_e_) "The Vizier of &c." (_f_) "We are
     not informed" is emphatic, and therefore should be inverted,
     "whether he was, &c., we are not informed." (_g_) "but he" will
     be omitted when "the Vizier" is made the subject of "pretended."
     (_h_) "Pretended" once meant "claimed," "professed." Write
     "professed." (_i_) "a certain dervish." (_j_) Introduce a new
     subject that you may substitute "Vizier" for "he," thus: "so that
     not a bird could open its mouth, but the Vizier knew &c." (_k_)
     "As he was, one evening, &c." (_l_) Note that the tree is
     represented as growing out of _ruins_. This is in accordance with
     the story of the mischief Mahmoud had done. (_m_) Omit this.
     (_n_) "Suspense" is out of place in a simple narrative like this;
     the sentence therefore ends with "owls." (_o_) "Upon his return."
     (_p_) "The Sultan" (_q_) "would not be satisfied." (_r_) "You
     must know then, &c." (_s_) Omit. (_t_) "so touched ... that."
     (_u_) end with "people." (_v_) Addison here uses "_which_"
     probably because of the preceding "that." We have to choose
     between sound and clearness. "Which" implies that _all_ the
     villages in the country had been destroyed, whereas the country
     had been only (see above) "_half_ unpeopled."

18. "Though this great king never permitted any pastime to interfere
with the duties of state, which he considered to be _superior to_ (54)
_all other claims and of paramount importance_, and (_a_) (37) kept
himself so far under control that he allowed no one pursuit or
amusement to run to any excess, yet he _took_ (54) _great pleasure in_
the chase, _of which he was_ (_b_) (2) _excessively_ (54) _fond_, and
for the purposes of which he created several _large_ parks _of
considerable_ (54) _magnitude_."

     (_a_) Either repeat "though," or else strikeout the first
     "though" and begin a new sentence after "excess." (_b_) Point out
     the contradiction between "excessively" and what precedes.

19. "To inundate (_a_) (11) their land, to man their ships, to leave
their country, with all its miracles of art and industry, its cities,
its villas, and its (_b_) (11) pastures buried under the waves (_c_)
(11); to bear to a distant climate their (_d_) (11) faith and their
old (_e_) (11) liberties; to establish, with auspices _that_(10 _a)
might perhaps be happier_, the new (_f_) (11) _constitution of their
commonwealth_, in a (_g_) (11) foreign and strange (_h_) (11) land, in
the Spice Islands of the Eastern Seas, (38) were the plans which they
had the spirit to form."

     (_a_) Introduce "dykes." (_b_) Introduce something _peculiar_ to
     the Dutch, _e.g._ "canals," "tulip gardens." (_c_) "of the German
     Ocean." (_d_) The Dutch were Calvinists. (_e_) The country was in
     old times "Batavia," so that "Batavian" would be a fit epithet to
     denote what the Dutch had inherited from their forefathers. (_f_)
     "Stadthaus," the German for "town-hall." (_g_) "other stars."
     (_h_) "strange vegetation."

20. "During twenty years of unexampled prosperity, _during_ (_a_)
_which_ the wealth of the nation had shot (14 _a_) _up and extended
its branches_ on every side, and the funds _had_ (14 _a_) _soared_ to
a higher point than had been ever attained before, (_b_) (15)
speculation had become general."

     (_a_) Omit. (_b_) Begin a new sentence: "This, _or_ Prosperity,
     had increased the taste for speculation."

21. "At that time (_a_) (16) a mere narrow-minded pedant (for he
deserves no better name) had been set up by the literary world as a
great author, and as the supreme (_b_) critic, alone qualified to
deliver decisions _which could never be_ (_b_) _reversed_ upon (15
_a_) _the literary productions of the day_."

     (_a_) End with " ... one who was--for he deserves no better
     name--a mere narrow-minded pedant." (_b_) "Which could never be
     reversed" can be expressed in one word; or else "the supreme ...
     reversed" may be condensed into a personification: "a very Minos
     of contemporary criticism."

22. "With the intention of fulfilling his promise, and (40 _a_)
_intending also_ to clear himself from the suspicion that attached to
him, he determined to ascertain _how_ (40 _a_) _far this testimony_
was corroborated, and (_a_) (40 _a_) the motives of the prosecutor,
(_b_) (43) who had begun the suit last Christmas."

     (_a_) "what were." (_b_) Begin a new sentence, "The latter &c.,"
     or "The suit had been begun &c."

23. "The Jewish nation, relying on the teaching of their prophets,
looked forward to a time when its descendants should be as numerous as
_the heavenly_ (11) _bodies_, and when the _products_ (_a_) (11) _of
the earth_ should be _so increased as to create an abundant_ (54)
_plenty_, when each man should rest beneath the shade of his own (_a_)
(11) _trees_, and when the _instruments_ (11) _of war_ should be
_converted to the_ (11) _uses of peace_."

     (_a_) Mention some "products," "trees" of Palestine.

24. "He replied (32), when he was asked the reason for his sudden
unpopularity, that he owed it to his refusal to annul the commercial
treaty, (_a_) (8) _which_(10 _a'_) gave great displeasure to the
poorer classes."

     (_a_) Point out the ambiguity, and remove it by (8) or (10 _a'_).

25. "I saw my old schoolfellow again by mere accident when I was in
London at the time of the first Exhibition, (19) _walking_ down Regent
Street and looking in at the shops."

     Point out and remove the ambiguity.

26. "He remained in the House while his speech was taken into
consideration; _which_ (52) _was_ a common practice with him, because
the debates amused his sated mind, and indeed _he used to say_ (_a_)
(6 _b_) _that they_ were sometimes as good as a comedy. His Majesty
had certainly never seen _a more_ (17) _sudden turn_ in any comedy of
intrigue, either at his own play-house or the Duke's, than that which
this memorable debate produced."

     (_a_) "and were sometimes, he used to say, as good &c."

27. "The Commons would not approve the war (20) _expressly_; neither
did they as yet condemn it (20) _expressly_; and (_a_) (18) the king
might even have obtained a supply for continuing hostilities (19) from
them, on condition _of_ (_b_) _redressing_ grievances _connected with
the_ (_c_) _administration of affairs at home_, among which the
Declaration of Indulgence was a very _important_ (_d_) (15_a_) one."

     (_a_) Write "they were even ready to grant the king &c." (_b_)
     Use the verb with a subject, (_c_) Condense all this into one
     adjective, meaning "that which takes place at home." (_d_) End
     with a noun, "importance," or "foremost place."

28. "Next to thinking clearly, (_a_) (5) _it is_ useful to speak
clearly, and whatever your position in life may hereafter be _it_
cannot be such (54) as not to be improved by _this_, (_b_) so that
_it_ is worth while making almost any effort to acquire (_c_) _it_, if
_it_ is not a natural gift: (_d_) _it_ being an undoubted (_d_) fact
that the effort to acquire _it_ must be successful, to some extent at
least, if (_d_) _it_ be moderately persevered in."

     (_a_) "Next in utility ... comes speaking clearly--a power that
     must be of assistance to you &c." (_b_)" If, therefore, you
     cannot speak clearly by nature, you &c." (_c_) "this power."
     (_d_) Omit "fact;" "for undoubtedly, with moderate perseverance
     &c."

29. "_It_ (_a_) (38) _appears to me_ (15) _a greater victory than
Agincourt, a grander triumph of wisdom and faith and courage than even
the English constitution or_ (_b_) _liturgy_, to have beaten back, or
even fought against and stemmed in ever so small a degree, those
_basenesses that_ (_c_) (10_a_) _beset_ human nature, which are now
held so invincible that the influences of them are assumed as the
fundamental axioms of economic science."

     (_a_) Begin with "To have beaten &c.," and end with "liturgy."
     (_b_) Repeat for clearness and emphasis, "the English." (_c_)
     "The besetting basenesses of &c."

30. "The (_a_) (2) _unprecedented_ impudence of our youthful
representative reminds us forcibly of the _unblushing and_ (54) (40)
_remarkable_ effrontery (_c_) (which (26) he almost succeeds in
equalling) of the Member for St. Alban's, whom our (_b_) (1)
_neophyte_ (_b_) (1) _alluded to_, in the last speech with which he
favoured _those whom_ (47_a_) _he represents_, (19) as his pattern and
example."

     (_a_) Show that "unprecedented" is inconsistent with what
     follows. (_b_) What is the meaning of "neophyte," "alluded to"?
     (_c_) Begin a new sentence, "Our young adventurer &c.," and end
     with "and he almost succeeds in equalling his master."

31. "The (_a_) (1) _veracity_ of this story is questionable, and there
is the more reason for doubting the (_a_) (1) _truth_ of the narrator,
because in his remarks on the (1) _observation_ of the Sabbath he
distinctly (_a_) (1) _alludes to_ a custom that can be shown never to
have existed."

     (_a_) Distinguish between "veracity" and "truth," "observation"
     and "observance." Show the inconsistency between "allude" and
     "distinctly."

32. "It (_a_) (5) is a most just distribution, (10 _a_) _which_ the
late Mr. Tucker has dwelt upon _so_ (_b_) largely in his works,
between pleasures in which we are passive, and pleasures in which we
are active. And I believe every attentive observer of human life will
_assent to_ (_c_) _this position_, that however (_d_) _grateful_ the
sensations may occasionally be in which we are passive, it is not
these, but the latter class of our pleasures, (8) _which_ constitutes
satisfaction, (_e_) (38) _which_ supply that regular stream of
moderate and miscellaneous enjoyments in (10 _c_) _which_ happiness,
as distinguished from voluptuousness, consists."

     (_a_) "There is great justice in &c." (b) Omit "so." (_c_)
     "admit." (_d_) Not often now used in this sense. (_e_) Repeat the
     antecedent, "I mean those (pleasures) &c."

33. "The prince seemed to have before him a _limitless_ (54) _prospect
of unbounded_ prosperity, carefully (33) _trained_ for the (_a_)
_tasks_ of the throne, and stimulated by the (_a_) _pattern_ of his
father, (_b_) who (43) _breathed his_ (3) _last_ suddenly at the age
of sixty-two, just after the conclusion of the war."

     (_a_) Find more appropriate words. (_b_) Begin a new sentence.

34. "On his way, he visited a son of an old friend (_a_) (25) _who_
had asked _him_ to call upon _him_ on his journey northward. _He_
(_b_) (5) was overjoyed to see _him_, and (_c_) _he_ sent for one of
_his_ most intelligent workmen and told (_d_) _him_ to consider
_himself_ at (_e_) _his_ service, (30) as _he himself_ could not take
(_f_) _him_ as _he_ (_g_) wished about the city."

     (_a_) If you mean that the "son" had "asked him," write "An old
     friend's son who;" if you mean that the "friend" had "asked him,"
     write "He had been asked by an old friend to call, on his journey
     northward, upon his son. Accordingly he visited him on his way."
     (_b_) Use, instead of _he_, some name meaning "one who entertains
     others." (_c_) Use participle, (_d_) "The man." (_e_) "the
     stranger's." (_f_) "his guest." (_g_) Write "could have wished"
     to make it clear that "he" means "the host."

35. "Tillotson died in this year. He was exceedingly beloved both by
King William and by Queen Mary (43), who nominated Dr. Tennison,
Bishop of Lincoln, to succeed him."

36. "(_a_) The entertainment was arranged with a magnificence that was
(_b_) perfectly _stupendous_ and (_c_) _most unprecedented_, and
which quite kept up his Lordship's _unrivalled_ reputation for
_unparalleled_ hospitality, and, thanks to the _unequalled_ energy of
Mr. Smith, who is _rapidly becoming one of the most effective_
toast-masters in the kingdom, the toasts were given with a spirit
_quite unexampled_ on occasions of this nature; and indeed we were
forcibly reminded in this respect of the _inimitable_ entertainment of
three years ago (2)."

     (_a_) Omit most of the epithets, or soften them down. Point out
     the contradictions in the sentence as it stands. (_b_) Write "a
     remarkable magnificence that quite &c.," thus dispensing with the
     following "and." (_c_) Show that "most" is superfluous.

37. "If we compare Shakespeare with the other dramatic authors of the
Elizabethan era, _his wonderful superiority to them in the_ (15)
_knowledge of human nature_ is _what_ (15 _a_) _principally strikes
us_."

38. "The prince found himself at once in sore perplexity how to
provide himself with the commonest comforts or even necessaries of
life, when he landed on this desolate coast, being (33) accustomed to
luxury."

39. "This make-shift policy recommended itself to the succeeding
_ministers_ (_a_) (50), _both because they were timid and because they
were prejudiced_, and they were delighted to _excuse_ (_b_) (13)
_themselves by quoting_ the example of one who (_c_) (34) had
controlled the Liberals and humoured the Conservatives, (37) commended
himself to the country at large by his unfailing good-humour, and
(_d_) (44) (37) done nothing worthy of the name of statesman."

     (_a_) "to the timidity and prejudices of &c." (_b_) "shelter
     themselves behind." (_c_) "while he had at once." (_d_) "had yet
     done."

40. "William Shakespeare was the sun among the lesser lights of
English poetry, and a native of Stratford-on-Avon (14 _a_)."

41. "(15 _b_) I think, gentlemen, you must confess that any one of you
would have done the same (32), if you had been tempted as I was then,
placed starving and ragged among wasteful luxury and comfort,
deliberately instigated to acts of dishonesty by those whom I had been
taught from infancy to love, (_a_) praised when I stole, mocked or
punished when I failed to (15 _a_) _do_ (_b_) _so_."

     (_a_) Insert another infinitive beside "love." "Love" produces
     "obedience." (b) Repeat the verb instead of "do so."

42. "So far from being the first (54) _aggressor_, he _not_ (22)
_only_ refused to prosecute his old friend when a favourable
opportunity presented itself for revenging himself thus upon him,
_but also_ his friend's adviser, John Smith. Smith (_a_) _at all_ (23)
_events_ suspected, if he did not know of the coming danger, and had
given no information of it."

     (_a_) If "at all events" qualifies "Smith," the sentence must be
     altered. "Yet, however innocent his friend may have been, at all
     events Smith suspected...." If the words qualify "suspected,"
     place them after "suspected."

43. "It is quite true that he paid 5_s._ per day to English navvies,
_and even 6s._, (19) in preference to 2_s._ 6_d._ to French navvies."

44. "Having climbed to the _apex_ of the Righi to enjoy the spectacle
of the sun-rise, I found myself so _incommoded_ by a number of
_illiterate individuals_ who had _emerged_ from the hotel for a (_a_)
(1) _similar_ purpose, that I determined to quit them _at the earliest
practicable period_; and therefore, without stopping to _partake of
breakfast_, I _wended my way_ back _with all possible celerity_." (3)

     (_a_) "the same."

45. "You admit that miracles are _not natural_. Now whatever _is
unnatural_ is wrong, and since, by your own admission, miracles are
