

  It comes from the misty ages,
  The banner of England's might,
  The blood-red cross of the brave St. George,
  That burns on a field of white!
  It speaks of the deathless heroes                                    5
  On fame's bright page inscrolled,
  And bids great England ne'er forget
  The glorious deeds of old!

  O'er many a cloud of battle
  The banner has floated wide;                                        10
  It shone like a star o'er the valiant hearts
  That dashed the Armada's pride!
  For ever amid the thunders
  The sailor could do or die,
  While tongues of flame leaped forth below,                          15
  And the flag of St. George was high!

  O ne'er may the flag beloved
  Unfurl in a strife unblest,
  But ever give strength to the righteous arm,
  And hope to the hearts oppressed!                                   20
  It says to the passing ages:
  "Be brave if your cause be right,
  Like the soldier saint whose cross of red
  Still burns on your banner white!"

  Great race, whose empire of splendour                               25
  Has dazzled the wondering world!
  May the flag that floats o'er thy wide domains
  Be long to all winds unfurled!
  Three crosses in concord blended,
  The banner of Britain's might!                                      30
  But the central gem of the ensign fair
  Is the cross of the dauntless Knight!

      --_By permission of the publishers, Novello & Co._


  PREPARATORY--Divide the poem into two parts, giving to
  each part a descriptive title.

  What feelings are aroused by this poem?

  What lines in stanzas i and iv call up a mental picture
  of the flag?

  What three phrases in stanza i suggest the important
  ideas to be associated with the flag? How does the voice
  indicate the importance of these ideas? (Introduction,
  p. 8.)

  Of what phrases in stanza i is stanza ii only an
  elaboration?

  What wish is contained in stanza iii? What sentences
  express it?

  What additional idea does stanza iv add to this wish?

  STAR, VALIANT, ARMADA, CENTRAL. Make a distinction in
  the sound of the letter _a_ in these words, and
  elsewhere in the poem. (Appendix A, 1.)

  GEORGE, CROSS, FORGET, FORTH, CONCORD. What sound has
  the letter _o_ in each word? (Appendix A, 1.)

  Articulate with energy the final consonantal
  combinations of all such words as: ENGLAND'S, BURNS,
  SPEAKS, INSCROLLED, FLOATED, HEARTS, DASHED, LEAPED,
  UNBLEST, STRENGTH, DAZZLED, UNFURLED, BLENDED. (Appendix
  A, 3.)

       *       *       *       *       *


JEAN VALJEAN AND THE BISHOP

From "Les Miserables"


At the bishop's house, his housekeeper, Mme. Magloire was saying:

"We say that this house is not safe at all; and, if Monseigneur will
permit me, I will go on and tell the locksmith to come and put the old
bolts in the door again. I say, than a door which opens by a latch on
the outside to the first comer, nothing could be more horrible; and
then Monseigneur has the habit of always saying: 'Come in,' even at
midnight. But, my goodness, there is no need to even ask leave----"

At this moment there was a violent knock on the door.

"Come in!" said the bishop.

The door opened.

It opened quickly, quite wide, as if pushed by some one boldly and
with energy.

A man entered.

That man we know already; it was the traveller we have seen wandering
about in search of a lodging.

He came in, took one step, and paused, leaving the door open behind
him. He had his knapsack on his back, his stick in his hand, and a
rough, hard, and fierce look in his eyes. He was hideous.

The bishop looked upon the man with a tranquil eye. As he was opening
his mouth to speak, doubtless to ask the stranger what he wanted, the
man, leaning with both hands on his club, glanced from one to another
in turn, and, without waiting for the bishop to speak, said, in a
loud voice:

"See here! my name is Jean Valjean. I am a convict; I have been
nineteen years in the galleys. Four days ago I was set free, and
started for Pontarlier; during these four days I have walked from
Toulon. To-day I have walked twelve leagues. When I reached this place
this evening I went to an inn, and they sent me away on account of my
yellow passport, which I had shown at the Mayor's office, as was
necessary. I went to another inn; they said, 'Get out!' It was the
same with one as with another; nobody would have me. I went to the
prison and the turnkey would not let me in. I crept into a dog kennel,
the dog bit me, and drove me away as if he had been a man; you would
have said that he knew who I was. I went into the fields to sleep
beneath the stars, there were no stars. I thought it would rain, and
there was no good God to stop the drops, so I came back to the town to
get the shelter of some doorway. There in the square I laid down upon
a stone; a good woman showed me your house, and said: 'Knock there!' I
have knocked. What is this place? Are you an inn? I have money; my
savings, one hundred and nine francs and fifteen sous, which I have
earned in the galleys by my work for nineteen years. I will pay. What
do I care? I have money, I am very tired--twelve leagues on foot--and
I am so hungry. Can I stay?"

"Mme. Magloire," said the bishop, "put on another plate."

The man took three steps and came near the lamp which stood on the
table. "Stop," he exclaimed; as if he had not been understood; "not
that, did you understand me? I am a galley slave--a convict--I am just
from the galleys." He drew from his pocket a large sheet of yellow
paper, which he unfolded. "There is my passport, yellow, as you see.
That is enough to have me kicked out wherever I go. Will you read it?
See, here is what they have put on my passport: Jean Valjean, a
liberated convict; has been nineteen years in the galleys; five years
for burglary; fourteen years for having attempted four times to
escape. This man is very dangerous. There you have it! Everybody has
thrust me out; will you receive me? Is this an inn? Can you give me
something to eat and a place to sleep? Have you a stable?"

"Mme. Magloire," said the bishop, "put some sheets on the bed in the
alcove."

The bishop turned to the man:

"Monsieur, sit down and warm yourself; we are going to take supper
presently, and your bed will be made ready while you sup."

At last the man quite understood; his face, the expression of which
till then had been gloomy, and hard, now expressed stupefaction, doubt
and joy, and became absolutely wonderful. He began to stutter like a
madman.

"True? What? You will keep me? you won't drive me away--a convict? You
call me monsieur and don't say, 'Get out, dog!' as everybody else
does. I shall have a supper! a bed like other people, with mattress
and sheets--a bed! It is nineteen years that I have not slept on a
bed. You are good people! Besides, I have money; I will pay well. I
beg your pardon, M. Innkeeper, what is your name? I will pay all you
say. You are a fine man. You are an innkeeper, is it not so?"

"I am a priest who lives here," said the bishop.

"A priest," said the man. "Oh, noble priest! Then you do not ask any
money?"

"No," said the bishop, "keep your money. How much have you?"

"One hundred and nine francs and fifteen sous," said the man.

"One hundred and nine francs and fifteen sous. And how long did it
take you to earn that?"

"Nineteen years."

"Nineteen years!"

The bishop sighed deeply, and shut the door, which had been left wide
open.

Mme. Magloire brought in a plate and set it on the table.

"Mme Magloire," said the bishop, "put this plate as near the fire as
you can." Then turning toward his guest he added: "The night wind is
raw in the Alps; you must be cold, monsieur."

Every time he said the word _monsieur_ with his gentle, solemn and
heartily hospitable voice, the man's countenance lighted up.
_Monsieur_ to a convict is a glass of water to a man dying of thirst
at sea.

"The lamp," said the bishop, "gives a very poor light."

Mme. Magloire understood him, and, going to his bedchamber, took from
the mantel the two silver candlesticks, lighted the candles and placed
them on the table.

"M. le Cure," said the man, you are good; "you don't despise me. You
take me into your house; you light your candles for me, and I haven't
hid from you where I come from, and how miserable I am."

The bishop touched his hand gently and said: "You need not tell me who
you are. This is not my house; it is the house of Christ. It does not
ask any comer whether he has a name, but whether he has an affliction.
You are suffering; you are hungry and thirsty; be welcome. And do not
thank me; do not tell me that I take you into my house. This is the
home of no man except him who needs an asylum. I tell you, who are a
traveller, that you are more at home here than I; whatever is here is
yours. What need have I to know your name? Besides, before you told
me, I knew it."

The man opened his eyes in astonishment.

"Really? You knew my name?"

"Yes," answered the bishop, "your name is my brother."

"Stop, stop, M. le Cure," exclaimed the man, "I was famished when I
came in, but you are so kind that now I don't know what I am; that is
all gone."

The bishop looked at him again and said:

"You have seen much suffering?"

"Oh, the red blouse, the ball and chain, the plank you sleep on, the
heat, the cold, the galley's screw, the lash, the double chain for
nothing, the dungeon for a word--even when sick in bed, the chain. The
dogs, the dogs are happier! nineteen years! and I am forty-six, and
now a yellow passport. That is all."

"Yes," answered the bishop, "you have left a place of suffering. But
listen, there will be more joy in heaven over the tears of a repentant
sinner than over the white robes of a hundred good men. If you are
leaving that sorrowful place with hate and anger against men, you are
worthy of compassion; if you leave it with good-will, gentleness, and
peace, you are better than any of us."

      --_Victor Hugo_


  This lesson can be used as an exercise on Pause
  springing from (1) Visualization and Grouping,
  (Introduction, pp. 7 and 8); (2) Narrative which breaks
  in upon the direct discourse. (Introduction, p. 24.)

  THAT MAN WE KNOW ALREADY. (Introduction, p. 11.)

  "SEE HERE ... CAN I STAY?" This paragraph is an exercise
  on Emphasis. Make a list of the words which are emphatic
  (1) because they express new and important ideas, (2)
  because of contrast. Why is GALLEYS not emphatic? Where
  is the emphasis placed in that sentence?

       *       *       *       *       *


THE WELL OF ST. KEYNE


  A well there is in the west country,
    And a clearer one never was seen;
  There is not a wife in the west country
    But has heard of the well of St. Keyne.

  An oak and an elm-tree stand beside,                                 5
    And behind doth an ash-tree grow,
  And a willow from the bank above
    Droops to the water below.

  A traveller came to the well of St. Keyne;
    Joyfully he drew nigh,                                            10
  For from cock-crow he had been travelling,
    And there was not a cloud in the sky.

  He drank of the water so cool and clear,
    For thirsty and hot was he;
  And he sat down upon the bank,                                      15
    Under the willow-tree.

  There came a man from the house hard by,
    At the well to fill his pail;
  On the well-side he rested it,
    And he bade the stranger hail.                                    20

  "Now, art thou a bachelor, stranger?" quoth he;
    "For, an if thou hast a wife,
  The happiest draught thou hast drank this day
    That ever thou didst in thy life.

  "Or has thy good woman, if one thou hast,                           25
    Ever here in Cornwall been?
  For, an if she have, I'll venture my life
    She has drank of the well of St. Keyne."

  "I have left a good woman who never was here,"
    The stranger he made reply;                                       30
  "But that my draught should be the better for that,
    I pray you answer me why."

  "St. Keyne," quoth the Cornish-man, many a time
    Drank of this crystal well;
  And before the angel summoned her,                                  35
    She laid on the water a spell,--

  "If the husband of this gifted well
    Shall drink before his wife,
  A happy man thenceforth is he,
    For he shall be master for life;                                  40

  "But, if the wife should drink of it first,
    God help the husband then!"--
  The stranger stooped to the well of St. Keyne,
    And drank of the water again.

  "You drank of the well, I warrant, betimes?"                        45
    He to the Cornish-man said;
  But the Cornish-man smiled as the stranger spake,
    And sheepishly shook his head:--

  "I hastened, as soon as the wedding was done,
    And left my wife in the porch;                                    50
  But i' faith she had been wiser than me,
    For she took a bottle to church."

      --_Robert Southey_


  PREPARATORY.--Select the lines that (_a_) describe the
  scene, (_b_) indicate the action, (_c_) give the
  dialogue.

  Show by recasting this ballad into dramatic form that it
  is a miniature drama.

  Give examples of Pause springing from (_a_)
  Visualization, in ll. 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13, 17, 19, (_b_)
  narrative which interrupts direct discourse, in ll. 21,
  29, 33, 45.

  Which are the emphatic words in ll. 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 14,
  21, 29, 31, 38, 45, 46? Give your reasons and show how
  they are made emphatic. (Introduction, p. 30.)

  l. 3. What is the Inflection on 'country,' l. 3?
  (Introduction, p. 17.)

  ll. 37-38. Note the Grouping and Pause. (Introduction,
  p. 12.)

       *       *       *       *       *


FAITH, HOPE AND CHARITY

1 Corinthians xiii


Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not
charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And
though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and
have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.

Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself
unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no
evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; beareth
all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all
things.

Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
knowledge, it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophesy
in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in
part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man I
put away childish things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; but
then face to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as
also I am known.

And now abideth faith, hope and charity, these three;
but the greatest of these is charity.


  CHARITY, SUFFERETH, PROFITETH. (Appendix A, 8 and 3.)

  Show by examples from this selection how completeness
  and incompleteness of thought affect the Inflection.
  (Introduction, pp. 15 and 16.)

