to-morrow."

Jane began to close up all the books hastily. Nan's petition was not to
be listened to for a moment. Mrs. Lorrimer's was law, and must be
cheerfully obeyed.

"Certainly," she said, in a pleasant tone, dropping her frozen manner as
if by magic. "It is a _perfect_ day for a picnic. Leave the schoolroom
tidy, my loves, and then go and get ready. You'd like me to see the
cook, wouldn't you, Mrs. Lorrimer? I can help her to cut sandwiches and
to pack plates and dishes."

"Jane, you're an angel," said Mrs. Lorrimer.

Jane Macalister kissed Hester, was introduced to Annie, and then rushed
down the spiral stairs, intent on housekeeping cares.

The Lorrimer boys and girls surrounded Hester and Annie. Nan flitted in
and out of the group, and was here, there, and everywhere. All was
excitement and laughter. Presently the children left the schoolroom in a
body.

No, there was one exception. Boris stayed behind. He looked wistfully
after the others as they streamed away. Miss Macalister had not said a
word about remitting his punishment, and he must be true to his colours.
He found it very difficult to keep back his tears, but he would indeed
think badly of himself if even one bright drop fell from his round blue
eyes.

It would have comforted him if Kitty had noticed him. Kitty might have
stayed if only to bestow a kiss of sympathy on him, but she was whirled
on with the others. No one gave him a thought. He was only Boris, one of
the younger children. He was alone in the schoolroom.

He looked at the clock; it pointed to half past eleven; he would not be
free until half past twelve. Picnics at the Towers were hastily
improvised affairs. Long before his hour of punishment was over the
others would all be off and away. It was scarcely likely that any of
them would even miss him. Kitty would be in such a frantic state of
excitement at having Nan Thornton to talk to, that she would not have
room in her heart to bestow a thought on him. He could not walk all the
way to Friar's Wood, the day was too hot. How delicious it would be
there in the shade. How interesting to watch the squirrels in the trees,
and the rabbits as they darted in and out of their holes. Well, well,
there was no use fretting. His heart felt sore, of course, but he
wouldn't be half a boy in his own opinion if he didn't take his
punishment without a murmur.

He drew his chair up to the table, pushed his ink-stained fingers
through his curly brown locks, and looked around him.

Miss Macalister had forgotten to set him any task, but he supposed he
could set himself something.

He was just wondering what would be the least irksome form of punishment
he could devise, when a small head was pushed in at the door, and a
voice, in accents of extreme surprise, shouted his name.

"Why, Boris, what are you doing? They'll be off if you don't look
sharp."

"I'm not going, Nell," said Boris; "but please don't fuss over it, it's
nothing."

"_Nothing!_" said Nell, coming into the room and seating herself by the
side of her little brother. "Don't you love picnics?"

"I _adore_ them," said Boris.

He shut up his lips as he spoke and winked his eyes.

"Don't make a fuss," he said again after a pause. "Do you think I might
learn a bit of the 'Ancient Mariner' for my punishment task? I like that
old chap, he's so grisly."

"It's a splendid poem," said Nell with enthusiasm, "particularly that
part about--

    _'Water, water everywhere,
    And not a drop to drink.'_

Can't you picture it all, Boris? The sea like a great pond, and the
thirsty old mariner looking at it, and longing, and longing, and longing
to drink it, and the dead people lying round. Sometimes at night I think
of it, and then afterwards I have a good, big, startling dream. A dream
that's not _too_ frightful is almost as good as a story-book. Don't you
think so?"

"No, I don't," said Boris. "I hate dreams. Perhaps I'd better learn the
first six verses of the 'Ancient Mariner,' and perhaps I'd better begin
at once. Jane Macalister is very stern, isn't she, Nell?"

"Awful in lesson times," said Nell.

"Well, the only way I can bear it," said Boris, "is this--I think of her
as the general of an army. I don't mind obeying her when I think of her
in that way. Soldiers have to promise obedience before anything else,
and I'm going to be a soldier some day. I'd better not talk now, Nell,
for I must get the first six verses of the 'Ancient' into me in an hour,
and I can't if you keep chattering. The general was rather sharp with me
this morning, I must say, for all my conduct marks are gone, too, and I
won't get sixpence on Saturday, and I'll have nothing to subscribe to
mother's birthday present; still, of course, 'tis 'diculous to fuss.
You'd best go, Nell. Why aren't you ready for the picnic?"

"I'm not going," said Nell. "I have a headache, and a drive in the sun
would make it worse. Besides, Nan Thornton does chatter so awfully."

"Chatter," repeated Boris; "you don't mean to say you mind her
chattering?"

"Yes, I do, when I have a headache."

"Well, I think she's sweet," said Boris.

"You had better learn your 'Mariner,' Boris, and I'll sit in the window
and look out."

The schoolroom was so high up in the tower that people who sat in one of
its windows had really only a bird's-eye view of what went on below.

Boris, in his rather tumbled sailor suit, sat with his back to Nell. He
kicked the rungs of the chair very often with his sturdy legs. His inky
fingers took fond clutches of his curls, his lips murmured the rhyme of
the "Ancient Mariner" in a monotonous sing-song. Nell pushed open the
lattice window and looked out. There was a waggonette drawn by a rather
bony old horse standing by the side entrance; behind the waggonette was
a pony-cart, a good deal the worse for wear. The pony, whose name was
Shag, stood very still and flicked his long tail backwards and forwards
to keep the flies away. Nell saw Miss Macalister and two of the servants
come out with those flat delicious picnic baskets which she knew so
well, and which had so often made her lips water in fond anticipation;
they were placed with solemnity in the waggonette. Then Molly and Nora,
in their white sun-bonnets, took their places, and Hester and Annie sat
opposite to them, and Mrs. Lorrimer took the seat of honour, and two or
three of the smaller children were packed in heterogeneously, while Nan
and Kitty and Miss Macalister bundled themselves into the pony-cart.

Nell's heart beat high as she watched. Was no one going to think of her
and Boris? Was no one going to miss them?

Apparently no one was.

The gay cavalcade got under weigh and disappeared from view down the
long and lovely beech avenue.

Nell did not wish to go to the picnic, not to-day with her heart so
sore, but it made that heart feel all the sorer not to be missed.




CHAPTER VI.

FRIAR'S WOOD.


As a matter of fact, the picnic party imagined that Boris and Nell
intended to follow on later in the donkey-cart. The Lorrimer picnics
were well known in the neighbourhood. They always passed through the
village in the following order--first the waggonette, drawn by the bony
horse and packed to overflowing with baskets and young people, who waved
their arms and shouted in high glee as they went by; then the pony-trap,
driven sometimes by Jane Macalister, sometimes, when Jane was in a very
good humour, by Kitty or even Boris; and last, at an interval of about
half an hour, the donkey-cart. The donkey-cart as a rule contained
kettles and pots, for the Lorrimers would consider a picnic only half a
picnic if they did not boil their own potatoes out of doors and make
their own tea in the woods. Consequently, the coarser utensils which
were required for the feast were usually reserved for the donkey-cart.
The donkey, as a rule, was driven, or rather led, by Guy, the tall
schoolboy, aged thirteen, who would be owner of the Towers, if it were
not sold over his head, some day. Harry, the brother next in age, would
also accompany the donkey-cart, and sometimes one or two of the younger
children would prefer this rough mode of travelling to the more refined
waggonette or the fleeter pony-carriage. The donkey-cart had of course
to be late, as Guy and Harry would not be home from school until quite
an hour after the rest of the party had started.

"Where is Boris?" asked Hester, addressing herself to Molly when they
had driven about half of the distance.

Molly had tranquil blue eyes, like her mother.

"Isn't he in the pony-carriage?" she asked.

"Who is Boris?" interrupted Annie Forest. "Is he the pretty little
round-faced boy in the sailor suit?"

"Yes," said Nora, joining in the conversation.

"Then he's not in the pony-trap," replied Annie. "I don't think he left
the schoolroom."

"Cute little beggar," laughed Nora. "He wants to come in the
donkey-cart."

Annie raised her brows in inquiry; the mystery of the donkey-cart was
explained to her, and no further questions were asked with regard to
Boris.

Elinor had not yet been missed.

Friar's Wood was a perfect place for a picnic, and in due course of time
the happy cavalcade arrived there. The younger children and Miss
Macalister began to make preparations for the first meal. The Lorrimers
always had two hearty ones whenever they went on a picnic. Kitty, Nora,
and Annie Forest went off to explore the Fairies' Glen, a lovely spot
about a quarter of a mile away. Mrs. Lorrimer took out her knitting and
sat with her back against a great beech tree, and Molly and Hester found
themselves thrown together.

"That's right," exclaimed Molly. "I wanted to have a talk with you,
Hetty. Will you come to the top of the knoll with me? We can sit there
and cool ourselves. There is not the faintest chance of dinner being
ready for quite an hour."

The girls set off at once. Molly was not yet sixteen, Hester was past
seventeen, nevertheless they had been intimate friends for a long time.

"Why have you got that little frown between your brows, Molly?" asked
Hester.

It smoothed out the moment Hester spoke.

"I surely ought not to have a frown to-day," retorted Molly. "The
weather is glorious, we are all in perfect health, we are out for a
picnic, you are here, you have brought your friend, Annie, about whom we
have always heard so much, and Nan is home from school. Yes, I certainly
ought not to frown; but let me retort on you, Hester. Why have you those
grave lines round your lips?"

"Because I'm a goose," answered Hester. "Sit down here, Molly. You have
not got me up to the top of this knoll just to make me recount my
grievances. Out with yours; you know you have one at least."

"Well, yes, I have one," said Molly. "A horrid little cankering jade--a
sort of black imp. I thought I had tucked him up snug in bed until the
evening, and there, you have loosened the sheets, and he has sprung up
again to confront me."

Molly's honest face was undoubtedly troubled now, and there was a
suspicion of tears in the blue eyes, which were nearly as frank and
round as Boris's.

"I suppose I must confess," she said: "it's only that the colts, Joe and
Robin, have been sold."

"I don't think I know them," said Hester.

"Well, you must imagine them. They are not broken-in yet. They were born
at the Towers, and we used to feed them when they were foals. Then one
day Robin got rather wild, and kicked Boris severely, and father said
we were to leave them alone; but Nell somehow managed to evade the
order; she never could be got to fear any four-footed creature. She
spent almost all her leisure time with the colts, and I believe she used
to ride them bare-backed. Well, they were sold this morning, and Nell
will fret awfully. Fretting is very bad for her, for she is not at all
strong, you know. That is one thing that troubles me," continued Molly,
after a brief pause. "I am sorry the colts are sold, on account of Nell,
for I know, although she won't pretend to fret a bit, how she will
secretly grieve and grieve; and the other reason is, that I know father
would not have sold them if he had not been hard up for money again. Oh,
I wish, I wish," continued Molly, her face turning crimson, "that there
was no such thing as money in the world."

Hester looked at her with a mingling of sympathy and surprise.

"I think you must be wrong," she said slowly. "I mean, of course, that I
know you're not rich as my father is rich, for you are such a large
family, and father has only Nan and me; but still, it cannot be true
that your father wants money to the extent of having to sell the colts
to get it, Molly."

"I'm afraid it is true," said Molly, in a sad voice. "I wish it were
only my imagination. You would never take me for a fanciful girl, would
you, Hester? I am always called matter-of-fact, and I think I am. I
really don't care a bit for poetry, and not much for music, and even
story-books don't amuse me unless they're the downright sort, like
'Little Women,' or unless they tell all about housekeeping and that sort
of thing. I love cooking, and I rather like accounts, and I delight in
overhauling the linen cupboard, and I am not a bad hand at darning the
linen. I'm just a commonplace, matter-of-fact sort of girl; it isn't in
me to imagine things."

"Well?" said Hester, for she saw that Molly was intensely in earnest.

"I know I'm right about the money," said Molly. "You cannot think how
troubled father looks sometimes; and mother told me only yesterday that
we were not to go to the seaside this year, and she thinks our shabby
old hats will do quite well for church. You don't suppose I care about
shabby hats, or even about the seaside, but I do care when I see father
looking troubled. Once a stranger came to see him, and they were shut up
together in the library for a long time, and when he went away I noticed
that father looked quite old. Oh, I know there are money troubles, and I
am sure things will get worse. I know what father dreads, and dreads and
dreads. Oh, Hester, if it happens it will kill him!"

"Molly, dear, how white you are. If what happens?"

"Don't whisper it, Hester; but I dread it. If he has to sell the Towers
it will kill him."

"To sell the Towers!" echoed Hester. "I should think so, indeed;
but----"

"What are you two doing up there?" shouted the voice of Nora from below.
"Come down at once and make yourselves useful. The donkey-cart has come,
and so have Guy and Harry, and we are washing the potatoes and want you
to rub them, Molly. Come along down and help, you lazy good-for-nothings."

The girls hastened to obey. As if by magic all trace of a cloud left
Molly's face. It became radiant, smiling, and dimpled. She was once more
matter-of-fact, charming, capable Molly, who could work with a will and
never once think of herself. Molly was so generally self-forgetful, that
her happiness was not put on. Good-nature shone from her eyes. She was
not a particularly brilliant or witty girl, but she was a strong rock to
rely upon, as all the other Lorrimers knew well.

Nora, who was very pretty and very gay, gave herself up to heedless
enjoyment as soon as Molly appeared upon the scene. The potatoes would
certainly be done to a turn now. The table-cloth would be laid in that
part of the wood where the midges were least troublesome. Jane
Macalister would not have to complain of no one helping her. Guy, who
was very like Molly, and nearly as good-natured, would also do his best
to make the picnic lively, and Nora, one year Molly's junior, could give
herself up to the fascinations of Annie Forest's society.

Nora had never before found herself in the company of such a completely
