spell instead of me. 'Twill be interesting to see which of us breaks
his neck first."

It was amazing to see how furniture came pouring in at Ted's bachelor
quarters during the next few days. The chintz curtains were finished
and hung; the Maguire rugs made their appearance; Mr. Turner produced a
shiny alarm clock; and Nancy a roll of colored prints which she had cut
from the magazines.

"You'll be wanting some pictures," said she. "Tack these up somewhere.
They'll brighten up the room and cover the bare walls."

Thus it was that day by day the wee shack in the woods became more
cheery and homelike.

"I've managed to hunt up a few trap's for you," called Mr. Wharton one
morning, as he met the boy going to work. "If you want to run over to
the cabin now and unlock the door, I'll send a man over with them."

Want to! Ted was off in a second, impatient to see what new treasures
he was to receive. He had not long to wait, for soon one of the farm
trucks came into sight, and the driver began to deposit its contents on
the wooden platform which sloped from the door down to the river.

As Ted helped the man unload, his eyes shone with delight. Could any
gifts be rarer? To be sure the furniture was not new. In fact, some of
it was old and even shabby with wear. But the things were all whole,
and although they were simple they were serviceable and perhaps looked
more in harmony with the old-fashioned curtains and the quaint rugs
than if they had come fresh from the shop. There was a chest of
drawers; a rocking chair, a leather armchair, and a straight wooden
chair; a mirror with frame of faded gilt; a good-sized wooden table;
and, best of all, a much scarred, flat-topped desk. Ted had never owned
a desk in all his life. Often he had dreamed of sitting behind one when
he grew to be a man. But to have it now--here! To have it for his own!
How it thrilled him!

After the furniture was in place and the teamster had gone, he arranged
his few papers and pencils in the desk drawers a score of times, trying
them first in one spot and then in another. It was marvelous how much
room there was in such an article of furniture. What did men use to
fill up such a mighty receptacle, anyway? Stretch his possessions as he
would, they only made a scattered showing at the bottom of three of the
drawers. He laughed to see them lying there and hear them rattle about
when he brought the drawers to with a click. However, it was very
splendid to have a desk, whether one had anything to put in it or not,
and perhaps in time he would be able to collect more pencils, rulers
and blocks of paper. The contrast between not having any room at all
for his things and then so much that he did not know what to do with it
was amusing.

Now at last he was fully equipped to take up residence in his new abode
and every instant he could snatch from his duties that day he employed
in settling his furniture, making up his bed, filling his water pitcher
from the river and completing his final preparations for residence at
the boathouse. That night he moved in.

Nothing had been omitted that would contribute to his comfort. Mr.
Wharton had given him screens for the windows and across the broad door
he had tacked a curtain of netting that could be dropped or pushed
aside at will. The candlelight glowing from a pair of old brass
candlesticks on the shelf above the fireplace contributed rather than
took away from the effect and to his surprise the room assumed under
the mellow radiance a quality actually aesthetic and beautiful.

"I don't believe Aldercliffe or Pine Lea have anything better than this
to offer," the boy murmured aloud, as he looked about him with pride.
"I'd give anything to have Mr. Wharton see it now that it's done!"

Strangely enough, the opportunity to exhibit his kingdom followed on
the very heels of his desire, for while he was arranging the last few
books he had brought from home on the shelf above his desk he heard a
tap at the door.

"Are you in bed, son?" called the manager. "I saw your light and just
dropped round to see if you had everything you wanted."

Rushing to the door, Ted threw it open.

"I haven't begun to go to bed yet," returned he. "I've been too
excited. How kind of you to come!"

"Curiosity! Curiosity!" responded the man hastily. Although Ted knew
well that the comment was a libel, he laughed as Mr. Wharton came in,
drawing the door together behind him.

"By Jove!" burst out the manager, glancing about the room.

"You like it?"

"Why--what in goodness have you done to the place? I--I--mercy on us!"

"You do like it then?" the boy insisted eagerly.

"Like it! Why, you've made it into a regular little palace. I'd no
idea such a thing was possible. Where did you get your candlesticks and
your andirons?"

"From home. We have radiators in the apartment and so my sisters had
stored them away and were only too glad to have me take them."

"Humph! And your curtains came from home, too?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, you've missed your calling, is all I can say. You belong in the
interior decorating business," asserted Mr. Wharton. "Wait until Mr.
Clarence sees this place." Again the elder man looked critically round
the interior. "I wouldn't mind living here myself--hanged if I would.
The only thing I don't like is those candles. There is a good deal of a
draught here and you are too near the pines to risk a fire. Electricity
would be safer."

Whistling softly to himself, he began to walk thoughtfully about.

"I suppose," he presently went on, "it would be a simple enough matter
to run wires over here from the barn."

"Wouldn't that be bully!"

"You'd like it?"

"Yes, siree!"

The manager took up his hat.

"Well, we'll see what can be done," he answered, moving toward the
door.

But on the threshold he stopped once more and looked about.

"I'm going to bring some of the Fernalds over here to see the place,"
observed he. "For some time Mr. Clarence has been complaining that this
shack was a blot on the estate and threatening to pull it down. He'd
better have a peep at it now. You may find he'll be taking it away from
you."

He saw a startled look leap into the boy's eyes.

"No, no, sonny! Have no fears. I was only joking," he added.
"Nevertheless, the house will certainly be a surprise to anybody who
saw it a week ago. I wouldn't have believed such a transformation was
possible."

Then as he disappeared with his flash-light through the windings of the
pine woods he called:

"We'll see about that electric wiring. I imagine it won't be much of a
job, and I should breathe easier to eliminate those candles, pretty as
they are. Until something is done, just be careful not to set yourself
and us afire!"

With that he was gone.

Ted dropped the screen and loitered a moment in the doorway, looking
out into the night. Before him stretched the river; so near was it that
he could hear the musical lappings of its waters among the tall grasses
that bordered the stream. From the ground, matted thickly with pine
needles, rose a warm, sun-scorched fragrance heavy with sleep.

The boy stretched his arms and yawned. Then he rolled the doors
together and began to undress.

Suddenly he paused with one shoe in his hand. A thought had come to
him. If Mr. Wharton ran the electric wires over to the shack, what was
to prevent him from utilizing the current for some of his own
contrivances? Why, he could, perhaps, put his wireless instruments into
operation and rig up a telephone in his little dwelling. What fun it
would be to unearth his treasures from the big wooden box in which they
had been so long packed away and set them up here where they would
interfere with no one but himself!

He hoped with all his heart the manager would continue to be nervous
about those candles.




CHAPTER V

A VISITOR


Fervent as this wish was, it was several days before Ted saw Mr.
Wharton again and in the meantime the boy began to adapt himself to his
new mode of living with a will. His alarm clock got him up in the
morning in time for a plunge in the river and after a brisk rub-down he
was off to breakfast with the Stevens's, whose cottage was one of a
tiny colony of bungalows where lived the chauffeurs, head gardener,
electricians, and others who held important positions on the two
estates.

It did not take many days for Ted to become thoroughly at home in the
pretty cement house where he discovered many slight services he could
perform for Mrs. Stevens during the scraps of leisure left him after
meals. His farm training had rendered him very handy with tools and he
was quick to see little things which needed to be done. Moreover, the
willingness to help, which from the moment of his advent to Aldercliffe
and Pine Lea had made him a favorite with Mr. Wharton and the men,
speedily won for him a place with the kindly farmer's wife.

Had Ted known it, she had been none too well pleased at the prospect of
adopting into her home a ravenous young lad who might, nay, probably
would be untidy and troublesome; but she did not dare oppose Mr.
Wharton when the plan was suggested. Nevertheless, although she
consented, she grumbled not a little to her husband about the
inconvenience of the scheme. The money offered her by the manager had
been the only redeeming factor in the case. Quite ignorant of these
conditions, Ted had made his advent into the house and she soon found
to her amazement that the daily coming of her cheery boarder became an
event which she anticipated with motherly interest.

"He is such a well-spoken boy and so nice to have round," asserted she
to Mr. Wharton. "Not a mite of trouble, either. In fact, he's a hundred
times handier than my own man, who although he can make a garden thrive
can't drive a nail straight to save his life. And there's never any
fussing about his food. He eats everything and enjoys it. I believe
Stevens and I were getting dreadful pokey all alone here by ourselves.
The lad has brightened us up no end. We wouldn't part with him now for
anything."

Thus it was that Ted Turner made his way. His password was usefulness.
He never measured the hours he worked by the clock, never was too busy
or too tired to fill in a gap; and although he was popular with
everybody, and a favorite with those in authority, he never took
advantage of his position to escape toil or obtain privileges. In fact,
he worked harder if anything than did the other men, and as soon as his
associates saw that the indulgence granted him did not transform him
into a pig, they ceased any jealousy they cherished and accorded him
their cordial goodwill. For Ted was always modestly respectful toward
older persons; and if he knew more about farming and some other things
than did a good many of the laborers on the place, he did not push
himself forward or boast of his superiority.

Consequently when he ventured to say, "I wonder if somebody would help
me with this harrow?" he would receive a dozen eager responses, the men
never suspecting that Mr. Wharton had given this little chap authority
to order them to aid with the harrowing of the field. Instead each
workman thought his cooperation a free-will offering and enjoyed giving
it.

Thus a fortnight passed and no one could have been happier than was Ted
Turner on a certain clear June evening. He had finished his Saturday
night supper of baked beans and brown bread and after it was over had
lingered to feed the Stevens's hens, in order to let Mr. Stevens go
early to Freeman's Falls to purchase the Sunday dinner. As a result, it
was later than usual when he started out for his camp on the river's
brink. The long, busy day was over; he was tired and the prospect of
his comfortable bed was very alluring. It was some distance to the
shack, and before he was halfway through the pine woods that separated
Aldercliffe from Pine Lea darkness had fallen, and he was compelled to
move cautiously along the narrow, curving trail. How black the night
was! A storm must be brewing, thought he, as he glanced up into the
starless heavens. Stumbling over the rough and slippery ground on he
went. Then suddenly he rounded a turn in the path and stood arrested
with terror.

Not more than a rod away, half concealed in the denseness of the
sweeping branches rose his little shack, a blaze of light! A wave of
consternation turned him cold and two solutions of the mystery
immediately flashed into his mind--fire and marauders. Either something
had ignited in the interior of the house; or, since it was isolated and
had long been known to be vacant, strolling mischief-makers had broken
in and were ransacking it. He remembered now that he had left a window
open when he had gone off in the morning. Doubtless thieves were at
this moment busy appropriating his possessions. Of course it could not
be any of the Fernald workmen. They were too friendly and honorable to
commit such a dastardly deed. No, it was some one from outside. Was it
not possible men had come down the river in a boat from Melton, the
village above, and spying the house had made a landing and encamped
there for the night?

Well, live or die, he must know who his unwelcome guests were. It would
be cowardly to leave them in possession of the place and make no
attempt to discover their identity. For that invaders were inside the
shack he was now certain. It was not a fire. There was neither smoke
nor flame. Softly he crept nearer, the thick matting of pine needles
muffling his footsteps. But how his heart beat! Suppose a twig should
crack beneath his feet and warn the vandals of his approach? And
suppose they rushed out, caught him, and--for a moment he halted with
fear; then, summoning every particle of courage he possessed, he
tiptoed on and contrived to reach one of the windows.

There he halted, staring, his knees weak from surging reaction.

Instead of the company of bandits his mind had pictured, there in the
rocker sat Mr. Wharton and opposite him, in the great leather armchair,
was Mr. Clarence Fernald. The latter fact would have been astounding
enough. But the marvel did not cease there. The light suffusing the
small room came from no flickering candles but glowed steadily from two
strong, unblinking electric lights, one of which had been connected
with a low lamp on his desk, and the other with a fixture in the
ceiling.

Ted could scarcely believe his eyes. All day, during his absence,
electricians must have been busy. How carefully they had guarded their
secret. Why, he had talked with Tim Toyer that very morning on his way
to work and Tim had breathed no word, although he was the head
electrician and had charge of the dynamo which generated the current
both for Aldercliffe and Pine Lea. The Fernalds had never depended on
Freeman's Falls for their electricity; on the contrary, they maintained
a small plant of their own and used the power for a score of purposes
