
This vessel, with ten line-of-battle ships, set sail to join Nelson, and
assist him in the difficult duty of watching the French fleet.



CHAPTER FIVE.

NELSON HUNTS THE FRENCH.

At this time Sir Horatio Nelson had been despatched to the Mediterranean
with a small squadron to ascertain the object of the great expedition
which was fitting out, under Napoleon Bonaparte, at Toulon.

Nelson had for a long time past been displaying, in a series of
complicated and difficult operations in the Mediterranean, those
splendid qualities which had already won for him unusual honours and
fame, and which were about to raise him to that proud pinnacle which he
ultimately attained as England's greatest naval hero.  His address and
success in matters of diplomacy had filled his superiors and the
Government with sentiments of respect; his moral courage in risking
reputation and position, with unflinching resolution, by _disobeying_
orders when by so doing the good and credit of his country could be
advanced, made him an object of dread to some, of admiration to others,
while his lion-like animal courage and amiability endeared him to his
officers and men.  Sailors had begun to feel that where Nelson led the
way victory was certain, and those who were ordered to join his fleet
esteemed themselves most fortunate.

The defeat of the French armament was considered by the English
Government a matter of so great importance, that Earl St. Vincent, then
engaged in blockading the Spanish fleet, was directed, if he thought it
necessary, to draw off his entire fleet for the purpose, and relinquish
the blockade.  He was, however, told that, if he thought a detachment
sufficient, he was to place it under the command of Sir Horatio Nelson.
The Earl did consider a detachment sufficient, and had already made up
his mind to give the command to Nelson, being thoroughly alive to his
great talents and other good qualities.  He accordingly sent him to the
Mediterranean with three ships of the line, four frigates, and a sloop
of war.

This force was now, by the addition to which we have referred, augmented
so largely that Nelson found himself in possession of a fleet with which
he might not only "watch" the enemy, but, if occasion should offer,
attack him.

He was refitting after a storm in the Sardinian harbour of St. Pietro,
when the reinforcements hove in sight.  As soon as the ships were seen
from the masthead of the Admiral's vessel, Nelson immediately signalled
that they should put to sea.  Accordingly the united fleet set sail, and
began a vigorous search for the French armament, which had left Toulon a
short time before.

The search was for some time unsuccessful.  No tidings could be obtained
of the destination of the enemy for some time, but at length it was
learned that he had surprised Malta.

Although his fleet was inferior in size to that of the French, Nelson--
and indeed all his officers and men--longed to meet with and engage
them.  The Admiral, therefore, formed a plan to attack them while at
anchor at Gozo, but he received information that the French had left
that island the day after their arrival.  Holding very strongly the
opinion that they were bound for Egypt, he set sail at once in pursuit,
and arrived off Alexandria on the 28th of June 1798.

There, to his intense disappointment, he found that nothing had been
seen or heard of the enemy.  Nelson's great desire was to meet with
Napoleon Bonaparte and fight him on the sea.  But this wish was not to
be gratified.  He found, however, that the governor of Alexandria was
endeavouring to put the city in a state of defence, for he had received
information from Leghorn that the French expedition intended to proceed
against Egypt after having taken Malta.

Leaving Alexandria, Nelson proceeded in various directions in search of
the French, carrying a press of sail night and day in his anxiety to
fall in with them, but being baffled in his search, he was compelled to
return to Sicily to obtain fresh supplies in order to continue the
pursuit.

Of course Nelson was blamed in England for his want of success in this
expedition, and Earl St. Vincent was severely censured for having sent
so young an officer on a service so important.  Anticipating the
objection, that he ought not to have made so long a voyage without more
certain information, Nelson said, in vindication of his conduct:--

"Who was I to get such information from?  The Governments of Naples and
Sicily either knew not, or chose to keep me in ignorance.  Was I to wait
patiently until I heard certain accounts?  If Egypt were their object,
before I could hear of them, they would have been in India.  To do
nothing was disgraceful; therefore I made use of my understanding.  I am
before your lordships' judgment; and if, under all circumstances, it is
decided that I am wrong, I ought, for the sake of our country, to be
superseded; for at this moment, when I know the French are not in
Alexandria, I hold the same opinion as off Cape Passaro--that, under all
circumstances, I was right in steering for Alexandria; and by that
opinion I must stand or fall."

It was ere long proved that Nelson _was_ right, and that Earl St.
Vincent had made no mistake in sending him on a service so important;
for we now know that in all the British fleet there was not another man
so admirably adapted for the duty which was assigned to him, of finding,
fighting, and conquering, the French, in reference to whom he wrote to
the first lord of the Admiralty, "Be they bound to the antipodes, your
lordship may rely that I will not lose a moment in bringing them to
action!"

Re-victualled and watered, the British fleet set sail on the 25th of
July from Syracuse.  On the 28th, intelligence was received that the
enemy had been seen about four weeks before, steering to the South East
from Candia.

With characteristic disregard of the possible consequences to his own
fame and interest, in his determination to "do the right," Nelson at
once resolved to return to Alexandria.  Accordingly, with all sail set,
the fleet stood once more towards the coast of Egypt.

Perseverance was at length rewarded.  On the 1st of August 1798, about
ten in the morning, they sighted Alexandria, and saw with inexpressible
delight that the port was crowded with the ships of France.

And here we venture to say that we sympathise with the joy of the
British on this occasion, and shall explain why we do so.

Not every battle that is fought--however brilliant in military or naval
tactics it may be, or in exhibitions of personal prowess--deserves our
sympathy.  Only that war which is waged against oppression is entitled
to respect, and this, we hold, applies to the war in which the British
were engaged at that time.

France, under the Directory, had commenced a career of unwarrantable
conquest, for the simple purpose of self-aggrandisement, and her great
general, Bonaparte, had begun that course of successful warfare in which
he displayed those brilliant talents which won for him an empire,
constituted him, in the ordinary acceptation of the word, a hero, and
advanced France to a high position of tyrannical power.  But brilliant
talents and success could not free him from the charge of being a
wholesale murderer.

To oppose such pretentions and practices was a bounden duty on the part
of those who loved justice, just as much as it is the duty of every one
who has the power to thwart the designs of, and forcibly overcome, a
highwayman or a pirate.

Observe, reader, that we do not intend here to imply an invidious
comparison.  We have no sympathy with those who hold that England was
and always is in favour of fair play, while France was bent on tyranny.
On the contrary, we believe that England has in some instances been
guilty of the sin which we now condemn, and that, on the other hand,
many Frenchmen of the present day would disapprove of the policy of
France in the time of Napoleon the First.  Neither do we sympathise with
the famous saying of Nelson that "one Englishman is equal to three
Frenchmen!"  The tendency to praise one's-self has always been regarded
among Christian nations as a despicable, or at least a pitiable,
quality, and we confess that we cannot see much difference between a
boastful man and a boastful nation.  Frenchmen have always displayed
chivalrous courage, not a whit inferior to the British, and history
proves that in war they have been eminently successful.  The question
whether they could beat us or we could beat them, if tested in a fair
stand-up fight with equal numbers, besides being an unprofitable one, is
not now before us.  All that we are concerned about at present is, that
in the war now under consideration the British _did_ beat the French,
and we rejoice to record the fact solely on the ground that we fought in
a righteous cause.

With these remarks we proceed to give an account of one of the greatest
naval victories ever achieved by British arms.



CHAPTER SIX.

THE BATTLE OF THE NILE.

After Napoleon Bonaparte had effected his landing in Egypt, the French
fleet was permitted to remain at Alexandria for some time, and thus
afforded Nelson the opportunity he had sought for so long.

For many previous days he had been almost unable, from anxiety, to take
sleep or food, but now he ordered dinner to be served, while
preparations were being made for battle, and when his officers rose to
leave the table, he said to them:--

"Before this time to-morrow, I shall have gained a peerage or
Westminster Abbey."

The French had found it impossible to enter the neglected and ruined
port of Alexandria.  Admiral Brueys had, by command of Napoleon, offered
a reward of 10,000 livres to any native pilot who would safely convey
the squadron in, but not one was found who would venture to take charge
of a single vessel that drew more than twenty feet.  The gallant admiral
was compelled, therefore, to anchor in Aboukir Bay, and chose the
strongest position that was possible in the circumstances.  He ranged
his ships in a compact line of battle, in such a manner that the leading
vessel lay close to a shoal, while the remainder of the fleet formed a
curve along the line of deep water so that it was thought to be
impossible to turn it by any means in a South Westerly direction, and
some of the French, who were best able to judge, said that they held a
position so strong that they could bid defiance to a force more than
double their own.  The presumption was not unreasonable, for the French
had the advantage of the English in ships, guns, and men, but they had
omitted to take into their calculations the fact that the English fleet
was commanded by one whose promptitude in action, readiness and
eccentricity of resource, and utter disregard of consequences when what
he deemed the path to victory lay before him, might have been equalled;
but certainly could not have been surpassed, by Bonaparte himself.

The French force consisted of thirteen ships of the line and four
frigates, carrying in all 1196 guns and 11,230 men.  The English had
thirteen ships of the line and a fifty-gun ship, carrying in all 1012
guns and 8068 men.  All the English line-of-battle ships were
seventy-fours.  Three of the French ships carried eighty-eight guns, and
one, _L'Orient_, was a monster three-decker with 120 guns.

In order to give the reader a better idea of the forces engaged on both
sides, we give the following list of ships.  It is right, however, to
add that one of those belonging to the English (the _Culloden_) ran
aground on a shoal when about to go into action, and took no part in the
fight.

ENGLISH SHIPS.

+===+===============+=============================+====+===+===========+
Y   YNames          YCommanders                   YGunsYMenY           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 1.YVanguard       YAdmiral Nelson, Captain BerryY  74Y595Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 2.YMinotaur       YThos. Louis                  Y  74Y640Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 3.YTheseus        YR.W. Millar                  Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 4.YAlexander      YA.J. Ball                    Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 5.YSwiftsure      YB Hallowell                  Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 6.YAudacious      YD Gould                      Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 7.YDefence        YJ Peyton                     Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 8.YZealous        YS Hood                       Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y 9.YOrion          YSir James Saumarez           Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y10.YGoliath        YThomas Foley                 Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y11.YMajestic       YG.B. Westcott                Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y12.YBellerophon    YH.D.E. Darby                 Y  74Y590Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y13.YCulloden       YT Trowbridge                 Y  74Y590YNot engagedY
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y14.YLeander        YT.B. Thomson                 Y  50Y343Y           Y
+---+---------------+-----------------------------+----+---+-----------+
Y15.YLa Mutine, BrigY                             Y    Y   Y           Y
+===+===============+=============================+====+===+===========+

FRENCH SHIPS.

+===+====================+==============+====+====+===============+
Y   YNames               YCommanders    YGunsYMen Y               Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 1.YL'Orient            YAdmiral BrueysY 120Y1010YBurnt          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 2.YLe Franklin         Y              Y  80Y 800YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 3.YLe Tonnant          Y              Y  80Y 800YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 4.YLe Guillaume Tell   Y              Y  80Y 800YEscaped        Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 5.YLe Conquerant       Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 6.YLe Spartiate        Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 7.YL'Aquilon           Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 8.YLe Souverain Peuple Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y 9.YL'Heureux           Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y10.YLe Timoleon         Y              Y  74Y 700YBurnt          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y11.YLe Mercure          Y              Y  74Y 700YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y12.YLe Genereux         Y              Y  74Y 700YEscaped        Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y13.YLe Guerrier         Y              Y  74Y 600YTaken          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y14.YLa Diane (Frigate)  Y              Y  48Y 300YEscaped        Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y15.YLa Justice (Frigate)Y              Y  44Y 300YEscaped        Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y16.YL'Artemise (Frigate)Y              Y  36Y 250YBurnt          Y
+---+--------------------+--------------+----+----+---------------+
Y17.YLa Serieux (Frigate)Y              Y  36Y 250YDismasted, sunkY
+===+====================+==============+====+====+===============+

Such were the forces that met to engage in deadly conflict on the 1st of
August 1798, with not only national but world-wide interest pending on
the issue, for the battle of the Nile was one of the leading battles of
the world.

When Nelson perceived the position of the enemy, his fertile and active
mind at once evolved a characteristic course of action.  Where there was
room, he said, for an enemy's ship to swing, there was room for one of
his to anchor.  He therefore at once formed the plan of doubling on the
French ships, stationing one of his ships on the bow and another on the
quarter of each of the enemy.

Nelson immediately explained his intended course to his officers.  It
had been his custom during the whole time he was engaged in searching
for the French fleet, to have his captains as frequently as possible on
board the _Vanguard_, when he explained to them his opinions as to the
best mode of attack in all the various positions in which it was
possible or probable that the enemy might be found.  Hence they knew
their commander's tactics so well, that when the hour for action
arrived, no time was lost in the tedious operation of signalling orders.
He had such confidence in all his officers, that after thoroughly
explaining his intended plan of attack, he merely said to them, "Form as
is most convenient for mutual support, and anchor by the stern.  First
gain the victory, and then make the best use of it you can."

When Captain Berry, perceiving the boldness of the plan, said, "If we
succeed, what will the world say?"  Nelson replied, "There is no _if_ in
the case; that we shall succeed is certain: who may live to tell the
story is a very different question!"

Nelson possessed in an eminent degree the power of infusing into his men
the irresistible confidence that animated his own bosom.  There was
probably not a man in the British fleet who did not sail into Aboukir
Bay on that memorable day with a feeling of certainty that the battle
was as good as gained before it was begun.  The cool, quiet,
self-possessed manner in which the British tars went to work at the
