very interesting company in the next room. "Don't be afraid," she said.
But I was very much afraid, I know not why, and hesitated a long time
before I ventured into the room.

And when I did venture to wander in casually, I was more afraid than
ever, for at a window a small lady sat reading. I knew her at once for
Jane Ryder, but that fact made me no bolder. On the contrary, I felt a
timidity that was almost childish; it was a feeling that carried me
away back to my boyhood, when I refused to go into a room where there
was a company of little girls.

"I beg your pardon," said I, and began to back toward the door.

"Oh, no harm is done," the lady declared, closing the book, but keeping
the place with her fore-finger. "Did you desire to see me? Or perhaps
you would see Miss Bledsoe?"

"No, ma'am--I--that is, Miss Bledsoe is talking with a friend of mine,
and I just wandered in here, having nothing else to do."

"To be sure! I believe that is a custom of Southern gentlemen."

"What is?" I asked, rather abruptly.

"Why, to go to houses and wander from room to room until their
curiosity is satisfied."

I was angry, though I knew that she meant not a word she said. "Does
Mrs. Bledsoe indulge in that habit?" I asked.

"Habit? I said custom. Mrs. Bledsoe is a changed woman since she has
lived among people who know something of the world and its ways, and
who are not slave-drivers."

"I believe this is Miss Jane Ryder," I said.

"Your memory is better than your manners," she replied, and though I
tried hard to keep my temper, her words stung me to the quick.

"I assure you I had not the least desire to disturb you. I came in here
with the hope, though not the expectation, of finding a lad who came
here last night."

"He is not here," she asserted, "and if he were, he has no desire to
see you. He told me something of his encounter with you, and if that is
the way you treat a young lad, I wonder how you would have treated an
unprotected woman."

I would not trust myself to speak to her. I made her a low obeisance
and retired from the room; but I was not to escape so easily. She
pursued her advantage; she followed me out into the hall. "Is it true
that the young man compelled you to accompany him to this house last
night?"

"If he told you so, madam, it is true," I replied.

"After threatening to give you a strapping?" she asked. Her mood was
almost exultant, though she had been gloomy enough when I first
disturbed her.

"If he says so, madam."

"He didn't say so, but I believe he slapped your face, for it is still
red."

"Perhaps he did, madam."

"I am no madam, I'll let you know; why do you call me so?"

"It is simply a term of respect, ma'am. Our young people are taught to
be respectful to ladies."

"You may be sure that the young man would have remained to see you, but
I was afraid you'd run away and leave your friend." Women can be very
childish sometimes, and this was pure childishness.

"Why, I had no idea that he bore me any ill-will," I remarked. "He
trotted along by my side in perfect good-humor when I was fetching him
home. If he has any grudge against me, I do not think the fault is
mine. Say to him that I apologize most humbly for any offence I may
have given him." Jane Ryder was now sure that I did not connect her
with the lad--was sure that I had not pierced her disguise, and she
became at once very much friendlier. Her relief was apparent in voice
and gesture.

"The truth is," she went on, "the young man is very fond of you, much
to my surprise. It is a strange fancy," she mused; "there is no
accounting for it. I believe you could prevail on him to leave his
friends and go with you to the South; that is why I am keeping him away
from you."

"I have had few friends," I said, "and if you could add the young man
to the list and place him above all the rest, I should be happy. But as
for persuading him to desert his principles, I should never think of
it; and I should think ill of him if he could be persuaded."

"He really thinks that you are one of the finest men he ever met,"
pursued Jane Ryder. "He says that a young woman would be as safe from
insult with you as she would be with her mother."

"And why not?" I inquired. "I thank your friend for his good opinion of
me; but it is no great compliment to me to say that I should protect a
woman with my life, if need be. Back yonder there are gathered three or
four thousand men, and out of that four thousand you will not find ten
who would not do the same and think it nothing to boast of."

"I wouldn't trust them," she declared.

"Would you trust me?" I asked. The words were out of my mouth before I
could recall them. They meant more than she would think or than she
would care for them to mean.

"I certainly would," she said, clenching her hands in a strange little
gesture.

"I thank you for saying that much," I declared. "The time may come--not
soon, perhaps--when I shall have to ask you to trust me."

"Soon or late," she replied, "my answer will be the same."

I never was more shaken with the excitement of temptation than at that
moment. She must have known it; they say women are quick at reading the
thoughts of a man, but, instead of drawing away from me, she drew
nearer. In another instant I should have seized her in my arms, the
pale and lonely creature, but just then the sound of footsteps came
along the hall, and I heard the happy laughter of Katherine Bledsoe. I
had raised my arms, but now I lowered them and she had seized my hand.

"Good-by!" she said, and as soon as she could tear her hand from mine
she was gone--gone by another door, and Harry and her companion came
plump upon me standing in the hallway, gazing at the door through which
Jane Ryder had disappeared. Then I turned and gazed at them, first at
one and then at the other.

"What have you done with her?" inquired Kate, with just a shade of
solicitude in her voice. "Oh, I hope you haven't hurt her," she cried.
"She has the tenderest heart in the world."

"Hurt her? Hurt her?" It was all that I could say, and then all of a
sudden I came to myself and stood there laughing very foolishly. "She
ran away," I explained. "I don't know why. I am sure I didn't want her
to go!"

Whereupon Kate fell to laughing, and kept it up until the tears came
into her eyes. "Oh, men are such simpletons!" she exclaimed; "I don't
know what I should do for amusement if I didn't see the lords of
creation once in a great while."

We bade good-by to the household--though Jane Ryder was nowhere to be
found--and went to our horses, which we had left in charge of Whistling
Jim. That worthy was in quite a flutter. He had heard strange noises,
and he was almost sure that he had caught a glimpse of more than one
man in the darkness. We paid little enough attention to what he said,
for we knew that the ladies were safe so far as the Confederates were
concerned, and Jack Bledsoe would answer for their safety with the
Federals.

Nevertheless, there was no one to answer for our safety, and we had no
more than mounted our horses before we discovered that we were
surrounded. We heard the tramp of cavalry on all sides. A quiet voice
in the darkness made itself heard: "Don't shoot unless they resist!"

"Ride them down!" exclaimed Harry. My horse ran full into another
horse, and he and his rider went down just as I used my pistol. Some
one with an oath whacked me over the head with a sabre, my horse
stumbled in the darkness, and down I went into chaos. I thought I heard
someone singing, and then it seemed as if there was a free concert in
progress, while I lay helpless in a great gully out of which I could
not climb.




VIII


Making a great effort to climb from the gully into which I had fallen,
my foot slipped, and I fell again, and continued to fall till I knew no
more. When I came to life again I was not in a gully at all, but
stretched out on a bed, with my boots on, and this fact fretted me to
such an extent that I threw back the covering and rose to a sitting
posture. My head was throbbing somewhat wildly, and I soon found that
the cause of the pain was a towel that had been too tightly bound
around my forehead. The towel changed into a bandage under my fingers,
and I found that I could not compass the intricacies of the fastenings.
I remembered that I had disposed safely of the papers I had found in
the chair-arm. One was a passport signed by one of the biggest men in
the country, authorizing Francis Leroy to pass in and out of the Union
lines at any time, day or night, and the other--there were but two--was
some useless information with respect to the movements of the Federal
forces between Murfreesborough and Memphis.

As I came more and more to my senses, I knew that these papers had been
the cause of my undoing; I could see in it, as plain as day, the hand
of Jane Ryder, and I was truly sorry. I thought I had been around the
world and back again, and I should have been very wise, but the bandage
and Jane Ryder were too much for me. How did she know that I had
secured the papers? And why did she permit the soldiers to attack me. I
was feeling very foolish and childish.

Then I observed that a large man was sitting in front of the small
fireplace, and his long legs were stretched completely across the
hearth. His head was thrown back, his mouth was open, and he was sound
asleep. There was half a handful of some kind of medicine in a saucer
on the table, and I judged that the man would be better off for a dose
of it. I suppose it was common table salt, but, whatever it was, the
notion remained with me that it would be a help to the man. It was a
fantastic notion, but it persisted, and finally I lifted the saucer,
emptied the medicine in my palm, and transferred it to the open mouth
of the man. It failed to arouse him; he merely closed his jaws on the
dose and slept on.

I enjoyed the man's discomfiture before it occurred; I knew what a
terrible splutter there would be when the stuff began to melt and run
down his windpipe. I should have laughed aloud, but the bandage was
hurting me terribly. With a vague hope of getting some relief from
pain, I opened the door as softly as I could, went out and closed it
behind me. Another door was open directly in front of me, and through
this I went. In the room a woman was sitting at a window, her head in
her hands. She looked up when she heard the slight noise I made, and I
was surprised to find myself face to face with Jane Ryder. Her eyes
were red and swollen with weeping, and her hands were all of a tremble.

"Will you please, ma'am, take this off?" I said, pointing to the
bandage.

She placed her finger on her lip. "Sh-sh!" she whispered, and then,
whipping around me, closed the door with no more noise than the wing of
a night-bird might make. "In there, and don't move on your life."

She pointed to a closet, but I shook my head.

"Not if I can help myself," I said. "I have just come out of a deep,
deep ditch, and I want to hear the splutter." I was whispering, too,
such was the woman's influence. She looked at me in amazement; she
tried to understand me; but she must have thought me out of my head,
for her lips were twitching pitifully and her hands trembling. "It's
the man in the next room," I whispered with a grin. "I put a handful of
medicine in his mouth. Wait! you'll hear him directly."

"Oh, I am so sorry for you," she cried, wringing her hands. "I am as
sorry for you as I am for myself."

"Then please take this bandage off and have my horse brought round."

"I can't! I can't! You're wounded. Go in the closet there."

"I'll go where you go, and I'll stay where you stay," I said; and I
must have been talking too loud, for she placed her hand on my
lips--and what should I do but hold it there and kiss it, the poor
little trembling hand!

And then there came from the next room the famous splutter for which I
had been waiting. The soldier made a noise as if he were drowning. He
gasped and coughed, and tried to catch his breath; he strangled and
lost it, and, when he caught it again, made a sound as if he had a
violent case of the whooping-cough. And all this time I was laughing
silently, and I came near strangling myself.

Jane Ryder was far from laughter. She was as cool as a cucumber. With
one quick movement, and with surprising strength, she had shoved me
into the closet. Then she flung the door wide open. As she did so the
guard cried out at the top of his voice that the prisoner had escaped.
And if ever a man was berated it was that big soldier who had fallen
asleep at the post of duty. "You drunken wretch!" she cried; "I knew
how it would be; I knew it!" He tried to make an explanation, but she
would not hear it. "Oh, I'll make you pay for this! Go--go and find
him, and if you fail take your cut-throats away from here and never let
me see them again. Report to my brother, and tell him how you carried
out your orders. You were to take them all without a struggle, but you
took only one, and you bring him here more dead than alive. He is
wandering about in the woods now, out of his head."

"But he shot one of my men. Haven't you any feeling for the man that'll
be cold and stiff by sun-up?"

"For the man, yes. You should have been the one to pay for your
blundering. You failed to carry out your orders, and you had a dozen
against three, and one of the three a negro."

The man started away, but his lagging footsteps showed that he had
something on his mind, and in a few moments I heard him coming back.
"'Tain't no use to hunt for the man in the dark, and by sun-up his
friends'll be buzzin' around here worse'n a nest of hornets. We are
going back--going back," he repeated, "and you may report what you
please."

Then the man went away, mumbling and mouthing to himself. As for me, I
should have preferred to go with him. Pretty much everything is fair in
war, and Jane Ryder was on the Union side. She knew of the ambuscade
and had not told me; it was her duty not to tell. She would have made
no sign if we had been going to our deaths. I have never felt more
depressed in my life than I did at that moment. Something had slipped
from under me, and I had nothing to stand on. I came out of the closet
both angry and sorry. "I shall be obliged to you if you will find my
hat," I said.

I tried hard to hide my real feelings, and with anyone else the effort
would have been successful; but she knew. She came and stood by me and
caught me by the arm. "Where would you go?" There was a baffled look in
her eyes, and her voice was uneasy.

"Call your man," I said; "I will go with him; it is not his fault that
he cannot find me; it is not his fault that I am hiding here in a
woman's closet. Nor shall he be punished for it."

"Your hat is not here," she declared. "It must be where you fell. Do
you know," she cried, "that you have killed a man? Do you know that?"
Her tone was almost triumphant.

"Well, what of that?" I asked. "You set them on us, and the poor fellow
took his chance with the rest. Gladly would I take his place." My head
was hurting and I was horribly depressed.

She had turned away from me, but now she flashed around with surprising
quickness. "You are the cause of it all--yes, you! And, oh, if I could
tell you how I hate you! If I could only show you what a contempt I
have for you!" She was almost beside herself with anger, passion--I
know not what. She shrank back from me, drew in a long breath, and fell
upon the floor as if a gust of wind had blown her over; and then I
began to have a dim conception of the power that moved and breathed in
the personality of this woman. She fell, gave a long, shivering sigh,
and, to all appearance, lay before me dead.

In an instant I was wild with remorse and grief. I seized a chair and
sent it crashing into the hallway to attract attention. To this noise I
added my voice, and yelled for help with lungs that had aroused the
echoes on many a hunting-field. There were whisperings below, and
apparently a hurried consultation, and then a young woman came mincing
up the stairs. I must have presented a strange and terrifying spectacle
with my head bandaged and my wild manner, for the woman, with a shriek,
turned and ran down the stairs again. I cried again for someone to come
to the aid of the lady, and presently someone called up the stairs to
know what the trouble was.

[Illustration: I was wild with remorse and grief.]

"Come and see," I cried. "The lady has fainted, and she may be dead."

I went into the room again, and, taking Jane Ryder in my arms, carried
her into the next room and laid her on the bed. There was a pitcher of
water handy, and I sprinkled her face and began to chafe her cold
hands. After what seemed an age, the landlord came cautiously along the
hall. "Call the woman," I commanded; "call the woman, and tell her to
come in a hurry."

This he did, and then peeped in the room, taking care not to come
inside the door. "What is the matter?" he said uneasily.

"Can't you see that the lady is ill?" I answered.

The woman--two women, indeed--came running in response to his summons.
"Go in there and see what the trouble is. See if he has killed her. I
told her he was dangerous. You shall pay for this," he said, shaking a
threatening hand at me, though he came no farther than the door. "You
think she has no friends and that you may use her as you please. But I
tell you she has friends, and you will have to answer to them."

"Why talk like a fool?" said the elder of the two women--the woman with
whom I had talked in the inner room of the tavern. "You know as well as
I do that this man has not hurt her. If it were some other man I'd
believe you. She has only fainted."

"But fainting is something new to her. He has hurt her, and he shall
pay for it," the man insisted.

"And I tell you," the woman repeated, "that he has not harmed a hair of
her head. If he had do you think I'd be standing here denying it? Don't
you know what I'd be doing?"

"If I am wrong I am quite ready to apologize. I was excited--was beside
myself."

"I want none of your apologies," I said to the man. "I have a crow to
pick with you, and I'll furnish a basket to hold the feathers."

"It is better to bear no malice," remarked the younger woman, calmly.
"The Bible will tell you so."

"It is better to tell me the cause of the trouble," interrupted her
elder.

"Why, I hardly know. I asked for my hat, and from one word to another
we went till she flamed out at me, and said she hated me, and had a
great contempt for me; and then she fell on the floor in a faint. I
thought she was dead, but when I laid her on the bed there I saw her
eyelids twitching."

The two women eyed each other in a way that displeased me greatly. "I
told you so," said one. "It's the world's wonder," replied the other.
And then Jane Ryder opened her eyes. It was natural that they should
fall on me. She closed them again with a little shiver and then the
natural color returned to her face. "I thought you were gone," she
whispered.

"Did you think I would go and leave you like this? Do you really think
I am a brute--that I have no feeling?" She closed her eyes again, as if
reflecting.

"But I told you I hated you. Didn't you hear me? Couldn't you
understand?"

"Perfectly," I replied. "I knew it before you told me; but, even so,
could I go and leave you as you were just now? Consider, madam. Put
yourself in my place--I who have never done you the slightest injury
under the blue sky----" I was going on at I know not what rate, but she
refused to listen.

"Oh, don't! don't! Oh, please go away!" she cried, holding her arms out
toward me in supplicating fashion. It was an appeal not to be resisted,
least of all by me. I looked at her--I gave her one glance, as the
elderly woman took me by the arm.

