to the wonderment of the child watching the quick change of fingers.

It is the earliest sleight-of-hand trick taught to the nursery child.


A B C GAME.

A spirited game may be played after this fashion. All seated round the
table or fireplace. One child sings a solo--a verse of some nursery
rhyme. For instance--

    "Hi diddle diddle,
        The cat and the fiddle,
      The cow jumped over the moon;
    The little dog laughed to see such fine sport,
      And the dish ran away with the spoon."

A chorus of voices takes up the tune and the solo is repeated, after
which the alphabet is sung through, and the last letter, Z, sustained
and repeated again and again, to bother the next child whose turn it now
is to sing the next solo. The new solo must be a nursery rhyme not
hitherto sung by any of the company. If unable to supply a fresh rhyme
the child stands out of the game and pays forfeit.


"I APPRENTICE MY SON."

In another parlour game of a rather interesting kind the youngest in the
room begins by saying--

    "I apprentice my son to a butcher; the first thing he sold was a
    pound of M."

Each has a turn to guess what M may stand for--some kind of meat the
butcher usually sells. Should the first person in the circle guess the
correct meaning, it becomes his or her turn to ask the next question.
Baker or grocer, chemist or draper, in fact any trade may be selected by
the person whose turn it is to put the question.


AN ARMENIAN CHILD'S GAME

of a thousand years ago is still played by the Christian children of
Asia. Like our Western street games of tops and tip-cats it perpetuates
the cruelties of the persecutions which their ancestors suffered, a most
terrible instance of the child's game outliving the serious performance
of that which it represented. The frontier of the Armenian kingdom had
been destroyed by one of the Christian Byzantine emperors, thus enabling
the Seljouck Turks to pass through the Armenian kingdom, and deal out to
the unoffending Asiatic Christians the terrors of pillage by firing
their peaceful homesteads. England, France, and Germany have a
modification of the game. In France the youngsters hand round a burning
faggot, exclaiming--

    "Petit bonhomme vit encore."

German children play a similar game with a stick instead of a firebrand,
and Halliwell gives the rhyme describing the English game as--

    "Jack's alive and in very good health,
    If he die in your hand you must look to yourself."


RUSSIAN SUPERSTITION.

An old custom of the Russian maiden--identical with the English girl's
habit on St. Valentine's Day--is still in vogue. Going into the street
she asks the first man she meets his Christian name, believing that her
future husband will be sure to bear the same.




CHAPTER III.

JEWISH RHYMES.


Sports, games, and amusements were unknown until a late day in Jewish
history. Within the walls of Jerusalem, or indeed throughout the whole
length of Palestine, no theatre, circus, hippodrome, nor even gallery
was to be found, until Jason, the Greek-Jew of the Maccabees dynasty,
became ruler, and built a place of exercise under the very tower of the
Temple itself. (2 Macc. iv. 10-14.) Herod subsequently completed what
Jason had begun, and erected a hippodrome within the Holy City to the
delight of the younger Hebrews, later building another at Caesarea.

Even the festivals were not of Mosaic appointment, and it is not
difficult to understand how certain gloomy censors and theologians
condemn merriment. To serve the Lord with gladness was quite an
after-thought of the Israelitish leaders and teachers. But when the
great fairs or wakes of the whole nation were held, pastimes and
diversions crept in similar to the merry meetings of our own times, and
religion, commerce, and amusement became the cardinal features of the
great Jewish fairs.

The Guy Fawkes Festival of Judaism, the Purim Feast, appointed by Esther
and Mordecai, commemorating deliverance from massacre which Hamar had
determined by lot against them, gave occasion for relaxation. Even the
most austere and gloomy rejoiced, while the younger people abandoned
themselves to dissolute mirth, opposite sexes dressing up in the
clothes of each other; a habit at present in favour amongst the coster
fraternity of East London on Bank Holidays. The Jews were a peculiar
people. No old-time imagery of the older nations enchanted them; they
were carefully taught to live for themselves and by themselves, but to
make their profit out of others whenever possible to do so. The spoiling
of the Egyptians took place more than once in their history. Whatever
nation they colonised amongst had to enforce strict laws and rigid
punishments in defence of their own less shrewd people.

Even their nursery rhymes are distinctive, full of religious and
national sentiment, and may be counted on the fingers of one hand. They
necessarily know the ones in common use belonging to the country of
their adoption, but so important are the two Hebrew rhymes considered to
be that every pious Jew teaches his child their significance. A
translation of the principal one, found in the Sepher Haggadah, a Hebrew
hymn in the Chaldee language, runs thus:--

                             _Recitative._

    "A kid, a kid, my father bought
    For two pieces of money--A kid! a kid!

       *       *       *

    Then came the cat and ate the kid
    That my father bought for two pieces of money.
    Then came the dog and bit the cat that ate the kid that my father
        bought for two pieces of money.
    Then came the staff and beat the dog that bit the cat, etc.
    Then came the fire that burned the staff, that beat the dog, that
        bit the cat, that ate the kid, etc.
    Then came the water and quenched the fire, that burned the staff,
        that beat the dog, that bit the cat, that ate the kid, etc.
    Then came the ox and drank the water, etc.
    Then came the butcher and slew the ox, that drank the water, etc.
    Then came the Angel of Death and killed the butcher, etc.
    Then came the Holy One, Blessed be He! and slew the Angel of Death,
        that killed the butcher, that slew the ox, that drank the water,
        that quenched the fire, that burned the staff, that beat the
        dog, that bit the cat, that ate the kid, that my father bought
        for two pieces of money--A kid! a kid!"

Now for the interpretation--for it is a historical and a prophetic
nursery rhyme. The kid which Jehovah the father purchased denotes the
select Hebrew race; the two pieces of money represent Moses and Aaron;
the cat signifies the Assyrians, by whom the ten tribes were taken into
captivity; the dog is representative of the Babylonians; the staff
typifies the Persians; the fire is Alexander the Great at the head of
the Grecian Empire; the water the Roman domination over the Jews; the ox
the Saracens who subdued the Holy Land and brought it under the Caliph;
the butcher is a symbol of the Crusaders' slaughter; the Angel of Death
the Turkish power; the last stanza is to show that God will take
vengeance on the Turks when Israel will again become a fixed nation and
occupy Palestine. The Edomites (the Europeans) will combine and drive
out the Turks.

Everyone, big and little, will recognise the source of the nursery fable
of "The house that Jack built."

    "This is the house that Jack built.
    This is the malt that lay in the house that Jack built.
    This is the rat that ate the malt that lay in the house, etc.
    This is the cat that killed the rat that ate the malt, etc.
    This is the dog that worried the cat that killed the rat, etc.
    This is the cow with a crumpled horn that tossed the little dog over
        the barn, that worried the cat that killed the rat, etc.
    This is the maiden all forlorn that milked the cow with a crumpled
        horn, that tossed the little dog over the barn, etc.
    This is the man all tatters and torn, that kissed the maiden all
        forlorn, that milked the cow with a crumpled horn, etc.
    This is the priest all shaven and shorn, that married the man all
        tatters and torn to the maiden all forlorn, etc.
    This is the cock that crowed in the morn, that wakened the priest
        all shaven and shorn, that married the man, etc.
    This is the farmer sowing his corn, that fed the cock that crowed in
        the morn, that wakened the priest all shaven and shorn, that
        married the man all tatters and torn unto the maiden all
        forlorn, that milked the cow with a crumpled horn, that tossed
        the little dog over the barn, that worried the cat, that killed
        the rat, that ate the malt, that lay in the house that Jack
        built."

A Scotch and North of England nursery tale, two centuries old, is cast
in the same mould, or rather built on the hymn of the Hebrews found in
the Sepher Haggadah. It is given below.

    "There was an old woman swept her house and found a silver penny,
    And she went to market and bought a kid;
    But when she came to drive it home kid would not go.
    She went a little further and met a stick, and said to it,
    'Stick, stick, beat kid, kid won't go, 'tis a'most midnight, and
        hame I must go.'
    But the stick would not.
    She went a little further and met a fire.
    'Fire, fire, burn stick, stick won't beat kid, kid won't go, 'tis
        a'most midnight, and hame I must go.'
    But the fire would not.
    She went a little further and met with water.
    'Water, water, quench fire, fire won't burn stick,' etc.
    But the water would not.
    She went a little further and met an ox.
    'Ox, ox, drink water,' etc.
    She went a little further and met a butcher, etc.
    She went a little further and met a rope, etc.
    She went a little further and met some grease, etc.
    'Grease, grease, grease rope.'
    She went a little further and met a rat.
    'Rat, rat, eat grease,' etc.
    She went a little further and met a cat.
    'Cat, cat, kill rat,' etc.
    The cat began to bite the rat, the rat began to eat the grease, the
        grease began to grease the rope, the rope to hang the butcher,
        the butcher to kill the ox, the ox to drink the water, the water
        to quench the fire, the fire to burn the stick, the stick to
        beat the kid, and so the kid went home."

In other accounts of the same tale the kid is a pig, the silver penny a
crooked sixpence; the pig would not go over the stile, and the old woman
could not get her old man's supper ready.

The several prefigurations are not difficult to make out. Very many of
the babblings put into the mouths of English children are of foreign
origin; the story of "The Kid" was known in Leipsic and sung by German
children in 1731, very possibly coming in this way from the Jewish
colony.

In Denmark it is also a favourite with the school children.

The other Jewish rhyme, kept in remembrance by modern Jews, is printed
at the end of their Passover Service in English and in Hebrew.

ONE is known as the Chad Gadya. It is an arithmetical poem, and begins--

    "Who knoweth One?"

    "I know One, One is God, who is over heaven and earth!"

    "Who knoweth two?"

    "I know two, two tables of the Covenant, but One is God, who
        reigneth over heaven and earth!"

When the Latin of our churches was on the lips of everyone in the Middle
Ages, an adaptation of this childish creed was taught to little
Christians, beginning--

    "Unus est Deus,"

but with a Christian theme.




CHAPTER IV.


AN ANCIENT ENGLISH RHYME

From which came the well-known nursery tale of--

    "A frog, who would a-wooing go.
    Hey, oh! says Rowly.
    Whether his mother would let him or no,
    With a Rowly Powly Gammon and Spinach,
    Hey, oh! says Anthony Rowly."

In 1549 the Scottish shepherds sang a song, entitled "The frog that came
to the myl dur." In 1580 a later ballad, called "A most strange wedding
of a frog and a mouse," was licensed by the Stationers' Company. There
is a second version extant in _Pills to Purge Melancholy_.

The following was commonly sung in the early years of Henry VIII.'s
reign:--

    "It was a frog in the well, Humbledum, humbledum,
      And the merry mouse in the mill, Tweedle, tweedle, twino.
    The frog he would a-wooing ride, Humbledum, humbledum,
      Sword and buckler by his side, Tweedle, tweedle, twino.
    When upon his high horse set, Humbledum, humbledum,
      His boots they shone as black as jet, Tweedle, tweedle, twino.

    "Then he came to the merry mill-pin,
    Saying, 'Lady mouse, be you within?'
    Then out came the dusty mouse,
    Saying, 'I'm the lady of this house.'

    "'Hast thou any mind of me?' asked the gallant Sir Froggy.
    'I have e'en great mind of thee,' her ladyship replied.
    'Who shall make our marriage?' suggested the frog.
    'Our lord, the rat!' exclaimed the mouse.
    'What shall we have for supper?' the thoughtful frog exclaimed.
    'Barley, beans, and bread and butter!' generously replied Miss Mouse.
    But when the supper they were at,
    The frog, the mouse, and the rat,
    In came Gib, our cat,
    And caught the mouse by the back;
    Then did they separate.
    The frog leapt on the floor so flat,
    In came Dick, our drake,
    And drew the frog into the lake.
    The rat ran up the wall,
    And so the company parted all."

The rhyming tale of "The frog who would a-wooing go" is similar in every
way to the above.

In Japan one of the most notable fairy-tales relates a story of a
mouse's wedding.


SONGS OF LONDON BOYS IN TUDOR TIMES.

In the next two reigns, Edward VI. and Philip and Mary's, the musical
abilities of the London boy were carefully looked after and cultivated.
The ballads he sang recommended him to employers wanting apprentices.
Christ's Blue Coat School and Bridewell Seminary offered unusual
facilities for voice training. One happy illustration of the customs of
the sixteenth century was the habit of the barber-surgeon's boy, who
amused the customers, waiting for "next turn" to be shaved or bled, with
his ballad or rhyming verse; and a boy with a good voice proved a rare
draw to the "bloods" about town, and those who frequented the taverns
and ordinaries within the City.

In the next reign the condition of the poor was much improved; the
effect of the land sales in Henry VII.'s reign, when the moneyed
classes purchased two-thirds of the estates of the nobility, and spent
their amassed wealth in cultivating and improving the neglected lands.
This factor--as well as the cessation of the Wars of the Roses--was
beginning to work a lasting benefit to the poor, as the street cries of
1557 show, for, according to the register of the Stationers' Company
that year, a licence was granted to John Wallye and Mrs. Toye to print a
ballad, entitled--

      "Who lyve so mery and make such sporte
      As they that be of the poorest sort?"

    "Who liveth so merry in all the land
    As doth the poor widow who selleth the sand?
    And ever she singeth, as I can guess,
    'Will you buy my sand--any sand--mistress?'

                    _Chorus._

    "Who would desire a pleasanter thing
    Than all the day long to do nothing but sing?
    Who liveth so merry and maketh such sport
    As those who be of the poorer sort?"

Even Daniel De Foe, writing one hundred and twenty years after, paid a
passing tribute to Queen Elizabeth, and said "that the faint-hearted
economists of 1689 would show something worthy of themselves if they
employed the poor to the same glorious advantage as did Queen
Elizabeth."

Going back to the centuries prior to the Tudor period, one is reminded
that all the best efforts at minstrelsy--song, glee, or romance--came
from the northern counties, or from just on either side the borders.

The prevalence of a northern dialect in the compositions show this
suggestion to be in a great degree real. The poems of minstrelsy,
however, claim something more than dialect--the martial spirit, ever
fever-heat on the borders of the kingdoms of England and Scotland; the
age of chivalry furnishing the minstrel with the subject of his poem.

But with the strife of war ended, on Henry VII.'s accession, ballads
took the place of war-songs in the heart affections of the people, and
they sang songs of peace and contentment. Bard, scald, minstrel,
gleeman, with their heroic rhymes and long metrical romances, gave way
in the evolution of song and harmony to the ballad-monger with his
licence. However, in turn they became an intolerable nuisance, and a wag
wrote of them in 1740--

    "Of all sorts of wit he's most fond of a ballad,
    But asses choose thistles instead of a salad."

Another of the wayside songs of Henry VIII.'s time, sung by man, woman,
and child, ran--

    "Quoth John to Joan, Wilt thou have me?
    I prithee, now wilt? and I'se marry with thee
    My cow, my calf, my house, my rents,
    And all my land and tenements--
    Oh, say, my Joan, will that not do?
    I cannot come each day to woo.
    I've corn and hay in the barn hard by,
    And three fat hogs pent up in a sty;
    I have a mare, and she's coal black;
    I ride on her tail to save her back.
    I have cheese upon the shelf,
    And I cannot eat it all myself.
    I've three good marks that lie in a rag
    In the nook of the chimney instead of a bag."

The London surgeon-barber's boy pleased his master's patrons with a
whole host of similar extravagances, but he was not alone in the habit,
for so usual was it for the poorest of the poor to indulge in mirth,
that literary men of the day wrote against the practice.

In a black-letter book--a copy of which is in the British Museum, date
1560--and entitled, "The longer thou livest more fool thou art," W.
Wager, the author, says in the prologue--

    "Good parents in good manners do instruct their child,
    Correcting him when he beginneth to grow wild."

The subject matter of this book also gives a fair view of the customs
and habits of the boys of that age. In the character of Moros, a youth
enters the stage, "counterfeiting a vain gesture and foolish
countenance, singing the 'foote' or burden of many songs, as fools are
wont."

Amongst the many rhymes enumerated by Moros, which he claims were taught
to him by his mother, occur: "Broome on the hill," "Robin lend me thy
bow," "There was a maid came out of Kent," "Dainty love, dainty love,"
"Come o'er the bourne, Bessie," and

    "Tom a Lin, and his wife and his wife's mother,
      They all went over the bridge together;
    The bridge was broken and they fell in,
      'The devil go with all,' quoth Tom a Lin."

Another version, more particularly the Irish one, runs--

    "Bryan O'Lynn, and his wife and wife's mother,
    All went over the bridge together;
    The bridge was loose, they all fell in,
    'What a precious concern,' cried Bryan O'Lynn.

    "Bryan O'Lynn had no breeches to wear,
    So he got a sheep's skin to make him a pair."

This rhyme is evidently much older than the Tudor age, and one is
reminded of the time when cloth and woollen goods were not much used by
the lower classes. The Tzigane of Hungary to-day wears his sheep-skin
breeches, and hands them down to posterity, with a plentiful supply of
quick-silver and grease to keep them soft and clean. "Bye baby bunting"
and the little "hare skin" is the other nursery rhyme having a
reference to skins of animals being used for clothing. But "Baby
bunting" has no purpose to point to, unless indeed the habits of the
Esquimaux are taken in account. In the list of nursery songs sung by
children in Elizabeth's reign, the following extract from "The longer
thou livest the more foole thou art" gives four:--

    "I have twentie mo songs yet,
      A fond woman to my mother;
    As I war wont in her lappe to sit,
      She taught me these and many other.

    "I can sing a song of 'Robin Redbreast,'
      And 'My litle pretie Nightingale,'
    'There dwelleth a Jolly Fisher here by the west,'
      Also, 'I com to drink som of you Christmas ale.'

    "Whan I walke by myselfe alone,
      It doth me good my songs to render;
    Such pretie thinges would soone be gon
      If I should not sometime them remembre."

To get back again to the true nursery lyrics, one more marriage game of
this period is given, entitled--


