    "'_Big bird rob en little bird sing,
    De big bee zoon en little bee sting,
    De little man lead en big hoss foller--
    Kin you tell w'at's good fer a head in a holler?_'

"Ole Brer Fox scratch he head en study, en study en scratch he head, but
de mo' he study de wuss he git mix up wid de riddle, en atter w'ile he
tuck'n tell Brer Rabbit dat he dunno how in de name er goodness ter
onriddle dat riddle.

"'Come en go 'longer me,' sez ole Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'en I boun' you I
show you how ter read dat same riddle. Hit's one er dem ar kinder
riddle,' sez ole man Rabbit, sezee, 'w'ich 'fo' you read 'er you got ter
eat a bait er honey, en I done got my eye sot on de place whar we kin
git de honey at,' sezee.

"Brer Fox, he ax wharbouts is it, en Brer Rabbit, he say up dar in ole
Brer B'ar cotton-patch, whar he got a whole passel er bee-gums. Brer
Fox, he 'low, he did, dat he ain't got no sweet-toof much, yit he wanter
git at de innerds er dat ar riddle, en he don't keer ef he do go 'long.

"Dey put out, dey did, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' dey come ter ole Brer B'ar
bee-gums, en ole Brer Rabbit, he up'n gun um a rap wid he walkin'-cane,
des lak folks thumps water-millions fer ter see ef dey er ripe. He tap
en he rap, en bimeby he come ter one un um w'ich she soun' like she plum
full, en den he go 'roun' behime it, ole Brer Rabbit did, en he up'n
say, sezee:--

"'I'll des sorter tilt 'er up, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'en you kin put yo'
head und' dar en git some er de drippin's,' sezee.

"Brer Rabbit, he tilt her up, en, sho' 'nuff, Brer Fox, he jam he head
un'need de gum. Hit make me laugh," Uncle Remus continued, with a
chuckle, "fer ter see w'at a fresh man is Brer Fox, kaze he ain't no
sooner stuck he head un'need dat ar bee-gum, dan Brer Rabbit turnt 'er
aloose, en down she come--_ker-swosh!_--right on Brer Fox neck, en dar
he wuz. Brer Fox, he kick; he squeal; he jump; he squall; he dance; he
prance; he beg; he pray; yit dar he wuz, en w'en Brer Rabbit git way
off, en tu'n 'roun' fer ter look back, he see Brer Fox des a-wigglin' en
a-squ'min', en right den en dar Brer Rabbit gun one ole-time whoop, en
des put out fer home.

"W'en he git dar, de fus' man he see wuz Brer Fox gran'daddy, w'ich
folks all call 'im Gran'sir' Gray Fox. W'en Brer Rabbit see 'im, he say,
sezee:--

"'How you come on, Gran'sir' Gray Fox?'

"'I still keeps po'ly, I'm 'blije ter you, Brer Rabbit,' sez Gran'sir'
Gray Fox, sezee. 'Is you seed any sign er my gran'son dis mawnin'?'
sezee.

"Wid dat Brer Rabbit laugh en say w'ich him en Brer Fox bin a-ramblin'
'roun' wid one er'n'er havin' mo' fun dan w'at a man kin shake a stick
at.

"'We bin a-riggin' up riddles en a-readin' un um,' sez Brer Rabbit,
sezee. 'Brer Fox is settin' off some'rs in de bushes right now, aimin'
fer ter read one w'at I gun 'im. I'll des drap you one,' sez ole Brer
Rabbit, sezee, 'w'ich, ef you kin read it, hit'll take you right spang
ter whar yo' gran'son is, en you can't git dar none too soon,' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee.

    [Illustration: "BRER RABBIT TURNT 'ER ALOOSE, EN DOWN SHE
    COME--_KER-SWOSH!_"]

"Den ole Gran'sir' Gray Fox, he up'n ax w'at is it, en Brer Rabbit, he
sing out, he did:--

    "'_De big bird rob en little bird sing;
    De big bee zoon en little bee sting,
    De little man lead en big hoss foller--
    Kin you tell w'at's good fer a head in a holler?_'

"Gran'sir' Gray Fox, he tuck a pinch er snuff en cough easy ter hisse'f,
en study en study, but he ain't make it out, en Brer Rabbit, he laugh en
sing:--

    "'_Bee-gum mighty big fer ter make Fox collar,
    Kin you tell w'at's good fer a head in a holler?_'

"Atter so long a time, Gran'sir' Gray Fox sorter ketch a glimpse er w'at
Brer Rabbit tryin' ter gin 'im, en he tip Brer Rabbit good-day, en
shuffle on fer ter hunt up he gran'son."

"And did he find him, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Tooby sho', honey. Brer B'ar year de racket w'at Brer Fox kickin' up,
en he go down dar fer ter see w'at de marter is. Soon ez he see how de
lan' lay, co'se he tuck a notion dat Brer Fox bin robbin' de bee-gums,
en he got 'im a han'ful er hick'ries, Brer B'ar did, en he let in on
Brer Fox en he wom he jacket scannerlous, en den he tuck'n tu'n 'im
loose; but 't wa'n't long 'fo' all de neighbors git wud dat Brer Fox bin
robbin' Brer B'ar bee-gums."





[Illustration: How Mr. Rooster lost his Dinner]

XI

HOW MR. ROOSTER LOST HIS DINNER


It seemed that the rainy season had set in in earnest, but the little
boy went down to Uncle Remus's cabin before dark. In some mysterious
way, it appeared to the child, the gloom of twilight fastened itself
upon the dusky clouds, and the great trees without, and the dismal
perspective beyond, gradually became one with the darkness. Uncle Remus
had thoughtfully placed a tin pan under a leak in the roof, and the
_drip-drip-drip_ of the water, as it fell in the resonant vessel, made a
not unmusical accompaniment to the storm.

The old man fumbled around under his bed, and presently dragged forth a
large bag filled with lightwood knots, which, with an instinctive
economy in this particular direction, he had stored away for an
emergency. A bright but flickering flame was the result of this timely
discovery, and the effect it produced was quite in keeping with all the
surroundings. The rain, and wind, and darkness held sway without, while
within, the unsteady lightwood blaze seemed to rhyme with the
_drip-drip-drip_ in the pan. Sometimes the shadow of Uncle Remus, as he
leaned over the hearth, would tower and fill the cabin, and again it
would fade and disappear among the swaying and swinging cobwebs that
curtained the rafters.

"W'en bed-time come, honey," said Uncle Remus, in a soothing tone, "I'll
des snatch down yo' pa buggy umbrell' fum up dar in de cornder, des lak
I bin a-doin', en I'll take'n take you und' my arm en set you down on
Miss Sally h'a'th des ez dry en ez wom ez a rat'-nes' inside a
fodder-stack."

At this juncture 'Tildy, the house-girl, rushed in out of the rain and
darkness with a water-proof cloak and an umbrella, and announced her
mission to the little boy without taking time to catch her breath.

"Miss Sally say you got ter come right back," she exclaimed. "Kaze she
skeerd lightin' gwine strak 'roun' in yer 'mongs' deze high trees
some'rs."

Uncle Remus rose from his stooping posture in front of the hearth and
assumed a threatening attitude.

"Well, is anybody year de beat er dat!" was his indignant exclamation.
"Look yer, gal! don't you come foolin' 'longer me--now, don't you do it.
Kaze ef yer does, I'll take'n hit you a clip w'at'll put you ter bed
'fo' bed-times come. Dat's w'at!"

"Lawdy! w'at I done gone en done ter Unk' Remus now?" asked 'Tildy, with
a great affectation of innocent ignorance.

"I'm gwine ter put on my coat en take dat ar umbrell', en I'm gwine
right straight up ter de big house en ax Miss Sally ef she sont dat
kinder wud down yer, w'en she know dat chile sittin' yer 'longer me. I'm
gwine ter ax her," continued Uncle Remus, "en if she ain't sont dat wud,
den I'm gwine ter fetch myse'f back. Now, you des watch my motions."

"Well, I year Miss Sally say she 'feard lightnin' gwine ter strak
some'rs on de place," said 'Tildy, in a tone which manifested her
willingness to compromise all differences, "en den I axt 'er kin I come
down yer, en den she say I better bring deze yer cloak en pairsol."

"Now you dun brung um," responded Uncle Remus, "you des better put um in
dat cheer over dar, en take yo'se'f off. Thunder mighty ap' ter hit
close ter whar deze here slick-head niggers is."

But the little boy finally prevailed upon the old man to allow 'Tildy to
remain, and after a while he put matters on a peace footing by inquiring
if roosters crowed at night when it was raining.

"Dat dey duz," responded Uncle Remus. "Wet er dry, dey flops der wings
en wakes up all de neighbors. Law, bless my soul!" he exclaimed
suddenly, "w'at make I done gone en fergit 'bout Mr. Rooster?"

"What about him?" inquired the little boy.

"One time, 'way back yander," said Uncle Remus, knocking the ashes off
his hands and knees, "dey wuz two plan'ations right 'longside one er
'ne'r, en on bofe er deze plan'ations wuz a whole passel of fowls. Dey
wuz mighty sociable in dem days, en it tu'n out dat de fowls on one
plan'ation gun a party, w'ich dey sont out der invites ter de fowls on
de 't'er plan'ation.

"W'en de day come, Mr. Rooster, he blow his hawn, he did, en 'semble um
all tergedder, en atter dey 'semble dey got in line. Mr. Rooster, he
tuck de head, en atter 'im come ole lady Hen en Miss Pullet, en den dar
wuz Mr. Peafowl, en Mr. Tukkey Gobbler, en Miss Guinny Hen, en Miss
Puddle Duck, en all de balance un um. Dey start off sorter raggedy, but
't wa'n't long 'fo' dey all kotch de step, en den dey march down by de
spring, up thoo de hoss-lot en 'cross by de gin-house, en 't wa'n't long
'fo' dey git ter whar de frolic wuz.

"'Dey dance, en dey play, en dey sing. Mo' 'speshually did dey play en
sing dat ar song w'ich it run on lak dis:--

    "'_Come under, come under,
    My honey, my love, my own true love;
    My heart bin a-weepin'
    Way down in Galilee._'

"Dey wuz gwine on dis a-way, havin' der 'musements, w'en, bimeby, ole
Mr. Peafowl, he got on de comb er de barn en blow de dinner-hawn. Dey
all wash der face en ban's in de back po'ch, en den dey went in ter
dinner. W'en dey git in dar, dey don't see nothin' on de table but a
great big pile er co'n-bread. De pones was pile up on pones, en on de
top wuz a great big ash-cake. Mr. Rooster, he look at dis en he tu'n up
he nose, en bimeby, atter aw'ile, out he strut. Ole Miss Guinny Hen, she
watchin' Mr. Rooster motions, en w'en she see dis, she take'n squall
out, she did:--

"_'Pot-rack! Pot-rack!_ Mr. Rooster gone back! _Pot-rack! Pot-rack!_ Mr.
Rooster gone back!'

"Wid dat dey all make a great ter-do. Miss Hen en Miss Pullet, dey
cackle en squall, Mr. Gobbler, he gobble, en Miss Puddle Duck, she shake
'er tail en say, _quickity-quack-quack_. But Mr. Rooster, he ruffle up
he cape, en march on out.

"Dis sorter put a damper on de yuthers, but 'fo' Mr. Rooster git outer
sight en year'n dey went ter wuk on de pile w'at wuz 'pariently
co'n-bread, en, lo en beholes, un'need dem pone er bread wuz a whole
passel er meat en greens, en bake' taters, en bile' turnips. Mr.
Rooster, he year de ladies makin' great 'miration, en he stop en look
thoo de crack, en dar he see all de doin's en fixin's. He feel mighty
bad, Mr. Rooster did, w'en he see all dis, en de yuther fowls dey holler
en ax 'im fer ter come back, en he craw, w'ich it mighty empty,
likewise, it up'n ax 'im, but he mighty biggity en stuck up, en he strut
off, crowin' ez he go; but he 'speunce er dat time done las' him en all
er his fambly down ter dis day. En you neenter take my wud fer't, ne'r,
kaze ef you'll des keep yo' eye open en watch, you'll ketch a glimse er
ole Mr. Rooster folks scratchin' whar dey 'specks ter fine der rations,
en mo' dan dat, dey'll scratch wid der rations in plain sight. Since dat
time, dey ain't none er de Mr. Roosters bin fool' by dat w'at dey see on
top. Dey ain't res' twel dey see w'at und' dar. Dey'll scratch spite er
all creation."

"Dat's de Lord's truth!" said 'Tildy, with unction. "I done seed um wid
my own eyes. Dat I is."

This was 'Tildy's method of renewing peaceful relations with Uncle
Remus, but the old man was disposed to resist the attempt.

"You better be up yander washin' up dishes, stidder hoppin' down yer wid
er whole packet er stuff w'at Miss Sally ain't dreamp er sayin'."




XII

BRER RABBIT BREAKS UP A PARTY


As long as Uncle Remus allowed 'Tildy to remain in the cabin, the little
boy was not particularly interested in preventing the perfunctory abuse
which the old man might feel disposed to bestow upon the complacent
girl. The truth is, the child's mind was occupied with the episode in
the story of Mr. Benjamin Ram which treats of the style in which this
romantic old wag put Mr. and Mrs. Wolf to flight by playing a tune upon
his fiddle. The little boy was particularly struck with this remarkable
feat, as many a youngster before him had been, and he made bold to recur
to it again by asking Uncle Remus for all the details. It was plain to
the latter that the child regarded Mr. Ram as the typical hero of all
the animals, and this was by no means gratifying to the old man. He
answered the little boy's questions as well as he could, and, when
nothing more remained to be said about Mr. Ram, he settled himself back
in his chair and resumed the curious history of Brother Rabbit:--

"Co'se Mr. Ram mighty smart man. I ain't 'spute dat; but needer Mr. Ram
ner yet Mr. Lam is soon creeturs lak Brer Rabbit. Mr. Benjermun Ram, he
tuck'n skeer off Brer Wolf en his ole 'oman wid his fiddle, but, bless
yo' soul, ole Brer Rabbit he gone en done wuss'n dat."

"What did Brother Rabbit do?" asked the little boy.

"One time," said Uncle Remus, "Brer Fox, he tuck'n ax some er de yuther
creeturs ter he house. He ax Brer B'ar, en Brer Wolf, en Brer 'Coon, but
he ain't ax Brer Rabbit. All de same, Brer Rabbit got win' un it, en he
'low dat ef he don't go, he 'speck he have much fun ez de nex' man.

"De creeturs w'at git de invite, dey tuck'n 'semble at Brer Fox house,
en Brer Fox, he ax um in en got um cheers, en dey sot dar en laugh en
talk, twel, bimeby, Brer Fox, he fotch out a bottle er dram en lay 'er
out on de side-bode, en den he sorter step back en say, sezee:--

"'Des step up, gentermens, en he'p yo'se'f,' en you better b'lieve dey
he'p derse'f.

"Wiles dey wuz drinkin' en drammin' en gwine on, w'at you 'speck Brer
Rabbit doin'? You des well make up yo' min' dat Brer Rabbit monst'us
busy, kaze he 'uz sailin' 'roun' fixin' up his tricks. Long time 'fo'
dat, Brer Rabbit had been at a bobbycue whar dey was a muster, en w'iles
all de folks 'uz down at de spring eatin' dinner, Brer Rabbit he crope
up en run off wid one er de drums. Dey wuz a big drum en a little drum,
en Brer Rabbit he snatch up de littles' one en run home.

"Now, den, w'en he year 'bout de yuther creeturs gwine ter Brer Fox
house, w'at do Brer Rabbit do but git out dis rattlin' drum en make de
way down de road todes whar dey is. He tuk dat drum," continued Uncle
Remus, with great elation of voice and manner, "en he went down de road
todes Brer Fox house, en he make 'er talk like thunner mix up wid hail.
Hit talk lak dis:--

"'_Diddybum, diddybum, diddybum-bum-bum--diddybum!_'

"De creeturs, dey 'uz a-drinkin', en a-drammin', en a-gwine on at a
terrible rate, en dey ain't year de racket, but all de same, yer come
Brer Rabbit:--

"'_Diddybum, diddybum, diddybum-bum-bum--diddybum!_'

"Bimeby Brer 'Coon, w'ich he allers got one year hung out fer de news,
he up'n ax Brer Fox w'at dat, en by dat time all de creeturs stop en
lissen; but all de same, yer come Brer Rabbit:--

"'_Diddybum, diddybum, diddybum-bum-bum--diddybum!_'

"De creeturs dey keep on lis'nin', en Brer Rabbit keep on gittin'
nigher, twel bimeby Brer 'Coon retch und' de cheer fer he hat, en say,
sezee:--

"'Well, gents, I 'speck I better be gwine. I tole my ole 'oman dat I
won't be gone a minnit, en yer 't is 'way 'long in de day.'

"Wid dat Brer 'Coon, he skip out, but he ain't git much furder dan de
back gate, 'fo' yer come all de yuther creeturs like dey 'uz runnin' a
foot-race, en ole Brer Fox wuz wukkin' in de lead."

"Dar, now!" exclaimed 'Tildy, with great fervor.

"Yasser! dar dey wuz, en dar dey went," continued Uncle Remus. "Dey tuck
nigh cuts, en dey scramble over one er 'n'er, en dey ain't res' twel dey
git in de bushes.

"Ole Brer Rabbit, he came on down de road--_diddybum, diddybum,
diddybum-bum-bum_--en bless gracious! w'en he git ter Brer Fox house dey
ain't nobody dar. Brer Rabbit is dat ow-dacious, dat he hunt all 'roun'
twel he fine de a'r-hole en de drum, en he put his mouf ter dat en sing
out, sezee:--

"'Is dey anybody home?' en den he answer hisse'f, sezee, 'Law, no,
honey--folks all gone.'

"Wid dat, ole Brer Rabbit break loose en laugh, he did, fit ter kill
hisse'f, en den he slam Brer Fox front gate wide open, en march up ter
de house. W'en he git dar, he kick de do' open en hail Brer Fox, but
nobody ain't dar, en Brer Rabbit he walk in en take a cheer, en make
hisse'f at home wid puttin' his foots on de sofy en spittin' on de flo'.

"Brer Rabbit ain't sot dar long 'fo' he ketch a whiff er de dram--"

"You year dat?" exclaimed 'Tildy, with convulsive admiration.

"--'Fo' he ketch a whiff er de dram, en den he see it on de side-bode,
en he step up en drap 'bout a tumbeler full some'rs down in de
neighborhoods er de goozle. Brer Rabbit mighty lak some folks I knows.
He tuck one tumbeler full, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he tuck 'n'er'n, en
w'en a man do dis a-way," continued Uncle Remus, somewhat
apologetically, "he bleedz ter git drammy."

"Truth, too!" said 'Tildy, by way of hearty confirmation.

"All des time de yuther creeturs wuz down hi de bushes lissenin' fer de
_diddybum_, en makin' ready fer ter light out fum dar at de drop uv a
hat. But dey ain't year no mo' fuss, en bimeby Brer Fox, he say he gwine
back en look atter he plunder, en de yuther creeturs say dey b'leeve
dey'll go 'long wid 'im. Dey start out, dey did, en dey crope todes Brer
Fox house, but dey crope mighty keerful, en I boun' ef somebody'd 'a'
shuck a bush, dem ar creeturs 'ud 'a' nat'ally to' up de ye'th gittin'
'way fum dar. Yit dey still ain't year no fuss, en dey keep on creepin'
twel dey git in de house.

"W'en dey git in dar, de fus' sight dey see wuz ole Brer Rabbit stannin'
up by de dram-bottle mixin' up a toddy, en he wa'n't so stiff-kneed
n'er, kase he sorter swage fum side ter side, en he look lak he mighty
limbersome, w'ich, goodness knows, a man bleedz ter be limbersome w'en
he drink dat kinder licker w'at Brer Fox perwide fer dem creeturs.

"W'en Brer Fox see Brer Rabbit makin' free wid he doin's dat a-way, w'at
you 'speck he do?" inquired Uncle Remus, with the air of one seeking
general information.

"I 'speck he cusst," said 'Tildy, who was apt to take a vividly
practical view of matters.

"He was glad," said the little boy, "because he had a good chance to
catch Brother Rabbit."

"Tooby sho' he wuz," continued Uncle Remus, heartily assenting to the
child's interpretation of the situation: "tooby sho' he wuz. He stan'
dar, Brer Fox did, en he watch Brer Rabbit motions. Bimeby he holler
out, sezee:--

"'Ah yi![13] Brer Rabbit!' sezee. 'Many a time is you made yo' 'scape,
but now I got you!' En wid dat, Brer Fox en de yuther creeturs cloze in
on Brer Rabbit.

"Seem like I done tole you dat Brer Rabbit done gone en tuck mo' dram
dan w'at 'uz good fer he wholesome. Yit he head ain't swim so bad dat he
dunner w'at he doin', en time he lay eyes on Brer Fox, he know he done
got in close quarters. Soon ez he see dis, Brer Rabbit make like he bin
down in de cup mo' deeper dan w'at he is, en he stagger 'roun' like town
gal stannin' in a batteau, en he seem lak he des ez limber ez a wet rag.
He stagger up ter Brer Fox, he did, en he roll he eyeballs 'roun', en
slap 'im on he back en ax 'im how he ma. Den w'en he see de yuther
creeturs," continued Uncle Remus, "he holler out, he did:--

"'Vents yo' uppance, gentermens! Vents yo' uppance![14] Ef you'll des
gimme han'-roomance en come one at a time, de tussle 'll las' longer.
How you all come on, nohow?' sezee.

"Ole Brer Rabbit talk so kuse dat de yuther creeturs have mo' fun dan
w'at you k'n shake a stick at, but bimeby Brer Fox say dey better git
down ter business, en den dey all cloze in on Brer Rabbit, en dar he
wuz.

"In dem days, ole man B'ar wuz a jedge 'mongs' de creeturs, en dey all
ax 'im w'at dey gwine do 'long wid Brer Rabbit, en Jedge B'ar, he put on
his specks, en cle'r up his th'oat, en say dat de bes' way ter do wid a
man w'at kick up sech a racket, en run de neighbors outer der own house,
en go in dar en level[15] on de pantry, is ter take 'im out en drown 'im;
en ole Brer Fox, w'ich he settin' on de jury, he up'n smack he hands
togedder, en cry, en say, sezee, dat atter dis he bleedz ter b'leeve dat
Jedge B'ar done got all-under holt on de lawyer-books, kaze dat 'zackly
w'at dey say w'en a man level on he neighbor pantry.

"Den Brer Rabbit, he make out he skeerd, en he holler en cry, en beg um,
in de name er goodness, don't fling 'im in de spring branch, kaze dey
all know he dunner how ter swim: but ef dey bleedz fer ter pitch 'im in,
den for mussy sake gin' 'im a walkin'-cane, so he kin have sumpin' ter
hol' ter w'iles he drownin'.

"Ole Brer B'ar scratch his head en say, sezee, dat, fur ez his
'membunce go back, he ain't come 'cross nothin' in de lawyer-book ter
de contraries er dat, en den dey all 'gree dat Brer Rabbit kin have a
walkin'-cane.

"Wid dat, dey ketch up Brer Rabbit en put 'im in a wheelborrow en kyar
'im down ter de branch, en fling 'im in."

"Eh-eh!" exclaimed 'Tildy, with well-feigned astonishment.

"Dey fling 'im in," continued Uncle Remus, "en Brer Rabbit light on he
foots, same ez a tomcat, en pick his way out by de helps er de
walkin'-cane. De water wuz dat shaller dat it don't mo'n come over Brer
Rabbit slipper, en w'en he git out on t'er side, he holler back,
