"Turn back to Captain Russell's cabin and ask him for the farm tools he
and I were talking about," he told the boy. "You can catch up with us
tomorrow."

James reached Captain Russell's safely. He camped that night with
several men who planned to join Boone. In the darkness some Indians
crept up and killed them all.

When the families with Boone heard the news, they no longer wanted to
go to Kentucky. They turned and went back over the mountains. The Boone
family was sad because of James' death. But Daniel would not give up
his dream of living in Kentucky. It would just have to wait a little.
He took his wife and children to a spot where they would be safe. But
they did not go all the way back to the Yadkin Valley.

Daniel learned that all through the Kentucky Wilderness the Indians
were fighting the white men.

Too many white men were coming west. Indians wanted to keep their
hunting grounds for themselves. Daniel Boone and another man went into
Kentucky to warn the surveyors who were measuring land there. Nearly
all of them escaped safely. For a time, the Indians stopped fighting
and Kentucky was peaceful again.




The Wilderness Road


Now a rich man named Richard Henderson had a big idea. He would try to
buy Kentucky from the Indians for himself and start another colony. His
own company would sell land to settlers. Henderson was Daniel's friend.
Boone had talked to the Indians about the idea and thought they would
sell the land. Many Indian tribes hunted in Kentucky, but the Cherokees
were the most important. They had conquered the other tribes and ruled
the land. Henderson sent Boone to ask the Cherokees to meet him at
Sycamore Shoals in what is now Tennessee.

Twelve hundred Indian men, women, and children came to the meeting
place. Henderson had all his trading goods spread out. There were yards
and yards of red cloth. There were hundreds of bright new guns. There
were beads and pins and little mirrors for the women. Henderson's
company had paid a great deal of money for the trading goods.

The Indians were like children about the business of trading land for
goods. They loved the bright-colored trinkets. But they knew nothing
about the value of land.

Although they had their own lawyer, they traded Kentucky to Henderson
for a tiny part of what it was worth. The Cherokees warned the white
men of savage Indians who came hunting from the west and the north.
They told Henderson he might have trouble settling the land.

Boone did not go with Henderson to Sycamore Shoals. He waited near
Cumberland Gap with thirty men. When Henderson sent word that he had
bought Kentucky, Boone spoke one word to his men.

"Start!" he said.

The men began to make the famous Wilderness Road that was to lead to
Kentucky. Later it would be traveled by settlers with their horses,
wagons, and cattle. Just now Boone's men chose the shortest and easiest
way over the mountains and through the woods. They followed Indian
trails and buffalo paths. They swung their axes. They cut down trees.
They crossed streams. Daniel Boone worked as hard as anyone. And all
the time he kept a sharp lookout for unfriendly Indians.

The men did not stop until they reached the banks of the Kentucky
River. Here they began to build a fort. Boone knew that the Shawnees
and other Indian tribes would not admit that Henderson had bought
Kentucky.

When Henderson came to the settlement, he said, "We will call this
place Boonesborough. It is right to name it for the man who led us
here."

Boone went back to get his family. Some of his children had grown up
and married before the Boones set out for Kentucky the first time.
Thirteen-year-old Jemima was his last unmarried daughter. She and her
mother were the first white women to stand on the bank of the Kentucky
River.




The Rescue


One Sunday afternoon, Jemima and two other girls went for a canoe ride
on the Kentucky River at Boonesborough. They knew they should not go
out of sight of the fort, but they went anyway. They paddled down the
river and around the bend. The current drew them in to the opposite
bank.

"Let's land and pick some of those bright-colored flowers," one of the
girls suggested.

Jemima shook her head. "I'm afraid of the Indians," she said. "Those
Shawnees are mean."

By now the canoe had drifted near the shore. The girl at the bow shoved
with her paddle. The boat would not move. It was stuck fast in the mud.

All at once five Indians leaped from the underbrush. They grabbed the
screaming girls and carried them into the forest. They planned to take
them north to the Indian towns and keep them there as slaves.

Back at the fort no one missed the girls until after dark. Then someone
saw that the canoe was gone. When Daniel Boone heard this, he picked up
his gun and rushed toward the river. He did not stop to put on his
shoes.

He felt sure that Indians had taken Jemima and her friends away.

Three young men who loved the girls very much went with Boone. The men
took another canoe and began to paddle down the river. They could not
go far in the dark. Before long, they had to stop and wait for morning.

When the sun came up, Boone found the girls' trail. He thought the
