
Donald's eyes opened wider and wider.

"I'd like to see a bear," cried he. "Just see him, you know--not have
him hurt the sheep."

"Mayhap you'll get your wish."

Thus--now talking, now lapsing into big, silent pauses, Donald and Sandy
jogged on. At sundown they stopped for the night near a water-hole and
here the flock was refreshed by a draught from a clear mountain stream.
Then Sandy unpacked his saucepans, built a fire, and fried bacon which
he laid--smoking hot--between two slices of bread. Was ever a meal so
delicious, Donald wondered! Supper finished, the little portable tent
was set up, more wood heaped on the fire, and the camp pitched for the
night. Donald was tired out. After the sheep were bedded down around
them, he crept only too gladly into his sleeping-bag and was soon
oblivious of the range, the herd, and even Sandy himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

When he awoke it was with a sense of being cramped within a small space.
He opened his eyes. It took him a few moments to collect his wits and
remember where he was. Ah, yes! Here was the little low tent over his
head, and just outside blinked the embers of the fire where he and Sandy
had cooked their supper.

[Illustration: THEY STOPPED FOR THE NIGHT]

He sat up softly and peered out into the night.

The country was flooded with moonlight in the brilliancy of which the
ridges of the far-off hills stood out clearly; even the pool in the
midst of the pasture caught the radiance and gleamed like a mirror. But
amid all the beauty a subtle feeling of solitude oppressed him. It
seemed as if he was the only being in the whole world.

Further out he leaned.

Then he started suddenly.

All that great sea of human creatures that had surrounded him when he
went to sleep had vanished!

Not a sheep was to be seen.

Thoroughly alarmed, he turned.

"Sandy!" he called. "Sandy!"

There was no reply.

With growing apprehension he thrust out his hand in the direction where
the herder had been lying.

The chill of the cold earth met his touch.

Terrified he sprang to his feet and bent down in the darkness.

There was no one with him in the tent! Sandy and the herd were gone!

For a while Donald stood very still. He was really alone, then--alone,
miles from the home ranch, and not knowing the way back again! This was
his first thought. The next was of Sandy.

All that Thornton had hinted flashed into his mind. Sandy was not to be
trusted, Thornton had told his father. If they placed any dependence on
the young Scotchman they would some time regret it.

Had Sandy deceived him?

What possible object could he have, Donald asked himself, in so quietly
departing with the sheep and leaving him behind?

At least he had left the tent.

Had he taken the food and rifles with him?

With beating heart Donald scrambled for his match-box and made a light.

No, there was the knapsack of provisions, the saucepan, the coffee-pot!
In the corner, too, stood his own rifle. But Sandy's rifle was missing.

Donald reflected a moment.

Sandy must be coming back. Ah, that was it! But where had he gone? Why
should he rise up in the middle of the night, take the flock and dogs,
and steal off in this noiseless fashion? The boy could not solve the
enigma.

For the present, at least, there was nothing to be done. He glanced at
his watch. It was three o'clock. He turned into his sleeping-bag again,
having first taken the precaution to put his rifle within easy reach.
Yet try as he would he could not sleep. His eyes stared, broad awake, at
the shadowy dome of the tent. He wished it was day.

As he lay there straining his ears for the cadence of approaching
herd-bells he was conscious of a muffled sound--a dull, soft footfall,
as if some one was loitering stealthily about the tent. He heard it
again. Then he could distinctly hear a sniffing at the corner of the
tent near which the provisions lay.

Donald's heart leaped to his throat.

He could feel the blood pounding under his ears.

Who was coming so near with that velvety tread?

Noiselessly he wriggled out of his sleeping-bag and stood behind the
flap of the tent, rifle in hand. Then he heard the unmistakable panting
of some heavy creature--some creature so close to him that he could
detect the rhythm of every breath it drew. Shaking in every limb he
stole a look outside. Just beside the opening of his shelter he could
see, clearly defined in the moonlight, a thick, dark shadow outlined on
the grass. It was cast by some beast that was halting near the doorway.

In another second it would be upon him.

The boy caught his breath.

There was no time to think.

Raising his rifle, he fired at the great dark mass. Again he fired!

Had he struck the mark?

Another instant would tell.

The creature would either roll over wounded, or would spring upon him.

He jammed back the trigger of his rifle. The tremor that had swept over
him at first now left his hand. His arm was perfectly steady, his blood
swinging in quick throbs through his body. He fired a third time.

There was a heavy thud, the rolling of a black mass on the ground, a
gasp, a growl! Then all was quiet.

Still Donald dared not take any chances. He poured another round of shot
into his victim. It did not move.

Then cautiously he crept outside, his rifle tight in his grasp.

There on the ground a shaggy object lay motionless.

He went nearer.

Then he gave a shout of astonishment.

It was a bear!

He had shot a bear--he, Donald Clark, alone and unaided, had really shot
a bear! What a story to tell his father; and Sandy, too; and the fellows
at home!

Then, for the first time, he was conscious of a trembling in his arms.
His knees felt strangely weak. Now that the excitement was over he
realized that he wanted to sit down. His rifle slipped from his fingers
and he dropped to the turf. There he rested in a dazed sort of way and
reviewed the tragedy. Suppose he had not been awake? Suppose the bear
had come into the tent while he lay there asleep and unarmed? In his
heart he felt very grateful for his escape.

Then there followed a disquieting thought--suppose there were other
bears! He had often read of their coming in groups of fives and sixes.
It was no time for him to sit limply on the ground. He caught up his
rifle and recharged its empty chambers. Then before the tent door he sat
until sunrise, anxiously scanning the dim pasture-land and the distant
rocky fastnesses. It seemed as if the day would never come.

Presently across the intervale he caught the faint tinkle of herd-bells.
Over the brim of rolling green just ahead of him came the flock, Sandy
leading them, and the collies nipping at their heels. The herder strode
rapidly forward, waving his sombrero as he came. Donald ran to meet
him.

"Are you safe and sound, laddie?" called Sandy when he got within
shouting distance. "I have had a thousand minds about you--whether I
ought not to have waked you, tired as you were, and taken you with me;
or whether it was better to let you sleep. You see when the full moon
rose the sheep set out grazing. It's a trick they have. Many a time they
have done it; when they once set out no power on earth will stop them.
So the dogs and I had to go along too. I reckoned you would sleep until
we got back. The herd went farther, though, than I thought they would. I
had great trouble rounding them up."

As he talked they neared the camp where Sandy's keen eye took in at a
glance every detail of the scene before him. Then he looked sharply at
Donald. Under the thick tan the boy could see him pale. His lips became
livid.

"Donald, lad, you are not hurt?" he cried, motioning to the bear that
lay stretched on the grass.

"No, Sandy, not a bit. Truly I'm not. See! Isn't he a big one?"

"He is many a size too big for a boy like you to be fighting alone. I
was a blind idiot to leave you behind me. Thank the good Lord you got
off without a scratch. When I think of what might have come to you----!
The next time I'll no go grazing without you, Don. But who would have
thought of a bear venturing into these lowlands! He must have been very
hungry."

Later Donald had to relate every part of his adventure, and they skinned
the black bear and spread his hide out in the sun.

"His coat is thicker than that of most bears at this season of the year.
It will make a bonny rug for your father's office, Don. When the
camp-tender comes we will send it back by him to the home ranch.
Thornton can get it cured for you at Glen City and it will be a sightly
present for your father. You are a son worth having!"

"I want to be, Sandy."

"Dinna bother your head. I've seen full a dozen lads worse than you!"
was the grim reply.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

A NARROW ESCAPE


It was not long before Donald felt almost as at home in the hill country
as did Sandy himself. They pitched camp and stayed in one place until
the grazing began to get scarce; then they "pulled up" and tramped on.
Sandy knew the region well and was therefore seldom at a loss to find
water-holes. During the night they watched the flock, and as soon as the
herd had fed in the morning and was ready to come to rest they left the
dogs on guard and slept. Donald usually slept soundly, for the fresh air
and exercise kept him in perfect health. Sandy, on the other hand,
slept with one eye open--or one ear open--the boy could never quite
decide which it was. But the result was the same; by some mysterious
means Sandy was always conscious of every move of his flock.

Donald never tired of watching the young Scotchman. What a picture he
was in his flannel blouse, open at the throat; his baggy trousers and
sheepskin belt; his sombrero with its band of Mexican leather; and the
field-glasses slung over his shoulder! From these glasses, his rifle,
and his crook he was seldom parted. His great knuckles, broad from the
grasp of his staff, were like iron; and his lithe, wiry body was never
weary. And yet with all his strength Sandy was the gentlest of men with
his sheep.

To his dogs he was a god! Still, with all their devotion, the collies
evidently understood that the sheep were their first care and they never
deserted their watch to accompany Sandy when he went on a hunt for
water-holes or more abundant feeding grounds. They were wonderfully
intelligent animals--these collies. Donald constantly marveled at their
cleverness. They were quick in singling out the slow or wayward sheep
and would bite their heels to hurry them along. They also recognized the
leaders and it was to them that they communicated the directions Sandy
gave them. Yet Sandy seldom spoke to his dogs. A motion of his arm and
they would spring forward and follow out his wish. Only when he
commanded it did they bark. With their drooping, bushy tails and sharp
noses they reminded Donald far more of wolves than dogs. Sandy was kind
to all of them, but it was Robin and Prince Charlie of which he was most
fond. They had been bred from dogs his father had brought from the Old
Country, he explained to Donald. There were few persons in the world for
whom he cared so much. Once when Robin had been lost on the range the
herder had traveled the hills three whole days to find him.

"What makes shepherd dogs so different from other dogs, Sandy?" asked
Donald one day.

"Some of it is in their blood. They seem to want to herd sheep--they
can't help it. Then some of the credit of a fine sheep dog is due to
his training. Why, I was months working over Robin and the Prince. I had
them with goats and sheep from the time they were born. As soon as they
were big enough I began teaching them to come when I called 'em. A good
dog has got to learn to come to you when you speak. If he has done wrong
he has got to come and be punished. Some dogs will run away when they
see that you have caught them doing the wrong thing. You cannot let a
sheep dog do that."

"But how do you train them so they won't?"

"I will tell you. It seems a heartless sort of way, but I had to do it.
I tied them with a long piece of rope; then I called them. As soon as
they came I spanked them good and hard, and afterward I'd pat them and
give them a scrap of meat. They understood in time. They would come
anyway--sure thing. If I whacked 'em it was all the same to them. By and
by when they got so they would mind, I didn't have to whack 'em, and now
it is seldom I lay hand to 'em. It was no pleasure to me, I can tell
you, and I quit it just as soon as I felt sure they would walk up like
gentlemen whenever I spoke, no matter if they knew beforehand that they
were to be whipped. You can see why this had to be, Don. Of course you
know such dogs have the nature of wolves. In fact the better the
shepherd dog, the more like a wolf he is. Now a wolf is a born enemy of
sheep. Sometimes the wolf in a shepherd dog will get the better of him
and he will turn about and kill the lambs instead of guarding them. If a
sheep-dog is once a killer he has to die. You can never be sure of him
again. So you cannot turn a dog loose on the range unless he will come
to you when you speak."

"I suppose he might start killing sheep and you would not be able to get
control of him," ventured Donald, much interested.

"That is just it! He must come even if he knows he is to be shot the
next minute. There is no safety for the sheep unless it is so. My dogs
would come to me willy-nilly."

"Isn't it wonderful?"

"Yes, unless you have been months and months, as I was, getting them to
do it; and even then it is rather wonderful. But a thing quite as
wonderful as that is that they know every sheep in the flock. Let a ewe
from another fold come in and they will scent her quick as lightning.
And there is something else they will do: they understand well as
ourselves that sheep will walk right over ledges and into pits, one
after another; so the collies will stand guard at the edges of such
places and warn 'em off. What is that but human, I ask you?"

Donald nodded.

"The men down at Crescent say," went on Sandy smiling broadly, "that I
am daffy about dogs--my own dogs most of all. Well, haven't I cause?
There is not a shepherd in this part of the country but would swap his
collies for mine; or they'd buy them. I've been offered many a dollar
for the two. But I'm no swapping my dogs, nor selling them, either!
Sometimes, you know, we fat up sheep for the market and sell them as
muttons. We then have to get the sheep into cars to send them off and it
is no so easy if they haven't the mind to go. Well, you should see
Robin and the Prince at the job. They will run right along the backs of
the herd, biting the necks of the leaders until they get them aimed
where they want 'em to go; then they'll nip the heels of the others till
they march up the planks into the cars neat as a line of soldiers. Or
they will drive a flock onto a boat the same way. It is a great thing to
get dogs that can do that. It takes more wit than a man has. Once a
sheep-raiser from California saw Robin down at Glen City getting a lot
of sheep off to Chicago on the train and he was hot for having him. He
offered me into the hundreds if I would let him take the collie back
with him."

"And you wouldn't sell?"

"The money ain't coined would tempt me to part with either of my dogs!"
Sandy replied, with a contented shake of his head.

He did not speak again, but lapsed into a thoughtful silence.

There were many of these long silences during those days on the hills
and to his surprise Donald had come to enjoy them. At first he had
looked forward eagerly to the coming of the camp-tender, who made his
rounds three times a week. Not only did this Mexican bring fresh-baked
bread, cold meat, and condensed milk to add to the campers' stock of
salt pork, lentils, and coffee, but he brought messages from the outside
world; gossip from the other herders; and now and then a letter from
Donald's father. These visits were as exciting as to meet an ocean liner
at sea. Gradually, however, Donald looked forward less and less to
seeing the tiny Mexican burros with their loaded paniers wend their way
up the hillsides. He grew into the shepherd life until like Sandy he
found himself courting the sense of isolation and almost resenting the
intrusion of the camp-tender.

He could now understand why the herders who had lived on the range for
years were such a silent lot of men. When his father and he had first
arrived at Crescent Ranch the shepherds had had so little to say that
Donald, who was a sensitive lad, had felt sure that the men did not like
to have them come. Later, however, he had found the herders kindly
despite their taciturn manner. It was not ill-will but habitual silence.

"What a lot of things people say that they don't need to, Sandy," he
observed to the Scotchman one day.

Sandy chuckled outright.

"So you have come to that way of thinking, have you? We'll make a
shepherd of you yet! Well, well, it is true enough. Folks chatter and
chatter and what does it amount to? Many's the time they wish afterward
they had held their tongues. But it is all as we're made. Some drop into
being contented on the range; others cannot bear the stillness. I was
ever happy alone in the open; but my brother Douglas was uneasy as a
colt."

"I didn't know you had a brother, Sandy!" exclaimed Donald, in surprise.

"Aye, a little lad, five years younger than myself."

"What--what became of him, Sandy?"

"What became of him--that's a question that I wish I could answer! He
came to Crescent Ranch years ago with my father and me and was about
the place for a long time. But he was all for the city. He hated the
quiet of the hills. He wanted to be seeing people and to be around in
the rush of things, and he begged my father to let him go to some big
place and find a job. My father was ever a strict man and he would have
none of the youngster's going off by himself. There came a day, though,
when the lad was so sore and unhappy that my father bid him set off for
the East. There was no other way to satisfy the boy. But it was a sad
time for my father--and for me, too."

"Where did he go?"

"To some city on the coast, I dinna just know where. We were ever
thinking he would come back some day--but he never did. It is years now
since I have had tidings from him. But sometimes when I am here by
myself I cannot but wonder where he is and what has become of him. He'd
be a man near twenty-five now."

"Does my father know this?"

"Likely not."

"May I tell him?"

"Aye, to be sure. No boy should have secrets from his father."

"I can't see why a boy should want to," declared Donald. "Why, my father
and I are--well, we are the greatest friends in the world! I like to be
with him better than any one else."

"So I figure. He must be thinking now and again that he'd like a sight
of you at Crescent instead of seeing Thornton every day."

"What sort of a man is Thornton, Sandy?"

"What sort of a man do you take him to be?"

"I do not like him!" was the prompt reply.

"And wherefore?"

"Oh, I--don't--know."

"A poor reason. Dinna say that about any man until you get a better
one."

Donald colored.

Sandy had dropped many a curt word that had brought the boy up,
standing. Whatever else the young herder was he was just. Not only did
Donald's liking, but his respect for him, increase.

Ah, what happy days they passed together! Donald became so attached to
the various camps that he hated to leave them. Sometimes he and Sandy
would stay in a spot a week, sometimes ten days; then onward and upward
over the great plateaus of the mountains they made their way. These flat
reaches of pasture-land were like huge steps. It was hard to realize
that they were constantly climbing. Yet up, up, up they went! Each camp
was several hundred feet higher than the last. As they went on the
pasturage became richer, the air cooler. Clear streams from melting,
snowy summits rushed along, leaving pathways of music behind them. With
a hawk's keenness Sandy chose the most fertile stretches of grass for
the flock.

"The weight of the clip depends on good grazing," he explained to
Donald.

"The clip?"

"Aye, the wool. Wool is sold by the pound, you must know. The better the
feed, the thicker the wool. We must look out, though, for poisoned
meadows. There do be many in this region."

"Poisoned meadows!"

"Fields where poison herbage grows. Hundreds of sheep lose their lives
devouring poisonous weeds. Keep your eye out for signs, laddie."

"Signs! Signs up here!"

"Where else? That is one of the many things our United States government
does for us. It posts notices of poisoned meadows to warn the grazers on
the range."

"That is a pretty nice thing to do!" Donald said.

"Sure enough it is," agreed Sandy. "Some day the survey will have all
the water-holes catalogued along with the poisoned herbage, and will
then be able to direct herders to the best grazing grounds. That is what
the government is busy trying to do now."

"And yet sheep-owners kick at paying for permits," exclaimed Donald.
"Why, lots of that permit money must come back in this way to the very
men who pay it."

"For certain! And mind what I'm telling you--you will see more things
that the government is doing for the herders when you get higher up. You
