
"And do you think," said master sternly, "that treatment like this will
make him fond of your will?"

"He had no business to make that turn; his road was straight on!" said
the man roughly.

"You have often driven that pony up to my place," said master; "it only
shows the creature's memory and intelligence; how did he know that you
were not going there again? But that has little to do with it. I must
say, Mr. Sawyer, that a more unmanly, brutal treatment of a little
pony it was never my painful lot to witness, and by giving way to such
passion you injure your own character as much, nay more, than you injure
your horse; and remember, we shall all have to be judged according to
our works, whether they be toward man or toward beast."

Master rode me home slowly, and I could tell by his voice how the thing
had grieved him. He was just as free to speak to gentlemen of his own
rank as to those below him; for another day, when we were out, we met
a Captain Langley, a friend of our master's; he was driving a splendid
pair of grays in a kind of break. After a little conversation the
captain said:

"What do you think of my new team, Mr. Douglas? You know, you are the
judge of horses in these parts, and I should like your opinion."

The master backed me a little, so as to get a good view of them. "They
are an uncommonly handsome pair," he said, "and if they are as good as
they look I am sure you need not wish for anything better; but I see
you still hold that pet scheme of yours for worrying your horses and
lessening their power."

"What do you mean," said the other, "the check-reins? Oh, ah! I know
that's a hobby of yours; well, the fact is, I like to see my horses hold
their heads up."

"So do I," said master, "as well as any man, but I don't like to
see them held up; that takes all the shine out of it. Now, you are a
military man, Langley, and no doubt like to see your regiment look well
on parade, 'heads up', and all that; but you would not take much credit
for your drill if all your men had their heads tied to a backboard! It
might not be much harm on parade, except to worry and fatigue them; but
how would it be in a bayonet charge against the enemy, when they want
the free use of every muscle, and all their strength thrown forward? I
would not give much for their chance of victory. And it is just the same
with horses: you fret and worry their tempers, and decrease their power;
you will not let them throw their weight against their work, and so
they have to do too much with their joints and muscles, and of course
it wears them up faster. You may depend upon it, horses were intended
to have their heads free, as free as men's are; and if we could act a
little more according to common sense, and a good deal less according
to fashion, we should find many things work easier; besides, you know as
well as I that if a horse makes a false step, he has much less chance
of recovering himself if his head and neck are fastened back. And now,"
said the master, laughing, "I have given my hobby a good trot out, can't
you make up your mind to mount him, too, captain? Your example would go
a long way."

"I believe you are right in theory," said the other, "and that's rather
a hard hit about the soldiers; but--well--I'll think about it," and so
they parted.




12 A Stormy Day


One day late in the autumn my master had a long journey to go on
business. I was put into the dog-cart, and John went with his master. I
always liked to go in the dog-cart, it was so light and the high wheels
ran along so pleasantly. There had been a great deal of rain, and now
the wind was very high and blew the dry leaves across the road in a
shower. We went along merrily till we came to the toll-bar and the low
wooden bridge. The river banks were rather high, and the bridge, instead
of rising, went across just level, so that in the middle, if the river
was full, the water would be nearly up to the woodwork and planks; but
as there were good substantial rails on each side, people did not mind
it.

The man at the gate said the river was rising fast, and he feared it
would be a bad night. Many of the meadows were under water, and in one
low part of the road the water was halfway up to my knees; the bottom
was good, and master drove gently, so it was no matter.

When we got to the town of course I had a good bait, but as the master's
business engaged him a long time we did not start for home till rather
late in the afternoon. The wind was then much higher, and I heard the
master say to John that he had never been out in such a storm; and so I
thought, as we went along the skirts of a wood, where the great branches
were swaying about like twigs, and the rushing sound was terrible.

"I wish we were well out of this wood," said my master.

"Yes, sir," said John, "it would be rather awkward if one of these
branches came down upon us."

The words were scarcely out of his mouth when there was a groan, and a
crack, and a splitting sound, and tearing, crashing down among the other
trees came an oak, torn up by the roots, and it fell right across the
road just before us. I will never say I was not frightened, for I was. I
stopped still, and I believe I trembled; of course I did not turn round
or run away; I was not brought up to that. John jumped out and was in a
moment at my head.

"That was a very near touch," said my master. "What's to be done now?"

"Well, sir, we can't drive over that tree, nor yet get round it; there
will be nothing for it, but to go back to the four crossways, and that
will be a good six miles before we get round to the wooden bridge again;
it will make us late, but the horse is fresh."

So back we went and round by the crossroads, but by the time we got to
the bridge it was very nearly dark; we could just see that the water was
over the middle of it; but as that happened sometimes when the floods
were out, master did not stop. We were going along at a good pace, but
the moment my feet touched the first part of the bridge I felt sure
there was something wrong. I dare not go forward, and I made a dead
stop. "Go on, Beauty," said my master, and he gave me a touch with the
whip, but I dare not stir; he gave me a sharp cut; I jumped, but I dare
not go forward.

"There's something wrong, sir," said John, and he sprang out of the
dog-cart and came to my head and looked all about. He tried to lead me
forward. "Come on, Beauty, what's the matter?" Of course I could not
tell him, but I knew very well that the bridge was not safe.

Just then the man at the toll-gate on the other side ran out of the
house, tossing a torch about like one mad.

"Hoy, hoy, hoy! halloo! stop!" he cried.

"What's the matter?" shouted my master.

"The bridge is broken in the middle, and part of it is carried away; if
you come on you'll be into the river."

"Thank God!" said my master. "You Beauty!" said John, and took the
bridle and gently turned me round to the right-hand road by the river
side. The sun had set some time; the wind seemed to have lulled off
after that furious blast which tore up the tree. It grew darker and
darker, stiller and stiller. I trotted quietly along, the wheels hardly
making a sound on the soft road. For a good while neither master nor
John spoke, and then master began in a serious voice. I could not
understand much of what they said, but I found they thought, if I had
gone on as the master wanted me, most likely the bridge would have given
way under us, and horse, chaise, master, and man would have fallen into
the river; and as the current was flowing very strongly, and there was
no light and no help at hand, it was more than likely we should all have
been drowned. Master said, God had given men reason, by which they could
find out things for themselves; but he had given animals knowledge which
did not depend on reason, and which was much more prompt and perfect in
its way, and by which they had often saved the lives of men. John had
many stories to tell of dogs and horses, and the wonderful things they
had done; he thought people did not value their animals half enough nor
make friends of them as they ought to do. I am sure he makes friends of
them if ever a man did.

At last we came to the park gates and found the gardener looking out for
us. He said that mistress had been in a dreadful way ever since dark,
fearing some accident had happened, and that she had sent James off on
Justice, the roan cob, toward the wooden bridge to make inquiry after
us.

We saw a light at the hall-door and at the upper windows, and as we came
up mistress ran out, saying, "Are you really safe, my dear? Oh! I
have been so anxious, fancying all sorts of things. Have you had no
accident?"

"No, my dear; but if your Black Beauty had not been wiser than we were
we should all have been carried down the river at the wooden bridge."
I heard no more, as they went into the house, and John took me to the
stable. Oh, what a good supper he gave me that night, a good bran mash
and some crushed beans with my oats, and such a thick bed of straw! and
I was glad of it, for I was tired.




13 The Devil's Trade Mark


One day when John and I had been out on some business of our master's,
and were returning gently on a long, straight road, at some distance we
saw a boy trying to leap a pony over a gate; the pony would not take the
leap, and the boy cut him with the whip, but he only turned off on one
side. He whipped him again, but the pony turned off on the other side.
Then the boy got off and gave him a hard thrashing, and knocked him
about the head; then he got up again and tried to make him leap the
gate, kicking him all the time shamefully, but still the pony refused.
When we were nearly at the spot the pony put down his head and threw up
his heels, and sent the boy neatly over into a broad quickset hedge, and
with the rein dangling from his head he set off home at a full gallop.
John laughed out quite loud. "Served him right," he said.

"Oh, oh, oh!" cried the boy as he struggled about among the thorns; "I
say, come and help me out."

"Thank ye," said John, "I think you are quite in the right place, and
maybe a little scratching will teach you not to leap a pony over a gate
that is too high for him," and so with that John rode off. "It may be,"
said he to himself, "that young fellow is a liar as well as a cruel one;
we'll just go home by Farmer Bushby's, Beauty, and then if anybody wants
to know you and I can tell 'em, ye see." So we turned off to the right,
and soon came up to the stack-yard, and within sight of the house. The
farmer was hurrying out into the road, and his wife was standing at the
gate, looking very frightened.

"Have you seen my boy?" said Mr. Bushby as we came up; "he went out an
hour ago on my black pony, and the creature is just come back without a
rider."

"I should think, sir," said John, "he had better be without a rider,
unless he can be ridden properly."

"What do you mean?" said the farmer.

"Well, sir, I saw your son whipping, and kicking, and knocking that good
little pony about shamefully because he would not leap a gate that was
too high for him. The pony behaved well, sir, and showed no vice; but at
last he just threw up his heels and tipped the young gentleman into the
thorn hedge. He wanted me to help him out, but I hope you will excuse
me, sir, I did not feel inclined to do so. There's no bones broken, sir;
he'll only get a few scratches. I love horses, and it riles me to see
them badly used; it is a bad plan to aggravate an animal till he uses
his heels; the first time is not always the last."

During this time the mother began to cry, "Oh, my poor Bill, I must go
and meet him; he must be hurt."

"You had better go into the house, wife," said the farmer; "Bill wants a
lesson about this, and I must see that he gets it; this is not the first
time, nor the second, that he has ill-used that pony, and I shall stop
it. I am much obliged to you, Manly. Good-evening."

So we went on, John chuckling all the way home; then he told James about
it, who laughed and said, "Serve him right. I knew that boy at school;
he took great airs on himself because he was a farmer's son; he used to
swagger about and bully the little boys. Of course, we elder ones would
not have any of that nonsense, and let him know that in the school and
the playground farmers' sons and laborers' sons were all alike. I well
remember one day, just before afternoon school, I found him at the large
window catching flies and pulling off their wings. He did not see me and
I gave him a box on the ears that laid him sprawling on the floor. Well,
angry as I was, I was almost frightened, he roared and bellowed in such
a style. The boys rushed in from the playground, and the master ran in
from the road to see who was being murdered. Of course I said fair and
square at once what I had done, and why; then I showed the master the
flies, some crushed and some crawling about helpless, and I showed him
the wings on the window sill. I never saw him so angry before; but as
Bill was still howling and whining, like the coward that he was, he did
not give him any more punishment of that kind, but set him up on a stool
for the rest of the afternoon, and said that he should not go out to
play for that week. Then he talked to all the boys very seriously about
cruelty, and said how hard-hearted and cowardly it was to hurt the
weak and the helpless; but what stuck in my mind was this, he said that
cruelty was the devil's own trade-mark, and if we saw any one who took
pleasure in cruelty we might know who he belonged to, for the devil was
a murderer from the beginning, and a tormentor to the end. On the other
hand, where we saw people who loved their neighbors, and were kind to
man and beast, we might know that was God's mark."

"Your master never taught you a truer thing," said John; "there is no
religion without love, and people may talk as much as they like about
their religion, but if it does not teach them to be good and kind to man
and beast it is all a sham--all a sham, James, and it won't stand when
things come to be turned inside out."




14 James Howard


Early one morning in December John had just led me into my box after my
daily exercise, and was strapping my cloth on and James was coming in
from the corn chamber with some oats, when the master came into the
stable. He looked rather serious, and held an open letter in his hand.
John fastened the door of my box, touched his cap, and waited for
orders.

"Good-morning, John," said the master. "I want to know if you have any
complaint to make of James."

"Complaint, sir? No, sir."

"Is he industrious at his work and respectful to you?"

"Yes, sir, always."

"You never find he slights his work when your back is turned?"

"Never, sir."

"That's well; but I must put another question. Have you no reason to
suspect, when he goes out with the horses to exercise them or to take a
message, that he stops about talking to his acquaintances, or goes into
houses where he has no business, leaving the horses outside?"

"No, sir, certainly not; and if anybody has been saying that about
James, I don't believe it, and I don't mean to believe it unless I have
it fairly proved before witnesses; it's not for me to say who has been
trying to take away James' character, but I will say this, sir, that a
steadier, pleasanter, honester, smarter young fellow I never had in this
stable. I can trust his word and I can trust his work; he is gentle and
clever with the horses, and I would rather have them in charge with him
than with half the young fellows I know of in laced hats and liveries;
and whoever wants a character of James Howard," said John, with a
decided jerk of his head, "let them come to John Manly."

The master stood all this time grave and attentive, but as John finished
his speech a broad smile spread over his face, and looking kindly
across at James, who all this time had stood still at the door, he said,
"James, my lad, set down the oats and come here; I am very glad to find
that John's opinion of your character agrees so exactly with my own.
John is a cautious man," he said, with a droll smile, "and it is not
always easy to get his opinion about people, so I thought if I beat the
bush on this side the birds would fly out, and I should learn what I
wanted to know quickly; so now we will come to business. I have a letter
