always did--there was a king of Samavia--an Ivor Fedorovitch with the
blood of the Lost Prince in his veins--alive in some town or city this
moment!  And Marco's own father knew where he was!

He glanced at Lazarus, but, though the old soldier's face looked as
expressionless as if it were cut out of wood, Marco realized that he
knew this thing and had always known it.  He had been a comrade at arms
all his life.  He continued to stare at the bread plate.

Loristan spoke again and in an even lower voice.  "The Samavians who
are patriots and thinkers," he said, "formed themselves into a secret
party about eighty years ago.  They formed it when they had no reason
for hope, but they formed it because one of them discovered that an
Ivor Fedorovitch was living.  He was head forester on a great estate in
the Austrian Alps.  The nobleman he served had always thought him a
mystery because he had the bearing and speech of a man who had not been
born a servant, and his methods in caring for the forests and game were
those of a man who was educated and had studied his subject.  But he
never was familiar or assuming, and never professed superiority over
any of his fellows.  He was a man of great stature, and was
extraordinarily brave and silent.  The nobleman who was his master made
a sort of companion of him when they hunted together. Once he took him
with him when he traveled to Samavia to hunt wild horses.  He found
that he knew the country strangely well, and that he was familiar with
Samavian hunting and customs. Before he returned to Austria, the man
obtained permission to go to the mountains alone.  He went among the
shepherds and made friends among them, asking many questions.

"One night around a forest fire he heard the songs about the Lost
Prince which had not been forgotten even after nearly five hundred
years had passed.  The shepherds and herdsmen talked about Prince Ivor,
and told old stories about him, and related the prophecy that he would
come back and bring again Samavia's good days.  He might come only in
the body of one of his descendants, but it would be his spirit which
came, because his spirit would never cease to love Samavia.  One very
old shepherd tottered to his feet and lifted his face to the myriad
stars bestrewn like jewels in the blue sky above the forest trees, and
he wept and prayed aloud that the great God would send their king to
them.  And the stranger huntsman stood upright also and lifted his face
to the stars.  And, though he said no word, the herdsman nearest to him
saw tears on his cheeks--great, heavy tears.  The next day, the
stranger went to the monastery where the order of good monks lived who
had taken care of the Lost Prince.  When he had left Samavia, the
secret society was formed, and the members of it knew that an Ivor
Fedorovitch had passed through his ancestors' country as the servant of
another man.  But the secret society was only a small one, and, though
it has been growing ever since and it has done good deeds and good work
in secret, the huntsman died an old man before it was strong enough
even to dare to tell Samavia what it knew."

"Had he a son?" cried Marco.  "Had he a son?"

"Yes.  He had a son.  His name was Ivor.  And he was trained as I told
you.  That part I knew to be true, though I should have believed it was
true even if I had not known.  There has ALWAYS been a king ready for
Samavia--even when he has labored with his hands and served others.
Each one took the oath of allegiance."

"As I did?" said Marco, breathless with excitement.  When one is twelve
years old, to be so near a Lost Prince who might end wars is a
thrilling thing.

"The same," answered Loristan.

Marco threw up his hand in salute.

"'Here grows a man for Samavia!  God be thanked!'" he quoted. "And HE
is somewhere?  And you know?"

Loristan bent his head in acquiescence.

"For years much secret work has been done, and the Fedorovitch party
has grown until it is much greater and more powerful than the other
parties dream.  The larger countries are tired of the constant war and
disorder in Samavia.  Their interests are disturbed by them, and they
are deciding that they must have peace and laws which can be counted
on.  There have been Samavian patriots who have spent their lives in
trying to bring this about by making friends in the most powerful
capitals, and working secretly for the future good of their own land.
Because Samavia is so small and uninfluential, it has taken a long time
but when King Maran and his family were assassinated and the war broke
out, there were great powers which began to say that if some king of
good blood and reliable characteristics were given the crown, he should
be upheld."

"HIS blood,"--Marco's intensity made his voice drop almost to a
whisper,--"HIS blood has been trained for five hundred years, Father!
If it comes true--" though he laughed a little, he was obliged to wink
his eyes hard because suddenly he felt tears rush into them, which no
boy likes--"the shepherds will have to make a new song--it will have to
be a shouting one about a prince going away and a king coming back!"

"They are a devout people and observe many an ancient rite and
ceremony.  They will chant prayers and burn altar-fires on their
mountain sides," Loristan said.  "But the end is not yet--the end is
not yet.  Sometimes it seems that perhaps it is near--but God knows!"

Then there leaped back upon Marco the story he had to tell, but which
he had held back for the last--the story of the man who spoke Samavian
and drove in the carriage with the King.  He knew now that it might
mean some important thing which he could not have before suspected.

"There is something I must tell you," he said.

He had learned to relate incidents in few but clear words when he
related them to his father.  It had been part of his training. Loristan
had said that he might sometime have a story to tell when he had but
few moments to tell it in--some story which meant life or death to some
one.  He told this one quickly and well. He made Loristan see the
well-dressed man with the deliberate manner and the keen eyes, and he
made him hear his voice when he said, "Tell your father that you are a
very well-trained lad."

"I am glad he said that.  He is a man who knows what training is," said
Loristan.  "He is a person who knows what all Europe is doing, and
almost all that it will do.  He is an ambassador from a powerful and
great country.  If he saw that you are a well-trained and fine lad, it
might--it might even be good for Samavia."

"Would it matter that _I_ was well-trained?  COULD it matter to
Samavia?" Marco cried out.

Loristan paused for a moment--watching him gravely--looking him
over--his big, well-built boy's frame, his shabby clothes, and his
eagerly burning eyes.

He smiled one of his slow wonderful smiles.

"Yes.  It might even matter to Samavia!" he answered.



VI

THE DRILL AND THE SECRET PARTY

Loristan did not forbid Marco to pursue his acquaintance with The Rat
and his followers.

"You will find out for yourself whether they are friends for you or
not," he said.  "You will know in a few days, and then you can make
your own decision.  You have known lads in various countries, and you
are a good judge of them, I think.  You will soon see whether they are
going to be MEN or mere rabble.  The Rat now--how does he strike you?"

And the handsome eyes held their keen look of questioning.

"He'd be a brave soldier if he could stand," said Marco, thinking him
over.  "But he might be cruel."

"A lad who might make a brave soldier cannot be disdained, but a man
who is cruel is a fool.  Tell him that from me," Loristan answered.
"He wastes force--his own and the force of the one he treats cruelly.
Only a fool wastes force."

"May I speak of you sometimes?" asked Marco.

"Yes.  You will know how.  You will remember the things about which
silence is the order."

"I never forget them," said Marco.  "I have been trying not to, for
such a long time."

"You have succeeded well, Comrade!" returned Loristan, from his
writing-table, to which he had gone and where he was turning over
papers.

A strong impulse overpowered the boy.  He marched over to the table and
stood very straight, making his soldierly young salute, his whole body
glowing.

"Father!" he said, "you don't know how I love you!  I wish you were a
general and I might die in battle for you.  When I look at you, I long
and long to do something for you a boy could not do. I would die of a
thousand wounds rather than disobey you--or Samavia!"

He seized Loristan's hand, and knelt on one knee and kissed it. An
English or American boy could not have done such a thing from
unaffected natural impulse.  But he was of warm Southern blood.

"I took my oath of allegiance to you, Father, when I took it to
Samavia.  It seems as if you were Samavia, too," he said, and kissed
his hand again.

Loristan had turned toward him with one of the movements which were
full of dignity and grace.  Marco, looking up at him, felt that there
was always a certain remote stateliness in him which made it seem quite
natural that any one should bend the knee and kiss his hand.

A sudden great tenderness glowed in his father's face as he raised the
boy and put his hand on his shoulder.

"Comrade," he said, "you don't know how much I love you--and what
reason there is that we should love each other!  You don't know how I
have been watching you, and thanking God each year that here grew a man
for Samavia.  That I know you are--a MAN, though you have lived but
twelve years.  Twelve years may grow a man--or prove that a man will
never grow, though a human thing he may remain for ninety years.  This
year may be full of strange things for both of us.  We cannot know WHAT
I may have to ask you to do for me--and for Samavia.  Perhaps such a
thing as no twelve-year-old boy has ever done before."

"Every night and every morning," said Marco, "I shall pray that I may
be called to do it, and that I may do it well."

"You will do it well, Comrade, if you are called.  That I could make
oath," Loristan answered him.


The Squad had collected in the inclosure behind the church when Marco
appeared at the arched end of the passage.  The boys were drawn up with
their rifles, but they all wore a rather dogged and sullen look.  The
explanation which darted into Marco's mind was that this was because
The Rat was in a bad humor.  He sat crouched together on his platform
biting his nails fiercely, his elbows on his updrawn knees, his face
twisted into a hideous scowl.  He did not look around, or even look up
from the cracked flagstone of the pavement on which his eyes were fixed.

Marco went forward with military step and stopped opposite to him with
prompt salute.

"Sorry to be late, sir," he said, as if he had been a private speaking
to his colonel.

"It's 'im, Rat!  'E's come, Rat!" the Squad shouted.  "Look at 'im!"

But The Rat would not look, and did not even move.

"What's the matter?" said Marco, with less ceremony than a private
would have shown.  "There's no use in my coming here if you don't want
me."

"'E's got a grouch on 'cos you're late!" called out the head of the
line.  "No doin' nothin' when 'e's got a grouch on."

"I sha'n't try to do anything," said Marco, his boy-face setting itself
into good stubborn lines.  "That's not what I came here for.  I came to
drill.  I've been with my father.  He comes first.  I can't join the
Squad if he doesn't come first. We're not on active service, and we're
not in barracks."

Then The Rat moved sharply and turned to look at him.

"I thought you weren't coming at all!" he snapped and growled at once.
"My father said you wouldn't.  He said you were a young swell for all
your patched clothes.  He said your father would think he was a swell,
even if he was only a penny-a-liner on newspapers, and he wouldn't let
you have anything to do with a vagabond and a nuisance.  Nobody begged
you to join.  Your father can go to blazes!"

"Don't you speak in that way about my father," said Marco, quite
quietly, "because I can't knock you down."

"I'll get up and let you!" began The Rat, immediately white and raging.
"I can stand up with two sticks.  I'll get up and let you!"

"No, you won't," said Marco.  "If you want to know what my father said,
I can tell you.  He said I could come as often as I liked--till I found
out whether we should be friends or not.  He says I shall find that out
for myself."

It was a strange thing The Rat did.  It must always be remembered of
him that his wretched father, who had each year sunk lower and lower in
the under-world, had been a gentleman once, a man who had been familiar
with good manners and had been educated in the customs of good
breeding.  Sometimes when he was drunk, and sometimes when he was
partly sober, he talked to The Rat of many things the boy would
otherwise never have heard of.  That was why the lad was different from
the other vagabonds.  This, also, was why he suddenly altered the whole
situation by doing this strange and unexpected thing.  He utterly
changed his expression and voice, fixing his sharp eyes shrewdly on
Marco's.  It was almost as if he were asking him a conundrum.  He knew
it would have been one to most boys of the class he appeared outwardly
to belong to. He would either know the answer or he wouldn't.

"I beg your pardon," The Rat said.

That was the conundrum.  It was what a gentleman and an officer would
have said, if he felt he had been mistaken or rude.  He had heard that
from his drunken father.

"I beg yours--for being late," said Marco.

That was the right answer.  It was the one another officer and
gentleman would have made.  It settled the matter at once, and it
settled more than was apparent at the moment.  It decided that Marco
was one of those who knew the things The Rat's father had once
known--the things gentlemen do and say and think.  Not another word was
said.  It was all right.  Marco slipped into line with the Squad, and
The Rat sat erect with his military bearing and began his drill:

"Squad!

"'Tention!

"Number!

"Slope arms!

"Form fours!

"Right!

"Quick march!

"Halt!

"Left turn!

"Order arms!

"Stand at ease!

"Stand easy!"

They did it so well that it was quite wonderful when one considered the
limited space at their disposal.  They had evidently done it often, and
The Rat had been not only a smart, but a severe, officer.  This morning
they repeated the exercise a number of times, and even varied it with
Review Drill, with which they seemed just as familiar.

"Where did you learn it?" The Rat asked, when the arms were stacked
again and Marco was sitting by him as he had sat the previous day.

"From an old soldier.  And I like to watch it, as you do."

"If you were a young swell in the Guards, you couldn't be smarter at
it," The Rat said.  "The way you hold yourself!  The way you stand!
You've got it!  Wish I was you!  It comes natural to you."

"I've always liked to watch it and try to do it myself.  I did when I
was a little fellow," answered Marco.

"I've been trying to kick it into these chaps for more than a year,"
said The Rat.  "A nice job I had of it!  It nearly made me sick at
first."

The semicircle in front of him only giggled or laughed outright. The
members of it seemed to take very little offense at his cavalier
treatment of them.  He had evidently something to give them which was
entertaining enough to make up for his tyranny and indifference.  He
thrust his hand into one of the pockets of his ragged coat, and drew
out a piece of newspaper.

"My father brought home this, wrapped round a loaf of bread," he said.
"See what it says there!"

He handed it to Marco, pointing to some words printed in large letters
at the head of a column.  Marco looked at it and sat very still.

The words he read were:  "The Lost Prince."

"Silence is still the order," was the first thought which flashed
through his mind.  "Silence is still the order."

"What does it mean?" he said aloud.

"There isn't much of it.  I wish there was more," The Rat said
fretfully.  "Read and see.  Of course they say it mayn't be true--but I
believe it is.  They say that people think some one knows where he
is--at least where one of his descendants is. It'd be the same thing.
He'd be the real king.  If he'd just show himself, it might stop all
the fighting.  Just read."

Marco read, and his skin prickled as the blood went racing through his
body.  But his face did not change.  There was a sketch of the story of
the Lost Prince to begin with.  It had been regarded by most people,
the article said, as a sort of legend.  Now there was a definite rumor
that it was not a legend at all, but a part of the long past history of
Samavia.  It was said that through the centuries there had always been
a party secretly loyal to the memory of this worshiped and lost
Fedorovitch.  It was even said that from father to son, generation
after generation after generation, had descended the oath  of fealty to
him and his descendants.  The people had made a god of him, and now,
romantic as it seemed, it was beginning to be an open secret that some
persons believed that a descendant had been found--a Fedorovitch worthy
of his young ancestor--and that a certain Secret Party also held that,
