"Six cents for lodgin', and six cents for supper and breakfast."

"That is, six cents for each."

"Yes; you ain't comin' to live there, are you?" asked Mike.

"I don't know--I may have to."

"You're jokin'."

"What makes you think I am joking?"

"Because you're a swell. Look at them clo'es!"

"I have a good suit of clothes, to be sure, but I haven't much money.
You are better off than I am."

"How's that?" asked Mike incredulously.

"You've got work to do, and I am earning nothing."

"If you've got money enough to buy a box and brush, you can go in with
me."

"I don't think I should like it, Mike. It would spoil my clothes, and I
am afraid I wouldn't have money enough to buy others."

"I keep my dress suit at home--the one I wear to parties."

"Haven't you got any father or mother, Mike? How does it happen that you
are living in New York alone?"

"My farder is dead, and me mudder, she married a man wot ain't no good.
He'd bate me till I couldn't stand it. So I just run away."

"Where does your mother live?"

"In Albany."

"Some time when you earn money enough you can ask her to come here and
live with you."

"They don't take women at the Lodge."

"No, I suppose not," said Rodney, smiling.

"Besides she's got two little girls by her new husband, and she wouldn't
want to leave them."

By this time the shine was completed, and Rodney paid Mike.

"If I ever come to the Lodge, I'll ask for you," he said.

"Where do you live now?"

"I'm just staying at a place on Fourteenth Street, but I can't afford to
stay there long, for they charge a dollar a day."

"Geewholliker, that would bust me, and make me a financial wreck as the
papers say."

"How did you lose your fortune and get reduced to blacking boots?" asked
Rodney jocosely.

"I got scooped out of it in Wall Street," answered Mike. "Jay Gould
cleaned me out."

"And I suppose now he has added your fortune to his."

"You've hit it boss."

"Well, good day, Mike, I'll see you again some day----"

"All right! I'm in my office all de mornin'."



CHAPTER VI.


AN IMPUDENT ADVENTURER.


While Rodney was talking with Mike Flynn he was an object of attention
to a man who stood near the corner of Barclay Street, and was ostensibly
looking in at the window of the drug store. As Rodney turned away he
recognized him at once as his enterprising fellow traveler who had taken
possession of the casket of jewels.

He did not care to keep up an acquaintance with him, and started to
cross the street. But the other came forward smiling, and with a nod
said: "I believe you are the young man I met yesterday in the cars and
afterwards at Kentville?"

"Yes, sir."

"I just wanted to tell you that I had got back my jewel box, the one for
which I mistook yours."

"Indeed!" said Rodney, who did not believe a word the fellow said.

"Quite an amusing mistake, I made."

"It might have proved serious to me."

"Very true, as I shouldn't have known where to find you to restore your
property."

"I don't think that would have troubled you much," thought Rodney.
"Where did you find your box?" he asked.

"In the car. That is, the conductor picked it up and left it at the
depot for me. Where are you staying here in the city? At the Astor
House?"

"No, I have found a boarding house on West Fourteenth Street."

"If it is a good place, I should like to go there. What is the number?"

"I can't recall it, though I could find it," answered Rodney with
reserve, for he had no wish to have his railroad acquaintance in the
house.

"Is the gentleman who was traveling with you there also?"

"Yes, sir."

"He is a very pleasant gentleman, though he misjudged me. Ha, ha! my
friends will be very much amused when I tell them that I was taken for a
thief. Why, I venture to say that my box is more valuable than yours."

"Very likely," said Rodney coldly. "Good morning."

"Good morning. I hope we may meet again."

Rodney nodded, but he could not in sincerity echo the wish.

He was now confronted by a serious problem. He had less than ten dollars
in his pocketbook, and this would soon be swallowed up by the necessary
expenses of life in a large city. What would he do when that was gone?

It was clear that he must go to work as soon as possible. If his
guardian had remained in the city, probably through his influence a
situation might have been secured. Now nothing was to be looked for in
that quarter.

He bought a morning paper and looked over the Want Column. He found two
places within a short distance of the Astor House, and called at each.
One was in a railroad office.

"My boy," said the manager, a pleasant looking man, "the place was taken
hours since. You don't seem to get up very early in the morning."

"I could get up at any hour that was necessary," replied Rodney, "but I
have only just made up my mind to apply for a position."

"You won't meet with any luck today. It is too late. Get up bright and
early tomorrow morning, buy a paper, and make early application for any
place that strikes you as desirable."

"Thank you, sir. I am sure your advice is good."

"If you had been the first to call here, I should have taken you. I like
your appearance better than that of the boy I have selected."

"Thank you, sir."

"This boy may not prove satisfactory. Call in six days, just before
his week expires, and if there is likely to be a vacancy I will let you
know."

"Thank you, sir. You are very kind."

"I always sympathize with boys. I have two boys of my own."

This conversation quite encouraged Rodney. It seemed to promise success
in the future. If he had probably impressed one man, he might be equally
fortunate with another.

It was about half past twelve when he passed through Nassau Street.

All at once his arm was grasped, and a cheery voice said, "Where are you
going, Rodney?"

"Mr. Woods!" he exclaimed, with pleased recognition.

"Yes, it's your old friend Woods."

"You are not the only railroad friend I have met this morning."

"Who was the other?"

"The gentleman who obligingly took care of my jewel box for a short
time."

"You don't mean to say you have met him? Where did you come across him?"

"In front of the Astor House, almost two hours since."

"Did you speak to him?"

"He spoke to me. You will be glad to hear that he has recovered his own
casket of jewels."

Adin Woods smiled.

"He must think you are easily imposed upon," he said, "to believe any
such story. Anything more?"

"He said his friends would be very much surprised to hear that he had
been suspected of theft."

"So he wanted to clear himself with you?"

"Yes; he asked where I was staying."

"I hope you didn't tell him."

"I only said I was at a boarding house on West Fourteenth Street, but
didn't mention the number."

"He thinks you have the casket with you, and that he may get possession
of it. It is well that you stored it at Tiffany's."

"I think so. Now I have no anxiety about it. Do you think he will find
out where we live?"

"Probably, as you gave him a clew. But, Rodney, it is about lunch time,
and I confess I have an appetite. Come and lunch with me."

"But I am afraid, Mr. Woods, I shall not be able to return the
compliment."

"There is no occasion for it. I feel in good humor this morning. I have
sold one lot, and have hopes of disposing of another. The one lot pays
me a commission of twenty dollars."

"I wish I could make twenty dollars in a week."

"Sometimes I only sell one lot in a week. It isn't like a regular
business. It is precarious. Still, take the year through and I make a
pretty good income. Come in here. We can get a good lunch here," and he
led the way into a modest restaurant, not far from the site of the old
post office, which will be remembered by those whose residence in New
York dates back twenty years or more.

"Now we will have a nice lunch," said the agent. "I hope you can do
justice to it."

"I generally can," responded Rodney, smiling. "I am seldom troubled with
a poor appetite."

"Ditto for me. Now what have you been doing this morning?"

"Looking for a place."

"With what success?"

"Pretty good if I had only been earlier."

Rodney told the story of his application to the manager of the railroad
office.

"You will know better next time. I think you'll succeed. I did. When I
came to New York at the age of twenty two I had only fifty dollars. That
small sum had to last me twelve weeks. You can judge that I didn't
live on the fat of the land during that time. I couldn't often eat at
Delmonico's. Even Beefsteak John's would have been too expensive for me.
However, those old days are over."

The next day and the two following Rodney went about the city making
application for positions, but every place seemed full.

On the third day Mr. Woods said, "I shall have to leave you for a week
or more, Rodney."

"Where are you going?"

"To Philadelphia. There's a man there who is a capitalist and likes land
investments. I am going to visit him, and hope to sell him several lots.
He once lived in this city, so he won't object to New York investments."

"I hope you will succeed, Mr. Woods. I think if you are going away I had
better give up the room, and find cheaper accommodations. I am getting
near the end of my money."

"You are right. It is best to be prudent."

That evening Rodney found a room which he could rent for two dollars a
week. He estimated that by economy he could get along for fifty cents a
day for his eating, and that would be a decided saving.

He was just leaving the house the next morning, gripsack in hand, when
on the steps he met Louis Wheeler, his acquaintance of the train.

"Where are you going?" asked Wheeler.

"I am leaving this house. I have hired a room elsewhere."

Wheeler's countenance fell, and he looked dismayed.

"Why, I have just taken a room here for a week," he said.

"You will find it a good place."

"But--I wouldn't have come here if I hadn't thought I should have
company."

"I ought to feel complimented."

Rodney was convinced that Wheeler had come in the hopes of stealing
the casket of jewels a second time, and he felt amused at the fellow's
discomfiture.

"You haven't got your jewel box with you?"

"No, I can take that another time."

"Then it's still in the house," thought Wheeler with satisfaction. "It
won't be my fault if I don't get it in my hands. Well, good morning," he
said. "Come around and call on me."

"Thank you!"


