"That isn't our fault, sir," said the Octopus. "Indeed, it's pretty
hard for us to go through life with such terrible names. Think of
the poor little seahorse. He used to be a merry and cheerful fellow,
but since they named him 'hippocampus' he hasn't smiled once."

"Let's go," said Trot. "I don't like to 'sociate with octopuses."

"OctoPI," said the creature, again correcting her.

"You're jus' as horrid whether you're puses or pies," she declared.

"Horrid!" cried the monster in a shocked tone of voice.

"Not only horrid, but horrible!" persisted the girl.

"May I ask in what way?" he inquired, and it was easy to see he was
offended.

"Why, ev'rybody knows that octopuses are jus' wicked an' deceitful,"
she said. "Up on the earth, where I live, we call the Stannerd Oil
Company an octopus, an' the Coal Trust an octopus, an'--"

"Stop, stop!" cried the monster in a pleading voice. "Do you mean to
tell me that the earth people whom I have always respected compare
me to the Stannerd Oil Company?"

"Yes," said Trot positively.

"Oh, what a disgrace! What a cruel, direful, dreadful disgrace!"
moaned the Octopus, drooping his head in shame, and Trot could see
great tears falling down his cheeks.

"This comes of having a bad name," said the Queen gently, for she
was moved by the monster's grief.

"It is unjust! It is cruel and unjust!" sobbed the creature
mournfully. "Just because we have several long arms and take
whatever we can reach, they accuse us of being like--like--oh, I
cannot say it! It is too shameful, too humiliating."

"Come, let's go," said Trot again. So they left the poor octopus
weeping and wiping his watery eyes with his handkerchief and swam on
their way. "I'm not a bit sorry for him," remarked the child, "for
his legs remind me of serpents."

"So they do me," agreed Cap'n Bill.

"But the octopi are not very bad," said the Princess, "and we get
along with them much better than we do with their cousins, the sea
devils."

"Oh. Are the sea devils their cousins?" asked Trot.

"Yes, and they are the only creatures of the ocean which we greatly
fear," replied Aquareine. "I hope we shall meet none today, for we
are going near to the dismal caverns where they live."

"What are the sea devils like, ma'am?" inquired Cap'n Bill a little
uneasily.

"Something like the octopus you just saw, only much larger and of a
bright scarlet color, striped with black," answered the Queen. "They
are very fierce and terrible creatures and nearly as much dreaded by
the inhabitants of the ocean as is Zog, and nearly as powerful as
King Anko himself."

"Zog! Who is Zog?" questioned the girl. "I haven't heard of him
before now."

"We do not like to mention Zog's name," responded the Queen in a low
voice. "He is the wicked genius of the sea, and a magician of great
power."

"What's he like?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"He is a dreadful creature, part fish, part man, part beast and part
serpent. Centuries ago they cast him off the earth into the sea,
where he has caused much trouble. Once he waged a terrible war
against King Anko, but the sea serpent finally conquered Zog and
drove the magician into his castle, where he now stays shut up. For
if ever Anko catches the monster outside of his enchanted castle, he
will kill him, and Zog knows that very well."

"Seems like you have your troubles down here just as we do on top
the ground," remarked Cap'n Bill.

"But I'm glad old Zog is shut up in his castle," added Trot. "Is it
a sea castle like your own palace?"

"I cannot say, my dear, for the enchantment makes it invisible to
all eyes but those of its inhabitants," replied Aquareine. "No one
sees Zog now, and we scarcely ever hear of him, but all the sea
people know he is here someplace and fear his power. Even in the old
days, before Anko conquered him, Zog was the enemy of the mermaids,
as he was of all the good and respectable seafolk. But do not worry
about the magician, I beg of you, for he has not dared to do an evil
deed in many, many years."

"Oh, I'm not afraid," asserted Trot.

"I'm glad of that," said the Queen. "Keep together, friends, and be
careful not to separate, for here comes an army of sawfishes."

Even as Aquareine spoke, they saw a swirl and commotion in the water
ahead of them, while a sound like a muffled roar fell upon their
ears. Then swiftly there dashed upon them a group of great fishes
with long saws sticking out in front of their noses, armed with
sharp, hooked teeth, all set in a row. They were larger than the
swordfishes and seemed more fierce and bold. But the mermaids and
Trot and Cap'n Bill quietly awaited their attack, and instead of
tearing them with their saws as they expected to do, the fishes were
unable to touch them at all. They tried every possible way to get at
their proposed victims, but the Magic Circle was all powerful and
turned aside the ugly saws; so our friends were not disturbed at
all. Seeing this, the sawfishes soon abandoned the attempt and with
growls and roars of disappointment swam away and were quickly out of
sight.

Trot had been a wee bit frightened during the attack, but now she
laughed gleefully and told the queen that it seemed very nice to be
protected by fairy powers. The water grew a darker blue as they
descended into its depths, farther and farther away from the rays of
the sun. Trot was surprised to find she could see so plainly through
the high wall of water above her, but the sun was able to shoot its
beams straight down through the transparent sea, and they seemed to
penetrate to every nook and crevice of the rocky bottom.

In this deeper part of the ocean some of the fishes had a
phosphorescent light of their own, and these could be seen far ahead
as if they were lanterns. The explorers met a school of argonauts
going up to the surface for a sail, and the child watched these
strange creatures with much curiosity. The argonauts live in shells
in which they are able to hide in case of danger from prowling wolf
fishes, but otherwise they crawl out and carry their shells like
humps upon their backs. Then they spread their skinny sails above
them and sail away under water till they come to the surface, where
they float and let the currents of air carry them along the same as
the currents of water had done before. Trot thought the argonauts
comical little creatures, with their big eyes and sharp noses, and
to her they looked like a fleet of tiny ships.

It is said that men got their first idea of boats and of how to sail
them from watching these little argonauts.




CHAPTER 10

THE UNDISCOVERED ISLAND


In following the fleet of argonauts, the four explorers had risen
higher in the water and soon found they had wandered to an open
space that seemed to Trot like the flat top of a high hill. The
sands were covered with a growth of weeds so gorgeously colored that
one who had never peered beneath the surface of the sea would
scarcely believe they were not the product of a dye shop. Every
known hue seemed represented in the delicate, fern-like leaves that
swayed softly to and fro as the current moved them. They were not
set close together, these branches of magnificent hues, but were
scattered sparsely over the sandy bottom of the sea so that while
from a distance they seemed thick, a nearer view found them spread
out with ample spaces of sand between them.

In these sandy spaces lay the real attractiveness of the place, for
here were many of those wonders of the deep that have surprised and
interested people in all ages.

First were the starfishes--hundreds of them, it seemed--lying
sleepily on the bottom, with their five or six points extended
outward. They were of various colors, some rich and brilliant,
others of dark brown hues. A few had wound their arms around the
weeds or were creeping slowly from one place to another, in the
latter case turning their points downward and using them as legs.
But most of them were lying motionless, and as Trot looked down upon
them she thought they resembled stars in the sky on a bright night,
except that the blue of the heavens was here replaced by the white
sand, and the twinkling diamond stars by the colored starfish.

"We are near an island," said the Queen, "and that is why so many
starfishes are here, as they love to keep close to shore. Also the
little seahorses love these weeds, and to me they are more
interesting than the starfish."

Trot now noticed the seahorses for the first time. They were quite
small--merely two or three inches high--but had funny little heads
that were shaped much like the head of a horse, and bright,
intelligent eyes. They had no legs, though, for their bodies ended
in tails which they twined around the stems of seaweeds to support
themselves and keep the currents from carrying them away.

Trot bent down close to examine one of the queer little creatures
and exclaimed, "Why, the seahorses haven't any fins or anything to
swim with."

"Oh yes we have," replied the Sea Horse in a tiny but distinct
voice. "These things on the side of my head are fins."

"I thought they were ears," said the girl.

"So they are. Fins and ears at the same time," answered the little
sea animal. "Also, there are small fins on our backs. Of course, we
can't swim as the mermaids do, or even as swiftly as fishes; but we
manage to get around, thank you."

"Don't the fishes catch and eat you?" inquired Trot curiously.

"Sometimes," admitted the Sea Horse, "and there are many other
living things that have a way of destroying us. But here I am, as
you see, over six weeks old, and during that time I have escaped
every danger. That isn't so bad, is it?"

"Phoo!" said a Starfish lying near. "I'm over three months old.
You're a mere baby, Sea Horse."

"I'm not!" cried the Sea Horse excitedly. "I'm full-grown and may
live to be as old as you are!"

"Not if I keep on living," said the Starfish calmly, and Trot knew
he was correct in his statement.

The little girl now noticed several sea spiders creeping around and
drew back because she did not think them very pretty. They were
shaped not unlike the starfishes, but had slender legs and big heads
with wicked-looking eyes sticking out of them.

"Oh, I don't like those things!" said Trot, coming closer to her
companions.

"You don't, eh?" said a big Sea Spider in a cross voice. "Why do you
come around here, then, scaring away my dinner when you're not
wanted?"

"It isn't YOUR ocean," replied Trot.

"No, and it isn't yours," snapped the Spider. "But as it's big
enough for us both, I'd like you to go away."

"So we will," said Aquareine gently, and at once she moved toward
the surface of the water. Trot and Cap'n Bill followed, with Clia,
and the child asked, "What island are we near?"

"It has no name," answered the Queen, "for it is not inhabited by
man, nor has it ever yet been discovered by them. Perhaps you will
be the first humans to see this island. But it is a barren, rocky
place, and only fit for seals and turtles."

"Are any of them there now?" Cap'n Bill inquired.

"I think so. We will see."

Trot was astonished to find how near they were to the "top" of the
ocean, for they had not ascended through the water very long when
suddenly her head popped into the air, and she gave a gasp of
surprise to find herself looking at the clear sky for the first time
since she had started upon this adventure by rowing into Giant's
Cave.

She floated comfortably in the water, with her head and face just
out of it, and began to look around her. Cap'n Bill was at her side,
and so were the two mermaids. The day was fair, and the surface of
the sea, which stretched far away as the eye could reach, rippled
under a gentle breeze. They had risen almost at the edge of a small,
rocky islet, high in the middle, but gradually slanting down to the
water. No trees or bushes or grass grew anywhere about; only rocks,
gray and bleak, were to be seen.

Trot scarcely noticed this at first, however, for the island seemed
covered with groups of forms, some still and some moving, which the
old sailor promptly recognized as seals. Many were lying asleep or
sunning themselves; others crept awkwardly around, using their
strong fins as legs or "paddles" and caring little if they disturbed
the slumbers of the others. Once in a while one of those crowded out
of place would give a loud and angry bark, which awakened others and
set them to barking likewise.

Baby seals were there in great numbers, and were more active and
playful than their elders. It was really wonderful how they could
scramble around on the land, and Trot laughed more than once at
their antics.

At the edge of the water lay many huge turtles, some as big around
as a wagon wheel and others much smaller in size.

"The big ones are very old," said the Queen, seeing Trot's eyes
fixed on the turtles.

"How old?" asked the child.

"Hundreds of years, I think. They live to a great age, for nothing
can harm them when they withdraw their legs and heads into their
thick shells. We use some of the turtles for food, but prefer the
younger ones. Men also fish for turtles and eat them, but of course
no men ever come to this out-of-the-way place in the ocean, so the
inhabitants of this little island know they are perfectly safe."

In the center of the island rose high cliffs on top of which were to
be seen great flocks of seagulls, some whirling in the air, while
others were perched upon the points of rock.

"What do the birds find to eat?" asked Cap'n Bill.

"They often feed upon seals which die of accident or old age, and
they are expert fishermen," explained Queen Aquareine. "Curiously
enough, the seals also feed upon these birds, which they are often
able to catch in their strong jaws when the gulls venture too near.
And then, the seals frequently rob the nests of eggs, of which they
are very fond."

"I'd like a few gulls' eggs now," remarked a big seal that lay near
them upon the shore. Trot had thought him sound asleep, but now he
opened his eyes to blink lazily at the group in the water.

"Good morning," said the Queen. "Aren't you Chief Muffruff?"

"I am," answered the old seal. "And you are Aquareine, the mermaid
queen. You see, I remember you, although you haven't been here for
years. And isn't that Princess Clia? To be sure! But the other
mermaids are strangers to me, especially the bald-headed one."

"I'm not a mermaid," asserted Cap'n Bill. "I'm a sailor jes'
a-visitin' the mermaids."

"Our friends are earth dwellers," explained the Queen.

"That's odd," said Muffruff. "I can't remember that any earth
dwellers ever came this way before. I never travel far, you see, for
I'm chief of this disorderly family of seals that live on this
island--on it and off it, that is."

"You're a poor chief," said a big turtle lying beside the seal. "If
your people are disorderly, it is your own fault."

Muffruff gave a chuckling laugh. Then, with a movement quick as
lightning, he pushed his head under the shell of the turtle and gave
it a sudden jerk. The huge turtle was tossed up on edge and then
turned flat upon its back, where its short legs struggled vainly to
right its overturned body.

"There!" snorted the Seal contemptuously. "Perhaps you'll dare
insult me again in the presence of visitors, you old mud-wallower!"

Seeing the plight of the turtle, several young seals came laughingly
wabbling to the spot, and as they approached the helpless creature
drew in his legs and head and closed his two shells tightly
together. The seals bumped against the turtle and gave it a push
that sent it sliding down the beach like a toboggan, and a minute
later it splashed into the water and sank out of sight. But that was
just what the creature wanted. On shore the upset turtle was quite
helpless; but the mischievous seals saved him. For as soon as he
touched the water, he was able to turn and right himself, which he
promptly did. Then he raised his head above the water and asked:

"Is it peace or war, Muffruff?"

"Whichever you like," answered the Seal indifferently.

Perhaps the turtle was angry, for it ran on shore with remarkable
swiftness, uttering a shrill cry as it advanced. At once all the
other turtles awoke to life and with upraised heads joined their
comrade in the rush for the seals. Most of Chief Muffruff's band
scrambled hastily down the rocks and plunged into the water of the
sea without waiting for the turtles to reach them; but the chief
himself was slow in escaping. It may be that he was ashamed to run
while the mermaids were watching, but if this was so he made a great
mistake. The turtles snapped at his fins and tail and began biting
round chunks out of them so that Chief Muffruff screamed with pain
and anger and floundered into the water as fast as he could go. The
vengeful turtles were certainly the victors, and now held undisputed
possession of the island.

Trot laughed joyously at the incident, not feeling a bit sorry for
the old seal who had foolishly begun the battle. Even the gentle
queen smiled as she said:

"These quarrels between the turtles and the seals are very frequent,
but they are soon ended. An hour from now they will all be lying
asleep together just as we found them; but we will not wait for
that. Let us go."

She sank slowly beneath the water again, and the others followed
after her.




CHAPTER 11

ZOG THE TERRIBLE AND HIS SEA DEVILS


"The sun must be going under a cloud," said Trot, looking ahead.

They had descended far into the ocean depths again--further, the
girl thought, than they had ever been before.

"No," the Queen answered after a glance ahead of them, "that is a
cuttlefish, and he is dyeing the sea around him with ink so that he
can hide from us. Let us turn a little to the left, for we could see
nothing at all in that inky water."

Following her advice, they made a broad curve to the left, and at
once the water began to darken in that direction.

"Why, there's another of 'em," said Cap'n Bill as the little party
came to a sudden halt.

"So there is," returned the Queen, and Trot thought there was a
little quiver of anxiety in her voice. "We must go far to the right
to escape the ink."

So they again started, this time almost at a right angle to their
former course, the little girl inquired:

"How can the cuttlefish color the water so very black?"

"They carry big sacks in front of them where they conceal the ink,"
Princess Clia answered. "Whenever they choose, the cuttlefish are
able to press out this ink, and it colors the water for a great
space around them."

The direction in which they were now swimming was taking them far
out of their way. Aquareine did not wish to travel very far to the
right, so when she thought they had gone far enough to escape the
inky water, she turned to lead her party toward the left--the
direction in which she DID wish to go. At once another cloud of ink
stained the water and drove them to the right again.

"Is anything wrong, ma'am?" asked Cap'n Bill, seeing a frown gather
upon the queen's lovely face.

"I hope not," she said. "But I must warn you that these cuttlefish
are the servants of the terrible sea devils, and from the way they
are acting they seem determined to drive us toward the Devil Caves,
which I wished to avoid."

This admission on the part of their powerful protector, the fairy
mermaid, sent a chill to the hearts of the earth people. Neither
spoke for a time, but finally Cap'n Bill asked in a timid voice:

"Hadn't we better go back, ma'am?"

"Yes," decided Aquareine after a moment's thought. "I think it will
be wise to retreat. The sea devils are evidently aware of our
movements and wish to annoy us. For my part, I have no fear of them,
but I do not care to have you meet such creatures."

But when they turned around to abandon their journey, another inky
cloud was to be seen behind them. They really had no choice but to
swim in the only streak of clear water they could find, and the
mermaids well knew this would lead them nearer and nearer to the
caves of their enemies.

But Aquareine led the way, moving very slowly, and the others
followed her. In every other direction they were hemmed in by the
black waters, and they did not dare to halt, because the inky fluid
crept swiftly up behind them and drove them on.

The queen and the princess had now become silent and grave. They
swam on either side of their guests as if to better protect them.

"Don't look up," whispered Clia, pressing close to the little girl's
side.

"Why not?" asked Trot, and then she did exactly what she had been
told not to do. She lifted her head and saw stretched over them a
network of scrawny, crimson arms interlaced like the branches of
trees in winter when the leaves have fallen and left them bare.

Cap'n Bill gave a start and muttered "Land sakes!" for he, too, had
gazed upward and seen the crimson network of limbs.

"Are these the sea devils?" asked the child, more curious than
frightened.

"Yes, dear," replied the Queen. "But I advise you to pay no
attention to them. Remember, they cannot touch us."

In order to avoid the threatening arms overhead, which followed them
as they swam, our friends kept near to the bottom of the sea, which
was here thickly covered with rough and jagged rocks. The inky water
had now been left far behind, but when Trot looked over her
shoulder, she shuddered to find a great crimson monster following
closely after them, with a dozen long, snaky feelers stretched out
as if to grab anyone that lagged behind. And there, at the side of
Princess Clia, was another devil, leering silently with his cruel,
bulging eyes at the pretty mermaid. Beside the queen swam still
another of their enemies. Indeed, the sea devils had crept upon them
and surrounded them everywhere except at the front, and Trot began
to feel nervous and worried for the first time.

Cap'n Bill kept mumbling queer words under his breath, for he had a
way of talking to himself when anything "upsot him," as he would
quaintly remark. Trot always knew he was disturbed or in trouble
when he began to "growl."

The only way now open was straight ahead. They swam slowly, yet fast
enough to keep a safe distance from the dreadful creature behind
them.

"I'm afraid they are driving us into a trap," whispered the Queen
softly. "But whatever happens, do not lose courage, earth friends.
Clia and I are here to protect you, and our fairy powers are
sufficient to keep you from all harm."

"Oh, I don't mind so very much," declared Trot calmly. "It's like
the fairy adventures in storybooks, and I've often thought I'd like
that kind of adventures, 'cause the story always turns out the right
way."

Cap'n Bill growled something just then, but the only words Trot
could make out were, "never lived to tell the tale."

"Oh, pshaw, Cap'n," she said. "We may be in danger, right enough,
an' to be honest, I don't like the looks of these sea devils at all.
But I'm sure it's no KILLING matter, for we've got the fairy circles
all around us."

"Ha ha!" laughed the monster beside her. "WE know all about the
fairy circles, don't we, Migg?"

"Ho ho!" laughed the monster on the other side. "We do, Slibb, my
boy, and we don't think much of fairy circles, either!"

"They have foiled our enemies many a time," declared the Princess
with much dignity.

"Ha ha!" laughed one. "That's why we're here now."

"Ho ho!" laughed the other. "We've learned a trick or two, and we've
got you fast this time."

Then all the sea devils--those above and the one behind, and the two
on the sides--laughed all together, and their laughter was so
horrible that it made even Trot shudder.

But now the queen stopped short, and the others stopped with her.

"I will go no farther," she said firmly, not caring if the monsters
overheard her. "It is evident that these monsters are trying to
drive us into some secret place, and it is well known that they are
in league with Zog the Terrible, whom they serve because they are as
wicked as he is. We must be somewhere near the hidden castle of Zog,
so I prefer to stay here rather than be driven into some place far
more dangerous. As for the sea devils, they are powerless to injure
us in any way. Not one of those thousand arms about us can possibly
touch our bodies."

The only reply to this defiant speech was another burst of horrible
laughter; and now there suddenly appeared before them still another
of the monsters, which thus completely hemmed them in. Then the
creatures began interlacing their long arms--or "feelers"--until
they formed a perfect cage around the prisoners, not an opening
being left that was large enough for one of them to escape through.

The mermaids and the girl and sailor man kept huddled close
together, for although they might be walled in by the sea devils,
their captors could not touch them because of the protecting magic
circles.

All at once Trot exclaimed, "Why, we must be moving!"

This was startling news, but by watching the flow of water past them
they saw that the little girl was right. The sea devils were
swimming, all together, and as the cage they were in moved forward,
our friends were carried with it.

Queen Aquareine had a stern look upon her beautiful face. Cap'n Bill
guessed from this look that the mermaid was angry, for it seemed
much like the look Trot's mother wore when they came home late to
dinner. But however angry the queen might be, she was unable to help
herself or her guests just now or to escape from the guidance of the
dreaded sea devils. The rest of the party had become sober and
thoughtful, and in dignified silence they awaited the outcome of
this strange adventure.
