had left.

When the door opened the thief fell back a pace as before an
unexpected thing.  It was the flare of firelight which struck upon his
eyes. He passed his hand over them.

"A fire!" he said.  "I haven't seen one for a week.  Coming out of the
blackness it gives a man a start."

Improvident joy gleamed in Glad's eyes.

"We'll be warm onct," she chuckled, "if we ain't never warm agaen."

She drew her circle about the hearth again.  The thief took the place
next to her and she handed out food to him--a big slice of meat, bread,
a thick slice of pudding.

"Fill yerself up," she said.  "Then ye'll feel like yer can talk."

The man tried to eat his food with decorum, some recollection of the
habits of better days restraining him, but starved nature was too much
for him.  His hands shook, his eyes filled, his teeth tore.  The rest of
the circle tried not to look at him. Glad and Polly occupied themselves
with their own food.

Antony Dart gazed at the fire. Here he sat warming himself in a loft
with a beggar, a thief, and a helpless thing of the street.  He had come
out to buy a pistol--its weight still hung in his overcoat pocket--and
he had reached this place of whose existence he had an hour ago not
dreamed.  Each step which had led him had seemed a simple, inevitable
thing, for which he had apparently been responsible, but which he knew--
yes, somehow he KNEW--he had of his own volition neither planned nor
meant.  Yet here he sat--a part of the lives of the beggar, the thief,
and the poor thing of the street.  What did it mean?

"Tell me," he said to the thief, "how you came here."

By this time the young fellow had fed himself and looked less like a
wolf.  It was to be seen now that he had blue-gray eyes which were
dreamy and young.

"I have always been inventing things," he said a little huskily.  "I did
it when I was a child.  I always seemed to see there might be a way of
doing a thing better--getting more power.  When other boys were playing
games I was sitting in corners trying to build models out of wire and
string, and old boxes and tin cans.  I often thought I saw the way to
things, but I was always too poor to get what was needed to work them
out.  Twice I heard of men making great names and for tunes because they
had been able to finish what I could have finished if I had had a few
pounds.  It used to drive me mad and break my heart." His hands clenched
themselves and his huskiness grew thicker.  "There was a man," catching
his breath, "who leaped to the top of the ladder and set the whole world
talking and writing--and I had done the thing FIRST--I swear I had!  It
was all clear in my brain, and I was half mad with joy over it, but I
could not afford to work it out.  He could, so to the end of time it
will be HIS."  He struck his fist upon his knee.

"Aw!"  The deep little drawl was a groan from Glad.

"I got a place in an office at last. I worked hard, and they began to
trust me.  I--had a new idea.  It was a big one.  I needed money to work
it out.  I--I remembered what had happened before.  I felt like a poor
fellow running a race for his life.  I KNEW I could pay back ten times--
a hundred times--what I took."

"You took money?" said Dart.

The thief's head dropped.

"No.  I was caught when I was taking it.  I wasn't sharp enough. Someone
came in and saw me, and there was a crazy row.  I was sent to prison.
There was no more trying after that.  It's nearly two years since, and
I've been hanging about the streets and falling lower and lower.  I've
run miles panting after cabs with luggage in them and not had strength
to carry in the boxes when they stopped.  I've starved and slept out of
doors.  But the thing I wanted to work out is in my mind all the time--
like some machine tearing round.  It wants to be finished.  It never
will be. That's all."

Glad was leaning forward staring at him, her roughened hands with the
smeared cracks on them clasped round her knees.

"Things 'AS to be finished," she said.  "They finish theirselves."

"How do you know?"  Dart turned on her.

"Dunno 'OW I know--but I do. When things begin they finish.  It's like a
wheel rollin' down an 'ill." Her sharp eyes fixed themselves on Dart's.
"All of us'll finish somethin'--'cos we've begun.  You will--Polly
will--'e will--I will." She stopped with a sudden sheepish chuckle and
dropped her forehead on her knees, giggling.  "Dunno wot I 'm talking
about," she said, "but it's true."

Dart began to understand that it was.  And he also saw that this ragged
thing who knew nothing whatever, looked out on the world with the eyes
of a seer, though she was ignorant of the meaning of her own knowledge.
It was a weird thing.  He turned to the girl Polly.

"Tell me how you came here," he said.

He spoke in a low voice and gently.  He did not want to frighten her,
but he wanted to know how SHE had begun.  When she lifted her childish
eyes to his, her chin began to shake.  For some reason she did not
question his right to ask what he would.  She answered him meekly, as
her fingers fumbled with the stuff of her dress.

"I lived in the country with my mother," she said.  "We was very happy
together.  In the spring there was primroses and--and lambs.  I--can't
abide to look at the sheep in the park these days.  They remind me so.
There was a girl in the village got a place in town and came back and
told us all about it. It made me silly.  I wanted to come here, too.
I--I came--" She put her arm over her face and began to sob.

"She can't tell you," said Glad. "There was a swell in the 'ouse made
love to her.  She used to carry up coals to 'is parlor an' 'e talked to
'er.  'E 'ad a wye with 'im--"

Polly broke into a smothered wail.

"Oh, I did love him so--I did!" she cried.  "I'd have let him walk over
me.  I'd have let him kill me."

"'E nearly did it," said Glad.

"'E went away sudden an' she's never 'eard word of 'im since."

From under Polly's face-hiding arm came broken words.

"I couldn't tell my mother.  I did not know how.  I was too frightened
and ashamed.  Now it's too late.  I shall never see my mother again, and
it seems as if all the lambs and primroses in the world was dead. Oh,
they're dead--they're dead--and I wish I was, too!"

Glad's eyes winked rapidly and she gave a hoarse little cough to clear
her throat.  Her arms still clasping her knees, she hitched herself
closer to the girl and gave her a nudge with her elbow.

"Buck up, Polly," she said, "we ain't none of us finished yet.  Look at
us now--sittin' by our own fire with bread and puddin' inside us--an'
think wot we was this mornin'. Who knows wot we'll 'ave this time
to-morrer."

Then she stopped and looked with a wide grin at Antony Dart.

"Ow did I come 'ere?" she said.

"Yes," he answered, "how did you come here?"

"I dunno," she said; "I was 'ere first thing I remember.  I lived with a
old woman in another 'ouse in the court.  One mornin' when I woke up she
was dead.  Sometimes I've begged an' sold matches.  Sometimes I've took
care of women's children or 'elped 'em when they 'ad to lie up. I've
seen a lot--but I like to see a lot.  'Ope I'll see a lot more afore I'm
done.  I'm used to bein' 'ungry an' cold, an' all that, but--but I
allers like to see what's comin' to-morrer.  There's allers somethin'
else to-morrer.  That's all about ME," and she chuckled again.

Dart picked up some fresh sticks and threw them on the fire.  There was
some fine crackling and a new flame leaped up.

"If you could do what you liked," he said, "what would you like to do?"

Her chuckle became an outright laugh.

"If I 'ad ten pounds?" she asked, evidently prepared to adjust herself
in imagination to any form of un-looked-for good luck.

"If you had more?"

His tone made the thief lift his head to look at him.

"If I 'ad a wand like the one Jem told me was in the pantermine?"

"Yes," he answered.

She sat and stared at the fire a few moments, and then began to speak in
a low luxuriating voice.

"I'd get a better room," she said, revelling.  "There's one in the next
'ouse.  I'd 'ave a few sticks o' furnisher in it--a bed an' a chair or
two.  I'd get some warm petticuts an' a shawl an' a 'at--with a ostrich
feather in it.  Polly an' me 'd live together.  We'd 'ave fire an' grub
every day.  I'd get drunken Bet's biby put in an 'ome. I'd 'elp the
women when they 'ad to lie up.  I'd--I'd 'elp 'IM a bit," with a jerk of
her elbow toward the thief.  "If 'e was kept fed p'r'aps 'e could work
out that thing in 'is 'ead. I'd go round the court an' 'elp them with
'usbands that knocks 'em about. I'd--I'd put a stop to the knockin'
about," a queer fixed look showing itself in her eyes.  "If I 'ad money
I could do it.  'Ow much," with sudden prudence, "could a body 'ave--
with one o' them wands?"

"More than enough to do all you have spoken of," answered Dart.

"It's a shime a body couldn't 'ave it.  Apple Blossom Court 'd be a
different thing.  It'd be the sime as Miss Montaubyn says it's goin' to
be."  She laughed again, this time as if remembering something
fantastic, but not despicable.

"Who is Miss Montaubyn?"

"She's a' old woman as lives next floor below.  When she was young she
was pretty an' used to dance in the 'alls.  Drunken Bet says she was one
o' the wust.  When she got old it made 'er mad an' she got wusser. She
was ready to tear gals eyes out, an' when she'd get took for makin' a
row she'd fight like a tiger cat. About a year ago she tumbled
downstairs when she'd 'ad too much an' she broke both 'er legs.  You
remember, Polly?"

Polly hid her face in her hands.

"Oh, when they took her away to the hospital!" she shuddered.  "Oh, when
they lifted her up to carry her!"

"I thought Polly 'd 'ave a fit when she 'eard 'er screamin' an'
swearin'. My! it was langwich!  But it was the 'orspitle did it."

"Did what?"

"Dunno," with an uncertain, even slightly awed laugh.  "Dunno wot it
did--neither does nobody else, but somethin' 'appened.  It was along of
a lidy as come in one day an' talked to 'er when she was lyin' there.
My eye," chuckling, "it was queer talk!  But I liked it.  P'raps it was
lies, but it was cheerfle lies that 'elps yer.  What I ses is--if THINGS
ain't cheerfle, PEOPLE's got to be--to fight it out.  The women in the
'ouse larft fit to kill theirselves when she fust come 'ome limpin' an'
talked to 'em about what the lidy told 'er.  But arter a bit they liked
to 'ear 'er--just along o' the cheerfleness.  Said it was like a
pantermine.  Drunken Bet says if she could get 'old 'f it an' believe it
sime as Jinny Montaubyn does it'd be as cheerin' as drink an' last
longer."

"Is it a kind of religion?" Dart asked, having a vague memory of rumors
of fantastic new theories and half-born beliefs which had seemed to him
weird visions floating through fagged brains wearied by old doubts and
arguments and failures.  The world was tired--the whole earth was sad--
centuries had wrought only to the end of this twentieth century's
despair.  Was the struggle waking even here--in this back water of the
huge city's human tide? he wondered with dull interest.

"Is it a kind of religion?" he said.

"It's cheerfler."  Glad thrust out her sharp chin uncertainly again.
"There's no 'ell fire in it.  An' there ain't no blime laid on
Godamighty."  (The word as she uttered it seemed to have no connection
whatever with her usual colloquial invocation of the Deity.)  "When a
dray run over little Billy an' crushed 'im inter a rag, an' 'is mother
was screamin' an' draggin' 'er 'air down, the curick 'e ses, 'It's
Gawd's will,' 'e ses--an' 'e ain't no bad sort neither, an' 'is fice was
white an' wet with sweat--'Gawd done it,' 'e ses. An' me, I'd nussed the
child an' I clawed me 'air sime as if I was 'is mother an' I screamed
out, 'Then damn 'im!'  An' the curick 'e dropped sittin' down on the
curbstone an' 'id 'is fice in 'is 'ands."
