and graceful; but as it sat silent and motionless upon the peak they
could see that its face was black as ink, and it wore a black cloth
costume made like a union suit and fitting tight to its skin.  Its
hands were black, too, and its toes curled down, like a bird's.  The
creature was black all over except its hair, which was fine, and
yellow, banged in front across the black forehead and cut close at the
sides.  The eyes, which were fixed steadily upon the barking dog, were
small and sparkling and looked like the eyes of a weasel.

"What in the world do you s'pose that is?" asked Dorothy in a hushed
voice, as the little group of travelers stood watching the strange
creature.

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

The thing gave a jump and turned half around, sitting in the same place
but with the other side of its body facing them.  Instead of being
black, it was now pure white, with a face like that of a clown in a
circus and hair of a brilliant purple.  The creature could bend either
way, and its white toes now curled the same way the black ones on the
other side had done.

"It has a face both front and back," whispered Dorothy, wonderingly;
"only there's no back at all, but two fronts."

Having made the turn, the being sat motionless as before, while Toto
barked louder at the white man than he had done at the black one.

"Once," said the shaggy man, "I had a jumping jack like that, with two
faces."

"Was it alive?" asked Button-Bright.

"No," replied the shaggy man; "it worked on strings and was made of
wood."

"Wonder if this works with strings," said Dorothy; but Polychrome cried
"Look!" for another creature just like the first had suddenly appeared
sitting on another rock, its black side toward them.  The two twisted
their heads around and showed a black face on the white side of one and
a white face on the black side of the other.

"How curious," said Polychrome; "and how loose their heads seem to be!
Are they friendly to us, do you think?"

"Can't tell, Polly," replied Dorothy.  "Let's ask 'em."

The creatures flopped first one way and then the other, showing black
or white by turns; and now another joined them, appearing on another
rock.  Our friends had come to a little hollow in the hills, and the
place where they now stood was surrounded by jagged peaks of rock,
except where the road ran through.

"Now there are four of them," said the shaggy man.

"Five," declared Polychrome.

"Six," said Dorothy.

"Lots of 'em!"  cried Button-Bright; and so there were--quite a row of
the two-sided black and white creatures sitting on the rocks all around.

Toto stopped barking and ran between Dorothy's feet, where he crouched
down as if afraid.  The creatures did not look pleasant or friendly, to
be sure, and the shaggy man's donkey face became solemn, indeed.

"Ask 'em who they are, and what they want," whispered Dorothy; so the
shaggy man called out in a loud voice:

"Who are you?"

"Scoodlers!" they yelled in chorus, their voices sharp and shrill.

"What do you want?" called the shaggy man.

"You!" they yelled, pointing their thin fingers at the group; and they
all flopped around, so they were white, and then all flopped back
again, so they were black.

"But what do you want us for?" asked the shaggy man, uneasily.

"Soup!" they all shouted, as if with one voice.

"Goodness me!" said Dorothy, trembling a little; "the Scoodlers must be
reg'lar cannibals."

"Don't want to be soup," protested Button-Bright, beginning to cry.

"Hush, dear," said the little girl, trying to comfort him; "we don't
any of us want to be soup.  But don't worry; the shaggy man will take
care of us."

"Will he?" asked Polychrome, who did not like the Scoodlers at all, and
kept close to Dorothy.

"I'll try," promised the shaggy man; but he looked worried.

Happening just then to feel the Love Magnet in his pocket, he said to
the creatures, with more confidence:

"Don't you love me?"

"Yes!" they shouted, all together.

"Then you mustn't harm me, or my friends," said the shaggy man, firmly.

"We love you in soup!" they yelled, and in a flash turned their white
sides to the front.

"How dreadful!" said Dorothy.  "This is a time, Shaggy Man, when you
get loved too much."

"Don't want to be soup!" wailed Button-Bright again; and Toto began to
whine dismally, as if he didn't want to be soup, either.

"The only thing to do," said the shaggy man to his friends, in a low
tone, "is to get out of this pocket in the rocks as soon as we can, and
leave the Scoodlers behind us.  Follow me, my dears, and don't pay any
attention to what they do or say."

With this, he began to march along the road to the opening in the rocks
ahead, and the others kept close behind him.  But the Scoodlers closed
up in front, as if to bar their way, and so the shaggy man stooped down
and picked up a loose stone, which he threw at the creatures to scare
them from the path.

At this the Scoodlers raised a howl.  Two of them picked their heads
from their shoulders and hurled them at the shaggy man with such force
that he fell over in a heap, greatly astonished.  The two now ran
forward with swift leaps, caught up their heads, and put them on again,
after which they sprang back to their positions on the rocks.




10.  Escaping the Soup-Kettle


The shaggy man got up and felt of himself to see if he was hurt; but he
was not.  One of the heads had struck his breast and the other his left
shoulder; yet though they had knocked him down, the heads were not hard
enough to bruise him.

"Come on," he said firmly; "we've got to get out of here some way," and
forward he started again.

The Scoodlers began yelling and throwing their heads in great numbers
at our frightened friends.  The shaggy man was knocked over again, and
so was Button-Bright, who kicked his heels against the ground and
howled as loud as he could, although he was not hurt a bit.  One head
struck Toto, who first yelped and then grabbed the head by an ear and
started running away with it.

The Scoodlers who had thrown their heads began to scramble down and run
to pick them up, with wonderful quickness; but the one whose head Toto
had stolen found it hard to get it back again.  The head couldn't see
the body with either pair of its eyes, because the dog was in the way,
so the headless Scoodler stumbled around over the rocks and tripped on
them more than once in its effort to regain its top.  Toto was trying
to get outside the rocks and roll the head down the hill; but some of
the other Scoodlers came to the rescue of their unfortunate comrade and
pelted the dog with their own heads until he was obliged to drop his
burden and hurry back to Dorothy.

The little girl and the Rainbow's Daughter had both escaped the shower
of heads, but they saw now that it would be useless to try to run away
from the dreadful Scoodlers.

"We may as well submit," declared the shaggy man, in a rueful voice, as
he got upon his feet again.  He turned toward their foes and asked:

"What do you want us to do?"

"Come!" they cried, in a triumphant chorus, and at once sprang from the
rocks and surrounded their captives on all sides.  One funny thing
about the Scoodlers was they could walk in either direction, coming or
going, without turning around; because they had two faces and, as
Dorothy said, "two front sides," and their feet were shaped like the
letter T upside down.  They moved with great rapidity and there was
something about their glittering eyes and contrasting colors and
removable heads that inspired the poor prisoners with horror, and made
them long to escape.

But the creatures led their captives away from the rocks and the road,
down the hill by a side path until they came before a low mountain of
rock that looked like a huge bowl turned upside down.  At the edge of
this mountain was a deep gulf--so deep that when you looked into it
there was nothing but blackness below.  Across the gulf was a narrow
bridge of rock, and at the other end of the bridge was an arched
opening that led into the mountain.

Over this bridge the Scoodlers led their prisoners, through the opening
into the mountain, which they found to be an immense hollow dome
lighted by several holes in the roof.  All around the circular space
were built rock houses, set close together, each with a door in the
front wall.  None of these houses was more than six feet wide, but the
Scoodlers were thin people sidewise and did not need much room.  So
vast was the dome that there was a large space in the middle of the
cave, in front of all these houses, where the creatures might
congregate as in a great hall.

It made Dorothy shudder to see a huge iron kettle suspended by a stout
chain in the middle of the place, and underneath the kettle a great
heap of kindling wood and shavings, ready to light.

"What's that?" asked the shaggy man, drawing back as they approached
this place, so that they were forced to push him forward.

"The Soup Kettle!" yelled the Scoodlers, and then they shouted in the
next breath:

"We're hungry!"

Button-Bright, holding Dorothy's hand in one chubby fist and Polly's
hand in the other, was so affected by this shout that he began to cry
again, repeating the protest:

"Don't want to be soup, I don't!"

"Never mind," said the shaggy man, consolingly; "I ought to make enough
soup to feed them all, I'm so big; so I'll ask them to put me in the
kettle first."

"All right," said Button-Bright, more cheerfully.

But the Scoodlers were not ready to make soup yet.  They led the
captives into a house at the farthest side of the cave--a house
somewhat wider than the others.

"Who lives here?" asked the Rainbow's Daughter.  The Scoodlers nearest
her replied:

"The Queen."

It made Dorothy hopeful to learn that a woman ruled over these fierce
creatures, but a moment later they were ushered by two or three of the
escort into a gloomy, bare room--and her hope died away.

For the Queen of the Scoodlers proved to be much more dreadful in
appearance than any of her people.  One side of her was fiery red, with
jet-black hair and green eyes and the other side of her was bright
yellow, with crimson hair and black eyes.  She wore a short skirt of
red and yellow and her hair, instead of being banged, was a tangle of
short curls upon which rested a circular crown of silver--much dented
and twisted because the Queen had thrown her head at so many things so
many times.  Her form was lean and bony and both her faces were deeply
wrinkled.

"What have we here?" asked the Queen sharply, as our friends were made
to stand before her.

"Soup!" cried the guard of Scoodlers, speaking together.

"We're not!" said Dorothy, indignantly; "we're nothing of the sort."

"Ah, but you will be soon," retorted the Queen, a grim smile making her
look more dreadful than before.

"Pardon me, most beautiful vision," said the shaggy man, bowing before
the queen politely.  "I must request your Serene Highness to let us go
our way without being made into soup.  For I own the Love Magnet, and
whoever meets me must love me and all my friends."

"True," replied the Queen.  "We love you very much; so much that we
intend to eat your broth with real pleasure.  But tell me, do you think
I am so beautiful?"

"You won't be at all beautiful if you eat me," he said, shaking his
head sadly.  "Handsome is as handsome does, you know."

The Queen turned to Button-Bright.

"Do YOU think I'm beautiful?"  she asked.

"No," said the boy; "you're ugly."

"I think you're a fright," said Dorothy.

"If you could see yourself you'd be terribly scared," added Polly.

The Queen scowled at them and flopped from her red side to her yellow
side.

"Take them away," she commanded the guard, "and at six o'clock run them
through the meat chopper and start the soup kettle boiling.  And put
plenty of salt in the broth this time, or I'll punish the cooks
severely."

"Any onions, your Majesty?" asked one of the guard.

"Plenty of onions and garlic and a dash of red pepper.  Now, go!"

The Scoodlers led the captives away and shut them up in one of the
houses, leaving only a single Scoodler to keep guard.

The place was a sort of store-house; containing bags of potatoes and
baskets of carrots, onions and turnips.

"These," said their guard, pointing to the vegetables, "we use to
flavor our soups with."

The prisoners were rather disheartened by this time, for they saw no
way to escape and did not know how soon it would be six o'clock and
time for the meatchopper to begin work.  But the shaggy man was brave
and did not intend to submit to such a horrid fate without a struggle.

"I'm going to fight for our lives," he whispered to the children, "for
if I fail we will be no worse off than before, and to sit here quietly
until we are made into soup would be foolish and cowardly."

The Scoodler on guard stood near the doorway, turning first his white
side toward them and then his black side, as if he wanted to show to
all of his greedy four eyes the sight of so many fat prisoners.  The
captives sat in a sorrowful group at the other end of the room--except
Polychrome, who danced back and forth in the little place to keep
herself warm, for she felt the chill of the cave.  Whenever she
approached the shaggy man he would whisper something in her ear, and
Polly would nod her pretty head as if she understood.

The shaggy man told Dorothy and Button-Bright to stand before him while
he emptied the potatoes out of one of the sacks.  When this had been
secretly done, little Polychrome, dancing near to the guard, suddenly
reached out her hand and slapped his face, the next instant whirling
away from him quickly to rejoin her friends.

The angry Scoodler at once picked off his head and hurled it at the
Rainbow's Daughter; but the shaggy man was expecting that, and caught
the head very neatly, putting it in the sack, which he tied at the
mouth.  The body of the guard, not having the eyes of its head to guide
it, ran here and there in an aimless manner, and the shaggy man easily
dodged it and opened the door.  Fortunately, there was no one in the
big cave at that moment, so he told Dorothy and Polly to run as fast as
they could for the entrance, and out across the narrow bridge.

"I'll carry Button-Bright," he said, for he knew the little boy's legs
were too short to run fast.

Dorothy picked up Toto and then seized Polly's hand and ran swiftly
toward the entrance to the cave.  The shaggy man perched Button-Bright
on his shoulders and ran after them.  They moved so quickly and their
escape was so wholly unexpected that they had almost reached the bridge
when one of the Scoodlers looked out of his house and saw them.

The creature raised a shrill cry that brought all of its fellows
bounding out of the numerous doors, and at once they started in chase.
Dorothy and Polly had reached the bridge and crossed it when the
Scoodlers began throwing their heads.  One of the queer missiles struck
the shaggy man on his back and nearly knocked him over; but he was at
the mouth of the cave now, so he set down Button-Bright and told the
boy to run across the bridge to Dorothy.

Then the shaggy man turned around and faced his enemies, standing just
outside the opening, and as fast as they threw their heads at him he
caught them and tossed them into the black gulf below.  The headless
bodies of the foremost Scoodlers kept the others from running close up,
but they also threw their heads in an effort to stop the escaping
prisoners.  The shaggy man caught them all and sent them whirling down
into the black gulf.  Among them he noticed the crimson and yellow head
of the Queen, and this he tossed after the others with right good will.

Presently every Scoodler of the lot had thrown its head, and every head
was down in the deep gulf, and now the helpless bodies of the creatures
were mixed together in the cave and wriggling around in a vain attempt
to discover what had become of their heads.  The shaggy man laughed and
walked across the bridge to rejoin his companions.

"It's lucky I learned to play base-ball when I was young," he remarked,
"for I caught all those heads easily and never missed one.  But come
along, little ones; the Scoodlers will never bother us or anyone else
any more."

Button-Bright was still frightened and kept insisting, "I don't want to
be soup!" for the victory had been gained so suddenly that the boy
could not realize they were free and safe.  But the shaggy man assured
him that all danger of their being made into soup was now past, as the
Scoodlers would be unable to eat soup for some time to come.

So now, anxious to get away from the horrid gloomy cave as soon as
possible, they hastened up the hillside and regained the road just
beyond the place where they had first met the Scoodlers; and you may be
sure they were glad to find their feet on the old familiar path again.




11.  Johnny Dooit Does It


"It's getting awful rough walking," said Dorothy, as they trudged
along.  Button-Bright gave a deep sigh and said he was hungry.  Indeed,
all were hungry, and thirsty, too; for they had eaten nothing but the
apples since breakfast; so their steps lagged and they grew silent and
weary.  At last they slowly passed over the crest of a barren hill and
saw before them a line of green trees with a strip of grass at their
feet.  An agreeable fragrance was wafted toward them.

Our travelers, hot and tired, ran forward on beholding this refreshing
sight and were not long in coming to the trees.  Here they found a
spring of pure bubbling water, around which the grass was full of wild
strawberry plants, their pretty red berries ripe and ready to eat.
Some of the trees bore yellow oranges and some russet pears, so the
hungry adventurers suddenly found themselves provided with plenty to
eat and to drink.  They lost no time in picking the biggest
strawberries and ripest oranges and soon had feasted to their hearts'
content.  Walking beyond the line of trees they saw before them a
fearful, dismal desert, everywhere gray sand.  At the edge of this
awful waste was a large, white sign with black letters neatly painted
upon it and the letters made these words:

  ALL PERSONS ARE WARNED NOT TO VENTURE UPON THIS DESERT

  For the Deadly Sands will Turn Any Living Flesh
  to Dust in an instant.  Beyond This Barrier is the

  LAND OF OZ

  But no one can Reach that Beautiful Country
  because of these Destroying Sands


"Oh," said Dorothy, when the shaggy man had read the sign aloud; "I've
seen this desert before, and it's true no one can live who tries to
walk upon the sands."

"Then we musn't try it," answered the shaggy man thoughtfully.  "But as
we can't go ahead and there's no use going back, what shall we do next?"

"Don't know," said Button-Bright.

"I'm sure I don't know, either," added Dorothy, despondently.

"I wish father would come for me," sighed the pretty Rainbow's
Daughter, "I would take you all to live upon the rainbow, where you
could dance along its rays from morning till night, without a care or
worry of any sort.  But I suppose father's too busy just now to search
the world for me."

"Don't want to dance," said Button-Bright, sitting down wearily upon
the soft grass.

"It's very good of you, Polly," said Dorothy; "but there are other
things that would suit me better than dancing on rainbows.  I'm 'fraid
they'd be kind of soft an' squashy under foot, anyhow, although they're
so pretty to look at."

This didn't help to solve the problem, and they all fell silent and
looked at one another questioningly.

"Really, I don't know what to do," muttered the shaggy man, gazing hard
at Toto; and the little dog wagged his tail and said "Bow-wow!" just as
if he could not tell, either, what to do.  Button-Bright got a stick
and began to dig in the earth, and the others watched him for a while
in deep thought.  Finally, the shaggy man said:

"It's nearly evening, now; so we may as well sleep in this pretty place
and get rested; perhaps by morning we can decide what is best to be
done."

There was little chance to make beds for the children, but the leaves
of the trees grew thickly and would serve to keep off the night dews,
so the shaggy man piled soft grasses in the thickest shade and when it
was dark they lay down and slept peacefully until morning.

Long after the others were asleep, however, the shaggy man sat in the
starlight by the spring, gazing thoughtfully into its bubbling waters.
Suddenly he smiled and nodded to himself as if he had found a good
thought, after which he, too, laid himself down under a tree and was
soon lost in slumber.

In the bright morning sunshine, as they ate of the strawberries and
sweet juicy pears, Dorothy said:

"Polly, can you do any magic?"

"No dear," answered Polychrome, shaking her dainty head.

"You ought to know SOME magic, being the Rainbow's Daughter," continued
Dorothy, earnestly.

"But we who live on the rainbow among the fleecy clouds have no use for
magic," replied Polychrome.

"What I'd like," said Dorothy, "is to find some way to cross the desert
to the Land of Oz and its Emerald City.  I've crossed it already, you
know, more than once.  First a cyclone carried my house over, and some
Silver Shoes brought me back again--in half a second.  Then Ozma took
me over on her Magic Carpet, and the Nome King's Magic Belt took me
home that time.  You see it was magic that did it every time 'cept the
first, and we can't 'spect a cyclone to happen along and take us to the
Emerald City now."

"No indeed," returned Polly, with a shudder, "I hate cyclones, anyway."

"That's why I wanted to find out if you could do any magic," said the
little Kansas girl.  "I'm sure I can't; and I'm sure Button-Bright
can't; and the only magic the shaggy man has is the Love Magnet, which
won't help us much."

"Don't be too sure of that, my dear," spoke the shaggy man, a smile on
his donkey face.  "I may not be able to do magic myself, but I can call
to us a powerful friend who loves me because I own the Love Magnet, and
this friend surely will be able to help us."

"Who is your friend?" asked Dorothy.

"Johnny Dooit."

"What can Johnny do?"

"Anything," answered the shaggy man, with confidence.

"Ask him to come," she exclaimed, eagerly.

The shaggy man took the Love Magnet from his pocket and unwrapped the
paper that surrounded it.  Holding the charm in the palm of his hand he
looked at it steadily and said these words:

  "Dear Johnny Dooit, come to me.
  I need you bad as bad can be."


"Well, here I am," said a cheery little voice; "but you shouldn't say
you need me bad, 'cause I'm always, ALWAYS, good."

At this they quickly whirled around to find a funny little man sitting
on a big copper chest, puffing smoke from a long pipe.  His hair was
grey, his whiskers were grey; and these whiskers were so long that he
had wound the ends of them around his waist and tied them in a hard
knot underneath the leather apron that reached from his chin nearly to
his feet, and which was soiled and scratched as if it had been used a
long time.  His nose was broad, and stuck up a little; but his eyes
were twinkling and merry.  The little man's hands and arms were as hard
and tough as the leather in his apron, and Dorothy thought Johnny Dooit
looked as if he had done a lot of hard work in his lifetime.

"Good morning, Johnny," said the shaggy man.  "Thank you for coming to
me so quickly."

"I never waste time," said the newcomer, promptly.  "But what's
happened to you?  Where did you get that donkey head?  Really, I
wouldn't have known you at all, Shaggy Man, if I hadn't looked at your
feet."

The shaggy man introduced Johnny Dooit to Dorothy and Toto and
Button-Bright and the Rainbow's Daughter, and told him the story of
their adventures, adding that they were anxious now to reach the
Emerald City in the Land of Oz, where Dorothy had friends who would
take care of them and send them safe home again.

"But," said he, "we find that we can't cross this desert, which turns
all living flesh that touches it into dust; so I have asked you to come
and help us."

Johnny Dooit puffed his pipe and looked carefully at the dreadful
desert in front of them--stretching so far away they could not see its
end.
