twelve, her mother when she was fourteen. They were north-country
folk, and they possessed all the best characteristics of their class.
They were rigidly upright people, they never went in debt; they
considered luxuries bad for the soul and the smaller refinements of
life altogether unnecessary.

Mr. Peel managed to save a little money out of his earnings. He took
year by year these savings to the nearest county bank and invested
them to the best of his ability. The bank broke, and in one fell
stroke he lost all the savings of a life. This affected his health,
and he never held up his head or recovered his vigor of mind and body
again.

He died and two years afterward his wife followed him. Priscilla was
then fourteen and there were three little sisters several years
younger. They were merry little children, strong, healthy, untouched
by care. Priscilla, on the contrary, was grave and looked much older
than her years.

On the night their mother was buried Aunt Rachel Peel, their father's
sister, came from her home far away on the borders of Devonshire, and
told the four desolate children that she was going to take them away
to live on her little farm with her.

Aunt Raby spoke in a very frank manner. She concealed nothing.

"It's only fair to tell you, Prissie," she said, addressing the tall,
gawky girl, who stood with her hands folded in front of her-- "it's
only fair to tell you that hitherto I've just made two ends meet for
one mouth alone, and how I'm to fill four extra ones the Lord knows,
but I don't. Still, I'm going to try, for it shall never be said that
Andrew Peel's children wanted bread while his sister, Rachel Peel,
lived."

"We have none of us big appetites," said Priscilla after a long,
solemn pause; "we can do with very little food-- very little. The only
one who ever is really hungry is Hattie."

Aunt Raby looked up at the pale face, for Prissie was taller than her
aunt even then, and said in a shocked voice:

"Good gracious, child! do you think I'd stint one of you? You ought
all to be hearty, and I hope you will be. No, no, it isn't that,
Prissie, but there'll be no luxuries, so don't you expect them."

"I don't want them," answered Priscilla.

The children all went to Devonshire, and Aunt Raby toiled, as perhaps
no woman had ever toiled before, to put bread into their mouths. Katie
had a fever, which made her pale and thin and took away that look of
robustness which had characterized the little Yorkshire maiden. Nobody
thought about the children's education, and they might have grown up
without any were it not for Priscilla, who taught them what she knew
herself. Nobody thought Priscilla clever; she had no brilliance about
her in any way, but she had a great gift for acquiring knowledge.
Wherever she went she picked up a fresh fact, or a fresh fancy, or a
new idea, and these she turned over and over in her active, strong,
young brain until she assimilated them and made them part of herself.

Among the few things that had been saved from her early home there was
a box of her father's old books, and as these comprised several of the
early poets and essayists, she might have gone further and fared
worse.

One day the old clergyman who lived at a small vicarage near called to
see Miss Peel. He discovered Priscilla deep over Carlyle's "History of
the French Revolution." The young girl had become absorbed in the
fascination of the wild and terrible tale. Some of the horror of it
had got into her eyes as she raised them to return Mr. Hayes'
courteous greeting. His attention was arrested by the look she gave
him. He questioned her about her reading, and presently offered to
help her. From this hour Priscilla made rapid progress. She was not
taught in the ordinary fashion, but she was being really educated. Her
life was full now; she knew nothing about the world, nothing about
society. She had no ambitions and she did not trouble herself to look
very far ahead. The old classics which she studied from morning till
night abundantly satisfied her really strong intellectual nature.

Mr. Hayes allowed her to talk with him, even to argue points with him.
He always liked her to draw her own conclusions; he encouraged her
really original ideas; he was proud of his pupil, and he grew fond of
her. It was not Priscilla's way to say a word about it, but she soon
loved the old clergyman as if he were her father.

Some time between her sixteenth and seventeenth birthday that
awakening came which altered the whole course of her life. It was a
summer's day Priscilla was seated in the old wainscoted parlor of the
cottage, devouring a book lent to her by Mr. Hayes on the origin of
the Greek drama and occasionally bending to kiss little Katie, who sat
curled up in her arms, when the two elder children rushed in with the
information that Aunt Raby had suddenly lain flat down in the
hayfield, and they thought she was asleep.

Prissie tumbled her book in one direction and Katie in the other. In a
moment she was kneeling by Miss Peel's side.

"What is it, Aunt Raby?" she asked tenderly. "Are you ill?"

The tired woman opened her eyes slowly.

"I think I fainted, dear love," she said. "Perhaps it was the heat of
the sun."

Priscilla managed to get her back into the house. She grew better
presently and seemed something like herself, but that evening the aunt
and niece had a long talk, and the next day Prissie went up to see Mr.
Hayes.

"I am interested," he said when he saw her enter the room, "to see how
you have construed that passage in Cicero, Priscilla. You know I
warned you of its difficulty."

"Oh, please, sir, don't," said Prissie, holding up her hand with an
impatient movement, which she now and then found herself indulging in.
"I don't care if Cicero is at the bottom of the sea. I don't want to
speak about him or think about him. His day is over, mine is-- oh,
sir, I beg your pardon."

"Granted, my dear child. Sit down, Prissie. I will forgive your
profane words about Cicero, for I see you are excited. What is the
matter?"

"I want you to help me, Mr. Hayes. Will you help me? You have always
been my dear friend, my good friend."

"Of course I will help you. What is wrong? Speak to me fully."

"Aunt Raby fainted in the hayfield yesterday."

"Indeed? It was a warm day; I am truly concerned. Would she like to
see me? Is she better to-day?"

"She is quite well to-day-- quite well for the time."

"My dear Priscilla, what a tragic face! Your Aunt Raby is not the
first woman who has fainted and got out of her faint again and been
none the worse."

"That is just the point, Mr. Hayes. Aunt Raby has got out of her
faint, but she is the worse."

Mr. Hayes looked hard into his pupil's face. There was no beauty in
it. The mouth was wide, the complexion dull, the features irregular.
Even her eyes-- and perhaps they were Prissie's best point-- were
neither large nor dark; but an expression now filled those eyes and
lingered round that mouth which made the old rector feel solemn.

He took one of the girl's thin unformed hands between his own.

"My dear child," he said, "something weighs on your mind. Tell your
old friend-- your almost father-- all that is in your heart."

Thus begged to make a confidence, Priscilla did tell a commonplace,
and yet tragic, story. Aunt Raby was affected with an incurable
illness. It would not kill her soon; she might live for years, but
every year she would grow a little weaker and a little less capable of
toil. As long as she lived the little farm belonged to her, but
whenever she died it would pass to a distant cousin. Whenever Aunt
Raby died, Priscilla and her three sisters would be penniless.

"So I have come to you," continued Prissie, "to say that I must take
steps at once to enable me to earn money. I must support Hattie and
Rose and Katie whenever Aunt Raby goes. I must earn money as soon as
it is possible for a girl to do so, and I must stop dreaming and
thinking of nothing but books, for perhaps books and I will have
little to say to each other in future."

"That would be sad," replied Mr. Hayes, "for that would be taking a
directly opposite direction to the path which Providence clearly
intends you to walk in."

Priscilla raised her eyes and looked earnestly at the old rector.
Then, clasping her hands tightly together, she said with suppressed
passion:

"Why do you encourage me to be selfish, Mr. Hayes?"

"I will not," he replied, answering her look; "I will listen patiently
to all you have to say. How do you propose to earn bread for yourself
and your sisters?"

"I thought of dressmaking."

"Um! Did you-- make-- the gown you have on?"

"Yes," replied Priscilla, looking down at her ungainly homespun
garment.

The rector rose to his feet and smiled in the most sweet and
benevolent way.

"I am no judge of such matters," he said, "and I may be wrong. But my
impression is that the style and cut of that dress would scarcely have
a large demand in fashionable quarters."

"Oh, sir!" Prissie blushed all over. "You know I said I should have to
learn."

"My dear child," said Mr. Hayes firmly, "when it becomes a question of
a woman earning her bread, let her turn to that path where promise
lies. There is no promise in the fit of that gown, Prissie. But here--
here there is much."

He touched her big forehead lightly with his hand.

"You must not give up your books, my dear," he said, "for,
independently of the pleasure they afford, they will also give you
bread and butter. Go home now and let me think over matters. Come
again to-morrow. I may have important things to say to you."

From this conversation came the results which, shortly after the
completion of her eighteenth year, made Priscilla an inmate of St.
Benet's far-famed college for women. Mr. Hayes left no stone unturned
to effect his object. He thought Priscilla could do brilliantly as a
teacher, and he resolved that for this purpose she should have the
advantages which a collegiate life alone could offer to her. He
himself prepared her for her entrance examination, and he and Aunt
Raby between them managed the necessary funds to give the girl a
three-years' life as a student in these halls of learning.

Prissie knew very little about the money part of the scheme. She only
guessed what had become of Aunt Raby's watch and chain; and a spasm
crossed her face when one day she happened to see that Aunt Raby's
poor little jewel case was empty. The jewels and the watch could
certainly not fetch much, but they provided Prissie with a modest
little outfit, and Mr. Hayes had got a grant from a loan society,
which further lightened expenses for all parties.

Priscilla bade her sisters, her aunt and the old rector good-by and
started on her new life with courage.

  CHAPTER VI

 COLLEGE LIFE

THE routine of life at St. Benet's was something as follows:

The dressing-bell was rung at seven, and all the students were
expected to meet in the chapel for prayers at eight. Nothing was said
if they did not appear; no reproofs were uttered and no inquiries
made; but the good-fellowship between the students and the dons was so
apparent in the three halls that known wishes were always regarded,
and, as a rule, there were few absentees.

The girls went to chapel in their white-straw sailor-hats, simply
trimmed with a broad band of ribbon of the college colors, green with
a narrow stripe of gold. Breakfast immediately followed chapel; tea
and coffee and different cold meats were placed on the side-tables,
and the girls helped themselves to what they pleased.

The great event at breakfast was the post. Each student, when she
entered the breakfast-hall, would make an eager rush to the side-table
where the letters were neatly placed. During breakfast these were read
and chatted over. The whole meal was most informal and seldom lasted
more than a quarter of an hour.

After breakfast the notice-board in the large entrance-hall was
visited and eagerly scanned, for it contained a detailed account of
the hours for the different lectures and the names of the lecturers
who would instruct the students during the day. By the side of the
large official notice-board hung another, which was read with quite as
deep interest. This contained particulars of the meetings of the
different clubs and societies for pleasure or profit got up by the
girls themselves.

On the morning after her arrival Priscilla, with the other students,
read the contents of these two boards, and then, in the company of a
fresher nearly as shy as herself, she wandered about the lovely
grounds which surrounded Heath Hall until nine o'clock, when lectures
began.

Lectures continued without interruption until lunchtime, a meal which
was taken very much when the girls pleased. The time allowed for this
light midday refreshment was from half-past twelve to two.
The-afternoons were mostly given up to games and gymnastics, although
occasionally there were more lectures, and the more studious of the
girls spent a considerable part of the time studying in their own
rooms.

Tea was the convivial meal of the day. To this the girls invited
outside friends and acquaintances, and, as a rule, they always took it
in their own rooms.

Dinner was at half-past six, and from half-past seven to half-past
nine was usually the time when the different clubs and societies met.

There was a regularity and yet a freedom about the life; invisible
bounds were prescribed, beyond which no right-minded or conscientious
girl cared to venture, but the rules were really very few. Students
might visit their friends in Kingsdene and receive them at the
college. They might entertain them at luncheon or dinner or at tea in
their own rooms at a fixed charge, and provided the friends left at a
certain hour, and the girls themselves asked for leave of absence when
they wished to remain out, and mentioned the place to which they
proposed to go, no questions were asked and no objections offered.

They were expected to return to the college not later than eleven at
night, and one invitation to go out in the week was, as a rule, the
most they ever accepted.

Into this life Priscilla came, fresh from the Devonshire farm and from
all the pursuits and interests which had hitherto formed her world.
She had made a very firm niche for herself in Aunt Raby's old cottage,
and the dislodgment therefrom caused her for the time such mental
disquiet and so many nervous and queer sensations that her pain was
often acute and her sense of awkwardness considerable.

Priscilla's best in her early life always seemed but a poor affair,
and she certainly neither looked nor was at her best at first here.
After a few days, however, she fitted into her new grooves, took up
the line of study which she intended to pursue and was quickly
absorbed in all the fascinations which it offered to a nature like
hers.
