
"There is no time for anger," said Amor, holding his crowned head high.
"It is a worthless thing."

After sunset there was a great banquet and after it a great ball, and
the courtiers and princes were delighted by the beauty and grace of the
new King. He was much brighter and more charming than any of the King
Mordreths had been. His laugh was full of gaiety and the people who
stood near him felt happier, though they did not know why.

But when the ball was at its height he stepped into the center of the
room and spoke aloud to the splendid company.

"I have seen the broad streets and the palaces and all that is beautiful
in my capital," he said. "Now I must go to the narrow streets and the
dark ones. I must see the miserable people, the cripples, the wretched
ones, the drunkards and the thieves."

Every one clamored and protested. These things they had hidden from him;
they said kings should not see them.

"I will see them," he said with a smile which was beautiful and strange.
"I go now, on foot, and unattended except for my friend the Ancient One.
Let the ball go on."

He strode through the glittering throng with the gray-clad Ancient One
at his side. He still wore his crown upon his head because he wished his
people to know that their King had come to them.

Through dark and loathsome places they went, through narrow streets and
back alleys and courts, where people scurried away like rats as the
gutter children had done in the daytime. King Amor could not have seen
them but that he had brought with him a bright lantern and held it up in
the air above his high head. The light shining upon his beautiful face
and his crown made him look more than ever like a young god and giant,
and the people cowered terrified before him, asking each other what such
a King would do to wretches like themselves. But just a few very little
children smiled at him because he was so young and bright and splendid.
No one in the black holes and corners could understand why a King should
come walking among them on the night of his coronation day. Most of them
thought that the next morning he would order them all to be killed, and
their houses burned, because he would only think of them as vermin.

Once as he passed through a dark court a madman darted out in his path
shaking his fist.

"We hate you!" he cried out. "We hate you!"

The dwellers in the court gasped with terror, wondering what would
happen. But the tall young King stood holding his lantern above his head
and gazing at the madman with deep thought in his eyes.

"There is no time for hatred in the world," he said. "There is no time."
And then he passed on.

The look of deep thought was in his face throughout the hours in which
he strode on until he had seen all he had come to see.

The next day he rode back up the mountain to his castle on the crag, and
when the night fell he lay out upon the battlements under the sky as he
had done on so many nights. The soft wind blew about him as he looked up
at the stars.

"I do not know, my brothers," he said to them. "Tell me." And he lay
silent until the great sweet stillness of the night seemed to fill his
soul, and when the stars began to fade he slept in rapturous peace.

The people in his kingdom on the plain waited, wondering what he would
do. During the next few days they quarreled and hated each other more
than ever, the rich ones because they all wanted to gain his favor, and
each was jealous of the other; the poor ones because they were afraid of
him and each man feared that his neighbor would betray things he had
done in the past.

Only two boys working together in a field, having stopped to wrangle and
fight, one of them suddenly stood still remembering something, and said
a strange thing in a strange voice:

"There is no time for anger. There is no time." And as he fell to work
again his companion did the same, and when they had finished their task
of weeding they talked about the thing and remembered that when they had
quarreled the day before they had not finished their task at all, and
had not been paid, and had gone home sore from the blows they had given
each other, and had had no supper.

"No, there is no time," they decided.

At the beginning of the following week there were rumors that a strange
law had been made--the strangest ever known in the world. It was
something about a Blue Flower. What had flowers to do with laws, or what
had laws to do with flowers? People quarreled about what the meaning of
such a law might be. Those who thought first of evil things and fears
began to say that in the rich people's gardens was to be planted a Blue
Flower whose perfume would poison all the poor.

The only ones who did not quarrel were the two boys and their friends
who had already begun to make a sort of password of "There is no time
for anger." One of them who was clever added a new idea to the saying.

"There is no time for fear!" he cried out in the field. "Let us go on
with our work." And they finished their task early and played games.

At last one morning it was made known that the new King was to give a
feast in the open air to all the people. It was to be on the plain
outside the city, and he himself was going to proclaim to them the Law
of the Blue Flower.

"Now we shall know the worst," growled and shivered the Afraid Ones as
they shuffled their way to the plain, and the boys who used the password
heard them.

"There is no time to think of the worst!" shouted the clever one at the
top of his voice. "There is no time. We shall be late for the feast."

And a number of people actually turned to listen because there was a
high, strong, gay sound in his voice such as had never been heard in
King Mordreth's Land before.
