Elizabeth Ann approached the stove with the holder in her hand and
horror in her heart. Nobody had ever dreamed of asking her to handle hot
things. She looked around dismally at Aunt Abigail, but the old woman
was standing with her back turned, doing something at the kitchen table.
Very gingerly the little girl took hold of the handle of the saucepan,
and very gingerly she shoved it to the back of the stove. And then she
stood still a moment to admire herself. She could do that as well as
anybody!

"Why," said Aunt Abigail, as if remembering that Betsy had asked her a
question. "Any man could strike a spark from his flint and steel that he
had for his gun. And he'd keep striking it till it happened to fly out
in the right direction, and you'd catch it in some fluff where it would
start a smoulder, and you'd blow on it till you got a little flame, and
drop tiny bits of shaved-up dry pine in it, and so, little by little,
you'd build your fire up."

"But it must have taken forEVER to do that!"

"Oh, you didn't have to do that more than once in ever so long," said
Aunt Abigail, briskly. She interrupted her story to say: "Now you put
the silver around, while I cream the potatoes. It's in that drawer--a
knife, a fork, and two spoons for each place--and the plates and cups
are up there behind the glass doors. We're going to have hot cocoa again
tonight." And as the little girl, hypnotized by the other's casual,
offhand way of issuing instructions, began to fumble with the knives and
forks she went on: "Why, you'd start your fire that way, and then you'd
never let it go out. Everybody that amounted to anything knew how to
bank the hearth fire with ashes at night so it would be sure to last.
And the first thing in the morning, you got down on your knees and poked
the ashes away very carefully till you got to the hot coals. Then you'd
blow with the bellows and drop in pieces of dry pine--don't forget the
water-glasses--and you'd blow gently till they flared up and the
shavings caught, and there your fire would be kindled again. The napkins
are in the second drawer."

Betsy went on setting the table, deep in thought, reconstructing the old
life. As she put the napkins around she said, "But SOMETIMES it must
have gone out ..."

"Yes," said Aunt Abigail, "sometimes it went out, and then one of the
children was sent over to the nearest neighbor to borrow some fire. He'd
take a covered iron pan fastened on to a long hickory stick, and go
through the woods--everything was woods then--to the next house and wait
till they had their fire going and could spare him a pan full of coals;
and then--don't forget the salt and pepper--he would leg it home as fast
as he could streak it, to get there before the coals went out. Say,
Betsy, I think that apple sauce is ready to be sweetened. You do it,
will you? I've got my hands in the biscuit dough. The sugar's in the
left-hand drawer in the kitchen cabinet."

"Oh, MY!" cried Betsy, dismayed. "_I_ don't know how to cook!"

Aunt Abigail laughed and put back a strand of curly white hair with the
back of her floury hand. "You know how to stir sugar into your cup of
cocoa, don't you?"

"But how MUCH shall I put in?" asked Elizabeth Ann, clamoring for exact
instruction so she wouldn't need to do any thinking for herself.

"Oh, till it tastes right," said Aunt Abigail, carelessly. "Fix it to
suit yourself, and I guess the rest of us will like it. Take that big
spoon to stir it with."

Elizabeth Ann took off the lid and began stirring in sugar, a
teaspoonful at a time, but she soon saw that that made no impression.
She poured in a cupful, stirred it vigorously, and tasted it. Better,
but not quite enough. She put in a tablespoonful more and tasted it,
staring off into space under bended brows as she concentrated her
attention on the taste. It was quite a responsibility to prepare the
apple sauce for a family. It was ever so good, too. But maybe a LITTLE
more sugar. She put in a teaspoonful and decided it was just exactly
right!

"Done?" asked Aunt Abigail. "Take it off, then, and pour it out in that
big yellow bowl, and put it on the table in front of your place. You've
made it; you ought to serve it."

"It isn't done, is it?" asked Betsy. "That isn't all you do to make
apple sauce!"

"What else could you do?" asked Aunt Abigail.

"Well...!" said Elizabeth Ann, very much surprised. "I didn't know it
was so easy to cook!"

"Easiest thing in the world," said Aunt Abigail gravely, with the merry
wrinkles around her merry old eyes all creased up with silent fun.

When Uncle Henry came in from the barn, with old Shep at his heels, and
Cousin Ann came down from upstairs, where her sewing-machine had been
humming like a big bee, they were both duly impressed when told that
Betsy had set the table and made the apple sauce. They pronounced it
very good apple sauce indeed, and each sent his saucer back to the
little girl for a second helping. She herself ate three saucerfuls. Her
own private opinion was that it was the very best apple sauce ever made.

After supper was over and the dishes washed and wiped, Betsy helping
with the putting-away, the four gathered around the big lamp on the
table with the red cover. Cousin Ann was making some buttonholes in the
shirt-waist she had constructed that afternoon, Aunt Abigail was darning
socks, and Uncle Henry was mending a piece of harness. Shep lay on the
couch and snored until he got so noisy they couldn't stand it, and
Cousin Ann poked him in the ribs and he woke up snorting and gurgling
and looking around very sheepishly. Every time this happened it made
Betsy laugh. She held Eleanor, who didn't snore at all, but made the
prettiest little tea-kettle-singing purr deep in her throat, and opened
and sheathed her needle-like claws in Betsy's dress.

"Well, how'd you get on at school?" asked Uncle Henry.

"I've got your desk," said Elizabeth Ann, looking at him curiously, at
his gray hair and wrinkled, weather-beaten face, and trying to think
what he must have looked like when he was a little boy like Ralph.

"So?" said Uncle Henry. "Well, let me tell you that's a mighty good
desk! Did you notice the deep groove in the top of it?"

Betsy nodded. She had wondered what that was used for.

"Well, that was the lead-pencil desk in the old days. When they couldn't
run down to the store to buy things, because there wasn't any store to
run to, how do you suppose they got their lead-pencils!" Elizabeth Ann
shook her head, incapable even of a guess. She had never thought before
but that lead-pencils grew in glass show-cases in stores.

"Well, sir," said Uncle Henry, "I'll tell you. They took a piece off the
lump of lead they made their bullets of, melted it over the fire in the
hearth down at the schoolhouse till it would run like water, and poured
it in that groove. When it cooled off, there was a long streak of solid
lead, about as big as one of our lead-pencils nowadays. They'd break
that up in shorter lengths, and there you'd have your lead-pencils, made
while you wait. Oh, I tell you in the old days folks knew how to take
care of themselves more than now."

"Why, weren't there any stores?" asked Elizabeth Ann. She could not
imagine living without buying things at stores.

"Where'd they get the things to put in a store in those days?" asked
Uncle Henry, argumentatively. "Every single thing had to be lugged clear
from Albany or from Connecticut on horseback."

"Why didn't they use wagons?" asked Elizabeth Ann.

"You can't run a wagon unless you've got a road to run it on, can you?"
asked Uncle Henry. "It was a long, long time before they had any roads.
It's an awful chore to make roads in a new country all woods and hills
and swamps and rocks. You were lucky if there was a good path from your
house to the next settlement."

"Now, Henry," said Aunt Abigail, "do stop going on about old times long
enough to let Betsy answer the question you asked her. You haven't given
her a chance to say how she got on at school."

"Well, I'm AWFULLY mixed up!" said Betsy, complainingly. "I don't know
what I am! I'm second-grade arithmetic and third-grade spelling and
seventh-grade reading and I don't know what in writing or composition.
We didn't have those."

Nobody seemed to think this very remarkable, or even very interesting.
Uncle Henry, indeed, noted it only to say, "Seventh-grade reading!" He
turned to Aunt Abigail. "Oh, Mother, don't you suppose she could read
aloud to us evenings?"

Aunt Abigail and Cousin Ann both laid down their sewing to laugh! "Yes,
yes, Father, and play checkers with you too, like as not!" They
explained to Betsy: "Your Uncle Henry is just daft on being read aloud
to when he's got something to do in the evening, and when he hasn't he's
as fidgety as a broody hen if he can't play checkers. Ann hates checkers
and I haven't got the time, often."

"Oh, I LOVE to play checkers!" said Betsy.

"Well, NOW ..." said Uncle Henry, rising instantly and dropping his
half-mended harness on the table. "Let's have a game."

"Oh, Father!" said Cousin Ann, in the tone she used for Shep. "How about
that piece of breeching! You know that's not safe. Why don't you finish
that up first?"

Uncle Henry sat down again, looking as Shep did when Cousin Ann told him
to get up on the couch, and took up his needle and awl.

"But I could read something aloud," said Betsy, feeling very sorry for
him. "At least I think I could. I never did, except at school."

"What shall we have, Mother?" asked Uncle Henry eagerly.

"Oh, I don't know. What have we got in this bookcase?" said Aunt
Abigail. "It's pretty cold to go into the parlor to the other one." She
leaned forward, ran her fat fore-finger over the worn old volumes, and
took out a battered, blue-covered book. "Scott?"

"Gosh, yes!" said Uncle Henry, his eyes shining. "The staggit eve!"

At least that was the way it sounded to Betsy, but when she took the
book and looked where Aunt Abigail pointed she read it correctly, though
in a timid, uncertain voice. She was very proud to think she could
please a grown-up so much as she was evidently pleasing Uncle Henry, but
the idea of reading aloud for people to hear, not for a teacher to
correct, was unheard-of.

   The Stag at eve had drunk his fill
   Where danced the moon on Monan's rill,

she began, and it was as though she had stepped into a boat and was
swept off by a strong current. She did not know what all the words
meant, and she could not pronounce a good many of the names, but nobody
interrupted to correct her, and she read on and on, steadied by the
strongly-marked rhythm, drawn forward swiftly from one clanging,
sonorous rhyme to another. Uncle Henry nodded his head in time to the
rise and fall of her voice and now and then stopped his work to look at
her with bright, eager, old eyes. He knew some of the places by heart
evidently, for once in a while his voice would join the little girl's
for a couplet or two. They chanted together thus:

   A moment listened to the cry
   That thickened as the chase drew nigh,
   Then, as the headmost foes appeared,
   With one brave bound, the copse he cleared.

At the last line Uncle Henry flung his arm out wide, and the child felt
as though the deer had made his great leap there, before her eyes.

"I've seen 'em jump just like that," broke in Uncle Henry. "A
two-three-hundred-pound stag go up over a four-foot fence just like a
piece of thistledown in the wind."

"Uncle Henry," asked Elizabeth Ann, "what is a copse?"

"I don't know," said Uncle Henry indifferently. "Something in the woods,
must be. Underbrush most likely. You can always tell words you don't
know by the sense of the whole thing. Go on."

   And stretching forward, free and far,

The child's voice took up the chant again. She read faster and faster as
it got more exciting. Uncle Henry joined in on

   For, jaded now and spent with toil,
   Embossed with foam and dark with soil,
   While every gasp with sobs he drew,
   The laboring stag strained full in view.

The little girl's heart beat fast. She fled along through the next
lines, stumbling desperately over the hard words but seeing the headlong
chase through them clearly as through tree-trunks in a forest. Uncle
Henry broke in in a triumphant shout:

   The wily quarry shunned the shock
   And TURNED him from the opposing rock;
   Then dashing down a darksome glen,
   Soon lost to hound and hunter's ken,
   In the deep Trossach's wildest nook
   His solitary refuge took.

"Oh MY!" cried Elizabeth Ann, laying down the book. "He got away, didn't
he? I was so afraid he wouldn't!"

"I can just hear those dogs yelping, can't you?" said Uncle Henry.

   Yelled on the view the opening pack.

"Sometimes you hear 'em that way up on the slope of Hemlock Mountain
back of us, when they get to running a deer."

"What say we have some pop-corn!" suggested Aunt Abigail. "Betsy, don't
you want to pop us some?"

"I never DID," said the little girl, but in a less doubtful tone than
she had ever used with that phrase so familiar to her. A dim notion was
growing up in her mind that the fact that she had never done a thing was
no proof that she couldn't.

"I'll show you," said Uncle Henry. He reached down a couple of ears from
a big yellow cluster hanging on the wall, and he and Betsy shelled them
into the popper, popped it full of snowy kernels, buttered it, salted
it, and took it back to the table.

It was just as she was eating her first ambrosial mouthful that the door
opened and a fur-capped head was thrust in. A man's voice said:
"Evenin', folks. No, I can't stay. I was down at the village just now,
and thought I'd ask for any mail down our way." He tossed a newspaper
and a letter on the table and was gone.

The letter was addressed to Elizabeth Ann and it was from Aunt Frances.
She read it to herself while Uncle Henry read the newspaper. Aunt
Frances wrote that she had been perfectly horrified to learn that Cousin
Molly had not kept Elizabeth Ann with her, and that she would never
forgive her for that cruelty. And when she thought that her darling was
at Putney Farm...! Her blood ran cold. It positively did! It was too
dreadful. But it couldn't be helped, for a time anyhow, because Aunt
Harriet was really VERY sick. Elizabeth Ann would have to be a dear,
brave child and endure it as best she could. And as soon ... oh, as soon
as ever she COULD, Aunt Frances would come and take her away from them.
"Don't cry TOO much, darling ... it breaks my heart to think of you there!
TRY to be cheerful, dearest! TRY to bear it for the sake of your
distracted, loving Aunt Frances."

Elizabeth Ann looked up from this letter and across the table at Aunt
Abigail's rosy, wrinkled old face, bent over her darning. Uncle Henry
laid the paper down, took a big mouthful of pop-corn, and beat time
silently with his hand. When he could speak he murmured: An hundred dogs
bayed deep and strong, Clattered an hundred steeds along.

Old Shep woke up with a snort and Aunt Abigail fed him a handful of
pop-corn. Little Eleanor stirred in her sleep, stretched, yawned, and
nestled down into a ball again on the little girl's lap. Betsy could
feel in her own body the rhythmic vibration of the kitten's contented
purr.

Aunt Abigail looked up: "Finished your letter? I hope Harriet is no
worse. What does Frances say?"

Elizabeth Ann blushed a deep red and crushed the letter together in her
hand. She felt ashamed and she did not know why. "Aunt Frances
says, ... Aunt Frances says,  ..." she began, hesitating. "She says Aunt
Harriet is still pretty sick." She stopped, drew a long breath, and went
on, "And she sends her love to you."

Now Aunt Frances hadn't done anything of the kind, so this was a really
whopping fib. But Elizabeth Ann didn't care if it was. It made her feel
less ashamed, though she did not know why. She took another mouthful of
pop-corn and stroked Eleanor's back. Uncle Henry got up and stretched.
"It's time to go to bed, folks," he said. As he wound the clock Betsy
heard him murmuring:

     But when the sun his beacon red....





CHAPTER VII

ELIZABETH ANN FAILS IN AN EXAMINATION

I wonder if you can guess the name of a little girl who, about a month
after this, was walking along through the melting snow in the woods with
a big black dog running circles around her. Yes, all alone in the woods
with a terrible great dog beside her, and yet not a bit afraid. You
don't suppose it could be Elizabeth Ann? Well, whoever she was, she had
something on her mind, for she walked more and more slowly and had only
a very absent-minded pat for the dog's head when he thrust it up for a
caress. When the wood road led into a clearing in which there was a
rough little house of slabs, the child stopped altogether, and, looking
down, began nervously to draw lines in the snow with her overshoe.

You see, something perfectly dreadful had happened in school that day.
The Superintendent, the all-important, seldom-seen Superintendent, came
to visit the school and the children were given some examinations so he
could see how they were getting on.

Now, you know what an examination did to Elizabeth Ann. Or haven't I
told you yet?

Well, if I haven't, it's because words fail me. If there is anything
horrid that an examination DIDn't do to Elizabeth Ann, I have yet to
hear of it. It began years ago, before ever she went to school, when she
heard Aunt Frances talking about how SHE had dreaded examinations when
she was a child, and how they dried up her mouth and made her ears ring
and her head ache and her knees get all weak and her mind a perfect
blank, so that she didn't know what two and two made. Of course
Elizabeth Ann didn't feel ALL those things right off at her first
examination, but by the time she had had several and had rushed to tell
Aunt Frances about how awful they were and the two of them had
sympathized with one another and compared symptoms and then wept about
her resulting low marks, why, she not only had all the symptoms Aunt
Frances had ever had, but a good many more of her own invention.

Well, she had had them all and had them hard this afternoon, when the
Superintendent was there. Her mouth had gone dry and her knees had
shaken and her elbows had felt as though they had no more bones in them
than so much jelly, and her eyes had smarted, and oh, what answers she
had made! That dreadful tight panic had clutched at her throat whenever
the Superintendent had looked at her, and she had disgraced herself ten
times over. She went hot and cold to think of it, and felt quite sick
with hurt vanity. She who did so well every day and was so much looked
up to by her classmates, what MUST they be thinking of her! To tell the
truth, she had been crying as she walked along through the woods,
because she was so sorry for herself. Her eyes were all red still, and
her throat sore from the big lump in it.

And now she would live it all over again as she told the Putney cousins.
For of course they must be told. She had always told Aunt Frances
everything that happened in school. It happened that Aunt Abigail had
been taking a nap when she got home from school, and so she had come out
to the sap-house, where Cousin Ann and Uncle Henry were making syrup, to
have it over with as soon as possible. She went up to the little slab
house now, dragging her feet and hanging her head, and opened the door.

Cousin Ann, in a very short old skirt and a man's coat and high rubber
boots, was just poking some more wood into the big fire which blazed
furiously under the broad, flat pan where the sap was boiling. The
rough, brown hut was filled with white steam and that sweetest of all
odors, hot maple syrup. Cousin Ann turned her head, her face very red
with the heat of the fire, and nodded at the child.

"Hello, Betsy, you're just in time. I've saved out a cupful of hot syrup
for you, all ready to wax."

Betsy hardly heard this, although she had been wild about waxed sugar on
snow ever since her very first taste of it. "Cousin Ann," she said
unhappily, "the Superintendent visited our school this afternoon."

"Did he!" said Cousin Ann, dipping a thermometer into the boiling syrup.

"Yes, and we had EXAMINATIONS!" said Betsy.

"Did you?" said Cousin Ann, holding the thermometer up to the light and
looking at it.

"And you know how perfectly awful examinations make you feel," said
Betsy, very near to tears again.

"Why, no," said Cousin Ann, sorting over syrup tins. "They never made me
feel awful. I thought they were sort of fun."

"FUN!" cried Betsy, indignantly, staring through the beginnings of her
tears.

"Why, yes. Like taking a dare, don't you know. Somebody stumps you to
jump off the hitching-post, and you do it to show 'em. I always used to
think examinations were like that. Somebody stumps you to spell
'pneumonia,' and you do it to show 'em. Here's your cup of syrup. You'd
better go right out and wax it while it's hot."

Elizabeth Ann automatically took the cup in her hand, but she did not
look at it. "But supposing you get so scared you can't spell 'pneumonia'
or anything else!" she said feelingly. "That's what happened to me. You
know how your mouth gets all dry and your knees ..." She stopped. Cousin
Ann had said she did NOT know all about those things. "Well, anyhow, I
got so scared I could hardly STAND up! And I made the most awful
mistakes--things I know just as WELL! I spelled 'doubt' without any b
and 'separate' with an e, and I said Iowa was bounded on the north by
Wisconsin, and I ..."

"Oh, well," said Cousin Ann, "it doesn't matter if you really know the
right answers, does it? That's the important thing."

This was an idea which had never in all her life entered Betsy's brain
and she did not take it in at all now. She only shook her head miserably
and went on in a doleful tone. "And I said 13 and 8 are 22! and I wrote
March without any capital M, and I ..."

"Look here, Betsy, do you WANT to tell me all this?" Cousin Ann spoke in
the quick, ringing voice she had once in a while which made everybody,
from old Shep up, open his eyes and get his wits about him. Betsy
gathered hers and thought hard; and she came to an unexpected
conclusion. No, she didn't really want to tell Cousin Ann all about it.
Why was she doing it? Because she thought that was the thing to do.
"Because if you don't really want to," went on Cousin Ann, "I don't see
that it's doing anybody any good. I guess Hemlock Mountain will stand
right there just the same even if you did forget to put a b in 'doubt.'
And your syrup will be too cool to wax right if you don't take it out
pretty soon."

She turned back to stoke the fire, and Elizabeth Ann, in a daze, found
herself walking out of the door. It fell shut after her, and there she
was under the clear, pale-blue sky, with the sun just hovering over the
rim of Hemlock Mountain. She looked up at the big mountains, all blue
and silver with shadows and snow, and wondered what in the world Cousin
Ann had meant. Of course Hemlock Mountain would stand there just the
same. But what of it? What did that have to do with her arithmetic, with
anything? She had failed in her examination, hadn't she?

She found a clean white snow-bank under a pine-tree, and, setting her
cup of syrup down in a safe place, began to pat the snow down hard to
make the right bed for the waxing of the syrup. The sun, very hot for
that late March day, brought out strongly the tarry perfume of the big
pine-tree. Near her the sap dripped musically into a bucket, already
half full, hung on a maple-tree. A blue-jay rushed suddenly through the
upper branches of the wood, his screaming and chattering voice sounding
like noisy children at play.

Elizabeth Ann took up her cup and poured some of the thick, hot syrup
out on the hard snow, making loops and curves as she poured. It
stiffened and hardened at once, and she lifted up a great coil of it,
threw her head back, and let it drop into her mouth. Concentrated
sweetness of summer days was in that mouthful, part of it still hot and
aromatic, part of it icy and wet with melting snow. She crunched it all
together with her strong, child's teeth into a delicious, big lump and
sucked on it dreamily, her eyes on the rim of Hemlock Mountain, high
above her there, the snow on it bright golden in the sunlight. Uncle
Henry had promised to take her up to the top as soon as the snow went
off. She wondered what the top of a mountain would be like. Uncle Henry
had said the main thing was that you could see so much of the world at
once. He said it was too queer the way your own house and big barn and
great fields looked like little toy things that weren't of any account.
It was because you could see so much more than just the....

She heard an imploring whine, and a cold nose was thrust into her hand!
Why, there was old Shep begging for his share of waxed sugar. He loved
it, though it did stick to his teeth so! She poured out another lot and
gave half of it to Shep. It immediately stuck his jaws together tight,
and he began pawing at his mouth and shaking his head till Betsy had to
laugh. Then he managed to pull his jaws apart and chewed loudly and
visibly, tossing his head, opening his mouth wide till Betsy could see
the sticky, brown candy draped in melting festoons all over his big
white teeth and red gullet. Then with a gulp he had swallowed it all
down and was whining for more, striking softly at the little girl's
skirt with his forepaw. "Oh, you eat it too fast!" cried Betsy, but she
shared her next lot with him too. The sun had gone down over Hemlock
Mountain by this time, and the big slope above her was all deep blue
shadow. The mountain looked much higher now as the dusk began to fall,
and loomed up bigger and bigger as though it reached to the sky. It was
no wonder houses looked small from its top. Betsy ate the last of her
sugar, looking up at the quiet giant there, towering grandly above her.
There was no lump in her throat now. And, although she still thought she
did not know what in the world Cousin Ann meant by saying that about
Hemlock Mountain and her examination, it's my opinion that she had made
a very good beginning of an understanding.

She was just picking up her cup to take it back to the sap-house when
Shep growled a little and stood with his ears and tail up, looking down
the road. Something was coming down that road in the blue, clear
twilight, something that was making a very queer noise. It sounded
almost like somebody crying. It WAS somebody crying! It was a child
crying. It was a little, little girl. ... Betsy could see her
now ... stumbling along and crying as though her heart would break. Why,
it was little Molly, her own particular charge at school, whose reading
lesson she heard every day. Betsy and Shep ran to meet her. "What's the
matter, Molly? What's the matter?" Betsy knelt down and put her arms
around the weeping child. "Did you fall down? Did you hurt you? What are
you doing 'way off here? Did you lose your way?"

"I don't want to go away! I don't want to go away!" said Molly over and
over, clinging tightly to Betsy. It was a long time before Betsy could
quiet her enough to find out what had happened. Then she made out
