because at any time fierce Mr. Goshawk might have come that way, and if
he had, and had found Peter Rabbit asleep, why, that would have been the
end of Peter and all the stories about him.

Peter did go to sleep. You see, the sunning-bank was so warm and
comfortable, and he was so tired and had had so little sleep for such
a long time that, in spite of all he could do, he nodded and nodded and
finally slipped off into dreamland.

Peter slept a long time, for no one came to disturb him. It was past
noon when he opened his eyes and blinked up at jolly, round, red Mr.
Sun. For a minute he couldn't remember where he was. When he did, he
sprang to his feet and hastily looked this way and that way.

"My gracious!" exclaimed Peter. "My gracious, what a careless fellow I
am! It's a wonder that Old Jed Thumper didn't find me asleep. My, but
I'm hungry! Seems as if I hadn't had a good square meal for a year."

Peter stopped suddenly and began to wrinkle his nose. "Um-m!" said he,
"if I didn't know better, I should say that there is a patch of
sweet clover close by. Um-m, my, my! Am I really awake, or am I still
dreaming? I certainly do smell sweet clover!"

Slowly Peter turned his head In the direction from which the delicious
smell seemed to come. Then he whirled around and stared as hard as ever
he could, his mouth gaping wide open in surprise. He blinked, rubbed his
eyes, then blinked again. There could be no doubt of it; there on the
edge of the sunning-bank was a neat little pile of tender, sweet clover.
Yes, Sir, there it was!

Peter walked all around it, looking for all the world as if he couldn't
believe that it was real. Finally he reached out and nibbled a leaf of
it. It WAS real!

There was no doubt in Peter's mind then. Some one had put it there while
Peter was asleep, and Peter knew that it was meant for him. Who could it
have been?

Suddenly a thought popped into Peter's head. He stopped eating and
hopped over to the big fern from behind which he had first seen the two
soft, gentle eyes peeping at him the day before. There in the soft earth
was a fresh footprint, and it looked very, very much like the footprint
of dainty little Miss Fuzzytail!

Peter's heart gave a happy little jump. He felt sure now who had put
the clover there. He looked wistfully about among the ferns, but she was
nowhere to be seen. Finally he hopped back to the pile of clover and ate
it, every bit, and it seemed to him that it was the sweetest, tenderest
clover he had ever tasted in all his life.




CHAPTER XVI

PETER RABBIT'S LOOKING-GLASS


 If people by their looks are judged,
   As judged they're sure to be,
 Why each should always look his best,
   I'm sure you will agree.
                                Peter Rabbit.

For the first time in his life Peter Rabbit had begun to think about his
clothes. Always he had been such a happy-go-lucky fellow that it never
had entered his head to care how he looked. He laughed at Sammy Jay for
thinking so much of that beautiful blue-and-white coat he wears, and he
poked fun at Reddy Fox for bragging so much about his handsome suit. As
for himself, Peter didn't care how he looked. If his coat was whole, or
in rags and tags, it was all the same to Peter. But now Peter, sitting
on the edge of his sunning-bank in the far corner of the Old Pasture,
suddenly realized that he wanted to be good-looking. Yes, Sir, he wanted
to be good-looking. He wished that he were bigger. He wished that he
were the biggest and strongest Rabbit in the world. He wished that he
had a handsome coat. And it was all because of the soft, gentle eyes of
little Miss Fuzzytail that he had seen peeping out at him so often. He
felt sure that it was little Miss Fuzzytail herself who had left the
pile of sweet clover close by his sunning-bank the other day while he
was asleep.

The fact is, Peter Rabbit was falling in love. Yes, Sir, Peter Rabbit
was falling in love. All he had seen of little Miss Fuzzytail were her
soft, gentle eyes, for she was very shy and had kept out of sight. But
ever since he had first seen them, he had thought and dreamed of nothing
else, until it seemed as if there were nothing in the world he wanted so
much as to meet her. Perhaps he would have wanted this still more if he
had known that it was she who had fooled her father, Old Jed Thumper,
the big, gray, old Rabbit, so that Peter might have the long nap on the
sunning-bank he so needed.

"I've just got to meet her. I've just got to!" said Peter to himself,
and right then he began to wish that he were big and fine-looking.

"My, I must be a sight!" he thought, "I wonder how I do look, anyway. I
must hunt up a looking-glass and find out."

Now when Peter Rabbit thinks of doing a thing, he wastes very little
time. It was that way now. He started at once for the bit of swamp where
he had first seen the tracks of Old Jed Thumper. He still limped from
the wounds made by Hooty the Owl. But in spite of this he could travel
pretty fast, and it didn't take him long to reach the swamp.

There, just as he expected, he found a looking-glass. What was it like?
Why, it was just a tiny pool of water. Yes, Sir, it was a quiet pool of
water that reflected the ferns growing around it and the branches of the
trees hanging over it, and Peter Rabbit himself sitting on the edge of
it. That was Peter's looking-glass.

For a long time he stared into it. At last he gave a great sigh. "My,
but I am a sight!" he exclaimed.

He was. His coat was ragged and torn from the claws of Hooty the Owl
and the teeth of Old Jed Thumper. The white patch on the seat of his
trousers was stained and dirty from sitting down in the mud. There were
burrs tangled in his waistcoat. He was thin and altogether a miserable
looking Rabbit.

"It must be that Miss Fuzzytail just pities me. She certainly can't
admire me," muttered Peter, as he pulled out the burrs.

For the next hour Peter was very busy. He washed and he brushed and he
combed. When, at last, he had done all that he could, he took another
look in his looking-glass, and what he saw was a very different looking
Rabbit.

  "Though I am homely, lank and lean,
   I can at least be neat and clean,"

said he, as he started back for the sunning-bank.




CHAPTER XVII

PETER MEETS MISS FUZZYTAIL


 That this is true there's no denying--
 There's nothing in the world like trying.
                                       Peter Rabbit.

Peter Rabbit was feeling better. Certainly he was looking better. You
see, just as soon as Old Mother Nature saw that Peter was trying to look
as well as he could, and was keeping himself as neat and tidy as he knew
how, she was ready to help, as she always is. She did her best with the
rents in his coat, made by the claws of Hooty the Owl and the teeth of
Old Jed Thumper, and so it wasn't long before Peter's coat looked nearly
as good as new. Then, too, Peter was getting enough to eat these days.
Days and days had passed since he had seen Old Jed Thumper, and this had
given him time to eat and sleep.

Peter wondered what had become of Old Jed Thumper. "Perhaps something
has happened to him," thought Peter. "I--I almost hope something has."
Then, being ashamed of such a wish, he added, "Something not very
dreadful, but which will keep him from hunting me for a while and trying
to drive me out of the Old Pasture."

Now all this time Peter had been trying to find little Miss Fuzzytail.
He was already in love with her, although all he had seen of her were
her two soft, gentle eyes, shyly peeping at him from behind a big fern.
He had wandered here and sauntered there, looking for her, but although
he found her footprints very often, she always managed to keep out of
his sight, You see, she knew the Old Pasture so much better than he
did, and all the little paths in it, that she had very little trouble in
keeping out of his way. Then, too, she was very busy, for it was she who
was keeping her cross father, Old Jed Thumper, away from Peter, because
she was so sorry for Peter. But Peter didn't know this. If he had, I am
afraid that he would have been more in love than ever.

The harder she was to find, the more Peter wanted to find her. He spent
a great deal of time each day brushing his coat and making himself look
as fine as he could, and while he was doing it, he kept wishing over and
over again that something would happen so that he could show little Miss
Fuzzytail what a smart, brave fellow he really was.

But one day followed another, and Peter seemed no nearer than ever to
meeting little Miss Fuzzytail. He was thinking of this one morning
and was really growing very down-hearted, as he sat under a friendly
bramble-bush, when suddenly there was a sharp little scream of fright
from behind a little juniper-tree.

Somehow Peter knew whose voice that was, although he never had heard it
before. He sprang around the little juniper-tree, and what he saw filled
him with such rage that he didn't once stop to think of himself. There
was little Miss Fuzzytail in the clutches of Black Pussy, Farmer Brown's
cat, who often stole away from home to hunt in the Old Pasture. Like a
flash Peter sprang over Black Pussy, and as he did so he kicked with
all his might. The cat hadn't seen him coming, and the kick knocked
her right into the prickly juniper-tree. Of course she lost her grip on
little Miss Fuzzytail, who hadn't been hurt so much as frightened.

By the time the cat got out of the juniper-tree, Peter and Miss
Fuzzytail were sitting side by side safe in the middle of a bull-briar
patch.

"Oh? how brave you are!" sobbed little Miss Fuzzytail.

And this is the way that Peter Rabbit at last got his heart's desire.




CHAPTER XVIII

TOMMY TIT PROVES A FRIEND INDEED


     Nothing in all the world is so precious as a true friend.
     Peter Rabbit.

After Peter Rabbit had saved little Miss Fuzzytail from Black Pussy, the
cat who belonged way down at Farmer Brown's house and had no business
hunting in the Old Pasture, he went with her as near to her home as she
would let him. She said that it wasn't necessary that he should go a
single step, but Peter insisted that she needed him to see that no more
harm came to her. Miss Fuzzytail laughed at that, for she felt quite
able to take care of herself. It had been just stupid carelessness on
her part that had given Black Pussy the chance to catch her, she said,
and she was very sure that she never would be so careless again. What
she didn't tell Peter was that she had been so busy peeping at him and
admiring him that she had quite forgotten to watch out for danger for
herself.

Finally she said that he could go part way with her. But when they were
almost within sight of the bull-briar castle of her father, Old Jed
Thumper, the big, gray Rabbit who thought he owned the Old Pasture, she
made Peter turn back. You see, she was afraid of what Old Jed Thumper
might do to Peter, and--well, the truth is she was afraid of what he
might do to her if he should find out that she had made friends with
Peter.

So Peter was forced to go back, but he took with him a half promise that
she would meet him the next night up near his sunning-bank in the far
corner of the Old Pasture.

After that there were many pleasant days for Peter Rabbit. Sometimes
little Miss Fuzzytail would meet him, and sometimes she would shyly hide
from, him, but somehow, somewhere, he managed to see her every day, and
so all the time in Peter's heart was a little song:

  "The sky is blue; the leaves are green;
   The golden sunbeams peep between;
   My heart is joyful as can be,
   And all the world looks bright to me."

And then one day Old Jed Thumper found out all about how his daughter,
little Miss Fuzzytail, and Peter Rabbit had become such good friends.
Old Jed Thumper went into a terrible rage. He chewed and chewed with
nothing in his mouth, that is, nothing but his temper, the way an angry
Rabbit will. He vowed and declared that if he never ate another mouthful
he would drive Peter Rabbit from the Old Pasture.

My, my, my, those were bad days for Peter Rabbit! Yes, Sir, those
certainly were bad days! Old Jed Thumper had found out how little Miss
Fuzzytail had been fooling him by making him think Peter was in parts
of the Old Pasture in quite the opposite direction from where he really
was. Worse still, he found Peter's favorite sunning-bank in the far
corner of the Old Pasture and would hide near it and try to catch
Peter every time Peter tried to get a few minutes' rest there. He did
something worse than that.

One day he saw fierce Mr. Goshawk hunting. He let Mr. Goshawk almost
catch him, and then ducked under a bramble-bush. Then he showed himself
again and once more escaped in the same way. So he led fierce Mr.
Goshawk to a point where Mr. Goshawk could look down and see Peter
Rabbit stretched out on his sunning-bank, trying to get a little rest.
Right; away Mr. Goshawk forgot all about Old Jed Thumper and sailed
up in the sky from where he could swoop down on Peter, while Old Jed
Thumper, chuckling to himself wickedly, hid where he could watch what
would happen.

That certainly would have been the last of Peter Rabbit if it hadn't
been for Tommy Tit the Chickadee. Tommy saw Mr. Goshawk and just in time
warned Peter, and so Mr. Goshawk got only his claws full of soft earth
for his pains, while Old Jed Thumper once more chewed on nothing in rage
and disappointment. Dear me, dear me, those certainly were dreadful days
for Peter Rabbit and little Miss Fuzzytail. You see, all the time little
Miss Fuzzytail was terribly worried for fear Peter would be caught.

[Illustration with caption: THAT NIGHT OLD MAN COYOTE STARTED FOR THE
OLD PASTURE.]




CHAPTER XIX

OLD MAN COYOTE PAYS A DEBT


 Some little seeds of goodness
   You'll find in every heart,
 To sprout and keep on growing
   When once they get a start.
                              Peter Rabbit.

Matters went from bad to worse with Peter Rabbit and little Miss
Fuzzytail. Peter would have made up his mind to go back to his old home
