
"I guess he knows enough now. You'd ought to set him to work."

"He is ready enough to work," said Mr. Walton. "He never was lazy."

"That's good. There's a sight of lazy, shiftless boys about in these
days. Seems as if they expected to earn their bread 'n butter a-doin'
nothin'. I've been a thinkin', neighbor Walton, that you'll find it hard
to pay for that cow in six months."

"I am afraid I shall," said the farmer, thinking in surprise, "Can he be
going to reduce the price?"

"So I thought mebbe we might make an arrangement to make it easier."

"I should be glad to have it made easier, squire. It was hard on me,
losing that cow by disease."

"Of course. Well, what I was thinkin' was, you might hire out your boy
to work for me. I'd allow him two dollars a month and board, and the
wages would help pay for the cow."

Harry looked up in dismay at this proposition. He knew very well the
meanness of the board which the squire provided, how inferior it was
even to the scanty, but well-cooked meals which he got at home; he knew,
also that the squire had the knack of getting more work out of his men
than any other farmer in the town; and the prospect of being six months
in his employ was enough to terrify him. He looked from Squire Green's
mean, crafty face to his father's in anxiety and apprehension. Were all
his bright dreams of future success to terminate in this?





CHAPTER VIII. HARRY'S DECISION


Squire Green rubbed his hands as if he had been proposing a plan with
special reference to the interest of the Waltons. Really he conceived
that it would save him a considerable sum of money. He had in his employ
a young man of eighteen, named Abner Kimball, to whom he was compelled
to pay ten dollars a month. Harry, he reckoned, could be made to do
about as much, though on account of his youth he had offered him but two
dollars, and that not to be paid in cash.

Mr. Walton paused before replying to his proposal.

"You're a little too late," he said, at last, to Harry's great relief.

"Too late!" repeated the squire, hastily. "Why, you hain't hired out
your boy to anybody else, have you?"

"No; but he has asked me to let him leave home, and I've agreed to it."

"Leave home? Where's he goin'?"

"He has not fully decided. He wants to go out and seek his fortune."

"He'll fetch up at the poorhouse," growled the squire.

"If he does not succeed, he will come home again."

"It's a foolish plan, neighbor Walton. Take my word for't. You'd better
keep him here, and let him work for me."

"If he stayed at home, I should find work for him on my farm."

Mr. Walton would not have been willing to have Harry work for the
squire, knowing well his meanness, and how poorly he paid his hired men.

"I wanted to help you pay for that cow," said the squire, crossly. "If
you can't pay for't when the time comes you mustn't blame me."

"I shall blame no one. I can't foresee the future; but I hope to get
together the money somehow."

"You mustn't ask for more time. Six months is a long time to give."

"I believe I haven't said anything about more time yet, Squire Green,"
said Hiram Walton, stiffly. "I don't see that you need warn me."

"I thought we might as well have an understandin' about it," said the
squire. "So you won't hire out the boy?"

"No, I cannot, under the circumstances. If I did I should consider his
services worth more than two dollars a month."

"I might give him two'n a half," said the squire, fancying it was merely
a question of money.

"How much do you pay Abner Kimball?"

"Wal, rather more than that," answered the squire, slowly.

"You pay him ten dollars a month, don't you?"

"Wal, somewheres about that; but it's more'n he earns."

"If he is worth ten dollars, Harry would be worth four or six."

"I'll give three," said the squire, who reflected that even at that rate
he would be saving considerable.

"I will leave it to Harry himself," said his father.

"Harry, you hear Squire Green's offer. What do you say? Will you go to
work for him at three dollars a month?"

"I'd rather go away, as you told me I might, father."

"You hear the boy's decision, squire."

"Wal, wal," said the squire, a good deal disappointed--for, to tell the
truth, he had told Abner he should not want him, having felt confident
of obtaining Harry. "I hope you won't neither of ye regret it."

His tone clearly indicated that he really hoped and expected they would.
"I bid ye good night."

"I'll hev the cow back ag'in," said the squire to himself. "He needn't
hope no massy. If he don't hev the money ready for me when the time is
up, he shan't keep her."

The next morning he was under the unpleasant necessity of reengaging
Abner.

"Come to think on't, Abner," he said, "I guess I'd like to hev you stay
longer. There's more work than I reckoned, and I guess I'll hev to have
somebody."

This was at the breakfast table. Abner looked around him, and after
making sure that there was nothing eatable left, put down his knife
and fork with the air of one who could have eaten more, and answered,
deliberately: "Ef I stay I'll hev to hev more wages."

"More wages?" repeated Squire Green, in dismay. "More'n ten dollars?"

"Yes, a fellow of my age orter hey more'n that."

"Ten dollars is a good deal of money."

"I can't lay up a cent off'n it."

"Then you're extravagant."

"No I ain't. I ain't no chance to be. My cousin, Paul Bickford, is
gettin' fifteen dollars, and he ain't no better worker'n I am."

"Fifteen dollars!" ejaculated, the squire, as if he were naming some
extraordinary sum. "I never heerd of such a thing."

"I'll work for twelve'n a half," said Abner, "and I won't work for no
less."

"It's too much," said the squire. "Besides, you agreed to come for ten."

"I know I did; but this is a new engagement."

Finally Abner reduced his terms to twelve dollars, an advance of two
dollars a month, to which the squire was forced to agree, though very
reluctantly. He thought, with an inward groan, that but for his hasty
dismissal of Abner the night before, on the supposition that he could
obtain Harry in his place, he would not have been compelled to raise
Abner's wages. This again resulted indirectly from selling the cow,
which had put the new plan into his head. When the squire reckoned up
this item, amounting in six months to twelve dollars, he began to doubt
whether his cow trade had been quite so good after all.

"I'll get it out of Hiram Walton some way," he muttered. "He's a great
fool to let that boy have his own way. I thought to be sure he'd oblige
me arter the favor I done him in sellin' him the cow. There's gratitude
for you!"

The squire's ideas about gratitude, and the manner in which he had
earned it, were slightly mixed, it must be acknowledged. But, though he
knew very well that he had been influenced only by the consideration
of his own interest, he had a vague idea that he was entitled to some
credit for his kindness in consenting to sell his neighbor a cow at an
extortionate price.

Harry breathed a deep sigh of relief after Squire Green left the room.

"I was afraid you were going to hire me out to the squire, father," he
said.

"You didn't enjoy the prospect, did you?" said his father, smiling.

"Not much."

"Shouldn't think he would," said his brother Tom.

"The squire's awful stingy. Abner Kimball told me he had the meanest
breakfast he ever ate anywhere."

"I don't think any of his household are in danger of contracting the
gout from luxurious living."

"I guess not," said Tom.

"I think," said Jane, slyly, "you'd better hire out Tom to the squire."

"The squire would have the worst of the bargain," said his father, with
a good-natured hit at Tom's sluggishness.

"He wouldn't earn his board, however poor it might be."

"The squire didn't seem to like it very well," said Mrs. Walton, looking
up from her mending.

"No, he fully expected to get Harry for little or nothing. It was
ridiculous to offer two dollars a month for a boy of his age."

"I am afraid he will be more disposed to be hard on you, when the time
comes to pay for the cow. He told you he wouldn't extend the time."

"He is not likely to after this; but, wife, we won't borrow trouble.
Something may turn up to help us."

"I am sure I shall be able to help you about it, father," said Harry.

"I hope so, my son, but don't feel too certain. You may not succeed as
well as you anticipate."

"I know that, but I mean to try at any rate."

"If you don't, Tom will," said his sister.

"Quit teasin' a feller, Jane," said Tom. "I ain't any lazier'n you are.
If I am, I'll eat my head."

"Then you'll have to eat it, Tom," retorted Jane; "and it won't be much
loss to you, either."

"Don't dispute, children," said Mrs. Walton. "I expect you both will
turn over a new leaf by and by."

Meanwhile, Harry was busily reading the "Life of Franklin." The more he
read, the more hopeful he became as to the future.





CHAPTER IX. LEAVING HOME


Monday morning came, and the whole family stood on the grass plat in
front of the house, ready to bid Harry good-by. He was encumbered by no
trunk, but carried his scanty supply of clothing wrapped in a red cotton
handkerchief, and not a very heavy bundle at that. He had cut a stout
stick in the woods near by, and from the end of this suspended over his
back bore the bundle which contained all his worldly fortune except the
twenty-five cents which was in his vest pocket.

"I don't like to have you go," said his mother, anxiously. "Suppose you
don't get work?"

"Don't worry about me, mother," said Harry, brightly. "I'll get along
somehow."

"Remember you've got a home here, Harry, whatever happens," said his
father.

"I shan't forget, father."

"I wish I was going with you," said Tom, for the first time fired with
the spirit of adventure.

"What could you do, Tom?" said Jane, teasingly.

"Work, of course."

"I never saw you do it yet."

"I'm no more lazy than you," retorted Tom, offended.

"Don't dispute, children, just as your brother is leaving us," said Mrs.
Walton.

"Good-by, mother," said Harry, feeling an unwonted moistening of the
eyes, as he reflected that he was about to leave the house in which he
had lived since infancy.

"Good-by, my dear child," said his mother, kissing him.

"Be sure to write."

"Yes I will."

So with farewell greetings Harry walked out into the world. He had all
at once assumed a man's responsibilities, and his face grew serious, as
he began to realize that he must now look out for himself.

His native village was situated in the northern part of New Hampshire.
Not far away could be seen, indistinct in the distance, the towering
summits of the White Mountain range, but his back was turned to them.
In the south were larger and more thriving villages, and the wealth was
greater. Harry felt that his chances would be greater there. Not that
he had any particular place in view. Wherever there was an opening, he
meant to stop.

"I won't come back till I am better off," he said to himself. "If I
don't succeed it won't be for want of trying."

He walked five miles without stopping. This brought him to the middle of
the next town. He was yet on familiar ground, for he had been here more
than once. He felt tired, and sat down by the roadside to rest before
going farther. While he sat there the doctor from his own village rode
by, and chanced to espy Harry, whom he recognized.

"What brings you here, Harry?" he asked, stopping his chaise.

"I'm going to seek my fortune," said Harry.

"What, away from home?"

"Yes, sir."

"I hadn't heard of that," said the doctor, surprised.

"You haven't run away from home?" he asked, with momentary suspicion.

"No, indeed!" said Harry, half indignantly. "Father's given his
permission for me to go."

"Where do you expect to go?"

"South," said Harry, vaguely.

"And what do you expect to find to do?"

"I don't know--anything that'll bring me a living."

"I like your spunk," said the doctor, after a pause. "If you're going
my way, as I suppose you are, I can carry you a couple of miles. That's
better than walking, isn't it?"

"I guess it is," said Harry, jumping to his feet with alacrity.

In a minute he was sitting beside Dr. Dunham in his old-fashioned
chaise. "I might have known that you were not running away," said the
doctor. "I should be more likely to suspect your Brother Tom."

"Tom's too lazy to run away to earn his own living," said Harry,
laughing, "as long as he can get it at home."

The doctor smiled.

"And what put it into your head to start out in this way?" he asked.

"The first thing, was reading the' Life of Franklin.'"

"To be sure. I remember his story."

"And the next thing was, because my father is so poor. He finds it hard
work to support us all. The farm is small, and the land is poor. I want
to help him if I can."

"Very commendable, Harry," said the doctor, kindly.

"You owe a debt of gratitude to your good father, who has not succeeded
so well in life as he deserves."

"That's true, sir. He has always been a hard-working man."

"If you start out with such a good object, I think you will succeed.
Have you any plans at all, or any idea what you would like to do?"

"I thought I should like to work in a shoe shop, if I got a chance,"
said Harry.

"You like that better than working on a farm, then?"

"Yes, sir, There isn't much money to be earned by working on a farm. I
had a chance to do that before I came away."

"You mean working on your father's land, I suppose?"

"No, Squire Green wanted to hire me."

"What wages did he offer?"

"Two dollars a month, at first. Afterwards he got up to three."

The doctor smiled.

"How could you decline such a magnificent offer?" he asked.

"I don't think I should like boarding at the squire's."

"A dollar is twice as large at least in his eyes as in those of anyone
else."

By this time they had reached a place where a road turned at right
angles.
