him standing there, she caught hold of him, and said,--

"I'll tell papa."

"Oh no, you won't!" returned the prince.

"Yes, I will," she persisted.  "What business had you to pull me down
out of the water, and throw me to the bottom of the air?  I never did
you any harm."

"Pardon me.  I did not mean to hurt you."

"I don't believe you have any brains; and that is a worse loss than
your wretched gravity.  I pity you."

The prince now saw that he had come upon the bewitched princess, and
had already offended her.  But before he could think what to say next,
she burst out angrily, giving a stamp with her foot that would have
sent her aloft again but for the hold she had of his arm,--

"Put me up directly."

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

He had fallen in love with her almost, already; for her anger made her
more charming than any one else had ever beheld her; and, as far as he
could see, which certainly was not far, she had not a single fault
about her, except, of course, that she had not any gravity.  No prince,
however, would judge of a princess by weight.  The loveliness of her
foot he would hardly estimate by the depth of the impression it could
make in mud.

"Put you up where, you beauty?" asked the prince.

"In the water, you stupid!" answered the princess.

"Come, then," said the prince.

The condition of her dress, increasing her usual difficulty in walking,
compelled her to cling to him; and he could hardly persuade himself
that he was not in a delightful dream, notwithstanding the torrent of
musical abuse with which she overwhelmed him.  The prince being
therefore in no hurry, they came upon the lake at quite another part,
where the bank was twenty-five feet high at least; and when they had
reached the edge, he turned towards the princess, and said,--

"How am I to put you in?" "That is your business," she answered, quite
snappishly.  "You took me out--put me in again."

"Very well," said the prince; and, catching her up in his arms, he
sprang with her from the rock.  The princess had just time to give one
delighted shriek of laughter before the water closed over them.  When
they came to the surface, she found that, for a moment or two, she
could not even laugh, for she had gone down with such a rush, that it
was with difficulty she recovered her breath.  The instant they reached
the surface--

"How do you like falling in?" said the prince.

After some effort the princess panted out,--

"Is that what you call FALLING IN?"

"Yes," answered the prince, "I should think it a very tolerable
specimen."

"It seemed to me like going up," rejoined she.

"My feeling was certainly one of elevation too," the prince conceded.

The princess did not appear to understand him, for she retorted his
question:--

"How do YOU like falling in?" said the princess.

"Beyond everything," answered he; "for I have fallen in with the only
perfect creature I ever saw."

"No more of that: I am tired of it," said the princess.

Perhaps she shared her father's aversion to punning.

"Don't you like falling in then?" said the prince.

"It is the most delightful fun I ever had in my life," answered she.
"I never fell before.  I wish I could learn.  To think I am the only
person in my father's kingdom that can't fall!"

Here the poor princess looked almost sad.

"I shall be most happy to fall in with you any time you like," said the
prince, devotedly.

"Thank you.  I don't know.  Perhaps it would not be proper.  But I
don't care.  At all events, as we have fallen in, let us have a swim
together."

"With all my heart," responded the prince.

And away they went, swimming, and diving, and floating, until at last
they heard cries along the shore, and saw lights glancing in all
directions.  It was now quite late, and there was no moon.

"I must go home," said the princess.  "I am very sorry, for this is
delightful."

"So am I," returned the prince.  "But I am glad I haven't a home to go
to--at least, I don't exactly know where it is."

"I wish I hadn't one either," rejoined the princess; "it is so stupid!
I have a great mind," she continued, "to play them all a trick.  Why
couldn't they leave me alone?  They won't trust me in the lake for a
single night!--You see where that green light is burning?  That is the
window of my room.  Now if you would just swim there with me very
quietly, and when we are all but under the balcony, give me such a
push--up you call it-as you did a little while ago, I should be able to
catch hold of the balcony, and get in at the window; and then they may
look for me till to-morrow morning!"

"With more obedience than pleasure," said the prince, gallantly; and
away they swam, very gently.

"Will you be in the lake to-morrow night?" the prince ventured to ask.

"To be sure I will.  I don't think so.  Perhaps," was the princess's
somewhat strange answer.

But the prince was intelligent enough not to press her further; and
merely whispered, as he gave her the parting lift, "Don't tell."

The only answer the princess returned was a roguish look.  She was
already a yard above his head.  The look seemed to say, "Never fear.
It is too good fun to spoil that way."

So perfectly like other people had she been in the water, that even yet
the prince could scarcely believe his eyes when he saw her ascend
slowly, grasp the balcony, and disappear through the window.  He
turned, almost expecting to see her still by his side.  But he was
alone in the water.  So he swam away quietly, and watched the lights
roving about the shore for hours after the princess was safe in her
chamber.  As soon as they disappeared, he landed in search of his tunic
and sword, and, after some trouble, found them again.  Then he made the
best of his way round the lake to the other side.  There the wood was
wilder, and the shore steeper-rising more immediately towards the
mountains which surrounded the lake on all sides, and kept sending it
messages of silvery streams from morning to night, and all night long.
He soon found a spot whence he could see the green light in the
princess's room, and where, even in the broad daylight, he would be in
no danger of being discovered from the opposite shore.  It was a sort
of cave in the rock, where he provided himself a bed of withered
leaves, and lay down too tired for hunger to keep him awake.  All night
long he dreamed that he was swimming with the princess.



10.  Look at the Moon.

Early the next morning the prince set out to look for something to eat,
which he soon found at a forester's hut, where for many following days
he was supplied with all that a brave prince could consider necessary.
And having plenty to keep him alive for the present, he would not think
of wants not yet in existence.  Whenever Care intruded, this prince
always bowed him out in the most princely manner.  When he returned
from his breakfast to his watch-cave, he saw the princess already
floating about in the lake, attended by the king and queen whom he knew
by their crowns--and a great company in lovely little boats, with
canopies of all the colours of the rainbow, and flags and streamers of
a great many more.  It was a very bright day, and soon the prince,
burned up with the heat, began to long for the cold water and the cool
princess.  But he had to endure till twilight; for the boats had
provisions on board, and it was not till the sun went down that the gay
party began to vanish.  Boat after boat drew away to the shore,
following that of the king and queen, till only one, apparently the
princess's own boat, remained.  But she did not want to go home even
yet, and the prince thought he saw her order the boat to the shore
without her.  At all events, it rowed away; and now, of all the radiant
company, only one white speck remained.  Then the prince began to sing.
And this is what he sung:--

  "Lady fair,
  Swan-white,
  Lift thine eyes,
  Banish night
  By the might
  Of thine eyes.

  Snowy arms,
  Oars of snow,
  Oar her hither,
  Plashing low.
  Soft and slow,
  Oar her hither.

  Stream behind her
  O'er the lake,
  Radiant whiteness!
  In her wake
  Following, following for her sake.
  Radiant whiteness!

  Cling about her,
  Waters blue;
  Part not from her,
  But renew
  Cold and true
  Kisses round her.

  Lap me round,
  Waters sad,
  That have left her.
  Make me glad,
  For ye had
  Kissed her ere ye left her."

Before he had finished his song, the princess was just under the place
where he sat, and looking up to find him.  Her ears had led her truly.

"Would you like a fall, princess?" said the prince, looking down.

