accustomed to these waves since their earliest girlhood, and were not
the least afraid. They stood now waiting in the little cove, and looking
round wonderingly for the appearance of Mike and Neil upon the scene.
They were to bring the boat with them. The girls were to wade through
the surf to get into it, and Biddy was stooping down to take off her
shoes and stockings for the purpose.

"Dear, dear!" she cried. "Do you see that ugly bank of clouds just
behind the moon? I hope my lady moon is not going to hide herself; we
can do nothing in the cave if we have not light."

"But the cave is dark, surely?"

"Yes. But don't you know there is a break in the cliffs above, just in
the center? And it is down there the moon sends its shafts when it is at
the full; it is there the Banshee will meet us, if we are to see her at
all. The shafts from the moon will only enter the cave at midnight. I
have counted the times, and I know everything."

"I want to see the Banshee so badly," said Nora.

"You won't be frightened, then, Nora?"

"Frightened? No. Not of our own Banshee."

"They say," began Biddy, "that if you see a spirit, and come face to
face with it, you are good for--"

"What?" said Nora.

"If you hold out during the year you have seen the spirit, you are good
to live for another ten; but during that first year you are in extreme
danger of dying. If you escape that fate, however, and are whole and
sound, you will be quite safe to live for ten more years. They say
nothing can send you out of the world; not sickness, nor accidents, nor
fire, nor water; but the second year you are liable to an accident,
and the year after to a misfortune; then in the fourth year your luck
turns--in the fourth year you find gold, in the fifth year health, in
the sixth year beauty. Oh, I would give anything to be beautiful!"

"You are very well as you are, Biddy."

"Very well as I am? What nonsense! Look at my turned-up nose." Here
Biddy pressed her finger on the feature in question.

"It looks very racy," answered Nora.

"Bedad, then, it does that," replied Biddy. "I believe I got it sound
and safe from one of the old----"

"You needn't go on," cried Nora. "I know what you are going to say."

"And why shouldn't I say it? You would be proud enough to be descended
from----"

"Oh, I have a very fine descent of my own," answered Nora, with spirit.

"Now, if I was like you," began Biddy, "wouldn't I be proud, just? But
dear, dear! there never were two Irish girls farther asunder as far as
appearance goes. See here, let me describe myself, feature by feature.
Oh, here's a clear pool. I can get a glimpse of myself in it. You come
and look in too, Nora. Now, then, we can see ourselves. Oh, holy poker!
it's cruel the difference between us. Here's my forehead low and bumpy,
and my little nose, scarcely any of it, and what there is turned right
up to the sky; and my wide mouth, and my little eyes, and my hair just
standing straight up as rakish as you please. And look at you, with your
elegant features and your--oh, but it's genteel you are!--and I love
you, Nora alannah; I love you, and am not a bit jealous of you."

Here the impulsive girl threw her arms round her friend's neck and
kissed her.

"All the same," she added, "I wish those clouds were not coming up.
It has been so precious hot all day that I should not be the least
surprised if we had a thunderstorm."

"A thunderstorm while we are in the cave would be magnificent," said
Nora.

"Does anything ever frighten you, Nora?"

"I don't think anything in nature could frighten me; but there are some
things I am frightened at."

"What? Do tell me. I should like to know."

"You'll keep it a secret--won't you, Biddy?"

"To be sure I will. When did I ever blaze out anything you told me? If I
am plain, I am faithful."

"Well, I am afraid of _pain_," said Nora.

"Pain! You? But I have seen you scratch yourself ever so deep and not so
much as wink; and I mind that time when you twisted your ankle and you
didn't even pretend you were hurt."

"Oh, it is not that sort of pain. I am terrified of pain when it affects
those I love. But there! don't ask me any more. Here are the boys; we'll
jump into the boat and be off. Why, it is half-past ten, and it will
take half-an-hour's good rowing to cross the bay, and then we have to
enter the cave and----"

"I don't like those clouds," said Biddy. "I wonder if it is safe to go."

"Safe?" said Nora. "We must go. Mother won't allow me to spend another
night here, and I shall lose my chance. I am determined to speak to the
Banshee or die in the attempt."

The splash of oars was now distinctly audible, and the next moment a
four-oared gig swiftly turned the little promontory and shot with a
rapid movement into the bay.

"Why," said Biddy, running forward, "who's in the boat?"

A lad and a man now stood upright and motioned to the girls.

"Where's Neil?" said Biddy.

"Neil could not come, Miss Biddy, so I'm taking his place," said the
deep voice of a powerful-looking man. He had a black beard down to his
waist, flashing black eyes, a turned-up nose, and a low forehead. A
more bull-dog and ferocious-looking individual it would be hard to find.
Biddy, however, knew him; he was Neil's father--Andy Neil, as he was
called. He was known to be a lawless and ferocious man, and was very
much dreaded by most of the neighbors around. Neither Nora nor Biddy,
however, felt any reason to fear him and Nora said almost cheerfully:

"As we are to have such a stiff row, it is just as well to have a man in
the boat."

"Faix, now, young ladies, come along, and don't keep me waiting," said
Andy, rising and brandishing one of his oars in a threatening way.
"There's a storm coming on, and I want to be out of this afore it
overtakes us. Oh, glory be to goodness, there's a flash of lightning!"

There came a flash on the edge of the horizon, lighting up the thick
bank of rapidly approaching clouds.

"Nora, had we better go tonight?" said Biddy. She had as little fear as
her friend, but even she did not contemplate with pleasure a wild storm
in the midst of the Atlantic.

The man Neil looked gravely round.

"Och! good luck to ye now, young ladies; don't be kaping me waiting
after the botheration of coming to fetch yez. Come along, and be quick
about it."

"To be sure," said Nora. She splashed bravely into the surf, for the
boat could not quite reach the shore. The waves reached high above her
pretty, rosy ankles as she stepped into the boat.

Biddy followed in her wake; and then Nora, producing a rough towel,
began to dry her feet. Both girls put on their shoes and stockings again
in absolute silence.

Neil had now faced the boat seaward, and with great sweeps with a pair
of sculls was taking it out to sea. The tide was in their favor, and
they went at a rapid rate. The man did not speak at all, and his face
was in complete shadow. Nora breathed hard in suppressed excitement and
delight. Biddy crouched at the bottom of the boat and watched the clouds
as they came up.

"I wish I hadn't come," she muttered once or twice.

The boy Mike sat at the stern. The two girls had nothing whatever to do.

"Shall I take an oar, Andy?" said Nora at last.

"You, miss?"

"I can take a pair of oars and help you," said the girl.

"If it plazes you, miss." The man hastily stepped to the back of the
boat. Nora took her place, and soon they were going at greater speed
than ever. She was a splendid oarswoman, and feathered her oars in the
most approved fashion.

In less than the prescribed half-hour they reached the entrance to the
great cave.

They were safe. A hollow, booming noise greeted them as they came close.
Andy bent forward and gave Nora a brief direction.

"Ship your oars now, miss. Aisy now; aisy now. Now, then, I'll take one
pull; pull your left oar again. Now, here we are."

He spoke with animation. Nora obeyed him implicitly. They entered the
shadow of the cave, and the next instant found themselves in complete
darkness. The boat bobbed up and down on the restless water, and just
at that instant a flash of vivid lightning illuminated all the outside
water, followed by a crashing roar of thunder.

"The storm is on us; but, thank the Almighty, we're safe," said Mike,
with a little sob. "I wish to goodness we hadn't come, all the same."

"And so do I," said Biddy; "it is perfectly awful being in a cave like
this. What shall we do?"

"Do!" said Neil. "Hould your tongues and stay aisy. Faix, it's the
Almighty is having a bit of a talk; you stay quiet and listen."

The four oars were shipped now, and the boat swayed restlessly up and
down.

"Aren't we going any farther?" said Nora.

"Not while this storm lasts. Oh, for goodness' sake, Nora, do stay
quiet," said Biddy.

Andy now produced out of his pocket a box of matches and a candle. He
struck a match, applied it to the candle, and the next moment a feeble
flame shot up. It was comparatively calm within the cave.

"There! that will light us a bit," said Andy. "The storm won't last
long. It's well we got into shelter. Now, then, we'll do fine."

"You don't think," said Biddy, in a terrified tone, "that the cave will
be be crashed in?"

"Glory be to Heaven, no, miss--we have cheated the storm coming here."
The man smiled as he spoke, showing bits of broken teeth. His words were
gentle enough, but his whole appearance was more like that of a wild
beast than a man. Nora looked full at him. The candle lit up her pale
face; her dark-blue eyes were full of courage; a lock of her black hair
had got loose in the exertion of rowing, and had fallen partly over her
shoulder and neck. "Faix, then, you might be the Banshee herself," said
Andy, bending forward and looking at her attentively.

"If the moon comes out again we may see the Banshee," whispered Nora.
"Can we not go farther into the cave? Time is flying." She took her
watch from her pocket and looked at the hour. It was already past eleven
o'clock.

"The storm will be over in good time," said the man. "Do you want to
get the gleam of moonlight in the crack of the inner cave? Is that what
you're afther, missy?"

"Yes," said Nora.

"Well, you stay quiet; you'll reach it right enough."

"Nora wants to see the Banshee, Andy," called out Biddy. "Oh, what a
flash! It nearly blinded me."

"The rain will soon be on us, and then the worst of the storm will be
past," said the man.

Mike uttered a scream; the lightning was now forked and intensely blue.
It flashed into every cranny in the cave, showing the barnacles on the
roof, the little bits of fern, the strange stalactites. After the flash
had passed, the darkness which followed was so intense that the light of
the dim candle could scarcely be seen. Presently the rain thundered
down upon the bare rock above with a tremendous sound; there were great
hailstones; the thunder became less frequent, the lightning less vivid.
In a little more than half an hour the fierce storm had swept on to
other quarters.

"Now, then, we can go forward," said Andy. He took up his oars. "You had
best stay quiet, missies; just sit there in the bottom of the boat, and
let me push ahead."

"Then I will hold the candle," said Nora.

"Right you are, miss."

She took it into her cold fingers. Her heart was beating high with
suppressed excitement; she had never felt a keener pleasure in her life.
If only she might see the Banshee, and implore the spirit's intercession
for the fortunes of her house!

The man rowed on carefully, winding round corners and avoiding many
dangers. At last they came bump upon some rocks.

"Now, then," he said, "we can't go a step farther."

"But we must," said Nora. "We have not reached the chasm in the rock. We
must."

"We dare not, miss; the boat hasn't water enough to float her."

"Well, then, I shall wade there. How far on is the chasm?"

"Oh, Nora! Nora! you won't be so mad as to go alone?" called out Biddy.

"I shan't be a scrap afraid," said Nora.

"But there's water up to your knees; you dare not do it," said Biddy.

"Yes, I dare; and the tide is going down--is it not?"

"It will be down a good bit in half an hour," said the man, "and we'll
be stranded here as like as not. These are bad rocks when the tide is
low; we must turn and get out of this, miss, in a quarter of an hour at
the farthest."

"Oh, I could just do it in a quarter of an hour," said Nora.

She jumped up, and the next moment had sprung out of the boat into the
water, which nearly reached up to her knees.

"Oh, Nora! Nora! you'll be lost; you'll slip and fall in that awful
darkness, and we'll never see you again," said Biddy, with a cry of
terror.

"No, no; let her go," said Andy. "There ain't no fear, miss; you have
but to go straight on, holding your candle and avoiding the rocks to
your left, and you'll come to the opening. Be as quick as you can, Miss
Nora; be as quick as you can."

His voice had a queer note in it. Nora gave him a look of gratitude,
and proceeded on her dangerous journey. Her one fear was that the candle
might go out; the flame flickered as the air got less good; the hot
grease scalded her fingers; but suddenly a breeze of fresher air reached
her, and warned her that she was approaching the aperture. There came a
little puff of wind, and the next moment the brave girl found herself in
total darkness. The candle had gone out. Just at that instant she
heard, or fancied she heard, a splash behind her in the water. There was
nothing for it now but to go forward. She resolved not to be terrified.
Perhaps it was a water-rat; perhaps it was the Banshee. Her heart beat
high; still she had no fear. She was going to plead for her father. What
girl would be terrified with such a cause in view? She walked slowly
and carefully on, and at last the fresher air was followed by a welcome
gleam of light; she was approaching the opening. The next moment she had
found it. She stood nearly up to her knees in the water; the shaft of
moonlight was piercing down into the cave. Nora went and stood in the
moonlight. The hole at the top was little more than a foot in width;
there was a chasm, a jagged chasm, through which the light came. She
could see a bit of cloudless sky, and the cold moonlight fell all over
her.

"Oh, Banshee!--Lady Spirit who belongs to our house, come and speak to
me," cried the girl. "Come from your home in the rock and give me a word
of comfort. A dark time is near, and we implore your help. Come, come,
Banshee--it is the O'Shanaghgans who want you. It is Nora O'Shanaghgan
who calls you now."

The sound of a laugh came from the darkness behind her, and the next
instant the startled girl saw the big form of Andy Neil approaching.

"Don't you be frightened, Miss Nora," he said. "I aint the Banshee, but
I am as good. Faix, now, I want to say something to you. I have come
here for the purpose. There! don't be frightened. I won't hurt ye--not
I; but I want yez to promise me something."

"What is that?" said Nora.

"I have come here for the purpose. _She_ aint no good." He indicated
with a motion of his thumb the distant form of Biddy within the dark
recess of the cave.

"Does Miss Murphy know you have followed me?" said Nora.

"No, she don't know it; she's in the dark. There's the little lad Mike
will look after her. She won't do nothing until we go back."

"Oh, I did want to see the Banshee!"

"The Banshee may come or not," said the man; "but I have my message to
yez, and it is this: If you don't get Squire O'Shanaghgan to let me keep
my little bit of land, and to see that I aint evicted, why, I'll--you're
a bonny lass, you're as purty a young lady as I ever set eyes on, but
I'll drownd yez, deep down here in this hole. No one will ever know;
they'll think you has fallen and got drowned without no help from
me. Yes, I'll do it--yes, I will--unless you promises that Squire
O'Shanaghgan shan't evict me. If I go out, why, you goes out first.
