Calhoun and others who had seemed almost demigods to their own
generation.

But a different crowd was there now. They were mostly paunchy men who
talked of contracts and profits. One, to whom the others paid deference,
was fat, heavy and of middle age, with a fat, heavy face and pouches
under his eyes. His small eyes were set close together, but they
sparkled with shrewdness and cunning.

The big man presently noticed the lad who was sitting quietly in one
of the chairs against the wall. Dick's was an alien presence there, and
doubtless this fact had attracted his attention.

"Good day to you," said the stranger in a bluff, deep voice. "I take
it from your uniform, your tan and your thinness that you've come from
active service."

"In both the west and the east," replied Dick politely. "I was at
Shiloh, but soon afterward I was transferred with my regiment to the
east."

"Ah, then, of course, you know what is going on in Virginia?"

"No more than the general public does. I was at Cedar Run, which both we
and the rebels claim as a victory."

The man instantly showed a great increase of interest.

"Were you?" he said. "My own information says that Banks and Pope were
surprised by Jackson and that the rebel general has merely drawn off to
make a bigger jump. Did you get that impression?"

"Will you tell me why you ask me these questions?" said Dick in the same
polite tone.

"Because I've a big stake in the results out there. My name is John
Watson, and I'm supplying vast quantities of shoes and clothing to our
troops."

Dick turned up the sole of one of his shoes and picked thoughtfully at a
hole half way through the sole. Little pieces of paper came out.

"I bought these, Mr. Watson, from a sutler in General Pope's army," he
said. "I wonder if they came from you?"

A deeper tint flushed the contractor's cheeks, but in a moment he threw
off anger.

"A good joke," he said jovially. "I see that you're ready of wit,
despite your youth. No, those are not my shoes. I know dishonest men are
making great sums out of supplies that are defective or short. A great
war gives such people many opportunities, but I scorn them. I'll not
deny that I seek a fair profit, but my chief object is to serve my
country. Do you ever reflect, my young friend, that the men who clothe
and feed an army have almost as much to do with winning the victory as
the men who fight?"

"I've thought of it," said Dick, wondering what the contractor had in
mind.

"What regiment do you belong to, if I may ask? My motive in asking these
questions is wholly good."

"One commanded by Colonel Winchester, recently sent from the west. We've
been in only one battle in the east, that fought at Cedar Run against
Jackson."

Watson again looked at Dick intently. The boy felt that he was being
measured and weighed by a man of uncommon perceptions. Whatever might be
his moral quality there could be no question of his ability.

"I am, as I told you before," said Watson, "a servant of my country. A
man who feeds and clothes the soldiers well is a patriot, while he who
feeds and clothes them badly is a mere money grubber."

He paused, as if he expected Dick to say something, but the boy was
silent and he went on:

"It is to the interest of the country that it be served well in all
departments, particularly in the tremendous crisis that we now face. Yet
the best patriot cannot always get a chance to serve. He needs
friends at court, as they say. Now this colonel of yours, Colonel
Winchester--I've observed both him and you, although I approached you
as if I'd never heard of either of you before--is a man of character and
influence. Certain words from him at the right time would be of great
value, nor would his favorite aide suffer through bringing the matter to
his attention."

Dick saw clearly now, but he was not impulsive. Experience was teaching
him, while yet a boy, to speak softly.

"The young aide of whom you speak," he said, "would never think of
mentioning such a matter to the colonel, of whom you also speak, and
even if he should, the colonel wouldn't listen to him for a moment."

Watson shrugged his shoulders slightly, but made no other gesture of
displeasure.

"Doubtless you are well informed about this aide and this colonel," he
said, "but it's a pity. If more food is thrown to the sparrows than they
can eat, is it any harm for other birds to eat the remainder?"

"I scarcely regard it as a study in ornithology."

"Ornithology? That's a big word, but I suppose it will serve. We'll
drop the matter, and if at any time my words here should be quoted I'll
promptly deny them. It's a bad thing for a boy to have his statements
disputed by a man of years who can command wealth and other powerful
influences. Unless he had witnesses nobody would believe the boy. I tell
you this, my lad, partly for your own good, because I'm inclined to like
you."

Dick stared. There was nothing insulting in the man's tone. He seemed
to be thoroughly in earnest. Perhaps he regarded his point of view as
right, and Dick, a boy of thought and resource, saw that it was not
worth while to make a quarrel. But he resolved to remember Watson,
feeling that the course of events might bring them together again.

"I suppose it's as you say," he said. "You're a man of affairs and you
ought to know."

Watson smiled at him. Dick felt that the contractor had been telling
the truth when he said that he was inclined to like him. Perhaps he was
honest and supplied good materials, when others supplied bad.

"You will shake hands with me, Mr. Mason," he said. "You think that
I will be hostile to you, but maybe some day I can prove myself your
friend. Young soldiers often need friends."

His eyes twinkled and his smile widened. In spite of his appearance and
his proposition, something winning had suddenly appeared in the manner
of this man. Dick found himself shaking hands with him.

"Good-bye, Mr. Mason," said Watson. "It may be that we shall meet on the
field, although I shall not be within range of the guns."

He left the lobby of the hotel, and Dick was rather puzzled. It was
his first thought to tell Colonel Winchester about him, but he finally
decided that Watson's own advice to him to keep silent was best. He and
Colonel Winchester took the train from Washington the next day, and on
the day after were with Pope's army on the Rapidan.

Dick detected at once a feeling of excitement or tension in this army,
at least among the young officers with whom he associated most. They
felt that a storm of some kind was gathering, either in front or on
their flank. McClellan's army was now on the transports, leaving behind
the Virginia that he had failed to conquer, and Pope's, with a new
commander, was not yet in shape. The moment was propitious for Lee and
Jackson to strike, and the elusive Jackson was lost again.

"Our scouts discover nothing," said Warner to Dick. "The country is
chockfull of hostility to us. Not a soul will tell us a word. We have to
see a thing with our own eyes before we know it's there, but the people,
the little children even, take news to the rebels. A veil is hung before
us, but there is none before them."

"There is one man who is sure to find out about Jackson."

"Who?"

Dick's only answer was a shake of the head. But he was thinking of
Shepard. He did not see him about the camp, and he had no doubt that he
was gone on another of his dangerous missions. Meanwhile newspapers from
New York and other great cities reflected the doubts of the North. They
spoke of Pope's grandiloquent dispatches, and they wondered what had
become of Lee and Jackson.

Dick, an intense patriot, passed many bitter moments. He, like others,
felt that the hand upon the reins was not sure. Instead of finding the
enemy and assailing him with all their strength, they were waiting in
doubt and alarm to fend off a stroke that would come from some unknown
point out of the dark.

The army now lay in one of the finest parts of Virginia, a region of
picturesque mountains, wide and fertile valleys, and of many clear
creeks and rivers coming down from the peaks and ridges. To one side lay
a great forest, known as the Wilderness, destined, with the country near
it, to become the greatest battlefield of the world. Here, the terrible
battles of the Second Manassas, Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville,
the Wilderness, Spottsylvania, and others less sanguinary, but great
struggles, nevertheless, were to be fought.

But these were yet in the future, and Dick, much as his eyes had been
opened, did not yet dream how tremendous the epic combat was to be. He
only knew that to-day it was the middle of August, the valleys were very
hot, but it was shady and cool on the hills and mountains. He knew, too,
that he was young, and that pessimism and gloom could not abide long
with him.

He and Warner and Pennington had good horses, in place of those that
they had lost at Cedar Run, and often they rode to the front to see
what might be seen of the enemy, which at present was nothing. Their
battlefield at Cedar Run had been reoccupied by Northern troops and Pope
was now confirmed in his belief that his men had won a victory there.
And this victory was to be merely a prelude to another and far greater
one.

As they rode here and there in search of the enemy, Dick came upon
familiar ground. Once more he saw the field of Manassas which had been
lost so hardly the year before. He remembered every hill and brook and
curve of the little river, because they had been etched into his brain
with steel and fire. How could anyone forget that day?

"Looks as if we might fight our battle of last year over again, but on a
much bigger scale," he said to Warner.

"Here or hereabouts," said the Vermonter, "and I think we ought to win.
They've got the better generals, but we've got more men. Besides, our
troops are becoming experienced and they've shown their mettle. Dick,
here's a farmer gathering corn. Let's ask him some questions, but I'll
wager you a hundred to one before we begin that he knows absolutely
nothing about the rebel army. In fact, I doubt that he will know of its
existence."

"I won't take your bet," said Dick.

They called to the man, a typical Virginia farmer in his shirt sleeves,
tall and spare, short whiskers growing under his chin. There was not
much difference between him and his brother farmer in New England.

"Good-day," said Warner.

"Good-day."

"You seem to be working hard."

"I've need to do it. Farm hands are scarce these days."

"Farming is hard work."

"Yes; but it's a lot safer than some other kinds men are doin'
nowadays."

"True, no doubt, but have you seen anything of the army?"

"What army?"

"The one under Lee and Jackson, the rebel army."

"I ain't heard of no rebel army, mister. I don't know of any such people
as rebels."

"You call it the Confederate army. Can you tell us anything about the
Confederate army?"

"What Confederate army, mister? I heard last month when I went in to the
court house that there was more than one of them."

"I mean the one under Lee and Jackson."

"That's cur'us. A man come ridin' 'long here three or four weeks ago.
Mebbe he was a lightnin' rod agent an' mebbe he had patent medicines to
sell, he didn't say, but he did tell me that General Jackson was in one
place an General Lee was in another. Now which army do you mean?"

"That was nearly a month ago. They are together now."

"Then, mister, if you know so much more about it than I do, what are you
askin' me questions for?"

"But I want to know about Lee and Jackson. Have you seen them?"

"Lord bless you, mister, them big generals don't come visitin' the likes
o' me. You kin see my house over thar among the trees. You kin search it
if you want to, but you won't find nothin'."

"I don't want to search your house. You can't hide a great army in a
house. I want to know if you've seen the Southern Army. I want to know
if you've heard anything about it."

"I ain't seed it. My sight's none too good, mister. Sometimes the
blazin' sun gits in my eyes and kinder blinds me for a long time. Then,
too, I'm bad of hearin'; but I'm a powerful good sleeper. When I sleep I
don't hear nothin', of course, an' nothin' wakes me up. I just sleep on,
sometimes dreamin' beautiful dreams. A million men wouldn't wake me, an'
mebbe a dozen armies or so have passed in the night while I was sleepin'
so good. I'd tell you anything I know, but them that knows nothin' has
nothin' to tell."

Warner's temper, although he had always practiced self-control, had
begun to rise, but he checked it, seeing that it would be a mere foolish
display of weakness in the face of the blank wall that confronted him.

"My friend," he said with gravity, "I judge from the extreme ignorance
you display concerning great affairs that you sleep a large part of the
time."

"Mebbe so, an' mebbe not. I most gen'ally sleep when I'm sleepy. I've
heard tell there was a big war goin' on in these parts, but this is my
land, an' I'm goin' to stay on it."

"A good farmer, if not a good patriot. Good day."

"Good day."

They rode on and, in spite of themselves, laughed.

"I'm willing to wager that he knows a lot about Lee and Jackson," said
Warner, "but the days of the rack and the thumbscrew passed long ago,
and there is no way to make him tell."

"No," said Dick, "but we ought to find out for ourselves."

Nevertheless, they discovered nothing. They saw no trace of a Southern
soldier, nor did they hear news of any, and toward nightfall they rode
back toward the army, much disappointed. The sunset was of uncommon
beauty. The hot day was growing cool. Pleasant shadows were creeping
up in the east. In the west a round mountain shouldered its black bulk
against the sky. Dick looked at it vaguely. He had heard it called
Clark's Mountain, and it was about seven miles away from the Union army
which lay behind the Rapidan River.

Dick liked mountains, and the peak looked beautiful against the red and
yellow bars of the western horizon.

"Have you ever been over there?" he said to Pennington and Warner.

"No; but a lot of our scouts have," replied Pennington. "It's just a
mountain and nothing more. Funny how all those peaks and ridges crop
up suddenly around here out of what seems meant to have been a level
country."

"I like it better because it isn't level," said Dick. "I'm afraid George
and I wouldn't care much for your prairie country which just rolls on
forever, almost without trees and clear running streams."

"You would care for it," said Pennington stoutly. "You'd miss at first
the clear rivers and creeks, but then the spell of it would take hold of
you. The air you breathe isn't like the air you breathe anywhere else."

"We've got some air of our own in Vermont that we could brag about, if
we wanted to," said Warner, defiantly.

"It's good, but not as good as ours. And then the vast distances, the
great spaces take hold of you. And there's the sky so high and so clear.
When you come away from the great plains you feel cooped up anywhere
else."

Pennington spoke with enthusiasm, his nostrils dilating and his eyes
flashing. Dick was impressed.

"When the war's over I'm going out there to see your plains," he said.
