again on the clearing at the end furthest from the lake, where the
Indians had been last seen moving about. All was still. Keeping among
the trees and moving with great caution, he made his way, for a
considerable distance, along the edge of the clearing; then he
dropped on his hands and knees and entered the cornfield, and for two
hours he crawled about, quartering the ground like a dog in search of
game. Everywhere he found lines where the Indians had crawled along
to the edge nearest to the house, but nowhere did he discover a sign
of life. Then, still taking great care, he moved down toward the
house and made a circuit of it a short distance outside the stockade;
then he rose to his feet.

"Yer may stop shooting," he shouted. "The pesky rascals are gone."
Then he walked openly up to the gate; it was opened at once by
William Welch.

"Are you sure they have gone?" he asked.

"Sure as gospel," he answered, "and they've been gone twenty-four
hours at least."

"How do you know that?"

"Easy enough. I found several of their cooking places in the woods;
the brands were out, and even under the ashes the ground was cold, so
they must have been out for a long time. I could have walked straight
on to the house, then, but I thought it safer to make quite sure by
searching everywhere, for they might have moved deeper into the
forest, and left a few men on guard here, in case the young uns
should come back. But it aint so; they've gone, and there aint a
living soul anywhere nigh the clearing. The young uns can come back
now, if they will, safely enough."

Before doing anything else the farmer assembled the party together in
the living room, and there solemnly offered up thanks to God for
their deliverance from danger, and implored his protection for the
absent ones. When this was over he said to his wife:

"Now, Jane; you had better lie down and get a few hours' sleep. It is
already two o'clock, and there is no chance whatever of their
returning tonight, but I shall go down to the lake and wait till
morning. Place candles in two of the upper windows. Should they be
out on the lake they will see them and know that the Indians have not
taken the house."

Morning came, without any signs of the absent ones. At daybreak
Pearson went out to scout in the woods, and returned late in the
afternoon with the news that the Indians had all departed, and that,
for a distance of ten miles at least, the woods were entirely free.

When it became dark the farmer again went down to the lake and
watched until two, when Pearson took his place. Mr. Welch was turning
to go back to the house when Pearson placed his hand on his shoulder.

"Listen!" he said; and for a minute the men stood immovable.

"What was it?" the farmer asked.

"I thought I heard the stroke of a paddle," Pearson said; "it might
have been the jump of a fish. There! there it is again!" He lay down
and put his ear close to the water. "There's a canoe in the lake to
the north'ard. I can hear the strokes of the paddle plainly."

Mr. Welch could hear nothing. Some minutes passed, then Pearson
exclaimed:

"There! I saw a break in the water over there! There it is!" he said,
straining his eyes in the darkness. "That's a canoe, sure enough,
although they have ceased paddling. It's not a mile away."

Then he rose to his feet and shouted "Halloo!" at the top of his
voice. An answering shout faintly came back across the water. He
again hailed loudly, and this time the answer came in a female voice.

"It's them, sure enough. I can swear to Nelly's voice."

William Welch uncovered his head and, putting his hand before his
face, returned fervent thanks to God for the recovery of his child.
Then he dashed off at full speed toward the house. Before he reached
it however, he met his wife running down to meet him, the shouts
having informed her that something was seen. Hand in hand they ran
down to the water's edge. The canoe was now swiftly approaching. The
mother screamed:

"Nelly! is that you?"

"Mamma! mamma!" came back in the girl's clear tones.

With a low cry of gladness Mrs. Welch fell senseless to the ground.
The strain which she had for four days endured had been terrible, and
even the assurances of Pearson had failed to awaken any strong
feeling of hope in her heart. She had kept up bravely and had gone
about her work in the house with a pale, set face, but the unexpected
relief was too much for her. Two minutes later the bow of the canoe
grated on the shore, and Nelly leaped into her father's arms.

"Where is mamma?" she exclaimed. "She is here, my dear, but she has
fainted. The joy of your return has been too much for her."

Nelly knelt beside her mother and raised her head, and the farmer
grasped Harold's hand.

"My brave boy," he said, "I have to thank you for saving my child's
life. God bless you!"

He dipped his hat in the lake and sprinkled water in his wife's face.
She soon recovered and, a few minutes afterward, the happy party
walked up to the house, Mrs. Welch being assisted by her husband and
Pearson. The two young ones were soon seated at a table, ravenously
devouring food, and, when their hunger was satisfied, they related
the story of their adventures, the whole of the garrison being
gathered round to listen. After relating what had taken place up to
the time of their hiding the canoe, Harold went on:

"We walked about a quarter of a mile until we came to a large clump
of underwood. We crept in there, taking great pains not to break a
twig or disturb a leaf. The ground was, fortunately, very dry, and I
could see that our footprints had not left the smallest marks. There
we have lain hid ever since. We had the fish and the berries, and,
fortunately, the fruit was ripe and juicy and quenched our thirst
well enough, and we could, sometimes, hear the firing by day, and
always at night. On the day we took refuge we heard the voices of the
Indians down toward the lake quite plainly, but we have heard nothing
of them since. Last night we heard the firing up to the middle of the
night, and then it suddenly stopped. To-day I crept out and went down
to the lake to listen; but it seemed that everything was still. Nelly
was in a terrible way, and was afraid that the house had been taken
by the Indians, but I told her that could not be, for that there
would certainly have been a tremendous lot of firing at last, whereas
it stopped, after a few shots, just as it had been going on so long.
Our provisions were all gone and Nelly was getting very bad for want
of water. I, of course, got a drink at the lake this morning. So we
agreed that, if everything was still again to-night, we would go back
to the place where we had hidden the canoe, launch it, and paddle
here. Everything was quiet, so we came along as we had arranged. When
I saw the lights in the windows I made sure all was right: still it
was a great relief when I heard the shout from the shore. I knew, of
course, that it wasn't a redskin's shout. Besides, Indians would have
kept quiet till we came alongside."

Very hearty were the commendations bestowed on the boy for his
courage and thoughtfulness.

"You behaved like an old frontiersman," Pearson said. "I couldn't
have done better myself. You only made one blunder from the time you
set out from shore."

"What was that?" Harold asked.

"You were wrong to pick the berries. The redskins, of course, would
find where you had landed, they'd see the marks where you lay down,
and would know that you had paddled away again. Had it not been for
their seeing the tracks you made in picking the berries they might
have, supposed you had started before daybreak, and had gone out of
sight across the lake; but them marks would have shown 'em that you
did not take to your canoe until long after the sun was up, and
therefore that you couldn't have made across the lake without their
seeing you, but must either have landed or be in your canoe under
shelter of the trees somewhere along the shore. It's a marvel to me
that they didn't find your traces, however careful you were to
conceal 'em. But that's the only error you made, and I tell you,
young un, you have a right to be proud of having outwitted a hull
tribe of redskins."




CHAPTER IV.


THE FIGHT AT LEXINGTON.

Harold remained for four months longer with his cousin. The Indians
had made several attacks upon settlements at other points of the
frontier, but they had not repeated their incursion in the
neighborhood of the lake. The farming operations had gone on
regularly, but the men always worked with their rifles ready to their
hand. Pearson had predicted that the Indians were not likely to
return to that neighborhood. Mr. Welch's farm was the only one along
the lake that had escaped, and the loss the Indians had sustained in
attacking it had been so heavy that they were not likely to make an
expedition in that quarter, where the chances of booty were so small
and the certainty of a desperate resistance so great.

Other matters occurred which rendered the renewal of the attack
improbable. The news was brought by a wandering hunter that a quarrel
had arisen between the Shawnees and the Iroquois, and that the latter
had recalled their braves from the frontier to defend their own
villages in case of hostilities breaking out between them and the
rival tribe.

There was no occasion for Harold to wait for news from home, for his
father had, before starting, definitely fixed the day for his return,
and when that time approached Harold started on his eastward journey,
in order to be at home about the date of their arrival. Pearson took
him in his canoe to the end of the lake and accompanied him to the
settlement, whence he was able to obtain a conveyance to Detroit.
Here he took a passage in a trading boat and made his way by water to
Montreal, thence down through Lake Champlain and the Hudson River to
New York, and thence to Boston.

The journey had occupied him longer than he expected, and Mr. and
Mrs. Wilson were already in their home at Concord when he arrived.
The meeting was a joyful one. His parents had upon their return home
found letters from Mr. Welch and his wife describing the events which
had happened at the farm, speaking in the highest terms of the
courage and coolness in danger which Harold had displayed, and giving
him full credit for the saving of their daughter's life.

Upon the day after Harold's return two gentlemen called upon Captain
Wilson and asked him to sign the agreement which a number of
colonists had entered into to resist the mother country to the last.
This Captain Wilson positively refused to do.

"I am an Englishman," he said, "and my sympathies are wholly with my
country. I do not say that the whole of the demands of England are
justifiable. I think that Parliament has been deceived as to the
spirit existing here. But I consider that it has done nothing
whatever to justify the attitude of the colonists. The soldiers of
England have fought for you against French and Indians and are still
stationed here to protect you. The colonists pay nothing for their
land; they pay nothing toward the expenses of the government of the
mother country; and it appears to me to be perfectly just that people
here, free as they are from all the burdens that bear so heavily on
those at home, should at least bear the expense of the army stationed
here. I grant that it would have been far better had the colonists
taxed themselves to pay the extra amount, instead of the mother
country taxing them; but this they would not do. Some of the
colonists paid their quota, others refused to do so, and this being
the case, it appears to me that England is perfectly justified in
laying on a tax. Nothing could have been fairer than the tax that she
proposed. The stamp-tax would in no way have affected the poorer
classes in the colonies. It would have been borne only by the rich
and by those engaged in such business transactions as required
stamped documents. I regard the present rebellion as the work of a
clique of ambitious men who have stirred up the people by incendiary
addresses and writings. There are, of course, among them a large
number of men--among them, gentlemen, I place you--who
conscientiously believe that they are justified in doing nothing
whatever for the land which gave them or their ancestors birth; who
would enjoy all the great natural wealth of this vast country without
contributing toward the expense of the troops to whom it is due that
they enjoy peace and tranquility. Such, gentlemen, are not my
sentiments. You consider it a gross hardship that the colonists are
compelled to trade only with the mother country. I grant that it
would be more profitable and better for us had we an open trade with
the whole world; but in this England only acts as do all other
countries toward their colonies. France, Spain, Portugal, and the
Netherlands all monopolize the trade of their colonies; all, far more
than does England, regard their colonies as sources of revenue. I
repeat, I do not think that the course that England has pursued
toward us has been always wise, but I am sure that nothing that she
has done justifies the spirit of disaffection and rebellion which is
ripe throughout these colonies."

"The time will come, sir," one of the gentlemen said, "when you will
have reason to regret the line which you have now taken."

"No, sir," Captain Wilson said haughtily. "The time may come when the
line that I have taken may cost me my fortune, and even my life, but
it will never cause me one moment's regret that I have chosen the
part of a loyal English gentleman."

When the deputation had departed Harold, who had been a wondering
listener to the conversation, asked his father to explain to him the
exact position in which matters stood.

It was indeed a serious one. The success of England, in her struggle
with France for the supremacy of North America had cost her a great
deal of money. At home the burdens of the people were extremely
heavy. The expense of the army and navy was great, and the ministry,
in striving to lighten the burdens of the people, turned their eyes
to the colonies. They saw in America a population of over two million
people, subjects of the king, like themselves, living free from rent
and taxes on their own land and paying nothing whatever to the
expenses of the country. They were, it is true, forced to trade with
England, but this obligation was set wholly at naught. A gigantic
system of smuggling was carried on. The custom-house officials had no
force at their disposal which would have enabled them to check these
operations, and the law enforcing a trade with England was virtually
a dead letter.

Their first step was to strengthen the naval force on the American
coast and by additional vigilance to put some sort of check on the
wholesale smuggling which prevailed. This step caused extreme
discontent among the trading classes of America, and these set to
work vigorously to stir up a strong feeling of disaffection against
England. The revenue officers were prevented, sometimes by force,
from carrying out their duties.

After great consideration the English government came to the
conclusion that a revenue sufficient to pay a considerable proportion
of the cost of the army in America might be raised by means of a
stamp-tax imposed upon all legal documents, receipts, agreements, and
licenses--a tax, in fact, resembling that on stamps now in use in
England. The colonists were furious at the imposition of this tax. A
Congress, composed of deputies from each State, met, and it was
unanimously resolved that the stamp-tax should not be paid. Meetings
were everywhere held, at which the strongest and most treasonable
language was uttered, and such violent threats were used against the
persons employed as stamp-collectors that these, in fear of their
lives, resigned their posts.

The stamp-tax remained uncollected and was treated by the colonists
as if it were not in existence.

The whole of the States now began to prepare for war. The Congress
was made permanent, the militia drilled and prepared for fighting,
and everywhere the position grew more and more strained.
Massachusetts was the headquarters of disaffection, and here a total
break with the mother country was openly spoken of. At times the more
moderate spirits attempted to bring about a reconciliation between
the two parties. Petitions were sent to the Houses of Parliament, and
even at this time had any spirit of wisdom prevailed in England the
final consequences might have been prevented. Unfortunately the
majority in Parliament were unable to recognize that the colonists
had any rights upon their side. Taxation was so heavy at home that
men felt indignant that they should be called upon to pay for the
keeping up of the army in America, to which the untaxed colonists,
with their free farms and houses, would contribute nothing. The plea
of the colonists that they were taxed by a chamber in which they were
unrepresented was answered by the statement that such was also the
case with Manchester, Leeds, and many other large towns which were
unrepresented in Parliament.

In England neither the spirit nor the strength of the colonists was
understood. Men could not bring themselves to believe that these
would fight rather than submit, still less that if they did fight it
would be successfully. They ignored the fact that the population of
the States was one-fourth as large as that of England; that by far
the greater proportion of that population were men trained, either in
border warfare or in the chase, to the use of the rifle; that the
enormous extent of country offered almost insuperable obstacles to
the most able army composed of regular troops, and that the vast
forests and thinly populated country were all in favor of a
population fighting as guerrillas against trained troops. Had they
perceived these things the English people would have hesitated before
embarking upon such a struggle, even if convinced, as assuredly the
great majority were convinced, of the fairness of their demands. It
is true that even had England at this point abandoned altogether her
determination to raise taxes in America the result would probably
have been the same. The spirit of disaffection in the colony had gone
so far that a retreat would have been considered as a confession of
weakness, and separation of the colonists from the mother country
would have happened ere many years had elapsed. As it was, Parliament
agreed to let the stamp-tax drop, and in its place established some
import duties on goods entering the American ports.

The colonists, however, were determined that they would submit to no
taxation whatever. The English government, in its desire for peace,
abandoned all the duties with the exception of that on tea; but even
this concession was not sufficient to satisfy the colonists. These
entered into a bond to use no English goods. A riot took place at
Boston, and the revenue officers were forced to withdraw from their
posts. Troops were dispatched from England and the House of Commons
declared Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion.

It must not be supposed that the colonists were by any means
unanimous in their resistance to England. There were throughout the
country a large number of gentlemen, like Captain Wilson, wholly
opposed to the general feeling. New York refused to send members to
the Congress, and in many other provinces the adhesion given to the
disaffected movement was but lukewarm. It was in the New England
provinces that the spirit of rebellion was hottest. These States had
been peopled for the most part by Puritans--men who had left England
voluntarily, exiling themselves rather than submit to the laws and
religion of the country, and among them, as among a portion of the
Irish population of America at the present time, the feeling of
hatred against the government of England was, in a way, hereditary.

So far but few acts of violence had taken place. Nothing could be
more virulent than the language of the newspapers of both parties
against their opponents, but beyond a few isolated tumults the peace
had not been broken. It was the lull before the storm. The great
majority of the New England colonists were bent upon obtaining
nothing short of absolute independence; the loyalists and the English
were as determined to put down any revolt by force.

The Congress drilled, armed, and organized; the English brought over
fresh troops and prepared for the struggle. It was December when
Harold returned home to his parents, and for the next three months
the lull before the storm continued.

The disaffected of Massachusetts had collected a large quantity of
military stores at Concord. These General Gage, who commanded the
troops at Boston, determined to seize and destroy, seeing that they
could be collected only for use against the Government, and on the
night of April 19 the grenadier and light infantry companies of the
various regiments, 800 strong, under command of Lieutenant Colonel
