undeserved punishment. On such evenings he remained sleepless for a long
time sitting on his bed.

Then he would rack his brains as to how it could happen so, since his
grandmother had told him that if he was God-fearing everything would
happen for the best. That he should be so scolded and badly treated was
not the best for him. He really wanted to be God-fearing and not forget
that the dear Lord saw and heard everything. But Sami was still very
young and could not know, what he later knew, that it is good for
everyone if he learns early in life to bear hardship. Then when the evil
days, which none escape, come again later on, he can cope with them
bravely, because he knows them already and his strength has become
hardened; and when the good days come he can enjoy them as no one else
can who has never tasted the bad ones.

At this time Sami knew nothing about this and almost never went to sleep
without tears; indeed, he often wondered whether the birds were still
calling up in the ash-trees: "Only trust in the dear Lord!" and if it
were still true that everything would come out right. The only comfort
for him was that his grandmother had told him so positively, and he held
fast to that.

It was a long, hard Winter. The snow lay so deep and immovable on the
meadows and trees, that Sami often asked with anxiety in his heart, if it
would ever entirely disappear, so that the meadows would be green
again, and the flowers become alive. It was already April, and the cold
white covering of snow still lay all around. Then a warm wind from the
South blew all one night into the valley, and when on the next day a very
warm rain fell, the obstinate snow melted into great brooks. Then came
the sun and dried up all the brooks, and everywhere the new young grass
sprang up over the meadows.

The four boys came across the big street of the village and turned into
the meadow. They were pulling along the cart, on which lay the cooking
utensils which the farmer's wife had just purchased at the annual fair in
the village. The boys had followed their mother's command to go slowly
and carefully, so that nothing would be broken, for they knew very well
that their mother set great store by these things, and it was worth while
to follow her instructions.

Now that they had come safely over the rough street and had turned into
the meadow road, two pulling, two pushing, they wanted to rest a little
while. They stopped under the first large pear-tree, stretched
themselves out on the ground and looked up into the blue sky. In the
pear-tree above, the birds were singing merrily together, and suddenly
one piped up in the midst of the others, always the same note, exactly as
if he had a special call to give.

"There he is," cried Sami, springing up from the ground with delight.
Then he listened again, and again sounded the staccato call, clear and
sharp above the singing of all the other birds.

"Do you hear it? Do you hear it?" cried Sami in his delight. "Now he is
calling again: 'Trust! Trust! Trust! Trust!' And then they all sing
together: 'Only trust the dear Lord!'"

"You are just talking nonsense!" exclaimed Stoeffi to the happy Sami. "The
bird is more knowing than you are. That is the rain bird; I know him
well. He notices the rain-wind and is calling: 'Shower! Shower! Shower!'
Then we know it is going to rain."

But Sami would not give up what was so dear to him and kept saying
to himself:

"But he is singing: 'Trust! Trust! Trust! Trust!'"

"Keep quiet!" continued Stoeffi sharply to him. "You are nothing but a
little tramp, who can't do anything and doesn't know anything and twists
everything he hears."

Then the blood rose to Sami's cheeks and the tears came into his eyes
and, more courageously than usual towards Stoeffi, he cried:

"I don't do that, but you have done it many times!"

Then Stoeffi sprang up and seized hold of Sami to throw him down; but in
his anger Sami turned quite differently from usual, so that Stoeffi had to
call the others to help him.

A great struggle ensued; the blows became more and more violent, first on
one side and then on the other. Suddenly the cart was upset. A fearful
cracking and crashing sounded, and a great heap of red, brown and white
crockery lay on the ground. Dumb with fright, the boys stood and looked
at the destruction.

Stoeffi was the first to recover himself.

"We will say that a wheel came off the cart, and it suddenly fell down."
He immediately picked up a big stone in order to pound out the nail and
take the wheel off from the axle.

"I shall say just how it all happened, that we quarreled, and upset the
wagon," said Sami calmly.

Then Steffi's wrath rose to its height.

"You traitor, you spy and mischief-maker!" he screamed. "You are nothing
but a ragamuffin. We will force you."

"You cannot," said Sami, "and you are no good either! If you were
God-fearing, you would not want to lie so."

"Well, well," they all screamed together, and shaking their fists in the
most threatening way. "You needn't say that. We are just exactly as
God-fearing as you, and even much more so!"

Suddenly a new thought came to Stoeffi. He ran off with all his might, and
Michael and Uli rushed after him. Sami saw that they were hurrying to the
house; he followed slowly after. The farmer's wife had come back to the
house by a shorter way, and the farmer was just returning home too from
the field, when the three boys came rushing along. The whole family was
standing in great excitement at the door and all were talking loudly
together and making threatening gestures, when Sami came along. He was
met by the farmer, shaking his fist, and his wife threw such harsh words
at him that he stood quite dumfounded.

"That was the last straw," she said, "that after all the kindness he had
received he should tell them they were not God-fearing people."

Then the farmer joined in. Such talk was insolent from Sami, and it had
been known for a long time how upright they were in his house, before
such a scamp had come there and tried to show them the way. Then his wife
began again and said Sami would have nothing more to do in her house; for
he had brought nothing but trouble since he stepped into it; he could go
to his room, and she would come right along.

Sami was so surprised and confused by all the attacks and charges, that
he had stood quite dumb until now. Now he wanted to explain how the cart
had been upset, but the father said they knew everything already, and all
he had to do was to go to his room. He obeyed.

Soon the farmer's wife came upstairs, packed Sami's things together and
tied them up again into a bundle, which was now much smaller than when
he had brought it there, for some pieces of his old things had been
worn out and were not replaced, and his grandmother's clothes were no
longer there.

While she was packing the woman kept on talking very angrily about Sami's
wickedness and insolence, so that he now for the first time understood it
all. The boys had stated that he had reproached them for not being
God-fearing people; they had punished him for it, and through his
resistance he had overturned the cart. Sami now tried to explain to the
woman that it had not happened so, but she said she knew enough, threw
his tied-up bundle beside his bed, and went out.

Now for the first time Sami was able to think over what had happened to
him and what was going to come. Then he was angry because he had to bear
such injustice and not once have a chance to speak. And now he was driven
out, or perhaps he would be sent to people where it would be even worse
for him. Then he was so overcome with anger and fear and anguish, that he
began to cry aloud and called out:

"Yes, yes, Grandmother, you said if I was God-fearing everything would
happen to me for the best; and I have been, and now it has happened
this way!"

But with the thought of his grandmother, there rose in his heart all the
memories of his life with her, how they had wandered so peacefully
through the meadows, and how beautiful it had been under those trees, how
the birds had sung and the brook murmured, and suddenly Sami was mightily
overcome, and he exclaimed:

"Away! away! Over there! over there!"

From that moment on a bright light rose in his heart. It was hope in a
new life as beautiful as the first had been. Then Sami said his evening
prayer gladly and fell asleep.




CHAPTER FIFTH

THE BIRDS ARE STILL SINGING


The next morning when Sami sat at the table with the family, no one said
a word to him. The farmer's wife pushed a piece of bread towards his
coffee-cup and made up an unfriendly face. The farmer was no different.
The three boys looked sourly down at their coffee-cups, for they had no
good consciences, and all three feared that their lies of the day before
might yet be found out, if Sami should happen to speak.

When they rose from the table, the farmer said shortly:

"Get your bundle! I shall have to lose more time with you, until I have
found a place for you, for surely no one will want you."

Since the night before a change had taken place in Sami. He no longer
hung his head, as he had done almost always before from fear; he lifted
it up and said:

"I know already where I must go."

The farmer and his wife looked at each other in astonishment.

"I want to go over the mountains," he added.

"Yes, that is best, that he should go back there, where he came from,"
said the farmer's wife quickly; "there will no doubt be someone going
over there from the inn. Go quickly with him up there."

This seemed right to the farmer also. The leave-taking was as short as
possible, and Sami was light-hearted when he started with his little
bundle on his back away from his cousins' house.

At the inn, sure enough, they found a driver who was going with a big
wood-wagon to Chateau d'AEux. He was ready to take the boy with him and
thought he would be able to find someone to take him farther, if the boy
knew his way down there on the French side. The farmer said Sami had been
brought up there and wanted to go back, he knew where.

Now the driver was ready. Sami's bundle was thrown into the wagon and the
boy seated on it.

"Good luck!" said the farmer, gave Sami his hand and went away.

Then the driver swung himself up on his seat and the two strong horses
started off. Although the wood-wagon was far less handsome and easy than
the coach in which Sami had come, still he sat much happier in his hard
