_Abraham Lincoln._


       *       *       *       *       *




_16_


lux'u ry
med'i cine
a bun'dant
wil'der ness



THE USE OF FLOWERS.


       God might have bade the earth bring forth
         Enough for great and small,
       The oak tree, and the cedar tree,
         Without a flower at all.

       He might have made enough, enough,
         For every want of ours;
       For luxury, medicine, and toil,
         And yet have made no flowers.

       The ore within the mountain mine
         Requireth none to grow,
       Nor doth it need the lotus flower
         To make the river flow.

       The clouds might give abundant rain,
         The nightly dews might fall,
       And the herb that keepeth life in man
         Might yet have drunk them all.

       Then wherefore, wherefore were they made
         All dyed with rainbow light,
       All fashioned with supremest grace,
         Upspringing day and night--

       Springing in valleys green and low,
         And on the mountains high,
       And in the silent wilderness,
         Where no man passeth by?

       Our outward life requires them not,
         Then wherefore had they birth?
       To minister delight to man,
         To beautify the earth;

       To whisper hope--to comfort man
         Whene'er his faith is dim;
       For whoso careth for the flowers
         Will care much more for Him!


_Mary Howitt._


       *       *       *       *       *


Give the plural forms of the following name-words: tree, leaf, copy,
foot, shoe, calf, life, child, tooth, valley.

Insert the proper punctuation marks in the following stanza:


       In the country on every side
         Where far and wide
       Like a leopard's tawny hide
         Stretches the plain
       To the dry grass and drier grain
       How welcome is the rain.


Memory Gem:


       Full many a gem of purest ray serene
         The dark unfathom'd caves of ocean bear;
       Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
         And waste its sweetness on the desert air.


_Stanza from Gray's "Elegy."_


       *       *       *       *       *




_17_


deigned
in' va lid
lone' li ness
smoothed
med'i cine
be wil'dered
gen' ius
riv' et ed
soul-sub du' ing



PIERRE'S LITTLE SONG.


In a humble room, in one of the poorer streets of London, little Pierre,
a fatherless French boy, sat humming by the bedside of his sick mother.
There was no bread in the house; and he had not tasted food all day. Yet
he sat humming to keep up his spirits.

Still, at times, he thought of his loneliness and hunger, and he could
scarcely keep the tears from his eyes; for he knew that nothing would be
so welcome to his poor invalid mother as a good sweet orange; and yet he
had not a penny in the world.

The little song he was singing was his own,--one he had composed, both
air and words; for the child was a genius. He went to the window, and,
looking out, saw a man putting up a great poster with yellow letters,
announcing that Madame Malibran would sing that night in public.

"Oh, if I could only go!" thought little Pierre; and then, pausing a
moment, he clasped his hands; his eyes sparkled with a new hope. Running
to the looking-glass, he smoothed his yellow curls, and, taking from a
little box an old, stained paper, he gave one eager glance at his
mother, who slept, and ran speedily from the house.


       *       *       *       *       *


"Who, do you say, is waiting for me?" said the lady to her servant. "I
am already worn out with company."

"Only a very pretty little boy, with yellow curls, who says that if he
can just see you, he is sure you will not be sorry, and he will not keep
you a moment."

"Oh, well, let him come!" said the beautiful singer, with a smile; "I
can never refuse children."

Little Pierre came in, his hat under his arm; and in his hand a little
roll of paper. With a manliness unusual in a child, he walked straight
up to the lady, and, bowing, said: "I have come to see you, because my
mother is very sick, and we are too poor to get food and medicine. I
thought that, perhaps, if you would only sing my little song at one of
your grand concerts, some publisher might buy it, for a small sum; and
so I could get food and medicine for my mother."

The beautiful woman rose from her seat; very tall and stately she
was;--she took the little roll from his hand, and lightly hummed the
air.

"Did you compose it?" she asked,--"you, a child! And the words?--Would
you like to come to my concert?" she asked, after a few moments of
thought.

"Oh, yes!" and the boy's eyes grew bright with happiness; "but I
couldn't leave my mother."

"I will send somebody to take care of your mother for the evening; and
here is a crown, with which you may go and get food and medicine. Here
is also one of my tickets; come to-night; and that will admit you to a
seat near me."

Almost beside himself with joy, Pierre bought some oranges, and many a
little luxury besides, and carried them home to the poor invalid,
telling her, not without tears, of his good fortune.


       *       *       *       *       *


When evening came, and Pierre was admitted to the concert hall, he felt
that never in his life had he been in so grand a place. The music, the
glare of lights, the beauty, the flashing of diamonds and the rustling
of silks, completely bewildered him. At last _she_ came; and the
child sat with his eyes riveted on her face. Could it be that the grand
lady, glittering with jewels, and whom everybody seemed to worship,
would really sing his little song?

Breathless he waited:--the band, the whole band, struck up a little
plaintive melody: he knew it, and clapped his hands for joy! And oh, how
she sang it! It was so simple, so mournful, so soul-subduing. Many a
bright eye was dimmed with tears, many a heart was moved, by the
touching words of that little song.

Pierre walked home as if he were moving on the air. What cared he for
money now? The greatest singer in Europe had sung his little song, and
thousands had wept at his grief.

The next day he was frightened by a visit from Madame Malibran. She laid
her hand on his yellow curls, and, turning to the sick woman, said:
"Your little boy, madam, has brought you a fortune. I was offered, this
morning, by the first publisher in London, a large sum for his little
song. Madam, thank God that your son has a gift from heaven."

The noble-hearted singer and the poor woman wept together. As for
Pierre, always mindful of Him who watches over the tried and the
tempted, he knelt down by his mother's bedside and uttered a simple
prayer, asking God's blessing on the kind lady who had deigned to notice
their affliction.

The memory of that prayer made the singer even more tender-hearted; and
she now went about doing good. And on her early death, he who stood by
her bed, and smoothed her pillow, and lightened her last moments by his
affection, was the little Pierre of former days,--now rich,
accomplished, and one of the most talented composers of the day.

All honor to those great hearts who, from their high stations, send down
bounty to the widow and the fatherless!


       *       *       *       *       *


PIERRE (pe [^a]r'), Peter.

MALIBRAN, a French singer and actress. She died in 1836, when only 28
years old.

What does "he walked as if moving on air" mean?

BREATHLESS = _breath_+_less_, without breath, out of breath;
holding the breath on account of great interest.

BREATHLESSLY, in a breathless manner. Use _breath, breathless,
breathlessly,_ in sentences of your own.

Pronounce separately the two similar consonant sounds coming together in
the following words and phrases:

humming; meanness; is sure; his spirit; send down; this shows; eyes
sparkled; wept together; frequent trials.


Memory Gems:

A single sunbeam is enough to drive away many shadows.

_St. Francis of Assisi._



       Howe'er it be, it seems to me,
         'Tis only noble to be good.
       Kind hearts are more than coronets,
         And simple faith than Norman blood.


_Tennyson_.


       *       *       *       *       *




_18_



SEPTEMBER.


       The golden-rod is yellow;
         The corn is turning brown;
       The trees in apple orchards
         With fruit are bending down.

       The gentian's bluest fringes
         Are curling in the sun;
       In dusty pods the milkweed
         Its hidden silk has spun.

       The sedges flaunt their harvest
         In every meadow nook;
       And asters by the brookside
         Make asters in the brook.

       From dewy lanes at morning
         The grapes' sweet odors rise;
       At noon the roads all flutter
         With yellow butterflies.

       By all these lovely tokens
         September days are here,
       With summer's best of weather,
         And autumn's best of cheer.


_Helen Hunt Jackson._


[Footnote: Copyright, Little, Brown & Co., Publishers.]


[Illustration:]


       *       *       *       *       *


sedges, coarse grasses which grow in marshy places.

Tell what the following expressions mean: dewy lanes; best of cheer;
sedges flaunt their harvest.

How do "Asters by the brookside make asters in the brook"?

Give in your own words the tokens of September mentioned in the poem.
Can you name any others?

Memorize the poem. What do you know of the author?


         *       *       *       *       *




_19_


tat'ter
wreathed
Ken tuck' y
de scend'ed
