any girl in school. Her fame as a dancer soon spread and she was in
constant demand at school entertainments. Nyoda watched her a trifle
anxiously at first. She was just a little afraid that Gladys's head
would be turned with all the homage paid her, or that, blinded by her
present success, she would lose the deeper meanings of life and be
nothing but a butterfly after all. But she need not have feared.
Gladys's experience in camp had kindled a fire in her that would never
be extinguished as long as life guarded the flame. Having changed her
Camp Fire name from Butterfly to Real Woman, she was anxious to prove
her right to the name. So she worked diligently to win new honors which
made her efficient in the home as well as those which helped her to
shine in society.

Mrs. Evans was returning from an afternoon card party. She was tired and
her head ached and she felt out of sorts. A remark which she had
overheard during the afternoon stayed in her mind and made her cross.
Two ladies on the other side of a large screen near which she was
sitting were discussing a campaign in which they were interested to
raise funds for a certain philanthropy. "I am going to ask Mrs. Evans if
she would not like to subscribe one hundred dollars," said the one lady.

"So much?" asked the other in an uncertain voice, "I don't believe I
would if I were you."

"Why not?" asked the first lady.

"Haven't you heard," replied the second lady, with the air of imparting
a delicious secret, "that Mr. Evans is on the verge of financial ruin?"

"No," replied the second in a tone of lively interest, "I haven't. Who
told you so?"

"A great many people are saying so," continued the first. "Do you know
that they took their daughter out of the private school she had been
attending and sent her to public school this year? They must be hard up
if they can't pay school bills any more."

"It certainly looks like it," said the first lady.

"Possibly I had better not ask Mrs. Evans for any subscription at all.
It might embarrass her, poor thing." The voices trailed off and Mrs.
Evans was left feeling decidedly annoyed. She was the kind of woman who
rarely discussed other people's affairs, and likewise disliked having
her own discussed by other people. The thought that some folks might
misconstrue Gladys's entering the public school to mean that her father
was about to fail in business, first amused, and then irritated her.
Nothing like that could be farther from correct, but the thought came to
her that such rumors floating around might have some effect on Mr.
Evans's standing in the business world. She began to wonder if after all
it had not been a mistake to take Gladys out of Miss Russell's school in
the middle of her course.

Thinking cynical thoughts about the gossiping abilities of most people,
she drove up the long driveway and entered the house. The long hall with
its wide staircase and large, splendidly furnished rooms opening on
either side, struck her as being cold and gloomy. The polished chairs
and tables shone dully in the fast waning light of the December
afternoon, cheerless and unfriendly looking. The house suddenly seemed
to her to be less a home than a collection of furniture. For the moment
she almost hated the wealth which made it necessary to maintain this
vast and magnificent display. The women she had played cards with that
afternoon seemed shallow and artificial. Life was decidedly
uninteresting just then. She went upstairs and took off her wraps and
came down again, aimlessly. Gladys was nowhere in sight, which made the
house seem lonelier than ever, for with Gladys around there would have
been somebody to talk to. At the foot of the stairs she paused. She
could hear some one singing in a distant part of the house. "Katy's
happy, anyway," she said with a sigh, "if she feels like singing in that
hot kitchen," A desire for company led her out to the kitchen. It was
not Katy, however, who greeted her when she opened the door. It was
Gladys--Gladys with a big apron on and her sleeves rolled up, just
taking from the oven a pan of golden brown muffins. The room was filled
with the delicious odor of freshly baked dough.

Gladys looked up with a smile when she saw her mother in the doorway.
"How do you like the new cook?" she asked. "Katy went home sick this
afternoon and I thought I would get supper myself." The kitchen looked
so cheerful and inviting that Mrs. Evans came in and sat down. Gladys
began mixing up potatoes for croquettes.

"Can't I do something?" asked her mother.

"Why, yes," said Gladys, bringing out another apron and tying it around
her waist, "you heat the fat to fry these in." Mrs. Evans and Gladys had
never had such a good time together. Gladys had planned the entire menu
and her mother meekly followed her directions as to what to do next. She
and Gladys frolicked around the kitchen with increasing hilarity as the
supper progressed. Never before had there existed such a comradeship
between them.

"Do you think this is seasoned right?" asked Mrs. Evans, holding out a
spoonful of white sauce for Gladys to taste.

"A little more salt," said Gladys judicially. Mrs. Evans had forgotten
her irritation of the afternoon. The conversation which had aroused her
ire before now struck her as humorous.

"If Mrs. Davis and Mrs. Jones could only see me now," she thought with
an inward chuckle, "doing my own cooking!" The half-formed plan of
sending Gladys back to Miss Russell's the first of the year faded from
her mind. Send Gladys away? Why, she was just beginning to enjoy her
company! Another plan presented itself to her mind. In the Christmas
vacation Gladys should give a party which would forever dispel any
doubts about the soundness of their financial standing. Her brain was
already at work on the details. Gladys should have a dress from Madame
Charmant's in New York. They would have Waldstein, from the Symphony
Orchestra, with a half dozen of his best players, furnish the music.
There would be expensive prizes and favors for the games. Mrs. Davis and
Mrs. Jones would have a chance to alter their opinions when their
daughters brought home accounts of the affair. She planned the whole
thing while she was eating her supper.

After supper Gladys washed the dishes and her mother wiped them, and
they put them away together. Then Gladys began to get ready to go to
Camp Fire meeting and Mrs. Evans reluctantly prepared to go out for the
evening. The nearer ready she was the more disinclined she felt to go.
"Those Jamieson musicales are always such a bore," she said to herself
wearily. "They never have good singers--my Gladys could do better than
any of them--and they are interminable. Father looks tired to death, and
I know he would rather stay at home. Gladys," she called, looking into
her daughter's room, "where is your Camp Fire meeting to-night?"

"At the Brewsters'," answered Gladys.

"Do you ever have visitors?" continued her mother.

"Why, yes," answered Gladys, "we often do."

"Do you mind if you have one to-night?" asked Mrs. Evans.

"Certainly not," replied Gladys.

"Well, then, I'm coming along," said her mother.

"Will you?" cried Gladys. "Oh goody!" The Winnebagos were surprised and
delighted when Mrs. Evans appeared with Gladys. Since that Saturday's
outing she had held a very warm place in their affections.

"Come in, mother," called Sahwah; "you might as well join the group too,
we have one guest. This is Mrs. Evans, Gladys's mother," she said, when
her mother appeared after hastily brushing back her hair and putting on
a white apron. The two women held out their hands in formal greeting,
and then changed their minds and fell on each other's necks.

"Why, Molly Richards!" exclaimed Mrs. Evans.

"Why, Helen Adamson!" gasped Mrs. Brewster. The Winnebagos looked on,
mystified.

"You can't introduce me to your mother," said Mrs. Evans to Sahwah,
laughing at her look of surprise. "We were good friends when we were
younger than you. Do you remember the time," she said, turning back to
Mrs. Brewster, "when you drew a picture of Miss Scully in your history
and she found it and made you stand up in front of the room and hold it
up so the whole class could see it?"

"Do you remember the time," returned Mrs. Brewster, "when we ran away
from school to see the Lilliputian bazaar and your mother was there and
walked you out by the ear?" Thus the flow of reminiscences went on.

"How little I thought," said Mrs. Evans, "when I first saw Sarah Ann
going around with Gladys, that she was your daughter!"

"How little I thought," said Mrs. Brewster, "when Gladys began coming
here, that she was _your_ daughter!"

"How many more of these girls' mothers are our old schoolmates, I
wonder?" said Mrs. Evans.

"Let's meet them and find out," said Mrs. Brewster. "Here, you girls,"
she said, "every one of you go home and get your mother." Delightedly
the girls obeyed, and the mothers came, a little backward, some of them,
a little shy, pathetically eager, and decidedly breathless. Migwan's
mother, Mrs. Gardiner, had known Mrs. Brewster in her girlhood, and
Nakwisi's mother had known Mrs. Evans, and Chapa's and Medmangi's
mothers had known each other. What a happy reunion that was, and what a
chorus of "Don't you remembers" rose on every side! Tears mingled with
the laughter when they spoke of the death of Mrs. Bradford, whom most of
them had known in their school days.

"Do you remember," said one of the mothers, "how we used to go coasting
down the reservoir hill? You girls have never seen the old reservoir. It
was levelled off years ago."

"I'd enjoy going coasting yet," said Mrs. Brewster.

"Let's!" said Mrs. Evans. "The snow is just right."

Girls and mothers hurried into their coats and out into the frosty air.
The street sloped down sharply, and the middle of the road was filled
with flying bobsleds, as the young people of the neighborhood took
advantage of the snowy crust. Sahwah brought out her brother's bob,
which he was not using this evening, and piled the whole company on
behind her. She could steer as well as a boy. Down the long street they
shot, from one patch of light into another as they passed the lamp
posts. The mothers shrieked with excitement and held on for dear life.
"Oh," panted Mrs. Brewster when they came to a standstill at the bottom
of the slope, "is there anything in the world half so exciting and
delightful as coasting?" Down they went, again and again, laughing all
the way, and causing many another bobload to look around and wonder who
the jolly ladies were. Most of the mothers lost their breath in the
swift rush and had to be helped up the hill to the starting point. Once
Sahwah turned too short at the bottom of the street and upset the whole
sledful into a deep pile of snow, from which they emerged looking like
snowmen. "Oh-h-h," sputtered Mrs. Brewster, "the snow is all going down
inside of my collar! Sarah Ann, you wretch, you deserve to have your
face washed for that!" She picked up a great lump of snow and hurled it
deftly at Sahwah's head. It struck its mark and flew all to pieces, much
of it going down the back of her neck.

"This coasting is all right," said Mrs. Gardiner, "but, oh, that walk up
hill!"

Mrs. Evans spied her machine standing in front of the Brewster house,
and it gave her an idea. "Why not tie the bob to the machine," she said,
"and go for a regular ride?" This suggestion was hailed with great joy,
and carried out with alacrity.

"Would you like to drive, mother?" asked Gladys.

"No, indeed!" said her mother. "I'm out sleigh-riding to-night. You get
in and drive it yourself!" Gladys complied, with Migwan up beside her
for company, and away they flew up one street and down another and
through the park. And just as they were going around a curve, Sahwah,
who sat at the front end of the sled, untied the rope, and away went the
machine around the corner, and left them stranded in the snow. Gladys
felt the release of the trailer, but pretended that she knew nothing
about it, and drove ahead at full speed, and traveling in a circle, came
up behind the marooned voyagers and surprised them with a hearty laugh.
This time she towed them back to Sahwah's house, where they drank hot
cocoa to warm themselves up, and all declared they had never had such
fun in their lives.

"And to think how near I came to missing this!" said Mrs. Evans, as she
and Gladys were driving home, and she shivered when she remembered how
she had almost gone to the musicale.




CHAPTER VI.


GLADYS UPHOLDS THE FAMILY CREDIT.

Mrs. Evans confided her plans for a Christmas week party to Gladys the
day following the snow frolic, and Gladys was delighted with the idea.
She dearly loved to entertain her friends. The frock was ordered from
New York and Mrs. Evans and Gladys spent long hours working out the
details of the affair. Rumors of the party and the dress Gladys was to
have leaked out to the Winnebagos and from them to the whole class.
Every one was on tiptoe to find out who would be invited. Mrs. Davis and
Mrs. Jones, hearing the talk about the coming function, began to wonder
if they were on the right track after all in regard to the Evans
fortune. Two weeks before Christmas the invitations came out.
Twenty-five girls and twenty-five boys, mostly from the high school
class, were asked. What a flutter of satisfaction there was among those
who had been invited, and what a disappointment among those who had not
been, and what consultations about dresses among the favored ones!

This question was an acute one with Migwan. She had not had a new party
dress for several years, and in the present state of their finances she
could not get one now. She looked at the old one, faded and spotted, and
shook her head despairingly. "I foresee where Miss Migwan develops a
sudden illness on the night of the party," she said with tight lips,
"unless I hear from my story in time." As if in answer to her thoughts
the story came back the very next day. There was no letter from the
editor concerning the merits or faults of the piece, only a printed
rejection slip, but that stated that only typewritten manuscripts would
be considered. Migwan's air castle tumbled about her ears. She had no
typewriter and knew no one who had. Her experience did not include a
knowledge of public stenographers, and even if she had thought of that
way out the expense would have prevented her from having her story
copied. Her dream of fame and wealth was short-lived, and the world was
stale, flat and unprofitable. The house was not yet rented, as the
repairs had been delayed again and again. It would be another month at
least before that would be a paying proposition. Hearing the other girls
talk about Gladys's party all the time filled her with desperation. She
began to shun the Winnebagos. The keen zest went out of her studying and
even her beloved Latin lost its savor.

Nyoda finally noticed it. Migwan failed to recite in English class for
two days in succession, which was an unheard-of thing. Nyoda thought
that Migwan had her head so full of the coming party that she was
neglecting her lessons, and said so, half banteringly, as Migwan
lingered after class to pick up some papers she had dropped on the
floor. That was the last straw, and Migwan burst into tears. Nyoda was
all sympathy in a moment. Now Nyoda happened to have the "seeing eye,"
with which some people are blessed, and had surmised, from certain
little signs she had observed, that Migwan had written something or
other, and sent it away to a magazine. She knew only too well what the
outcome would be, and her heart ached when she thought of Migwan's
coming disappointment. Therefore, when Migwan, quickly recovering her
composure, said calmly, "It's nothing, Nyoda; I simply tried to do
something and failed," Nyoda asked quietly, "Did your story come back?"

Migwan looked at her in amazement. "How did you know I had written any
story?" she asked.

"Oh, a little bird told me," replied Nyoda lightly. "Cheer up. All the
famous authors had their first work rejected. You have achieved the
first mark of fame." Migwan smiled wanly. Her tragedies always seemed to
lose their sting in the light of Nyoda's optimism. She told her about
the necessity for a typewriter. "I could have told you that to begin
with, if you had asked my humble advice," replied Nyoda. "But if a
miserable writing machine is all that stands between you and fame and
fortune, your fortune is already made. The woman whose rooms I am living
in has one in her possession. It belongs to her son, I believe, but as
he is at present in China there is no danger of his wanting it for some
time. She has offered to let me use it on several occasions, and I don't
doubt but what we can make some arrangement to accommodate you."

The world seemed a pretty good place of habitation after all to Migwan
that day when she went home from school, in spite of the fact that she
had no dress to wear to the party. The situation began to appear faintly
humorous to her. Here was all the interest centered on what Gladys was
going to wear, when all the time the real, vital question was what _she_
was going to wear! What a commotion there would be if the other
Winnebagos knew the truth! Her thoughts began to beat themselves, into
rhythm as she walked home through the crunching snow:

  "Broke, broke, broke,
  And such clothes in the windows I see!
  And I would that my purse could answer
  The demands that are made on she!

  "O well for the millionaire's wife,
  Who can pay eighty bones for a shawl,
  And well for the African maids,
  Who don't need any clothes at all!

  "And the pennies, they all go
  To the grocer, and so do the dimes,
  But, O, for the little crepe meteor dress
  I saw down in Oppenheim's!

  "Broke, broke, broke,
  And such styles in the windows I see!
  What would I not give for the rest of the month
  For the salary of John D!"

"Would you just as soon run up to the attic and get the blanket sheets
