"Dee, dee, everything is all right," said he. "Bowser the Hound is
eating; his breakfast out back where he can't see you at all, and Black
Pussy is nowhere about. All you have to do is to follow me over to that
big tree close to the house, and I will show you where Farmer Brown's
boy is."

"I--I'm afraid," confessed Happy Jack.

"Pooh! There's nothing to be afraid of," asserted Tommy Tit in the most
positive way. "Don't be a coward. Remember how Farmer Brown's boy saved
you from Shadow the Weasel. Come on! Dee, dee, dee, come on!" With that
Tommy flew across to the tree close by the house.

Happy Jack scrambled up on the old stone wall and looked this way and
looked that way. He couldn't see a thing to be afraid of. He jumped down
and ran a few steps. Then his heart failed, and he scampered back to the
old stone wall in a panic. After a few minutes he tried again, and once
more a foolish fear sent him back. The third time he gritted his teeth,
said to himself over and over, "I will! I will! I will!" and ran with
all his might. In no time at all he was across the dooryard and up in
the big tree, his heart pounding with excitement.

"Dee, dee, dee," called Tommy Tit.

Happy Jack looked over to the house, and there sat Tommy on a
window-sill, helping himself to the most delicious-looking cracked nuts.
The sight of them made Happy Jack's mouth water. A long branch hung down
over the window and almost touched the sill. Happy Jack ventured half
way and stopped. Somehow it seemed very dangerous to go so close to that
window.

"Come on! Come on! What are you afraid of?" called Tommy.

Something like shame that such a little fellow as Tommy Tit should dare
to go where he did not, crept into Happy Jack's heart. With a quick
little run and jump he was on the sill, and a second later he was
staring in at all the strange things inside. At first he didn't see
anything of Farmer Brown's boy, but in a few minutes he made him out. He
was lying down all covered over except his head. There _was_ something
the matter with him. Happy Jack didn't need to be told that, and a great
pity filled his heart. He wanted to do something for Farmer Brown's boy.




CHAPTER XX

WHAT WAS THE MATTER WITH FARMER BROWN'S BOY?

He who climbs the highest has the farthest to fall,
but often it is worth the risk.

_Happy Jack._


All the way home from his visit to Farmer Brown's house Happy Jack
Squirrel puzzled and wondered over what he had seen. He had peeped in at
a window and seen Farmer Brown's boy lying all covered up, with only his
head showing. Happy Jack couldn't see very well, but somehow that head
didn't look just right. One thing was sure, and that was there was
something wrong with Farmer Brown's boy. He never would have been lying
still like that if there hadn't been.

Happy Jack had been so troubled by what he saw that he had hardly tasted
the nuts he had found on the window-sill. "I am going to make him
another call to-morrow," said he when he and Tommy Tit were once more
back in the Green Forest.

"Of course," replied Tommy. "I expected you would. I will be around for
you at the same time. You're not afraid any more to go up there, are
you?"

"No-o," replied Happy Jack, slowly. The truth is, he was still a little
afraid. It seemed to him a terribly venturesome thing to cross that
open dooryard, but having done it once in safety, he knew that it would
be easier the next time. It was. The next morning he and Tommy Tit went
just as before, and this time Happy Jack scampered across the dooryard
the very first time he tried. They found things just as they had been
the day before. They saw Farmer Brown's boy, but he didn't see them.
Tommy Tit was just going to tap on the window to let him know they were
there, when a door inside opened, and in walked Mrs. Brown. It
frightened them so that Tommy Tit flew away without tasting a single
nut, and Happy Jack nearly fell as he scrambled back into the tree close
by the window. You see, they never had made her acquaintance, and
having her walk in so suddenly frightened them terribly. They didn't
stop to think that there was nothing to fear because there was the
window between. Somehow they couldn't understand that queer stuff that
they could see through but which shut them out. If they had seen Mrs.
Brown go to the window and put more cracked nuts on the sill, perhaps
they would have been less afraid. But they had been too badly frightened
to look back, and so they didn't know anything about that.

The next morning Tommy Tit was on hand as usual, but he found Happy
Jack a little doubtful about paying another visit. He wasn't wholly over
his scare of the day before. It took him some time to make up his mind
to go, but finally he did. This time when they reached the tree close by
the house, they found a great surprise awaiting them. Farmer Brown's boy
was sitting just inside the window, looking out. At least, they thought
it was Farmer Brown's boy, but when they got a little nearer, they grew
doubtful. It looked like Farmer Brown's boy, and yet it didn't. His
cheeks stuck way out just as Striped Chipmunk's do when he has them
stuffed full of corn or nuts.

Happy Jack stared at him very hard. "My goodness, I didn't know he
carried his food that way!" he exclaimed. "I should think it would be
dreadfully uncomfortable."

If Farmer Brown's boy could have heard that, he certainly would have
tried to laugh, and if he had--well, it was bad enough when he tried to
smile at the sight of Tommy Tit and Happy Jack. He didn't smile at all
but made up an awful face instead and clapped both hands to his cheeks.
Happy Jack and Tommy Tit didn't know what to make of it, and it was some
time before they made up their minds that it really was Farmer Brown's
boy, and that they had nothing to fear. But when they finally ventured
on to the sill and, as they helped themselves to nuts, saw the smile in
his eyes, though he did not smile with his mouth at all, they knew that
it was he, and that he was glad that they had called. Then they were
glad too.

But what was the matter with Farmer Brown's boy? Happy Jack puzzled over
it all the rest of the day, and then gave it up.




CHAPTER XXI

HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL GROWS VERY BOLD

    When you find a friend in trouble
      Pass along a word of cheer.
    Often it is very helpful
      Just to feel a friend is near.

    _Happy Jack._


Every day Happy Jack visited the window sill of Farmer Brown's house to
call on Farmer Brown's boy, who was always waiting for him just inside
the window. In fact Happy Jack had got into the habit of getting his
breakfast there, for always there were fat, delicious nuts on the
window-sill, and it was much easier and more comfortable to breakfast
there than to hunt up his own hidden supplies and perhaps have to dig
down through the snow to get them. Most people are just like Happy
Jack--they do the easiest thing.

Each day Farmer Brown's boy looked more and more like himself. His
cheeks stuck out less and less, and finally did not stick out at all.
And now he smiled at Happy Jack with his mouth as well as with his eyes.
You know when his cheeks had stuck out so, he couldn't smile at all
except with his eyes. Happy Jack didn't know what had been the matter
with Farmer Brown's boy, but whatever it was, he was better now, and
that made Happy Jack feel better.

One morning he got a surprise. When he ran out along the branch of the
tree that led to the window-sill he suddenly discovered something wrong.
There were no nuts on the sill! More than this there was something very
suspicious looking about the window. It didn't look just right. The
truth is it was partly open, but Happy Jack didn't understand this, not
then, anyway. He stopped short and scolded, a way he has when things
don't suit him. Farmer Brown's boy came to the window and called to him.
Then he thrust a hand out, and in it were some of the fattest nuts Happy
Jack ever had seen. His mouth watered right away. There might be
something wrong with the window, but certainly the sill was all right.
It would do no harm to go that far.

So Happy Jack nimbly jumped across to the window-sill. Farmer Brown's
boy's hand with the fat nuts was still there, and Happy Jack lost no
time in getting one. Then he sat up on the sill to eat it. My, but it
was good! It was just as good as it had looked. Happy Jack's eyes
twinkled as he ate. When he had finished that nut, he wanted another.
But now Farmer Brown's boy had drawn his hand inside the window. He was
still holding it out with the nuts in it, but to get them Happy Jack
must go inside, and he couldn't get it out of his head that that was a
very dangerous thing to do. What if that window should be closed while
he was in there? Then he would be a prisoner.

So he sat up and begged. He knew that Farmer Brown's boy knew what he
wanted. But Farmer Brown's boy kept his hand just where it was.

"Come on, you little rascal," said he. "You ought to know me well enough
by this time to know that I won't hurt you or let any harm come to you.
Hurry up, because I can't stand here all day. You see, I've just got
over the mumps, and if I should catch cold I might be sick again. Come
along now, and show how brave you are."

Of course Happy Jack couldn't understand what he said. If he could
have, he might have guessed that it was the mumps that had made Farmer
Brown's boy look so like Striped Chipmunk when he has his cheeks stuffed
with nuts. But if he couldn't understand what Farmer Brown's boy said,
he had no difficulty in understanding that if he wanted those nuts he
would have to go after them. So at last he screwed up his courage and
put his head inside. Nothing happened, so he went wholly in and sat on
the inside sill. Then by reaching out as far as he could without
tumbling off, he managed to get one of those nuts, and as soon as he had
it, he dodged outside to eat it.

Farmer Brown's boy laughed, and putting the rest of the nuts outside,
he closed the window. Happy Jack ate his fill and then scampered back to
the Green Forest. He felt all puffed up with pride. He felt that he had
been very, very bold, and he was anxious to tell Tommy Tit the
Chickadee, who had not been with him that morning, how bold he had been.

"Pooh, that's nothing!" replied Tommy, when he had heard about it. "I've
done that often."




CHAPTER XXII

HAPPY JACK DARES TOMMY TIT

    A wise philosopher is he
    Who takes things as they chance to be,
    And in them sees that which is best
    While trying to forget the rest.

    _Happy Jack._


Somehow Happy Jack's day had been spoiled. He knew that he had no
business to allow it to be spoiled, but it was, just the same. You see,
he had been all puffed up with pride because he thought himself a very
bold fellow because he had really been inside Farmer Brown's house. He
couldn't help feeling quite puffed up about it. But when he told Tommy
Tit the Chickadee about it, Tommy had said, "Pooh! I've done that
often."

That was what had spoiled the day for Happy Jack. He knew that if Tommy
Tit said that he had done a thing, he had, for Tommy always tells the
truth and nothing but the truth. So Happy Jack hadn't been so dreadfully
bold, after all, and had nothing to brag about. It made him feel quite
put out. He actually tried to make himself feel that it was all the
fault of Tommy Tit, and that he wanted to get even with him. He thought
about it all the rest of the day, and just before he fell asleep that
night an idea came to him.

"I know what I'll do! I'll dare Tommy to go as far inside Farmer
Brown's house as I do!" he exclaimed, and went to sleep to dream that he
was the boldest, bravest squirrel that ever lived.

The next morning when he reached the tree close by Farmer Brown's house,
he found Tommy Tit already there, flitting about impatiently and calling
his loudest, which wasn't very loud, for you know Tommy is a very little
fellow, and his voice is not very loud. But he was doing his best to
call Farmer Brown's boy. You see, there wasn't a single nut on the
window-sill, and the window was closed. Pretty soon Farmer Brown's boy
came to the window and opened it. But he didn't put out any nuts. Tommy
Tit at once flew over to the sill, and to show that he was just as
bold, Happy Jack followed. Looking inside, they saw Farmer Brown's boy
standing in the middle of the room, holding out a dish of nuts and
smiling at them. This was the chance Happy Jack wanted to try the plan
he had thought of the night before.

"I dare you to go way in there and get a nut," said he to Tommy Tit. He
hoped that Tommy would be afraid.

But Tommy wasn't anything of the kind. "Dee, dee, dee! Come on!" he
cried, and flitted over and helped himself to a cracked nut and was back
with it before Happy Jack could make up his mind to jump down inside.
Of course now that he had dared Tommy Tit, and Tommy had taken the dare,
he just had to do it too. It looked a long way in to where Farmer
Brown's boy was standing. Twice he started and turned back. Then he
heard Tommy Tit chuckle. That was too much. He wouldn't be laughed at.
He just wouldn't. He scampered across, grabbed a nut, and rushed back to
the window-sill, where he ate the nut. It was easier to go after the
second nut, and when he went for the third, he had made up his mind that
it was perfectly safe in there, and so he sat up on a chair and ate it.
Presently he felt quite at home, and when he had eaten all the nuts he
wanted, he ran all around the room, examining all the strange things
there.

This was a little more than Tommy Tit could make up his mind to do. He
wasn't afraid to fly in for a nut and then fly out again, but he
couldn't feel easy inside a house like that. Of course, this made Happy
Jack feel good all over. You see, he felt that now he really did have
something to boast about. No one else in all the Green Forest or on the
Green Meadows could say that they had been all over Farmer Brown's boy's
room as he had. Happy Jack swelled himself out at the thought. Now
everybody would say, "What a bold fellow!"




CHAPTER XXIII


SAMMY JAY IS QUITE UPSET

    I know of nothing sweeter than
    Success to Squirrel or to man.

    _Happy Jack._


Very few people can be all puffed up with pride without showing it.
Happy Jack Squirrel couldn't. Just to have looked at him you would have
known that he was feeling very, very good about something. When he
thought no one was looking, he would actually strut. And it was all
because he considered himself a very bold fellow. That was a new feeling
for Happy Jack. He knew that all his neighbors considered him rather
timid, and many a time he had envied, actually envied Jimmy Skunk and
Reddy Fox and Unc' Billy Possum and even Sammy Jay because they did such
bold things and had dared to visit Farmer Brown's dooryard and henhouse
