Everyone asked questions, and no one listened to the answers. Such a fight
at the Rehbock! It began over the card-table. The cattle-dealer from
Fohrensee was on his way home with his bag full of money, when he stopped
in at the Rehbock, and joined the game. When the dispute broke out, his
big fists took their share in the fray. Not until two of the party lay for
dead on the ground, did the brawling cease and the combatants begin to
cool. Then the cattle-dealer discovered that his bag full of gold was
gone, and raised a fearful alarm.

Then the red-haired man from Fohrensee shouted into the midst of the
excited crowd,

"Don't let any one get away. Run after them! That's the only way to find
out the thief!"

This man had not taken part in the fight, but had mixed with the crowd,
trying to pacify them, and to restore quiet.

His advice was useless. A good many had already gone. First of all,
Dietrich had disappeared; then several fellows ran after him, and then
all the rest went together.

On the way home, Jost had told his companions that Dietrich had made off
with himself, and that he, Jost, had told him when he saw him going that
there was doubtless good reason for his wishing to be out of the way. But
in truth Jost had not said any such thing to Dietrich!

One of the men had run at once for the doctor, and the doctor had come in
the night to the Rehbock, and had found that the two men were not dead
after all. So he had given orders that they should be let alone till they
had slept off the effect of their carouse.

In the morning, all those who had been at the Rehbock the night before,
were called together; and every one denied stoutly having any knowledge
of the cattle-dealer's money, and all were ready to be searched in proof
of their innocence. Dietrich alone was not there; he had vanished, no one
knew whither. Some one whispered, and then it was softly repeated, then
louder and louder, that Dietrich would not have taken himself off if he
had had a clear conscience; and although nobody seriously believed
Dietrich capable of a disgraceful act, yet after awhile it seemed to grow
more likely, especially when it became known that he had lost a great deal
of money in betting and gambling, and was unable to pay back what he had
lost. And many shook their heads and said, "How easy it is for a man to be
drawn into evil ways if he once begins to go down hill!"

Where Dietrich had gone, was now the important question. No trace of him
had been discovered from the moment of his disappearance. The
cattle-dealer left no stone unturned to find him, but he could get no clue
to his whereabouts. He had entered complaints against Dietrich, and hoped
that the hands of the law would succeed in getting track of him. But it
was all in vain. Gradually, no one knew how, a report got about that
Dietrich had fled to Australia, and would never come back. Little by
little every one came to believe it.

Except one. One single person in all Tannenegg was bold enough to swim
against this stream of suspicion. This was Judith. Not timidly and in
secret, but aloud, at all times and in all places, she declared decidedly,

"There's not one word of truth in what you all say. It's a lie from
beginning to end. Dietrich has no more stolen than I have, and I needn't
say more than that. I'll ferret this thing out, till I find the true
culprit, or my name's not Judith."

The first thing to do was to get a clear account of the whole affair; for
although she had already heard it told a dozen times, it had always been
among other people, who were continually interrupting and asking
questions, and were too anxious to hear the end, to wait for the full
account of the beginning. So she decided to apply to Blasi, who, as he had
been on the spot, must know all about it. But she had to hunt him up; for
since that unlucky evening he had kept himself out of sight. She placed
her bucket under the spout at the well, and then took a turn about the
kitchen garden behind the sexton's cottage. Blasi stood in the back
doorway, just as he was in the habit of standing in the front doorway,
only instead of holding his face up as if to catch any agreeable odors
that might be floating about, he stood to-day with drooping head, gazing
sadly at the uncared-for garden.

"What's amiss, Blasi?" asked Judith, sharply, coming upon him before he
was aware of her approach.

"Nothing; if you know of anything we will share it," said Blasi sullenly.

"Well, perhaps I know something that it would not be a bad thing for you
to share with me. Perhaps it's worth while for some one who has learned it
by the sweat of her brow, to tell you that vegetables can be made to grow
in a garden, instead of nettles, which you seem to cultivate."

"I don't care what grows anywhere; one thing is as good as another to me,
now that Dietrich has gone. There's nothing to do in the evening now. I've
half a mind to go after him."

"Go where? do you know where he is?"

"I don't, myself, but Jost does, and I know that Jost is expecting to hear
from him. Though he does call me stupid, I have my eye on him," said
Blasi, with angry emphasis. "And I know it was Jost who advised Dietrich
to run away and hide, though he didn't mean to let me know. Oh, I'm no
fool!"

Judith nodded assentingly, as if Blasi's information confirmed her own
suspicions.

"Here, Blasi, here's a little something for you. Now I want you to tell me
exactly how this thing happened, from the very beginning; and don't leave
out a single thing. I want to hear the whole story, connectedly."

"You may be sure I will," said Blasi, weighing the silver piece which
Judith had given him affectionately in his hand. "You see they were all
together in the little back room at first; the red-haired man and Jost and
Dietrich, and when I went in I noticed at once that something had happened
that our two didn't like; for Dietrich sat with his elbows on the table
and his head in his hands, and Jost was swearing roundly. Presently Jost
said, 'We will double our bets, Dietrich, and perhaps the luck will turn.'
Dietrich, only groaned. Then the red-haired fellow said, 'Come, let's go
down and play cards with the cattle-dealer, and take a glass of something
that will raise your spirits.'"

"Dietrich never used to gamble; nor to drink when he was not thirsty;"
cried Judith angrily.

"Pooh! When every one is playing cards, a fellow can't hold off and say he
won't join, and as for the drink, Dietrich has washed down a good deal of
vexation with it lately, and he took it powerfully too, I can tell you.
Well, the play began, and it went on fast. I noticed that the red man
looked mightily pleased, and urged them all on, and the louder the
cattle-dealer scolded, the more the red man filled up his glass. When the
quarrel came to blows, I heard the red-head call out to the
cattle-dealer, 'Come over here, you'll soon silence them,' So he kept
exciting him, and he struck out well with his great fists. The red-head
mixed in the crowd, and stuck close to the cattle-dealer, but he never
struck a blow himself; of course not, such a gentleman as he is! I did not
see Dietrich knock the Fohrensee fellow down, but just when the storm was
most furious, I saw Dietrich run out, and Jost after him, and I thought I
saw Jost give Dietrich something. I ran out after them, and I heard Jost
advising Dietrich to make off as fast as he could, and send him word where
he hid himself. When I came up to them, Jost pushed me back; I couldn't
get a word with Dietrich, who ran right off, and Jost pulled me into the
house. There the noise was increasing every minute, for the cattle-dealer
had discovered that his money-bag was gone, and red-head screamed out like
a mad-man, that nobody must get away, and everybody must be searched. When
they found that Dietrich had gone, the cattle-man started off after him,
and some others too, and then they all broke up. Now you know all that I
know. Nothing else happened; except that I went for the doctor, who said
the two men were not dead. When Jost tells Dietrich that, why, there's
nothing to prevent his coming back. That is, unless there's something
else."

"What do you mean by 'something else'?" said Judith sharply. "But
there--you're all alike. One repeats what another has said, till you all
get to saying the same thing and then of course you believe it. A nice
set of friends you are--the whole of you. I mean to stir up the ground
under you all until I find out where the truth is. Then you can begin to
stare with the others, you blind mole!" and Judith suddenly walked off as
if the earth were burning beneath her angry feet.

Blasi understood neither her words nor her anger. He looked after her,
shook his head rather sadly, and said to himself,

    "Women folk are a very foolish folk."

Home sped the "foolish" Judith; put on her Sunday garments and started on
her journey. If ever she had a project in her head, she did not wait till
to-morrow to put it into execution. And to-day she was bent on giving the
cattle dealer a piece of her mind. She paused a moment when she came to
Gertrude's house, then went on her way, saying half aloud,

"No, I'll say nothing to her, since she says nothing to me. If 'mum's' the
word I can use it as well as she."

Judith was pained that Gertrude had not from the beginning talked with her
of her troubles, for Judith was one who liked to give and receive
sympathy. Veronica too was much too reticent to please her kind-hearted
neighbor who could never get a word with her about what was going on.
Veronica and Gertrude were both very silent by nature, about anything that
touched them deeply, especially in sorrow. On the first day after the
terrible blow that had befallen them, they talked it all over, and wept
together, to ease their hearts of the first misery. Then Gertrude said,

"Dietrich has sinned and he must make atonement, but he has not stolen; I
am sure that my son is not a thief." And Veronica had responded promptly,

"If every one in the whole world said that he had stolen that money, I
should not listen; for I know he is no thief."

As soon as it became known that Dietrich was gone, letters and bills came
pouring in upon the poor widow. Her son had borrowed large sums of money
and had lost even more at play. She soon found that not only all her
husband's savings, but also the house and the business were deeply
encumbered. She talked things over with the workman who had been so many
years in her employ and asked if he would help her carry on the business
as he had done after her husband's death while Dietrich was still a child.
The man was very angry with Dietrich for having thrown away the result of
all those years of labor, and at first refused to have anything more to do
with the business. He yielded at last, however, to Gertrude's urgent
request, and consented to remain with her at least till the future
prospects of the business could be decided upon; and Gertrude agreed that
if it should prosper she would hand it over to him, in case Dietrich
should not return within a certain time.

And so the mother set herself again to her task. She worked early and
late; she seemed to have gained new strength and courage instead of being
crushed down by this new burden.

It was curious to see how differently the two women nearest to Dietrich
were affected by this trouble. Gertrude's countenance gradually resumed
its customary look of cheerfulness and peace, while on Veronica's handsome
features rested a heavy scowl which now seldom left her clouded brow. Yet
she was almost an object of envy to all the young girls of the
neighborhood, and no wonder; for she was an attractive sight to all eyes,
with her neat, well-fitting clothes, that always looked new and fresh, and
her air of strength and activity. Not a few of the strangers who came to
Fohrensee, made inquiries about her, wondering where she could have come
from; for they noticed the marked difference between her and the other
women of the place. The work which passed through her hands, even if it
were most elaborately embroidered, was never crumpled nor soiled, but
looked as fresh as if it had not been handled at all. She could obtain any
price she chose to set upon her work, and everything she did found ready
sale. Moreover, she had been appointed to the place of which Sabina had
spoken to her. She was at the head of the great Industrial School for
women, where she received so handsome a salary, that she was in a fair way
to the accumulation of a nice little fortune. It was common to hear it
said of her, "She is really a lady! she can have whatever she pleases,"
and it was often added, "If I were in her shoes, I wouldn't go about with
a face like a thirty days' storm, as she does, when she can be a
gentleman's wife whenever she chooses!" It had been proposed that
Veronica should go to live in the school-buildings at Fohrensee. But she
did not accept the offer; she could not leave her mother alone in this
time of trouble. Every evening after her work she returned to Gertrude's
cottage.

During the long summer days it was easy for Veronica to get home before
the twilight was over. But when the days grew shorter, dusk came on even
before she could reach the wood. One bright Saturday afternoon, late in
August, Veronica had delayed longer than usual in the work-room, to clear
all away and leave things in perfect order for Sunday.

She hurried up the hill road, not so much from fear of going through the
wood alone, as from desire to spare Gertrude the anxiety of watching for
her. Just before she reached the wood, she met Jost coming towards her. He
held out his hand with a friendly smile, saying,

"I came to meet you; I thought it would be getting too dark for you to go
alone through the forest; I can't let you go unprotected."

"You may spare yourself the pains," said Veronica shortly and crossed over
to the other side of the road. Jost crossed too.

"Veronica," he began after a little while, "it is not nice of you to treat
me as you have done since Dietrich went off. I know as well as you do,
that he did wrong in running away from you without letting you know where
he went to; but he may write yet, and meantime--"

"Don't say another word," interrupted Veronica; so decidedly that Jost was
silent for awhile. She crossed the road again, and presently Jost did the
same, and as he came up to her, he began again in a soft insinuating tone,

"Don't you see Veronica, that it isn't my fault that things have taken
this turn? I often thought of you when Dietrich was risking so much money,
and I used to say to him "think of her," for I knew how you would feel
about it."

"Oh, you Judas!" cried Veronica, swelling with rage, and she sprang
forward and ran on with all her might. Jost followed close at her heels.
When she had passed through the wood, and had come out on the Tannenegg
side, he said, in a flattering voice,

"Veronica, do you see how precious you are to me? I will protect you and
take care of you even if you do not speak one kind word to me. I shall
come to meet you every day, for I will not allow you to go through the
wood alone. You may meet all sorts of people there and may sometimes be
glad of my company. Bye-and-bye you will be convinced how much I care for
you."

Veronica was now near the house. She hurried on and without once looking
back, she sprang through the door and shut it fast behind her.

"You shall be tame enough before I have done with you," muttered Jost, and
he bit his lips until the blood came.

Veronica stood still on the other side of the door until she heard his
retreating footsteps; then she opened it and went out again. She went
over to the sexton's house. Blasi stood in the doorway, in a despondent
attitude, with his hands in his pockets. He was brooding over the
melancholy reflection that he had paid away the last penny of the coin
that Judith had given him, for last evening's glass at the Rehbock, and
that he had no credit. He saw no glimmer of hope in the prospect before
him, and looked disconsolately at the ground. Suddenly Veronica stood
before him. He stared at her with surprise.

"Blasi, will you do me a favor?" she asked in a friendly tone, "I will
return it sometime when you need help."

Here was an unexpected chance. He opened his eyes yet wider with delight.

"Tell me what it is, Veronica," he said; "I will go through fire and
water for you."

"It is only to go through the wood for me, to-morrow evening, and every
evening till the days grow longer again. Will you? You can have your
evening glass afterwards at my expense."

Blasi stood speechless; staring at Veronica, who waited for his answer.

"Why; do you want two of us?" he said presently, "I don't see why. Jost is
going too, for you told him to go and meet you every evening."

Veronica's dark eyes flashed forth a fire that dazzled poor Blasi.

"So! I told him to go, did I? Who told you such a thing as that?"

"Jost said so himself at the Rehbock last evening, before a room full of
people; and some of them said that you were going to prove that you could
get along very well without the fellow that ran away."

Veronica flushed burning red.

"Tell Jost," she said, scornfully, "that if he is clever in nothing else
he is a master liar. I would tell him myself, but I will never speak to
him again. Will you come for me tomorrow or not, Blasi?" she had turned to
leave him.

"Why of course, if that's the way it is about Jost, I'll come. You may
count on me," he replied gleefully. She held out her hand to him, and was
gone.

The next evening, as Blasi was walking at his ease, towards the wood, he
met Jost hurrying along from another direction.

"Where may you be going?" asked Jost peremptorily.

"I am going to meet Veronica; she engaged me to," answered Blasi, not at
all unwilling to make known his errand.

"Well, you are a dunderhead to take a joke like that for sober earnest,"
said Jost, bursting into a loud laugh. "Hadn't you sense enough to see
that she was making a fool of you? We had a good laugh together about it
last night, she and I, and she said she had a mind to make you go all
winter long to Fohrensee, to fetch her; and that you would never find out
that she was making sport of you. She seems to have made a good
beginning."

Jost laughed again immoderately, and Blasi began to waver.

"If I only knew which of you was telling a lie;" he said, and stood still
to think it over. Suddenly he started forward on the full run, for it
occured to him that he could decide by Veronica's air when he met her,
whether she had cheated him or not. Jost saw that Blasi was determined not
to give up his enterprise so he turned about, and disappeared among the
bushes; for he had no desire to have Blasi see how Veronica treated him.

When Blasi met Veronica, her face had so pleasant and bright a look, that
the lad was struck with her beauty. It was not the look of one who was
making a fool of him. Veronica was sincere. She talked kindly with him all
the way home, more kindly than he had ever thought she could talk, and
when they parted, she said persuasively,

"You'll come tomorrow, and every day, won't you Blasi?"

Then she pressed a piece of money into his hand, and thanked him for his
kindness so gratefully, that it seemed as if he had conferred a great
favor on her, instead of having received payment for service rendered.

As the young man turned away, a new set of ideas took possession of his
mind. For the first time in his life, he felt a desire to use the money
that he held in his hand, for something better than drink. He recollected
that he had no necktie on, and he was conscious of looking slovenly and
dirty. That was not the way for a fellow to look who was going to be seen
walking with the pretty Veronica along the high-road. He would buy a
neck-tie in the morning; he had money enough for that. Then his thoughts
ran on still farther. Veronica had not spoken to him in this friendly way
for many a long year. It was not to make fun of him, Jost was a liar as
