"They tried to hold Paul a prisoner, and they're not at war with us,"
rejoined Sol. "We've got a right to hit back. Besides, we're doin' it to
save a war, and we're only borrowin' their boat fur their own good."

The two, without further ado, made a circuit around the Spanish camp,
coming down on the northern side. There fortunately for them the trees and
bushes were thick to the water's edge, and the shore was very low. In
fact, the river, owing to the flood, overlapped the bushes.

They redoubled their caution, using every art and device of woodcraft to
approach without noise. They could see the flare of the camp fire beyond
the bushes, and now and then they caught sight of a sentinel's head. They
felt amply justified in this attempt, for Alvarez had not only held Paul a
prisoner, but was plotting with the Indian chiefs to slay all the white
people in Kentucky.

"Here are the boats," whispered Henry.

There they were, eight in number, large, strong boats, every one with
several pairs of oars, and tied with ropes to the bushes.

The eyes of Shif'less Sol watered as he gazed.

"They look pow'ful good to a lazy man," he said, "I could shorely sleep
mighty comf'table in one o' them while Jim Hart wuz pullin' at the oars."

"I think the small one at the end nearest to us would just suit our
party," said Henry; "although it has more, it could be handled easily with
a single pair of oars."

"Shorely!" said Shif'less Sol, "but how to git away with it is now the
question."

It was indeed a problem, vexing and likewise dangerous. A sentinel, musket
on shoulder, walked up and down in front of the Spanish navy, and he
seemed to be very wide awake. Moreover, two men slept in each boat.

"We must get that sentinel somehow," said Henry, "not to hurt him, but to
see that he doesn't talk for the next half hour or so."

"What's your idea?" asked the shiftless one.

Henry whispered to him rapidly and Sol grinned with satisfaction.

"Good enough," said the shiftless one. "It'll work," and he crept away
from Henry deep in the bushes a little west of the sentinel. A moment or
two later the Spaniard on watch was startled by a sharp, warning hiss
from the edge of the thicket. He knew very well what made it--a
rattlesnake, a thing that he loathed and feared. He certainly did not want
such a deadly reptile sliding through the grass on his feet, and, clubbing
his musket, he walked forward, looking intently for the venomous thing. He
did not see it at first and all his faculties became absorbed in the
search. Holding the clubbed musket ready for an instant blow he peered
into the grass and short bushes. He was a Spaniard not without courage,
but he was oppressed by the night, the wilderness, the huge river flowing
by, and his feeling that he was far, very far, from Spain. Under the
circumstances, the poisonous hiss inspired him with an intense dread and
he was eager to slay. He leaned a little farther, swinging the musket butt
back and forth, ready for a quick blow when he should see the target.

He did not hear a light step behind him, but he did feel a powerful arm
grasp him around the waist, pinning his own arms to his side, while a hand
was clasped over his mouth, checking the ready cry that could not pass his
lips. Then before his starting eyes a figure rose out of the bushes whence
the hiss had come. It was not that of a rattlesnake, but that of a man, a
tall man with powerful shoulders, blue eyes, and yellow hair, undoubtedly
one of the ferocious Americans.

The sentinel felt that his hour had come, and he began to patter his
prayers in his throat, but the two Americans, the one before him, and the
one who had grasped him from behind, did not slay him at once. Instead
they said words together in their harsh tongue. Then they tore pieces from
the sentinel's clothing, made a wad of it and pressed it into his mouth.
They also tied a strip from the same clothing over his mouth and behind
his head, and, still despoiling his clothing, they bound him hand and foot
and laid him in the bushes, where he was invisible to his comrades and
could only see a sky in which a few dim stars danced. But on the whole he
was glad. They had not killed him as he had expected, and the gag in his
mouth was soft. Moreover, his comrades would surely find him in time and
release him.

Henry and Shif'less Sol turned away and smiled again at each other.

"Not much trouble, that," whispered the shiftless one. "He wuz shorely a
skeered Spaniard ef I kin read a man's face. Guess he wuz glad to get off
ez easy ez he did. Now fur the boat!"

"Here we are," said Henry. "We must pitch out the two men sleeping in
it--you take one and I'll take the other--and then we must seize the oars
and pull like mad, because the whole camp will be up."

The boat was tied with a rope to a stout sapling and two Spanish soldiers
slumbered in great peace inside. The oars lay beside them. Henry cut the
rope with one sweep of his long-bladed hunting-knife, and then he and
Shif'less Sol sprang into the boat. Each seized a man by the shoulders and
lifted him in his powerful arms. It was a chance that one of the sleepers
was Luiz, and, when he was snatched suddenly from blissful dreams to
somber fact, he opened his eyes to see bending over him the same grave,
tanned being who had rescued him from the raging buffalo.

But it was not a beneficent spirit, because Luiz was tossed bodily the
next moment into three feet of muddy water. He uttered a cry of terror and
despair as he went down, and another Spaniard uttered a similar cry at the
same moment. Both cries were cut off short by mouthfuls of the
Mississippi, but the two Spaniards came up a moment later, and began to
wade hastily to the shore. Each cast a frightened glance behind him, and
saw their boat disappearing on the river's bosom, carrying the two evil
spirits with it.

"I shorely enjoyed that," said Shif'less Sol, as the oars bent beneath his
powerful stroke. "That Spaniard's face as he woke up an' found hisself
whirled out into the Mississippi wuz the funniest thing I ever seed, an' I
had the fun, too, without hurting him. It ain't often, Paul, that you kin
do what you need to do an' be full o' laugh, too, an' so when the time
comes I make the most o' it."

"It was worth seeing," said Henry, "and we've been in great luck, too.
There, hear 'em! They've got the water out of their mouths and are giving
tongue again! Pull, Sol! Pull!"

Loud shouts came from the sentinels who had risen from their bath and it
was followed by cries in the Spanish camp. Torches flared, there was the
sound of running footsteps, and dusky figures appeared at the river's
bank.

"Pull, Sol! Pull!" exhorted Henry again. "We're not yet out of range!"

Shots were fired and bullets pattered on the water but none reached the
boat. They heard angry cries, imprecations, and they saw one figure
apparently giving commands, which they were sure was that of Francisco
Alvarez.

"Now if they had our Kentucky rifles and real marksmen," said Shif'less
Sol, "they could pick you an' me off without any trouble. Thar's light
enough. But with them old bell-mouthed muskets they can't do much. No,
Henry, we're bold pirates on the high seas an' we've been an' took a
Spanish gall-yun--ain't that what they call their treasure ships? 'Pears
to me, Henry, I kinder like bein' a pirate, 'specially when you do the
takin', an' ain't took yourself."

"That's so," laughed Henry, "but we'd better keep pulling, Sol, with all
our might. They're sure to pursue, and, as they have plenty of men for the
oars we need all the start that we can get."

They were well out in the middle of the stream now, and the deep, powerful
current of the Mississippi was aiding them greatly, but both glanced back.
The shore was lined with men and another volley was fired. All the bullets
fell short, and Shif'less Sol laughed contemptuously.

"Now they are beginnin' the pursuit," he said.

Four boats had been cut loose, and, filled with Spaniards, they were
pushed from the bank. Henry turned the prow of their own boat until it
bore in a slanting direction toward the eastern shore.

"What's your plan?" asked the shiftless one.

"The river, you know, has overflowed on the eastern shore over there for
three or four miles; we must lose ourselves in the forest on that side."

"An' let 'em pass us?"

"That's just it. We want 'em to go on ahead of us to Louisiana, while we
follow. Besides we've got to pick up Paul and Jim and Tom."

Shouts arose from the pursuers and more shots were fired, but they were
still beyond the range of the Spanish muskets and the two were untouched.
They were not even alarmed.

"There's a lot of confusion in the boats," said Henry, who looked back
again with a critical eye, "and as they don't pull together they're not
gaining. The night is also growing darker and that helps us, too. Keep it
up, Sol!"

"All right," said the shiftless one, increasing his stroke. "It's fine to
be a pirate, Henry. Wonder why I never tried it afore! But I believe I'll
always be a pirate at night when you've got more chance to git away."

"You're right as usual, Sol," said Henry as he, too, increased his stroke.

They pulled away for some time without further words, and the pursuers,
also, settled into silence save for an encouraging shout now and then to
the rowers. Henry thought that he discerned both Alvarez and Braxton
Wyatt in the foremost boat and he could imagine the rage and chagrin of
both.

"I believe they're gaining," he said presently to Sol.

"Yes," replied the shiftless one, "that big boat thar is creepin' up."

"Crack!" came a report and a bullet embedded itself in the stout wood of
their own boat. Both recognized the report. It was not that of a Spanish
musket, but the lashing fire of a Kentucky rifle like their own.

"That was Braxton Wyatt," said Henry. "I thought I could make him out in
that boat. He's got a rifle that reaches and he's a danger."

"Why don't you talk back?" asked Shif'less Sol.

"I will," replied Henry. "We're not at war with Spain, but we are surely
at war with Braxton Wyatt. I think the second man in the boat is Braxton.
Hold her steady just a second, Sol."

Henry shipped his oars, knelt a moment, and up went the long, slender
barrel of his Kentucky rifle. As he looked down the sight he was sure that
the man at whom he was aiming was Braxton Wyatt, and he was sure,
moreover, that he would not miss. But a feeling for which he could not
account made him deflect slightly the muzzle of his weapon.

Braxton Wyatt richly deserved death for crimes already done and he would
be, as long as he lived, a deadly menace to the border. But Henry felt
that he could not be both judge and executioner. He and Braxton Wyatt had
been young boys together. So, when he deflected the muzzle of his rifle,
it was to turn the bullet from his heart to his arm.

The rifle flashed, the sharp report echoed over the flowing waters, and a
cry of pain came from the pursuing boat, which quickly slackened its
speed.

"I hit him in the arm only," said Henry.

Shif'less Sol glanced at his comrade and he understood, but he made no
criticism.

"Ef you've stung him in the arm," he said, "it ain't likely that he kin
use that rifle o' his ag'in, an' I notice, too, since you shot that them
oarsmen ain't burnin' up with zeal. Now you row, Henry, while I plunk a
bullet in among 'em, an' they'll burn less than ever."

Shif'less Sol fired. He did not shoot to kill, but his bullet whistled
unpleasantly near the heads of the rowers, and, as he had predicted, they
rapidly lost zeal. The captured boat slid swiftly ahead.

"Here we are among the trees," said Henry. "Now, Sol, keep on rowing and
I'll look out that we don't run into anything."

The swollen waters rose far up on the trunks of the trees, which grew
thickly here, and Sol rowed slowly, making no noise save a slight ripple,
while Henry pushed the prow of the boat away from the trunks and the
bushes. It was very dark here and in a few minutes the pursuing boats were
shut out of sight.

"Thar ain't eyes enough in that Spanish camp to find us now," said
Shif'less Sol.

But they rowed deeper and deeper into the forest, and then, in a cluster
of trees where they could not be seen ten feet away, they stopped and
listened. Not a sound but the lapping of the water came to their ears.

"We'll take a good rest and then row Northward, still keeping in the
forest," said Henry.

They shipped their oars and drew long, deep breaths of relief and
satisfaction.

"Henry," said Shif'less Sol presently in a tone of great exultation, "have
you noticed that this is a shore enough gall-yun that we've took? We
didn't know it, but we jest boarded and sailed away with a real treasure
ship. Look!"

He opened a locker and took out two fine ornamented guns.

"What are these?" he said.

"Why, those are fowling pieces," replied Henry, "and they are of the very
best English make. We'll certainly borrow those, Sol."

"Yes, an' this end o' the locker is full o' powder an' shot fur 'em.
Thar's no lack o' ammunition, an' look here, Henry, at these!"

He took out of another locker three beautiful rapiers with polished hilts
and decorated scabbards.

"Spaniards like sech tools ez these," continued the shiftless one, "an'
they're mighty purty to look at, but ez fur me give me my good old
Kentucky rifle. At a hundred yards what chance would them things have
ag'in me?"

"We'll borrow them, too," said Henry. "We may have a use for them later
on. They're weapons that never have to be reloaded."

Sol drew forth one of the small swords and held it up. A shaft of
moonlight fell across the blade, and showed the keen edge.

"They're such fine weepins they must hev belonged to that thar Spanish
commander hisself," he said. "After all, a thing like this mightn't be bad
when you come to it right close. Mebbe Paul could handle it. You know Mr.
Pennypacker used to teach him how to swing the sword. This is how it goes:
Ah, ha! Sa ha! touched you thar! How's that my hearty!"

Shif'less Sol lunged at the night air, slashed, cut, swept his sword
around in circles, and then laughed again. But none of his exclamations
was uttered above a whisper. Henry was forced to smile.

"Put it down, Sol," he said, "and let's see what else we've got. It may be
that we've taken Alvarez's own private boat."

Sol opened the locker again, and held up a curiously shaped stone jug,
which he contemplated for a few moments. Then he took out the stopper,
smelled the contents, and looked appreciatively at his comrade.

"Henry," he said, "I'm going to risk it."

"It's no risk."

Sol turned the jug up to his lips, took a mouthful, which he held for a
moment or two, and then swallowed. After waiting a half minute he uttered
a deep sigh of content, and rubbed his chest.

"It tasted good all the way down, Henry," he said. "Here's something writ
over the label, but I guess it's Spanish, another o' them useless
tongues, an' so it tells nothin'."

"Put it back," said Henry. "It's some of those fancy liquors, but we'll
keep it for times when we're wet or cold or tired out."

"All right," said Sol, "an' here's three more little jugs like it."

"What else do you find?" asked Henry.

"Oh, look at these, will you!" exclaimed Sol, holding up two splendid
double barreled duelling pistols of Spanish make.

"Now I'm sure that this is the boat of Alvarez himself," said Henry. "Such
fine things as these could belong only to the Commander. Those are
duelling pistols, Sol, but they can be made mighty useful, too, for our
defense in case of a pinch. We'll keep them, too."

The shiftless one put them back and opening another locker uttered a
little cry of delight.

"A hull carpenter shop!" he exclaimed. "Jest look, Henry! A fine axe,
hammers an' hatchets, an' saws an' augers an' a lot o' other things
pow'ful useful to fellers like us that have to cut an' bore their own way
out here in the woods. This is shorely one o' them gall-yuns that Paul
tells us about, an' I guess we're about ez highfalutin' an lucky pirates
ez any o' them."

"You're right, Sol," said Henry. "This boat is a great find, and it's
lawful prize as they began the war upon us by seizing Paul. Keep on
looking, Sol."

"Here's some beautiful blankets," continued the shiftless one. "Guess they
were made to trade with the Injuns. But it's more'n likely that this here
most gorg-y-us one will, on occasions, shelter, warm, purtect an'
otherwise care fur the deservin' body o' one Solomon Hyde, a highly
valooable citizen o' the new country they call Kentucky. An' say, Henry,
what do you call this?"

His voice took a rapidly rising inflection, as he held up a glittering
garment, puffed with magnificent lace.

"That," said Henry, "is what they call a doublet, and I should say that it
