speak; but Primrose was strangely silent.

"First of all, Poppy, you must go to the places which improve your
mind; now, I do hope you are not going to be giddy, running just after
pretty things; but I suppose your aunt, who is so wise, and who keeps
the boarding-house, will see to that. Well, first of all you had
better go to Westminster Abbey. Oh, Poppy! I have read such glorious
descriptions of it--the lights from the painted windows--the
wonderfully ancient look of the old pillars, and then the music; it
peals down the aisles and echoes through the fretted roofs; you will
be greatly overpowered at Westminster Abbey, Poppy; but you must
remember that you are a very privileged person, and be thankful for
being permitted to see with your own eyes such a lovely, lovely,
glorious place!"

"It do sound, from your description, very awe-inspiring, Miss
Jasmine," answered Poppy. "Is there no other place where one might get
more, so to speak, into the festive mood, miss?"

"Oh yes, you silly Poppy, lots and lots; but we'll come to those
presently. You'll have to see the Houses of Parliament, where our laws
are made--if you don't feel grave there, you ought. Then you must
visit the Tower, where people's heads were cut off--it's very solemn
indeed at the Tower; and, of course, you will pay a visit to the Zoo,
and you can see the lions fed, and you can look at the monkey-house."

"I likes monkeys," said Poppy, whose face had been growing graver and
graver while Jasmine was talking; "and if you'll throw in a little bit
of gazing into shop windows, Miss Jasmine, and learning the newest
cuts of a bonnet, and the most genteel fit of a mantle, why, then,
I'll do even that dreadful Tower, as in duty bound. My mother calls
London a vast sea and a world of temptation, and nothing but vanity
from end to end; but when I thinks of the beautiful ladies in aunt's
boarding-house, and of the shop windows I feels that it is dazzling."

"I wish that I were going," repeated Jasmine, whose cheeks were
flushed, and her starry eyes brighter than usual; "I wish I were
going. Oh, Primrose, think of you, and Daisy, and me saying our
prayers in the Abbey!"

"We must not think of it," said Primrose; "God hears our prayers
wherever we say them, Jasmine, darling."

"Yes," answered Jasmine; "and I am not going to complain. Well, Poppy,
you are a very lucky girl, and I hope you'll be as good as gold, and
as happy as the day is long."

"And if ever you does come to London, Miss Jasmine," said Poppy, rising
to her feet, "you'll remember aunt's boarding-house, for ladies only;
and proud I'll be to wait on you, miss."

"But we can't come, Poppy dear--we are very poor now--we have only got
thirty pounds a year to live on."

To Poppy, who had never been known in her life to possess thirty
pence, this sum sounded by no means modest.

"Might I make bold to inquire, miss," she asked, "if the thirty pounds
is once for all, or if it's a yearly recurrence?"

"Oh, it's an income, Poppy--how stupid you are!"

"Then I'll consult my aunt in town, miss, and try to find out if you
three dear young ladies couldn't contrive a London visit out of part
of the savings."

After this sapient speech Poppy bade the Mainwarings good-bye. They
looked after her retreating form down the street with many regrets,
for they were very fond of her, and Jasmine at least envied her.




CHAPTER X.

WAYS OF EARNING A LIVING.


That night, after her sisters were in bed, Primrose again sat up
late--once again she read her mother's letter; then burying her face
in her hands, she sat for a long, long time lost in thought.

Jasmine and Daisy, all unconcerned and unconscious, slept overhead,
but Hannah was anxious about her young mistress, and stepped into the
drawing-room, and said in her kind voice--

"Hadn't you better be getting your beauty sleep, missie?"

"Oh, Hannah! I am so anxious," said Primrose.

"Now, deary, whatever for?" asked the old servant.

Primrose hesitated. She wanted to talk to Hannah about her mother's
letter; she half took it out of her pocket, then she restrained
herself.

"Another time," she whispered to herself. Aloud she said--

"Hannah, Mrs. Ellsworthy and Miss Martineau hinted to me what Mr.
Danesfield said plainly to-day--we three girls have not got money
enough to live on."

"Eh, dear!" answered Hannah, dropping on to the nearest chair, "and
are you putting yourself out about that, my pretty? Why, tisn't likely
that you three young ladies could support yourselves. Don't you fret
about that, Miss Primrose; why, you'll get quite old with fretting,
and lose all your nice looks. You go to bed, my darling--there's a
Providence over us, and he'll find ways and means to help you."

Primrose rose to her feet, some tears came to her eyes, and taking
Hannah's hard old hand, she stooped and kissed her.

"I won't fret, Hannah," she said, "and I'll go to bed instantly. Thank
you for reminding me about God." Then she lit her bedroom candle and
went very gently up the stairs to her bedroom, but as she laid her
head on the pillow she said to herself--"Even Hannah sees that we
can't live on our income."

The next morning early Primrose said rather abruptly to her two
sisters--

"I have found out the meaning of Miss Martineau's fussiness and Mrs.
Ellsworthy's kindness. They are both sorry for us girls, for they know
we can't live on thirty pounds a year."

"Oh, what nonsense!" said Jasmine; "any one can live on thirty pounds
a year. Didn't you see how Poppy opened her eyes when we mentioned
it;--she thought it quite a lot of money, and said we could come to
London out of the savings. I am sure, Primrose, if any one ought to
know, it is Poppy, for her mother is really very poor."

"Mr. Danesfield, too, says we can't live on it," continued Primrose;
"and when I asked Hannah last night, she said 'Of course not'--that no
one expected us to. Now look here, Jasmine, this is all quite fresh to
you and Daisy, but I'm accustomed to it, for I have known it for
twenty-four hours, and what I say is this, if we can't live on our
income we have got to make some more income to live on. If thirty
pounds a year is not enough for us at the end, neither is it enough
for us at the beginning, so we had better see about earning an income
at once, or we'll get into debt, which will be quite awful. Jasmine, I
am afraid the days of our merry childhood are over, and I am so sorry
for you and Daisy, for you are both very young."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Jasmine--"I--I--I'd do anything--I fancy I
could make dresses best, or--Oh, suppose I wrote poetry, and sold it?
You know you and Daisy do like my poems. Do you remember how you cried
over the one I called 'An Ode to the Swallow?'"

"No, I didn't cry over that one," interrupted Daisy. "I thought that
one rather stupid--I cried over the one in which you spoke about my
darling Pink being caught in a trap, and having her leg broken."

"Oh, that one," repeated Jasmine--"I thought that one a little vulgar.
I only made it up to please you, Daisy. Primrose, don't you notice
what a lot of poems there are in all the magazines, and of course,
somebody must write them. I should not be a bit surprised if I could
add to our income by writing poetry, Primrose. All the books, nearly
all the magazines and newspapers, come from London. Poppy will not be
going to London until to-morrow--I'll run round this morning and ask
her to try and find out for me which of the publishers want poems like
my 'Ode to the Swallow.' Perhaps they'd like it in the ---- _Review_;
only the ---- _Review_ is so horribly deep. My ode is deep too, for
Daisy cannot understand it. Perhaps I could send my poem about Pink to
one of the other magazines. Oh, Primrose! may I run round to Poppy,
and see if she can help us?"

Primrose smiled very faintly, and it dawned across her again in rather
a painful manner what a mere child her little sister was.

"I think I wouldn't, darling," she said. "Poppy could not really help
you about publishers. Look here, Jasmine and Daisy; here is a letter I
found in mamma's cabinet yesterday--it is directed to me, but the news
it contains is for us all; will you and Daisy go out into the garden
and read it together. You will be very much astonished when you read
the letter--poor mamma, what she must have suffered! While you are
reading I will go out. Mr. Danesfield says I may consult him, and as I
know he is a wise man, I will do so."

"Would you like to take my ode with you?" inquired Jasmine.

"No, not to-day, dear--if I am not in to dinner, don't wait for me."

"I know one thing; we'll be very saving about that dinner," remarked
Jasmine, shaking back her curly locks. "If you are not in, Primrose,
Daisy and I will divide an egg between us--I read somewhere that eggs
were very nourishing, and half a one each will do fine. Come into the
garden now, Eyebright. Oh, Primrose! I don't feel a bit low about
adding to our income. If we choose we can eat so very little, and
then if the ---- _Review_ likes my poetry, I can spin it off by the
yard."




CHAPTER XI.

BREAD AND BUTTER.


Primrose, her head a little more erect than usual, her step firm, and
a proud bright light in her eyes, went quickly down the little
rambling village street. The plain black dress she wore set off her
yellow hair and extremely fair complexion to the best advantage. She
had never looked sweeter or more independent than at this moment,
when, for the first time in her young life, she was about to ask for
help.

Mr. Danesfield was not so busy this morning, and he saw his young
visitor without delay.

"Sit down, my dear," he said; "I am very pleased to see you. You want
to ask for my advice? I will give it with the greatest pleasure."

Primrose raised her head slowly. "I have been thinking over what you
said yesterday," she began. "As it is quite impossible for my sisters
and me to live on our little income, even with the help of what you
have in the bank, we must try to help ourselves, must we not?"

"This is a brave thought, my dear--of course you must help
yourselves, and you will be none the worse for doing so."

"We must earn money," continued Primrose. "How can girls like us, who
are not educated--for I know we are not _really_ educated--add to our
incomes?"

Mr. Danesfield knit his brows. "Child," he said, "you ask me a
puzzler. I have no children of my own, and I know very little about
young folk. Of one thing, however, I am quite certain; Daisy can earn
no money, nor can Jasmine. You, Primrose, might with some difficulty
get a little place as a nursery governess; you are a nice,
presentable-looking girl, my dear."

Primrose flushed, and the tears, wrung from great pain, came into her
eyes.

"There is just one thing," she said, in a tremulous voice; "whatever
happens, we three girls won't be parted. On that point I have quite
firmly made up my mind."

Mr. Danesfield again knit his brows, and this time he fidgeted
uneasily on his chair.

"Look here, Primrose," he said: "I am an old bachelor, and I don't
know half nor a quarter the ways in which a woman may earn her living.
I have always been told that a woman is a creature of resources. Now
it is a well-known fact that an old bachelor has no resources. You go
and put your question to Miss Martineau, my dear. Miss Martineau is a
kind soul--'pon my word, now, a very kind soul--and she has managed
wonderfully to exist herself on absolutely nothing. You go to Miss
Martineau, Primrose, and get some secrets from her. Everything in my
power you may depend on my doing. I will exert my interest, and my
purse is at your service."

Here Primrose got up.

"Good-bye, Mr. Danesfield," she said. "I know you mean to be very
kind, but we three must keep together, and we must be independent."
Then she left the office, and went again down the street.

Mr. Danesfield looked after her as she walked away.

"Poor, proud young thing!" he said to himself. "Life will be a
tussle for her, or I am much mistaken. She is really growing
wonderfully nice-looking, too. How she flushed up when I said she
was presentable--poor child! poor child! That mother of theirs
might have done something to provide for those girls--lady-like
girls--distinguished-looking. I expect the mother was a weak, poor
soul. Well, I hope Miss Martineau will think of something. I must call
and see Miss Martineau; 'pon my word I don't know what to suggest for
the children to do."

When Primrose arrived at Miss Martineau's, that lady was just
dismissing the last of her morning pupils. She was standing on her
steps in her neat brown alpaca dress, over which she wore a large
black apron of the same material with a bib to it. This apron had
capacious pockets, which at the present moment were stuffed with her
pupils' French exercises. On her head she had an antique-looking cap,
made of black lace and rusty black velvet, and ornamented with queer
little devices of colored beads.

She was delighted to see Primrose, and took her at once into her
little sitting-room. "Now my dear, you will stay and have dinner with
me. You don't mind having no meat, dear. My middle-day meal to-day
consists of a salad and a rice soufflee. You are welcome to share it
with me, Primrose."

"Thank you," said Primrose, "but I am not at all hungry. If you do not
mind, I will talk to you while you dine. Miss Martineau, I have come
to ask your advice."

Miss Martineau came up instantly and kissed the young girl on both
cheeks.

"My love, I am delighted. It gives me the sincerest pleasure to give
counsel to the young and inexperienced. Have you come from Mrs.
Ellsworthy, dearest?"

"Not at all," answered Primrose. "Mrs. Ellsworthy has nothing to say
to me. She is only a friend, nothing more. Miss Martineau, we have
discovered that we cannot live on our little income. Please will you
tell me how we can add to it, so that we three can keep together?"

"Keep together--impossible!" replied Miss Martineau. "There is nothing
whatever before you, Primrose, but to face the inevitable. The
inevitable means that you must break up your home--that you obtain,
through the kind patronage of the Ellsworthys, a situation as
governess, or companion, or something of that sort--and that the
little girls, Jasmine and Daisy, are put into a good school for the
orphan daughters of military men. The Ellsworthys will use their
influence toward this end. They are very kind--they have taken up your
cause warmly. Primrose, my dear, it sounds hard, but plain speaking is
best. You must be parted from your sisters. This is inevitable. You
have got to face it."

"It is not inevitable," answered Primrose--then she paused, and her
face turned very white.

"It is not inevitable," she repeated, "for this reason because neither
you nor Mrs. Ellsworthy have the smallest control over my sisters or
myself. I asked for your advice, but if this is the best you can give,
it is useless. Mrs. Ellsworthy never cared to know my mother, and she
is not going to part my mother's children now. Good-bye, Miss
Martineau--no, I am not hungry, I have a headache. Oh, I am not
offended--people mean to be kind, but there are things which one
cannot bear. No, Miss Martineau, the inevitable course you and Mrs.
Ellsworthy have been kind enough to sketch out, my sisters and I will
certainly not adopt."




CHAPTER XII.

THEY WOULD NOT BE PARTED.


Primrose walked down the street, passing by the little cottage which
for so many years had been her home. Her sisters did not expect her to
return to dinner, and her heart was too full to allow her to go in
just then.

So they were to be parted--this was the advice of those who called
themselves their friends. Primrose, Jasmine, and Daisy, her three
flowers, as mother had called them, were no longer to grow sweetly in
one garden together. They were to be parted--Primrose was to go one
way, and the little ones another. Impulsive Jasmine would no longer
cry out her griefs on Primrose's neck, or tell her joys and griefs,
her hopes and aspirations, to the calm and elder sister. Daisy--their
baby, as Primrose called her--might be ill or sad, or lonely, and she,
Primrose, would no longer be there to comfort her.

Parted! No, they should not be parted--all their young lives they had
lived together, and whether they starved, or whether they feasted,
they would live together still. Thank God, no one had any real
control over them--their very loneliness would now, therefore, be
their safety--they might sketch out their own career, and no one could
prevent them.

Primrose said to herself--

"After all, I am glad I know the very worst. People mean to be kind;
but, oh! how can they understand what we three girls are to one
another?"

She walked quickly in her agitation, and passing the village green,
came suddenly upon Poppy Jenkins, who was hurrying home to her
mother's cottage.

"Well, Miss Primrose, I'm off to-morrow," said Poppy, dropping one of
her quick curtseys, and a more vivid red than usual coming into her
bright cheeks.

"Yes, Poppy," answered Primrose; "I hope you will be very happy in
London"--then a sudden thought occurring to her, she ran after the
young girl and laid her hand on her shoulder.

"Poppy, give me your London address--I may want it."

