discovered. When he reached them he lay flat on the ground and took one
from the top. He knew by its lack of weight that it was empty, and he
laid it aside. Then he paused for a glance at the sentinel who was still
walking steadily on his beat, and whom he now saw very clearly.

He was disappointed to find the first canteen empty, but he was
convinced that some in that heap must contain water, and he would
persevere. The second and third failed him in like manner, but he would
yet persevere. The fourth was heavy, and when he shook it gently he
heard the water plash. That thirst at once became burning and
uncontrollable. The cry of his body to be assuaged overpowered his will,
and while deadly danger menaced he unscrewed the little mouthpiece and
drank deep and long. It was not cold and perhaps a little mud lurked at
the bottom of the canteen, but like the gift of the water palm it
brought fresh life and strength.

He put down the canteen half empty and took another from the heap. It,
too, proved to be filled, and he hung it around neck and shoulder by the
strap provided for that purpose. He could have found no more precious
object for the dry regions through which he intended to make his
journey.

Ned went back toward the pyramid, but his joy over finding the water
made him a little careless. Great fragments of stone lay about
everywhere, and his foot slipped on a piece of black basalt. He fell and
the metal of his canteen rang against the stone.

He sprang to his feet instantly, but the sentinel had taken the alarm
and as Ned's sombrero had slipped back he saw the fair face. He knew
that it was the face of no Mexican, and shouting "Gringo!" he fired
straight at him. Luckily, haste and the darkness prevented good aim,
although he was at short range. But Ned felt the swish of the bullet so
close to him that every nerve jumped, and he jumped with them. The first
jump took him half way to the pyramid and the next landed him at its
base. There the second nearest sentinel fired at him and he heard the
bullet flatten itself against the stone.

Fortunately for Ned, the silent, thoughtful lad, he had often tried to
imagine what he would do in critical junctures, and now, despite the
terrible crisis, he was able to take control of his nerves. He
remembered to pull the sombrero down over his face and to keep close to
the pyramid. The shots had caused an uproar in the camp. Men were
running about, lights were springing up, and officers were shouting
orders. A single fugitive among so many confused pursuers might yet pass
for one of them. Chance which had been against him was now for him. The
wind suddenly took a wilder sweep and the rain lashed harder. He left
the pyramid and darted behind a tumulus. He stood there quietly and
heard the uproar of the hunt at other points. Presently he slouched
away in the manner of a careless peon, with his serape drawn about chin
as well as body, for which the wind and the rain were a fitting excuse.
He also shouted and chattered occasionally with others, and none knew
that he was the Gringo at whom the two sentinels had fired.

Ned thought to make a way through the lines, but so many lights now
flared up on all the outskirts that he saw it was impossible.

He turned back again to the side of the pyramid, where he was almost
hidden by debris and foliage. Two or three false alarms had been sounded
on the other side of the great structure, and practically the whole mob
of searchers was drawn away in that direction. He formed a quick
decision. He would reascend the pyramid. And he would take with him a
water supply in the canteen that he still carried over his shoulder. He
began to climb, and he noticed as he went up that it was almost the
exact point at which he had ascended before.

He heard the tumult below, caught glimpses of lights flashing here and
there, and he ascended eagerly. He was almost half way up when he came
face to face with a Mexican soldier who carried in his hand a small
lantern. The soldier, the only one perhaps who had suspected the pyramid
as a place of refuge, had come at another angle, and there on a terrace
the two had met.

They were not more than three feet apart. Ned had put his machete back
in his belt that he might climb with more ease, but he hit out at once
with his clenched right hand. The blow took the Mexican full between the
eyes and toppling over backward he dropped the lantern. Then he slid on
the narrow terrace and with an instinctive cry of terror fell. Ned was
seized with horror and took a hasty glance downward. He was relieved
when he saw that the man, grasping at projections and outgrowing
vegetation, was sliding rather than falling, and would not be hurt
seriously.

He turned to his own case. There lay the lantern on the stone, still
glowing. Below rose the tumult, men coming to his side of the pyramid,
drawn by his cry. He could no longer reach the top of the pyramid
without being seen, but he knew another way. He snatched up the lantern,
tucked it under his serape and made for the opening which he had noticed
in the side of the pyramid at his first ascent. It was scarcely ten feet
away, and he boldly stepped in, a thing that he would never have dared
to do had it not been for the happy chance of the lantern.

His foot rested on solid stone, and he stood wholly in the dark. Yet the
uproar came clearly to his ears. It was a certainty now that more
soldiers would ascend the pyramid looking for him, but he believed that
ignorance and superstition would keep them from entering it.

The air that came to his nostrils out of the unknown dark was cold and
clean, but he did not yet dare to take out his lantern. He felt
cautiously in front of him with one foot and touched a stone step below.
He also touched narrow walls with his outstretched hand. He descended to
the step, and then, feeling sure that the light of his lantern could not
be seen from without, he took it from under his serape and held it as
far in front of him as he could. A narrow flight of stone steps led
onward and downward further than he could see, and, driven by imminent
necessity, he walked boldly down them.

The way was rough with the decay of time from which stone itself cannot
escape, but he always steadied himself with one hand against the wall.
The stone was very cold and Ned had the feeling that he was in a tomb.
Once more he had that overwhelming sense of old, old things, of things
as old as Egypt. At another time, despite every effort of reason, he
would have thrilled with superstitious terror, but now it was for his
life, and down he went, step by step.

The air remained pure like that of great caves in the States, and Ned
did not stop until a black void seemed to open almost before him when he
drew back in affright. Calming himself he held up the lantern and looked
at the void. It was a deep and square well, its walls faced as far as he
could see with squared stones. His lantern revealed no water in the
depths and he fancied that it had something to do with ceremonials,
perhaps with sacrifice. There was a way around the well, but it was
narrow and he chose to go no further. Instead he crouched on the steps
where he was safe from a fall, and put the lantern beside him.

It was an oil lamp. Had he possessed any means of relighting it he would
have blown it out, and sought sleep in the dark, but once out, out
always, and he moved it into a little niche of the wall, where no sudden
draught could get at it, and where its hidden light would be no beacon
to any daring Mexican who might descend the stairway.

The sense of vast antiquity was still with the boy, but it did not
oppress him now as it might have done at another time. His feeling of
relief, caused by his escape from the Mexicans, was so great that it
created, for the time at least, a certain buoyancy of the mind. The
unknown depths of the ancient pyramid were at once a shelter and a
protection. He folded the serape, in order to make as soft a couch as
possible, and soon fell asleep.

When Ned awoke he was lying in exactly the same position on the steps,
and the lantern was still burning in the niche. He had no idea how long
he had slept, or whether it was day or night, but he did not care. He
took the full canteen and drank. It was an unusually large canteen and
it contained enough, if he used economy, to last him two days. The cool
recesses of the pyramid's interior did not engender thirst like its
blazing summit. Then he ate, but whether breakfast, dinner or supper he
did not know, nor did he care.

He was tempted to go up to the entrance of the stairway and see what was
going forward in the camp, but he resisted the impulse. For the sake of
caution he triumphed over curiosity, and remained a long time on the
steps, beside the niche in which his lamp sat. Then he began to
calculate how much longer the oil would last, and he placed the time at
about thirty hours. Surely some decisive event would happen in his favor
before the last drop was burned.

After an interminable time the air on the stairway seemed to him to be
growing colder, and he inferred that night had come. Taking the lantern
he climbed the steps and peered out at the ancient doorway. He saw
lights below, and he could discern dimly the shapes of tents.
Disappointed, he returned to his place on the steps, and, after another
long wait, fell asleep again. When he awoke he calculated by the amount
of oil left in the lamp that at least twelve hours had passed since his
previous awakening.

Once more he made a great effort of the will in order to achieve a
conquest over curiosity and impatience. He would not return to the
entrance until the oil had only an hour more to burn. Necessity had
proved so stern a master that he was able to keep his resolution. Many
long, long hours passed and sometimes he dozed or slept, but he did not
go to the entrance. The oil at last marked the final hour, and, taking
up the lamp, he went back to the entrance.

Ned looked out and then gave a cry of joy. It was broad daylight, but
the army was gone, soldiers, horses, tents, everything. The Calle de los
Muertos was once more what its name meant. Silence and desolation had
regained the ruined city. He blew out the lantern and set it down at the
opening. It had served him well. Then he went out and climbed again to
the summit of the pyramid, from which he examined the valley long and
well.

He saw no signs of human life anywhere. Traces of the camp remained in
abundance, but the army itself had vanished. There were no lurking camp
followers to make him trouble. He descended to the ground, and stood a
while, drawing in deep draughts of the fresh daylight air. It had not
been oppressive in the pyramid, but there is nothing like the open sky
above. He went down to the Teotihuacan, and, choosing a safe place,
bathed in its waters. Then he resumed the flight across the hills which
had been delayed so long. He knew by the sun that it was morning not far
advanced, and he wished to travel many miles before night. He saw
abundant evidences on the great highway that the army was marching
toward Vera Cruz, and as before he traveled on a line parallel with it,
but at least a mile away. He passed two sheep herders, but he displayed
the machete, and whistling carelessly went on. They did not follow, and
he was sure that they took him for a bandit whom it would be wise to let
alone.

Ned wandered on for two or three days. In one of his turnings among the
mountains he lost the Vera Cruz highway, and came out again upon a wide,
sandy plain, dotted with scattered cactus. As he was crossing it a
Norther came up, and blew with great fierceness. Sand was driven into
his face with such force that it stung like shot. The cold became
intense, and if it had not been for the serape he might have perished.

The storm was still blowing when he reached the far edge of the plain,
and came into extremely rough country, with patches of low, thorny
forest. Here he found a dilapidated bark hut, evidently used at times by
Mexican herdsmen, and, thankful for such shelter, he crept into it and
fell asleep. When he awoke he felt very weak. He had eaten the last of
his food seven or eight hours before.

Driven by desperate need, Ned ate wild fruits, and, for a while, was
refreshed, but that night he fell ill, suffering greatly from internal
pains. He was afraid at first that he had poisoned himself, and he knew
that he had eaten something not used for food, but by morning the pains
were gone, although he was much weaker than before.

Now he felt for the first time the pangs of despair. It was a full two
hundred miles yet to Vera Cruz, and he was in the heart of a hostile
country. He did not have the strength of a child left, and the chance
that he could deliver his message of warning to the Texans seemed to
have gone. He rambled about all that day, light-headed at times, and,
toward evening, he fell into a stupor. Unable to go any further, he sank
down beside a rock, and lapsed wholly into unconsciousness.




CHAPTER VI

THE MARCH WITH COS


When Ned came to himself he was surrounded by men, and at first he
thought he was back among his Texans. He was in a vague and dreamy state
that was not unpleasant, although he was conscious of a great weakness.
He knew that he was lying on the ground upon his own serape, and that
another serape was spread over him. In a little while mind and vision
grew more definite and he saw that the soldiers were Mexicans. After his
long endurance and ingenuity on the pyramid he had practically walked
into their hands. But such was his apathy of mind and body that it
roused no great emotion in him. He closed his eyes for a little while,
and then fresh strength poured into his veins. When he opened his eyes
again his interest in life and his situation was of normal keenness.

They were in a little valley and the soldiers, lancers, seemed to number
about two hundred. Their horses were tethered near them, and their
lances were stacked in glittering pyramids. It was early morning.
Several men were cooking breakfast for the whole troop at large fires.
The far edge of the little valley was very rocky and Ned inferred that
he had fallen there by a big outcropping of stone, and that the
soldiers, looking around for firewood, had found him. But they had not
treated him badly, as the serape spread over his body indicated.

Feeling so much better he sat up. The odor of the cooking made him
realize again that he was fiercely hungry. A Mexican brought him a large
tin plate filled with beans and meat chopped small. He ate slowly
although only an effort of the will kept him from devouring the food
like a famished wild animal. The Mexican who had brought him the plate
stood by and watched him, not without a certain sympathy on his face.
Several more Mexicans approached and looked at him with keen curiosity,
but they did not say or do anything that would offend the young Gringo.
Knowing that it was now useless, Ned no longer made any attempt to
conceal his nationality which was evident to all. He finished the plate
and handed it back to the Mexican.

"Many thanks," he said in the native tongue.

"More?" said the soldier, looking at him with understanding.

"I could, without hurting myself," replied Ned with a smile.

A second plate and a cup of water were brought to him. He ate and drank
in leisurely fashion, and began to feel a certain relief. He imagined
that he would be returned to imprisonment in the City of Mexico with Mr.
Austin. At any rate, he had made a good attempt and another chance might
come.

An officer dressed in a very neat and handsome uniform approached and
the other Mexicans fell back respectfully. This man was young, not more
than thirty-two or three, rather tall, fairer than most of his race, and
with a singularly open and attractive face. His dress was that of a
colonel, and the boy knew at once that he was commander of the troop. He
smiled down at Ned, and Ned, despite himself, smiled back.

"I know you," said he, speaking perfect English. "You are Edward Fulton,
the lad who was held in the prison with Stephen Austin, the Texan, the
lad who starved himself that he might slip between the bars of his
window. There was much talk at the capital about it, and you were not
without admirers. You showed so much courage and resource that you
deserved to escape, but we could not let you go."

"I got lost and I was without food."

"Rather serious obstacles. They have held many a boy and man. But since
I know so much about you and you know nothing about me I will tell you
who I am. My name is Juan Nepomuceno Almonte, and I am a colonel in the
service of Mexico and of our great Santa Anna. I was educated in that
United States of yours, Texan, though you call yourself. That is why I
speak the English that you hear. I have friends, too, among your
people."

"Well, Colonel Almonte," said Ned, "since I had to be recaptured, I'm
glad I fell into your hands."

"I wish I could keep you in them," he said, "but I am under the command
of General Cos, and I have to rejoin the main force which he leads."

Ned understood. Cos was a man of another type. But he resolved not to
anticipate trouble. Almonte again looked at him curiously, and then
leaning forward said confidentially:

"Tell me, was it you who knocked our soldier down on the side of the
pyramid and took his lantern? If it is true, it can't do you any harm to
acknowledge it now."

"Yes," replied Ned with some pride, "it was I. I came upon him suddenly
and I was as much surprised as he. I hit out on the impulse of the
moment, and the blow landed in exactly the right place. I hope he was
not much hurt."

"He wasn't," replied Almonte, laughing with deep unction. "He was
pretty well covered with bruises and scratches, but he forgot them in
the awful fright you gave him. He took you to be some demon, some
mysterious Aztec god out of a far and dim past, who had smitten him with
lightning, because he presumed to climb upon a sacred pyramid. But some
of us who were not so credulous, perhaps because we did not have his
bruises and scratches, searched all the sides and the top of the
pyramid. We failed to find you and we knew that you could not get
through our lines. Now, will you tell me where you were?"

His tone was so intent and eager that Ned could not keep from laughing.
Besides, the boy had a certain pride in the skill, daring and resource
with which he had eluded the men of Cos.

"Did you look inside the pyramid?" he asked.

"Inside it?"

"Yes, inside. There's an opening sixty or seventy feet above the ground.
I took your man's lantern when he dropped it and entered. There's a
stairway, leading down to a deep, square well, and there's something
beyond the well, although I don't know what. I stayed in there until
your army went away. Before that I had been for two or three days on top
of the pyramid, where a little water palm gave up its life to save me."

Almonte regarded him with wonder.

"I am not superstitious myself--that is, not unnecessarily so," he said,
"but yours must be a lucky star. After all that, you should have
escaped, and your present capture must be a mere delay. You will slip
from us again."

"I shall certainly try," said Ned hopefully.

"It is bound to come true," said Almonte. "All the omens point that
way."

Ned smiled. Almonte, young, brilliant and generous, had made him almost
feel as if he were a guest and not a prisoner. He did not discern in him
that underlying strain of Spanish cruelty, which passion might bring to
the surface at any moment. It might be due to his youth, or it might be
due to his American education.

"We march in an hour," said Almonte. "We are to rejoin General Cos on
the Vera Cruz road, but that will not occur for two or three days.
Meanwhile, as the way is rough and you are pretty weak, you can ride on
a burro. Sorry I can't get you a horse, but our lancers have none to
spare. Still, you'll find a burro surer of foot and more comfortable
over the basalt and lava."

Ned thanked him for his courtesy. He liked this cheerful Mexican better
than ever. In another hour they started, turning into the Vera Cruz
road, and following often the path by which great Cortez had come. Ned's
burro, little but made of steel, picked the way with unerring foot and
never stumbled once. He rode in the midst of the lancers, who were full
that day of the Latin joy that came with the sun and the great panorama
of the Mexican uplands. Now and then they sang songs of the South,
sometimes Spanish and sometimes Indian, Aztec, or perhaps even Toltec.
Ned felt the influence. Once or twice he joined in the air without
knowing the words, and he would have been happy had it not been for his
thoughts of the Texans.

The courtesy and kindliness of Almonte must not blind him to the fact
that he was the bearer of a message to his own people. That message
could not be more important because its outcome was life and death, and
he watched all the time for a chance to escape. None occurred. The
lancers were always about him, and even if there were an opening his
burro, sure of foot though he might be, could not escape their strong
horses. So he bided his time, for the present, and shared in the gayety
of the men who rode through the crisp and brilliant southern air. All
the time they ascended, and Ned saw far below him valley after valley,
much the same, at the distance, as they were when Cortez and his men
first gazed upon them more than three hundred years before. Yet the look
of the land was always different from that to which he was used north of
the Rio Grande. Here as in the great valley of Tenochtitlan it seemed
ancient, old, old beyond all computation. Here and there, were ruins of
which the Mexican peons knew nothing. Sometimes these ruins stood out on
a bare slope, and again they were almost hidden by vegetation. In the
valleys Ned saw peons at work with a crooked stick as a plow, and once
or twice they passed swarthy Aztec women cooking tortillas and frijoles
in the open air.

The troop could not advance very rapidly owing to the roughness of the
way, and Ned learned from the talk about him that they would not
overtake Cos until the evening of the following day. About twilight they
encamped in a slight depression in the mountain side. No tents were set,
but a large fire was built, partly of dry stems of the giant cactus. The
cactus burned rapidly with a light, sparkling blaze, and left a white
ash, but the heavier wood, mixed with it, made a bed of coals that
glowed long in the darkness.

