complied with her father's instructions, for, as has been shown, she put
forth every possible exertion to save herself, and now she called on
Heaven to assist her.

Perched in the top of the tree, with the enormous bear sitting beneath
and looking hungrily upward, she prayed:

"Heavenly Father, please take care of me and don't let that big bear
catch me; don't let papa and mamma feel too bad, and please make the bad
bear go away and let me alone."




CHAPTER XI.

"GOTT SEI DANK!"


The prayer of little Nellie Ribsam--so far as it related to herself--was
answered.

She secured her seat, as best she could, in the branches of the chestnut
sapling, and, by arranging her dress and the yielding limbs with
considerable skill, she made herself quite comfortable.

The trying situation in which she was placed, it would be thought, was
enough to drive away all disposition to sleep, but at the end of less
than half an hour the little head was nodding again, and, forgetful of
her peril, her senses soon left her.

It will be understood that the danger of the young wanderer was rendered
all the greater by this loss of consciousness, for her muscles would
relax in slumber, and, unless her position was unusually secure, she was
certain to fall.

But that gracious Father in whom she so implicitly trusted watched over
the little one, and she remained as though seated in the broad
rocking-chair at home.

When at last she moved slightly and was on the point of losing her
balance, she awoke so quickly that she saved herself just in the nick of
time.

She was shocked and startled, but regaining her breath she held fast
with one hand while she parted the branches with the other and carefully
peered down among the limbs.

"He is gone!" was her joyous exclamation; "I knew the Lord would make
him go away, because I asked him to."

She was right: the bear had vanished, and all danger from that source
for the time had passed.

The brute probably found enough to eat without waiting for little girls
to fall into his clutches. As he had never been known to trouble any one
in the neighborhood, it was reasonable to believe that he got all he
wanted without venturing away from the depths of the woods, and rousing
an ill-will against himself that would speedily result in his
destruction.

Nellie did not feel surprised at all, for, as I have shown, she had the
faith to believe that her prayer would be answered.

"Now I will go down to the ground and start for home. I guess the bear
isn't far off, but the Lord will not let him hurt me."

She carefully descended the tree and stood on the ground a minute later.
She found that her dress was torn and she had lost part of the ribbon
from her hat. This troubled her more than anything else, for her frugal
mother had told her many a time that she must take the best care of her
clothing.

"I was so scared that I forgot to look out," she said to herself, after
taking an inventory of the damages; "but I guess mother will excuse me
for losing the ribbon, though I know she won't for coming so far into
the woods without permission."

She now set out resolutely for the bridge, determined to lose no more
time in reaching home. As is the rule, the brief space she had passed in
sleep seemed three times as long as was actually the case, and she
thought it must be near morning.

She had gone but a short distance when she stopped with another shock of
affright.

"My gracious! what can that be?"

A point of light appeared between her and the bridge, flickering about
like an _ignis-fatuus_ or jack-o'-lantern. Nellie felt like taking to
the tree again, but she bravely stood her ground until she could satisfy
her curiosity as to its nature.

Watching it closely she observed shadowy figures flitting around the
light in a curious and grotesque way. She was in greater doubt than
ever, when she heard voices.

"I think I saw her tracks, but I couldn't be sure; Nellie knows too much
to walk or fall into the deep water."

"I hope so, but my heart misgives me sorely. God be merciful, for if she
is lost I can never recover!"

The first speaker was Nick Ribsam, and the second was the father, the
mother immediately adding:

"Why the poor child came here is more than I can understand, but He
doeth all things well."

_"Oh, mother! Oh, father! Oh, Nick! It is I, Nellie! I am so glad to see
you!"_

And the little wanderer flew like the wind along the bank of the creek.
The mother was the first to recognize the voice, and rushing forward she
caught her child in her arms, murmuring in her own language:

"Mein Kind! Mein Kind! Gott sei Dank!" (My child! My child! God be
thanked!)

"Mein lieber Nellie! Komm an mein Herz! Kannst du es sein?" (My dear
Nellie! Come to my heart! Can it be you?) exclaimed the overjoyed
father.

"O meine abtruennige Schwester! Wie du uns erschreckt hast! Wie es mich
freut dich zu finden!" (Oh, my truant sister! What a scare you have
given us! How glad I am to find you!) shouted Nick.

And the child that was lost and was found was hugged first by mother,
then by father, and then by Nick, and then all strove to get hold of her
at the same time, till the brother ceased, through fear that she would
be torn apart.

Nellie was laughing and crying, and wondering why it was such commotion
was caused by her return to her folks.

Mr. Layton and Kilgore heard the tumult, and knew what it meant. A few
minutes brought them to the spot, and, though their greeting was less
demonstrative, their eyes filled with tears over the exceeding joy of
the reunited family.

When the excitement had subsided somewhat, the group listened to the
story of Nellie. She told it in her childish, straightforward manner,
and it was all the more impressive on that account.

The listeners were greatly touched; but the probability that a large
bear was in the neighborhood hastened their footsteps and they lost no
time in hurrying away.

When they reached the highway above, crossed the bridge, and had gone
some distance on their way home, they began to feel there was nothing to
be feared from the animal. Mr. Layton referred to the tracks of the
beast which they had noticed when hunting for Nellie, but said he would
never have mentioned it until the fate of the girl became known; for the
suggestions which must have followed were too dreadful.

Nothing was seen of the animal, however, and, as the distance from the
bridge was increased the party finally gave up all thought and
conversation respecting it.

There was a grateful household that night, when, at a late hour, they
gathered about the family altar and the head returned thanks to Him who
had been so merciful to them and theirs.

The happy mother held the daughter in her arms all night, while they
both slept; and when the parent awoke, now and then, through the
darkness, she shuddered, pressed the little one closer to her and kissed
the chubby cheek, on which her former tears had not yet dried.

But Katrina Ribsam was none the less an affectionate mother when,
several days later, she called Nellie to her knee and told her how
wrongly she had acted in venturing on such a dangerous tramp without
asking permission from her parents.

Nellie said she knew it, and wondered why it was her mother delayed the
punishment so long. She was ready, and loved and respected her mother
the more for administering it.

But truth compels me to say that the chastisement was given with such a
gentle hand that it was hardly worth the name, and the mother herself
suffered far more than did the child, who to this day is not conscious
that she received anything like physical pain.




CHAPTER XII.

OMINOUS PREPARATIONS.


Happily there are few little girls in this favored land who are called
upon to go through such trials as fell to the lot of little Nellie
Ribsam when she was but eight years old.

It created much talk in the neighborhood, and she was complimented on
the bravery she had shown, while the glad father became more confirmed
than ever in his favorite belief that God helps them that help
themselves.

"'Spose dot she didn't try to helps herself some," he said, in talking
the matter over with Mr. Marston, "don't you not sees dot she would get
eat up doo, dree times by dot bear dot vos bigger as nefer vos?"

"It is a good thing for one, even though he be a child, to be able to do
his utmost when overtaken by danger--there can be no question about
_that_; but it would require a great deal of training to bring some
children to that point, even when they are double the years of your
little girl."

"Dot's becos dere folks don't not begins right; we starts mit Nick and
Nellie when dey was so small dot dey didn't know nuffin, which is why it
happens dey knows so much now."

Great as was the interest excited by the adventure of Nellie, it was not
long before it was thrown in the shade by another fact which was brought
to light by that same experience: that was the existence of a large bear
in the woods which lay to the east and west of the road leading to
Dunbarton.

This forest, as has already been intimated, covered a large tract of
country, in which, a few years previous, bears, deer, and wolves had
been hunted by many of those dwelling on the outskirts. Large inroads
had been made on the woodland, and here and there the cabin of a settler
or squatter was found by those who penetrated any distance.

There were clearings extending over several acres, while, again, a man
might wander for hours without emerging from the timber, which included
the common varieties found in the Middle States--oak, beech, maple,
birch, hickory, hemlock, black walnut, American poplar or whitewood,
gum, elm, persimmon, and others less important.

The pine resembled the famous white pine of the Allegheny mountains, and
predominated. Where there was such a large area covered with timber,
about every variety of surface was known. In some places were rocks,
ravines, hollows, and gulches; in others there were marshy swamps
through which a hunter would find it hard work to force his way.

Shark Creek entered from the east and was of considerable volume. In
many places it was deep, while elsewhere it widened into broad and
shallow expansions. It wound its way through the woods in the sinuous
course always taken by such streams, and, crossing the road, where it
was spanned by a bridge, it continued onward a quarter of a mile, when
it reached Shark Pond, the overflow of which ultimately found its way
into the Susquehanna and so to the Atlantic.

Why the waters were called Shark Creek and Pond was more than any one
could explain. Most likely it was because no such fish as the shark had
ever been seen near them, the circumstances of the case rendering it
impossible that such a voracious creature ever should have sported in
their depths.

From what has been said, it will be seen that the woods offered a most
inviting home for a few wild bears, and there was the best reason for
the belief of many of the neighbors that if the tract was well hunted
over several of the animals would be found.

The universal opinion was that they should be exterminated, for so long
as they were in the woods, so long were they a standing menace to all
the men, women, and children who dwelt in the section. The children,
especially, were considered in great peril, and several timid mothers
refused to let their girls and boys go to school, which stood at no
great distance from the woods.

There was more than one farmer who contended that, if the few bears were
left alone they would multiply to that degree that they would sally
forth from the forest, like the Delaware Indians of the last century,
and carry death and destruction before them.

A few individuals, like Gustav Ribsam, said there was nothing to fear,
for when the bears showed any marked increase they would be killed, and
it would be no very difficult job, either.

But no one could dispute the desirability of ridding the country of the
brute which came so near eating little Nellie Ribsam; and, where there
was so much talk, something was done, or at least attempted.

A hunting party of six men was organized in the month of October, and
they tramped through the woods for days, with a couple of dogs, but the
trail of the animal could not be found. They finally gave up the hunt,
the most tired and disgusted not hesitating to declare they did not
believe a bear had been seen in the forest for half a century.

The opinion of those best qualified to judge, was that bruin obtained
all the food he wanted with such little trouble that he did not care to
molest any persons, and therefore kept out of the way of the hunters.

Nick Ribsam, like all boys, was fond of a gun and dog, and he did not
own either. His father had brought from Holland an old musket, used
before the country was erected into a kingdom for Louis Bonaparte, more
than eighty years ago; but when Nick rammed a charge down its dusty
throat one day, forgetful that one had been resting there for months,
and pulled trigger, it hung fire a long time; but, when it did go off,
it did so in an overwhelming fashion, bursting into a dozen pieces and
narrowly missing killing the astounded lad who discharged it.

But Nick was so anxious to own a gun, that his father bought him one on
the day he reached the age of ten years, which was shortly after
Nellie's adventure with the bear. Although the farmer was frugal in all
things, he believed it was the cheapest to buy the best, and the gun
which was placed in the hands of Nick was a breech-loader with double
barrels. It was a shot-gun, as a matter of course, for little use could
be found for a rifle in that neighborhood.

But Nick had practiced with this piece only a few weeks, when his
ambition was turned in another direction by a large, strong boy, who
hired himself out upon the farm of Mr. Marston. He was sixteen years of
age, and was named Sam Harper. His father had been a soldier in the late
war, and gave to Sam a fine breech-loading rifle, which he brought with
him when he hired out to Mr. Marston.

The lad had owned it two years, and, under the tutelage of his father,
who was wounded and living upon a pension, he became very skillful for
one of his age.

Beside this, Mr. Marston himself, as I have shown, was fond of hunting
in his early manhood, and was the owner of an excellent muzzle-loading
rifle, which was as good as when his keen eye glanced along the brown
barrel and the bullet was buried in the unsuspicious deer, so far away
as to be scarcely visible to the ordinary vision.

"If you and Sam want to hunt the bear," said the kind owner, "you are
welcome to my rifle, for you know a shot-gun ain't exactly the thing to
go hunting bears with."

"That's just what I want it for," said Nick, with sparkling eyes.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE BEAR HUNTERS.


Nothing is impossible to pluck and perseverance. That boy who is
determined to become brilliant in his studies, no matter what their
nature, or to master a difficult profession, or to attain any point
possible of attainment, is sure to win, if he will but _stick to it_.

Nick Ribsam was resolved to become skillful with the rifle, and he gave
all the time he could spare to practice with the gun which belonged to
Mr. Marston. He was desirous of starting after the bear with Sam, as
soon as he could use the gun, but his sensible father shook his head.

"No, Nicholas, that would be doing wrong, for you do not know how to
handle the rifle; God does not step in and help the lazy and careless;
first learn how to use the weapon, so you will never miss; then you may
go hunt bears."

Although a lusty lad, Nick found the heavy gun was quite a burden, and
he preferred to rest the barrel on the fence, or in the crotch of a
tree, when aiming, but Sam Harper told him he could never amount to
anything unless he used his weapon off-hand, and was ready to do so
effectively, no matter how sudden the call.

Nick applied all his energies, and in the course of a few weeks won the
praise of Sam, who had become very fond of the bright and good-natured
"Pennsylvania Dutchman," who, in return, helped him in his efforts to
improve his knowledge in arithmetic, which he studied in a desultory way
on the long autumn evenings, having promised his father to do so.

Mr. Marston owned a dog which was not of much account, but the boys
trained him with rare patience, and were confident he would prove
valuable when they took him on the hunt.

By the time they were ready to start autumn was advanced, and Nick, who
had carefully studied up the peculiarities of the animal, said he was
afraid the bear had gone into some hollow tree or cave to take his
winter's sleep.

"I don't think they do that till the weather gets colder," said Sam, who
had once helped hunt bruin in the wilds of Tennessee, "and even in very
cold weather I have seen their tracks in the snow; but if we can only
find the tree or cave where he is hiding, why, that will just be
splendid."

"Why so?"

"He is fat, lazy, and so sleepy that he don't fight much; but in the
spring-time he is lean, hungry, and fierce, and then everybody must look
out. There are so many chestnuts and hickory nuts in the woods now that
he can get all he wants to eat without scaring the farmers by visiting
them."

