to get up and put on his stockings, and found Fame gone and himself a
child again, without honour, in his own country, and in his father's
house.

These sad dreams (sad in their uselessness) were destined, however, to
do him some good at last; and, oddly enough, the childish council that
condemned the ballad-book decided his fate also. This was how it
happened.

The children were accustomed, as we have said, to celebrate the Feast
of St. Nicholas by readings from their beloved book. St. Nicholas's
Day (the 6th of December) has for years been a favourite festival with
the children in many parts of the Continent. In France, the children
are diligently taught that St. Nicholas comes in the night down the
chimney, and fills the little shoes (which are ranged there for the
purpose) with sweetmeats or rods, according to his opinion of their
owner's conduct during the past year. The Saint is supposed to travel
through the air, and to be followed by an ass laden with two panniers,
one of which contains the good things, and the other the birch, and he
leaves his ass at the top of the chimney and comes down alone. The
same belief is entertained in Holland; and in some parts of Germany he
is even believed to carry off bad boys and girls in his sack,
answering in this respect to our English Bogy.

The day, as may be supposed, is looked forward to with no small amount
of anxiety; very clean and tidy are the little shoes placed by the
young expectants; and their parents--who have threatened and promised
in St. Nicholas's name for a year past--take care that, with one sort
of present or the other, the shoes are well filled. The great
question--rods or sweetmeats--is, however, finally settled for each
individual before breakfast-time on the great day; and before dinner,
despite maternal warnings, most of the said sweetmeats have been
consumed. And so it came to pass that Friedrich and his brothers and
sisters had hit upon a plan for ending the day, with the same spirit
and enjoyment with which it opened.

The mother, by a little kind manoeuvring, generally induced the
father to sup and take his evening pipe with a neighbour, for the
tradesman was one of those whose presence is rather a "wet blanket"
upon all innocent folly and fun. Then she good-naturedly took herself
off to household matters, and the children were left in undisturbed
possession of the stove, round which they gathered with the book, and
the game commenced. Each in turn read whichever poem he preferred; and
the reader for the time being, was wrapt in a huge hood and cloak,
kept for the purpose, and was called the "Maerchen-Frau," or Story
Woman. Sometimes the song had a chorus, which all the children sang to
whichever suited best of the thousand airs that are always floating
in German brains. Sometimes, if the ballad was a favourite one, the
others would take part in any verses that contained a dialogue. This
was generally the case with some verses in the pet ballad of
Bluebeard, at that exciting point where Sister Anne is looking from
the castle window. First the Maerchen-Frau read in a sonorous voice--

    "Schwester Aennchen, siehst du nichts?"
    (Sister Anne, do you see nothing?)

Then the others replied for Anne--

    "Staeubchen fliegen, Graeschen wehen."
    (A little dust flies, a little grass waves.)

Again the Maerchen-Frau--

    "Aennchen, laesst sich sonst nichts sehen?"
    (Little Anne, is there nothing else to be seen?)

And the unsatisfactory reply--

    "Schwesterchen, sonst seh' ich nichts!"
    (Little sister, I see nothing else!)

After this the Maerchen-Frau finished the ballad alone, and the
conclusion was received with shouts of applause and laughter, that
would have considerably astonished the good father, could he have
heard them, and that did sometimes oblige the mother to call order
from the loft above, just for propriety's sake; for, in truth, the
good woman loved to hear them, and often hummed in with a chorus to
herself as she turned over the clothes among which she was busy.

At last, however, after having been for years the crowning enjoyment
of St. Nicholas's Day, the credit of the Maerchen-Frau was doomed to
fade. The last reading had been rather a failure, not because the old
ballad-book was supplanted by a new one, or because the children had
outgrown its histories; perhaps--though they did not acknowledge
it--Friedrich was in some degree to blame.

His increasing knowledge, the long readings in the bookseller's shop,
which his brothers and sisters neither shared nor knew of, had given
him a feeling of contempt for the one book on which they feasted from
year to year; and his part, as Maerchen-Frau, had been on this occasion
more remarkable for yawns than for anything else. The effect of this
failure was not confined to that day. Whenever the book was brought
out, there was the same feeling that the magic of it was gone, and
very greatly were the poor children disquieted by the fact.

At last, one summer's day, in the year of which we are writing, one of
the boys was struck, as he fancied, by a brilliant idea; and as
brilliant ideas on any subject are precious, he lost no time in
summoning a council of his brothers and sisters in the garden. It was
a half-holiday, and they soon came trooping round the great linden
tree--where the bees were already in full possession--and the youngest
girl, who was but six years old, bore the book hugged fast in her two
arms.

The boy opened the case--as lawyers say--by describing the loss of
interest in their book since the last Feast of St. Nicholas. "This did
not," he said, "arise from any want of love to the stories themselves,
but from the fact of their knowing them so well. Whatever ballad the
Maerchen-Frau chose, every line of it was so familiar to each one of
them that it seemed folly to repeat it. In these circumstances it was
evident that the greatest compliment they could pay the stories was to
forget them, and he had a plan for attaining this desirable end. Let
them deny themselves now for their future pleasure; let them put away
the Maerchen-Frau till next St. Nicholas's Day, and, in the meantime,
let each of them do his best to forget as much of it as he possibly
could." The speaker ceased, and in the silence the bees above droned
as if in answer, and then the children below shouted applause until
the garden rang.

But now came the question, where was the Maerchen-Frau to be put? and
for this the suggestive brother had also an idea. He had found
certain bricks in the thick old garden wall which were loose, and when
taken out there was a hole which was quite the thing for their
purpose. Let them wrap the book carefully up, put it in the hole, and
replace the bricks. This was his proposal, and he sat down. The bees
droned above, the children shouted below, and the proposal was carried
amid general satisfaction. "So be it," said the suggestor, in
conclusion. "It is now finally decided. The Maerchen-Frau is to be
walled up."

And walled up she was forthwith, but not without a parting embrace
from each of her judges, and possibly some slight latent faith in the
suggestion of one of the party that perhaps St. Nicholas would put a
new inside and new stories into her before next December.

"I don't think I should like a new inside, though," doubted the child
before mentioned, with a shake of her tiny plaits, "or new stories
either."

As this quaint little Fraeulein went into the house she met Friedrich,
who came from the bookseller's.

"Friedrich," said she, in a solemn voice, "we have walled up the
'Maerchen-Frau.'"

"Have you, _Schwesterchen_?"

This was Friedrich's answer; but it may safely be stated that, if any
one had asked him what it was his sister had told him, he would have
been utterly unable to reply.

He had been to the bookseller's!

The summer passed, and the children kept faithfully to their resolve.
The little sister sometimes sat by the wall and comforted the
Maerchen-Frau inside, with promises of coming out soon; but not a brick
was touched. There was something pathetic in the children's voluntary
renouncement of their one toy. The father was too absent and the
mother too busy, to notice its loss; Marie missed it and made
inquiries of the children, but she was implored to be silent, and
discreetly held her tongue. Winter drew on, and for some time a change
was visible in the manners of one of the children; he seemed restless
and uncomfortable, as if something preyed upon his mind. At last he
was induced to unburden himself to the others, when it was discovered
that he couldn't forget the poems in "Maerchen-Frau." This was the
grievance.

"It seems as if I did it on purpose," groaned he in self-indignation.
"The nearer the time comes, and the more I try to forget, the clearer
I remember them everyone. You know my pet is Bluebeard; well, I
thought I would forget that altogether, every word: and then when my
turn came to be Maerchen-Frau I would take it for my piece. And now, of
all the rest, this is just the one that runs in my head. It is quite
as if I did it on purpose."

Involuntarily the company--who appeared to have forgotten it as little
as he--struck up in a merry tune--

    "Blaubart war ein reicher Mann," etc.[A]

"Oh, don't!" groaned the victim. "That's just how it goes in my head
all along, especially the verse--

    "Stark war seines Koerpers Ban,
    Feurig waren seine Blicke,
    Aber ach!--ein Missgeschicke!--
    Aber ach! sein Bart war blau."[B]

"On Sunday, when the preacher gave out the text, I was looking at him,
and it came so strongly into my head that I nearly said it out
loud--'But ah! his beard was blue!' To-day the schoolmaster asked me a
question about Solomon. I could remember nothing but 'Ah! his beard
was blue!' I have tried this week with all my might; and the harder I
try, the better I remember every word. It is dreadful."

[Footnote A: "Bluebeard was a rich man."]

[Footnote B:

    "Strong was the build of his body,
    Fiery were his glances,
    But ah!--disaster!--
    But ah! his beard was blue."]

It was dreadful; but he was somewhat comforted to learn that the
memories of his brothers and sisters were as perverse as his own.
Those ballads were not to be easily forgotten. They refused to give up
their hold on the minds they had nourished and amused so long.

One and all the children were really distressed, with the exception of
Friedrich, who had, as usual, given about half his attention to the
subject in hand; and who now sat absently humming to himself the
account of Bluebeard's position and character, as set forth in
Gotter's ballad.

The others came to the conclusion that there was but one hope
left--that St. Nicholas might have put some new ballads into the old
book--and one and all they made for the hiding-place, followed at a
feebler pace by the little Fraeulein, who ran with her lips tightly
shut, her hands clenched, and her eyes wide open with a mixture of
fear and expectation. The bricks were removed, the book unwrapped, but
alas! everything was the same, even to the rough woodcut of Bluebeard
himself, in the act of sharpening his scimitar. There was no change,
except that the volume was rather the worse for damp. It was thrown
down with a murmur of disappointment, but seized immediately by the
little Fraeulein, who flung herself upon it in a passion of tears and
embraces. Hers was the only faithful affection; the charm of the
Maerchen-Frau was gone.

They were all out of humour with this, and naturally looked about for
some one to find fault with. Friedrich was at hand, and so they fell
upon him and reproached him for his want of sympathy with their
vexation. The boy awoke from a brown study, and began to defend
himself:--"He was very sorry," he said; "but he couldn't see the use
of making such a great fuss about a few old ballads, that after all
were nothing so very wonderful."

This was flat heresy, and he was indignantly desired to say where any
were to be got like them--where even _one_ might be found, when St.
Nicholas could not provide them? Friedrich was even less respectful to
the idea of St. Nicholas, and said something which, translated into
English, would look very like the word _humbug_. This was no answer to
the question "where were they to get a ballad?" and a fresh storm came
upon his head; whereupon being much goaded, and in a mixture of vanity
and vexation of spirit, he let out the fact that "he thought he could
write one almost as good himself."

This turned the current of affairs. The children had an instinctive
belief in Friedrich's talents, to which their elders had not attained.
The faith of childhood is great; and they saw no reason why he should
not be able to do as he said, and so forthwith began to pet and coax
him as unmercifully as they had scolded five minutes before.

"Beloved Friedrich; dear little brother! _Do_ write one for us. We
know thou canst!"

"I cannot," said Friedrich. "It is all nonsense. I was only joking."

"It is not nonsense; we know thou canst! Dear Fritz--just to please
us!"

"Do!" said another. "It was only yesterday the mother was saying,
'Friedrich can do nothing useful!' But when thou hast written a poem
thou wilt have done more than any one in the house--ay, or in the
town. And when thou hast written one poem thou wilt write more, and be
like Hans Sachs, and the Twelve Wise Masters thou hast told us of so
often."

Friedrich had read many of the verses of the Cobbler Poet, but the
name of Hans Sachs awakened no thought in his mind. He had heard
nothing of that speech but one sentence, and it decided him.

_Friedrich can do nothing useful._ "I will see what I can do," he
said, and walked hastily away. Down the garden, out into the road,
away to the mill, where he could stand by the roaring water and talk
aloud without being heard.

"Friedrich can do nothing useful. Yes, I will write a ballad."

He went home, got together some scraps of paper, and commenced.

In half-a-dozen days he began as many ballads, and tore them up one
and all. He beat his brains for plots, and was satisfied with none. He
had a fair maiden, a cruel father, a wicked sister, a handsome knight,
and a castle on the Rhine; and so plunged into a love story with a
moonlight meeting, an escape on horseback, pursuit, capture, despair,
suicide, and a ghostly apparition that floated over the river, and
wrung her hands under the castle window. It seems impossible for an
author to do more for his heroine than take her out of the world, and
bring her back again; but our poet was not content. He had not come
himself to the sentiment of life, and felt a rough boyish disgust at
the maundering griefs of his hero and heroine, who, moreover, were
unpleasantly like every other hero and heroine that he had ever read
of under similar circumstances; and if there was one thing more than
another that Friedrich was determined to be, it was to be original.

He had no half hopes. With the dauntlessness of young ambition, he
determined to do his very best, and that that best should be better
than anything that ever had been done by any one.

Having failed with the sentimental, he tried to write something funny.
Surely such child's tales as Bluebeard, Cinderella, etc., were easy
enough to write. He would make a _Kindeslied_--a child's song. But he
was mistaken; to write a new nursery ballad was the hardest task of
all. Time after time he struggled; and, at last, one day when he had
written and destroyed a longer effort than usual, he went to bed in
hopeless despair.

His disappointment mingled with his dreams. He dreamt that he was in
the bookseller's shop hunting among the shelves for some scraps of
paper on which he had written. He could not find them, he thought, but
came across the Petrarch volumes in their beautiful binding. He opened
one and saw--not a word of that fair-looking Italian, but--his own
ballad that he could not write, written and printed in good German
character with his name on the title-page. He took it in his hands and
went out of the shop, and as he did so it seemed to him, in his dream,
that he had become a man. He dreamt that as he came down the steps,
the people in the street gathered round him and cheered and shouted.
The women held up their children to look at him; he was a Great Man!
He thought that he turned back into the shop and went up to the
counter. There sat the smiling little bookseller as natural as life,
who smiled and bowed to him, as Friedrich had a hundred times seen
him bow and smile to the bearded men who came in to purchase.

"How many have you sold of this?" said Friedrich, in his dream.

"Forty thousand!" with another smile and bow.

Forty thousand! It seemed to him that all the world must have read it.
This was Fame.

He went out of the shop, through the shouting market-place, and home,
where his father led him in and offered pipes and a mug of ale, as if
he were the Burgomaster. He sat down, and when his mother came in,
rose to embrace her, and, doing so, knocked down the mug. Crash! it
went on the floor with a loud noise, which woke him up; and then he
found himself in bed, and that he had thrown over the mug of water
which he had put by his bedside to drink during the thirsty feverish
hours that he lay awake.

He was not a great man, but a child.

He had not written a ballad, but broken a mug.

"Friedrich can do nothing useful."

He buried his face, and wept bitterly.

In time, his tears were dried, and as it was very early he lay awake
and beat his brains. He had added nothing to his former character but
the breaking of a piece of crockery. Something must be done. No more
funny ballads now. He would write something terrible--miserable;
something that should make other people weep as he had wept. He was in
a very tragic humour indeed. He would have a hero who should go into
the world to seek his fortune, and come back to find his lady-love in
a nunnery; but that was an old story. Well, he would turn it the other
way, and put the hero into a monastery; but that wasn't new. Then he
would shut both of them up, and not let them meet again till one was a
monk and the other a nun, which would be grievous enough in all
