Venus, the brightest. Pleiades (pro. ple'ya-dez), a group of seven small
stars in the constellation of Taurus.

Lyra, Androm'eda, two brilliant constellations in the northern part of the
heavens. Pointers, two stars of the group called the Dipper, in the Great
Bear. These stars and the Polar Star are nearly in the same straight line.


Blue Hills, hills about seven hundred feet high, southwest of Boston,
Massachusetts.

Magians, Persian worshipers of fire and the sun, as representatives of the
Supreme Being.



IV. DESCRIPTION OF A STORM. (70)

Benjamin Disraeli. 1805-1881, was of Jewish descent. His ancestors were
driven out of Spain by the Inquisition, and went to Venice. In 1748, his
grandfather came to England. His father was Isaac Disraeli, well known as
a literary man. Benjamin was born in London, and received his early
education under his father. He afterwards studied for a lawyer, but soon
gave up his profession for literature. His first novel, "Vivian Grey,"
appeared when the author was twenty-one years of age; it received much
attention. After several defeats he succeeded in an election to
Parliament, and took his seat in that body, in the first year of
Victoria's reign. On his first attempt to speak in Parliament, the House
refused to hear him. It is said that, as he sat down, he remarked that the
time would come when they would hear him. In 1849, he became the leader of
the Conservative party in the House. During the administration of W. E.
Gladstone, Mr. Disraeli was leader of the opposition. In 1868, he became
prime minister, holding the office for a short time. In 1874, he was again
appointed to the same office, where he remained until 1880. His wife was
made Viscountess of Beaconsfield in 1868. After her death, the title of
Earl of Beaconsfield was conferred on Disraeli. He ranked among the most
eminent, statesmen of the age, but always devoted a portion of his time to
literature. "Lothair," a novel, was published in 1870.
###


* * * They looked round on every side, and hope gave way before the scene
of desolation. Immense branches were shivered from the largest trees;
small ones were entirely stripped of their leaves; the long grass was
bowed to the earth; the waters were whirled in eddies out of the little
rivulets; birds, leaving their nests to seek shelter in the crevices of
the rocks, unable to stem the driving air, flapped their wings and fell
upon the earth; the frightened animals of the plain, almost suffocated by
the impetuosity of the wind, sought safety and found destruction; some of
the largest trees were torn up by the roots; the sluices of the mountains
were filled, and innumerable torrents rushed down the before empty
gullies. The heavens now open, and the lightning and thunder contend with
the horrors of the wind.

In a moment, all was again hushed. Dead silence succeeded the bellow of
the thunder, the roar of the wind, the rush of the waters, the moaning of
the beasts, the screaming of the birds. Nothing was heard save the plash
of the agitated lake, as it beat up against the black rocks which girt it
in.

Again, greater darkness enveloped the trembling earth. Anon, the heavens
were rent with lightning, which nothing could have quenched but the
descending deluge. Cataracts poured down from the lowering firmament. For
an instant, the horses dashed madly forward; beast and rider blinded and
stifled by the gushing rain, and gasping for breath. Shelter was nowhere.
The quivering beasts reared, and snorted, and sank upon their knees,
dismounting their riders.

He had scarcely spoken, when there burst forth a terrific noise, they knew
not what; a rush, they could not understand; a vibration which shook them
on their horses. Every terror sank before the roar of the cataract. It
seemed that the mighty mountain, unable to support its weight of waters,
shook to the foundation. A lake had burst upon its summit, and the
cataract became a falling ocean. The source of the great deep appeared to
be discharging itself over the range of mountains; the great gray peak
tottered on its foundation!--It shook!--it fell!  and buried in its ruins
the castle, the village, and the bridge!



V. AFTER THE THUNDERSTORM. (72)

James Thomson, 1700-1748, the son of a clergyman, was born in Scotland. He
studied at the University of Edinburgh, and intended to follow the
profession of his father, but never entered upon the duties of the sacred
office. In 1724 he went to London, where he spent most of his subsequent
life. He had shown some poetical talent when it boy; and, in 1826, he
published "Winter," a part of a longer poem, entitled "The Seasons," the
best known of all his works. He also wrote several plays for the stage;
none of them, however, achieved any great success. In the last year of his
life, he published his "Castle of Indolence," the most famous of his works
excepting "The Seasons." Thomson was heavy and dull in his personal
appearance, and was indolent in his habits. The moral tone of his writings
is always good. This extract is from "The Seasons."
###


    As from the face of heaven the shattered clouds
  Tumultuous rove, the interminable sky
  Sublimer swells, and o'er the world expands
  A purer azure.

           Through the lightened air
  A higher luster and a clearer calm,
  Diffusive, tremble; while, as if in sign
  Of danger past, a glittering robe of joy,
  Set off abundant by the yellow ray,
  Invests the fields; and nature smiles revived.

    'T is beauty all, and grateful song around,
  Joined to the low of kine, and numerous bleat
  Of flocks thick-nibbling through the clovered vale:
  And shall the hymn be marred by thankless man,
  Most favored; who, with voice articulate,
  Should lead the chorus of this lower world?

    Shall man, so soon forgetful of the Hand
  That hushed the thunder, and serenes the sky,
  Extinguished fed that spark the tempest waked,
  That sense of powers exceeding far his own,
  Ere yet his feeble heart has lost its fears?



VI. HOUSE CLEANING. (73)

Francis Hopkinson, 1737-1791. He was the son of an Englishman; born in
Philadelphia, and was educated at the college of that city, now the
University of Pennsylvania. He represented New Jersey in the Congress of
1776, and was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence. He
was one of the most sensible and elegant writers of his time, and
distinguished himself both in prose and verse. His lighter writings abound
in humor and keen satire; his more solid writings are marked by clearness
and good sense. His pen did much to forward the cause of American
independence. His "Essay on Whitewashing," from which the following
extract is taken, was mistaken for the composition of Dr. Franklin, and
published among his writings, It was originally in the form of "A Letter
from a Gentleman in America to his Friend in Europe, on Whitewashing."
###


There is no season of the year in which the lady may not, if she pleases,
claim her privilege; but the latter end of May is generally fixed upon for
the purpose. The attentive husband may judge, by certain prognostics, when
the storm is at hand. If the lady grows uncommonly fretful, finds fault
with the servants, is discontented with the children, and complains much
of the nastiness of everything about her, these are symptoms which ought
not to be neglected, yet they sometimes go off without any further effect.


But if, when the husband rises in the morning, he should observe in the
yard a wheelbarrow with a quantity of lime in it, or should see certain
buckets filled with a solution of lime in water, there is no time for
hesitation. He immediately locks up the apartment or closet where his
papers and private property are kept, and, putting the key into his
pocket, betakes himself to flight. A husband, however beloved, becomes a
perfect nuisance during this season of female rage. His authority is
superseded, his commission suspended, and the very scullion who cleans the
brasses in the kitchen becomes of more importance than he. He has nothing
for it but to abdicate for a time, and run from an evil which he can
neither prevent nor mollify.

The husband gone, the ceremony begins. The walls are stripped of their
furniture--paintings, prints, and looking-glasses lie huddled in heaps
about the floors; the curtains are torn from their testers, the beds
crammed into windows, chairs and tables, bedsteads and cradles, crowd the
yard, and the garden fence bends beneath the weight of carpets, blankets,
cloth cloaks, old coats, under petticoats, and ragged breeches. Here may
be seen the lumber of the kitchen, forming a dark and confused mass for
the foreground of the picture; gridirons and frying pans, rusty shovels
and broken tongs, joint stools, and the fractured remains of rush-bottomed
chairs. There a closet has disgorged its bowels--riveted plates and
dishes, halves of china bowls, cracked tumblers, broken wineglasses,
phials of forgotten physic, papers of unknown powders, seeds and dried
herbs, tops of teapots, and stoppers of departed decanters--from the rag
hole in the garret, to the rat hole in the cellar, no place escapes
unrummaged. It would seem as if the day of general doom had come, and the
utensils of the house were dragged forth to judgment.

In this tempest, the words of King Lear unavoidably present themselves,
and might, with little alteration, be made strictly applicable.


  "Let the great gods,
  That keep this dreadful pother o'er our heads,
  Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
  That hast within thee undivulged crimes
  Unwhipp'd of justice.
                       Close pent-up guilts,
  Rive your concealing continents, and cry
  These dreadful summoners grace."


This ceremony completed, and the house thoroughly evacuated, the next
operation is to smear the walls and ceilings with brushes dipped into a
solution of lime, called whitewash; to pour buckets of water over every
floor; and scratch all the partitions and wainscots with hard brushes,
charged with soft soap and stonecutters' sand.

The windows by no means escape the general deluge. A servant scrambles out
upon the penthouse, at the risk of her neck, and, with a mug in her hand
and a bucket within reach, dashes innumerable gallons of water against the
glass panes, to the great annoyance of passengers in the street.

I have been told that an action at law was once brought against one of
these water nymphs, by a person who had a new suit of clothes spoiled by
this operation: but after long argument, it was determined that no damages
could be awarded; inasmuch as the defendant was in the exercise of a legal
right, and not answerable for the consequences. And so the poor gentleman
was doubly non-suited; for he lost both his suit of clothes and his suit
at law.

These smearings and scratchings, these washings and dashings, being duly
performed, the next ceremonial is to cleanse and replace the distracted
furniture. You may have seen a house raising, or a ship launch--
recollect, if you can, the hurry, bustle, confusion, and noise of such a
scene, and you will have some idea of this cleansing match. The misfortune
is, that the sole object is to make things clean. It matters not how many
useful, ornamental, or valuable articles suffer mutilation or death under
the operation. A mahogany chair and a carved frame undergo the same
discipline; they are to be made clean at all events; but their
preservation is not worthy of attention.

For instance: a fine large engraving is laid flat upon the floor; a number
of smaller prints are piled upon it, until the superincumbent weight
cracks the lower glass--but this is of no importance. A valuable picture
is placed leaning against the sharp corner of a table; others are made to
lean against that, till the pressure of the whole forces the corner of the
table through the canvas of the first. The frame and glass of a fine print
are to be cleaned; the spirit and oil used on this occasion are suffered
to leak through and deface the engraving--no matter. If the glass is clean
and the frame shines, it is sufficient--the rest is not worthy of
consideration. An able arithmetician hath made a calculation, founded on
long experience, and proved that the losses and destruction incident to
two white washings are equal to one removal, and three removals equal to
one fire.

This cleansing frolic over, matters begin to resume their pristine
appearance: the storm abates, and all would be well again; but it is
impossible that so great a convulsion in so small a community should pass
over without producing some consequences. For two or three weeks after the
operation, the family are usually afflicted with sore eyes, sore throats,
or severe colds, occasioned by exhalations from wet floors and damp walls.


I know a gentleman here who is fond of accounting for everything in a
philosophical way. He considers this, what I call a custom, as a real
periodical disease peculiar to the climate. His train of reasoning is
whimsical and ingenious, but I am not at leisure to give you the detail.
The result was, that he found the distemper to be incurable; but after
much study, he thought he had discovered a method to divert the evil he
could not subdue. For this purpose, he caused a small building, about
twelve feet square, to be erected in his garden, and furnished with some
ordinary chairs and tables, and a few prints of the cheapest sort. His
hope was, that when the whitewashing frenzy seized the females of his
family, they might repair to this apartment, and scrub, and scour, and
smear to their hearts' content; and so spend the violence of the disease
in this outpost, whilst he enjoyed himself in quiet at headquarters. But
the experiment did not answer his expectation. It was impossible it
should, since a principal part of the gratification consists in the lady's
having an uncontrolled right to torment her husband at least once in every
year; to turn him out of doors, and take the reins of government into her
own hands.

There is a much better contrivance than this of the philosopher's; which
is, to cover the walls of the house with paper. This is generally done.
And though it does not abolish, it at least shortens the period of female
dominion. This paper is decorated with various fancies; and made so
ornamental that the women have admitted the fashion without perceiving the
design.

There is also another alleviation to the husband's distress. He generally
has the sole use of a small room or closet for his books and papers, the
key of which he is allowed to keep. This is considered as a privileged
place, even in the whitewashing season, and stands like the land of Goshen
amidst the plagues of Egypt. But then he must be extremely cautious, and
ever upon his guard; for, should he inadvertently go abroad and leave the
key in his door, the housemaid, who is always on the watch for such an
opportunity, immediately enters in triumph with buckets, brooms, and
brushes--takes possession of the premises, and forthwith puts an his books
and papers "to rights," to his utter confusion, and sometimes serious
detriment.

Notes.--Lear.--The reference is to Shakespeare's tragedy, Act III, Scene
2.

Goshen.--The portion of Egypt settled by Jacob and his family. In the
Bible, Exodus viii, 22, Goshen was exempted from the plague of the flies.

The teacher should ascertain that the pupils note the satire and humor of
this selection.

This letter was written about a hundred years ago. What word in the first
paragraph that would probably not be used by an elegant writer of the
present day? Note the words that indicate changes in domestic customs;
such as testers, joint stools, wainscots, house raising.



VII. SCHEMES OF LIFE OFTEN ILLUSORY. (78)

Samuel Johnson, 1700-1784. This truly remarkable man was the son of a
bookseller and stationer; he was born in Lichfield, Staffordshire,
England. He entered Pembroke College, Oxford, in 1728; but, at the end of
three years, his poverty compelled him to leave without taking his degree.
In 1736, he married Mrs. Porter, a widow of little culture, much older
than himself, but possessed of some property. The marriage seems to have
been a happy one, nevertheless; and, on the death of his wife, in 1752,
Johnson mourned for her, most sincerely. Soon after his marriage, he
opened a private school, but, obtained only three pupils, one of whom was
David Garrick, afterward the celebrated actor. In 1737, he removed to
London, where he lived for most of the remainder of his life. Here he
entered upon literary work, in which he continued, and from which he
derived his chief support, although at times it was but a meager one, His
"Vanity of Human Wishes" was sold for ten guineas. His great Dictionary,
the first one of the English language worthy of mention, brought him
1575 Pounds, and occupied his time for seven years. Most of the money he
received for the work went to pay his six amanuenses. The other most
famous of his numerous literary works are "The Rambler," "Rasselas," "The
Lives of the English Poets," and his edition of Shakespeare. In person,
Johnson was heavy and awkward; he was the victim of scrofula in his youth,
and of dropsy in his old age. In manner, he was boorish and overbearing;
but his great powers and his wisdom caused his company to be sought by
many eminent men of his time.
###


Omar, the son of Hassan, had passed seventy-five years in honor and
prosperity. The favor of three successive caliphs had filled his house
with gold and silver; and whenever he appeared, the benedictions of the
people proclaimed his passage.

Terrestrial happiness is of short continuance, The brightness of the flame
is wasting its fuel; the fragrant flower is passing away in its own odors.
The vigor of Omar began to fail; the curls of beauty fell from his head;
strength departed from his hands, and agility from his feet. He gave back
to the caliph the keys of trust, and the seals of secrecy; and sought no
other pleasure for the remainder of life than the converse of the wise and
the gratitude of the good.

The powers of his mind were yet unimpaired. His chamber was filled by
visitants, eager to catch the dictates of experience, and officious to pay
the tribute of admiration. Caleb, the son of the viceroy of Egypt, entered
every day early, and retired late. He was beautiful and eloquent; Omar
admired his wit, and loved his docility.

"Tell me," said Caleb, "thou to whose voice nations have listened, and
whose wisdom is known to the extremities of Asia, tell me, how I may
resemble Omar the prudent? The arts by which thou hast gained power and
preserved it, are to thee no longer necessary or useful; impart to me the
secret of thy conduct, and teach me the plan upon which thy wisdom has
built thy fortune."

"Young man," said Omar, "it is of little use to form plans of life. When I
took my first survey of the world, in my twentieth year, having considered
the various conditions of mankind, in the hour of solitude I said thus to
myself, leaning against a cedar which spread its branches over my head:
'Seventy years are allowed to man; I have yet fifty remaining.

" 'Ten years I will allot to the attainment of knowledge, and ten I will
pass in foreign countries; I shall be learned, and therefore I shall be
honored; every city will shout at my arrival, and every student will
solicit my friendship. Twenty years thus passed will store my mind with
images which I shall be busy through the rest of my life in combining and
comparing. I shall revel in inexhaustible accumulations of intellectual
riches; I shall find new pleasures for every moment, and shall never more
be weary of myself.

" 'I will not, however, deviate too far from the beaten track of life; but
will try what can be found in female delicacy. I will marry a wife as
beautiful as the houries, and wise as Zobeide; and with her I will live
twenty years within the suburbs of Bagdad, in every pleasure that wealth
can purchase, and fancy can invent.

" 'I will then retire to a rural dwelling, pass my days in obscurity and
contemplation; and lie silently down on the bed of death. Through my life
it shall be my settled resolution, that I will never depend on the smile
of princes; that I will never stand exposed to the artifices of courts; I
will never pant for public honors, nor disturb my quiet with the affairs
of state.' Such was my scheme of life, which I impressed indelibly upon my
memory.

"The first part of my ensuing time was to be spent in search of knowledge,
and I know not how I was diverted from my design. I had no visible
impediments without, nor any ungovernable passion within. I regarded
knowledge as the highest honor, and the most engaging pleasure; yet day
stole upon day, and month glided after month, till I found that seven
years of the first ten had vanished, and left nothing behind them.

"I now postponed my purpose of traveling; for why should I go abroad,
while so much remained to be learned at home? I immured myself for four
years, and studied the laws of the empire. The fame of my skill reached
the judges: I was found able to speak upon doubtful questions, and I was
commanded to stand at the footstool of the caliph. I was heard with
attention; I was consulted with confidence, and the love of praise
fastened on my heart.

"I still wished to see distant countries; listened with rapture to the
relations of travelers, and resolved some time to ask my dismission, that
I might feast my soul with novelty; but my presence was always necessary,
and the stream of business hurried me along. Sometimes, I was afraid lest
I should be charged with ingratitude; but I still proposed to travel, and
therefore would not confine myself by marriage.

"In my fiftieth year, I began to suspect that the time of my traveling was
past; and thought it best to lay hold on the felicity yet in my power, and
indulge myself in domestic pleasures. But, at fifty, no man easily finds a
woman beautiful as the houries, and wise as Zobeide. I inquired and
rejected, consulted and deliberated, till the sixty-second year made me
ashamed of wishing to marry. I had now nothing left but retirement; and
for retirement I never found a time, till disease forced me from public
employment.

"Such was my scheme, and such has been its consequence. With an insatiable
thirst for knowledge, I trifled away the years of improvement; with a
restless desire of seeing different countries, I have always resided in
the same city; with the highest expectation of connubial felicity, I have
lived unmarried; and with an unalterable resolution of contemplative
retirement, I am going to die within the walls of Bagdad."


Notes.--Bag dad'--A large city of Asiatic Turkey, on the river Tigris.

In the ninth century, it was the greatest center of Moslem power and
learning.

Zobeide (Zo-bad').--A lady of Bagdad, whose story is given in the "Three
Calendars" of the "Arabian Nights."

In this selection the form of an allegory is used to express a general
truth.



VIII. THE BRAVE OLD OAK. (81)

Henry Fothergill Chorley, 1808-1872. He is known chiefly as a musical
critic and author; for thirty-eight years he was connected with the
"London Athenaeum." His books are mostly novels.
###


A song to the oak, the brave old oak,
  Who hath ruled in the greenwood long;
Here's health and renown to his broad green crown,
  And his fifty arms so strong.
There's fear in his frown, when the sun goes down,
  And the fire in the west fades out;
And he showeth his might on a wild midnight,
  When the storms through his branches shout.

In the days of old, when the spring with cold
  Had brightened his branches gray,
Through the grass at his feet, crept maidens sweet,
  To gather the dews of May.
And on that day, to the rebec gay
  They frolicked with lovesome swains;
They are gone, they are dead, in the churchyard laid,
  But the tree--it still remains.

He saw rare times when the Christmas chimes
  Were a merry sound to hear,
When the Squire's wide hall and the cottage small
  Were filled with good English cheer.
Now gold hath the sway we all obey,
  And a ruthless king is he;
But he never shall send our ancient friend
  To be tossed on the stormy sea.

Then here's to the oak, the brave old oak,
  Who stands in his pride alone;
And still flourish he, a hale green tree,
  When a hundred years are gone.


IX. THE ARTIST SURPRISED. (82)

It may not be known to all the admirers of the genius of Albert Durer,
that that famous engraver was endowed with a "better half," so peevish in
temper, that she was the torment not only of his own life, but also of his
pupils and domestics. Some of the former were cunning enough to purchase
peace for themselves by conciliating the common tyrant, but woe to those
unwilling or unable to offer aught in propitiation. Even the wiser ones
were spared only by having their offenses visited upon a scapegoat.

This unfortunate individual was Samuel Duhobret, a disciple whom Durer had
admitted into his school out of charity. He was employed in painting signs
and the coarser tapestry then used in Germany. He was about forty years of
age, little, ugly, and humpbacked; he was the butt of every ill joke among
his fellow disciples, and was picked out as an object of especial dislike
by Madame Durer. But he bore all with patience, and ate, without
complaint, the scanty crusts given him every day for dinner, while his
companions often fared sumptuously.

Poor Samuel had not a spice of envy or malice in his heart. He would, at
any time, have toiled half the night to assist or serve those who were
wont oftenest to laugh at him, or abuse him loudest for his stupidity.
True, he had not the qualities of social humor or wit, but he was an
example of indefatigable industry. He came to his studies every morning at
daybreak, and remained at work until sunset. Then he retired into his
lonely chamber, and wrought for his own amusement.

Duhobret labored three years in this way, giving himself no time for
exercise or recreation. He said nothing to a single human being of the
paintings he had produced in the solitude of his cell, by the light of his
lamp. But his bodily energies wasted and declined under incessant toil.
There was none sufficiently interested in the poor artist, to mark the
feverish hue of his wrinkled cheek, or the increasing attenuation of his
misshapen frame.

None observed that the uninviting pittance set aside for his midday
repast, remained for several days untouched. Samuel made his appearance
regularly as ever, and bore with the same meekness the gibes of his
fellow-pupils, or the taunts of Madame Durer, and worked with the same
untiring assiduity, though his hands would sometimes tremble, and his eyes
become suffused, a weakness probably owing to the excessive use he had
made of them.

One morning Duhobret was missing at the scene of his daily labors. His
absence created much remark, and many were the jokes passed upon the
occasion. One surmised this, and another that, as the cause of the
phenomenon; and it was finally agreed that the poor fellow must have
worked himself into an absolute skeleton, and taken his final stand in the
glass frame of some apothecary, or been blown away by a puff of wind,
while his door happened to stand open. No on thought of going to his
lodgings to look after him or his remains.

Meanwhile, the object of their mirth was tossing on a bed of sickness.
Disease, which had been slowly sapping the foundations of his strength,
burned in every vein; his eyes rolled and flashed in delirium; his lips,
usually so silent, muttered wild and incoherent words. In his days of
health, poor Duhobret had his dreams, as all artists, rich or poor, will
sometimes have. He had thought that the fruit of many years' labor,
disposed of to advantage, might procure him enough to live, in an
economical way, for the rest of his life. He never anticipated fame or
fortune; the height of his ambition or hope was, to possess a tenement
large enough to shelter him from the inclemencies of the weather, with
means enough to purchase one comfortable meal per day.

Now, alas! however, even that one hope had deserted him. He thought
himself dying, and thought it hard to die without one to look kindly upon
him, without the words of comfort that might soothe his passage to another
world. He fancied his bed surrounded by fiendish faces, grinning at his
sufferings, and taunting his inability to summon power to disperse them.
At length the apparition faded away, and the patient sunk into an
exhausted slumber.

He awoke unrefreshed; it was the fifth day he had lain there neglected.
His mouth was parched; he turned over, and feebly stretched out his hand
toward the earthen pitcher, from which, since the first day of his illness
he had quenched his thirst. Alas! it was empty! Samuel lay for a few
moments thinking what he should do. He knew he must die of want if he
remained there alone; but to whom could he apply for aid?

An idea seemed, at last, to strike him. He arose slowly, and with
difficulty, from the bed, went to the other side of the room, and took up
the picture he had painted last. He resolved to carry it to the shop of a
salesman, and hoped to obtain for it sufficient to furnish him with the
necessaries of life for a week longer. Despair lent him strength to walk,
and to carry his burden. On his way, he passed a house, about which there
was a crowd. He drew nigh, asked what was going on, and received for an
answer, that there was to be a sale of many specimens of art, collected by
an amateur in the course of thirty years. It has often happened that
collections made with infinite pains by the proprietor, have been sold
without mercy or discrimination after his death.

Something whispered to the weary Duhobret, that here would be the market
for his picture. It was a long way yet to the house of the picture dealer,
and he made up his mind at once. He worked his way through the crowd,
dragged himself up the steps, and, after many inquiries, found the
auctioneer. That personage was a busy man, with a handful of papers; he
was inclined to notice somewhat roughly the interruption of the lean,
sallow hunchback, imploring as were his gesture and language.

"What do you call your picture?" at length, said he, carefully looking at
it.

"It is a view of the Abbey of Newburg, with its village and the
surrounding landscape," replied the eager and trembling artist.

The auctioneer again scanned it contemptuously, and asked what it was
worth. "Oh, that is what you please; whatever it will bring," answered
Duhobret.

"Hem! it is too odd to please, I should think; I can promise you no more
