wood beyond.

Then the Huron turned to the duty before him.  Taking a northerly
direction, he proceeded at such a rapid walk that the young soldier was
compelled every now and then to run a few steps to maintain his place
beside him.  He kept up his pace for a half-hour or so, when he
suddenly halted.

"Fast walk--make breathe fast," said he, his black eye sparkling.

"It is rather rapid walking, Oonomoo, but I can stand it.  Don't stop
on my account."

"Plenty time--git dar mornin'--soon enough."

"How far are we from the Shawnee village?"

"Two--eight--dozen miles--go in canoe part way."

"When will we rescue her from the dogs--the Shawnees?" asked the young
Lieutenant, scarcely able to restrain his curiosity.

"Dunno--may be can't get her 't all."

"Won't get her?" he repeated, his heart throbbing painfully.  "My God,
Oonomoo, why do you say that?"

"'Cause true--hain't got her yit--may be won't--Shawnee watch
close--t'ink Oonomoo 'bout."

"But you _expect_ to rescue her, do you not?"

"Yeh, 'spect to--do all can--ain't sartin--mustn't t'ink I am--be ready
for her dead."

"I will try to be prepared for the worst, Oonomoo, but I place great
hopes on you."

"Place hopes on Him--He do it, may be."

Never, to his dying day, did Lieutenant Canfield forget the rebuke of
that Huron Indian.  As he uttered these words he pointed upward--a
flood of moonlight, streaming down through the trees upon his upturned
face, rested like a halo of glory upon his bronzed brow.  Years
afterward, when Oonomoo had been gathered to his fathers, and
Lieutenant Canfield was an old man, he asserted that he could hear
those words as distinctly, and see that reverential expression as
plainly as upon that memorable night.

"You are right, Oonomoo."  said the Lieutenant, "and I feel the reproof
you have given me.  The merciful God is the only one upon whom we can
rely, and under Him it is upon your sagacity and skill that I depend."

"Dat so--we go purty soon."

After resting a half-hour, the two moved forward at a much slower rate
than before.  As the moon ascended, its light was so clear and
unobstructed that in the open spots in the woods he could easily have
read a printed page.  For a night of reconnoitering and action it
possessed all the advantages and disadvantages of a clear day.  The
Huron almost invariably held his peace when walking, and the young
soldier did not attempt to disturb him upon the present occasion.  From
his remarks, he gathered that it was his wish to reach the neighborhood
of the Shawnee village in a few hours, and wait until daylight before
attempting to accomplish anything.  To carry out his intentions, it was
necessary, in the first place, to see Hans Vanderbum, and secure his
cooperation.  Fully aware of his astonishing sleeping qualities, the
Huron knew he might as well try to wake a dead man as to secure an
interview with him during the night.

An hour later the bank of the Miami was reached.  As they stood on the
shore and looked down-stream, its clear surface, glistening brightly in
the moonlight, could be seen as plainly as at noonday, until it
disappeared from sight in a sweeping bend.  From their stand-point it
resembled a lake more than a river, the woods, apparently, shutting
down in such a manner as to hide it entirely.  Not a ripple was heard
along the shore, and only once a zephyr hurried over its bosom,
crinkling the surface as it passed, and rustling the tops of a few
trees along the bank as it went on and was lost in the wood beyond.
The great wilderness, on every hand, stretched miles and miles away,
until it was lost afar, like a sea of gloom, in the sky.  Once a
night-bird rushed whirring past, so startlingly close, that the
Lieutenant felt a cold chill run over him as its wings fanned his face.
It shot off like a bullet directly across the river, and could be
distinguished for several minutes, its body resembling a black ball,
until it faded out from view.  Nothing else disturbed the solemn
stillness that held reign.  Everything wore the spirit of quietness and
repose.

The soldier was the first to speak.

"Isn't this an impressive sight, Oonomoo?"

"Yeh--make think of Great Spirit."

"That is true.  You seem to be more than usually solemn in your
reflections, my good friend, and I am glad to see it.  This calm
moonlight night, the clear sky and the deep, silent wood, is enough to
make any person thoughtful; but it must have required something more
than ordinary to impress you thus."

"Saw Fluellina to-day, Oonomoo's wife."

Lieutenant Canfield was considerably puzzled to understand how this
could account for the peculiar frame of the Huron's mind, but he had
too much consideration to question him further.  It was not until he
spoke again, that he gained a clear idea of his meaning.

"Fluellina Christian--got Bible--tell 'bout God--Great Spirit up
dere--read out of it--tell Oonomoo 'bout t'ings in it--Oonomoo nebber
take anodder scalp."

"A wise determination; such a brave man as you needs no _proof_ of your
bravery, and that good Being which your Fluellina has told you about
will smile upon your noble conduct."

"Know dat--_feel_ it," added the Huron, eagerly.  He stood a moment
longer, and then added, "Time dat we go."

"You spoke of going part way in a canoe, but I do not see any for us."

"Down yonder, by dat rock."

The Indian pointed down the river as he spoke, and, following the
direction of his finger, Lieutenant Canfield distinguished a large rock
projecting some distance from the shore, but could distinguish nothing
of the canoe of which he spoke.  Knowing, however, that it must be
concealed somewhere in the vicinity, he remarked, as they withdrew
again into the wood:

"How is it, Oonomoo, that you have your canoe in every part of the
country?  You must be the owner of quite a fleet."

"Got two--free--twenty--more'n dat--all ober--in Big Miami--Little
Miami--all 'long Ohio--Soty (Sciota)--Hocking--Mussygum
(Muskingum)--'way out 'long de Wabash--hid all ober--got 'em
eberywhere."

"And I suppose you find occasion to use them all?"

"Use 'em all.  Out on Wabash last winter--snow deep--two days in de
snow--paddlin' on de ribber--hab 'em hid 'long de shore--sometime lose
'em."

"How did you get them in these different places?  Carry them there
yourself?"

"Made 'em--knowed want use 'em--made 'em and hid 'em."

The young soldier was about to speak, when the Huron motioned for him
to maintain his peace.  The conversation had been carried on in so low
tones that a third party, a rod distant, could not have overheard their
words.  Before the Indian spoke, he had glanced around to satisfy
himself that it was impossible for a human being to be concealed within
that area.

Now, however, he was about to change his position, and the strictest
silence was necessary.

The two passed down through the woods, and were just emerging again
upon the bank, when the Huron, who was in front, suddenly started back,
so quickly and lightly that the Lieutenant did not understand his
movement till he saw their relative change of position.

"What is the matter?" he asked, in a whisper.

"'Sh!  Shawnees dere."

"Where? on the rock?"

The Huron pointed across the river.

"Dere! on dat shore--may be come over."

The soldier, was much puzzled to know how his companion had made such a
sudden discovery, when they were so far away.  As there could be no
danger of their words being overheard, he made the inquiry.

"See'd water splash," replied Oonomoo.  "Got canoe."

"Not yours?"

"No--deir own--come ober here, putty soon."

His words were true.  He had hardly spoken, when a noise, as of the
dipping of a paddle, was heard, and the next moment a canoe shot out
from the bank and headed directly toward them.  This being the case, it
was impossible to determine the number of savages in it, although there
must have been several.

"Would it not be best to move to prevent discovery?" asked the
Lieutenant, as he watched the approaching Shawnees with considerable
anxiety.

"Won't land here--go 'low us."

A moment later the head of the canoe turned down-stream.  It was then
seen to be of considerable size.  Five savages were seated within it.
Oonomoo bent his head, took one earnest glance at them, and then said:

"Ain't Shawnees--Miamis."

"Friends or foes?"

"Jes' as bad--take scalp--kill white people--take your scalp--see you."

Lieutenant Canfield by no means felt at ease at the indifference with
which his friend uttered these words.  It certainly was no pleasant
prospect--that of having these bloodthirsty Miamis for such near
neighbors, and he expressed as much to Oonomoo.

"Won't come here--keep quiet--won't git hurt," replied the
imperturbable Huron.

Considerably relieved at this assurance, he said no more, but watched
the canoe.  To his astonishment and dismay it again changed its course,
and headed directly toward the rock in front of them.  He looked at his
companion, but his face was as immovable as a statue's and, determined
not to show any childish fear, he maintained his place and said no more.

Reaching the outer end of the rock, the Miamis halted for a moment or
two, when they turned down the river again, and landed about a hundred
yards below where our two friends were standing.  The latter waited for
full half an hour, when, seeing and hearing nothing more of them, the
Huron resolved to obtain his canoe, and continue their journey down the
river.

"But where is it?" asked the soldier, when he announced his intention.

"Fastened out end of rock."

"May be the Miamis discovered it and have destroyed it."

"Dunno--meb' so--didn't take him 'way, dough."

"Is the water very deep?"

"Two--t'ree--twenty feet--swim dere."

As it seemed impossible to run even the most ordinary risk, the
Lieutenant felt no apprehension at all when he saw him walk down to the
water without his rifle, and wade out and commence swimming.  The moon,
as we have said, was unusually bright, and not only the dark, ball-like
head of the Huron could be seen, floating on the surface, but, when his
face was turned in the right direction, his black eyes and aquiline
nose and high cheek-bones were plainly distinguishable, while his long,
black hair, simply closed in one clasp (years before it was always
gathered in the defiant scalp-lock), floated like a veil behind him.
The soldier watched him until he disappeared around the corner of the
rock, and then patiently awaited his return.

The Huron was a most consummate swimmer, and moved, while in the water,
as silently as a fish.  More from habit than anything else, as he found
himself in the eddy made by the twisting of the river around the upper
edge of the stone, he "backed water," and, for a moment, remained
perfectly motionless.  The moon was in such a quarter of the sky that a
long line of shadow was thrown out from the rock, far enough to envelop
both Oonomoo and his canoe, lying several yards below him.  As he
caught sight of the latter, he saw a Miami Indian seated in it,
apparently waiting and watching for some one.  As quick as lightning
the meaning of the singular action of the other canoe flashed upon his
mind.  By some means which he could only conjecture, the Miamis had
gained a knowledge of his movements.  Perhaps the discovery of his boat
was what first awakened their suspicions.  At any rate, they had
learned enough to satisfy themselves that a rich prize was within their
grasp.  Leaving one of their number in the strange canoe, they had
passed on down-stream, concealing the absence of their comrade with
such skill, that the watchful eye of the Huron failed to detect it.
Beyond a doubt they were lingering in the vicinity, ready to come to
his assistance at the first signal.

The instructions of the warrior who remained behind were to shoot the
savage at the moment of his appearance, and, in case he had a
companion, to put out in the stream at once and call to his friends,
who would immediately come to him.  A brief glance at the situation of
the Miami will show that his task was one of no ordinary peril,
especially if the returning Indian should have any apprehension of
danger.  If he chose, the latter could swim out to the rock, and walk
over its surface to its outer edge, when he would be directly above the
Miami, and could brain him with his tomahawk in an instant.  As the
physical exertion thus incurred would be greater than the simple act of
swimming out to the canoe, it was not likely such a thing would take
place, unless, as we have said, the suspicions of the approaching
savage be aroused.  The probability was that the latter would take
precisely the same course that we have seen the Huron take, that is, if
he believed the coast clear; but as there was no certainty of this, the
Miami was compelled to keep watch both up-stream and down-stream, and
it was thus it happened that his back was turned to Oonomoo at the very
moment he came around the edge of the rock.

The different methods by which the Miami could be disposed of occurred
to the Huron with electric quickness.  To the first--that of passing
over the rock and tomahawking him, there was one objection so important
as to make it a fatal one.  In the bright moonlight, he would offer too
fine a target to the other Miamis concealed along the bank.  Without
the responsibility of his white friend's safety, Oonomoo felt it would
be hardly short of suicide, for it would be affording his deadliest
enemies the opportunity of capturing or killing him as they preferred.
He had but the choice of two plans: that of pressing forward and
engaging the Miami, or of instantly returning to the shore, and
proceeding to the Shawnee village by land.  He chose the former.

Everything depended now upon the quickness of the Huron's movements.
The Miami being compelled to watch both directions, it was certain he
would turn his head in a moment, when, if Oonomoo was still in the
water, his fate would be pretty certain.  Accordingly he shot rapidly
forward, and was so close when he halted, that, do his utmost, he could
not prevent his head from striking the prow of the canoe.  Slight as
was the shock, it did not escape the notice of the Miami, who instantly
turned his head, and approaching the prow, leaned over and looked in
the water.

The Huron had been expecting this movement, and to guard against its
consequences, sunk quietly beneath the surface, and allowed the current
to carry him just the length of the canoe, when he again rose, with his
head beneath its stem.  Resting here a moment, with his nose and eyes
just in sight, he commenced drifting down-stream, inch by inch, until
he caught a glimpse of the Miami's head over the edge of the canoe when
he returned to his former position under the stern and gathered his
energies for the struggle.

Sustaining himself by his feet alone, he reached his hands upward,
grasped the canoe in such a manner that it was firmly held on each
side.  Holding it thus only long enough to make his hold sure, he
pressed the stern quickly downward, and then by a sudden wrench threw
the Miami upon his back in the water.  Letting go his hold, the Huron
made a dash at him, and closing in the deadly embrace, the two went
down--down--down--till their feet struck the soft bottom, when they
shot up again like two corks.

Imminent as was the peril of Oonomoo, his greatest fear was that their
struggles would carry them below the rock, where the moonlight would
discover them to the Miamis on the bank.  With a skill as wonderful as
it was rare even among his own people, he _regulated_ his movements
while submerged, in such a manner that they operated to carry both
combatants _up_-stream, had there been no current, so that when they
came to the surface, it was very nearly in the same spot that they had
gone down.

But Oonomoo and the Miami had whipped out their knives, and they raised
them aloft at the same instant.  But neither descended.  They were
still in the air, when the one spoke the simple word.  "Heigon!" and
the other simultaneously with him uttered the name of "Oonomoo," and
the hands of both dropped beside them.  Without speaking, the Miami
grasped the edge of the rock and clambered to the surface, and beckoned
for the Huron to follow; but the latter held back, and whispered, in
the tongue of his companion:

"Miamis on shore wait to make Oonomoo a prisoner."

"Oonomoo is the friend of Heigon, and the Miamis will not injure him."

[Illustration: But Oonomoo and the Miami had whipped out their knives.]

The Huron hesitated no longer, but the next moment stood beside the
Miami on the broad mass of stone.  Heigon gave a short peculiar whoop,
which was instantly followed by the appearance of the other canoe with
its four inmates, who impelled it forward with great rapidity, and in
almost a twinkling were also upon the rock.  Each held a glittering
knife in hand, and they gazed upon their victim with exulting eyes, who
stood firm, unmoved, and returned their glances with as proud and
defiant an air as a king would have looked upon the vassals beneath
him.  They were about to proceed to violence, when Heigon simply said:
"He is my friend."  Instantly every knife was sheathed, and the
gloating expression of the Miamis changed to one of interest and
pleasure.  They gathered more closely around the Huron, and looked to
their companion for some further explanation.

"When the snow was upon the ground," said he, "Heigon was hunting, and
he became weak and feeble, like an old man, or the child that cannot
walk.[1]  The snow came down till it covered the rocks like this, and
Heigon grew weaker and feebler until he could walk no further, and lay
down in the snow to die.  When he was covered over, and the Great
Spirit was about to take him to himself, another Indian came that way.
He was Heigon's enemy, but he lifted him to his feet and brushed the
snow from his face and limbs and poured his fire-water down his throat.
He dug the snow away until he came to the dry leaves, and then he
kindled a fire to warm Heigon by.  He stayed by him all night, and in
the morning Heigon was strong and a man again.  When he went away, he
asked the Indian his name.  It was Oonomoo, the Huron.  He stands by
us, and is now in our power."

The eyes of the Miamis fairly sparkled as they listened to this
narration of their comrade, and they looked upon the far-famed Huron
with feelings only of friendship and admiration.  He had been
considered for years as one of the deadliest enemies of the Miamis, and
his capture or death by them would have been an exploit that would have
descended through tradition to the last remnant of their people.  Fully
sensible of this, this same Huron had come upon one of their most
distinguished warriors when he was as helpless as an infant, and could
have been scalped by a mere child.  But the magnanimous savage had
acted the part of a good Samaritan, feeding and warming him and sending
him on his way in the morning, refreshed and strengthened.  Such a deed
as this could never be forgotten, either by the recipient or those of
his tribe to whom it became known.

During the narrative the Huron stood with arms folded, and as
insensible to the praises of Heigon as if he had not uttered a syllable
since the advent of his companions.  He who appeared to be the leading
warrior now asked:

"Whither does my brother Huron wish to go?"

"To the Shawnee village on the shore of the Miami."

"We journey thither, and will take our brother with us."

"Oonomoo goes as the enemy of the Shawnees.  He goes to save a
pale-faced maiden who has fallen into their hands.  My Miami brothers
go as the friends of the Shawnees."

"They go as the friends of Oonomoo, who saved one of their warriors,
and they will carry him in their canoe."

"The feet of Oonomoo are like the deer's, and his eyes are as the
eagle's.  He can see his path at night in the wood, and can journey
from the rising until the setting sun without becoming weary."

"We know our brother is brave and fleet of foot.  His Miami friends
will carry him far upon his journey, and when he wishes to go through
the woods, they will leave him upon the shore."

Oonomoo could not decline this kind offer.  Simply to show in a small
degree their friendship for him, the Miamis insisted upon carrying him
in their canoe as far as he wished, landing him upon the bank whenever
it was his desire that they should do so.  The Miamis being allies of
the Shawnees, and on their way to join one of their war-parties, they
could not (even on account of their peculiar relations with the Huron)
act as their enemies in any way; consequently the Huron did not expect
or ask their assistance.  But while they were prevented from aiding him
in the least, in his attempt to rescue the captive, the claims which he
had upon their gratitude were such, that he well knew they would
carefully avoid throwing any obstacle in his way, and would act as
neutrals throughout the affair, believing, however, that it was not
inconsistent with such a profession to carry him even in sight of the
Shawnee village itself.  Beyond that it would be as if these five
Miamis were a thousand miles distant.

All this time, it may well be supposed, that Lieutenant Canfield was no
uninterested spectator of the interview between his Huron friend and
the Miamis.  When they made their appearance upon the rock, he believed
that Oonomoo had been captured.  He was about to seek his own safety in
flight, but he was struck by the apparently good feeling of the
conference.  Their words being in the Miami tongue, he could not
distinguish their meaning, but from their sound, judged them to be
friendly in their nature.  Still, there could be no certainty, and he
was in a torment of doubt, when he was startled by hearing the Huron
call his name.  At first he determined not to answer, thinking his
friend had been compelled to betray him by his captors.  A moment's
reflection, however, convinced him that such could not be the case.

"Canfiel'!  Canfiel'!"

"What do you want, Oonomoo?"

"Go down bank--wait for us--Miami won't hurt."

The young soldier did as he requested, and the next moment saw the two
canoes put out from the rock.  In the first were the four Miamis, and
in the second Oonomoo and Heigon, the latter using the paddle.  They
touched a point on the shore about a hundred yards down-stream, almost
at the same moment that it was reached by the Lieutenant.

"How-de-do, brudder?" asked the foremost, extending his hand.  The
soldier exchanged similar greetings with the others, when at a signal
the five seated themselves upon the ground, and he followed suit.  A
pipe, the "calumet of peace," was produced and passed from mouth to
mouth, each one smoking slowly and solemnly a few whiffs.

This tedious ceremony occupied fully a half-hour, during which it was
nearly impossible for the young Lieutenant to conceal his impatience.
It seemed to him nothing but a sheer waste of time, and he wondered how
Oonomoo could take it so composedly.  At length the last smoker had
taken what he evidently believed the proper number of whiffs, and they
arose and embarked again in their canoes.

In the boat, which really belonged to the Huron, were seated himself,
Lieutenant Canfield, and Heigon, who insisted upon using the paddle
himself.  For a moment they glided along under the shadow of the wooded
bank, and then, coming out on the clear, moonlit surface of the river,
they shot downstream like swallows upon the wing.

It was not quite ten miles to the Shawnee town, and, as it was now in
the neighborhood of midnight, their destination would be easily reached
in time.

All went well for some four or five miles, when an exclamation from the
canoe in advance attracted the attention of Oonomoo and the soldier.

"What is it?" inquired the latter.

"Ugh! nudder canoe comin'--Shawnees."

Such proved to be the case.  A large war-canoe, containing over a score
of painted warriors, was coming up the river, nearly in the center of
the stream, while the Miamis were nearer the right bank.  When nearly
opposite each other, the war-canoe paused while that which contained
the four Miamis went over to it, somewhat after the manner that two
friendly ships come to anchor in the midst of the ocean, and exchange
congratulations and news.

During the interview, Heigon prudently kept at a safe distance, but
from the gesticulations and words of the Shawnees it was evident they
were making inquiries in regard to the inmates of his boat.  The
replies proved satisfactory, for a moment later, the canoes separated,
and each party proceeded on his way.  Little did the Shawnees dream
that the very foe for whom they were searching--he whose scalp was
worth that of a hundred warriors, whose death they would have nearly
given their own life to secure--little did they dream, we say, that
this very man was within a few rods of them--so close that he
recognized the features of every one of their number!

Several miles further, and Oonomoo spoke to Heigon.  They were now in
the vicinity of the Shawnee village, and he wished to land.  Heigon
instantly turned the prow of his canoe toward shore, and the others,
understanding the cause, followed.  A moment later, Lieutenant Canfield
and the Huron stood upon _terra firma_.  They were compelled again to
shake hands all around with their curiously-made friends, when they
separated--the latter to go down the river as brothers to the warlike
Shawnees, and the former to go to the same destination as their deadly
enemies!

