believed the Ghoojurs had kept to it possibly because there was less
danger of pursuit.  One fact was self-evident: nothing was to be gained
by standing still, while there was a chance of accomplishing something
by going on.  With scarcely a minute's hesitation he advanced at a
rapid stride over the more faintly marked course, peering in advance
for a glimpse of his enemies.

Since the latter had not gained much start it would seem that he ought
to be close upon them, always provided he was traveling in their actual
footsteps.  The ground continued rough and broken, but it had no effect
on his progress.  Something like a shadow whisked across the path in
front at the moment of his passing round a turn.  Some animal had
caught sight of him, and, scared by the vision, had leaped into the
jungle at the side.  Whether it was a tiger, leopard, cheetah, wild
boar or another brute he did not know or care.  If it dared to dispute
his way he would shoot.

He was pressing forward in this reckless, desperate fashion, when he
dropped as if he had collided with a stone wall, and his heart almost
ceased its beating.  He had caught the faint report of a firearm.  It
came from a point on his right and sounded as if caused by a revolver,
rather than a larger weapon.  The thought that came to him was that it
was the pistol of Mary Marlowe!

"She is at bay; she may have fired it at herself, and yet I do not
think she would do that until some of the bullets had reached the
wretches who have captured her.  I am following the wrong path, for
this one leads me away from her."

Without an instant's hesitation he turned and began his return on a
loping trot.  He was incensed with himself because of his mistake, and
yet there was no reasonable cause for such feeling, but grief is as
thoughtless as love, and he was stirred to the very depth of his soul
by both.  Reaching the last forking, he did not pause, but set out over
the main trail.

In front of him towered a mass of rocks higher than any he had yet
seen.  The path wound about these, but instead of following it, he
climbed to the highest part.

"I may gain sight of something from up there," was his thought as he
pushed on, "that will be of some help."

And he did see something from the crest which fairly took away his
breath.




CHAPTER XVII.

ALMOS.

Mary Marlowe was an obedient daughter, and when her father checked her
move to go to the aid of the imperilled ones on the boat, and
peremptorily ordered her to wait where she was, she obeyed without
protest.  She would have been glad to bear them company, but knew she
would be more of a hindrance than a help.

It was less than five minutes after the disappearance of her father and
betrothed when she was frightened by hearing a slight sound directly
behind her in the path.  Her thought naturally was that some wild
animal was stealing upon her, but the first glance told a more dreadful
story.  Five men, who, from their ragged, scant attire, their dark
complexion and wild expression of features, she knew to belong to the
terrible bandits called Ghoojurs, had come upon her unnoticed, and
pausing within a half dozen paces, were looking fixedly at her.

The sight was so startling that the young woman gasped and recoiled.
She would have fled after her friends had not the leader made a
gesture, accompanied by the command:

"Stay where you are or you shall be killed!  I know you as the daughter
of the doctor, and we seek you and him."

Each of the Ghoojurs carried a long, muzzle-loading gun, and every one
had a yataghan thrust into a girdle around his waist, the weapon being
a foot or more in length, and with a point of needle-like fineness.
The leader spoke in Hindustani, which was as familiar to the young
woman as her own tongue.

The young woman possessed quick wit.  She could not doubt that the
five, including Almos and Mustad, were now her deadly enemies.  Whether
they had taken part in the massacre of those left on the boat could not
be conjectured, but the probabilities were the other way, since it
would have been well-nigh impossible for them to reach their present
position from the river without colliding with Dr. Marlowe and Jack
Everson.

Mary showed her shrewdness by acting as if the two men were the friends
they had always shown themselves when their former meetings took place.

"Why, Almos," she said, forcing a smile in which there was no pleasure,
"we have not met before since you came to my home and my father gave
you medicine that cured your illness.  How do you do?"

And she had the courage to advance a step and offer her dainty hand,
but the brute refused it.  With a shake of his head he retreated a step
and said:

"My caste will not allow me."

"But it allowed you to take drink and food from my hand and medicine
from that of my father," she said, stung by the repulse.

"I did evil, for which Allah has pardoned me; the faithful have been
summoned to drive the infidels from India; the followers of Islam have
heard the call, and they are flocking to the banner of the Prophet from
all parts of Hindostan; not one infidel shall be left in all the land."

During these few moments Mustad stood directly behind the leader, with
a fixed grin in which there was a certain shamefacedness, for with all
his fierce fanaticism he could not forget the gentle, sweet nature of
the one who had become a prisoner nor the unvarying kindness he had
received at her hands.  True, the devil in his nature was roused, and
there could be little question that he was acting as guide to these
murderers while they hunted for the doctor and his family.

"And do you mean to help kill those who have been your friends,
Mustad?" she asked, with her penetrating eyes fixed upon him.

Had the two been alone, it is possible the edge would have been taken
off the response, but with four Ghoojurs at his elbow, and one of them
the furious Almos, he dared not be behind them in savagery.

"This is a war for our deen; when we fight for that we know none but
the followers of the Prophet!  The Inglese loge stole our homes and our
land from us!  They have put lard on the cartridges of the Sepoys that
the faithful may become unclean and be shut out of paradise!  I hate
them all!  I have no friends among them!  I shall never sheath my knife
nor stay my hand while one remains alive in India."

"Let it be as you say," she calmly replied, seeing that it was useless
to hold converse with the wretch.

Her wish was to keep the party where they were until Jack and her
father could have time to return.  Here would be an opportunity for the
young man to make a few more bull's-eyes, but Almos was too wise to run
the risk.  He was not afraid to fight two men, even though not so well
armed as they, but his wish was first to place the young woman beyond
their reach--for when the fight came it would be to the death.

"No harm shall come to you," said the leader in a gentler tone.  "Walk
forward over the path and we will guard you against harm."

"Whither do you intend to take me?" she asked, debating whether to obey
or to make a fight then and there and force matters to an issue.

"To Akwar."

"Why there?"

"To place you among friends that your enemies may not reach you."

"Why not take me to my home?"

"It has been burned and the men are hiding among the trees that they
may slay you when you and your father return."

After a moment's hesitation she obeyed, taking the path along which her
parent soon after pressed in the desperate effort to recover her from
her captors.




CHAPTER XVIII.

DOCTOR AND PATIENT.

The bright wits of Miss Marlowe were active.  Mustad took the lead
along the path, she following next, while Almos, the leader of the
Ghoojurs, and his three companions, brought up the rear.  Like most of
the trails through the Asiatic jungles, this was inclosed on each side
by a growth of trees, undergrowth and matted vegetation of such density
that it was next to impossible for any one to pick his way forward or
backward except by keeping within the path itself.  To step aside into
the jungle would immediately involve one in so inextricable a tangle
that he could move only with the greatest difficulty.

An attempt to escape, therefore, by darting to one side was not to be
thought of, and she knew that her only hope lay with her absent
friends.  She was confident that they would speedily return, and,
finding her gone, start in immediate pursuit.  A collision between them
and the Ghoojurs was imminent.

The latter acted as if their only interest lay in their prisoner.  So
far as she could judge no attention was paid to the rear, whence the
danger of attack threatened.  The place of Mustad, at the head,
confirmed her suspicion that he had been playing the part of guide for
the rest from the first.

She did not doubt that her home and its contents had been burned by the
wretches, but under the circumstances the matter gave her little
concern.  She was inclined to believe that her captors meant to conduct
her into the town of Akwar, nearby, and with her knowledge of the
fanatical hatred of the population against all Christians she still
hoped to find some friends there who would protect her from harm.  And
thus it was that she was not in the state of collapse or despair that
might be supposed.

Suddenly a pistol was fired from some point at the rear beyond her
captors, and out of sight.  All the men instantly stopped, grasped
their arms and looked back, the young woman doing the same.  Her
thought was: "That was father or Jack, but he did not hit any one;
therefore, it wasn't Jack."

While the six were looking expectantly to the rear Dr. Marlowe, his
face flushed, and his whole appearance, showing his intense excitement,
came into sight.  He was panting from his severe exertion, and raised
his hand as a signal for the Ghoojurs to wait for him.  It is probable
that he would have received a shot, but for an interruption that was as
unexpected as it was remarkable.  Almos, the leader of the Ghoojurs,
emitted a yell that could have been heard a half-mile away, and leaped
several feet in the air, while his companions with exclamations of
terror hastily recoiled from him.

"Great Allah!  He has been bitten!" exclaimed the horrified Mustad,
almost knocking the young woman off her feet in his rush towards his
master; but one of the others had perceived the monstrous cobra, and,
clubbing his gun, he beat the life out of it with one blow, before it
could glide away into the jungle.  It looked as if this part of the
country was specially pestered by the dreadful reptiles.

Almos knew he was doomed.  All hope had vanished, and, dropping to the
ground, he bared his bronzed ankle, looked at the tiny points where the
horrible poison had been injected into his system, and then, like the
fatalist be was, he calmly folded his arms and waited for the last
moment that was rushing upon him.  He was a faithful follower of the
Prophet and knew how to meet the inevitable that awaits us all.  His
companions, awed and silent, stood around, unable to say or do anything
that could give him comfort.  Miss Marlowe, after walking part way to
the group, paused and looked at them and at her father, who was
hurrying to the spot.  She wondered that Almos had permitted the
killing of the cobra, since the snake is looked upon as sacred in
India, and few natives can be induced to injure one.  The Ghoojurs
probably slew it in the flurry of the moment.

Dr. Marlowe had heard the cry and noted the excitement, but did not
suspect the cause until he drew near the spot.  Then Mustad, familiar
with the skill of the medical man, beckoned to him and said:

"Make haste, great sahib, Almos has been bitten by a snake; no one can
save him but you."

The stricken chief, from his seat on the ground, looked up in the face
of the white man, of whose wonderful skill he had received proof in his
own self.  The countenance of the Ghoojur was of ashen hue, and the
yearning expression of his eyes told of the hope that had been kindled
within his breast.

Now that the physician had dropped into what may be called his
professional character, he was himself again.  He set down the caba
containing his instruments, and medicaments, adjusted his glasses, and
stooping over, intently studied the wound made by the cobra.  Then he
drew out his watch, as if he were timing the pulse beats of a patient.

"It is one minute and a half since you were bitten," he said, still
holding the timepiece in his hand, but looking into the face of Almos;
"in three more minutes and a half no power but Allah can save you."

Catching the full meaning of these words, the Ghoojur leader quivered
with suddenly renewed hope.

"Can you save me?" he asked in Hindustani.

"I have in there," replied the physician, tapping his caba with his
long forefinger, "that which will render the bite of the snake as
harmless as the peck of a bird that flies in the air, but barely three
minutes remain in which to apply it."

"Then I beseech you, do not wait," said the eager Almos, shoving his
foot towards the doctor; "great is the English doctor; be quick; why do
you tarry?"

"Before I heal you," replied Dr. Marlowe, with maddening deliberation,
"I must be paid my fee; I have attended you before and refused to
accept what you offered, but now I demand payment before applying the
remedy."

"You shall have it; name it, I beg you; all that I have shall be yours
if you will save me, but haste, O great physician, haste!"

"It is strong, and will do its work well, if it be given the chance."

He next drew out a lancet, with its edge like a razor's.  Almos
breathlessly watched him, but when he expected the doctor to begin
work, he leaned back and said:

"Why should I bring you back from death, when you are seeking the lives
of my daughter and myself?  The best thing I can do is to let you die,
as you will do in two minutes and a half more," he added, looking again
at his watch; "the venom of the cobra works fast and it will soon
strike your heart."

"You promised to save me if I would pay you in advance.

"So I will."

"Name your fee; be quick with it!"

"It is that you and the rest of the Ghoojurs shall leave me and mine
alone; that you shall depart at once; that you shall not attempt to
follow, nor harm us in any way.  Without that pledge on your part, I
shall let you die like the dog that you are.  What is your answer?"

"I promise; I promise!" exclaimed Almos, almost beside himself with
excitement and renewed hope.  "I will guide you through the jungle to a
safe point, and will watch over you till all danger is gone."

"You have given me your promise, but you may break it; swear by the
mantle of the Prophet, or I shall let you die."

"I swear by the mantle of the Prophet!" the Ghoojur chieftain fairly
shrieked, "that I will do as I have promised!  Quick, quick, or it will
be too late!"

"You have made the most sacred vow that a Mussulman can make; I will
test it by saving your life."




CHAPTER XIX.

ASIATIC HONOR.

One quick movement with the lancet made an incision across the red
specks left by the fangs of the cobra, and into the opening he poured a
teaspoonful of the yellowish fluid, which was so much like liquid fire
and pepper that even the dusky scoundrel gasped with agony.  Then he
was made to open his mouth and swallow something from a large bottle,
which, as regards strength and flavor, was a twin of that which was
consuming his flesh.

All at once the countenance of the physician expanded with a beaming
smile as he looked at his patient and said gently as if speaking to his
own child:

"All danger is past, Almos."

From the abundance of rags which fluttered about his person, the doctor
tore a piece and bandaged the wound.  Then he said in a business-like
tone:

"I am through; now you and the rest of you may go."

Almos hesitated.

"You have saved my life: is there nothing I can do for you?"

"I have just told you what to do--_leave_?"

Probably there would have been less promptness in complying with the
command had there been less in uttering it.  As it was, Almos, without
a word, motioned to the rest of his band, and led the way down the path
in the direction of the stream, the four tramping after him like so
many ragged phantoms.

Dr. Marlowe was more eager to leave the place than he would permit his
child to know.  He had no faith in Almos's promise, knowing that the
Ghoojur chieftain would break his oath, which he and his brother
fanatics did not consider binding when made to infidels, and the only
hope, therefore, was for the fugitives to conceal themselves from the
miscreants--a thing which the physician's intimate knowledge of the
country would enable him to do.

Footfalls sounded along the path over which the two had just come, and
a minute later Almos, Mustad and their three companions emerged into
the opening and approached the couple, one of whom suspected nothing
until her father spoke.

"Well, Almos, what do you want?" demanded Dr. Marlowe, calmly looking
up at the Ghoojur chieftain, as he paused in front of him and made a
salaam.

"We have come for the infidel and his daughter; our deen commands us to
put them to death."

"What does the oath you gave me a little while ago command you to do?"

"That was made to an infidel; it is not binding upon a true son of the
Prophet."

"A true son of the devil!" exclaimed the physician, unable to repress
his rage.

Turning to his daughter, he said:

"My child, you have a pistol; when they make a move, shoot; leave Almos
to me and save your last bullet for yourself."

"The infidels shall be destroyed everywhere," said Almos; "none of the
Inglese loge shall be left in India.  The faithful have risen and they
will crush them all, for so commands the Prophet----"

Dr. Marlowe had placed his hand on the butt of his revolver at his hip,
meaning to whip out the weapon and fire before the miscreant had
finished his high-sounding tomfoolery.  His daughter had also grasped
hers, intending to obey to the letter the command of her parent, when
the Ghoojur chieftain abruptly paused in his speech, staggered for a
moment, and then sank to the ground like a bundle of rags, with the
breath of life gone from his body.

The incident would have been as inexplicable to parent and child as to
the Ghoojurs, had they not caught the faint, far-away report of a
rifle, which, if heard by the bandits, was not associated by them with
the startling thing that had taken place before their eyes.  But the
doctor and Mary knew the connection.

And about half-a-mile away, on the top of that huge rock, hot enough
under the flaming sun to roast eggs, Jack Everson had assumed the same
position that he held the afternoon before on the bank of the Ganges,
when he checked the advance of the Ghoojur horsemen across the river.
With the aid of the glasses, he had descried the forms of his beloved
and her father when the bright eyes failed to detect his own.  Then,
when about to start to join them, he observed their visitors, and the
glass again helped to identify them, after which he "proceeded to
business."

The instant he made his aim sure he pulled the trigger, came to a
sitting position, readjusted a cartridge, and placing the glasses to
his eyes that he might see the more plainly, watched the result of his
shot.

"By Jove; another bull's-eye!" he gleefully exclaimed, as he saw his
man stagger and fall almost at the feet of Dr. Marlowe.  "I don't know
the gentleman's name, but a first-class obituary notice is in order.
That makes six, and now for the seventh.  I really hope the doctor is
keeping score for me."

The professional eye of the physician saw where the pellet of lead had
