balance, and fell into the water.

11. Fortunately, the water was not deep, and she soon scrambled out
again; but she was thoroughly wet, and, having been very warm before the
accident, she was now chilled to the heart.

12. Grasping the little ship, the cause of all the mischief, she hurried
home, and creeping softly into the kitchen, sought her friend Kitty, to
screen her from Betty's anger. By this time she was shivering with a
violent ague, and Kitty carried her immediately to Betty.

13. Poor Anna! she was now obliged to be put to bed, and to take some
of Betty's bitter herb tea, seasoned too with scolding, and all kinds of
evil predictions. She felt very unhappy, and cried sadly; but
repentance, in this case, came too late.

14. Her head began to ache dreadfully; her skin was parched with fever,
and before the next morning she was very ill. She had taken a violent
cold, which brought on an attack of scarlet fever; and when Mrs. Elmore
returned, she found her little daughter stretched on a bed of sickness.

15. How did that fond mother tremble, as she watched by the bedside of
her darling child, uncertain whether she would ever again lift up her
head from her uneasy pillow!

16. Anna did not know her mother in the delirium of fever, and her
melancholy cry of "Mother! mother! come back!--I will never be so bad
again!" wrung Mrs. Elmore's heart.

17. For three weeks Anna lay between life and death; and when she was at
length pronounced out of danger, she was as helpless as an infant.

18. One day, as she sat propped up by pillows, she told her mother all
that had passed during her absence, and awaited her decision respecting
the use she had made of her time.

19. "My dear child," said Mrs. Elinore, "I trust the past will afford a
lesson you will never forget. So far from having made good use of your
time, you have done harm in everything you have undertaken.

20. "Your attempts at study, instead of affording you any real
instruction, have only given you habits of inattention, which you will
find very difficult to overcome; for your eyes have wandered over the
page, while your thoughts have been with the fool's, to the ends of the
earth.

21. "Your irregular care of my plants, which you thought would serve
instead of habitual attention, has been the means of destroying them as
effectually as if you had allowed them to perish from total neglect.

22. "Your injudicious benevolence to the Wilsons served only to make the
children envious of each other, without giving them habits of neatness,
which are essential to the well-being of such a family; while it had a
worse effect upon yourself, because it not only wasted your precious
time, but excited in you a feeling of vanity, on account of what you
considered a good action.

23. "If, instead of trusting so boldly to your good resolutions, you had
entered upon your duties with an humble mind, and resolved to _try_ to
do right,--if you had apportioned your time with some degree of
regularity,--you might have performed all that was required of you,
enjoyed all your amusements, and gratified every kindly feeling, without
a single self-reproach.

24. "As it is, you feel sensible of having failed in everything,--of
having exposed yourself to great peril, and subjected your mother to
great anxiety, simply from your disposition to loiter, when you should
labor.

25. "I trust that, in the solitude of your sick chamber, 'the still
small voice' of your many wasted hours has made itself heard, and that
hereafter you will not so utterly fail to make good use of your time."




LESSON XXXI.

_Verse, or Poetry._


1. All the lessons in this book which you have thus far read have been
in prose. I intend to give you some lessons in verse, or, as it is
sometimes, but improperly called, poetry.

2. There is a great deal of difference between verse and poetry; but as
this book is intended for those who are not quite old enough to
understand all these differences, I shall not attempt at present to
point them out to you.

3. But I wish you first to understand the difference, which you can see
with your eye, between prose and verse. The lines of verse often end in
what are called _rhymes_. Thus, if one line ends with the word _found_,
the next line ends with a word which sounds very much like it, as
_ground, round, bound, sound, hound, wound_.

4. These are called _rhymes_. Here are a few such lines.


IMPROVEMENT OF TIME.

    "Defer not till to-morrow to be wise;
     To-morrow's sun to thee may never rise."


BEST USE OF MONEY.

    "When wealth to virtuous hands is given,
     It blesses like the dew of Heaven;
     Like Heaven, it hears the orphan's cries,
     And wipes the tears from widow's eyes."

5. Sometimes the rhymes occur in alternate lines; that is, two lines
come together which are not rhymes, and are followed by two lines to
make rhymes to both, as follows:

    "Let the sweet work of prayer and praise
       Employ our youngest breath;
     Thus we're prepared for longer days,
       Or fit for early death."

6. There are some kinds of verses that do not rhyme. These are called
_blank_ verse. Here is an example of blank verse:

        "Mark well, my child, he said; this little stream
    Shall teach thee charity. It is a source
    I never knew to fail: directed thus
    Be that soft stream, the fountain of thy heart.
    For, oh! my much-loved child, I trust thy heart
    Has those affections that shall bless thyself;
    And, flowing softly like this little rill,
    Cheer all that droop. The good man did not err."

7. Now, there are several things that I wish you to notice in these
lines. In the first place, if you will count the syllables, you will
find that there are exactly ten syllables in each line; and it is always
the case, that in verse it is necessary that there should be a certain
number of syllables of a certain kind.

8. What that number is, I cannot now explain to you; but you will be
able to understand from a book called a grammar, which you will probably
study at some future time, if you do not study it now. It is contained
in that part of grammar called Prosody.

9. The next thing I wish you to notice is, that every line of verse
always begins with a capital letter.

10. And thirdly you will notice, that the lines of verse are more
regular in their sound than lines of prose. They have a kind of musical
sound about them, which you very rarely hear, except in verse.

11. And fourthly you will notice, that some of the words are shortened
by leaving out a letter, and putting in its place a mark called an
_apostrophe_, which looks just like a comma, only it is placed higher up
in the line, as in the following line:

    "Thus we're prepared for longer days."

12. In this line, if the words were written out at full length, with all
their letters in them, the line would stand as follows:

    "Thus we are prepared for longer days."

13. But this would destroy what is called the _measure_ of the line, by
putting too many syllables into it; and therefore the words _we are_ are
shortened, so as to be read as one syllable, and the line is to be read
as follows:

    "Thus weer prepared for longer days."

14. The next difference I shall point out to you between prose and
verse, is that in verse the words are placed in a different order from
what they would be in prose; as you will notice in the following lines:

    "When all thy mercies, oh my God!
       My rising soul surveys,
     Transported with the view, I'm lost
       In wonder, love and praise."

15. Now, if these lines were written in prose, the words would stand in
the following order: "O my God! when my rising soul surveys all thy
mercies, I'm transported with the view of them, and lost in wonder, love
and praise."

16. And now that I have explained to you a few of the points in which
verse differs from prose, I will only add, that when you read verse, you
must not stop at the end of every line, unless there is a pause or mark
there; and that you must avoid reading it as if you were singing it to a
tune.




LESSON XXXII.

_God Present Everywhere._


    1. Thou, Lord, by strictest search hast known
    My rising up and lying down;
    My secret thoughts are known to thee,
    Known long before conceived by me.

    2. Surrounded by thy power I stand,
    On every side I find thy hand:
    O skill for human reach too high!
    Too dazzling bright for mortal eye!

    3. From thy all-seeing Spirit, Lord,
    What hiding-place does earth afford?
    O where can I thy influence shun,
    Or whither from thy presence run?

    4. If up to heaven I take my flight,
    'Tis there thou dwell'st enthroned in light;
    If to the world unseen, my God,
    There also hast thou thine abode.

    5. If I the morning's wings could gain,
    And fly beyond the western main;
    E'en there, in earth's remotest land,
    I still should find thy guiding hand.

    6. Or, should I try to shun thy sight
    Beneath the sable wings of night;
    One glance from thee, one piercing ray,
    Would kindle darkness into day.

    7. The veil of night is no disguise,
    No screen from thy all-searching eyes;
    Through midnight shades thou find'st thy way,
    As in the blazing noon, of day.

    8. Thou know'st the texture of my heart,
    My reins, and every vital part:
    I'll praise thee, from whose hands I came
    A work of such a wondrous frame.

    9. Let me acknowledge too, O God,
    That since this maze of life I trod,
    Thy thoughts of love to me surmount
    The power of numbers to recount.

    10. Search, try, O God, my thoughts and heart,
    If mischief lurk in any part;
    Correct me where I go astray,
    And guide me in thy perfect way.




LESSON XXXIII.

_Devotion._


    1. While thee I seek, protecting Power,
    Be my vain wishes stilled;
    And may this consecrated hour
    With better hopes be filled.

    2. Thy love the power of thought stowed,
    To thee my thoughts would soar:
    Thy mercy o'er my life has flowed,
    That mercy I adore.

    3. In each event of life, how clear
    Thy ruling hand I see!
    Each blessing to my soul more dear,
    Because conferred by thee.

    4. In every joy that crowns my days,
    In every pain I bear,
    My heart shall find delight in praise,
    Or seek relief in prayer.

    5. When gladness wings my favored hour,
    Thy love my thoughts shall fill;
    Resigned, when storms of sorrow lower,
    My soul shall meet thy will.

    6. My lifted eye, without a tear,
    The gathering storm shall see;
    My steadfast heart shall know no fear--
    That heart will rest on thee.




LESSON XXXIV.

_The Gardener and the Hog._--GAY.

    1. A gardener, of peculiar taste,
    On a young hog his favor placed,
    Who fed not with the common herd,--
    His tray was to the hall preferred;
    He wallowed underneath the board,
    Or in his master's chamber snored,
    Who fondly stroked him every day,
    And taught him all the puppy's play.

    2. Where'er he went, the grunting friend
    Ne'er failed his pleasure to attend.
    As on a time the loving pair
    Walked forth to tend the garden's care,
    The master thus addressed the swine:

    3. "My house, my garden, all is thine:
    On turnips feast whene'er you please,
    And riot in my beans and peas;
    If the potato's taste delights,
    Or the red carrot's sweet invites,
    Indulge thy morn and evening hours,
    But let due care regard my flowers;
    My tulips are my garden's pride--
    What vast expense these beds supplied!"

    4. The hog, by chance, one morning roamed
    Where with new ale the vessels foamed;
    He munches now the steaming grains,
    Now with full swill the liquor drains;
    Intoxicating fumes arise,
    He reels, he rolls his winking eyes;
    Then, staggering, through the garden scours,
    And treads down painted ranks of flowers;
    With delving snout he turns the soil,
    And cools his palate with the spoil.

    5. The master came,--the ruin spied.
    "Villain, suspend thy rage!" he cried:
    "Hast then, thou most ungrateful sot,
    My charge, my only charge, forgot?
    What, all my flowers?" No more he said;
    But gazed, and sighed, and hung his head.

    6. The hog, with stuttering speech, returns:--
    "Explain, sir, why your anger burns;
    See there, untouched, your tulips strown,
    For I devoured the roots alone!"

    7. At this the gardener's passion grows;
    From oaths and threats he fell to blows;
    The stubborn brute the blows sustains,
    Assaults his leg, and tears the veins.
    Ah! foolish swain, too late you find
    That sties were for such friends designed!

    8. Homeward he limps with painful pace,
    Reflecting thus on past disgrace:
    Who cherishes a brutal mate,
    Shall mourn the folly soon or late.




LESSON XXXV.

_The Hare and many Friends._--GAY.


    1. A hare, who, in a civil way,
    Complied with everything, like Gay,
    Was known by all the bestial train
    Who haunt the wood, or graze the plain.
    Her care was never to offend,
    And every creature was her friend.

    2. As forth she went, at early dawn,
    To taste the dew-besprinkled lawn,
    Behind she hears the hunter's cries,
    And from the deep-mouthed thunder flies.

    3. She starts, she stops, she pants for breath;
    She hears the near advance of death;
    She doubles to mislead the hound,
    And measures back her mazy round;
    Till, fainting in the public way,
    Half dead with fear, she gasping lay.

    4. What transport in her bosom grew,
    When first the horse appeared in view!
    "Let me," says she, "your back ascend,
    And owe my safety to a friend.
    You know my feet betray my flight,--
    To friendship every burden's light."

    5. The horse replied:--"Poor honest puss,
    It grieves my heart to see thee thus.
    Be comforted,--relief is near;
    For all your friends are in the rear."

    6. She next the stately bull implored;
    And thus replied the mighty lord:--
    "Since every beast alive can tell
    That I sincerely wish you well,
    I may, without offense, pretend
    To take the freedom of a friend.
    Love calls me hence; a favorite cow
    Expects me near yon barley-mow;
    And when a lady's in the case,
    You know all other things give place.
    To leave you thus might seem unkind;
    But see,--the goat is just behind."

    7. The goat remarked her pulse was high,
    Her languid head, her heavy eye,--
    "My back," says he, "may do you harm;
    The sheep's at hand, and wool is warm."

    8. The sheep was feeble, and complained
    His sides a load of wool sustained:
    Said he was slow, confessed his fears;
    For hounds eat sheep, as well as hares.

    9. She now the trotting calf addressed,
    To save from death a friend distressed.
    "Shall I," says he, "of tender age,
    In this important care engage?
    Older and abler passed you by;
    How strong are those! how weak am I!

    10. "Should I presume to bear you hence,
    Those friends of mine may take offense.
    Excuse me, then,--you know my heart;
    But dearest friends, alas! must part.
    How shall we all lament! Adieu!
    For see,--the hounds are just in view."

    11. 'Tis thus in friendships; who depend
    On many, rarely find a friend.

[Illustration]




LESSON XXXVI.

_Maxims._--SELECTED.


Never delay until to-morrow what you can do to-day.

Never trouble others for what you can do yourself.

Never spend your money before you have it.

Never buy what you do not want, because it is cheap.

Pride costs more than hunger, thirst, or cold.

We never repent of having eaten too little.

Nothing is troublesome that we do willingly.

How much pains have those evils cost us which never happened!

Take things always by their smooth handle.

When angry, count ten before you speak; if very angry, a hundred.

Hear as little as possible spoken against others; and believe nothing of
the kind, until you are absolutely forced to believe it.

Always believe that if you heard what may be said on the other side of
the question, a very different account of the matter might be given.

Do to others what you would have them do to you.




LESSON XXXVII.

_How to be Happy._--CHILD AT HOME.


1. Every child must have observed how much happier and more beloved some
children are than others. There are some children whom you always love
to be with. They are happy themselves, and they make you happy.

2. There are others, whose society you always avoid. The very expression
of their countenances produces unpleasant feelings. They seem to have no
friends.

3. No person can be happy without friends. The heart is formed for love,
and cannot be happy without the opportunity of giving and receiving
affection.

4. But you cannot receive affection, unless you will also give it. You
cannot find others to love you, unless you will also love them. Love is
only to be obtained by giving love in return. Hence the importance of
cultivating a cheerful and obliging disposition. You cannot be happy
without it.

5. I have sometimes heard a girl say, "I know that I am very unpopular
at school." Now, this is a plain confession that she is very disobliging
and unamiable in her disposition.

6. If your companions do not love you, it is your own fault. They cannot
help loving you, if you will be kind and friendly. If you are not loved,
it is a good evidence that you do not deserve to be loved. It is true,
that a sense of duty may, at times, render it necessary for you to do
that which will be displeasing to your companions.

7. But, if it is seen that you have a noble spirit, that you are above
selfishness, that you are willing to make sacrifices of your own
personal convenience to promote the happiness of your associates, you
will never be in want of friends.

8. You must not regard it as your _misfortune_ that others do not love
you, but your _fault_. It is not beauty, it is not wealth, that will
give you friends. Your heart must glow with kindness, if you would
attract to yourself the esteem and affection of those by whom you are
surrounded.

9. You are little aware how much the happiness of your whole life
depends upon the cultivation of an affectionate and obliging
disposition. If you will adopt the resolution that you will confer
favors whenever you have an opportunity, you will certainly be
surrounded by ardent friends.

10. Begin upon this principle in childhood, and act upon it through
life, and you will make yourself happy, and promote the happiness of all
within your influence.

11. You go to school on a cold winter morning. A bright fire is blazing
upon the hearth, surrounded with boys struggling to get near it to warm
themselves. After you get slightly warmed, another school-mate comes in,
suffering with cold. "Here, James," you pleasantly call out to him, "I
am almost warm; you may have my place."

12. As you slip aside to allow him to take your place at the fire, will
he not feel that you are kind? The worst dispositioned boy in the world
cannot help admiring such generosity.

13. And even though he be so ungrateful as to be unwilling to return the
favor, you may depend upon it that he will be your friend as far as he
is capable of friendship. If you will habitually act upon this
principle, you will never want friends.

14. Suppose, some day, you were out with your companions, playing ball.
After you had been playing for some time, another boy comes along. He
cannot be chosen upon either side, for there is no one to match him.
"Henry," you say, "you may take my place a little while, and I will
rest."

15. You throw yourself down upon the grass, while Henry, fresh and
vigorous, takes your bat and engages in the game. He knows that you gave
up to accommodate him; and how can he help liking you for it?

16. The fact is, that neither man nor child can cultivate such a spirit
of generosity and kindness, without attracting affection and esteem.

17. Look and see which of your companions have the most friends, and you
will find that they are those who have this noble spirit,--who are
