"Try to keep from under each other's feet mostly," Martha answered. "Eh!
there does seem a lot of us then. Mother's a good-tempered woman but she
gets fair moithered. The biggest ones goes out in th' cow-shed and plays
there. Dickon he doesn't mind th' wet. He goes out just th' same as if
th' sun was shinin'. He says he sees things on rainy days as doesn't
show when it's fair weather. He once found a little fox cub half drowned
in its hole and he brought it home in th' bosom of his shirt to keep it
warm. Its mother had been killed nearby an' th' hole was swum out an'
th' rest o' th' litter was dead. He's got it at home now. He found a
half-drowned young crow another time an' he brought it home, too, an'
tamed it. It's named Soot because it's so black, an' it hops an' flies
about with him everywhere."

The time had come when Mary had forgotten to resent Martha's familiar
talk. She had even begun to find it interesting and to be sorry when she
stopped or went away. The stories she had been told by her Ayah when she
lived in India had been quite unlike those Martha had to tell about the
moorland cottage which held fourteen people who lived in four little
rooms and never had quite enough to eat. The children seemed to tumble
about and amuse themselves like a litter of rough, good-natured collie
puppies. Mary was most attracted by the mother and Dickon. When Martha
told stories of what "mother" said or did they always sounded
comfortable.

"If I had a raven or a fox cub I could play with it," said Mary. "But I
have nothing."

Martha looked perplexed.

"Can tha' knit?" she asked.

"No," answered Mary.

"Can tha' sew?"

"No."

"Can tha' read?"

"Yes."

"Then why doesn't tha' read somethin', or learn a bit o' spellin'?
Tha'st old enough to be learnin' thy book a good bit now."

"I haven't any books," said Mary. "Those I had were left in India."

"That's a pity," said Martha. "If Mrs. Medlock'd let thee go into th'
library, there's thousands o' books there."

Mary did not ask where the library was, because she was suddenly
inspired by a new idea. She made up her mind to go and find it herself.
She was not troubled about Mrs. Medlock. Mrs. Medlock seemed always to
be in her comfortable housekeeper's sitting-room down-stairs. In this
queer place one scarcely ever saw any one at all. In fact, there was no
one to see but the servants, and when their master was away they lived a
luxurious life below stairs, where there was a huge kitchen hung about
with shining brass and pewter, and a large servants' hall where there
were four or five abundant meals eaten every day, and where a great deal
of lively romping went on when Mrs. Medlock was out of the way.

Mary's meals were served regularly, and Martha waited on her, but no one
troubled themselves about her in the least. Mrs. Medlock came and looked
at her every day or two, but no one inquired what she did or told her
what to do. She supposed that perhaps this was the English way of
treating children. In India she had always been attended by her Ayah,
who had followed her about and waited on her, hand and foot. She had
often been tired of her company. Now she was followed by nobody and was
learning to dress herself because Martha looked as though she thought
she was silly and stupid when she wanted to have things handed to her
and put on.

"Hasn't tha' got good sense?" she said once, when Mary had stood waiting
for her to put on her gloves for her. "Our Susan Ann is twice as sharp
as thee an' she's only four year' old. Sometimes tha' looks fair soft in
th' head."

Mary had worn her contrary scowl for an hour after that, but it made her
think several entirely new things.

She stood at the window for about ten minutes this morning after Martha
had swept up the hearth for the last time and gone down-stairs. She was
thinking over the new idea which had come to her when she heard of the
library. She did not care very much about the library itself, because
she had read very few books; but to hear of it brought back to her mind
the hundred rooms with closed doors. She wondered if they were all
really locked and what she would find if she could get into any of them.
Were there a hundred really? Why shouldn't she go and see how many doors
she could count? It would be something to do on this morning when she
could not go out. She had never been taught to ask permission to do
things, and she knew nothing at all about authority, so she would not
have thought it necessary to ask Mrs. Medlock if she might walk about
the house, even if she had seen her.

She opened the door of the room and went into the corridor, and then she
began her wanderings. It was a long corridor and it branched into other
corridors and it led her up short flights of steps which mounted to
others again. There were doors and doors, and there were pictures on the
walls. Sometimes they were pictures of dark, curious landscapes, but
oftenest they were portraits of men and women in queer, grand costumes
made of satin and velvet. She found herself in one long gallery whose
walls were covered with these portraits. She had never thought there
could be so many in any house. She walked slowly down this place and
stared at the faces which also seemed to stare at her. She felt as if
they were wondering what a little girl from India was doing in their
house. Some were pictures of children--little girls in thick satin
frocks which reached to their feet and stood out about them, and boys
with puffed sleeves and lace collars and long hair, or with big ruffs
around their necks. She always stopped to look at the children, and
wonder what their names were, and where they had gone, and why they wore
such odd clothes. There was a stiff, plain little girl rather like
herself. She wore a green brocade dress and held a green parrot on her
finger. Her eyes had a sharp, curious look.

"Where do you live now?" said Mary aloud to her. "I wish you were here."

Surely no other little girl ever spent such a queer morning. It seemed
as if there was no one in all the huge rambling house but her own small
self, wandering about up-stairs and down, through narrow passages and
wide ones, where it seemed to her that no one but herself had ever
walked. Since so many rooms had been built, people must have lived in
them, but it all seemed so empty that she could not quite believe it
true.

It was not until she climbed to the second floor that she thought of
turning the handle of a door. All the doors were shut, as Mrs. Medlock
had said they were, but at last she put her hand on the handle of one of
them and turned it. She was almost frightened for a moment when she felt
that it turned without difficulty and that when she pushed upon the door
itself it slowly and heavily opened. It was a massive door and opened
into a big bedroom. There were embroidered hangings on the wall, and
inlaid furniture such as she had seen in India stood about the room. A
broad window with leaded panes looked out upon the moor; and over the
mantel was another portrait of the stiff, plain little girl who seemed
to stare at her more curiously than ever.

"Perhaps she slept here once," said Mary. "She stares at me so that she
makes me feel queer."

After that she opened more doors and more. She saw so many rooms that
she became quite tired and began to think that there must be a hundred,
though she had not counted them. In all of them there were old pictures
or old tapestries with strange scenes worked on them. There were curious
pieces of furniture and curious ornaments in nearly all of them.

In one room, which looked like a lady's sitting-room, the hangings were
all embroidered velvet, and in a cabinet were about a hundred little
elephants made of ivory. They were of different sizes, and some had
their mahouts or palanquins on their backs. Some were much bigger than
the others and some were so tiny that they seemed only babies. Mary had
seen carved ivory in India and she knew all about elephants. She opened
the door of the cabinet and stood on a footstool and played with these
for quite a long time. When she got tired she set the elephants in
order and shut the door of the cabinet.

In all her wanderings through the long corridors and the empty rooms,
she had seen nothing alive; but in this room she saw something. Just
after she had closed the cabinet door she heard a tiny rustling sound.
It made her jump and look around at the sofa by the fireplace, from
which it seemed to come. In the corner of the sofa there was a cushion,
and in the velvet which covered it there was a hole, and out of the hole
peeped a tiny head with a pair of frightened eyes in it.

Mary crept softly across the room to look. The bright eyes belonged to a
little gray mouse, and the mouse had eaten a hole into the cushion and
made a comfortable nest there. Six baby mice were cuddled up asleep near
her. If there was no one else alive in the hundred rooms there were
seven mice who did not look lonely at all.

"If they wouldn't be so frightened I would take them back with me," said
Mary.

She had wandered about long enough to feel too tired to wander any
farther, and she turned back. Two or three times she lost her way by
turning down the wrong corridor and was obliged to ramble up and down
until she found the right one; but at last she reached her own floor
again, though she was some distance from her own room and did not know
exactly where she was.

"I believe I have taken a wrong turning again," she said, standing still
at what seemed the end of a short passage with tapestry on the wall. "I
don't know which way to go. How still everything is!"

It was while she was standing here and just after she had said this that
the stillness was broken by a sound. It was another cry, but not quite
like the one she had heard last night; it was only a short one, a
fretful, childish whine muffled by passing through walls.

"It's nearer than it was," said Mary, her heart beating rather faster.
"And it _is_ crying."

She put her hand accidentally upon the tapestry near her, and then
sprang back, feeling quite startled. The tapestry was the covering of a
door which fell open and showed her that there was another part of the
corridor behind it, and Mrs. Medlock was coming up it with her bunch of
keys in her hand and a very cross look on her face.

"What are you doing here?" she said, and she took Mary by the arm and
pulled her away. "What did I tell you?"

"I turned round the wrong corner," explained Mary. "I didn't know which
way to go and I heard some one crying."

She quite hated Mrs. Medlock at the moment, but she hated her more the
next.

"You didn't hear anything of the sort," said the housekeeper. "You come
along back to your own nursery or I'll box your ears."

And she took her by the arm and half pushed, half pulled her up one
passage and down another until she pushed her in at the door of her own
room.

"Now," she said, "you stay where you're told to stay or you'll find
yourself locked up. The master had better get you a governess, same as
he said he would. You're one that needs some one to look sharp after
you. I've got enough to do."

She went out of the room and slammed the door after her, and Mary went
and sat on the hearth-rug, pale with rage. She did not cry, but ground
her teeth.

"There _was_ some one crying--there _was_--there _was_!" she said to
herself.

She had heard it twice now, and sometime she would find out. She had
found out a great deal this morning. She felt as if she had been on a
long journey, and at any rate she had had something to amuse her all the
time, and she had played with the ivory elephants and had seen the gray
mouse and its babies in their nest in the velvet cushion.




CHAPTER VII

THE KEY OF THE GARDEN


Two days after this, when Mary opened her eyes she sat upright in bed
immediately, and called to Martha.

"Look at the moor! Look at the moor!"

The rain-storm had ended and the gray mist and clouds had been swept
away in the night by the wind. The wind itself had ceased and a
brilliant, deep blue sky arched high over the moorland. Never, never had
Mary dreamed of a sky so blue. In India skies were hot and blazing; this
was of a deep cool blue which almost seemed to sparkle like the waters
of some lovely bottomless lake, and here and there, high, high in the
arched blueness floated small clouds of snow-white fleece. The
far-reaching world of the moor itself looked softly blue instead of
gloomy purple-black or awful dreary gray.

"Aye," said Martha with a cheerful grin. "Th' storm's over for a bit. It
does like this at this time o' th' year. It goes off in a night like it
was pretendin' it had never been here an' never meant to come again.
That's because th' springtime's on its way. It's a long way off yet, but
it's comin'."

"I thought perhaps it always rained or looked dark in England," Mary
said.

"Eh! no!" said Martha, sitting up on her heels among her black lead
brushes. "Nowt o' th' soart!"

"What does that mean?" asked Mary seriously. In India the natives spoke
different dialects which only a few people understood, so she was not
surprised when Martha used words she did not know.

Martha laughed as she had done the first morning.

"There now," she said. "I've talked broad Yorkshire again like Mrs. Medlock
said I mustn't. 'Nowt o' th' soart' means 'nothin'-of-the-sort,'" slowly
and carefully, "but it takes so long to say it. Yorkshire's th' sunniest
place on earth when it is sunny. I told thee tha'd like th' moor after a
bit. Just you wait till you see th' gold-colored gorse blossoms an' th'
blossoms o' th' broom, an' th' heather flowerin', all purple bells, an'
hundreds o' butterflies flutterin' an' bees hummin' an' skylarks soarin'
up an' singin'. You'll want to get out on it at sunrise an' live out on
it all day like Dickon does."

"Could I ever get there?" asked Mary wistfully, looking through her
window at the far-off blue. It was so new and big and wonderful and such
a heavenly color.

"I don't know," answered Martha. "Tha's never used tha' legs since tha'
was born, it seems to me. Tha' couldn't walk five mile. It's five mile
to our cottage."

"I should like to see your cottage."

Martha stared at her a moment curiously before she took up her polishing
brush and began to rub the grate again. She was thinking that the small
plain face did not look quite as sour at this moment as it had done the
first morning she saw it. It looked just a trifle like little Susan
Ann's when she wanted something very much.

"I'll ask my mother about it," she said. "She's one o' them that nearly
always sees a way to do things. It's my day out to-day an' I'm goin'
home. Eh! I am glad. Mrs. Medlock thinks a lot o' mother. Perhaps she
could talk to her."

"I like your mother," said Mary.

"I should think tha' did," agreed Martha, polishing away.

"I've never seen her," said Mary.

"No, tha' hasn't," replied Martha.

She sat up on her heels again and rubbed the end of her nose with the
back of her hand as if puzzled for a moment, but she ended quite
positively.

"Well, she's that sensible an' hard workin' an' good-natured an' clean
that no one could help likin' her whether they'd seen her or not. When
I'm goin' home to her on my day out I just jump for joy when I'm
crossin' th' moor."

"I like Dickon," added Mary. "And I've never seen him."

"Well," said Martha stoutly, "I've told thee that th' very birds likes
him an' th' rabbits an' wild sheep an' ponies, an' th' foxes themselves.
I wonder," staring at her reflectively, "what Dickon would think of
thee?"

"He wouldn't like me," said Mary in her stiff, cold little way. "No one
does."

Martha looked reflective again.
