"No. I have been so little at home of recent years that I know very
little of the private affairs of my tenants, but I remember her, of
course, and I was grieved to learn by a letter from Sir John
Greendale the other day that in some strange way she was missing."

"Who knew that better than yourself?" the man said, raising himself
on his elbow, and fixing a look of such deadly hatred upon Mallett,
that the latter involuntarily drew back a step.

"I saw you laughing and talking to her in front of her father's
house. I heard you with her in their garden the evening before you
left and she disappeared, and it was my voice you heard in the
lane. Had I known that you were going that night, I would have
followed you and killed you, and saved her. The next morning you
were both gone. I waited a time and then went to the depot of your
regiment and enlisted. I had failed to save her, but at least I
could avenge her. That bullet was mine, and had you not stumbled
over a Pandy's body, I suppose, just as I pulled my trigger, you
would have been a dead man.

"I did not know that I had failed, and, rushing forward with my
company, was in the thickest of the fight. I wanted to be killed,
but no shot struck me, and at last, when chasing a Pandy along a
passage in the Kaiser Bagh, he turned and levelled his piece at me.
Mine was loaded, and I could have shot him down as he turned, but I
stood and let him have his shot. When I found myself here I was
sorry that he had not finished me at once, but when I heard that
you were alive, and likely to recover, I thanked him in my heart
that he had left me a few more days of life, that I could let you
know that it was I who had fired, and that Martha's wrong had not
been wholly unavenged."

He sank back exhausted on to the pillow. Frank Mallett had made no
attempt to interrupt him: the sudden agony of his wound and his
astonishment at this strange accusation had given him so grave a
shock that he leaned against the wall behind him in silent wonder.

"Hello! Mallett, what the deuce is the matter with you?" the
surgeon exclaimed, as, looking up from a patient over whom he was
bending a short distance away, his eyes fell on the officer's face.
"You look as if you were going to faint, man.

"Here, orderly, some brandy and water, quickly!"

Frank drank some of the brandy and water and sat down for a few
minutes. Then, when he saw the surgeon at the other end of the
room, he got up and went across to Lechmere's bed.

"There is some terrible mistake, Lechmere," he said, quietly. "I
swear to you on my honour as a gentleman that you are altogether
wrong. From the moment that I got into my dog cart at Bennett's I
never saw Martha again. I know nothing whatever of this talk in the
garden. Did you think you saw me as well as heard me?"

"No, you were on one side of that high wall and I on the other, but
I heard enough to know who it was. You told her that you had to go
abroad at once, but that if she would come out there you would put
her in charge of someone until you could marry her. You told her
that she could not stay where she was long, and I knew what that
meant. I suppose she is at Calcutta still waiting, for of course
she could not have come out with you. I suppose that she is
breaking her heart there now--if she is not dead, as I hope she
is."

"Did you hear the word Calcutta or India mentioned, Lechmere?"

"No, I did not, but I heard quite enough. Everyone knew that you
were going in a day or two, and that was enough for me after what I
had seen in the afternoon."

"You saw nothing in the afternoon," Captain Mallett said, angrily.
"The girl's father and mother were at home. We were all chatting
together until we came out. She came to the trap with me while they
stood at the open window. It was not more than a minute before I
drove off. I have not spoken to the girl half a dozen times since
she was a little child.

"Why, man, if everyone took such insane fancies in his head as you
do, no man would dare to speak to a woman at all.

"However," he went on in an altered voice, "this is not a time for
anger. You are very ill, Lechmere, but the doctor has not given you
up, and I trust that you will yet get round and will be able to
prove to your own satisfaction that, whatever has happened to this
poor girl, I, at least, am wholly innocent of it. But should you
not get over this hurt, I should not like you to go to your grave
believing that I had done you this great wrong. I speak to you as
to a dying man, and having no interest in deceiving you, and I
swear to you before Heaven that I know absolutely nothing of this.
I, too, may fall from a rebel shot before long, and I thank God
that I can meet you before Him as an innocent man in this matter.

"I must be going, for I see the doctor coming to fetch me. Goodbye,
lad, we may not meet again, though I trust we shall; but if not, I
give you my full forgiveness for that shot you fired at me. It was
the result of a strange mistake, but had I acted as you believed, I
should have well deserved the death you intended for me."

"Confound it, Mallett, there seems no end of mischief from your
visit here. In the first place, you were nearly knocked over
yourself, and now there is this man lying insensible. So for
goodness' sake get off to your room again, and lie down and keep
yourself quiet for the rest of the day. I shall have you
demoralising the whole ward if you stay here."

Captain Mallett walked back with a much feebler and less steady
step than that with which he had entered the hospital. He had some
doubts whether the man who had made this strange accusation and had
so nearly taken his life was really sane, and whether he had not
altogether imagined the conversation which he declared he had heard
in the garden. He remembered now the sudden way in which George
Lechmere had turned round and gone away when he saw him saying
goodbye to Martha, and how she had shrugged her shoulders in
contempt.

The man must either be mad, or of a frightfully jealous
disposition, to conjure up harm out of such an incident: and one
who would do so might well, when his brain was on fire, conjure up
this imaginary conversation. Still, he might have heard some man
talking to her. From what Sir John had said, she did leave the
house and go into the garden about that hour, and she certainly
never returned.

He remembered all about George Lechmere now. He had the reputation
of being the best judge of cattle in the neighbourhood, and a
thoroughly steady fellow, but he could see no resemblance in the
shrunk and wasted face to that he remembered.

That evening both the officers and men in the hospital were carried
away to the new one outside the town. When the doctor came in
before they were moved, he told Mallett that the man he had seen
had recovered from his swoon.

"He was very nearly gone," he said, "but we managed to get him
round, and it seems to me that he has been better since. I don't
know what he said to you or you to him, and I don't want to know;
but he seems to have got something off his mind. He is less
feverish than he was, and I have really some faint hopes of pulling
him through, especially as he will now be in a more healthful
atmosphere."

It was a comfort indeed to all the wounded when late that evening
they lay on beds in the hospital marquees. The air seemed
deliciously cool and fresh, and there was a feeling of quiet and
restfulness that was impossible in the town, with the constant
movement of troops, the sound of falling masonry, the dust and
fetid odour of decay.

A week later the surgeon told Mallett that he had now hopes that
the soldier he was interested in would recover.

"The chances were a hundred to one against him," he said, "but the
one chance has come off."

"Will he be fit for service again, doctor?"

"Yes, I don't see why he should not be, though it will be a long
time before he can carry his kit and arms on a long day's march. It
is hot enough now, but we have not got to the worst by a long way,
and as there is still a vast amount of work to be done, I expect
that the regiment will be off again before long."

"Well, at any rate, I shall be able to go with you, doctor."

"I don't quite say that, Mallett," the doctor said, doubtfully. "In
another fortnight your wound will be healed so that you will be
capable of ordinary duty, but certainly not long marches. If you do
go you will have to ride. There must be no more marching with your
company for some time."

A week later orders were issued, under which the regiment was
appointed to form part of the force which, under the command of
General Walpole, was to undertake a campaign against Rohilcund, a
district in which the great majority of the rebels who had escaped
from Lucknow had now established themselves. Unfortunately, the
extent of the city and the necessity for the employment of a large
proportion of the British force in the actual assault, had
prevented anything like a complete investment of the town, and the
consequence had been that after the fall of the Kaiser Bagh, by far
the greater portion of the rebel force in the city had been able to
march away without molestation.

Before leaving, Mallett had an interview with George Lechmere, who
was now out of danger.

"I should have known you now, Lechmere," he said, as he came to his
bedside. "Of course you are still greatly changed, but you are
getting back your old expression, and I hope that in the course of
two or three months you will be able to take your place in the
ranks again."

"I don't know, sir. I ain't fit to stay with the regiment, and have
thought of being invalided home and then buying my discharge. I
know you have said nothing as to how you got that wound, not even
to the doctor; for if you had done so there is not a man in
hospital who would have spoken to me. But how could I join the
regiment again? knowing that if there was any suspicion of what I
had done, every man would draw away from me, and that there would
be nothing for me to do but to put a bullet in my head."

"But no one ever will know it. It was a mad act, and I believe you
were partly mad at the time."

"I think so myself now that I look back. I think now that I must
have been mad all along. It never once entered my mind to doubt
that it was you, and now I see plainly enough that except what the
man said about going away--and anyone might have said that--there
was not a shadow of ground or suspicion against you. But even if I
had never had that suspicion I should have left home.

"Why, sir, I know that my own father and mother suspected that I
killed her. I resented it at the time. I felt hard and bitter
against it, but as I have been lying here I have come to see that I
brought their suspicions upon myself by my own conduct, and that
they had a thousand times better ground for suspecting me than I
had for suspecting you.

"All that happened was my fault. Martha cared for me once, but it
was my cursed jealousy that drove her from me. She was gay and
light hearted, and it was natural for her to take her pleasure,
which was harmless enough if I had not made a grievance of it. If I
had not driven her from me she would have been my wife long before
harm came to her; but it was as well that it was not so, for as I
was then I know I should have made her life a hell.

"I did it all and I have been punished for it. Even at the end she
might never have gone off if I had not shouted out and tried to
climb the wall. She must have recognised my voice, and, knowing
that I had her secret, feared that I might kill her and him too,
and so she went. She would not have gone as she did, without even a
bonnet or a shawl, if it had not been for that."

"Then you don't think, as most people there do, that she was
murdered?"

"Not a bit, sir. I never thought so for a moment. She went straight
away with that man. I think now I know who it was."

"Never mind about that, Lechmere. You know what the Bible says,
'Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord,' and whoever it may be, leave
him safely in God's hands."

"Yes, sir, I shall try to act up to that. I was fool enough to
think that I could avenge her, and a nice business I made of it."

"Well, I think it is nonsense of you to think of leaving the
regiment. There is work to be done here. There is the work of
punishing men who have committed the most atrocious crimes. There
is the work of winning back India for England. Every Englishman out
here, who can carry a weapon, ought to remain at his post until the
work is done.

"As to this wound of mine, that is a matter between us only. As I
have told you, I have altogether forgiven you, and am not even
disposed greatly to blame you, thinking, as you did, that I was
responsible for that poor girl's flight. I shall never mention it
to a soul. I have already put it out of my mind, therefore it is as
if it had never been done, and there is no reason whatever why you
should shrink from companionship with your comrades. I shall think
much better of you for doing your duty like a man, than if you went
home again and shrank from it."

"You are too good, sir, altogether too good."

"Nonsense, man. Besides, you have to remember that you have not
gone unpunished. Had it not been for your feeling, after you had,
as you believed, killed me, you never would have stood and let that
Sepoy shoot you; so that all the pain that you have been going
through, and may still have to go through before you are quite
cured, is a punishment that you have yourself accepted. After a man
has once been punished for a crime there is an end of it, and you
need grieve no further over it; but it will be a lesson that I hope
and believe you will never forget.

"Hackett, who has been my soldier servant for the last five years,
was killed in the fight in the Kaiser Bagh. If you like, when you
rejoin, I shall apply for you in his stead. It will make your work
a good deal easier for you, and I should like to have the son of
one of my old tenants about me."

The man burst into tears.

"There, don't let's say anything more about it," Mallett went on,
taking the thin hand of the soldier in his. "We will consider it
settled, and I shall look out for you in a couple of months, so get
well as quick as you can, and don't worry yourself by thinking of
the past. I must be off now, for I have to take down a party of
convalescents to rejoin this evening.

"Goodbye, lad," and without waiting for any reply, he turned and
left the marquee.



Chapter 5.

"It is little more than two years and a half since I left,
Lechmere, but it seems almost a lifetime."

"It does seem a time, Major. We must have marched thousands of
miles, and I could not say how many times we have been engaged.
There has not been a week that we have not had a fight, and
sometimes two or three of them."

"Well, thank God, we are back again. Still I am glad to have been
through it."

"So am I, sir. It will be something to look back on, and it is
curious to think that while we have been seeing and doing so much,
father and my brother Bob have just been going about over the farm,
and seeing to the cattle, and looking after the animals day in and
day out, without ever going away save to market two or three times
a month at Chippenham."

"And you have quite made up your mind to stay with me, Lechmere?"

"Quite, sir. Short of your turning me out, there is nothing that
would get me away from you. No one could be happier than I have
been, ever since I rejoined after that wound. It has not been like
master and servant, sir. You have just treated me as if you had
been the squire and I had been your tenant's son, and that nothing
had ever come between us. You have made a man of me again, and I
only wish that I had more opportunities of showing you how I feel
it."

"You have had opportunities enough, and you have made the most of
them. You were by my side when I entered that house where there
were a score of desperate rebels, and it would have gone hard with
us if aid had not come up. You stood over me when I was knocked
down by that charge of rebel cavalry, and got half a dozen wounds
before the Hussars swept down and drove them back."

"I was well paid for that, sir," the man said with a smile.

"Yes, you got the Victoria Cross, and no man ever won it more
fairly. But, after all, it was not so much by such things as these
that you showed your feelings, Lechmere, as by your constant and
faithful service, and by the care with which you looked after me.
Still, as I told you before, I don't like standing in your way. In
the natural course of things you would have had your father's farm,
and there is now no reason why you should not go back there."

"No, sir. Since we heard that that poor girl came back home and
died, there is no reason why I should not go back to the old place,
but I don't like to. Two years of such a life as we have been
leading does not fit one for farm work. Brother Bob stopped and
took my place while I went soldiering, and even if I were willing
to go back to it, which I am not, it would not be fair to him for
me to step in just as if nothing had happened. But, anyhow, I shall
be glad to be back again at the old place and see them all. Father
and mother will know now that they suspected me wrongly. But they
were not to blame. Mad as I was then, I might have done it if I had
had the chance."

"Well, Lechmere, you know well that I shall be always glad to have
you with me as long as you are willing to stay. Perhaps the time
will come when you may wish to make a home for yourself, and you
may be sure that the first farm on the estate that falls vacant
shall be yours, or, as that does not very often happen, I will see
that you get a good one somewhere in the neighbourhood."

The man shook his head, and without answering went on unpacking his
master's portmanteau. They were at the Hummums Hotel, in Covent
Garden, and had arrived half an hour before by the evening train,
having come overland from Marseilles.

Two years' soldiering had greatly altered George Lechmere. He had
lost the heavy step caused by tramping over ploughed fields, and
was a well set-up, alert and smart-looking soldier; and although
now in civilian clothes--for his master had bought him out of the
service when he sent in his own papers--no one could avoid seeing
that he had served, for in addition to the military carriage there
was the evidence of two deep scars on his face, the handiwork of
the mutineers' sabres on the day when he had stood over his master
surrounded by rebel horse. His complexion was deeply bronzed by the
sun, and there was that steady but watchful expression in his eyes
that is characteristic of men who have gone through long and
dangerous service.

"I shall stay two or three days in town," Major Mallett said. "I
must get an entire refit before I go down. You had better come
round with me to the tailor's tomorrow, the first thing after
breakfast. You will want three or four suits, too."

"Yes, sir. And besides, they would like to know down there when you
are coming home. They are sure to want to give you a welcome."

"And you, too, Lechmere. I am sure that all your old friends will
give you as hearty a welcome as they will give me. Indeed, it ought
to be a good deal heartier, for you have been living among them all
your life, while I have been away for the most part ever since I
was a boy."

Four days later they went down to Chippenham. Mr. Norton, the
steward, was on the platform when the train came in.

"Welcome home again, sir," he said warmly, as Frank stepped from
the carriage. "We were all glad, indeed, when we heard that you
were back safe, and were coming down among us."

"I am glad enough to be back again, Norton," Frank Mallett said; as
he shook the man's hand. "We had warm work of it for a bit, but at
the end, when the excitement was over, one got pretty tired of it.

"This is George Lechmere, Norton," the Major said, as he went along
with the agent to where George was standing with the pile of
luggage. "You have heard how gallantly he behaved, and how he saved
my life at the risk of his own."

"How are you, George?" the agent said, as he shook hands with him.
"I should hardly have known you. Indeed, I am sure I should not
have done so if I had met you in the street. You seem to have grown
taller and altogether different."

