
"Of all the mean things!" muttered Pepper to himself. "I'll soon stop
that!" And he made a leap over the guard-rail of the craft. The ax was
raised for another blow, but before it could be delivered, Pepper caught
the bully by the shoulders and sent him sprawling on his back.




CHAPTER VIII

THE FOOTBALL ELEVEN


"Hi! Let go of me!" spluttered Reff Ritter, as he found himself flat on
his back, with the ax up-raised in his two hands.

"Ritter, you leave this boat alone!" exclaimed Pepper.

"Humph! so it's you, Ditmore," muttered the bully, and now he turned
over and arose.

"Going to chop the boat to pieces, I suppose," went on Pepper, "Well,
not if I can prevent it."

"I'll chop you to pieces!" roared the bully, and swung the ax so
suggestively that Pepper leaped back in alarm. "You've got no right to
interfere with me!"

"This is Jack Ruddy's sloop; you have no right to touch her."

"Aw, you shut up."

"I'll not shut up, Reff Ritter. If you make another mark on this boat
I'll have you locked up!"

"Humph! you think you've got the best of me, don't you?" sneered the
bully, but his manner showed that he was considerably disconcerted. He
had imagined that all the cadets were at supper and that no one would
see his foul actions.

"I want you to get off of this boat."

"Supposing I won't?"

"Then I'll call help, and advise Jack to have you arrested."

"Going to run the whole school, aren't you?"

"I am going to run this affair, Ritter. Now leave the boat."

"Oh, I'll leave," muttered the bully, and walking to the side, he sprang
down to the float. Then he ran to the boathouse and placed the ax
inside. "Don't you dare to mention this to anybody!" he shouted as he
reappeared. "If you do, you'll get yourself in hot water. My word is as
good as yours." And then he turned and ran towards the school building.

Pepper watched him out of sight.

"No use of reporting this to Captain Putnam," he reasoned. "Ritter
would, of course, deny everything. Wonder if he did much damage?"

Pepper made an examination. Luckily the bully had not had time to get in
his nefarious work to any extent, and the bottom of the sloop showed
only two slight ax cuts, not deep enough to do harm.

"Caught him just in time," thought Pepper, and then he sat down on the
stern seat and munched away at the sandwich and cake, washing the stuff
down with a drink from the cooler in the boathouse.

By the time he had finished, the other cadets were coming from their
supper, and soon he was joined by Jack, Dale and several others. In
private, he told the young major of what had occurred.

"The rascal!" cried Jack. "If he hurts my boat he shall pay for it!"

"Captain Putnam must have given him a good dressing down to make him so
ugly."

"Well, he deserved it."

"Say," put in Dale. "That was mean of old Crabtree to send you away from
the table."

"Never mind, I'll pay him back," answered The Imp, grimly.

Several days passed and during that time Reff Ritter kept his distance.
The bully was in a bitter mood, and even his cronies could get little
out of him.

The reason for this was twofold. He was smarting over the treatment
received at the hands of Jack and Captain Putnam and he was also
disturbed because his father had written to him, stating he could allow
him hardly any spending money for the term. He had already borrowed a
small amount from Paxton and he was wondering how he was going to pay it
back. Added to this, he had gambled with some racetrack men during the
summer, and one of those fellows now held his IOU for forty dollars.

"Dad has got to let me have money, that is all there is to it," he told
himself. "If he won't, then I'll write to mother. She'll raise it for me
somehow; she always does." Which shows how foolish an indulgent mother
can sometimes be.

In the meantime, Andy had recovered from the accident and was now around
as usual. Another hunt had been instituted for his belongings, but
without success. A report came in that a strange man had been seen on
the road just previous to the accident, and the cadets and Captain
Putnam wondered if that individual had picked up Andy's things and made
off with them.

"Maybe he was the fellow I saw," said Andy, and then he heaved a deep
sigh, thinking he would never hear of his property again.

Jack and Pepper were glad to see Bert Field again, and also to see their
old friend, Joseph Hogan. Emerald came back wearing a smile that was
sunniness itself.

"Sure, an' it does me heart good to be here once more, so it does," he
said, in his rich Irish brogue. "I traveled all over the ould sod this
summer, so I did. But Putnam Hall an' the States fer me every toime!"

"Is this your last term here, Emerald?" asked Dale.

"I think so--if I am lucky and get through. How about you?"

"I hope to graduate next June."

"And so do Jack and I," added Pepper. "But you can't always tell. I'll
be sorry to leave Putnam Hall."

"That's so; such good times as we have had here," added Jack.

As soon as the cadets were settled down at the Hall, and the excitement
over the runaway, the loss of Andy's things, and the fight between Jack
and Ritter, was at an end, the talk of the boys turned to football and
other Fall sports. As in the past, the cadets hoped to have a good
eleven and win some substantial victories.

"Wonder if we'll be allowed to play Pornell," said Jack.

"I don't know," answered Dale. "I rather think the captain is sore over
the reply he got from the head of that school, over the carryall affair,
and maybe he won't let us play them." And in this Dale was correct.
Pornell was cut out that season, but it played Putnam Hall the year
following.

Dale Blackmore was at the head of the football eleven, and, as before,
he organized a fine team. Jack, Andy, Hogan, and Bart Conners were in
their usual places.

"And I want you, too, Pepper," said Dale.

"Oh, I can go on the sub-bench," was the answer, for Pepper did not care
very much for football. "Give Fred Century and Bert Field a chance."

"I know what Pepper wants," said Andy. "He wants us to play, while he
sits in the grandstand, having a good time with the girls."

"Sure thing," answered The Imp, coolly. "Somebody has got to entertain
'em."

"They ought to be entertained by the game," came from Dale.

"Girls make me tired when they are at a football game," put in the cadet
named Brown. "I took one once, and she said she knew all about football.
After the game was half over she asked me how many runs and base hits
had been made, and what they had done with the bats!"

Reff Ritter felt extra sore when the football eleven went out for
practice. He wanted to play, but Captain Putnam would not allow it, and
the bully went off by himself, up the lake-shore, where he sat down on a
rock to smoke cigarettes and brood over his troubles. While he sat
there he took from his pocket a letter and read it over several times.

"Twenty dollars by Saturday! I don't see how I am going to raise it," he
muttered to himself. "I guess I'll have to send mother a telegram for a
remittance."

The first football game of the season was arranged to take place between
Putnam Hall and an eleven from Cedarville called the Dauntless. The
Dauntless players were made up of former college boys and some
all-around athletes, and the cadets were told that they would have a
stiff time of it trying to beat the aggregation. The game was to take
place on the grounds at Cedarville. These were roped off and an
admission fee was charged, the entire proceeds to go to a local Old
Folks' Home.

"I've got news!" cried Pepper, a few days before the game was to come
off. "Some of the Pornell students are coming to the game, and I
understand they are going to try to make trouble for our team."

"Is it the Roy Bock crowd?" questioned Jack.

"Yes."

"Then it is up to you to keep an eye on them, Pepper. We can't do it
while we are playing."

"I'll keep an eye on 'em, don't fear," was the answer.

The eleven practiced every afternoon, under the direction of Mr. Strong,
who had once been a player on a college team. Josiah Crabtree took no
interest in the sport, declaring it was a waste of valuable time.

"I've got a plan to outwit the Pornellites, if they try any funny work,"
said Pepper, the day before the game. And then he took about a dozen
cadets aside and told them what his plan was. All agreed to help him,
and did what he asked of them without delay.

The day for the game dawned clear and bright, and promptly on time the
eleven started for Cedarville in the carryall, which had just come from
the repair shop. Some of the cadets went on their bicycles, and Captain
Putnam and some of the teachers drove over in carriages.

When the cadets arrived at the grounds they found quite a crowd
assembled. Horns and banners were in evidence, and from a flagpole
floated the Stars and Stripes. On one side was a grandstand and this was
about three-quarters filled.

"I see some friends of mine," cried Pepper, and advanced to the stand.

He had caught sight of Laura Ford, and her sister, Flossie, two young
ladies who lived on the lake-shore at a place called Point View Lodge.
In the past Pepper and his chums had done the Ford sisters several
valuable services, for which Laura and Flossie were profoundly grateful.

"Oh, how do you do, Pepper?" called out Laura, on catching sight of him.

"Aren't you playing?" questioned Flossie.

"No, I'm merely an onlooker to-day," answered Pepper, and he raised his
cap and shook hands. "How have you been since I saw you last?"

"Very well, thank you," answered Laura.

"We hope Putnam Hall will win," came from her sister.

"You can't hope it any more than I do," answered Pepper, and then he
introduced several cadets to the young ladies, and all sat down to enjoy
the game.

Pepper has his eyes open for the appearance of the students from
Pornell. At first a few came in and took a stand in a corner, out of the
way. They did not belong to the Bock crowd and seemed to be content to
behave themselves.

"Maybe Roy Bock got cold feet and stayed away," said a cadet named
Melmore.

"No, here he comes!" cried Bob Grenwood. "And Sedley and four others are
with him."

Pepper looked in the direction pointed out and saw Roy Bock and his
cronies approaching. All had big tin horns and immense wooden rattles,
and their pockets bulged with apples and peanuts.

"Whoop her up, Dauntless!" yelled Roy Bock, as soon as he reached the
grandstand. "Whoop her up, and wipe up the ground with Putnam Hall!" And
then he swung his big rattle, and his cronies did likewise. Then the
Pornellites crowded into the grandstand and took seats near Pepper and
his fellow cadets and the girls. They talked in loud voices and said a
number of things that caused the faces of the girls to burn, and made
the cadets thoroughly angry.

"They ought to be put off the stand!" cried Bob, indignantly.

"And they will be put off if they keep this up," answered Pepper. "They
can cheer all they please for the Dauntless eleven, but they have got to
act like gentlemen."

As soon as the two elevens appeared, the practice commenced, and then
there was a toss-up for goals, which Dauntless won. They took the south
goal and Putnam Hall took the ball. Then came the kick-off, and the game
was on.




CHAPTER IX

THE FOOTBALL GAME


At first the playing was rather tame, but inside of a few minutes both
elevens warmed up, and from that moment the work became fast and
furious.

The Dauntless team had the advantage of weight, but the eleven had not
played together as much as had the majority of the Putnam Hall cadets,
consequently some of their combination efforts were decidedly ragged.
One move resulted in a bad fumble on the part of the left end. The ball
was captured by Jack, and he carried it forward fifteen yards before
downed.

"Oh, my, isn't it rough!" screamed Laura Ford, as the young major hit
the grass with great force, two of the Dauntless men being on top of
him.

"Oh, that's all in the game," was Pepper's comment. "But I shouldn't
want to see anybody get his ribs stove in," he added.

Putnam Hall got the pigskin to within ten yards of the Dauntless goal
line, and then came an unexpected turn of affairs. The leather was lost
by the Putnam Hall center, and carried around the right end and up the
field for thirty yards.

"Hurrah! that's the way to do it, Dauntless!"

"Keep it up!"

"Dauntless to the front!" yelled Roy Bock. "Everybody in the game!" and
then, in the midst of the excitement, he drew back with a soft apple in
his hand and threw the half-decayed fruit at Jack. It just grazed the
young major's shoulder.

Pepper was on the watch, for he had expected just such a dirty trick. He
leaped up, and reaching over, caught the Pornell student by the ear.

"Ouch!" yelled Bock. "Let go!"

"You get out of the grandstand!" cried Pepper. "If you don't I'll get a
crowd to mob you."

"See here, Ditmore----"

"Don't talk--get!" interrupted Pepper.

"Let Roy alone!" sang out Bat Sedley. "If you don't, I'll crack you
one!"

"Hello, you rascals!" came unexpectedly from nearby, and a farmer named
Baker showed himself. "You here? Jest wait till I git my paws on you!"
And he started in the direction of Roy Bock, Bat Sedley and two of their
cronies.

"Great Scott! It's that farmer!" ejaculated Roy Bock, and he started to
scramble out of the grandstand in a hurry, and after him went the
others.

But they were not quite quick enough for Darius Baker, and at the foot
of the stand the farmer caught Bock in one hand and Bat Sedley in the
other. Then he swung the two together until their heads cracked.

"Will steal my apples and pears?" he shrilled. "Will talk sassy to my
darter, eh? I'll teach you!" And then, letting go suddenly, he cuffed
Roy Bock on the ear and thumped Bat Sedley in the jaw so hard that that
student howled outright.

"Let up!"

"Please don't hit me again!"

"It was all a mistake!"

"No mistake!" bawled Darius Baker. "Git out o' here before I call the
constable an' have ye locked up!" And then Roy Bock and his cronies lost
no time in hurrying away, without so much as looking behind them.

"Guess you know 'em?" remarked Pepper, when the farmer came back into
the stand and resumed his seat.

"Guess I do!" was the snorted-out reply. "They came around to my place
yesterday, and stole my apples and pears, and talked sassy to my darter
an' the hired man. I saw 'em, but they ran, away before I could git my
hands on 'em. I vowed I take 'em down a peg when I met 'em, an' I guess
I done it," added the old farmer, with evident satisfaction.

"You did, Mr. Baker," answered Pepper. "And you've done us a service in
the bargain."

"How's thet?"

"Those fellows came here to make trouble for our eleven, the Putnam Hall
team."

"That so? Well, then, I'm mighty glad I cleared 'em out. I like to see a
game now an' then, but I want it clean--no rowdy work."

There was no time to say more, for everybody was interested in the game.
The Dauntless eleven had worked the pigskin up to within a few yards of
the Putnam Hall goal line, and now over it came.

"A touchdown for Dauntless!"

"Great work! Now make it a goal!"

The ball was brought out, and the Dauntless quarterback kicked a
beautiful goal, amid a great cheering and tooting of horns.

"Eight minutes more to play," said Dale. "Boys, let us tie the score if
nothing else."

Again the battle was on, and now Dale made a beautiful run, being aided
by some fine interference by Jack and Andy. Then Hogan got the pigskin
and worked it up to within five yards of the Dauntless goal line--and
then the whistle blew and the first half of the great game had to come
to a close.

The Putnam Hall eleven were a sober lot when they filed into their
dressing-room to be rubbed down and to talk it over.

"Well, they've only got a touchdown and goal to their credit," said
Jack, cheerfully. "That's not such a terrible lead to overcome."

"We must have more snap and ginger!" cried Dale. "Now, I want everybody
on the job from the word go."

"Try that left-end play," suggested George Strong. "It may surprise
them--and, anyway, it can do no harm."

The play he mentioned was something of a trick they had been practicing
for a week. It was rather intricate, but Dale promised to take his
advice and use it at the first opportunity.

The Dauntless eleven scented a victory, and went into the second half of
the game with renewed vigor. But Putnam Hall stood up manfully, and Andy
got the pigskin in a manner that elicited much applause. He carried it
down the gridiron for eight yards and passed it over to Jack. Then, on
the next down, Dale signaled for the trick play. Across the field came
the ball and then back to center. Here a quick turn was made that
bewildered the Dauntless eleven. On came the pigskin, and almost before
anybody knew it, Jack kicked a goal from the field.

"Hurrah! a field goal for Putnam Hall!"

"Talk about clever work, wasn't that great?"

"It sure was!"

"Never mind," came from a Dauntless supporter. "That doesn't count as
much as the goal from a touchdown."
