life for him, though he did not know it then nor till years afterward.

RALPH CONNOR: "The Man from Glengarry."




Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.

ST. JOHN, XV. 13




IAGOO, THE BOASTER


      And Iagoo, the great boaster,
    He the marvellous story-teller,
    He the friend of old Nokomis,
    Saw in all the eyes around him,
    Saw in all their looks and gestures,
    That the wedding guests assembled,
    Longed to hear his pleasant stories,
    His immeasurable falsehoods.

      Very boastful was Iagoo;
    Never heard he an adventure
    But himself had met a greater;
    Never any deed of daring
    But himself had done a bolder;
    Never any marvellous story
    But himself could tell a stranger.

      Would you listen to his boasting,
    Would you only give him credence,
    No one ever shot an arrow
    Half so far and high as he had;
    Ever caught so many fishes,
    Ever killed so many reindeer,
    Ever trapped so many beaver!

      None could run so fast as he could,
    None could dive so deep as he could,
    None could swim so far as he could;
    None had made so many journeys,
    None had seen so many wonders,
    As this wonderful Iagoo,
    As this marvellous story-teller!

      Thus his name became a by-word
    And a jest among the people;
    And whene'er a boastful hunter
    Praised his own address too highly,
    Or a warrior, home returning,
    Talked too much of his achievements,
    All his hearers cried: "Iagoo!
    Here's Iagoo come among us!"

LONGFELLOW: "Hiawatha."




THE STORY OF A FIRE


Thirteen years have passed since, but it is all to me as if it had
happened yesterday,--the clanging of the fire-bells, the hoarse shouts
of the firemen, the wild rush and terror of the streets; then the great
hush that fell upon the crowd; the sea of upturned faces with the fire
glow upon it; and up there, against the background of black smoke that
poured from roof to attic, the boy clinging to the narrow ledge, so far
up that it seemed humanly impossible that help could ever come.

But even then it was coming. Up from the street, while the crew of the
truck company were labouring with the heavy extension ladder that at its
longest stretch was many feet too short, crept four men upon long,
slender poles with cross-bars, iron-hooked at the end. Standing in one
window, they reached up and thrust the hook through the next one above,
then mounted a story higher. Again the crash of glass, and again the
dizzy ascent. Straight up the wall they crept, looking like human flies
on the ceiling, and clinging as close, never resting, reaching one
recess only to set out for the next; nearer and nearer in the race for
life, until but a single span separated the foremost from the boy. And
now the iron hook fell at his feet, and the fireman stood upon the step
with the rescued lad in his arms, just as the pent-up flames burst lurid
from the attic window, reaching with impotent fury for their prey. The
next moment they were safe upon the great ladder waiting to receive them
below.

Then such a shout went up! Men fell on each other's necks, and cried and
laughed at once. Strangers slapped one another on the back with
glistening faces, shook hands, and behaved generally like men gone
suddenly mad. Women wept in the street. The driver of a car stalled in
the crowd, who had stood through it all speechless, clutching the reins,
whipped his horses into a gallop and drove away, yelling like a
Comanche, to relieve his feelings. The boy and his rescuer were carried
across the street without anyone knowing how. Policemen forgot their
dignity and shouted with the rest. Fire, peril, terror, and loss were
alike forgotten in the one touch of nature that makes the whole world
kin.

Fireman John Binns was made captain of his crew, and the Bennett medal
was pinned on his coat on the next parade day.

JACOB A. RIIS




    Whene'er a noble deed is wrought,
    Whene'er is spoken a noble thought,
      Our hearts in glad surprise
      To higher levels rise.

LONGFELLOW




THE QUEST


        There once was a restless boy
          Who dwelt in a home by the sea,
        Where the water danced for joy,
          And the wind was glad and free;
    But he said: "Good mother, O let me go!
    For the dullest place in the world, I know,
          Is this little brown house,
          This old brown house,
          Under the apple tree.

        "I will travel east and west;
          The loveliest homes I'll see;
        And when I have found the best,
          Dear mother, I'll come for thee.
    I'll come for thee in a year and a day,
    And joyfully then we'll haste away
          From this little brown house,
          This old brown house,
          Under the apple tree."

        So he travelled here and there,
          But never content was he,
        Though he saw in lands most fair
          The costliest homes there be.
    He something missed from the sea or sky,
    Till he turned again with a wistful sigh
          To the little brown house,
          The old brown house,
          Under the apple tree.

        Then the mother saw and smiled,
          While her heart grew glad and free.
        "Hast thou chosen a home, my child?
          Ah, where shall we dwell?" quoth she.
    And he said: "Sweet mother, from east to west,
    The loveliest home, and the dearest and best,
          Is a little brown house,
          An old brown house,
          Under an apple tree."

EUDORA S. BUMSTEAD




THE JACKAL AND THE PARTRIDGE


A Jackal and a Partridge swore eternal friendship; but the Jackal was
very exacting and jealous. "You don't do half as much for me as I do for
you," he used to say, "and yet you talk a great deal of your friendship.
Now my idea of a friend is one who is able to make me laugh or cry,
give me a good meal, or save my life if need be. You couldn't do that!"

"Let us see," answered the Partridge; "follow me at a little distance,
and if I don't make you laugh soon you may eat me!"

So she flew on till she met two travellers trudging along, one behind
the other. They were both foot-sore and weary, and the first carried his
bundle on a stick over his shoulder, while the second had his shoes in
his hand.

Lightly as a feather the Partridge settled on the first traveller's
stick. He, none the wiser, trudged on; but the second traveller, seeing
the bird sitting so tamely just in front of his nose, said to himself:
"What a chance for a supper!" and immediately flung his shoes at it,
they being ready to hand. Whereupon the Partridge flew away, and the
shoes knocked off the first traveller's turban.

"What a plague do you mean?" cried he, angrily turning on his companion.
"Why did you throw your shoes at my head?"

"Brother!" replied the other, mildly, "do not be vexed. I didn't throw
them at you, but at a Partridge that was sitting on your stick."

"On my stick! Do you take me for a fool?" shouted the injured man, in a
great rage. "Don't tell me such cock-and-bull stories. First you insult
me, and then you lie like a coward; but I'll teach you manners!"

Then he fell upon his fellow-traveller without more ado, and they fought
until they could not see out of their eyes, till their noses were
bleeding, their clothes in rags, and the Jackal had nearly died of
laughing.

"Are you satisfied?" asked the Partridge of her friend.

"Well," answered the Jackal, "you have certainly made me laugh, but I
doubt if you could make me cry. It is easy enough to be a buffoon; it is
more difficult to excite the higher emotions."

"Let us see," retorted the Partridge, somewhat piqued; "there is a
huntsman with his dogs coming along the road. Just creep into that
hollow tree and watch me; if you don't weep scalding tears, you must
have no feeling in you!"

The Jackal did as he was bid, and watched the Partridge, who began
fluttering about the bushes till the dogs caught sight of her, when she
flew to the hollow tree where the Jackal was hidden. Of course the dogs
smelled him at once, and set up such a yelping and scratching that the
huntsman came up and, seeing what it was, dragged the Jackal out by the
tail. Whereupon the dogs worried him to their hearts' content, and
finally left him for dead.

By and by he opened his eyes--for he was only foxing--and saw the
Partridge sitting on a branch above him.

"Did you cry?" she asked anxiously. "Did I rouse your higher emo--"

"Be quiet, will you!" snarled the Jackal; "I'm half-dead with fear!"

So there the Jackal lay for some time, getting the better of his
bruises, and meanwhile he became hungry.

"Now is the time for friendship!" said he to the Partridge. "Get me a
good dinner, and I will acknowledge you are a true friend."

"Very well!" replied the Partridge; "only watch me, and help yourself
when the time comes."

Just then a troop of women came by, carrying their husbands' dinners to
the harvest-field.

The Partridge gave a little plaintive cry, and began fluttering along
from bush to bush as if she were wounded.

"A wounded bird!--a wounded bird!" cried the women; "we can easily catch
it!"

Whereupon they set off in pursuit, but the cunning Partridge played a
thousand tricks, till they became so excited over the chase that they
put their bundles on the ground in order to pursue it more nimbly. The
Jackal, meanwhile, seizing his opportunity, crept up, and made off with
a good dinner.

"Are you satisfied now?" asked the Partridge.

"Well," returned the Jackal, "I confess you have given me a very good
dinner; you have also made me laugh--and cry--ahem! But, after all, the
great test of friendship is beyond you--you couldn't save my life!"

"Perhaps not," acquiesced the Partridge, mournfully. "I am so small and
weak. But it grows late--we should be going home; and as it is a long
way round by the ford, let us go across the river. My friend, the
crocodile, will carry us over."

Accordingly, they set off for the river, and the crocodile kindly
consented to carry them across; so they sat on his broad back, and he
ferried them over. But just as they were in the middle of the stream the
Partridge remarked: "I believe the crocodile intends to play us a trick.
How awkward if he were to drop you into the water!"

"Awkward for you, too!" replied the Jackal, turning pale.

"Not at all! not at all! I have wings, you haven't."

On this the Jackal shivered and shook with fear, and when the crocodile,
in a grewsome growl, remarked that he was hungry and wanted a good meal,
the wretched creature hadn't a word to say.

"Pooh!" cried the Partridge, airily, "don't try tricks on us--I should
fly away, and as for my friend, the Jackal, you couldn't hurt _him_. He
is not such a fool as to take his life with him on these little
excursions; he leaves it at home locked up in the cupboard."

"Is that a fact?" asked the crocodile, surprised.

"Certainly!" retorted the Partridge. "Try to eat him if you like, but
you will only tire yourself to no purpose."

"Dear me! how very odd!" gasped the crocodile; and he was so taken aback
that he carried the Jackal safe to shore.

"Well, are you satisfied now?" asked the Partridge.

"My dear madam!" quoth the Jackal, "you have made me laugh, you have
made me cry, you have given me a good dinner, and you have saved my
life; but upon my honour I think you are too clever for a friend: so,
good-bye!"

And the Jackal never went near the Partridge again.

FLORA ANNIE STEEL: "Tales from the Punjab."




HIDE AND SEEK


    All the trees are sleeping, all the winds are still,
    All the flocks of fleecy clouds have wandered past the hill;
    Through the noonday silence, down the woods of June,
    Hark! a little hunter's voice comes running with a tune.

                "Hide and seek!
                "When I speak,
                "You must answer me:
                "Call again,
                "Merry men,
              "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

