what else, Dimple?"

"Sugar, and little bits of butter and--what else? Oh, yes, a little
sprinkling of flour. Now the top goes on, and it can go into the oven. I
wonder how long it will take to bake. It is one o'clock, and I am
beginning to get hungry.

"The oven isn't very hot," she presently pronounced. "Put some more wood
in, Bubbles. Oh, what is the matter, Florence?" as an exclamation made
her turn in her cousin's direction.

"I have burned my hand," said Florence, trying hard not to cry. "I
wanted to look at the fire, and when I lifted the lid, the steam from
the kettle came just where I put my hand. I didn't know steam could
burn so."

"It is worse than anything else," informed Dimple. "It is too bad. I'll
get something to put on it, to take the burn out."

"Kar'sene's mighty good," suggested Bubbles.

"Yes, and so is flour; and linseed oil is good; that will be the best,"
and the bottle being brought, the wounded hand was bound up and
Florence retired from action and sat on the step watching the others,
while she nursed her hurt.

"Let me see," went on Dimple, bustling about. "We have chicken, and
bread and butter, and sliced tomatoes, and milk, and the 'cobbler.' It
is doing, Florence; it is beginning to brown."

"I wish it would hurry up," Florence said. "I'm hungry, and, oh! how my
hand hurts."

"Isn't it any better?"

"A little; but it doesn't feel a bit good."

"It is too bad," said Dimple, sympathetically, coming over and putting a
floury hand on her cousin's.

"I smell the pie," she exclaimed, jumping up. "It must be burning," and
she ran to the oven.

"Is it burned?" asked Florence, anxiously.

"No, only just a weeny bit caught. I'll take it out. Doesn't it look
good?"

Florence gave an admiring assent, and they proceeded to take their meal;
but alas!--when the pie was cut a mass of sticky dough and raw apple was
disclosed to the disappointment of them all.

"We'll have to put it back and eat it after awhile," said Florence. "It
will taste just as good then."

"Yes, and we can eat cake for dessert," and the pie was again placed in
the oven.

Not long after, a rapping was heard at the side porch. "Who in the world
can that be around there!" exclaimed Dimple. "Go and see, Bubbles."

Bubbles looked out, cautiously, for it was not the usual place for any
one to make an appearance. Presently she came back with big eyes and a
somewhat scared expression. "Hit's a man, Miss Dimple," she said, in an
excited whisper, "with a gre't big haid an' long hair, an' somethin' on
his back."

Florence and Dimple looked at each other. "Let's peep and see,"
whispered the latter, as the rapping, which had ceased, began again.

They peeped timidly through the shutters. "He looks queer," said Dimple,
"maybe he is crazy."

"Oh!" cried Florence, with a stifled scream, "maybe he is an escaped
lunatic. Dimple, let's lock all the doors, and hide," and the two ran
into the kitchen, barring and locking the door, and then raced upstairs
as fast as they could go, with Bubbles close following at their heels.

Florence buried her face in the pillows and covered up her head with the
bed clothes; Bubbles crawled under the bed, then, as the rapping
continued louder than before, interspersed with calls of "Hey, there!
Hey, there!" Dimple, feeling very brave, opened the window and cried
out, "Go away!" then she shut down the window with a slam, and sprang
into the middle of the room with very red cheeks and a beating heart.

After a little time all was quiet, and the three timidly ventured
downstairs to find the pie baked to such a crisp brownness, that it
barely escaped being called black. It was set aside to cool, and after a
short parley, the children set out to reconnoitre, armed with such
weapons as they thought most useful. Bubbles carried an axe, Florence a
bottle of ammonia, which she meant to throw in the face of the intruder
"to take his breath away," she declared; and Dimple bore a long rope and
a pair of large scissors. She intended, she said, to snip at the man if
he came near her, and, when he was overpowered by Florence's ammonia,
to bind him hand and foot with the rope.

But, after a long and thorough search, no one was found about the
premises, and they all returned to the house to eat the "cobbler," which
by this time was cool.

"It doesn't taste like Sylvy's," said Dimple. "I believe I forgot to put
any salt in the crust, and where it isn't hard it is tough; there! I
didn't put any water in it, of course there is scarcely any juice. I was
going to save some for mamma, but I don't think I shall. We'll give it
away to the first person we can," she continued to Florence.

This happened to be an organ grinder, who made his appearance at the
gate. Bubbles was despatched with the message that they hadn't any
money, but there was some pie, and the organ grinder departed, whether
grateful or not, they did not learn.

"It seems to me it has been a pretty long day," said Dimple, as the
afternoon wore on. "Five o'clock. Three hours before we can possibly
expect mamma. I should think she would get dreadfully tired of
housekeeping," she continued, remembering her discouraging pie. "I
don't feel as if I wanted any supper, do you, Florence?"

"Not now," replied Florence; "but your mamma will want some."

"Oh, well, Bubbles can attend to it," decided Dimple. "I'm tired of
seeing dishes and dabs. What shall we do next, Florence?"

"We haven't cleared up the porch yet. Mr. Star is out there and all the
pieces."

"Sure enough. Well, we'll get those put away, and then we can dress. I
wonder what became of the crazy man."

"Why do you remind me of him?" said Florence, plaintively. "I had almost
forgotten, and now I shall dream of him."

"I don't believe he was crazy," said Dimple. "I suppose he had something
to sell. I thought so at the time, but I began, to get scared and
couldn't stop. Roll up Mr. Star, Florence, we may want him again. There!
I have the bag and all the rest of the things. You bring Mr. Star and
the dolls."

Just here came a "Hallo!" from around the corner of the house. The
children gave a suppressed scream which changed into a hearty laugh
when Rock appeared; and with words tumbling over each other they began
to give a breathless recital of the day's experiences which amused Rock
vastly.

"But how did you happen to be here?" the girls remembered at last to
ask. "We thought you had gone to the city."

"No, I didn't go after all. Mr. Brisk was going off in the country, and
mamma gave me my choice of places, so I thought I'd not enjoy going
shopping very much, and I decided to go with Mr. Brisk. We got back
about half an hour ago, and I came over to see if you wouldn't go back
to the house with me. I want to show you something I found."

"What is it?"

"Wait till you see."

"I'm afraid we oughtn't to leave the house," said Dimple.

"Can't you lock it up? We won't be gone long, and I'll come back and
stay with you till your mother comes. Then I can walk home with my
mother, for she'll stop here first."

"That will be very nice, but I don't believe we dare lock it up."

"Let Bubbles stay."

But Bubbles' eyes nearly popped out of her head at this suggestion; and,
finally, after many plans Rock went over to the house of the man whom
Mr. Dallas employed to take care of the garden and stable, and he
promised to stay on the place to give Bubbles countenance, till the
others should return.

"I've got a job over there, anyhow," he said, "though I mostly leaves
about this time, but I can do what I have to do as well now as in the
morning." Therefore the children felt perfectly safe in leaving Bubbles.

Rock led the way to Mr. Brisk's workhouse. "What I've to show you is in
here," he said. The girls followed him somewhat timidly, but were
reassured when Rock drew out a box of shavings where, cuddled up, they
saw a cat and three little bits of kittens.

"Oh! how cunning," cried Dimple, getting down on her knees. "You little
tootsy-wootsy, deary things. Aren't they soft? Oh! if we might have
them. There are three, just one a piece. Rock, don't you believe we
might have them?"

"We'll go and ask," said Rock, and they ran pell-mell into the house.

"What is the matter?" said Mr. Brisk, starting up lest something were
wrong.

"We are only going to ask Mrs. Brisk if we may have the kittens," they
cried, breathlessly.

Mrs. Brisk was standing in the hall, and heard their story.

"Well! Well! Well!" she said. "If old Topple hasn't another lot of
kittens. Have them? To be sure you may, and welcome, when they are big
enough to take from their mother."

The girls clapped their hands delightedly and went back to the little
blind things, who, with their tight shut eyes, were mewing and nosing
against each other.

"Now let's choose," said Rock, after they had taken them out on the
grass where it was lighter. "Two black, and one black and white. If you
girls like the black ones best I'll take the other, or if either of you
like that best, I'll take one of the black ones."

So, after much talking, Dimple chose a black one, and Florence the black
and white, while Rock expressed himself delighted with the other black
one as really what he liked the best.

"I shall name mine Jet," said he.

"And mine I'll name Onyx, and call it Nyxy for short," said Dimple.

"And mine shall be Marble," said Florence.

So that question being decided they left them, "like birds in their
nest," said Dimple, and started for home, for it was growing late.

"We couldn't carry the kittens home to-night, anyhow," said Florence;
"but I do hope we can see them often, and that I can take mine home."

She did take it home, and it grew to be a big cat; though before she
went, the children often laughed to see Rock coming in with the three
little things in a basket, bringing them over for a visit. He did this
several times, taking them back to their mother, until one day they came
to stay.

Although time dragged, eight o'clock did come at last, and the hour
brought Mrs. Dallas.

"And you are really glad to have me back again," she said, with an arm
around each little girl, "though you were so glad to have me go. And how
did the pie turn out?"

"It wasn't good," admitted Dimple, candidly; "so we gave it to an
organ-grinder."

"What charitable, generous children, to be sure," laughed Mrs. Dallas.
"By the way, Dimple, I forgot to tell you that possibly the paperhanger
might be here; he was to come one day this week to paper the upper
hall."

Dimple looked at Florence and Florence looked at Dimple. "We thought he
was a crazy man," presently said the latter, in a shamefaced way.

"Crazy! Why, what do you mean?"

"He came to the side door," explained Dimple. "Those were rolls of paper
on his back, Florence, and we got frightened and wouldn't let him in."

"You silly little geese! I see I must not leave you again."

"But everything else was all right," Florence informed her, "only I
burned my hand a little. I had almost forgotten it, Dimple."

"Then you don't want me to go away, altogether," said Mrs. Dallas.

"No indeed," said they both, in the most emphatic manner.

"You dearest, loveliest," continued Dimple; "it is too delicious to see
you again."

"And I didn't dream about the crazy man after all," said Florence, the
next morning.




CHAPTER VIII

Adrift


During this time Mr. Atkinson was not forgotten, and the two little
girls spent many a happy morning in his beautiful garden, for even the
small house which Mr. Dallas had built for Dimple, was not proof against
the attractions Mr. Atkinson's place had to offer. They were careful not
to venture beyond bounds, and kept in the walks and on the porches, but
one hot day they wandered down to where a fence marked the limits of the
place in that direction. Then came a steep bank sloping down to Big Run
which, a little further on, emptied into the river.

It was a wild, romantic spot and full of charm for the two little girls
whose fancies pictured all sorts of possible things. The hollows, in the
scraggy willows bending over the stream, might be the hiding-places of
nymphs or fairies; yonder soft sward dotted with buttercups and daisies,
might be the favorite spot for a midnight revel; among those rocks
queer little gnomes might live. Florence was especially struck with it
all. She had never been quite so near to such a picturesque spot, and
now nothing would do but that they should climb the fence and explore
further.

"There isn't a soul anywhere to be seen," said Florence, "and it will be
perfectly safe."

"Suppose we should meet a fierce dog," Dimple, a little more cautious,
suggested.

"Oh, no, we're not likely to at all. Dogs are not going to such a place
as that, at least, I don't think so. It would be perfectly fine to go
out on one of those willow trees, and hang our feet over the water."

"Suppose we should slip and fall in."

"Oh, we'll be careful; besides the branches of the trees hang so far
over the stream that we couldn't fall very far, anyhow, and it is very
shallow there. We'll only get a wetting and it's such a hot day I
shouldn't mind if we did. If we should sit there very quietly we might
see fairies."

"Do you believe there are fairies, really?"

"Why, yes,--I'm not sure. There may be, you know. Wouldn't it be funny
to see a tiny little being, in a red cloak or a spun-silver robe, come
out from the hollow of a tree and say, 'Maiden, your wish shall be
granted'?"

"What wish?"

"Any wish we happen to be making at the time. Come on, Dimple, I am just
crazy to go." And Florence put her foot on the fence and was soon over,
Dimple following.

It was not so easy as it seemed, to get out on the trees, and they
decided not to attempt it, but thought they would wander along the brink
of the stream, and in doing this they discovered all sorts of wonderful
things in what Florence called the Fairy Dell: moss-grown rocks from
which sprung tiny bell-shaped flowers; a circle of wee pink toadstools,
which indeed seemed fit for the elfin folk; a wild grapevine with a most
delightfully arranged swing on which the two girls "teetered" away in
great joy; shining pebbles, bits of rose-colored quartz, a forest of
plumy ferns, and all such like things, over which the city child
exclaimed and marveled.

At last they were obliged to cross a little bridge, for the bank became
higher and higher on that side, and a little further walking showed
them the river.

"Oh!" Florence exclaimed. "Isn't this fine? I wish we could go out
rowing. See those girls over there by that funny flat sort of boat. They
are going to get on it. Come, let us go down and watch them."

They clambered down and were soon on the brink of the river. Two or
three girls, much older than Dimple and Florence, were pulling a small
flat barge up on the sands. One of the girls recognized Dimple. "Hallo,
Eleanor," she cried. "Where did you come from? Don't you want to get on
with us?"

"Oh, do let us," whispered Florence.

"Are you going out on the river?" asked Dimple.

"No, we are only going to get on this flat boat, and sit here where we
can get the breeze, and maybe we will fish. We brought some tackle along
with us. Come, give me your hand. There, you are landed. Come, little
girl, there is plenty of room." She held out her hand to Florence, who
eagerly accepted the invitation, and was soon by her cousin's side.

"Isn't it nice?" said Dimple.

"Fine," Florence responded, heartily, as she sat down in the bottom of
the boat.

"It's rather sunny, though," Dimple remarked.

"Oh, you mustn't mind that. We're going to fish. Don't you want to try
your luck?"

Dimple looked rather disgustedly at the can of angle-worms and decided
that she would look on.

"What are you going to do, Libbie?" Dimple's acquaintance inquired of
one of the other girls.

"I'm going to try to get the boat out where it will float. It's such fun
to have it bob up and down," replied the girl addressed. She had a long
pole and was pushing the boat off from the shore. It was fastened to a
stake, so it could only career around a little, and Dimple's friend
Callie Spear assured the little girls that it was perfectly secure, and
so they gave themselves up to their enjoyment.

Both Florence and Dimple felt very proud of being invited to join this
company of older girls; and, while the latter amused themselves by
fishing, the two little ones set afloat small chips, freighted with the
daisies they had gathered, and wondered how far they could go before
they should upset.

"Wouldn't it be funny if they sailed all the way to the ocean and were
seen by the people on one of the big steamers. They would wonder how in
the world the daisy people got out so far." Florence said this as she
was watching a chip rapidly drifting down stream. Suddenly she became
aware that the shore was further away than she supposed, and she cried,
"Oh, how wide the water is! See how far it is to the shore."

The other girls looked up, startled, and to their dismay discovered that
their boat had slipped its moorings and was fast drifting down the
river, nearer and nearer to the current of midstream. They looked at
each other with scared faces, but they did not want to alarm the little
girls, and so Callie said, with a forced laugh: "Oh, that's all right.
We'll get in easily enough. Some one will see us from the shore, or a
boat will come along that can tow us in. It's rather fun to have a
little adventure." However, she eagerly scanned the shore and the
water; but no help seemed to be near, and the boat was drifting on and
on.

Dimple realized that they were moving further and further away from
home, as she saw the objects on the shore grow smaller and smaller. The
big tears began to gather in her eyes.

"Don't cry, dear," said Callie, soothingly. "We'll get home all right."

"But suppose we shouldn't. Suppose we should drift on and on down to
where the steamboats come up, and we should keep going till it got dark,
and nobody should see us, and we should get run into and drowned. Oh
dear! I want my mamma, and my papa."

Florence took alarm at this, and, putting her head in Dimple's lap,
began to cry too.

The older girls were scarcely less frightened, for they knew there was a
danger in their reaching the rapids, and in being whirled around between
the rocks, when they would be very likely to upset, even in a boat like
the one in which they were. They managed, however, to show less fear, in
their endeavor to calm the younger children.

"Why, we'll get home long before we reach the steamboats," said Emma
Bradford, cheerfully. "Haven't you seen the river in a freshet? and
don't you know how it carries all sorts of things along? haystacks, and
sheds, and even houses with people in them, I've seen, and they are
always rescued."

Libbie Jackson was looking over the side of the boat. "It is very
shallow here. We could almost walk ashore," she said.

"We are right over the old ford," said Callie. Suddenly she sprang to
her feet and began to tear off the skirt of her frock. As soon as she
was freed from it she began to wave it frantically. "I see some one on
shore," she exclaimed, excitedly. "All shout as loud as you can, girls;"
and across the water rang the shrill cry of "Help! Help! Help!"

The man riding along the shore caught sight of the flapping skirt, of
hats waving frantically, and the cry of "help" came faintly to his ears.
He stopped his horse and looked around. "Them gals is adrift," he said
to himself. "Whatever possessed 'em I don't know, but I reckon I'll have
to see if I can't stop 'em."

He rode to the water's edge and looked across. "We're right at the
ford," he remarked, as if his horse could understand what he said. "It
won't hurt you to go out," he continued. "It's a hot day, and you can
get cooled off good." And the girls in the boat were rejoiced to see the
horse headed toward them.

"Oh, how lucky that we're at the ford," said Callie, "otherwise the man
might not venture. See, Eleanor! See, Florence, he can tow us in. Haul
up that bit of rope, girls, while I put on my skirt."

The man was not long in coming alongside. "What happened ye?" he asked.
"A lot o' gals like you ain't no business gittin' into such a fix. Whar
did ye start from, anyhow? How long ye been driftin'?"

They told him how the trouble had occurred, and he replied with, "Humph!
I reckon ye'd better not try that agin. You're a matter o' five mile
from home, and the boat don't belong to ye, ye say. How do ye expect to
git back? And how are ye going to manage about the boat? Do ye know
whose it is?"

"No, but we can find out," said Callie. "What do you think would be the
best way to get it home again? Isn't it a dreadful fix to be in? Can you
suggest any way to help us?"

"I might take it up for ye to-morrow, maybe, but ye'll have to pay for
it."

"How much would you charge us?"

"Lemme see; a couple of dollars."

The girls looked at each other, and held a whispered consultation which
resulted in Callie's agreeing to the amount, each girl promising to put
in her share.

The boat was easily towed to the shore; but here it was wet and
slippery, and it required considerable agility to get ashore without
slipping in the soft mud. Every one accomplished it safely but Dimple,
whose foot slipped, and over she went, full length into the mire. A
sorry sight she was indeed, when she was picked up; plastered from head
to foot; face, hands and hair full of the soft ooze. But after she had
been scraped off, Callie concluded that it would be better to let the
sun dry her well, before attempting to get rid of the rest.

"About this job," said the man, "it's worth somethin', ain't it? It's
considerable out of my way, travelin' to the middle of the river;
besides I've got to look out for that boat, that nobody don't steal it."

"How much do you expect?" asked Callie, meekly. This was getting more
and more serious.

"A couple of dollars ain't much when ye consider there's five of ye, and
if I hadn't stopped ye, ye'd be goin' yet. My name's Bill Hart, and any
one'll tell you I'm safe. Ye needn't be afraid but what I'll bring back
the boat."

"Well, if you will come to my house, you shall have your money," said
Callie. "Do you know where Mr. Harley Spear lives?"

"Big white house, left side the main street. Yes, I know. You his gal?"

"I'm his daughter."

"All right. I reckon ye can git home now, can't ye? It's a straight road
along the river. I must be gettin' on. I'll fetch the boat back
to-morrow."

The girls saw him disappear, and stood, a most subdued little group.
Dimple felt herself to be in a very unhappy plight, and dreaded meeting
any one. How should she get home through the town without being seen?
She looked very miserable and woe-begone as she thought of all this.

"Well, girls, we'll have to be up and doing," said Callie. "We've a five
mile walk before us, and it's a pretty hot day, so we'll have to take it
slowly. You'll have plenty of time to get dried off, before we get
there, Eleanor, so don't look so unhappy, you poor little midget. Think
how dreadful it is for me who got you into this scrape. I can never
forgive myself for it."

"I'll tell you what let's do," said Libbie. "Let Eleanor take off her
frock, and we'll wash it out in the river, and dry it as we go along.
We're not likely to meet any one, and it's so hot she'll not take cold
going without it. We can hold it out between us as we walk along, so it
will dry before we get home, and it will be clean at least."

Dimple was so grateful for this suggestion that she could have hugged
Libbie; but she did not know her very well, and only expressed her
thanks very fervently. At the first opportunity the frock was washed
out, and really looked much better. "I wish I could do my stockings,
too," said Dimple, "but I couldn't go barefoot. Mamma wouldn't like me
to, although I'd like to." So this part of her dress had to remain as it
was, and the girls took up their line of march again.

"I am so thirsty I don't know what to do," said Callie. "If I don't have
a drink I'll drop by the way. I hate to think of drinking that warm
river water; besides, it isn't so easy to get it."

"There's a spring somewhere further along," said Emma Bradford. "If we
can manage to exist till we reach it, we can rest there. We shall be
half starved, too, by the time we get home."

"If we only had something to eat we could sit down by the spring till it
grew cooler, and we'd have a sort of a picnic. Oh, girls, we left all
our fishing tackle in the boat! I never once thought of it."

"Nor I."

"Nor I."

"Perhaps Bill What's-his-name will bring it back when he comes with the
boat. We've made a pretty expensive trip of it, as it is, without
losing our fishing tackle. Think what that four dollars would buy: such
a lot of ice cream and soda water," said Callie.

"Don't mention such things when we are consumed with thirst, and are so
warm," said Emma.

"We may have to pay for the use of the boat, too," said Libbie. "I
suppose we are out at least a dollar apiece, and maybe more. It will
take all my pin money for a month. No more soda water for a while,
unless some one treats me."

"I suppose we ought to be thankful to get home at all," Dimple spoke up.

"Yes, when you consider it in that light, we're let off cheaply enough,"
Callie replied. "Oh, dear, where is that spring?"

"Just beyond that turn," Emma told her. And they toiled on till they
reached the spot where the cold water bubbled out from a pebbly hollow
under an old tree.

"We must cool off before we drink," Libbie warned them. "We'll bathe our
faces and hands, and sit here for a while. We are so overheated we ought
not to drink right away."

"It's very hard not to," said Callie, "but I suppose you are right."

"I am as hungry as I am thirsty," Libbie remarked. "If we only had one
biscuit apiece, it would be something."

They had refreshed themselves with the cool spring water, and were idly
