opponent; who was, thereby, wholly unable to use his lance, while
Oswald marked the junction of gorget and helmet with several white
circles. Furious at finding himself incapable of either defending
himself, or of striking a blow, the squire threw away his lance, and
drew his sword.

Hotspur shouted, at the top of his voice:

"A breach of the rules! A breach of the rules! The combat is at an
end."

But his words were unheard, in the helmet. Making his horse wheel round
on his hind legs, Sinclair rode at Oswald with uplifted sword. The
latter again couched his spear under his arm and, touching his horse
with his spur, the animal sprung forward; and before the sword could
fall, the point of the spear caught the squire under the armpit, and
hurled him sideways from his saddle.

Hotspur and those round him ran forward. Sinclair lay without moving,
stunned by the force with which he had fallen. Oswald had already leapt
from his horse, and raised Sinclair's head, and began to unlace the
fastenings of his helmet. Hotspur's face was flushed with anger.

"Do not upbraid him, my lord, I pray you," Oswald said. "He could
scarce have avoided breaking the conditions, helpless as he felt
himself; and he could not have heard your voice, which would be lost in
his helmet. I pray you, be not angered with him."

Hotspur's face cleared.

"At your request I will not, lad," he said; "and, indeed, he has been
punished sufficiently."

By the time that the helmet was removed, one of the soldiers from the
battlements ran out from the castle, with a ewer of water. This was
dashed into the squire's face. He presently opened his eyes. A heavy
fall was thought but little of in those days; and as Sinclair was
raised to his feet, and looked round in bewilderment at those who were
standing round him, Hotspur said good temperedly:

"Well, Master Sinclair, the lad has given us all a lesson that may be
useful to us. I would scarce have believed it, if I had not seen it;
that a stout soldier, in full armour, should have been worsted by a lad
on a rough pony; but I see now that the advantage is all on the
latter's side, in a combat like this, with plenty of room to wheel his
horse.

"Why, he would have slain you a dozen times, Sinclair. Look at your
vizor. That white mark is equal on both sides of the slit, and had
there been a spear head on the shaft, it would have pierced you to the
brain. Every joint of your armour, behind, is whitened; and that
thrust, that brought you from your horse, would have spitted you
through and through.

"Now, let there be no ill feeling over this. It is an experiment, and a
useful one; and had I, myself, been in your place, I do not know that I
could have done aught more than you did."

Sinclair was hot tempered, but of a generous disposition, and he held
out his hand to Oswald, frankly.

"It was a fair fight," he said, "and you worsted me, altogether. No one
bears malice for a fair fall, in a joust."

"The conditions were not at all even," Oswald said. "On a pony like
mine, unless you had caught me in full career, it was impossible that
the matter could have turned out otherwise."

"I often wondered," Hotspur said, as they walked towards the gate,
"that our chivalry should have been so often worsted by the rough
Scottish troopers; but now I understand it. The Scotch always choose
broken ground, and always scatter before we get near them; and,
circling round, fall upon our chivalry when their weight and array are
of no use to them. Happily, such a misadventure has never happened to
myself; but it might well do so. The Scotch, too, have no regard for
the laws of chivalry; and once behind will spear the horse, as indeed
happened to me, at Otterburn. 'Tis a lesson in war one may well take to
heart; and when I next fight the Scots, I will order that on no
account, whatever, are the mounted men to break their ranks; but,
whatever happens, are to move in a solid body, in which case they could
defy any attacks upon them by light-armed horse, however numerous."

At the gate of the castle, Alwyn Forster met them.

"You have given me a more useful addition to my following than I dreamt
of, Alwyn," Hotspur said. "Did you see the conflict?"

"I watched it from the wall, Sir Henry. I felt sure how the matter
would end. The lad is quick and sharp at border exercises. I have seen
him work with his father's troopers. There were not many of them who
could hold their own against him, and in fighting in their own way, I
would back the moss troopers against the best horsemen in Europe. They
are always accustomed to fight each man for himself, and though a score
of men-at-arms would ride through a hundred of them, if they met the
charge; in single combat their activity, and the nimbleness of their
horses, would render them more than a match for a fully-caparisoned
knight."

"So it seems," Hotspur said; "and yet, if Sinclair had but known that
the lad was about to swerve in his course, which indeed he ought to
have known--for it would have been madness to meet his charge--he too
should have changed his course to his left, when a couple of lengths
away; for he might be sure that the lad would turn that way, so as to
get on his left hand, and in that case he would have ridden over him
like a thunderbolt."

"Yes, Sir Henry, but Oswald would have had his eye on knee and bridle;
and the moment the horse changed his direction, he would have been
round the other way, like an arrow from a bow; and would have planted
himself, as he did, in the squire's rear."

"Perhaps so," Hotspur said thoughtfully. "At any rate, Alwyn, the boy
has given us all a lesson, and you have done me good service, by
presenting him to me."



Chapter 5: A Mission.


For the next three or four months, Oswald was but little at the castle;
Percy utilizing his services, in the manner most agreeable to him, by
sending him on errands to various knights and gentlemen, in different
parts of Northumberland, and to the fortified places held by the
English across the Border. A fortnight after his contest with Sinclair,
Sir Henry formally appointed him one of his esquires.

"You are young," he said, "for such a post; but as you have shown that
you are well able to take care of yourself in arms, and as I perceive
you to be shrewd and worthy of confidence, your age matters but little.
As my messenger, you will be more useful travelling as one of my
esquires, than as one without settled rank; and I can not only send
written communications by you, but can charge you to speak fully in my
name, and with my authority."

Oswald was not slow in finding out the advantages that the position
gave him. On the first errands on which he had been sent, he had been
treated as but an ordinary messenger, had been placed at dinner below
the salt, and herded with the men-at-arms. As an esquire of Lord Percy,
he was treated with all courtesy, was introduced to the ladies of the
family, sat at the high table, and was regarded as being in the
confidence of his lord. His youth excited some little surprise, but
acted in his favour, because it was evident that Percy would not have
nominated him as one of his esquires, had he not shown particular
merit. In his journeys, he often passed near Yardhope, where the
rebuilding of the wall and keep was being pushed on with much vigour;
the inhabitants of the villages in the valley lending their assistance
to restore the fortalice, which they regarded as a place of refuge, in
case of sudden invasion by the Scots. His parents were both greatly
pleased at his promotion, especially his mother, who had always been
anxious that he should not settle down to the adventurous, and
dangerous, life led by his father.

"By our Lady," John Forster said, "though it be but six months since
you first left us, you have changed rarely. I speak not of your fine
garments, but you have grown and widened out, and are fast springing
from a boy into a man; and it is no small thing that Percy should have
thought so well of you as to make you one of his esquires, already."

"It was from no merit of mine, Father, but because he thought that, as
his messenger, I should be able to speak in his name with more
authority than had I been merely the bearer of a letter from him."

"'Tis not only that," his father replied. "I received a letter but two
days since from my brother Alwyn, written by the hand of a monk of his
acquaintance, telling me that Lord Percy was mightily pleased with you;
not only because you had set yourself to read and write, but from the
way in which you had defeated one of his esquires in a bout at arms.
Alwyn said that he doubted not that you would win knightly spurs, as
soon as you came to full manhood. So it is clear that merit had
something to do with your advancement, though this may be also due, to
some extent, to the cause you assign for it. The monk who wrote the
letter added, on his own account, that he had been your preceptor; and
that, though he had often rated you soundly, you had made wonderful
progress."

"The monk is a good teacher," Oswald laughed; "but he would have made a
better man-at-arms than he will ever make a monk. I believe it pleased
him more that I worsted Sinclair--which indeed was a small thing to do,
seeing that he had no idea of fighting, save of charging straight at a
foe--than at the progress I made at my books. He commands the
contingent that the monastery sends, when Percy takes the field to
repel an invasion; and, could he have his own will, would gladly
exchange a monk's robes for the harness of a man-at-arms. I would wish
for no stouter companion in the fray."

The speed with which he had performed his journeys, and the
intelligence which he showed in carrying out his missions and reporting
on their issue, earned for the lad an increasing amount of liking and
confidence, on the part of his lord. It was not only that he delivered
the replies to Hotspur's messages accurately; but his remarks, upon the
personal manner and bearing of those to whom he was sent, were of still
greater value to Percy. Naturally, all had promised to have their
contingent of fighting men ready, in case of serious invasion by the
Scots; but Oswald was able to gather, from their manner, whether the
promises would surely be fulfilled; or whether, in case of trouble, the
knights were more likely to keep their array for the defence of their
own castles than to join Percy in any general movement.

One day, when Oswald had been engaged six months at this work, which
had taken him several times into Cumberland and Westmoreland, as well
as the north, Lord Percy summoned him to his private apartment.

"Hitherto you have done well, Oswald, and I feel now that I can trust
you with a mission of far higher importance than those you have
hitherto performed. 'Tis not without its dangers, but I know that you
will like it none the less for that reason. You are young, indeed, for
business of such importance; but it seems to me that, of those around
me, you would be best fitted to carry it out. Your manner of speech has
changed much, since you came here; but doubtless you can fall at will
into the border dialect, which differs little from that on the other
side; and you can pass, well enough, as coming from Jedburgh, or any
other place across the border.

"All the world knows, lad, that George, Earl of March and Dunbar, was
mightily offended at Rothesay breaking off the match with his daughter,
and marrying the child of his rival Douglas; but now I am going to tell
you what the world does not know, and which is a secret that would cost
many a life, were it to be blabbed abroad, and which I should not tell
you, had I not a perfect confidence in your discretion. The anger of
March--as he is mostly called on this side of the border, while in
Scotland they more often call him Earl of Dunbar--goes beyond mere
displeasure with the Douglas, and sullen resentment against Rothesay.
He has sent a confidential messenger to me, intimating that he is ready
to acknowledge our king as his sovereign, and place himself and his
forces at his disposal.

"I see you are surprised, as is indeed but natural; but the Marches
have ever been rather for England than for Scotland, although they have
never gone so far as to throw off their allegiance to the Scottish
throne. It is not for us to consider whether March is acting
treacherously, to James of Scotland; but whether he is acting in good
faith, towards us.

"It was easy for him to send a messenger to me, since Scotland trades
with England, and a ship bound for London might well touch at one of
our ports on the way down; but the presence of an Englishman, at
Dunbar, would not be so readily explained. His messenger especially
enjoined on me not to send any communication in writing, even by the
most trustworthy hand; since an accident might precipitate matters, and
drive him to take up arms, before we were in a position to give him
aid. Therefore, in the first place, I wish you to journey to Dunbar, to
see the earl, and deliver to him the message I shall give you, and
endeavour to inform yourself how far he is to be trusted. Say what he
will, I can scarce bring myself to believe that he will really throw
off his allegiance to Scotland; save in the event of a great English
army marching north, when doubtless he would do what most Scotch nobles
have always done, namely, hasten to give in his submission, and make
the best terms he can, for himself. 'Tis a business which I like not,
although it is my duty to accept a proposal that, if made in good
faith, would be of vast value to the king.

"You must, after seeing the earl, return here with all speed, to bear
me any message March may give you, and to report your impressions as to
his sincerity, and good faith. 'Tis a month since I received his
message. Since then, I have communicated with the king, and have
received his authority to arrange terms with March, to guarantee him in
the possession of his lordships, to hand over to him certain tracts of
the Douglas country which he bargained for, and to assure him of our
support. But he must be told that the king urges him to delay, at
present, from taking any open steps; as, in the first place, he is
bound by the truce just arranged, for the next two years; and in the
second because, having no just cause of quarrel with Scotland, and
being at present but newly seated on the throne, he would have
difficulty in raising an army for the invasion of that country. The
king is ready to engage himself not to renew the truce, and to collect
an army, in readiness to act in concert with him, as soon as it is
terminated.

"The earl has sent, by his messenger, a ring; which, on being presented
at Dunbar, will gain for the person who carries it immediate access to
him; and I shall also give you my signet, in token that you are come
from me. You will carry, also, a slip of paper that can be easily
concealed, saying that you have my full authority to speak in my name.
You yourself can explain to him that I have selected you for the
mission because of your knowledge of border speech, and because a youth
of your age can pass unobserved, where a man might excite attention and
remark, and possibly be detained, until he could render a satisfactory
account of himself.

"Here are the conditions, set down upon paper. Take it, and commit them
to heart, and then tear the paper into shreds, and burn them. As far as
Roxburgh you can, of course, ride as my squire; but beyond, you must
travel in disguise. This you had better procure here, and take with
you; for although the Governor of Roxburgh is a trusty knight, it were
best that no soul should know that you go on a mission to March; and I
shall simply give you a letter to him, stating that you are engaged in
a venture in my service, and that your horse and armour are to be kept
for you, until your return."

Thanking Lord Percy for the honour done him, in selecting him for the
mission, and promising him to carry it out, to the best of his power,
Oswald retired and, making his way up to an inner room, set about
learning the contents of the paper given him, which was, indeed, a copy
of the royal letter to Percy. When he had thoroughly mastered all the
details, and could repeat every word, he followed Sir Henry's
instructions, tore the letter up, and carefully burned every fragment.
Then he went out into the town, and bought garments suited for
travelling unnoticed in Scotland, the dress being almost identical on
both sides of the border, save for the lowland Scotch bonnet.

On his return, he found that Lord Percy had sent for him during his
absence, and he at once went to his apartments.

"I have been thinking over this matter further," Sir Henry said. "The
abbot came in, just as you left me; and, among other things, he
mentioned that friar Roger had again fallen into disgrace, having gone
so far as to strike the sub-prior on the cheek, almost breaking the jaw
of that worthy man; and that, finding discipline and punishment of no
avail with him, he was about to expel him, in disgrace, from the
community. He said that he had only retained him so long on account of
my goodwill for the fellow, and from the fact that he would, as I had
often urged, be most valuable as leader of the abbot's forces, in case
of troubles with the Scots, but that his last offence has passed all
bearing.

"For the time I could say nothing, for discipline must be maintained,
in a monastery as well as in the castle; but after the abbot had left
me, and I was walking up and down in vexation over the affair--for I
like the rascal, in spite of his ways, and there is no one else who
could so well lead the contingent of the monastery--a thought occurred
to me. I like not your going altogether alone, for the times are
lawless, and you might meet trouble on the road; and yet I did not see
whom I could send with you. Now it seems to me that this stout knave
would make an excellent companion for you.

"In the first place, you like him, and he likes you; secondly, a monk
travelling north on a mission, say from the abbot to the prior of a
monastery near Dunbar, could pass anywhere unheeded; and in the third
place, although as a peaceful man he could carry no military arms, he
might yet take with him a staff, with which I warrant me he would be a
match for two or three ordinary men; and lastly, I may be able to
convince the abbot that he can thus get rid of him from the monastery,
for some time, and avoid the scandals he occasions, and yet hold him
available on his return for military service.

"What say you, lad?"

"I should like it much, Sir Henry. I could wish for no stouter
companion; and although he may be quarrelsome with his fellows, it is,
methinks, solely because the discipline of the monastery frets him, and
he longs for a more active life; but I believe that he could be fully
trusted to behave himself discreetly, were he engaged in outdoor work,
and there can be no doubt that he is a stout man-at-arms, in all ways."

"I should not trust him, in any way, with the object of your mission.
If I obtain the abbot's consent, I shall simply send for him, rate him
soundly for his conduct, but telling him I make all allowances for his
natural unfitness for his vocation; and that I have, as a matter of
grace, obtained from the abbot permission to use his services for a
while, and to suspend his sentence upon him, until it be seen how he
comports himself; and, with that view, I am about to send him as your
companion, on a commission with which I have intrusted you, to the town
of Dunbar. I shall hint that, if he behaves to my satisfaction, I may
persuade the abbot to allow him to remain in my service, until the time
comes when he may be useful to the convent for military work; he still
undertaking to drill the lay brothers, and keep the abbot's contingent
in good order; and that, when the troubles are at an end, I will obtain
for him full absolution from his vows, so that he may leave the
monastery without the disgrace of being expelled, and may then take
service with me, or with another, as a man-at-arms.

"I wish you to be frank with me. If you would rather go alone, matters
shall remain as they are."

"I would much rather that he went with me, my lord. From the many
conversations that I have had with him, I am sure that he is shrewd and
clever, and that, once beyond the walls of the monastery and free to
use his weapon, he would be full of resource. There is doubtless much
lawlessness on both sides of the border, and although I should seem but
little worth robbing, two travel more pleasantly than one; and the monk
has taken such pains with me, and has been so kind, that there is no
one with whom I would travel, with greater pleasure."

"Then I will go across to the monastery, at once, and see the abbot;
and I doubt not that he will grant my request, for, much and often as
brother Roger has given him cause for anger, I know that he has a sort
of kindness for him, and will gladly avoid the necessity for punishing
and disgracing him. If all is arranged, the monk shall come over here,
and see you."

An hour later, Brother Roger came in to the captain's quarters.

"So you have been in trouble again, Brother Roger," Alwyn Forster said
with a laugh, as he held out his hand to him.

"That have I, and an hour ago I was lying in a prison cell, cursing my
hot temper; and with, as it seemed, the certainty of being publicly
unfrocked, and turned out like a mangy dog from a pack. It was not,
mind you, that the thought of being unfrocked was altogether
disagreeable; for I own that I am grievously ill fitted for my
vocation, and that fasts and vigils are altogether hateful to me; but
it would not be a pleasant thing to go out into the world as one who
had been kicked out, and though I might get employment as a
man-at-arms, I could never hope for any promotion, however well I might
behave. However, half an hour ago the cell door was opened, and I was
taken before the abbot, whom I found closeted with Hotspur.

"The latter rated me soundly, but said that, for the sake of Otterburn,
he had spoken for me to the abbot; and that as he would, for the
present, be able to make use of me in work that would be more to my
liking, the abbot had consented to reconsider his decision, and would
lend me to him for a time, in hopes that my good conduct would, in the
end, induce him to overlook my offences; and that, in that case, he
might even be induced to take steps, of a less painful description than
public disgrace, for freeing me of my gown.

"I naturally replied that I was grateful for his lordship's
intercession; and that, outside monkish offices, there was nothing I
would not do to merit his kindness. He told me that I was to report
myself to your nephew, who would inform me of the nature of the service
upon which I was, at first, to be employed."

"It is to undertake a journey with me," Oswald said. "I am going on a
mission for our lord, to Dunbar. The object of my mission is one that
concerns me only, but it is one of some importance; and as the roads
are lonely, since March and Douglas quarrelled, and order is but badly
kept on the other side of the border, he thought that I should be all
the better for a companion. Assuredly, I could wish for none better
than yourself, for in the first place you have proved a true friend to
me; in the second, you have so much knowledge, that we shall not lack
subjects for conversation upon the journey; and lastly, should I get
into any trouble, I could reckon upon you as a match for two or three
border robbers."

"Nothing could be more to my taste," the monk said joyfully. "I did not
feel quite sure, before, whether I was glad or sorry that my expulsion
was put off, for I always thought that it would come to that some day;
but now that I learn for what service Hotspur intends me, I feel as if
I could shout for joy.

"Get me a flagon of beer, good Alwyn. I have drunk but water for the
last twenty-four hours, and was in too great haste, to learn what was
before me, even to pay a visit to brother Anselm, the cellarer, who is
a stanch friend of mine.

"And do I go as a man-at-arms, Master Oswald? For, as your mission is
clearly of a private character, disguise may be needful."

"No, Roger, you will go in your own capacity, as a monk, journeying on
a mission from the abbot to the head of some religious community, near
Dunbar. I doubt not that Lord Percy will obtain a letter from the
abbot, and though it may be that there will be no need to deliver it,
still it may help us on the way. As you are going with me, I shall
attire myself as a young lay servitor of the convent."

"I would that it had been otherwise," the monk said, with a sigh. "I
should have travelled far more lightly, in the heaviest mail harness,
than in this monk's robe. Besides, how can I carry arms, for use in
case of necessity?"

"You can carry a staff," Oswald said, laughing; "and being so big a
man, you will assuredly require a long and heavy one; and, even if it
is heavily shod with iron, no one need object."

"That is not so bad, Master Oswald. A seven-foot staff, of the
thickness of my wrist; with an iron shoe, weighing a pound or two, is a
carnal weapon not to be despised. As you doubtless know, our bishops,
when they ride in the field, always carry a mace instead of a sword, so
that they may not shed blood; though I say not that the cracking of a
man's skull is to be accomplished, without some loss thereof. However,
if a bishop may lawfully crack a man's head, as an eggshell, I see not
that blame can attach to me, a humble and most unworthy son of the
church, if some slight harm should come to any man, from the use of so
peaceful an instrument as a staff. And how about yourself, young
