you with it, but undertook to cook it for you?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. West's only comment on this affirmation was a deep sigh.

Further examination failed to make Cadbury contradict himself; but to
certain enquiries he politely declined to furnish an answer.

"Was any boy with you at the time who can bear witness to your story?

"Will you give me this woman's address, that I may send for her?

"How did you manage to get the chicken after it was cooked?"

Such questions as these drew forth nothing.

At length Mr. West, without expressing any opinion, passed on to the
subject of the cracked window, but he could not persuade any of
Hallett's room to own to the accident. He threatened, he even
entreated,--in vain. The clock ticked on; it was a quarter past nine,
and everyone was very tired of standing, when the enquiry was brought to
an end, and sentence pronounced.

Green and another boy named Buckland were complimented on having "wisely
and most properly" kept themselves and their respective rooms entirely
outside the affair. Cadbury, on his own confession--"an extraordinary,
and, I am bound to say, improbable tale"--was to suffer first and worst,
and had the doubtful distinction of accompanying Mr. West there and then
to his study. Next, the inmates of Hallett's and Trevelyan's rooms were
doomed to forego supper for three days, Hallett's room being sentenced
in addition to pay for the mending of the cracked pane. Lastly, and this
was the part of the sentence that roused the whole school, all--boarders
and day-boys alike--were to forfeit the next half-holiday.

The day-boys looked so exceedingly blank at the news that Mr. West added
that he included them because, "as long as I can obtain no full
confession, I am compelled to regard you, with all your opportunities
and freedom, as being as much under suspicion as the rest". He wound up
by observing that no doubt it was "the old, hard case of the many
suffering for the few", but this did not afford much consolation to his
aggrieved pupils.

Of course there was nothing to be said at the time, but as soon as they
were alone they fell into clusters, and gave vent to their opinions by
storming at one another.

"Abominable!"

"Beastly unfair!"

"The meanest thing I ever heard!"

These were the kind of expressions that floated about the room.

But one small group, of which Hallett was the principal member, instead
of reviling the head-master, was expending its wrath upon a fellow-boy.

"The cowardly young toad! Had to do with it, you say? I should think he
had, indeed! A good deal more than we've any idea of."

"Well, we know he did the window."

"We do, and he shall have the pleasure of paying for that. He shall, if
it empties his cash-box for a year following. Those members of the room
who yearn to subscribe may do so."

"He was on the outlook for the chicken, you remember. Of course he must
have known all about it. Cadbury can confirm that."

"_Can_, but you don't know Cadbury if you think he will. What I say is,
ask the young sneak himself. Put it to him straight, and let's see that
we get the truth. Why, we should never have lost our half if he had
owned up with Cadbury."

"And it's so jolly rough on Cadbury too! Why should one be licked and
not the other?"

"Oh, we'll see to the other if necessary. But let's hear what he says
for himself. By the way, where is he?"

Where indeed? A careful search revealed the hapless Grey huddled up in
the book-room, terrified and miserable.

"Here he is! Hoping to be taken for the _Treasury of Knowledge_," cried
his discoverer, and straightway dragged him into the light. There was a
rush to the book-room.

Grey was put to the question, failed to clear himself, found guilty--and
licked.

Jack Brady was the centre of another group, which seemed inclined to be
angry with him.

"Brady's no business to have his supper stopped," said Trevelyan. "He
never touched a morsel of that wretched fowl."

"He ought to have told West so."

"Such nonsense!" exclaimed Jack. "I could have eaten some if I'd wanted
to. Now, Toppin's case is different. He wasn't allowed to have any. I
vote we sign a petition in favour of him. It will really be hard cheese
if he's made to suffer."

"Toppin, here!"

The boy was chanting over his spelling, but he hopped up promptly at his
elder brother's call.

"They say they are going to get up a petition to have you let off the
sentence for our room, because you didn't eat any chicken."

"Oh, I'd hate to be let off!" exclaimed Toppin. "I know it's because I'm
little, and I want to be treated as if I was big like the rest. I'd
heaps rather! 'Sides, I would have eaten some chicken if you'd have let
me, so it's same as if I had done, isn't it?"

"You hear, Brady?" said Trevelyan with a laugh. "A nice pair of lawyers
you'd make! Two exactly contrary arguments are used to persuade us of
the very same fact."

"Well, it comes to this, that we want all to share and share alike.
Isn't that it, Top?"

Jack tweaked the defiant tuft as he put the question, and Toppin laughed
up at him and nodded.

The most unfortunate effect of the whole incident was the bitterness
which it revived in the day-scholars. It had almost seemed as if time
was breaking down the wall of enmity which was so strong at the
beginning. But today's work strengthened it still further. The day-boys
had congregated together, and were speaking their minds in tones that
were the more seriously angry because they were subdued.

"This is what they wanted, to bring us into trouble; and a lot they care
that they're in the same boat!" The theory was Bacon's, and he announced
it with confidence.

"It's the spirit of the thing one kicks at--the spite, the injustice!
Not the loss of the half!" declaimed Mason with warmth.

"Let's pay 'em out!" said Simmons.

"How, Lew?" Hughes put the question, but all waited eagerly for the
answer.

Simmons might be small, but he was brimful of bright ideas.

"Fight," he replied. "We're much fewer, but it would be mostly a matter
of siege and stratagem, and if we planned it out, I bet we could give
them a wipe-down."

"I mayn't fight," said Frere sadly. "They won't allow me to."

"And I'm awfully afraid I can't," added Hughes.

"What's more, you sha'n't, Ethel!" said Simmons, who was amusingly
careful of his friend's health. "There'll be lots of quiet work for you
and Frere--scouting and so forth."

"I'm nuts on fighting," put in Armitage.

"As for me, I'm spoiling for the fray," laughed Mason, exhibiting the
muscle of his arm with great pride.

"Oh, well, it will teach them to respect us anyway. And that will be
something gained," said Simmons. "Mason, will you captain us?"

"Not much! No, I'll do my duty as a lieutenant, but I am no commander.
Nor are you. You're too little."

"Napoleon--Nelson!" muttered Simmons. He would have liked the offer of
the post, and his size was a sore point with him.

"Jack Brady must be captain," said Bacon firmly, and all agreed with
him.

"However could we have forgotten him?" exclaimed Hughes.

"He's the right man, if he'll consent," remarked Mason. "But I wish I
felt sure about that."

[Illustration]

"Well, I see at the present moment he's hobnobbing with the enemy," said
Hughes doubtfully.

"Oh, but he's really one of us, he has been all along," cried Simmons.
"Here, Brady, you're wanted."

"At your service," said Jack merrily, and, breaking off his conversation
with Trevelyan and Vickers, he joined the group of day-boys.

"Brady, have you heard that they've dragged us into this row? That our
half's stopped along with the boarders'? Though none of us ever saw or
tasted so much as a drum-stick!"

"None of you? Ever?" put in Jack. "That's a big order, Piggy-wig."

"You know what I mean," rejoined Bacon. "They might have had a swan or a
peacock for all we knew about it."

"But, my dear fellow, it's West you must blame. No one mentioned you."

"No, but not one of them had the honesty to stand out and clear us--to
assure him we'd nothing to do with it," said Mason. "Instead of that
they are careful to turn it into a mystery, on purpose that we may all
be suspected."

"Well, well, it's only just a single half that's lost. It'll soon be
over and forgotten."

"Will it?" cried Simmons indignantly. "I fancy it will be remembered
longer than you think by some. We mean to pay them in full for their
mean spite. We're going to unite and fight."

"Oh, challenge them to a cricket match instead! I'll play for you.
Think how much more sportive that will be! Not to say, sensible."

"Come, Brady, we're not babies. We mean to make them sorry by force."

"Take care you're not made sorry by force, Lucy!"

"Oh, never fear! The masters won't know anything at all about it if we
can help it. We shall pick our opportunity. But look here, Brady, you've
got to captain us!"

"Bothered if I do!" said Jack.

"Very well, don't! Go over to the boarders instead, as you want to, and
repeat everything we've told you." Bacon spoke angrily.

"Piggy-wig, don't be a fool! If you want me to quarrel either with your
set or with the other chaps, I say I won't, and that's flat! You must
take me as you find me, and if you're all bent on fighting and making
geese of yourselves, I shall just stay as I am--once for all--Jack of
Both Sides."




CHAPTER VI

THE MARCH HARE'S REVENGE


Cling, clang--creak! Cling, clang--creak! So the discordant bell sounded
forth in the playground, the interval between the strokes being filled
by a harsh, rusty squeak that set one's teeth on edge. The message it
bore to the boys was, "Come in--quick! Come in--quick!" For the time was
ten minutes to nine, and the day that following the incident which was
already known as the Chicken Row.

The monitors this week were Brady, Bacon, and Armitage, and they had
already gone in to their duties. The old bell always went on ringing for
two minutes, and the boys were in the habit of waiting until it was on
the point of ceasing, when they obeyed it with a rush.

But on this particular morning the day-scholars seemed, for some reason
best known to themselves, one and all consumed with zeal for their
studies. At the first preparatory creak they made a simultaneous dash
for the entrance, which caused much mirth amongst the boarders.

Cadbury waved his arm in their direction, and turned up his eyes with an
air of mock tragedy, while he spouted with rolling "r's":

    "How fair a sight it is to see
    Youth lay aside its giddy glee,
    Athirst for learning's boundless sea!
    How different from you and me!"

"My dear boys," said Vickers, with pretended solemnity, "I require
obedience in you, but I desire something more--something which you can
give, but I cannot command. That something is cheerful obedience--ready
obedience--obedience that hurries gladly at the call of duty. And now
that you see a pattern of such obedience, you might do worse than copy
it."

His imitation of Mr. West's emphatic voice and rather studied manner was
so true to life that it was greeted with a roar of laughter, and for
once Vickers had the gratification of seeing his wit appreciated. The
very phrase, "you might do worse", was a favourite with the head-master,
and one which the boys had long ago selected for mimicry.

But now there came the faint, irregular stroke that foretold the
stopping of the bell, and the boys moved quickly towards the entrance,
and began to jostle one another in their haste. On reaching the door,
however, much fumbling and kicking began.

"Hi, you in front there! Look sharp and go in! We're waiting!" cried
Hallett in a voice of angry authority, and pushing commenced in the
rear.

"It's no good pushing; it's stuck!" was holloaed back, and the kicking
and banging increased in vigour.

"What nonsense! Let me come! It must be opened! Won't Pepper wire into
us in a minute!"

Green elbowed his way to the front, and turned the handle violently.
Only once, and then he faced round with the exclamation, "You fools!
It's locked!"

At which news much breath and a little time were wasted in furious
threats towards those by whom they had been tricked.

"Won't they pay for this!"

"West shall hear if they don't let us in sharp."

"I'll knock their heads together when I do get in!"

"The impudent beggars! We'll give them such a lesson!"

But within all was glee and triumph. Simmons and Bacon fairly danced
with malicious satisfaction, whilst Armitage and Mason chuckled grimly.

