could see you, and that would be almost as good."

"Almost," echoed Uncle Bob.

"But you are coming to New York to see me some time, Jean dear," the
girl said with her eyes far on the horizon. "You know your uncle has
promised that when you go to Pittsburgh both you and Giusippe are to
stop and visit me for a few days."

"Yes, I have not forgotten; it will be lovely, too," replied Jean.
"Still that is not like having you live where you can dress dolls all
the time. Why don't you move to Boston? I am sure you would like it. We
have the loveliest squirrels on the Common!"

Everybody laughed.

"I have been trying to tell Miss Cartright what a very nice place
Boston is to live in," added Mr. Cabot softly.

"Well, we all will keep on telling her, and then maybe she'll be
convinced," Jean declared.

So they parted for the night.

With the morning came the bustle and confusion of landing. Much of
Uncle Bob's time was taken up with the inspection of trunks, and with
helping Giusippe sign papers and answer the questions necessary for his
admission to the United States. Then came the parting. They bade a
hurried good-bye to Miss Cartright, whom Uncle Bob was to put aboard
the New York train, and into a cab bundled Hannah, Giusippe, and Jean,
in which equipage, almost smothered in luggage, they were rolled off to
Beacon Hill.

Nothing could exceed Giusippe's interest in these first glimpses of the
new country to which he had come. For the next few weeks he went about
as if in a trance, struggling to adjust himself to life in an American
city. How different it was from his beloved Venice! How sharp the
September days with their early frost! How he missed the golden warmth
of the sunny Adriatic and the familiar sights of home! During his
journey through France and England the constant change of travel had
carried with it sufficient excitement to keep him from being homesick;
but now that he was settled for a time in Boston he got his first taste
of what life in the United States was to be like. Not that he was
disappointed; it was only that he felt such a stranger to all about
him. The automobiles, subways, elevated roads, all confused his brain,
and the dusty streets made his throat smart with dryness.

Daily, however, he became more and more accustomed to his surroundings,
and when at last he ventured out alone and discovered that he could
find his way back again his courage rose. Then he began going on
errands for Hannah, and was proud and glad to be of use. He accompanied
Uncle Bob to his office and arrived home alone in safety. Gradually the
strangeness of his new home wore away. Every novel sight he beheld,
every custom which was surprising to him, everything that he did not
understand he asked a score of questions about. It was _why_, _why_,
_why_, from morning until night. His questions, fortunately, were
intelligent ones, and as he remembered with accuracy the answers given
him and applied the knowledge thus gained to future conditions he made
amazing headway in becoming Americanized. He got books and read them;
he visited the churches, Library, and Art Museum. And when he saw how
much of its beauty the New World had borrowed from the Old he no longer
felt cut off from his Italian home.

Uncle Bob, in the meantime, had been forced to plunge so deeply into
business that he had had little opportunity to aid his protege in these
explorations. But one Saturday noon he came home and announced that he
was to treat himself to a half holiday.

"I am not going back to the office to-day," he declared. "Instead I
intend to carry off you two young persons and show you something very
beautiful, the like of which you will see nowhere else in all the
world."

"What is it?" cried Jean and Giusippe.

"Oh, I'm not telling. Just you be ready directly after luncheon to go
with me to Cambridge."

"Cambridge! Oh, I know. It is the University, Mr. Cabot. It is
Harvard!" exclaimed Giusippe, very proud of his knowledge.

"Not quite," Mr. Cabot said, shaking his head, "although, being a
Harvard man, I naturally feel that the equal of my Alma Mater cannot be
found elsewhere. But you are on the right track. It is something which
is out at Harvard. Guess again."

"I don't know," confessed Giusippe.

"Well, you may be excused because you have not been in this country
long enough to be acquainted with all its marvels. But Jean should
know. Where are you, young lady? You at least should be able to tell
what treasures America possesses."

"I am afraid I can't."

"Then we must excuse you also; you are so young. I see plainly that we
must appeal to Hannah. She who is ever extolling Boston can of course
tell us what it is that Harvard University possesses which is
unsurpassed in any other part of the world."

Hannah looked chagrined.

"You do not know?" went on Uncle Bob teasingly. "Oh, for shame! And you
such an ardent Bostonian! Well, so far as I can see there is nothing
for it but for me to take you all three to Cambridge as fast as ever we
can get there. Such ignorance is deplorable."

You may be very sure that during the ride out from the city every means
was employed to get Uncle Bob to tell what particular wonder he was to
display. At last, driven to desperation by Jean's persistent questions,
he answered:

"I will tell you just one fact. The things we are going to see are made
of glass."

"Glass! But we have already seen everything that ever could be made
from glass, Uncle Bob," cried Jean in dismay.

"No, we haven't."

"Is it stained glass windows?"

"No."

"Mosaics?"

"No."

"A telescope?"

"No."

"What is it, Uncle Bob?"

"Never you mind. You would never guess if you guessed a lifetime. You
better give it up," was Mr. Cabot's smiling answer.

Cambridge was soon reached, and after a walk through the College Yard
that Giusippe might have a peep at Holworthy, where Uncle Bob had spent
his student days, the sightseers entered a quiet old brick building and
were led by Mr. Cabot into a room where stood case after case of
blooming flowers. There were garden blossoms of every variety, wild
flowers, tropical plants, all fresh and green as if growing. And yet
they were not growing; instead they lay singly or in clusters, each
bloom as perfect as if just cut from the stalk.

"How beautiful! Oh, Uncle Bob, it is like a big greenhouse!" exclaimed
Jean.

"This is what I brought you to see."

"But you said we were coming to see something made of glass," objected
Giusippe.

"You did say so, Uncle Bob."

"Behold, even as I said!"

"Bu-u-t, these flowers are not glass. What do you mean?"

"On the contrary, my unbelieving friends, glass is precisely what they
are made of. Every blossom, every leaf, every bud, every seed here is
the work of an expert glass-maker."

Mr. Cabot watched their faces, enjoying their incredulity.

"_Glass_!"

"Even so. Shall I tell you about it?"

"Yes! Yes!"

"This collection of flowers is called the Ware Collection, the name
being bestowed out of compliment to Mrs. and Miss Ware, who generously
donated much of the money for which to pay for it. Sometimes, too, it
is known as the Blaschka Collection of Glass Flower Models, for the
making was done by Leopold Blaschka and his son Rudolph, both of whom
were Bohemians. It happened that several years ago Harvard University
wished to equip its Botanical Department with flower specimens which
might be used for study by the students. The question at once arose how
this was to be done. Real flowers would of course fade, and wax flowers
would melt or break. What could be used? There seemed to be no such
thing as imperishable flowers."

Mr. Cabot paused a moment while the others waited expectantly.

"There were, however, in the Zooelogical Department some wonderfully
accurate glass models of animals made by a Bohemian scientist named
Blaschka, who was a rather remarkable combination of scholar and
glass-maker. Accordingly when it became necessary to have fadeless
flowers one of the professors wondered if this same Bohemian could not
reproduce them. So he set out for Blaschka's home at Hosterwirtz, near
Dresden, to see."

"Did he have to go way to Germany to find out?"

"Yes, because in the first place he did not know that Blaschka could
make flowers at all; and if he could he was not certain that he could
make them perfectly enough to render them satisfactory for such a
purpose. So he traveled to Germany and found the house where lived the
famous glass-maker; and it was while waiting alone in the parlor that
he saw on a shelf a vase containing what seemed to be a very beautiful
fresh orchid."

"It was made of glass!" Jean declared, leaping at the truth.

"Yes; and it was so perfect that the Harvard professor could hardly
believe his eyes. At that moment the scientist entered. He confessed
that he had made the flower for his wife; indeed, he had made many
glass orchids--one collection of some sixty varieties which had been
ordered by Prince Camille de Rohan, but which had later been destroyed
when the Natural History Museum at Liege had been burned. Since then,
Blaschka explained, he had given all his attention to making models of
animals. He said that his son Rudolph helped him, and that they two
alone knew how the work was done. It was their knowledge of zooelogy and
of botany added to their skill at glass-making which enabled them to
turn out such correct copies of real objects."

"Of course the Harvard professor was delighted," Jean ventured.

"Indeed he was! Before he left he won a promise from Blaschka and his
son to send to Cambridge a few flowers to serve as specimens of what
they could do. Now you may fancy the rage of the Harvard authorities
when on the arrival of the cases of flowers they found that almost all
of them had been broken to bits in the New York Custom House. There
was, however, enough left of the consignment to give to the Cambridge
professors the assurance that the two Bohemians were well equal to the
task demanded of them. Those who saw the shattered blossoms were most
enthusiastic, and Mrs. Ware and her daughter told the authorities to
order a limited number as a gift to the University. This second lot
came safely and were so beautiful that Harvard at once arranged that
the two Blaschkas send over to America all the flowers they could make
for the next ten years."

"My!"

"Yes, that seems a great many, doesn't it?" Mr. Cabot assented, nodding
to Jean. "But after all, it was not so tremendous as it sounds. You see
Harvard needed a copy of every American flower, plant, and fruit. The
making of them would take a great deal of time. Of course unless the
collection was complete it would be of little use to students. So the
Blaschkas began their work, and for a few years averaged a hundred sets
of flowers a year. Then the father died and Rudolph was left to finish
the work alone. You remember I told you that in true mediaeval fashion
they had kept the secret of their art to themselves; as a consequence
there now was no one to aid the son in his undertaking. Twice he came
to our country to get copies of flowers from which to work, toiling
bravely on in order to finish the task his father had begun. He said he
considered it a sort of monument or memorial to the elder man's genius.
There you have the story," concluded Mr. Cabot. "No other such
collection exists anywhere else in the world. Even with a microscope it
is impossible to distinguish between the real flower and the glass
copy."

"How were they made?" Giusippe demanded. "Was the glass blown?"

"No; the flowers were modeled. That is all I can tell you. The brittle
glass was in some way made plastic so it could be shaped by hand or by
instruments. Some of the coloring was put on while the material was
hot; some while it was cooling; and some after it was cold. It all
depended upon the result desired. But one thing is evident--the
Blaschkas worked very quickly and with marvelous scientific accuracy."

"It is simply wonderful," said Giusippe. "Even at Murano there is
nothing to equal this."

"I thought you, who knew so much of glass-making, would appreciate what
such a collection represents in knowledge, toil, and skill. Furthermore
it is beautiful, and for that reason alone is well worth seeing,"
answered Mr. Cabot.

"It is wonderful!" repeated the Italian lad.

All the way home the young Venetian was peculiarly silent. His national
pride had received a blow. Bohemia had surpassed Venice at its own
trade, the art of glass-making!




CHAPTER VIII

JEAN THREATENS TO STEAL GIUSIPPE'S TRADE


It was the next morning while Mr. Cabot and Giusippe were still
discussing the Blaschka glass flowers that the Italian lad remarked:

"I have wondered and wondered ever since we went out to Harvard how
those fragile flower models were annealed without breaking. It must
have been very difficult."

"What is annealing?" inquired Jean, holding at arm's length a doll's
hat and straightening a feather at one side of it.

"Annealing? Why, the gradual cooling of the glass after it has been
heated."

"What do they heat it for?"

"Don't you know how glass is made?" Giusippe asked in surprise.

Jean shook her head.

"No. How should I?"

"Why--but I thought every one knew that!"

"I don't see why. How could a girl know about the work you men do
unless you take the trouble to tell her?" Jean dimpled. "All through
Europe you and Uncle Bob have talked glass, glass, glass--nothing but
glass, and as you both seemed to understand what you were talking about
I did not like to interrupt and ask questions; but I had no more idea
than the man in the moon what you meant sometimes."

"Do you mean to say you know nothing at all about the process of
glass-making, Jean?" asked Mr. Cabot.

"Not a thing."

"Well, well, well! You have been a very patient little lady, that is
all I can say. Giusippe and I have been both rude and remiss, haven't
we, Giusippe? I thought of course you understood; and yet it is not at
all strange that you did not. As you say, how could you? Why didn't you
ask us, dear?"

"Oh, I didn't like to. I hate to seem stupid and be a bother."

"You are neither of those things, dear child. Is she, Giusippe?"

"I should say not."

"Well then, if it is all the same to you, I do wish somebody would tell
me whether glass is dug up out of the earth or is made of things mixed
together like a pudding," said Jean.

Both Giusippe and Uncle Bob laughed.

"The pudding idea is the nearer correct. Glass is made from ingredients
which are mixed together, boiled, baked, and set away to cool. Isn't
that about it, Giusippe?"

Giusippe nodded.

"I think the best remedy we can administer to this young lady, as well
as the most fitting penance for our own discourtesy to her, is to
escort her through a glass factory and let her, with her own eyes,
behold the process. What do you say, Giusippe?"

"A capital idea, senor. Then I, too, should have the chance to visit an
American factory and compare the process you use here with our Italian
method. I should like it above everything else."

"That is precisely what we will do then," declared Mr. Cabot. "On my
first leisure day we will go, and in the meantime I will hunt up the
location of the most satisfactory and nearest glass works."

Not more than a week passed before Uncle Bob fulfilled his promise.

"Make yourselves ready, oh ye glass-makers," said he one morning at
breakfast. "I find after telephoning to the office that I am not needed
to-day; therefore, the moment we have swallowed these estimable griddle
cakes of Hannah's we will hie us forth to instruct Jean in the art of
manufacturing vases, bottles, tumblers and the various sorts of
glassware."

The two young people greeted the suggestion with pleasure.

"Can you really get away to-day, Uncle Bob?" cried Jean. "What fun
we'll have!"

"I think it will be fun. We must, however, make Giusippe captain of the
expedition for he is the one who really knows glass-making from
beginning to end, and can answer all our questions."

"I think I might in Murano," returned the Venetian modestly, "but that
is no sign that I can do it here; your process may differ from the one
we use at home."

"Oh, I do not believe so--at least, not in essentials," Mr. Cabot
answered.

So they started out, and before they had proceeded any distance at all
they got into a spirited debate over the tiny lights of glass set in
the top of the electric car. The panes were of ground glass dotted with
an all-over pattern of small stars which had been left transparent.

"How did they make the stars on that glass?" was Jean's innocent
question. "Did they scratch off the thick surface and leave the design
of clear glass?"

"No indeed," Mr. Cabot replied. "On the contrary they started with the
stars and then made the background cloudy."

"But I don't see how they could."

"Do you, Giusippe?"

"I am afraid not, senor."

"Good! At last there is one fact about glass-making that I can impart
to you. This sort of glass is known as sand-blast glass, and the art of
making it, they say, chanced to be discovered near the seashore. It was
found that when the strong winds rose and blew the sand against glass
window-panes of the houses the small particles, being sharp, cut into
the glass surface, and before long wore it to a cloudy white through
which it was impossible to see out. Often the glass fronts of
lighthouses were injured in this way and the lights dimmed. Finally
some man came along who said: 'See here! Why not turn this grinding
effect of the sand to some purpose? Why not apply it to transparent
glass and make it frosted so one can get light but not see through it?
Often such glass would be a convenience.' Therefore this inventor set
his brain to the task. Strong currents or streams of sand were directed
against a clear glass surface with such force that they cut and ground
it until it was no longer transparent. They called the product thus
made sand-blast glass. Later they improved upon it by laying a stencil
over it so that a desired design was covered and remained protected
from the sand blast. The result was a pattern such as you see--clear
figures set in a background of clouded glass."

"How interesting!"

"Yes, isn't it? As is true of so many other of our most clever
inventions nature first showed man the path. Ground glass in its
modified forms is used for many purposes now; and yet I venture to say
few persons know how it came to be discovered."

Just at this point the car stopped with a sudden jerk, and beckoning
Jean and Giusippe to follow, Mr. Cabot got out and entered a large
brick building that stood close at hand. Evidently he was expected, for
a man came forward to greet him.

"Mr. Cabot?" he asked.

"Yes. I received your note this morning, so I brought my young charges
out at once. It is very good of you to allow us to go through the
factory."

"We are always glad to see visitors. I will put you in the hands of one
of our foremen who will take you about and tell you everything you may
want to know."

He touched a bell.

"Show Mr. Cabot and his friends down-stairs," said he to the boy who
answered his call, "and introduce them to Mr. Wyman. Tell him he is to
conduct them over the works."

Mr. Wyman welcomed them cordially.

"We see many visitors here, sir," said he, "and are always glad to have
them come. Although glass-making is an old story to us scarce a day
passes that some one does not visit us to whom the process is entirely
new; and it certainly is interesting if a person has never seen it.
Suppose we begin at the very beginning. In this bin, or trough, you
will see the mixture or batch of which the glass is made. It is
composed of red lead and the finest of white beach sand. The lead is
what gives the inside of the trough its vermilion color. The sand comes
from abroad, and before it can be used it must be sifted and sifted
through a series of closely woven cloths until it is smooth and fine as
powder. Before we put the mixture into the melting pots we heat it to a
given temperature so that it will be less likely to chill the clay pots
and break them."

"Do you really make glass by melting up that stuff?" asked Jean
incredulously.

The man smiled.

"But isn't it all red?"

"The red comes out in the melting. We have to be very careful, however,
in weighing out the ingredients, for much of our success depends on the
accurate proportions of the materials combined in the batch. Of course
the chemical composition differs some for different sorts of glass. It
all depends on what kind of glass is to be made. Then too the
conditions of the furnaces vary at times, the draughts being better at
some seasons than at others. We take a test or proof of every fresh
melt, and you would be surprised to see how little these differ.
Careful mixing of the raw materials is the first important item of
successful glass-making; the second is the fusion by heat of the
materials."

"The batch is next melted, Jean," explained Giusippe, as they followed
Mr. Wyman into the great brick-paved room where the furnaces were.

Here indeed was a picturesque scene. Numberless men were hurrying
hither and thither, some whirling in the air glowing masses of molten
glass; others standing before the furnace doors gathering balls of it
on the end of long iron blow-pipes which were from six to nine feet in
length. Everybody was scurrying. As soon as a ball of red-hot glass had
