steady-going article--from the approaching nuptials. She concluded by
informing the company that to-morrow was the day she had lived for
expressly; and that, when it was over, she would desire nothing better
than to be packed up and disposed of in any genteel place of burial.

As these remarks were quite unanswerable--which is the happy property of
all remarks that are sufficiently wide of the purpose--they changed the
current of the conversation, and diverted the general attention to the
Veal and Ham Pie, the cold mutton, the potatoes, and the tart. In order
that the bottled beer might not be slighted, John Peerybingle proposed
To-morrow: the Wedding-day; and called upon them to drink a bumper to
it, before he proceeded on his journey.

For you ought to know that he only rested there, and gave the old horse
a bait. He had to go some four or five miles farther on; and, when he
returned in the evening, he called for Dot, and took another rest on his
way home. This was the order of the day on all the Picnic occasions, and
had been ever since their institution.

There were two persons present, besides the bride and bridegroom elect,
who did but indifferent honour to the toast. One of these was Dot, too
flushed and discomposed to adapt herself to any small occurrence of the
moment; the other, Bertha, who rose up hurriedly before the rest, and
left the table.

"Good-bye!" said stout John Peerybingle, pulling on his dreadnought
coat. "I shall be back at the old time. Good-bye all!"

"Good-bye, John," returned Caleb.

He seemed to say it by rote, and to wave his hand in the same
unconscious manner; for he stood observing Bertha with an anxious
wondering face, that never altered its expression.

"Good-bye, young shaver!" said the jolly Carrier, bending down to kiss
the child; which Tilly Slowboy, now intent upon her knife and fork, had
deposited asleep (and, strange to say, without damage) in a little cot
of Bertha's furnishing; "good-bye! Time will come, I suppose, when
_you_'ll turn out into the cold, my little friend, and leave your old
father to enjoy his pipe and his rheumatics in the chimney-corner; eh?
Where's Dot?"

"I'm here, John!" she said, starting.

"Come, come!" returned the Carrier, clapping his sounding hands.
"Where's the pipe?"

"I quite forgot the pipe, John."

Forgot the pipe! Was such a wonder ever heard of? She! Forgot the pipe!

"I'll--I'll fill it directly. It's soon done."

But it was not so soon done, either. It lay in the usual place--the
Carrier's dreadnought pocket--with the little pouch, her own work, from
which she was used to fill it; but her hand shook so, that she entangled
it (and yet her hand was small enough to have come out easily, I am
sure), and bungled terribly. The filling of the pipe and lighting it,
those little offices in which I have commended her discretion, were
vilely done from first to last. During the whole process, Tackleton
stood looking on maliciously with the half-closed eye; which, whenever
it met hers--or caught it, for it can hardly be said to have ever met
another eye: rather being a kind of trap to snatch it up--augmented her
confusion in a most remarkable degree.

"Why, what a clumsy Dot you are this afternoon!" said John. "I could
have done it better myself, I verily believe!"

With these good-natured words, he strode away, and presently was heard,
in company with Boxer, and the old horse, and the cart, making lively
music down the road. What time the dreamy Caleb still stood, watching
his blind daughter, with the same expression on his face.

"Bertha!" said Caleb, softly. "What has happened? How changed you are,
my darling, in a few hours--since this morning! _You_ silent and dull
all day! What is it? Tell me!"

"Oh, father, father!" cried the Blind Girl, bursting into tears. "Oh, my
hard, hard fate!"

Caleb drew his hand across his eyes before he answered her.

"But think how cheerful and how happy you have been, Bertha! How good,
and how much loved, by many people."

"That strikes me to the heart, dear father! Always so mindful of me!
Always so kind to me!"

Caleb was very much perplexed to understand her.

"To be--to be blind, Bertha, my poor dear," he faltered, "is a great
affliction; but----"

"I have never felt it!" cried the Blind Girl. "I have never felt it in
its fulness. Never! I have sometimes wished that I could see you, or
could see him--only once, dear father, only for one little minute--that
I might know what it is I treasure up," she laid her hands upon her
breast, "and hold here! That I might be sure I have it right! And
sometimes (but then I was a child) I have wept in my prayers at night,
to think that, when your images ascended from my heart to Heaven, they
might not be the true resemblance of yourselves. But I have never had
these feelings long. They have passed away, and left me tranquil and
contented."

"And they will again," said Caleb.

"But, father! Oh, my good gentle father, bear with me, if I am wicked!"
said the Blind Girl. "This is not the sorrow that so weighs me down!"

Her father could not choose but let his moist eyes overflow; she was so
earnest and pathetic. But he did not understand her yet.

"Bring her to me," said Bertha. "I cannot hold it closed and shut within
myself. Bring her to me, father!"

She knew he hesitated, and said, "May. Bring May!"

May heard the mention of her name, and, coming quietly towards her,
touched her on the arm. The Blind Girl turned immediately, and held her
by both hands.

"Look into my face, Dear heart, Sweet heart!" said Bertha. "Read it
with your beautiful eyes, and tell me if the truth is written on it."

"Dear Bertha, yes!"

The Blind Girl, still upturning the blank sightless face, down which the
tears were coursing fast, addressed her in these words:

"There is not, in my soul, a wish or thought that is not for your good,
bright May! There is not, in my soul, a grateful recollection stronger
than the deep remembrance which is stored there of the many many times
when, in the full pride of sight and beauty, you have had consideration
for Blind Bertha, even when we two were children, or when Bertha was as
much a child as ever blindness can be! Every blessing on your head!
Light upon your happy course! Not the less, my dear May,"--and she drew
towards her in a closer grasp,--"not the less, my bird, because, to-day,
the knowledge that you are to be His wife has wrung my heart almost to
breaking! Father, May, Mary! Oh, forgive me that it is so, for the sake
of all he has done to relieve the weariness of my dark life: and for the
sake of the belief you have in me, when I call Heaven to witness that I
could not wish him married to a wife more worthy of his goodness!"

While speaking, she had released May Fielding's hands, and clasped her
garments in an attitude of mingled supplication and love. Sinking lower
and lower down, as she proceeded in her strange confession, she dropped
at last at the feet of her friend, and hid her blind face in the folds
of her dress.

"Great Power!" exclaimed her father, smitten at one blow with the truth,
"have I deceived her from her cradle, but to break her heart at last?"

It was well for all of them that Dot, that beaming, useful, busy little
Dot--for such she was, whatever faults she had, and however you may
learn to hate her, in good time--it was well for all of them, I say,
that she was there, or where this would have ended, it were hard to
tell. But Dot, recovering her self-possession, interposed, before May
could reply, or Caleb say another word.

"Come, come, dear Bertha! come away with me! Give her your arm, May! So.
How composed she is, you see, already; and how good it is of her to mind
us," said the cheery little woman, kissing her upon the forehead. "Come
away, dear Bertha! Come! and here's her good father will come with her,
won't you, Caleb? To--be--sure!"

Well, well! she was a noble little Dot in such things, and it must have
been an obdurate nature that could have withstood her influence. When
she had got poor Caleb and his Bertha away, that they might comfort and
console each other, as she knew they only could, she presently came
bouncing back,--the saying is, as fresh as any daisy; _I_ say
fresher--to mount guard over that bridling little piece of consequence
in the cap and gloves, and prevent the dear old creature from making
discoveries.

"So bring me the precious Baby, Tilly," said she, drawing a chair to the
fire; "and while I have it in my lap, here's Mrs. Fielding, Tilly, will
tell me all about the management of Babies, and put me right in twenty
points where I'm as wrong as can be. Won't you, Mrs. Fielding?"

Not even the Welsh Giant, who, according to the popular expression, was
so "slow" as to perform a fatal surgical operation upon himself, in
emulation of a juggling trick achieved by his arch enemy at
breakfast-time; not even he fell half so readily into the snare prepared
for him as the old lady into this artful pitfall. The fact of Tackleton
having walked out; and furthermore, of two or three people having been
talking together at a distance, for two minutes, leaving her to her own
resources; was quite enough to have put her on her dignity, and the
bewailment of that mysterious convulsion in the Indigo Trade, for
four-and-twenty hours. But this becoming deference to her experience, on
the part of the young mother, was so irresistible, that after a short
affectation of humility, she began to enlighten her with the best grace
in the world; and, sitting bolt upright before the wicked Dot, she did,
in half an hour, deliver more infallible domestic recipes and precepts
than would (if acted on) have utterly destroyed and done up that Young
Peerybingle, though he had been an Infant Samson.

To change the theme, Dot did a little needlework--she carried the
contents of a whole workbox in her pocket; however she contrived it, _I_
don't know--then did a little nursing; then a little more needlework;
then had a little whispering chat with May, while the old lady dozed;
and so in little bits of bustle, which was quite her manner always,
found it a very short afternoon. Then, as it grew dark, and as it was a
solemn part of this Institution of the Picnic that she should perform
all Bertha's household tasks, she trimmed the fire, and swept the
hearth, and set the tea-board out, and drew the curtain, and lighted a
candle. Then she played an air or two on a rude kind of harp, which
Caleb had contrived for Bertha, and played them very well; for Nature
had made her delicate little ear as choice a one for music as it would
have been for jewels, if she had had any to wear. By this time it was
the established hour for having tea; and Tackleton came back again to
share the meal, and spend the evening.

Caleb and Bertha had returned some time before, and Caleb had sat down
to his afternoon's work. But he couldn't settle to it, poor fellow,
being anxious and remorseful for his daughter. It was touching to see
him sitting idle on his working stool, regarding her so wistfully, and
always saying in his face, "Have I deceived her from her cradle, but to
break her heart?"

When it was night, and tea was done, and Dot had nothing more to do in
washing up the cups and saucers; in a word--for I must come to it, and
there is no use in putting it off--when the time drew nigh for expecting
the Carrier's return in every sound of distant wheels, her manner
changed again, her colour came and went, and she was very restless. Not
as good wives are when listening for their husbands. No, no, no. It was
another sort of restlessness from that.

Wheels heard. A horse's feet. The barking of a dog. The gradual approach
of all the sounds. The scratching paw of Boxer at the door!

"Whose step is that?" cried Bertha, starting up.

"Whose step?" returned the Carrier, standing in the portal, with his
brown face ruddy as a winter berry from the keen night air. "Why, mine."

"The other step," said Bertha. "The man's tread behind you!"

"She is not to be deceived," observed the Carrier, laughing. "Come
along, sir. You'll be welcome, never fear!"

He spoke in a loud tone; and, as he spoke, the deaf old gentleman
entered.

"He's not so much a stranger that you haven't seen him once, Caleb,"
said the Carrier. "You'll give him house room till we go?"

"Oh, surely, John, and take it as an honour!"

"He's the best company on earth to talk secrets in," said John. "I have
reasonable good lungs, but he tries 'em I can tell you. Sit down, sir.
All friends here, and glad to see you!"

When he had imparted this assurance, in a voice that amply corroborated
what he had said about his lungs, he added in his natural tone, "A chair
in the chimney-corner, and leave to sit quite silent and look pleasantly
about him, is all he cares for. He's easily pleased."

Bertha had been listening intently. She called Caleb to her side, when
he had set the chair, and asked him, in a low voice, to describe their
visitor. When he had done so (truly now, with scrupulous fidelity), she
moved, for the first time since he had come in, and sighed, and seemed
to have no further interest concerning him.

The Carrier was in high spirits, good fellow that he was, and fonder of
his little wife than ever.

"A clumsy Dot she was, this afternoon!" he said, encircling her with his
rough arm, as she stood, removed from the rest; "and yet I like her
somehow. See yonder, Dot!"

He pointed to the old man. She looked down. I think she trembled.

"He's--ha, ha, ha!--he's full of admiration for you!" said the Carrier.
"Talked of nothing else the whole way here. Why, he's a brave old boy! I
like him for it!"

"I wish he had a better subject, John," she said with an uneasy glance
about the room. At Tackleton especially.

"A better subject!" cried the jovial John. "There's no such thing. Come!
off with the great-coat, off with the thick shawl, off with the heavy
wrappers! and a cosy half-hour by the fire. My humble service, mistress.
A game at cribbage, you and I? That's hearty. The cards and board, Dot.
And a glass of beer here, if there's any left, small wife!"

His challenge was addressed to the old lady, who, accepting it with
gracious readiness, they were soon engaged upon the game. At first, the
Carrier looked about him sometimes with a smile, or now and then called
Dot to peep over his shoulder at his hand, and advise him on some knotty
point. But his adversary being a rigid disciplinarian, and subject to an
occasional weakness in respect of pegging more than she was entitled to,
required such vigilance on his part, as left him neither eyes nor ears
to spare. Thus, his whole attention gradually became absorbed upon the
cards; and he thought of nothing else, until a hand upon his shoulder
restored him to a consciousness of Tackleton.

"I am sorry to disturb you--but a word directly."

"I'm going to deal," returned the Carrier. "It's a crisis."

"It is," said Tackleton. "Come here, man!"

There was that in his pale face which made the other rise immediately,
and ask him, in a hurry, what the matter was.

"Hush! John Peerybingle," said Tackleton, "I am sorry for this. I am
indeed. I have been afraid of it. I have suspected it from the first."

"What is it?" asked the Carrier with a frightened aspect.

"Hush! I'll show you, if you'll come with me."

The Carrier accompanied him without another word. They went across a
yard, where the stars were shining, and by a little side-door, into
Tackleton's own counting-house, where there was a glass window,
commanding the ware-room, which was closed for the night. There was no
light in the counting-house itself, but there were lamps in the long
narrow ware-room; and consequently the window was bright.

"A moment!" said Tackleton. "Can you bear to look through that window,
do you think?"

"Why not?" returned the Carrier.

"A moment more," said Tackleton. "Don't commit any violence. It's of no
use. It's dangerous too. You're a strong-made man; and you might do
murder before you know it."

The Carrier looked him in the face, and recoiled a step as if he had
been struck. In one stride he was at the window, and he saw----

Oh, Shadow on the Hearth! Oh, truthful Cricket! Oh, perfidious wife!

He saw her with the old man--old no longer, but erect and
gallant--bearing in his hand the false white hair that had won his way
into their desolate and miserable home. He saw her listening to him, as
he bent his head to whisper in her ear; and suffering him to clasp her
round the waist, as they moved slowly down the dim wooden gallery
towards the door by which they had entered it. He saw them stop, and saw
her turn--to have the face, the face he loved so, so presented to his
view!--and saw her, with her own hands, adjust the lie upon his head,
laughing, as she did it, at his unsuspicious nature!

He clenched his strong right hand at first, as if it would have beaten
down a lion. But, opening it immediately again, he spread it out before
the eyes of Tackleton (for he was tender of her even then), and so, as
they passed out, fell down upon a desk, and was as weak as any infant.

He was wrapped up to the chin, and busy with his horse and parcels, when
she came into the room, prepared for going home.

"Now, John dear! Good night, May! Good night, Bertha!"

Could she kiss them? Could she be blithe and cheerful in her parting?
Could she venture to reveal her face to them without a blush? Yes.
Tackleton observed her closely, and she did all this.

Tilly was hushing the baby, and she crossed and recrossed Tackleton a
dozen times, repeating drowsily:

"Did the knowledge that it was to be its wives, then, wring its hearts
almost to breaking; and did its fathers deceive it from its cradles but
to break its hearts at last!"

"Now, Tilly, give me the Baby! Good night, Mr. Tackleton. Where's John,
for goodness' sake?"

"He's going to walk beside the horse's head," said Tackleton; who helped
her to her seat.

"My dear John! Walk? To-night?"

The muffled figure of her husband made a hasty sign in the affirmative;
and, the false stranger and the little nurse being in their places, the
old horse moved off. Boxer, the unconscious Boxer, running on before,
running back, running round and round the cart, and barking as
triumphantly and merrily as ever.

When Tackleton had gone off likewise, escorting May and her mother home,
poor Caleb sat down by the fire beside his daughter; anxious and
remorseful at the core; and still saying, in his wistful contemplation
of her, "Have I deceived her from her cradle, but to break her heart at
last?"

The toys that had been set in motion for the Baby had all stopped and
run down long ago. In the faint light and silence, the imperturbably
calm dolls, the agitated rocking-horses with distended eyes and
nostrils, the old gentlemen at the street-doors, standing half doubled
up upon their failing knees and ankles, the wry-faced nut-crackers, the
very Beasts upon their way into the Ark, in twos, like a Boarding-School
out walking, might have been imagined to be stricken motionless with
fantastic wonder at Dot being false, or Tackleton beloved, under any
combination of circumstances.




CHIRP THE THIRD


The Dutch clock in the corner struck Ten when the Carrier sat down by
his fireside. So troubled and grief-worn that he seemed to scare the
Cuckoo, who, having cut his ten melodious announcements as short as
possible, plunged back into the Moorish Palace again, and clapped his
