escaped from her castle, to which he had fled after the battle.  And
over there is Lord Cecil Talbot, her father; he fell at Naseby.  There
in that corner is another James, his brother, one of Prince Rupert's
men, wounded at Marston Moor.  Here is Sir Hilary, slain at the Boyne;
and this old man is Lord Philip, your great-uncle.  He was out in the
'45, and was beheaded.  These are your people, Hilary," she said,
standing very straight, her head thrown back, her eyes aflame with
pride and determination, "and these struck, fought, lived, and died for
their king.  I could bear to see you dead," she laid her hand upon her
heart in sudden fear at the idea, in spite of her brave words, "but I
could not bear to see you a rebel.  Think again.  You will not so
decide?"  She said it bravely; it was her final appeal, and as she made
it she knew that it was useless.  The sceptre had departed out of her
hand.

He smiled sadly at her, but shook his head ominously.  "Mother, do you
know these last fought for Stuart pretenders against the house of
Hanover?  George III., in your creed, has no right to the place he
holds.  Do I not then follow my ancestors in taking the field against
him?"

"Ah, my child, 't is an unworthy subterfuge.  They did fight for the
house of Stuart, God bless it!  It was king against king then, and at
least they fought for royalty, for a king; but now the house of Stuart
is gone; the new king occupies the throne undisputed, and our
allegiance is due to him.  These unfortunate people who are fighting
here strive to create a republic where all men shall be equal!  Said
the sainted martyr Charles on the scaffold, ''T is no concern of the
common people's how they are governed.'  A common man equal to a
Talbot!  Fight, my son, if you must; but oh, fight for the king, even
an usurper, before a republic, a mob in which so-called equality stands
in very unstable equilibrium,--fight for the rightful ruler of the
land, not against him."

"Mother, if I am to believe the opinions of those whom I have been
taught to respect, the rightful rulers of this colony, of our country,
of any country, are the people who inhabit it."

"And who says that, pray, my boy?"

"Mr. Henry."

"And do you mean to tell me, a Talbot, that you have been taught to
look up to men of the social stamp of Patrick Henry, or to respect
their opinions?" she said with ineffable disdain.

"Mother, the logic of events has forced all men to do so.  Had you
heard his speeches before the Burgesses at Williamsburg, you would have
thought that he was second to no man in the colony, or in the world
beside; but if he be not satisfactory, there is his excellency General
Washington."

"Mr. Washington," she replied with an emphasis on the "Mr."  "Now
there, I grant you, is a man," she said reluctantly.  "I cannot
understand the perversion of his destiny or the folly of his course."

"And, mother, you know his family was as loyal as our own.  One of his
forefathers held Worcester for King Charles with the utmost gallantry
and resolution.  And he had as a companion in arms in that brave
attempt Sir George Talbot, one of our ancestors.  There is an example
for you.  I have often heard you speak with the greatest respect of
George Washington."

"It is true, my son," she replied honestly, "but I am at a loss to
fathom his motive.  What can it be?"

"Mother, I am persuaded of the purity of his motives; his actions
spring from the very highest sense of his personal obligation to the
cause of liberty."

"'Liberty, liberty,' 't is a weak word when matched with loyalty.  But
be this as it may, my son, it is beside the question.  Our family,
these men and women who look down upon us, all fought for principles of
royalty.  It makes no difference whether or no they fought for or
against one or another king, so long as it was a king they fought for.
Such a thing as a democracy never entered their heads.  And if you take
this course, you will be false to every tradition of our past.  In my
opinion, the people are not fit to govern, and you will find it so.  In
the impious attempt that is being made to reverse what I conceive to be
the divinely appointed polity and law of God, disaster must be the only
end."

"Mother, I must follow my convictions in the present rather than any
examples in the past.  But this is a painful discussion.  Should we not
best end it?  I honor your opinions, I love you, but I must go."

There was a long silence.  She broke it.  "Well, my child," she said in
despair, "you have reached man's estate, and the men of the Talbot race
have ever been accustomed to do as their judgment dictates.  If you
have decided to join Washington's rabble and take part among the rebels
in this fratricidal contest, I shall say no more.  I cannot further
oppose you.  I cannot give you my blessing--as I might in happier
circumstances--nor can I wish success to your cause.  I too am a
Talbot, and have my principles, which I must also maintain; but at
least I can gird your sword about you, and express the hope and make
the prayer, as I do, that you may wear and use it honorably; and that
hope, if you are true to the traditions of our house, will never be
broken,--I feel sure of that, at least."

The young man bent and kissed his mother, a new light shining in his
eyes.  "Mother, I thank you.  At least, as far as I am concerned, I
will endeavor to do my duty honorably in every field.  And now I think,
with your permission, I will go over and tell Katharine that I have at
last made up my mind and cast my lot in with her--I mean with our
country," he said, blushing, but with the thoughtless disregard of
youth as to the meaning and effect of his words.

"Go, my son, and God be with you!" she said solemnly.

He stepped quickly out on the porch, and, swinging into the saddle of
the horse which awaited him, with the ease and grace of an accomplished
horseman, galloped off in the moonlight night followed by the groom.

The little old woman stood rigidly in the doorway a moment, looking
after her departed son, and then she walked quickly down to a rustic
seat on the brow of the hill and sat down heavily, following with
straining eyes and yearning heart his rapidly disappearing figure.  The
same pang that every mother must feel, those who have a son at least,
once in her life if no more, came to her heart; all her prayers had
been unavailing, her requests unheeded, her pleas and wishes
disregarded.  She had an idea, not altogether warranted perhaps, but
still she had it, that the influence was not so much the example of
General Washington, nor the eloquence of Patrick Henry, nor the force
of neighborly example, nor rigid principle, but the influence of a
sunny head, and a pair of youthful eyes, and a merry laugh, and a young
heart, and a pleading voice.  These have always stood in the light of a
mother since the world began, and these have taken her son from her
side.  All her hopes gone, her dreams shattered, her sacrifice vain,
her love wasted, she bowed her white head upon her thin hands, and wept
quietly in the silent night.  The deep waters had gone over her soul,
and the rare tears of the old woman bespoke a breaking heart.




CHAPTER VIII

_An Untold Story_

There were two roads which led from Fairview Hall to the home of the
Wiltons,--one by the river, and the other over the hills farther
inland.  Talbot had chosen the river-road, and was riding along with a
light heart, forgetful of his mother and those tears which indeed she
would not have shown him, and full of pleasant anticipations as to the
effect of his decision upon Katharine.

As he rode along in the moonlight, his mind, full of that calm repose
which comes to men when they have finally arrived at a decision upon
some point which has troubled them, felt free to range where it would,
and naturally his thoughts turned toward the girl he loved.  He was
getting along in life, twenty-four his last birthday, while Katharine
was several years his junior.  It was time to settle himself; and if he
must ride away to the wars, it were well, pleasant at least, to think
that he was leaving at home a wife over whom he had thrown the
protecting aegis of his name.

Katharine would be much happier,--his thoughts dwelt tenderly upon
her,--and the definite arrangement would be better than this tacit
understanding, which of course was sufficiently binding; though, now he
thought of it, Katharine had seemed a little difficult of late,
probably because of the indefinite character of the tie.  He laughed
boyishly in pleasure at his own thought.  It was another proof that she
loved him, that she resented any assumption on his part based on hopes
indulged in and plans formed by her father and his mother.  He must
declare himself at once.  Poor mother! it was hard for her; but she
would soon get over all that, and when he came back distinguished and
honored by the people, she would feel very differently.  As for the
capricious Katharine, he would speak out that very night, never
doubting the issue, and get it done with.  Of course, that was all that
was necessary.

When she knew that he was engaged heart and soul in the cause of the
Revolution, she would be ready to yield him anything.  Not that he had
any doubt of the result of his proposal in any case; as soon doubt that
the nature and orderly sequence of events should be suddenly and
violently interrupted, as imagine that these cherished plans, in which
they had both acquiesced so long ago, should fall through.  And so my
lord was prepared to drop the handkerchief at the feet of my lady for
her to pick up!  It was a time, however, he might have remembered, in
which the old established order of events in other fields, which men
had long since conceived of as fixed as natural laws, was being rudely
broken and destroyed.  Many things which had heretofore been habitually
taken for granted, now were required to be proved, and Talbot was
destined to meet the fate of every over-confident lover.  Devotion,
self-abnegation, persistency,--these during ten days had held the
field; and the result of the campaign had been that inevitable one
which may always be looked for when the opposing forces, even after
years of possession, muster under the banner of habit, assurance,
confidence, and neglect.

So musing, the light-hearted gentleman galloped along.  The intervening
distance was soon passed over, and Talbot found himself entering the
familiar stretch of woodland which marked the beginning of the
colonel's estate.  Under the trees and beneath the high bank of the
river the shadows deepened; scarcely any light from the moon fell on
the road.  It was well, therefore, that our cavalier drew rein, and
somewhat checked the pace of his horse, advancing with some caution
over the familiar yet unseen road; for just as he came opposite the
land end of the pier which led out to the boat-house, the animal
stopped with such suddenness that a less practised rider would have
suffered a severe fall.  The horse snorted and trembled in terror, and
began rearing and backing away from the spot.  Looking down in the
darkness, Talbot could barely discern a dark, bulky object lying in the
road.

"Here, Dick!" he called to the groom, who had stopped and reined in his
own horse, apparently as terrified as the other, a few paces back of
his master; and tossing his bridle rein toward him, "take my horse,
while I see what stopped him."

Lightly leaping to the ground, and stepping up to the object before
him, he bent down and laid his hand upon it, and then started back in
surprise and horror.  "It's a man," he exclaimed; "dead, yet warm
still.  Who can it be?"  The moonlight fell upon the pebbly beach of
the river a little farther out; overcoming his reluctance, he half
lifted, half carried the body out where the light would fall upon its
face.  This face, which was unknown to him, was that of a
desperate-looking ruffian, who was dressed in a soiled and tattered
uniform, the coat of which was red; the man's hand tightly clasped a
discharged pistol; he had been shot in the breast, for where his coat
had fallen open might be seen a dark red stain about a ragged hole in
his soiled gray shirt; the bullet had been fired at short range, too,
for there were powder marks all about his breast.  Talbot noticed these
things rapidly, his mind working quickly.

"Oh, Mars' Hil'ry--wha-wha's de mattah?  I kyarnt hol' dese hosses;
dey'se sumfin wrong, sho'ly," broke in the groom, his teeth chattering
with terror.

"Quiet, man! don't make so much noise.  This is the dead body of a man,
a soldier; he has been shot too.  Take the horses back beyond the old
tree on the little bend there; tie them securely, and come back here
quickly.  Make no noise.  Bring the pistols from your holsters."

As the man turned to obey him, Talbot glanced about in perplexity, and
his eyes fell upon a small sloop rapidly disappearing down the river,
under full sail in the fresh breeze which had sprung up.  She was too
far away now to make out any details in the moonlight, but the sight
was somewhat unusual and alarming, he scarcely knew why.

"I got dem tied safe, Mars' Hil'ry," called out the voice of the boy
from the road.

"All right, Dick!  We will leave this one here, and try to find out
what's wrong; you follow me, and keep the pistols ready."

"Yes, Mars', I got dem."  The man was brave enough in the presence of
open danger; it was only the spiritual he feared.

They had scarcely gone ten paces farther toward the path, when, at the
foot of it, they stumbled over another body.

"Here is another one.  What does it mean?  See who it is, Dick."

The groom, mastering his instinctive aversion, bent down obediently,
and lifting the face peered into it.  It was lighter here, and he
recognized it at once.

"Hit's Mars' Blodgett, de kunnel's old sojuh man.  Him got a
bullet-hole in de fohaid, suh; him a dead man sholy, an' heah is his
gun by his han'," he said in an awestruck whisper.

"Blodgett!  Good God, it can't be."

"Yes, suh, it's him, and dere's anoder one ober dah.  See, suh!"  He
laid his hand upon another body, in the same uniform as the first one.
This man groaned slightly.

"Dis one's not daid yit," said Dick, excitedly; "he been hit ober de
haid, his face all bloody.  Oh, Mars' Hil'ry, dem raidahs you done tell
me 'bout been heah.  Mars' Blodgett done shot dat one by de riber on de
waf, an' den hit dis one wid his musket, an' den dey done shoot Mars'
Blodgett.  Oh, Mars' Hil'ry, le' 's get out ob heah."

Talbot saw it all now,--the slow and stealthy approach of the boat from
the little sloop out in the river (it had disappeared round the bend,
he noticed), Blodgett's quiet watch at the foot of the path, the
approach of the men, Blodgett's challenge, the first one shot dead as
he came up, the pistol-shot which missed him, the rush of the men at
the indomitable old soldier, the nearest one struck down from the blow
of the clubbed musket of the sturdy old man, the second pistol-shot,
which hit him in the forehead, his fall across the path.  Faithful unto
death at the post of duty.  The little drama was perfectly plain to
him.  But who were these raiders?  Who could they be?  And Katharine?

"Oh, my God," he exclaimed, stung into quick action at the thought of a
possible peril to his love.  "Come, Dick, to the house; she may be in
danger."

"But dis libe one, Mars' Hil'ry?"

"Quick, quick! leave him; we will see about him later."

With no further attempt at caution, they sprang recklessly up the steep
path, and, gaining the brow of the hill, ran at full speed toward the
house.  He noticed that there were no lights in the negro quarters, no
sounds of the merry-making usually going on there in the early evening.
Through the open windows on the side of the house, he had a hasty
glimpse of the disordered dining-room.  The great doors of the hall
were open.  They were on the porch now,--now at the door of the hall.
It was empty.  He paused a second.  "Katharine, Katharine!" he called
aloud, a note of fear in his voice, "where are you?  Colonel Wilton!"
In the silence which his voice had broken he heard a weak and feeble
moan, which struck terror into his heart.

He ran hastily down the hall, and stopped at the dining-room door
aghast.  The smoking candles in the sconces were throwing a somewhat
uncertain light over a scene of devastation and ruin; the furniture of
the table and the accessories of the meal lay in a broken heap at the
foot of it, the chairs were overturned, the curtains torn, the great
sideboard had been swept bare of its usual load of glittering silver.

At his feet lay the body of a man, in the now familiar red uniform,
blood from a ghastly sword-thrust clotted about his throat, the floor
about his head being covered with ominous stains.  A little farther
away on the floor, near the table, there was the body of another man,
in another uniform, a naked sword lying by his side; he had a
frightful-looking wound on his forehead, and the blood was slowly
oozing out of his coat-sleeve, staining the lace at his left wrist.
Even as he looked, the man turned a little on the floor, and the same
low moan broke from his lips.  Talbot stepped over the first body to
the side of the other.

"My God, it's Seymour," he said.  He knelt beside him, as Katharine had
done.  "Seymour," he called, "Seymour!"  The man opened his eyes
slowly, and looked vacantly at him.

"Katharine," he murmured.

"What of her? is she safe?" asked Talbot, in an agony of fear.

"Raiders--prisoner," continued Seymour, brokenly, in a whisper, and
then feebly murmured, "Water, water!"

"Here, Dick, get some water quickly!  First hand me that decanter of
wine," pointing to one which had fortunately escaped the eyes of the
marauders.  He lifted Seymour's head gently, and with a napkin which he
had picked up from the floor, wiped the bloody face, washing it with
