clinching hands, and was almost on the point of shouting out to
them that they were the thieves and should say no evil of his
father, when he remembered, just in time, that to breathe a word
or make a sound was to bring ruin on himself and sever him
forever from Hirschvogel. So he kept still, and the men barred
the shutters of the little lattice and went out by the door,
double-locking it after them. He had made out from their talk
that they were going to show Hirschvogel to some great person:
therefore he kept quite still and dared not move.

Muffled sounds came to him through the shutters from the streets
below,--the rolling of wheels, the clanging of church-bells, and
bursts of that military music which is so seldom silent in the
streets of Munich. An hour perhaps passed by; sounds of steps on
the stairs kept him in perpetual apprehension. In the intensity
of his anxiety, he forgot that he was hungry and many miles away
from cheerful, Old World little Hall, lying by the clear gray
river-water, with the ramparts of the mountains all around.

Presently the door opened again sharply. He could hear the two
dealers' voices murmuring unctuous words, in which, "honor,"
"gratitude," and many fine long noble titles played the chief
parts. The voice of another person, more clear and refined than
theirs, answered them curtly, and then, close by the Nuernberg
stove and the boy's ear, ejaculated a single "_Wunderschoen!_"
August almost lost his terror for himself in his thrill of pride
at his beloved Hirschvogel being thus admired in the great city.
He thought the master-potter must be glad too.

"_Wunderschoen!_" ejaculated the stranger a second time, and then
examined the stove in all its parts, read all its mottoes, gazed
long on all its devices.

"It must have been made for the Emperor Maximilian," he said at
last; and the poor little boy, meanwhile, within, was "hugged up
into nothing," as you children say, dreading that every moment he
would open the stove. And open it truly he did, and examined the
brass-work of the door; but inside it was so dark that crouching
August passed unnoticed, screwed up into a ball like a hedgehog
as he was. The gentleman shut to the door at length, without
having seen anything strange inside it; and then he talked long
and low with the tradesmen, and, as his accent was different
from that which August was used to, the child could distinguish
little that he said, except the name of the king and the word
"gulden" again and again. After awhile he went away, one of the
dealers accompanying him, one of them lingering behind to bar up
the shutters. Then this one also withdrew again, double-locking
the door.

The poor little hedgehog uncurled itself and dared to breathe
aloud.

What time was it?

Late in the day, he thought, for to accompany the stranger they
had lighted a lamp; he had heard the scratch of the match, and
through the brass fret-work had seen the lines of light.

He would have to pass the night here, that was certain. He and
Hirschvogel were locked in, but at least they were together. If
only he could have had something to eat! He thought with a pang
of how at this hour at home they ate the sweet soup, sometimes
with apples in it from Aunt Maila's farm orchard, and sang
together, and listened to Dorothea's reading of little tales, and
basked in the glow and delight that had beamed on them from the
great Nuernberg fire-king.

"Oh, poor, poor little 'Gilda! What is she doing without the
dear Hirschvogel?" he thought. Poor little 'Gilda! she had only
now the black iron stove of the ugly little kitchen. Oh, how
cruel of father!

August could not bear to hear the dealers blame or laugh at his
father, but he did feel that it had been so, so cruel to sell
Hirschvogel. The mere memory of all those long winter evenings,
when they had all closed round it, and roasted chestnuts or
crab-apples in it, and listened to the howling of the wind and
the deep sound of the church-bells, and tried very much to make
each other believe that the wolves still came down from the
mountains into the streets of Hall, and were that very minute
growling at the house-door,--all this memory coming on him with
the sound of the city bells, and the knowledge that night drew
near upon him so completely, being added to his hunger and his
fear, so overcame him that he burst out crying for the fiftieth
time since he had been inside the stove, and felt that he would
starve to death, and wondered dreamily if Hirschvogel would care.
Yes, he was sure Hirschvogel would care. Had he not decked it all
summer long with Alpine roses and edelweiss and heaths and made
it sweet with thyme and honeysuckle and great garden-lilies? Had
he ever forgotten when Santa Claus came to make it its crown of
holly and ivy and wreathe it all around?

"Oh, shelter me; save me; take care of me!" he prayed to the old
fire-king, and forgot, poor little man, that he had come on this
wild-goose chase northward to save and take care of Hirschvogel!

After a time he dropped asleep, as children can do when they
weep, and little robust hill-born boys most surely do, be they
where they may. It was not very cold in this lumber-room; it was
tightly shut up, and very full of things, and at the back of it
were the hot pipes of an adjacent house, where a great deal of
fuel was burnt. Moreover, August's clothes were warm ones, and
his blood was young. So he was not cold, though Munich is
terribly cold in the nights of December; and he slept on and
on,--which was a comfort to him, for he forgot his woes, and his
perils, and his hunger, for a time.




                              IX


Midnight was once more chiming from all the brazen tongues of the
city when he awoke, and, all being still around him, ventured to
put his head out of the brass door of the stove to see why such a
strange bright light was round him.

It was a very strange and brilliant light indeed; and yet, what
is perhaps still stranger, it did not frighten or amaze him, nor
did what he saw alarm him either, and yet I think it would have
done you or me. For what he saw was nothing less than all the
_bric-a-brac_ in motion.

A big jug, an Apostel-Krug, of Kruessen, was solemnly dancing a
minuet with a plump Faenza jar; a tall Dutch clock was going
through a gavotte with a spindle-legged ancient chair; a very
droll porcelain figure of Littenhausen was bowing to a very stiff
soldier in _terre cuite_ of Ulm; an old violin of Cremona was
playing itself, and a queer little shrill plaintive music that
thought itself merry came from a painted spinet covered with
faded roses; some gilt Spanish leather had got up on the wall and
laughed; a Dresden mirror was tripping about, crowned with
flowers, and a Japanese bonze was riding along on a griffin; a
slim Venetian rapier had come to blows with a stout Ferrara
sabre, all about a little pale-faced chit of a damsel in white
Nymphenburg china; and a portly Franconian pitcher in _gres gris_
was calling aloud, "Oh, these Italians! always at feud!" But
nobody listened to him at all. A great number of little Dresden
cups and saucers were all skipping and waltzing; the teapots,
with their broad round faces, were spinning their own lids like
teetotums; the high-backed gilded chairs were having a game of
cards together; and a little Saxe poodle, with a blue ribbon at
its throat, was running from one to another, whilst a yellow cat
of Cornelis Lachtleven's rode about on a Delft horse in blue
pottery of 1489. Meanwhile the brilliant light shed on the scene
came from three silver candelabra, though they had no candles set
up in them; and, what is the greatest miracle of all, August
looked on at these mad freaks and felt no sensation of wonder! He
only, as he heard the violin and the spinet playing, felt an
irresistible desire to dance too.

No doubt his face said what he wished; for a lovely little lady,
all in pink and gold and white, with powdered hair, and
high-heeled shoes, and all made of the very finest and fairest
Meissen china, tripped up to him, and smiled, and gave him her
hand, and led him out to a minuet. And he danced it perfectly,--poor
little August in his thick, clumsy shoes, and his thick, clumsy
sheepskin jacket, and his rough homespun linen, and his broad
Tyrolean hat! He must have danced it perfectly, this dance of
kings and queens in days when crowns were duly honored, for the
lovely lady always smiled benignly and never scolded him at all,
and danced so divinely herself to the stately measures the spinet
was playing that August could not take his eyes off her till,
their minuet ended, she sat down on her own white-and-gold
bracket.

"I am the Princess of Saxe-Royale," she said to him, with a
benignant smile; "and you have got through that minuet very
fairly."

Then he ventured to say to her,--

"Madame my princess, could you tell me kindly why some of the
figures and furniture dance and speak, and some lie up in a
corner like lumber? It does make me curious. Is it rude to ask?"

For it greatly puzzled him why, when some of the _bric-a-brac_
was all full of life and motion, some was quite still and had not
a single thrill in it.

"My dear child," said the powdered lady, "is it possible that you
do not know the reason? Why, those silent, dull things are
_imitation_!"

This she said with so much decision that she evidently considered
it a condensed but complete answer.

"Imitation?" repeated August, timidly, not understanding.

"Of course! Lies, falsehoods, fabrications!" said the princess in
pink shoes, very vivaciously. "They only _pretend_ to be what we
_are_! They never wake up: how can they? No imitation ever had
any soul in it yet."

"Oh!" said August, humbly, not even sure that he understood
entirely yet. He looked at Hirschvogel: surely it had a royal
soul within it: would it not wake up and speak? Oh dear! how he
longed to hear the voice of his fire-king! And he began to forget
that he stood by a lady who sat upon a pedestal of gold-and-white
china, with the year 1746 cut on it, and the Meissen mark.

"What will you be when you are a man?" said the little lady,
sharply, for her black eyes were quick though her red lips were
smiling. "Will you work for the _Koenigliche Porcellan-Manufactur_,
like my great dead Kandler?"

"I have never thought," said August, stammering; "at least--that
is--I do wish--I do hope to be a painter, as was Master Augustin
Hirschvogel at Nuernberg."

"Bravo!" said all the real _bric-a-brac_ in one breath, and the
two Italian rapiers left off fighting to cry, "_Benone!_" For
there is not a bit of true _bric-a-brac_ in all Europe that does
not know the names of the mighty masters.

August felt quite pleased to have won so much applause, and grew
as red as the lady's shoes with bashful contentment.

"I knew all the Hirschvoegel, from old Veit downwards," said a fat
_gres de Flandre_ beer-jug: "I myself was made at Nuernberg." And
he bowed to the great stove very politely, taking off his own
silver hat--I mean lid--with a courtly sweep that he could
scarcely have learned from burgomasters. The stove, however, was
silent, and a sickening suspicion (for what is such heart-break
as a suspicion of what we love?) came through the mind of August:
_Was Hirschvogel only imitation_?

"No, no, no, no!" he said to himself, stoutly: though Hirschvogel
never stirred, never spoke, yet would he keep all faith in it!
After all their happy years together, after all the nights of
warmth and joy he owed it, should he doubt his own friend and
hero, whose gilt lion's feet he had kissed in his babyhood? "No,
no, no, no!" he said, again, with so much emphasis that the Lady
of Meissen looked sharply again at him.

"No," she said, with pretty disdain; "no, believe me, they may
'pretend' forever. They can never look like us! They imitate even
our marks, but never can they look like the real thing, never can
they _chassent de race_."

"How should they?" said a bronze statuette of Vischer's. "They
daub themselves green with verdigris, or sit out in the rain to
get rusted; but green and rust are not _patina_; only the ages
can give that!"

"And _my_ imitations are all in primary colors, staring colors,
hot as the colors of a hostelry's sign-board!" said the Lady of
Meissen, with a shiver.

"Well, there is a _gres de Flandre_ over there, who pretends to
be a Hans Kraut, as I am," said the jug with the silver hat,
pointing with his handle to a jug that lay prone on its side in a
corner. "He has copied me as exactly as it is given to moderns to
copy us. Almost he might be mistaken for me. But yet what a
difference there is! How crude are his blues! how evidently done
over the glaze are his black letters! He has tried to give
himself my very twist; but what a lamentable exaggeration of that
playful deviation in my lines which in his becomes actual
deformity!"

"And look at that," said the gilt Cordovan leather, with a
contemptuous glance at a broad piece of gilded leather spread out
on a table. "They will sell him cheek by jowl with me, and give
him my name; but look! _I_ am overlaid with pure gold beaten thin
as a film and laid on me in absolute honesty by worthy Diego de
