"Can't Cash take it?  We're not nearly finished."

"No.  Cut off, sharp!"

"Awful shame!" growled the messenger to himself, as he departed.  "I
hate Clapperton; he always waits till I'm enjoying myself, and then
routs me out.  I shan't stand it much longer.  What does he want with
Yorke!  Perhaps it's a challenge.  Yes, by the way, very good chance!
I'll see what that cad Wally's got to say about those kids I found in
his room yesterday.  Nice old games he gets up to; Wally's all very well
when he's asleep, or grubbing, or doing impositions, but he's a sight
too artful out of school, like all those Classic kids.  One's as bad as
another."

As if to emphasise this sentiment, a Classic kid at that moment came
violently into collision with Master Percy's waistcoat.

It was Fisher minor, who had once more caught sight in the distance of
the mysterious borrower of his half-crown, and was giving chase.

"Where are you coming to, you kid.  You've nearly smashed a button.
I'll welt you for that."

"I beg your pardon, Wally, I--"

"Wally--what do you mean by calling me Wally?" exclaimed Percy.

"Well, Wheatfield, I beg your pardon; I was in a hurry to catch a fellow
up and I didn't see you."

"Didn't you?  Well, you'll feel me.  Take that."

Fisher minor meekly accepted the cuff, and, full of his half-crown,
essayed to proceed.  But Percy stopped him.

"You're that new kid, Fisher's minor, aren't you?"

It astonished Fisher minor, that the speaker, whom he supposed he had
seen only ten minutes ago, should so soon have forgotten his name.

"Yes, but I say, Wally, I mean Wheatfield--"

"Humph--I suppose you held up both hands for your precious brother
yesterday."

"No, only one.  I was nearly late, though.  I waited an hour at the
gymnasium, you know, and no Modern chaps came out at all."

Percy began to smell rats.

"Waited at the gymnasium, did you?  Who told you to do that?"

"Oh, you know--it was part of the canvassing."

"Oh, _you_ were in that job, were you, my boy?  All serene, I'll--"

"I say," cried Fisher minor, turning pale, "aren't you Wally Wheatfield?
I thought--"

"Me Wally? what do you take me for?  I'll let you know who I am.  You're
a beauty, you are.  Some of our chaps'll tell you who I am, Mr
Canvasser.  Now, look here, you stop there till I come back from
Yorke's.  If you move an inch--whew! you'll find the weather pretty
warm, I can tell you.  Canvassing?  You'll get canvassed, I fancy,
before you grow much taller."

And off stalked the indignant Percy, promising himself a particularly
pleasant afternoon, as soon as his errand to the captain was over.

Yorke was at work, with his lexicon and notebooks on the table, when the
envoy entered.

"Well, is that you or your brother?" inquired he.

"Not my brother, if I know it," said Percy.

"That's not much help.  He says exactly the same when I put the same
question to him."

"He does, does he?  I owe Wally one already, now--"

"Thanks--then you're not Wally.  What do you want?"

"This note.  Clapperton said I was to wait while you read it, and bring
an answer if there was one."

Yorke read the note, and smiled as he did so.  Percy wished he knew what
was in it.  He didn't know Clapperton could make jokes.

"Any answer?" he demanded.

"Yes--there's an answer," said the captain.

He took out a list of names from his pocket, and compared it with that
on Clapperton's letter.  Then he wrote as follows:--

"Dear Clapperton,--The fifteen against Rendlesham is already made up as
follows," (here followed the list).  "You will see it includes six of
the names you sent.  We must play the best team we can; and I think we
shall have it.

"Yours truly,--

"Cecil Yorke."

"There's the answer.  Take it over at once."

"I like his style," growled Percy to himself.  "He don't seem to have a
`please' about him.  Catch me hurrying myself for him; I've got this
precious canvasser to look after."

And he returned at a leisurely pace to the rendezvous.

No Fisher minor was there!

That young gentleman, when left to himself, found himself in a
perspiration of doubt and fear.  He had made a most awkward blunder, and
confessed the delinquencies of his comrades to the very last man they
would wish to know of them.  That was bad enough; but, to make things
worse, he was to be let in for the blame of the whole affair, and, with
Master Percy's assistance, was shortly to experience warm weather among
the Moderns.

Happy thought!  He would not stay where he was.  He would retire, as the
Latin book said, into winter quarters, and entrench himself in the
stronghold of Wally and D'Arcy and Ashby.  If he _was_ to get it hot, he
would sooner get it from them than from the barbarians in Forder's.

With which desperate conclusion, and once more devoutly wishing himself
safe at home, he made tracks, at a rapid walk, to Wally's room.  His
three comrades were all there.

"What's up?" said they as he entered, with agitated face.

"Oh, I say, it's all because you and your brother are so alike.  I met
him just now; and--he's heard about that canvassing, you know, and I
thought you'd like to know."

"You mean to say you blabbed?" said Wally, jumping to his feet.

"It's your fault," said D'Arcy.  "I've made the same mistake myself.
Why can't you grow a moustache or something to distinguish you?"

"Why can't you get your brother to be a Classic! then it wouldn't
matter--either of you would do," suggested Ashby.

Ashby was beginning to feel quite at home in Wakefield's.

"I'll let some of you see if it won't matter," retorted Wally.  "If
they've got wind of that affair the other side, there'll be a fearful
row.  They'll want another election.  Oh, you young idiot!  That comes
of trusting a new kid, that sings comic songs, and parts his hair the
wrong side, with a secret.  D'Arcy's nearly as big an ass as you are
yourself, to trust you."

After this Philippic, Wally felt a little better, and was ready to
consider what had better be done.

"He's bound to come here, you chaps," said he.  "You cut.  Leave him to
me--I'll tackle him."

Fisher minor considered this uncommonly good advice, and obeyed it with
alacrity.  The other two followed less eagerly.  They would have liked
to stay and see the fun.

As Wally expected, his affectionate relative, being baulked of his prey
outside, came to pay a fraternal visit.

"What cheer?" said he.  "I say, have you seen a kid called Fisher minor?
The new kid, you know, that we had a lark with at dinner on first-
night."

"Oh, that chap.  Bless you, he messes in our study.  What about him?"

"I want him.  I want to say something to him."

"I'll tell him."

"All right.  He's come and told you, has he? and you're hiding him?
Never mind; I'll bowl him out, the beauty.  I know all about that little
game of yours, yesterday, you know!"

"What little game?"

"As if you didn't know!  Do you suppose I didn't find five of 'em shut
up here yesterday, being kept out of the way at Elections?"

"Yes; and do you suppose if it hadn't been for me they'd have got into
the Hall at all?  Don't be a beast, Percy, if you can help.  They stayed
here of their own accord.  No one kept them in.  I say, have some
toffee?"

"Got any?"

"Rather.  A new brew this morning.  I say, you can have half of it."

"Thanks, awfully, Wally."

"You see--oh, take more than that--these new kids are such born asses,
they boss everything.  You should have heard that Fisher minor at lamb's
singing the other night--like the toffee?  I say, don't be a sneak about
those chaps.  You'd never have got them in without me.  I backed you up,
and got the door open.  I say--would you like a Turkish stamp?  I've got
one to swop--but you can have it if you like."

"Thanks, old man.  Yes, new kinds are rot.  Well, ta, ta--better make it
up, I suppose.  I say, I shan't have time to write home to-day.  You
write this time, and I'll do the two next week."

"All serene, if you like.  Here, you're leaving one of your bits of
toffee.  Ta, ta, old chappie."

And these great twin brethren, whose infirmity it was always to be fond
of one another when they were together, and to scorn one another when
they were apart, separated in a most amicable fashion.

"Well?" asked the three exiles, putting in their heads as soon as the
enemy had gone.

"Choked him off," said Wally, fanning himself.  "Jolly hard work.  But
he came round."

Percy, meanwhile, having suddenly remembered his errand, hastened back
to the house.  As he did so he observed notices of the fifteen for the
Rendlesham match posted on Wakefield's door, on the school-board, and at
Forder's.  He solaced himself by writing in bold characters the word
"beast" against each of the names which belonged to a Classic boy, and
discovered, when his task was done, that he had inscribed the word nine
times out of fifteen on each notice.  Whereupon he made off at a run to
his senior's.

"Well," said Clapperton, evidently anxious, "didn't I tell you to come
back at once!  Any answer?"

"Yes, this," said Percy, producing the captain's letter.  "I say, Yorke
grinned like anything when he read yours."

"Did he?" replied Clapperton, opening the envelope.

Evidently Yorke in his reply had not been guilty of a joke, for the face
of the Modern captain was dark and scowling as he read it.

"Cool cheek," muttered he.  "Dangle was right, after all.  You can go,
youngster."

"All right.  I say, they've got the fifteen stuck up on the boards--six
of our chaps in it.  We ought to lick them this year."

But as Clapperton did not do him the favour of heeding his observations,
he retired, and tried vainly to collect his scattered forces to conclude
the eight-handed boxing match, which had been so unfeelingly interrupted
an hour ago.

Clapperton, to do him justice, could not deny to himself that the team
selected by the captain was the best fighting fifteen the School could
put into the football field.  But, having advanced his claim for half
numbers, his pride was hurt at finding it almost contemptuously set
aside.  It would never do for him to climb down now.

The Moderns, after all, had a right to have their men in; and he had a
right to assume they were better players than some of the selected
Classics.  It was easy to work himself into a rage, and talk about
favouritism, and abuse of privilege, and all that.  His popularity in
his own house depended on his fighting their battles, and he must do it
now.  So he wrote a reply to Yorke.

"Dear Yorke,--I do not agree with you about the fifteen.  I consider the
men on our side whom you have omitted are better than the three I have
marked on your list.  If we are to make the clubs a success, we ought to
pull together, and let there be no suspicion, however groundless, of
favouritism.

"Yours truly, Geo.  Clapperton."

To this letter, which he sent over by another junior, more expeditious
than his last, he received the following reply:--

"Dear Clapperton,--Sides have nothing to do with it.  If the best
fifteen names were all on your side, I should have to select them.  But
they are not.  The fifteen I have chosen are undoubtedly the best men we
have, and the team most likely to win the match.  I suppose that is what
we play for.

"Yours truly,--

"Cecil Yorke."

This polite correspondence Clapperton laid before his friends.  The
general feeling was that the Moderns were being unfairly and
disrespectfully used.

"It's the old story over again," said Dangle.  "If we don't look after
ourselves, nobody else will."

"At any rate, as long as he's captain, I suppose he has the right to
pick the team," said Fullerton.  "_I_ shouldn't be particularly sorry if
he were to leave me out.  It wouldn't matter to me."

"Who cares whether it matters to you?  It matters to our side," said
Brinkman, "and we oughtn't to stand it."



CHAPTER SIX.

ROLLITT.

Rollitt of Wakefield's was a standing mystery at Fellsgarth.  Though he
had been three years at the school, and worked his way up from the
junior form to one of the first six, no one knew him.  He had no
friends, and did not want any.  He rarely spoke when not obliged to do
so; and when he did, he said either what was unexpected or disagreeable.
He scarcely ever played in the matches, but when he did he played
tremendously.  Although a Classic, he was addicted to scientific
research and long country walks.  His study was a spectacle for
untidiness and grime.  He abjured his privilege of having a fag.  No one
dared to take liberties with him, for he had an arm like an oak branch,
and a back as broad as the door.

All sorts of queer stories were afloat about him.  It was generally
whispered that his father was a common workman, and that the son was
being kept at school by charity.  Any reference to his poverty was the
one way of exciting Rollitt.  But it was too risky an amusement to be
popular.

His absence of mind, however, was his great enemy at school.  Of him the
story was current that once in the Fourth, when summoned to the front to
call-over the register, he called his own name among the rest, and
receiving no reply, looked to his place, and seeing the desk vacant,
marked Rollitt down as absent.  Another time, having gone to his room
after morning school to change into his flannels for cricket, he had
gone to bed by mistake, and slept soundly till call-bell next morning.
"Have you heard Rollitt's last?" came to be the common way of prefacing
any unlikely story at Fellsgarth; and what with fact and fiction, the
hero had come to be quite a mythical celebrity at Fellsgarth.

His thrift was another of his characteristics.  He had never been seen
to spend a penny, unless it was to save twopence.  If fellows had dared,
they would have liked now and then to pay his subscriptions to the
clubs; or even hand on an old pair of cricket shoes or part of the
contents of a hamper for his benefit.  But woe betide them if they ever
tried it!  The only extravagance he had ever been known to commit was
some months ago, when he bought a book of trout-flies, which rumour said
must have cost him as much as an ordinary Classic's pocket-money for a
whole term.

To an impressionable youth like Fisher minor it was only natural that
Rollitt should be an object of awe.  For a day or two after his arrival,
when the stories he had heard were fresh in his memory, the junior was
wont to change his walk to a tip-toe as he passed the queer boy's door.
If ever he met him face to face, he started and quaked like one who has
encountered a ghost or a burglar.  After a week this excess of deference
toned down.  Finding that Rollitt neither hurt nor heeded him, he
abandoned his fears, and, instead of running away, stood and stared at
his man, as if by keeping his eye hard on him he could discover his
mystery.

It was two or three days after Elections that Fisher minor, having
discovered by the absence of everybody from their ordinary haunts that
it was a half-holiday, took it into his head to explore a little way
down the Shargle Valley.  He believed the other fellows had gone up; and
he thought it a little unfriendly that they should have left him in the
lurch.

He was not particularly fond of woods, unless there were nuts in them;
or of rivers, unless there were stones on the banks to shy in.  Still,
it seemed to be half-holiday form at Fellsgarth to go down valleys, so
he went, quite indifferent to the beauties of Nature, and equally
indifferent as to where this walk brought him.

A mile below Fellsgarth, as everybody knows, the Shargle tumbles wildly
into the Shayle, with a great fuss of rapids and cataracts and "narrows"
to celebrate the fact; and a mile further, the united streams flow
tamely out among reeds and gravel islands into Hawkswater.

Fisher minor had nearly reached the junction, and was proceeding to
speculate on the possibility of picking his way among the stones towards
the lake, when he caught sight of a boat in the middle of the rapid
stream.  It was tied somewhat carelessly to the overhanging branch of a
tree, which bent and creaked with every lurch of the boat in the passing
rapids.  Standing in the stern as unconcerned as if he was on an island
in a duck-pond, was Rollitt with his fishing-rod, casting diligently
into the troubled waters.

For the first time the junior enjoyed an uninterrupted view of the
object of his curiosity.  He found it hard to recognise at first in the
eager, sportsmanlike figure, with his animated face, the big shambling
fellow whom he had so often eyed askance in the passages at Wakefield's.
But there was no mistaking the shabby clothes, the powerful arms, the
broad, square back.  Rollitt the sportsman was another creature from
Rollitt the Classic, and Fisher minor was critic enough to see that the
advantage was with the former.
