while he wasn't looking.  He was a kid of about four and a half, I
fancy, with a turnippy head and a suit of togs that must have been new,
he was so jolly proud of them.  He sat staring at the lamp and swinging
his legs for a good bit.  Then he got hold of the window-strap and
fooled about with that.  Then he remembered his swagger togs and looked
himself all over, and stuck his hands in his pocket.  He twigged me
looking at him as he did so.

"I've got a knife," he said, as cool as if he'd known me a couple of
terms.

"Who said you hadn't?"  I responded.

"It's in my pocket," he said.

"Oh," said I.  I didn't want to encourage him.

He pulled it out, staring at me all the time.  Then he slipped down off
the seat and brought it up to me.

"Open it," he said.

"Open it yourself," said I.

"I can't," said he.  "Open it!  Open it!"

"All right, keep your temper," said I, and I opened it.  A beastly blunt
thing it was.  "There you are; take it."

"I want to sit beside you," he said, when he'd got it.

"Do you?  I don't want you.  Haven't you got all the rest of the
carriage?"

"Lift Tommy up," he whined.

I'd a good mind to chuck him out of the window.

"Lift yourself up," I said, "and shut up.  I want to read."  Then I'm
bothered if the young cad didn't begin yelling!  Just because I didn't
lift him up.  I never saw such a blub-baby in all my life.  I couldn't
make out what he was up to at first.  I thought he was curtseying and
seeing how long he could hold his breath.  But when it did come out, my
eye!  I thought the engine-driver would hear.  I was in a regular funk;
I thought he'd got a fit or something; I never heard such yelling.  He
was black in the face over it, and dancing.  I'd a good mind to pull the
cord and stop the train.  But I thought I'd see if I could pull him
round first.

So I picked him up and stuck him up on the seat.  Would you believe it,
Jossy?  The moment he was up he stopped howling and began grinning.  It
had all been a plant to get me to lift him up; and as soon as he'd made
me do it he laughed at me!

I can tell you it's not pleasant to be made a fool of, even by a kid.

"I'm sitting beside you now," he said, as much as to tell me he'd scored
one off me.

I was too disgusted to take any further notice of him.  I suppose he saw
I was riled, and began to be a bit civil.  He pulled a nasty sticky bit
of chocolate out of his pocket and held it up to my nose.

"A sweetie for you," he said.

I didn't want to have him yelling again, so I took it.  Ugh!--all over
dust and hairs, and half melted.

He watched me gulp it down, and then, to my relief, got hold of the
_Boy's Own Paper_ and began looking at the pictures.  He got sick of
that soon, and went and looked out of the window.  Then he came and sat
by me again, and began to get jolly familiar.  He stroked my cheeks with
his horrid sticky hand, and then climbed up on the seat and tried to
lark with my cap.  Then just because I didn't shut him up, he clambered
up on my back and nearly throttled me with his arms round my neck; and--
what do you think?--he began to kiss me!

That was a drop too much.

"Stow it, kid!"  I said.

"Dear, dear!" he said, getting regularly maudlin, and kissing me at
about two a second.

"Let go, do you hear? you're scrugging me."

"Nice mannie," he said.

I didn't know what to do until I luckily thought of my grub.

"Like a bun?" said I.

He let me go and was down beside me like a shot.  You should have seen
him walk into that bun!  His face was all over it, and the crumbs were
about an inch deep all over the place.  When he got near the end of bun
Number 1, he looked up as near choking as they make them, and said--

"I like buns awfully."

"All right, have another," said I.  You see as his governor was going to
meet him in town, it didn't matter much to me if he got gripes at night.
Anything to keep him quiet.

After the third bun he was about full up, and said he was thirsty.  I
couldn't make the young ass understand that I had no water in the
carriage.  He kept on saying he was thirsty for half an hour, till we
came to a station.  I had made up my mind I would get into another
carriage at the first stop we came to; but, somehow, it seemed rather
low to leave the kid in the lurch.  So I bought him a glass of milk
instead, which set him up again.  Nobody else got in the carriage--knew
better--and off we went again.

He'd got an awful lot to say for himself; about dicky-birds and puff-
puffs, and dogs, and trouser-pockets and rot of that sort, and didn't
seem to care much whether I listened or no.  Then, just when I thought
he had about run dry and was getting sleepy, he rounded on me with--

"Tell me a story."

"Me?  I don't know any stories."

"Oh yes; a funny one, please."

"I tell you I don't know any--what about?"

"`The Three Bears.'"

"I don't know anything about `three bears,'" said I.

"Do! do!! do!!!" he said, beginning to get crusty.

So I did my best.  He kept saying I was all wrong, and putting me right;
he might just as well have told it himself.  I told him so.  But he took
no notice, and went on badgering me for more stories.

I can tell you I was getting sick of it!

When I made up a story for him to laugh at, he looked so solemn and
said--

"Not that; a funny one."

And when I told him a fairy tale, he snapped up and said he didn't like
it.

It ended in my telling him the "The Three Bears" over and over again.
It was about the sixty-fifth time of telling that we got to Vauxhall,
and had to give up tickets.

"Now, young 'un, look out for your governor when we get in--I don't know
him, you know."

The young ass didn't know what I meant.

"Look out for daddy, then," I said.

He promptly stuck his head out of the window and said the ticket-
collector was daddy; then that the porter was; then that a sweep on the
platform was.

It wasn't very hopeful for spotting the real daddy at Waterloo.  I told
him to shut up and wait till we got there.

When we got there, I stuck him up at the window, as large as life, for
his governor to see.  There were a lot of people about; but I can tell
you I was pretty queer when no one owned him.  We hung about a quarter
of an hour, asking everybody we met if they'd come to meet a kid, and
watching them all go off in cabs, till we had the platform to ourselves.

"Here's a go, kid!" said I; "daddy's not come."

"I 'spex," says he, "when the middling-size bear found his porridge
eaten up, he wondered who it was."

"Shut up about the bears," said I.  "What about your gov.--your daddy?
Where does he live?"

"In London town," said he, as soon as I could knock those bears out of
his head.

"Whereabouts?  What street?"

"London town."

"Do you mean to say--look here, what's your name?  Tommy what?"

"It's Tommy," he said.

"I know that.  Is it Tommy Jones, or Tommy Robinson, or what?"

"It's Tommy," he repeated.  "My name's Tommy."  Here was a nice go!
Stranded with a kid that didn't know his own name, or where his governor
lived!  The worst of it was, I had to stop in London that night as there
was no train on.  My pater had written to get a room for me at the
Euston Hotel, so that I should be on the spot for starting home first
train in the morning.

I was regularly stumped, I can tell you.  It never turned a feather on
the kid, his governor not turning up; and I couldn't make the idiot
understand anything.  He hung on to me singing and saying, "Who's been
tasting my porridge and eaten it all up?" or else cheeking the porters,
or else trying to whistle to make the trains go.

I thought I'd better leave word with the station-master where I'd gone,
in case any one turned up; and then there was nothing for it but to take
a cab across to the hotel.

The kid was no end festive to have a ride in the cab.  It would have
been in a little better taste if he'd held his tongue, and shown a
little regret for the jolly mess he'd let me into.  But, bless you, he
didn't care two straws.

"What will daddy say when he can't find you?"  I said, trying to get him
to look at things seriously.

"Daddy will say, `Who's been sitting in my chair, and broken the bottom
out?'" said he, still harping on those blessed bears.  I gave him up
after that, and let him jaw on.

When we got to the hotel I was in another fix.  The chap in charge said
he'd got instructions about one young gentleman, but not two.

"Oh, I'm looking after this boy," said I, "till tomorrow: I'll have him
in my room."

The chap looked as if he didn't like it.  And, of course, just when he
was thinking it over, the young cad must go and cheek him.

"What makes that ugly man so red on his nose?" he asks at the top of his
voice, for every one to hear.

The chap was no end riled at that, and looked as if he'd kick us out.
When he'd cooled down he said--

"You wait here; I'll attend to you presently."

That was a nice go!  If I had had tin enough I should have gone
somewhere else; but I'd only got enough for the journey to-morrow, and
so thought I'd better hang on here, where the governor had arranged.

The lid went on anyhow while we were waiting in the hall.  He ran and
stood in front of people, and he pulled waiters' coat-tails, and got
mixed up with the luggage, and called out to me to know where the ugly
red-nosed man had gone.  At last I had to pull him in.

"Look here, kid!" said I; "if you don't hold your jaw and sit here
quietly, I'll give you to a policeman."

"Tell me about the bears, then."

Oh, how I loathed those bears!  Think of me, captain of my eleven, in
that rackety hall, with people coming and going, and a row enough to
deafen you, telling a kid about The Three Bears!  You may grin, Jossy;
but I was reduced to it.

After a time the hotel chap came and said we were to have a double-
bedded room, and he should charge half-extra for the kid, and if we
wanted dinner we'd better look sharp, as it was just beginning.

So we went up and washed--at least I had to wash the kid's sticky hands
and face for him--and then came down to _table d'hote_.  I was in a
regular funk lest any of our fellows, or any one I knew, should see me.
We got squeezed in between a lady in grand evening dress, and a
professor chap with blue spectacles; and as they were both attending to
their neighbours, I hoped we might scrape through without a scene.

You should have seen that kid tuck in!  I mildly suggested that he'd
better not have any mock-turtle soup; but he began to get up steam for a
bowl and a half, so I gave it up.

He said it was ugly stuff, but for all that he polished off a plate of
it, and then walked into salmon.  After that he had a turn at roast pork
and apple sauce, and after that a cabinet pudding and some Gorgonzola
cheese.  He was very anxious to have some beer, like the professor, or
some wine, like the lady; but I put my foot down there, and let him have
lemonade instead.  You should have seen people stare at him!  The
professor glared as if he was a rum animal.

"Your brother?" said he.

"Not exactly," said I.

"Uncommon appetite.  Would you mind telling me in the morning what sort
of night he had?  I shall be curious to know."

The lady glared too, chiefly because the kid had sprinkled her silk
dress with melted butter, and pork gravy and lemonade.  He caught her
eye once, and said out loud to her--

"Our cat's called Flossy; what's your cat called?"

The lady turned away; whereupon the kid began his cheek again.

"That lady," said he to me and the company at large, "has got a nice
dress and a nasty face.  I like nice faces bestest--do you?"

"Shut up, or I'll clout your ear," snarled I, in a regular perspiration
of disgust.

"What's clout?" inquired he.  Then, feeling his ears, "My ears don't
stick out like that man's over there, do they?"

"Do you hear? shut up, you little fool!"

"We've got a donkey at home, and his--"

Here I could stand it no longer, and lugged him off, whether he liked it
or no.  He was just as bad in the reading-room.  He wouldn't sit still
unless I told him stories, and made a regular nuisance of himself to the
other people.  Then (I suppose it was his big feed) he began to get
crusty, and blubbered when I talked sharply to him, and presently set up
a regular good old howl.

"Why don't you put the child to bed?" said a lady; "he's no business up
at this hour."

Nice, wasn't it?

I had to sneak off with him upstairs, howling all the way.  He wouldn't
stop till I gave him a mild cuff on the head.  That seemed to bring him
round enough to demand the "The Three Bears" once more.

Anything to keep him still; so at it I went again.

Then I told him to go to bed; and he told me to undress him, as he
