that way, his reasoning powers were strong enough to tell him that they
were not likely to return by the same path.  It was more natural they
should continue on.  A man, ignorant of all the preceding events
connected with their journey would have reasoned much in the same way.
If you have been at all observant, you have seen other animals--such as
dogs, deer, hares, or even birds--act just as the lion did on this
occasion.

Beyond a doubt the intellectual process described passed through the
mind of this lion; and he had skulked round to shun an encounter with
the three travellers.

Now a lion will not always act so--though he will in five cases out of
six, or oftener.  Hence very erroneous views are held in relation to the
courage of this animal.  Some naturalists, led away by what appears to
be a feeling of envy or anger, accuse the lion of downright _cowardice_,
denying him a single noble quality of all those that have from earliest
times been ascribed to him!  Others, on the contrary, assert that he
knows no fear, either of man or beast; and these endow him with many
virtues besides courage.  Both parties back up their views, not by mere
assertions, but by an ample narration of well-attested facts!

How is this?  There is a dilemma here.  Both cannot be right in their
opinions?  And yet, odd as it may appear to say so, both _are_ right in
a certain sense.

The fact is, _some lions are cowardly, while others are brave_.

The truth of this might be shown by whole pages of facts, but in this
little volume we have not room.  I think, however, boy reader, I can
satisfy you with an analogy.

Answer me--Do you know any species of animal, the individuals of which
are exactly alike in character?  Think over the dogs _of your
acquaintance_!  Are they alike, or anything near it?  Are not some of
them noble, generous, faithful, brave to the death?  Are not others
mean, sneaking, cowardly curs?  So is it with lions.

Now, you are satisfied that my statement about the lions may be true.

There are many causes to affect the courage and ferocity of the lion.
His age--the state of his stomach--the season of the year--the hour of
the day--but, above all, the _sort of hunters that belong to the
district he inhabits_.

This last fact appears quite natural to those who believe in the
_intellect_ of animals, which of course _I_ do.  It is perfectly natural
that the lion, as well as other animals, should soon learn the character
of his enemy, and fear him or not, as the case may be.  Is this not an
old story with us?  If I remember aright, we had a talk upon this
subject when speaking of the crocodiles of America.  We remarked that
the alligator of the Mississippi rarely attacks man in modern times; but
it has not been always so.  The rifle of the alligator-leather hunter
has tamed its ferocity.  The very _same species_ in South America eats
Indians by scores every year; and the crocodile of Africa is dreaded in
some parts even more than the lion!

It is asserted that the lions of the Cape are more cowardly in some
districts than in others.  They are less brave in those districts where
they have been "jaged" by the courageous and stalwart boor with his long
loud-cracking "roer."

Beyond the frontier, where they have no enemy but the tiny arrow of the
Bushman (who does not desire to kill them!) and the slender "assegai" of
the Bechuana, the lion has little or no fear of man.

Whether the one, before the eyes of our party, was naturally a brave
one, could not yet be told.  He was one with a huge black mane, or
"schwart-fore life," as the boors term it; and these are esteemed the
fiercest and most dangerous.  The "yellow-maned,"--for there is
considerable variety in the colour of the Cape lions--is regarded as
possessing less courage; but there is some doubt about the truth of
this.  The young "black-manes" may often be mistaken for the true yellow
variety, and their character ascribed to him to his prejudice,--for the
swarthy colour of the mane only comes after the lion is many years of
age.

Whether the "schwart-fore life" was a fierce and brave one, Von Bloom
did not stay to think about.  It was evident that the edge had been
taken off the animal's appetite.  It was evident he did not meditate an
attack; and that had the horsemen chosen to make a detour, and ride
peacefully away, they might have continued their journey without ever
seeing or hearing of him again.

But the field-cornet had no such intention.  He had lost his precious
oxen and cattle.  _That_ lion had pulled down some of them, at least.
The Dutch blood was up, and if the beast had been the strongest and
fiercest of his tribe, he was bound to be brought out of that bush.

Ordering the others to remain where they were, Von Bloom advanced on
horseback until within about fifty paces of where the lion lay.  Here he
drew up, coolly dismounted, passed the bridle over his arm, stuck his
loading-rod into the ground, and knelt down behind it.

You will fancy he would have been safer to have kept his saddle, as the
lion cannot overtake a horse.  True; but the lion would have been safer
too.  It is no easy matter to fire correctly from any horse, but when
the mark happens to be a grim lion, he is a well-trained steed that will
stand sufficiently firm to admit of a true aim.  A shot from the saddle
under such circumstances is a mere chance shot; and the field-cornet was
not in the mood to be satisfied with a chance shot.  Laying his roer
athwart the loading-rod, and holding the long barrel steady against it,
he took deliberate aim through the ivory sights.

During all this time the lion had not stirred.  The bush was between him
and the hunter; but he could hardly have believed that it sufficed to
conceal him.  Far from it.  His yellow flanks were distinctly visible
through the thorny twigs, and his head could be seen with his muzzle and
whiskers stained red with the blood of the oxen.

No--he did not believe himself hid.  A slight growl, with one or two
shakes of his tail, proved the contrary.  He lay still however, as lions
usually do, until more nearly approached.  The hunter, as already
stated, was full fifty yards from him.

Excepting the motion of his tail, he made no other till Von Bloom pulled
trigger; and then with a scream he sprang several feet into the air.
The hunter had been afraid of the twigs causing his bullet to glance
off; but it was plain it had told truly, for he saw the fur fly from the
side of that lion where it struck him.

It was but a wound; and not deadly, as soon appeared.

With long bounds the angry brute came on--lashing his tail, and showing
his fearful teeth.  His mane, now on end, seemed to have doubled his
size.  He looked as large as a bull!

In a _few_ seconds time he had crossed the distance that separated him
from the hunter, but the latter was gone far from that spot.  The moment
he had delivered his fire, he leaped upon his well-trained horse, and
rode off towards the others.

All three were for a short while together--Hendrik holding his yager
cocked and ready, while Swartboy grasped his bow and arrows.  But the
lion dashed forward before either could fire; and they were obliged to
spur and gallop out of his way.

Swartboy had ridden to one side, while Von Bloom and Hendrik took the
other; and the game was now between the two parties--both of which had
pulled up at some distance off.

The lion, after the failure of his charge, halted, and looked first at
one, then at the other--as if uncertain which to pursue.

His appearance at this moment was terrible beyond expression.  His whole
fierce nature was roused.  His mane stood erect--his tail lasher his
flanks--his mouth, widely open, showed the firm-set trenchant teeth--
their white spikes contrasting with the red blood that clotted his
cheeks and snout, while his angry roaring added horror to his
appearance.

But none of the three were terrified out of their senses.  Hendrik at
this moment covered him with his rifle, took cool aim, and fired; while
at the same instant Swartboy sent an arrow whistling through the air.

Both had aimed truly.  Both bullet and arrow struck; and the shaft of
the latter could be seen sticking in the lion's thigh.

The fierce brute that up to this time had exhibited the most determined
courage, now seemed overcome with a sudden fear.  Either the arrow or
one of the bullets must have sickened him with the combat; for, dropping
his mop-like tail to a level with the line of his back, he broke away;
and, trotting sulkily forward, sprang in at the door of the kraal!



CHAPTER TEN.

A LION IN THE TRAP.

There was something singular in the lion seeking shelter in so unusual a
place; but it showed his sagacity.  There was no other cover within
convenient distance, and to have reached any bush that would have
afforded him concealment, since the passage of the locusts, would have
been difficult.  The mounted hunters could easily have overtaken him,
had he attempted to run off.  He was aware that the house was
uninhabited.  He had been prowling around it all the night--perhaps
within it--and therefore knew what sort of place it was.

The brute's instinct was correct.  The walls of the house would protect
him from the guns of his enemies at a distance; and for these to
approach near would be his advantage and their danger.

An odd incident occurred as the lion entered the kraal.  There was a
large window in one end of the house.  Of course it was not glazed--it
never had been.  A glass window is a rarity in these parts.  A strong
wooden shutter alone closed it.  This was still hanging on its hinges,
but in the hurried "flitting," the window had been left open.  The door
also had been standing ajar.  As the lion sprang in at the latter, a
string of small foxy wolf-like creatures came pouring out through the
former, and ran with all their might across the plain.  They were
jackals!

As it afterwards appeared, one of the oxen had been chased into the
house either by lions or hyenas, and killed there.  His carcass had been
overlooked by the larger carnivora, and the cunning jackals had been
making a quiet breakfast upon it, when so unceremoniously disturbed.

The entrance of their terrible king in such angry mood, by the door,
caused the fox-wolves to beat a quick retreat by the window; and the
appearance of the horsemen without had still further frightened these
cowardly brutes, so that they ran away from the kraal at top speed, and
never halted until they were out of sight.

The three hunters could not restrain a laugh; but their tone was
suddenly changed by another incident that happened almost at the same
moment.

Von Bloom had brought with him his two fine dogs, to assist in driving
back the cattle.

During the short halt the party had made by the spring, these had
fastened upon a half-eaten carcass behind the walls; and, being
extremely hungry, had stuck to it, even after the horsemen, had ridden
off.  Neither of the dogs had seen the lion, until the moment when the
savage brute charged forward, and was making for the kraal.  The shots,
the growling of the lion, and the loud wings of the vultures as they
flew off affrighted, told the dogs that something was going on in front,
at which they ought to be present; and, forsaking their pleasant meal,
both came bounding over the walls.

They reached the open space in front, just as the lion leaped into the
door; and without hesitation the brave noble animals rushed on, and
followed him inside the house.

For some moments there was heard a confused chorus of noises--the
barking and worrying of the dogs, the growling and roaring of the lion.
Then a dull sound followed as of some heavy object dashed against the
wall.  Then came a mournful howl--another, another--a noise like the
cracking of bones--the "purr" of the great brute with its loud rough
bass--and then a deep silence.  The struggle was over.  This was
evident, as the dogs no longer gave tongue.  Most likely they were
killed.

The hunters remained watching the door with feelings of intense anxiety.
The laugh had died upon their lips, as they listened to those hideous
sounds, the signs of the fearful combat.  They called their dogs by
name.  They hoped to see them issue forth, even if wounded.  But no.
The dogs came not forth--they never came forth--they were dead!

A long-continued silence followed the noise of the conflict.  Von Bloom
could no longer doubt that his favourite and only dogs had been killed.

Excited by this new misfortune he almost lost prudence.  He was about to
rush forward to the door, where he might deliver his fire close to the
hated enemy, when a bright idea came into the brain of Swartboy; and the
Bushman was heard calling out,--

"Baas! baas! we shut him up! we close da skellum up."

There was good sense in this suggestion--there was plausibility in it.
Von Bloom saw this; and, desisting from his previous intention, he
determined to adopt Swartboy's plan.

But how was it to be executed?  The door still hung upon its hinges, as
also the window-shutter.  If they could only get hold of these, and shut
them fast, they would have the lion secure, and might destroy him at
their leisure.

But how to shut either door or window in safety?  That was the
difficulty that now presented itself.

Should they approach either, the lion would be certain to see them from
within; and, enraged as he now was, would be sure to spring upon them.
Even if they approached on horseback to effect their purpose, they would
not be much safer.  The horses would not stand quiet while they
stretched out to lay hold of latch or handle.  All three of the animals
were already dancing with excitement.  They knew the lion was inside, an
occasional growl announced his presence there--they would not approach
either door or window with sufficient coolness; and their stamping and
snorting would have the effect of bringing the angry beast out upon
them.

It was clear, then, that to shut either door or window would be an
operation of great danger.  So long as the horsemen were in open ground,
and at some distance from the lion, they had no cause to fear; but
should they approach near and get entangled among the walls, some one of
them would be most likely to fall a victim to the ferocious brute.

Low as may be the standard of a Bushman's intellect, there is a species
of it peculiar to him in which he appears to excel.  In all matters of
hunter-craft, his intelligence, or instinct you might almost call it, is
quite a match for the more highly--developed mind of the Caucasian.
This arises, no doubt, from the keen and frequent exercise of those
particular faculties,--keen and frequent, because his very existence
often depends on their successful employment.

Huge ill-shapen head as Swartboy carried on his shoulders, there was an
ample stock of brains in it; and a life of keen endeavour to keep his
stomach supplied had taught him their exercise.  At that moment
Swartboy's brains came to the relief of the party.

"Baas!" he said, endeavouring to restrain the impatience of his master,
"vyacht um bige, mein baas!  Leave it to da ole Bushy to close da door.
He do it."

"How?" inquired Von Bloom.

"Vyacht um bige, mein baas! no long to wait,--you see."

All three had ridden up together within less than an hundred yards of
the kraal.  Von Bloom and Hendrik sat silent, and watched the
proceedings of the Bushman.

The latter drew from his pocket a clew of small cord, and, having
carefully uncoiled it, attached one end to an arrow.  He then rode up to
within thirty yards of the house, and dismounted--not directly opposite
the entrance, but a little to the one side--so that the face of the
wooden door, which was fortunately but three-quarters open, was thus
fair before him.  Keeping the bridle over his arm, he now bent his bow,
and sent the arrow into the woodwork of the door.  There it was,
sticking near the edge, and just under the latch!

As soon as Swartboy delivered the shaft, he had leaped back into his
saddle--to be ready for retreat in case the lion should spring out.  He
still, however, kept hold of the string, one end of which was attached
to the arrow.

The "thud" of the arrow, as it struck the door, had drawn the attention
of the lion.  Of course, none of them saw him, but his angry growl told
them that it was so.  He did not show himself, however, and was again
silent.

Swartboy now drew the string taut,--first felt it with a steady pull;
and then, satisfied of its strength, gave it a stronger jerk, and
brought the door to.  The latch acted beautifully, and the door remained
shut even after the strain was taken off the cord.

To have opened the door now the lion must have had the sagacity to lift
the latch, or else must have broken through the thick, strong planks--
neither of which was to be feared.
