gulch, climbed over the carcass of the dead horse.  Then, finding his
own outside, he mounted and rode off to rejoin his red-skinned comrades
engaged in sacking the caravan.

On reaching it a spectacle was presented to his eyes--frightful, though
not to him.  For he was a man who had seen similar sights before--one
with soul steeped in kindred crime.

The waggons had been drawn partially apart, disclosing the space
between.  The smoke had all ascended or drifted off, and clear sunlight
once more shone upon the sand--over the ground lately barricaded by the
bodies of those who had so bravely defended it.  There were thirteen of
them--the party of traders and hunters being in all but fifteen.  Of
those slain upon the spot there was not one now wearing his hair.  Their
heads were bare and bloody, the crown of each showing a circular disc of
dark crimson colour.  The scalping-knife had already completed its work,
and the ghastly trophies were seen impaled upon the points of spears--
some of them stuck upright in the sand, others borne triumphantly about
by the exulting victors.  Their triumph had cost them dear.  On the
plain outside at least thirty of their own lay extended, stone dead;
while here and there a group bending over some recumbent form told of a
warrior wounded.

By the orders of their chief, some had set about collecting the corpses
of their slain comrades, with the intent of interring them.  Others,
acting without orders, still continued to wreak their savage spite upon
the bodies of their white victims, submitting them to further
mutilation.  They chopped off their heads; then, poising these on the
points of spears, tossed them to and fro, all the while shouting in
savage glee, laughing with a cacchination that resembled the mirth of a
madhouse.

Withal, there was stern vengeance in its tones.  A resistance, they
little expected, causing them such serious loss, had roused their
passions to a pitch of the utmost exasperation; and they tried to allay
their spiteful anger by expending it on the dead bodies of those who,
while living, had so effectually chastised them.  These were slashed and
hacked with tomahawks, pierced with spears, and arrows, beaten with war
clubs, then cut into pieces, to be tied to the tails of their horses,
and dragged in gallop to and fro over the ground.  For some time this
tragical spectacle held play.  Then ensued a scene savouring of the
ludicrous and grotesque.

The waggons were emptied of their contents, while the rich freight,
transported to a distance, was spread out upon the plain, and its
partition entered upon--all crowding around to receive their share.

The distribution was superintended by the Horned Lizard, though he with
the beard appeared to act with equal, or even greater, authority.
Backed by the second personage, who wore hair on his cheeks, he dictated
the apportionment.

And as he had said in soliloquy, the cotton prints of gaudy patterns
satisfied the cupidity of his red-skinned companions, leaving to himself
and his confidential friend the costlier fabrics of silken sheen.  Among
the traders' stock were knives of common sort--the cheapest cutlery of
Sheffield; guns and pistols of the Brummagem brand, with beads, looking
glasses, and such-like notions from the New England Boston.  All these,
delectable in the eyes of the Horned Lizard and his Tenawas, were left
to them; while the bearded man, himself selecting, appropriated the
silks and satins, the laces and real jewellery that had been designed to
deck the rich _doncellas_ of Santa Fe, El Paso, Chihuahua, and Durango.

The distribution over, the scene assumed a new aspect.  It was now that
the ludicrous came prominently into play.  Though not much water had
been found in the waggons, there was enough fluid of stronger spirit.  A
barrel of Monongahela whisky was part of the caravan stores left
undestroyed.  Knowing the white man's firewater but too well, the
Indians tapped the cask, and quaffed of its contents.

In a short time two-thirds of the band became intoxicated.  Some rolled
over dead drunk, and lay a-stretch along the sand.  Others tottered
about, uttering maudlin speeches.  Still others of stronger stomach and
steader brain kept their feet, as also their senses; only that these
became excited, increasing their cupidity.  They wanted more than they
had got, and would gamble to get it.  One had a piece of cotton print,
and so had another.  Each wished to have both or none.  How was it to be
decided?  By cards?  By dice?  No.  There was a way more congenial to
their tastes--more _a propos_ to their habits.  It should be done by
their horses.  They knew the sort of game, for it is not the first time
they have played it.  The piece of print is unrolled, and at each end
tied to a horse's tail.  The owners spring to the backs of the animals,
then urge them in the opposite directions till the strain comes; at the
pluck the web gives way, and he who holds the longer part becomes
possessor of the whole.

Others, not gamblers, out of sheer devilry and diversion, similarly
attach their stuffs, and gallop over the ground with the prints trailing
fifty yards behind them.  In the frenzied frolic that had seized hold of
them they forgot their slain comrades, still unburied.  They whoop,
shout, and laugh till the cliffs, in wild, unwonted echo, send back the
sound of their demoniac mirth.  A riot rare as original--a true saturnal
of savages.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A LIVING TOMB.

Literally buried alive, as Walt Wilder had said, were he and his
companion.

They now understood what had caused the strange noise that mystified
them--the rumbling followed by a crash.  No accidental _debacle_ or
falling of a portion of the cliff, as they had been half supposing; but
a deed of atrocious design--a huge rock rolled by the united strength of
the savages, until it rested over the orifice of the shaft, completely
coping and closing it.

It may have been done without any certain knowledge of their being
inside--only to make things sure.  It mattered not to the two men thus
cruelly enclosed, for they knew that in any case there was no hope of
their being rescued from what they believed to be a living tomb.

That it was such neither could doubt.  The guide, gifted with herculean
strength, had tried to move the stone on discovering how it lay.  With
his feet firmly planted in the projections below, and his shoulder to
the rock above, he had given a heave that would have lifted a loaded
waggon from its wheels.

The stone did not budge with all this exertion.  There was not so much
as motion.  He might as successfully have made trial to move a mountain
from its base.  He did not try again.  He remembered the rock itself.
He had noticed it while they were searching for a place to conceal
themselves, and had been struck with its immense size.  No one man could
have stirred it from its place.  It must have taken at least twenty
Indians.  No matter how many, they had succeeded in their design, and
their victims were now helplessly enclosed in the dark catacomb--slowly,
despairingly to perish.

"All up wi' us, I reck'n," said the guide, as he once more let himself
down upon the ledge to communicate the particulars to his companion.

Hamersley ascended to see for himself.  They could only go one at a
time.  He examined the edge of the orifice where the rock rested upon
it.  He could only do so by the touch.  Not a ray of light came in on
any side, and groping round and round he could detect neither crevice
nor void.  There were weeds and grass, still warm and smouldering, the
_debris_ of what had been set on fire for their fumigation.  The rock
rested on a bedding of these; hence the exact fit, closing every crack
and crevice.

On completing his exploration Hamersley returned to his companion below.

"Hopeless!" murmured Wilder, despondingly.

"No, Walt; I don't think so yet."

The Kentuckian, though young, was a man of remarkable intelligence as
well as courage.  It needed these qualities to be a prairie merchant--
one who commanded a caravan.  Wilder knew him to be possessed of them--
in the last of them equalling himself, in the first far exceeding him.

"You think thar's a chance for us to get out o' hyar?" he said,
interrogatively.

"I think there is, and a likely one."

"Good!  What leads ye to think so, Frank?"

"Reach me my bowie.  It's behind you there in the cave."

Wilder did as requested.

"It will depend a good deal upon what sort of rock this is around us.
It isn't flint, anyhow.  I take it to be either lime or sandstone.  If
so, we needn't stay here much longer than it would be safe to go out
again among those bloodthirsty savages."

"How do you mean, Frank?  Darn me if I yet understan ye."

"It's very simple, Walt.  If this cliff rock be only sandstone, or some
other substance equally soft, we may cut our way out--under the big
stone."

"Ah!  I didn't think o' thet.  Thar's good sense in what ye say."

"It has a softish feel," said the Kentuckian, as he drew his hand across
one of the projecting points.  "I wish I only had two inches of a
candle.  However, I think I can make my exploration in the dark."

There was a short moment of silence, after which was heard a clinking
sound, as of a knife blade being repeatedly struck against a stone.  It
was Hamersley, with his bowie, chipping off a piece from the rock that
projected from the side of the shaft.

The sound was pleasant to the Kentuckian's ear, for it was not the hard
metallic ring given out by quartz or granite.  On the contrary, the
steel struck against it with a dull, dead echo, and he could feel that
the point of the knife easily impinged upon it.

"Sandstone," he said; "or something that'll serve our purpose equally as
well.  Yes, Walt, there's a good chance for us to get out of this ugly
prison; so keep up your heart, comrade.  It may cost us a couple of
days' quarrying.  Perhaps all the better for that; the Indians are
pretty sure to keep about the waggons for a day or so.  They'll find
enough there to amuse them.  Our work will depend a good deal on what
sort of a stone they've rolled over the hole.  You remember what size
the boulder was?"

"'Twas a largish pebble; looked to me at least ten feet every way.  It
sort o' serprised me how the skunks ked a budged it.  I reck'n 'twar on
a coggle, an' rolled eezy.  It must ha' tuk the hul clanjamfry o' them."

"If we only knew the right edge to begin at.  For that we must go by
guess-work.  Well, we mustn't lose time, but set about our stone-cutting
at once.  Every hour will be taking the strength out of us.  I only came
down for the bowie to make a beginning.  I'll make trial at it first,
and then we can take turn and turn about."

Provided with his knife, the Kentuckian again climbed up; and soon after
the guide heard a crinkling sound, succeeded by the rattling of pieces
of rock, as they got detached and came showering down.

To save his crown, now uncovered by the loss of both kerchief and cap,
he crept back into the alcove that had originally protected them from
the stones cast in by the Indians.  Along with the splinters something
else came past Walt's face, making a soft, rustling sound; it had a
smell also that told what it was--the "cussed stink-weed."

From the falling fragments, their size and number, he could tell that
his comrade was making good way.

Walt longed to relieve him at his work, and called up a request to this
end; but Hamersley returned a refusal, speaking in a cautious tone, lest
his voice might be borne out to the ear of some savage still lingering
near.

For over an hour Wilder waited below, now and then casting impatient
glances upward.  They were only mechanical; for, of course, he could see
nothing.  But they were anxious withal; for the success of his comrade's
scheme was yet problematical.

With sufficient food and drink to sustain them, they might in time
accomplish what they had set about; but wanting these, their strength
would soon give way, and then--ah! then--

The guide was still standing on the ledge, pursuing this or a similar
train of reflection, when all at once a sight came, not under but above
his eyes, which caused him to utter an exclamation of joy.

It was the sight of his comrade's face--only that!

But this had in it a world of significance.  He could hot have seen that
face without light.  Light had been let into their rock-bound abode, so
late buried in the profoundest darkness.

It was but a feeble glimmer, that appeared to have found admission
through a tiny crevice under the huge copestone; and Hamersley's face,
close to it, was seen only in faint shadow--fainter from the film of
smoke yet struggling up the shaft.

Still was it light--beautiful, cheering light--like some shore-beacon
seen by the storm-tossed mariner amid the dangers of a night-shrouded
sea.

Hamersley had not yet spoken a word to explain what had occurred to
cause it.  He had suddenly left off chipping the rock, and was at rest,
apparently in contemplation of the soft silvery ray that was playing so
benignly upon his features.

Was it the pleasure of once more beholding what he lately thought he
might never see again--the light of day?  Was it this alone that was
keeping him still and speechless?

No, something else; as he told his comrade when he rejoined him soon
after on the ledge.

"Walt," he said, "I've let daylight in, as you see; but I find it'll
take a long time to cut a passage out.  It's only the weeds I've been
able to get clear of.  The big rock runs over at least five feet, and
the stone turns out harder than I thought of."

These were not cheering words to Walt Wilder.

"But," continued Hamersley, his speech changing to a more hopeful tone,
"I've noticed something that may serve better still; perhaps save us all
the quarrying.  I don't know whether I'm right; but we shall soon see."

"What hev ye noticed?" was the question put by Wilder.

"You see there's still some smoke around us."

"Yes, Frank, my eyes tell me that plain enuf.  I've nigh nibbed 'em out
o' thar sockets."

"Well, as soon as I had scooped out the crack that let in the daylight.
I noticed that the smoke rushed out as if blasted through a pair of
bellows.  That shows there's a draught coming up.  It can only come from
some aperture below, acting as a furnace or the funnel of a chimney.  We
must try to get down to the bottom, and see if there's such a thing.  If
there be, who knows but it may be big enough to let us out of our
prison, without having to carve our way through the walls, which I feel
certain would take us several days.  We must try to get down to the
bottom."

To accede to this request the guide needed no urging, and both--one
after the other--at once commenced descending.

They found no great difficulty in getting down, any more than they had
already experienced, for the shaft continued all the way down nearly the
same width, and very similar to what it was above the ledge.  Near the
bottom, however, it became abruptly wider by the retrocession of the
walls.  They were now in a dilemma, for they had reached a point where
they could go no further without dropping off.  It might be ten feet, it
might be a hundred--in any case enough to make the peril appalling.

Wilder had gone first, and soon bethought himself of a test.  He unslung
his powder-horn and permitted it to drop from his hand, listening
attentively.  It made scarce any noise; still he could hear it striking
against something soft.  It was the brush thrown in by the Indians.
This did not seem far below; and the half-burnt stalks would be
something to break their fall.

"I'll chance it," said Walt, and almost simultaneous with his words was
heard the bump of his heavy body alighting on the litter below.

"You may jump without fear, Frank.  'Taint over six feet in the clar."

Hamersley obeyed, and soon both stood at the bottom of the chimney--on
the hearthstone where the stalks of the creosote still smouldered.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

OFF AT LAST!

On touching _terra firma_, and finding plenty of space around, they
scrambled from off the pile of loose stones and stalks cast down by the
Indians, and commenced groping their way about.  Again touching the firm
surrounding of rock, they groped searchingly along it.

They were not long engaged in their game of blind-man's buff, when the
necessity of trusting to the touch came abruptly to an end--as if the
handkerchief had been suddenly jerked from their eyes.  The change was
caused by a light streaming in through a side gallery into which they
had strayed.  It was at first dim and distant, but soon shone upon them
with the brilliance of a flambeau.

Following the passage through which it guided them, they reached an
aperture of irregular roundish shape, about the size, of the cloister
window of a convent.  They saw at once that it was big enough to allow
the passage of their bodies.  They saw, too, that it was admitting the
sunbeams--admonishing them that it was still far from night.

They had brought all their traps down along with them--their knives and
pistols, with Hamersley's gun still carefully kept.  But they hesitated
about going out.  There could be no difficulty in their doing so, for
there was a ledge less than three feet under the aperture, upon which
they could find footing.  It was not that which caused them to hesitate,
but the fact of again falling into the hands of their implacable
enemies.

That these were still upon the plain they had evidence.  They could hear
their yells and whooping, mingled with peals of wild demon-like
laughter.  It was at the time when the firewater was in the ascendant,
and the savages were playing their merry game with the pieces of
despoiled cotton goods.

There was danger in going out, but there might be more in staying in.
The savages might return upon their search, and discover this other
entrance to the vault.  In that case they would take still greater pains
to close it and besiege the two fugitives to the point of starvation.

Both were eager to escape from a place they had lately looked upon as a
living tomb.

Still, they dared not venture out of it.  They could not retreat by the
plain so long as the Indians were upon it.  At night, perhaps, in the
darkness, they might.  Hamersley suggested this.

"No," said Walt, "nor at night eyther.  It's moontime, you know; an'
them sharp-eyed Injuns niver all goes to sleep thegither.  On that sand
they'd see us in the moonlight 'most as plain as in the day.  Ef we wait
at all, we'll hev to stay till they go clar off."

Wilder, while speaking, stood close to the aperture, looking cautiously
out.  At that moment, craning his neck to a greater stretch, so as to
command a better view of what lay below, his eye caught sight of an
object that elicited an exclamation of surprise.

"Darn it," he said, "thar's my old clout lyin' down thar on the rocks."

It was the red kerchief he had plucked from his head to put the pursuers
on the wrong track.

"It's jest where I flinged it," he continued; "I kin recognise the
place.  That gully, then, must be the one we didn't go up."

Walt spoke the truth.  The decoy was still in the place where he had set
it.  The square of soiled and faded cotton had failed to tempt the
cupidity of the savages, who knew that in the waggons they had captured
were hundreds of such, clean and new, with far richer spoil besides.

"S'pose we still try that path, Frank.  It may lead us to the top arter
all.  If they've bin up it they've long ago gone down agin; I kin tell
by thar yelpin' around the waggons.  They've got holt of our corn afore
this; and won't be so sharp in lookin' arter us."

"Agreed," said Hamersley.

Without further delay the two scrambled out through the aperture, and,
creeping along the ledge, once more stood in the hollow of the ravine,
at the point of its separation into the forks that had perplexed them in
their ascent.  Perhaps, after all, they had chosen the right one.  At
the time of their first flight, had they succeeded in reaching the plain
above, they would surely have been seen and pursued; though with
superior swiftness of foot they might still have escaped.

Once more they faced upward, by the slope of the ravine yet untried.

On passing it, Walt laid hold of his "clout," as he called it, and
replaced it, turban fashion, on his head.

"I can only weesh," he said, "I ked as convenient rekiver my rifle; an',
darn me, but I would try, ef it war only thar still.  It ain't, I know.
Thet air piece is too precious for a Injun to pass by.  It's gone back
to the waggons."

They could now more distinctly hear the shouts of their despoilers; and,
as they continued the ascent, the narrow chine in the cliff opened
between them and the plain, giving them a glimpse of what was there
going on.

They could see the savages--some on foot, others on horseback--the
latter careering round as if engaged in a tournament.

They saw they were roystering, wild with triumph, and maddened with
drink--the fire-water they had found in the waggons.

"Though they be drunk, we mustn't stay hyar so nigh 'em," muttered Walt.
"I allers like to put space atween me and seech as them.  They mout get
some whimsey into their heads, an' come this ways.  They'll take any
amount o' trouble to raise ha'r; an' maybe grievin' that they hain't got
ourn yit, an' mout think they'd hev another try for it.  As the night's
bound to be a mooner, we can't git too far from 'em.  So let's out o'
this quick's we kin."

"On, then!" said Hamersley, assenting; and the next moment the two were
rapidly ascending the gorge, Wilder leading the way.

This time they were more fortunate.  The ravine sloped on up to the
summit of the cliff, debouching upon a level plain.  They reached this
without passing any point that could bring them under the eyes of the
Indians.

They could still hear the shouts of triumph and wild revelry; but as
they receded from the crest of the cliff these grew fainter and fainter,
until they found themselves fleeing over an open table-land, bounded
above by the sky, all round them silent as death--silent as the heart of
a desert.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

INTO THE DESERT.

The cliff, up which the young prairie merchant and his guide, after
their series of hairbreadth escapes, have succeeded in climbing, is the
scarped edge of a spur of the famous Llano Estacado, or "Staked Plain,"
and it is into this sterile tract they are now fleeing.

Neither have any definite knowledge of the country before them, or the
direction they ought to take.  Their only thought is to put space
between themselves and the scene of their disaster--enough to secure
them against being seen by the eye of any Indian coming after.

