
"No, I can't coax him out," cried Ramball snappishly; "but you mind your
own business, I know mine.  I have had enough of you putting your spoons
in my porridge."

"Here, Mr Severn!  Mr Singh!" shouted the mathematical master.  "This
way!  We are going back to the college."  But he did not go far.

"But I want to see the elephant brought out, sir," replied Singh.  "He
oughtn't to be left like this.  He may do mischief."

"Oh, now you've begun, have you?" yelped the proprietor, whose voice in
his anger had gradually reached the soprano.  "I suppose you would like
to have a try?"

"Oh, I don't want to interfere," replied Singh coolly.  "Where do you
want the elephant to go?"

"Where do I want him to go?  Why, home of course, before he does any
more mischief.  I wish he was dead; that I do!  And he shall be too.
Here, Jem, run back to Number One--here's the key--and bring my rifle
and the powder-flask and bullet-bag.  I'm sick of him.  He'll be killing
somebody before he's done--a beast!--Tigers is angels to him, sir," he
continued appealingly to Morris.  "He's the wickedest elephant I ever
see, and I've spent more on him in damages than I paid for him at first;
but he's played his last prank, and if I can't drive him I can
shoot.--'Member that lion, my lads, as killed the gentleman's hoss?"

"Ay, ay, ay!" came in a low murmured growl.

"Got out, sir," continued the proprietor, waving one hand about
oratorically, and dabbing his bald head with his hand.  "Here, some of
you, where's my yellow handkerchy?  Oh, I know; I left it in that there
apple-wood, and I'd lay sixpence, he's picked it up and swallowed it
because it's yellow and he thinks it's the skin of a big orange.  Got
out of his cage, he did, sir, that there lion--been fiddling all night,
I suppose, at the bolts and bars--and we followed him up to where he got
in the loose-box of a gentleman's stable; and there was the poor horse
down--a beauty he was--and that there lion--Arena his name was--lying on
him with his face flattened out and teeth buried in the poor hoss's
throat, so that when I got to the stable door there he was, all eyes and
whiskers, and growling at you like thunder.  I knowed what my work was,
sir," continued the proprietor, addressing his conversation entirely to
Morris, "and you can ask my men, sir; they was there."

"Ay, ay, ay!" was growled.

"It warn't the time for showing no white feathers when a lion's got his
monkey up like that.  I brought my gun with me--fine old flint-lock
rifle it is, and I got it now--and the next minute that there dead horse
had got a dead lion lying beside him.  But I sold his skin to a gent for
a ten-pun note, to have it stuffed, and it's in his front hall now, near
Lungpuddle, in Lancashire.--Well, you, are you going to fetch that there
rifle, or am I to fetch it myself?" he yelled at his man.

"Oh, I wouldn't shoot him, guv'nor," growled the man.

"What's it got to do with you?" almost shrieked his master.

"Oh, I aren't going to lose nothing, guv'nor, only a bit of a chum.
He's knocked me about a bit, and tried to squeeze all the wind out of me
two or three times; but that was only his fun.  I shouldn't like to see
him hurt."

"Then perhaps you'd like to go and fetch him out of that there urcherd?"
cried his master.

"He aren't in," said the man sturdily; "and if he were, no, thank you,
to-day.  To-morrow morning perhaps I shouldn't mind; but I do say that
it'd be a burning shame to shoot the finest elephant there is in
England.  The one at the Slogical Gardens in London is nothing to him,
and you know, master, that that's the truth."

"You fetch my rifle."

"I wouldn't talk quite so loud, guv'nor, if I was you," replied the man.
"Elephants is what they call 'telligent beasts, and you don't know but
what that there annymile is a-hearing every word you say and only
waiting till I'm gone to make a roosh, knock you down, and do his
war-dance all over you."

"Hah!  The same as they trample the life out of the tigers at home."

Every one turned sharply upon the speaker, whose voice sounded clear and
ringing, as he stood there frowning angrily at the elephant's master.

"Bah!  Stuff!" cried the man in his high-pitched voice.  "I have read
anecdotes about animals, and I know all them stories by heart.  They
look as if they could; but them beasts can't think, and the stories are
all lies.--You be off and fetch that rifle before I send somebody else;
and look here, Jem, if you don't obey my orders you take a fortnight's
notice to quit from next Saturday, when you are paid."

"Then you are going to shoot the elephant," cried Glyn, "because you
don't know how to manage him?"

"What!" half-shrieked the man.  "Here, I say, where do you go to school?
Things are coming to a pretty pass when boys like you begin teaching
me, who've been nigh forty year in the wild-beast trade!  What next?"

"Glyn Severn's right," said Singh sternly.

"Here's another of them!" cried the man, looking round from face to
face.

"Quite right," continued Singh.  "Why, the poorest coolie in my father's
dominions would manage one of the noble beasts far better."

"Ho!" said Ramball sarcastically.  "Then perhaps the biggest swell out
of my father's dominions would like to show me how to do it himself."

"I don't know that I can," said Singh quietly; "but I dare say the poor
beast would obey me if I tried."

"Oh, pray try, then, sir.--Only, look here, governor," continued the
man, addressing Morris, who was not far off, "I don't know whether he's
your son or your scholar--I wash my hands of it.  I warn you; he's a
vicious beast, and I aren't a-going to pay no damages if my young
cock-a-hoop comes to grief."

Singh laughed a curious, disdainful laugh.  Then he took a step in the
direction of the elephant, but Glyn caught him by the arm.

"Don't do that, Glyn," said the boy quietly.  "I don't believe he would
hurt me.  Come with me if you like.  You know what he'll do if he's
going to be savage, and you run one way and I'll run the other."

This was in a low voice, unheard by any one but him for whom it was
intended; and the next moment, amidst a profound hush, the two boys
moved towards the elephant, who was swaying his head slowly from side to
side, and looking "ugly," as the man Jem afterwards said.

Then out of the silence, urged by a sense of duty, Morris cried in a
harsh, cracked, emotional voice, not in the least like his own, "Severn!
Prince!  Come back!  What are you going to do?"

His last words came as if he were half-choked, and then like the rest he
stood gazing, with a strange clammy moisture gathering in his hands and
upon his brow, for as the two boys drew near, the elephant suddenly
raised its head, threw up its trunk, and uttered a shrill trumpeting
sound.

As the defiant cry ceased, Singh stepped forward in advance of his
companion, and shouted a few words in Hindustani.

The elephant lowered its trunk and stood staring at the boy, as if
wonderingly, before coming slowly forward in its heavy, ponderous way,
crashing down the green herbage beneath the orchard trees, and its great
grey bulk parting the twigs of a tree that stood alone, and beneath
whose shade the monster stopped.

The boys stood still now, and Singh uttered a short, sharp order in
Hindustani once more.

Instantly, but in a slow, ponderous way, the great beast slowly
subsided, kneeling in the long grass, while Singh went up quite close,
with the animal watching him sharply the while, and laying out its trunk
partly towards him, so that when close up the boy planted one of his
feet in the wrinkling folds of the monstrous nose, caught hold of the
huge flapping ear beside him, climbed quickly up, and the next minute
was astride the tremendous neck and uttering another command in the
Indian tongue.  The result was that the elephant raised its ears
slightly so that Singh could nestle his legs beneath; and as he settled
himself in position a merry smile spread about his lips.

"Come on, Glyn," he cried.  "It's all right.  Take my hand."

Glyn obeyed, and as if fully accustomed to the act, he rapidly climbed
up and settled himself behind his companion.

There was another sharp order, and the great beast slowly heaved himself
up, muttering thunder, and grumbling the while.

"Well, I _am_ blessed!" cried the proprietor.  "You, Jem, did you ever
see such a game as this?"

The man addressed did not say a word, but gave one thigh a tremendous
slap, while the elephant stretched out his trunk towards them, took a
step or two in their direction, and uttered a squeal.

Singh shouted out a few words angrily, and the long serpent-like trunk
hung pendent once again, with the tip curled up inward so that it should
not brush the ground.

"Now then," cried Singh to the proprietor, "where do you want him to
go?"

"Right up into the show-field, squire," cried the man excitedly.  "Think
you can take him?"

"Try," replied the boy with a scornful laugh; "but I ought to have an
_ankus_.  But never mind, I can do it with words.--I say, Glyn," he
continued, speaking over his left shoulder, "we are going to ride in the
procession after all.  If the Colonel knew, what would he say?"

"But--but--" cried Morris.  "My dear boys, pray, pray come down!  Think
of the consequences to yourselves--and what will be said to me."

"Oh, it's all right, Mr Morris," cried Glyn confidently; "we must take
the elephant now.  Singh and I have ridden on elephants hundreds of
times, though we have never acted the parts of mahouts.--There, go on,
Mr What's-your-name, and Singh here will make him carry us back right
to where you wish."

There was no further opposition.  In fact, it would have been a bold man
who would have dared to offer any; but the proprietor came as close as
he thought prudent, panting hard, as the huge beast swept along in its
stately stride.

"I beg your pardons, young gents--beg your pardons!  Honour bright,
sirs, I didn't know.  Oh, thank you; thank you kindly.  You are saving
me a hundred pounds at least, and if you'd like a nice silver watch
apiece, or a monkey, or a parrot, only say the word, and you shall have
the pick of the collection.  And look here, gentlemen, I'll give you
both perpetual passes to my show."

"Thank you! thank you!"  Glyn shouted back.  "We will come and see it;"
while Singh sat as statuesque as a native mahout, and an imaginative
Anglo-Indian would have forgotten his Eton costume and pictured him in
white cotton and muslin turban; while, as they neared the great
elm-trees where the gap showed grimly in the fence and the boughs hung
low, the amateur driver uttered a warning cry in Hindustani, with the
result that his great steed threw up its trunk, twined it round a
pendent branch that was in their way, snapped it off, and trampled it
under foot.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

"SALAAM, MAHARAJAH!"

The menagerie proprietor hurriedly led the way straight across the
cricket-field; for, full of excitement, he was eager to get right away
with the depredating animal before the owner of the damaged fence and
orchard came upon the scene.

"I can talk to him better when I get on my own ground," he said to
himself; and, making straight for the gap in the Doctor's hedge, the
elephant, in obedience to word after word from his mahout, followed with
long, swinging strides.

There was a crowd outside the hedge in the road, and they would have
been across the field long before; but, in obedience to an order from
the Doctor, Wrench was on guard and kept them back.  His rather
difficult task ceased as the elephant drew near, for the crowd scattered
to avoid the monster, and the Doctor's man gave way too, the only
difference being that the little mob drew away outside the hedge while
the man made way in; for, seeing who were mounted on the great animal's
neck, he ran towards the house to meet the Doctor, who, followed by the
other masters, was now coming toward the gap with a small opera-glass in
his hand.

"Here, Joseph," he cried breathlessly, "am I right?  Are those two of my
pupils?"

"Yes, sir; a-riding striddling on the elephant's neck."

"Dangerous!  Madness!  So undignified too!  What will people think?  Run
and tell them to get off directly and come to me."

The man hurriedly retraced his steps; but before he could reach the gap
in the hedge the elephant strode through and out into the road, and the
Doctor and his aides hurried back into the house to reach one of the
front windows just as, headed by the proprietor and followed by a crowd,
the elephant strode by, the two boys taking off their caps to salute
those at the window.

The Doctor turned with a look of blank amazement upon his countenance,
to stare for a few moments at the classical and French masters, who had
followed him in.

"Gentlemen," he exclaimed angrily, "did you ever see such extraordinary
behaviour in your lives?  Oh, this must be stopped!"

But it was not stopped, for the elephant was striding away along the
main street of the town, with a crowd regathering as they saw that the
powerful monster seemed to be well under control; while the boys, now
thoroughly enjoying their exciting ride, needed no persuasion from
Ramball to keep their places and take their mount right up to the
show-field, where several of the yellow vans were already in place,
their drivers having commenced the formation of the oblong square which
was to form the show.

Here, shortly afterwards, the elephant stopped of its own volition close
to a great iron picket which was being driven into the soft earth, and
by which a truss of hay had been placed ready for its refection.

Here, as the elephant stood still, it paid no heed to a couple of
Ramball's men, who in obedience to their master's orders set to work to
fasten a strong chain to the monster's leg and attach it to the iron
picket.

For, evidently satisfied with its fruity lunch, and calmed down from the
excitement brought on by the accident, possibly too from a certain
feeling of satisfaction at hearing the native tongue of some old mahout
ringing in its great ears, the huge beast now began to take matters
according to its old routine.  It commenced by gathering up portions of
the hay, which it loosened with its trunk, sniffing at it audibly, and
then beginning to scatter it about, the boys making no attempt to quit
their lofty perch.

"Here, one of you, bring a bucket of water," cried Ramball.  "He ain't
hungry now.  Don't let him waste that hay.  Have you fastened the
chain?"

Without waiting for the men to answer, the menagerie proprietor examined
the great fetters himself.

"Look sharp," he shouted; "quick with that water before he spoils all
the hay."

One man had hurried off to the pump with a couple of empty buckets,
while the others seized upon the truss which the elephant was
disturbing, but only to drop it directly, for the captive just lightly
waved its trunk right and left, and the men were sent flying in
different directions.

_Phoompf_ snorted the tyrant, and immediately went on picking up and
scattering the hay all around it, thickly covering the grass.

"Well, I suppose we had better get down now, hadn't we?" cried Glyn.

"Yes, sir--no, sir.  Just wait a little bit, please," cried Ramball.
"You're a-keeping of him quiet; only I don't want this 'ere to be made a
free gratus exhibition for everybody to see.  It's a cutting off my
profits.  Hi, there, some of you! why don't you shut them gates?" he
shouted to certain of his men who were driving in the latter half of the
line of yellow vans.

"Can't get the rest in if we do, sir," came back.

"No, of course they can't," grunted their master, looking up at the two
lads.  "Things is going awkward to-day, and no mistake.--Oh, here comes
the water," he continued, speaking now to Singh.  "I dare say that will
cool him down.  Just say a word to him, sir, and tell him to drink."

"Tell the men to put the buckets down before him," replied Singh; and as
the water-bearer drew near the elephant evidently scented the refreshing
fluid, and uttered a sonorous snort.

Directly after, as the man nervously set down the brimming buckets,
anxiously watching the waving trunk the while, and leaping away as he
saw it coming towards him, the tip of the great hose-like organ was
thrust into the first vessel, there was a low sound of suction as many
quarts were drawn up, and then the end was curled under, thrust right
back into the huge creature's mouth, and then there was a loud squirting
sound like a fire-engine beginning to play to put out the animal's
burning thirst.

Back went the trunk into the bucket again, the curving inward followed
for a second discharge, there was repetition, till in a very brief space
the first bucket was empty, and then, with a disdainful swing of the
trunk, the vessel was sent flying, and the emptying of the second
commenced, to be ended by the satiated beast picking it up to hold it on
high as if to drain out the last drops, and then begin to swing it to
and fro as if to hurl it at its master.

"Hah-h-h-h-ah!" cried Singh, and the great creature ceased swinging the
bucket to and fro, and dropped it on the hay.

"Come, Singh, we have had enough of this," cried Glyn impatiently.
"Let's get back, or we shall be having the Doctor sending to see what
has become of us."

"Don't you be afraid about that, young gentlemen," cried Ramball.  "I'll
speak up for you both."

"Thank you," said Glyn drily; "but you've done with us now."
