"That must be very valuable," said Howard.

"It is so heavy it tires my arms to hold it."

"That same thing would bring yez five hundred dollars, any day, in San
Francisco," added Tim O'Rooney. "It'll pay yez to carry it there."

"It is just the thing to wrap around us when we lie down to sleep."

"Yis, if ye wraps up in that yez'll wake up and find yersilves roasted
to dith. Yez might as well crawl into an oven and bake yersilves and be
done with it."

"We can then spread it on the ground, and protect ourselves from the
moisture!" said Howard, who was beginning to appreciate the value of the
article.

"I've saan them things before," added Tim O'Rooney. "The Apaches and
Mohaws in New Mexico make 'em. It has tuk a couple of squaws the bist
part of a year to do the same."

"But where is the owner? An Indian could not lose such a thing without
knowing it. Why, it is a load to carry, and I should expect to lose my
coat as soon as to part with this."

Of course there could be no explanation of the cause of the blanket
being found where it was. It was plain that no Indian could have parted
with it unknowingly, and its high value made it still more puzzling that
it should have been left in such a place. It might be that the
owner--some fragile Indian girl--had wearied with carrying it, and had
thrown it down for a warrior friend of hers to pick up and take to its
destination for her.

This conjecture, made by Tim O'Rooney himself, raised a serious question
as to whether they had a right to carry the blanket away when there was
good reason to doubt its being lost or abandoned.

"If a year's work has been lavished upon it," said Elwood, "it cannot be
possible that it has no owner."

"I think Tim is right; he or she expects to return or send and get it."

"But it is singular that if such is the case it should be left here,
when it could have been easily hid in these bushes."

"That only proves that there are no people about--no white ones at
least. If the owner had any fear of this place being visited by
_Christians_, he would have taken pains to hide his property; but as he
was sure there were none but savages and heathen, he was certain his
blanket was safe."

Howard Lawrence, jesting though he was, spoke the truth, and deeply
ashamed are we to confess it.

The question received an unexpected and unmistakable solution. While
they were still conversing, they descried a gaudily dressed, rather
handsome-looking squaw tripping lightly behind them. Her head was bent,
and she did not discover them until the growl of the dog caused her to
raise her head. She was then within a dozen yards of Howard, he being in
the rear and holding the blanket in his hand. She looked at them with an
alarmed expression in her strange dark eyes, and seemed to be too much
frightened to think of fleeing.

Howard signified his friendship by walking quietly toward her and
holding out the blanket as if inviting her to take it. She readily
comprehended the meaning of his advance, and when the article was within
reach she took it.

"Now make a bargain if you can," called out Elwood.

Howard produced the gold watch--a small hunting-case--and offered it to
the young woman. She examined it with childish curiosity, but in a
manner that showed that it was not the first time she had looked upon
such an article. She held it a for moments, and then with a pleased
smile passed the blanket to him, bowed gracefully, wheeled quickly, and
slipped away charmingly.

"Hurra!" fairly shouted Elwood, "you are as good as Tim at making a
bargain."

"She must live somewhere about here, and no doubt will tell how she got
the watch, and that may set some of her friends on our track."

"Let 'em come," said Tim. "I've a gun that I larned how to shoot, and
that blanket we can wrap around us, and I don't believe you could shoot
a bullet through it by raison of its thickness."

The party resumed their journey, quite jubilant over the rifle and
blanket. They still needed but one thing, or rather two things, guns for
the boys. Terror was such a sharp and faithful sentinel they would have
felt almost safe with these additional fire-arms. Howard and Elwood were
quite confident that they could shoot with remarkable precision,
although, neither had ever aimed or discharged a gun; but in this
respect they were not so very different from other boys.

At noon they made a hearty meal upon a portion of what still remained of
the mountain sheep, and then stretched themselves out for an hour's
rest. Tim O'Rooney was plentifully supplied with tobacco, and perhaps
could not have felt more comfortable or satisfied with his situation. He
lolled on the grass, and wondered whether Mr. Lawrence was anxious for
him to get home or not, finally reaching the conclusion that he was
rather indifferent upon the subject himself. The greatest distress of
Howard and Elwood was the pain that their parents would feel regarding
them; but they hoped to reach home without great delay, when they would
quickly turn their weeping into joy.

The two could not grow weary of admiring their beautiful blanket. It was
a wonderful affair indeed, and doubtless contained within it enough
material to supply a "shoddy" contractor with the basis for a thousand
army blankets. The boys would have willingly given both their watches
for it and considered themselves greatly the gainers. They looked upon
it as their joint property.

"I do believe it is rifle-proof," said Howard. "The fine threads of
which it is composed are woven so compactly that you can hardly
distinguish them."

"I should be rather fearful of risking a rifle-shot from any one if that
were all that protected me."

"We can easily test it. Let's hung it up and shoot a bullet at it."

"No, that would be too bad. The ball might go through, and then it would
be spoiled in its looks. Now it seems really perfect----"

"I say, me boys----"

Tim's utterance was checked by the discharge of a rifle and the near
whistle of the bullet. He started up and glanced around him.

"Injuns, or me name isn't Tim O'Rooney, from Tipperary, Ireland, the gem
of the say!"




CHAPTER XIV.

A STRANGE OCCURRENCE.


On a slight eminence, about an eighth of a mile south of them, stood the
solitary Indian who had fired the alarming shot, he was in open view, as
though he had no fears of the results of his challenge, and appeared to
be surveying the white people with an air of curiosity that they should
presume to encroach upon his hunting-grounds.

"If yez manes that, there's two of us, as me brother Pat towld the judge
when he called him a good-for-nothing dog."

With which exclamation Tim O'Rooney sighted his rifle at the aborigine,
and taking a tedious, uncomfortable aim, pulled the trigger, and then
lowered his piece and stared at his target to watch the result. The
Indian stood as motionless as a statue, and finally the Irishman drew a
deep sigh.

"I wonder whether the bullet has reached him yet?"

"Reached him!" laughed Howard. "I saw it clip off a piece of rock fully
forty feet from him."

"Worrah, worrah! but I've ate so much dinner I can't howld the gun
stiddy."

"I saw it vibrate----"

"Look out! he's going to shoot again!" called Elwood, as he and Howard
dropped on their faces. "Get down, Tim, or he'll hit you. He's a better
marksman than you are."

"Who cares----Heaven! save me!"

The second discharge sent the bullet within a few inches of the
Irishman's face, and somewhat alarmed him.

"Load quick!" admonished Howard, "and shelter yourself, or you are a
dead man."

The Irishman obeyed this, and had his gun reloaded in a few moments.

"Now let me try my hand," said Elwood; "you can never hit him."

"Be all manes, if yez wish it."

"The piece is too heavy for me to shoot off-hand and I'll rest it on my
knee."

The boy took the gun, and placing the barrel on his knee, drew back the
hammer, when presto! the savage whisked out of sight like magic. The
noble aborigine had come to the conclusion that discretion was the
better part of valor.

"Where is he?" asked the bewildered boy, rising to his feet and looking
around him.

"He is gone," replied Howard.

"I admire his sense; he doesn't care about being shot just yet."

Howard laughed.

"You have a good opinion of your marksmanship, Elwood, and he seems to
fear you more than Tim."

"But he didn't give me time to practice on 'im," said the latter. "If he
had stood there an hour or two I'd hit him sure."

"Yes, and he would have picked you off at the next fire. He's a good
marksman at any rate."

They kept their position for some time, but saw nothing more of the
Indian.

"He has left," said Elwood, "and will give us a wide berth after this."

"It was rather curious that he should expose himself in that manner."

"Perfectly natural," replied Elwood. "He knew there was no danger until
_I_ took the gun; then he thought it best for him to clear out."

"He may turn up again when we least expect it."

"Do yees understand the maning of that?"

"Not precisely; do you?"

"He's a lover of the fair female that ye gave the watch to for the
blanket, and he had been watchin' us till he sane me, and then he got so
jailous of me that he has tried to put me out of the way."

The boys laughed at this explanation, which Tim gave with every
appearance of earnestness, and were rather doubtful about believing it.

There was some fear expressed that this Indian might send them a bullet
from some covert, when he could make his aim sure and shelter himself
from all danger of a return fire; although as regards that the specimen
he had been given of the skill of the whites should have convinced him
that there was no need of his being particularly alarmed on this point.

Our friends were sufficiently rested, and the associations of the place
were such that they resumed their journey at once toward the Salinas
river. They had gone but a short distance when Howard exclaimed:

"Halloo! yonder goes that Indian!"

He pointed in the direction of the river fully a mile away, and looking
there they saw very near the center of the stream a small Indian canoe,
propelled by a single occupant. The distance was so great that they
could decide nothing regarding his dress and appearance, and for a time
it was doubtful whether there were one or two in the boat. They were
sure, however, that it was the same personage that had so startled them,
and that he was returning to his home.

"That looks as though he did not belong to these parts," said Elwood,
"and seems to throw doubt on his being the young squaw's lover."

"And it's a qua'r lover the same would be if he wouldn't go five hundred
miles for the smile of his beloved. Begorrah! but it was meself that
used to walk five miles and back agin ivery Sunday night in Tipperary to
see Bridget Ann Mulloney, and then lost her after all when I'd spent
almost half a pound on her."

"There's another thing I'd like to buy, beside our rifles," said Elwood.

"What is that?"

"A canoe. See how smoothly the savage floats down the river. The current
is quite rapid, and it would take very little labor for us to make much
better headway than we now do.'"

"But we do not know how to paddle one of those frail concerns."

"We could learn soon enough."

"We may find one of them along the shore, as there seem to be plenty of
Indians hereabouts, and I suppose every one of them is the proprietor of
one of these establishments."

"It isn't likely if yees finds one ye'll find the owner," said Tim, "and
I s'pose your conscience wouldn't let you take it unless you made a fair
bargain with the owner."

"I don't know," laughed Howard, "but what under the circumstances we
could persuade ourselves to take it."

In the course of a few hours they found themselves in the vicinity of
the Salinas River, and turned to the left so as to follow its windings
as nearly as possible to the mouth, where they hoped to secure safer and
speedier transportation to their homes.

At night when they encamped the soft murmur of the river was in their
ears, and the cool, dry wind fanned them quietly as they sat down near a
cluster of thick cottonwood to smoke their pipe, chat and prepare for
the night's rest. They made a good meal from their mountain sheep, and
gorging Terror, threw the rest away as they deemed it hardly fit for
further use.

It was quite late when they camped. Tim would have nothing to do with
the blanket, so the boys spread it upon the earth, lay down upon it, and
then drew the borders over them.

Wearied out they soon fell asleep, depending, under the kindness of
heaven, upon the watchfulness of the faithful Newfoundland that had
never yet proved unfaithful to his trust.

In the middle of the night Elwood awoke from a feeling of uncomfortable
warmth, and threw the blanket off and slept thus until morning. He was
the first to awake, just as light was dawning, and was on the point of
rising when he started and became suddenly transfixed with horror at a
sight directly before his eyes!




CHAPTER XV.

THE CROTALUS.


There are several species of rattlesnakes found in California, among
which are the black, spotted and striped. Some of them grow to an
enormous size and are anything but pleasant strangers to encounter,
especially when you come upon them suddenly and find them coiled. It is
a peculiarity of these specimens of the _Crotalus_ of America that they
strike only from the coil, are easily killed, and generally, although
_not always_, do they rattle before they dart forward their poisonous
fangs.

We can conceive of nothing upon the face of this beautiful earth more
shudderingly repulsive than a rattlesnake. The arrowy head, and shiny,
flabby body, with its glistening scales and variegated color, its
tapering tail, with that dreadful arrangement by which it imitates so
closely the _whirr_ of the locust, the bead-like eyes, with no lids and
a fleshy film dropping over them--all these make up the most terrible
reptile found on the American continent.

And then imagine one of these creatures _coiled_! The thick, heavy body
with the tail projecting upward from the center, the head drawn back,
and the red, cavernous mouth open, with the curved, hollow teeth and the
sacs at their roots filled nigh to bursting with this concentrated
essence of the vilest of all poison--imagine this, we say--but don't do
it either! If you have never seen a rattlesnake, don't go near one,
unless you have a chance to kill it, even if his fangs have been
extracted. The heel shall bruise the serpent, and that is the best use
to which they can be put.

But as Howard Lawrence opened his eyes, in the dull light of this summer
morning, he saw coiled within five feet of him a striped rattlesnake,
its intensely black eyes fairly scintillating light, and its rattle
gently waving but making no noise.

In a single second his true peril flashed upon him. If he moved the
reptile would strike. He might throw himself suddenly backward, but in
that case if he escaped, the malignant fangs would be buried in the
sleeping Elwood ere he could open his eyes and understand the danger
that threatened him. And he was afraid, too, to speak to him and Tim in
the hope of awaking them. There would be blundering upon their part, and
blundering meant but one thing--death.

Howard looked straight at the serpent's eyes and became conscious of a
strange sensation passing through him. The small, black orbs seemed to
advance, shrink and float away through the air, enchaining his own
vision until the will, which had so vehemently repelled the danger grew
indifferent, and the thought of peril merged into a vague, dreamy
semi-consciousness, which, while it took knowledge of the terrible
reptile, coiled and ready to strike, yet failed to impress the mind with
the energy to withdraw from its terrible power. His blood slowly
chilled, as if vein by vein it froze throughout his person, until from
head to foot the vital current was congealed. At times he strove to
move, or more properly sought, in the mysterious make-up of our
composition, to rouse the will from its torpor, but with the same result
as follows the effort of the sufferer to use his paralyzed limb. The
will seemed to make a feeble twitch or two and then subside, unable to
break the fatal spell spreading over his mind and faculties. The eyes of
the reptile glared upon his own, their bead-like blackness taking the
form of a point of fire waving, floating, gyrating and circling in the
air, doubling in and out in rings of the rainbow's hues, melting away
into the distance, then drifting forward until mingled with his own, up
and down in the same bewildering maze of color and design that visits
the patient when lost in the delirium of fever. And all the time it was
as if the rattlesnake was conscious of the dreadful power he held over
his victim. Its arrowy head and long neck were started silently toward
him, as if threatening instant destruction; and then, like the cat
toying with her victim, it was withdrawn again, and the spell deepened
and increased. A strange whirl passed through the mind of the boy. By a
violent attempt to call in his wandering thoughts he gathered an idea of
the mortal danger impending over him, but he could not centralize his
mental powers.

The bewildering sensations were somewhat similar to that of a man whose
brain has received a violent concussion--the mysterious chambers and
channels through which thought forced its way were choked up and the
subtle impetus recoiled, powerless to perform its function. He felt the
necessity of clear, vigorous thought, but his dull brain would not
work--the cold incubus upon it chilled it through and through; and all
the time the malignantly beautiful reptile was partly coiling and
uncoiling, the articulated ring giving a faint rattle, as if caused by
the slight vibration of its body. After a while the serpent lay still,
but never once was its eye removed from its victim. It was growing tired
of dallying with its prey and was making ready to strike. The coil
became close and compact, the rattle rising from the center, and the eye
assumed a clear, metallic sharpness that appeared to throw forward its
fateful rays into his own. He saw that the sport was done and the snake
was ready to strike; he strove to move, but could not; he essayed to
speak, but the words choked him unuttered. He saw the reptile calling in
its strength and----

_"Quick, Howard, draw the blanket over you! He can't strike through
that!"_

The practical, energetic words of Elwood Brandon, whom he had imagined
asleep at his side, broke the dreadful spell that had enchained Howard.
He felt the mist pass from his eyes, his mind threw off the incubus
which had borne it down, and he was himself again, with clear mental
powers.

His right hand lay upon the thick blanket, and sensible of his extreme
peril, he quickly closed it, grasping the edge firmly, and then threw
himself over upon his face and against his cousin, but covering both
their bodies at the same instant with the heavy, closely-knit cloth.

At the very moment of doing so the angry locust-like ring of the reptile
and a sharp thrust against the blanket as if struck by a small stick
announced that it has given its blow.

Howard and Elwood both shouted to Tim to come to their assistance; but
