unaccustomed to menial work, and he knew that Sidi Hassan was a
turbulent member of the community.  However, being a man of prompt
action, and knowing that it was of the utmost importance that he should
stand well in the good graces of the Dey, he resolved to receive Paulina
into his establishment as governess of the nursery and companion to his
wife, and to leave Sidi Hassan very much to the freedom of his own will,
so long as that will did not interfere with the interests of the
consulate.

On the return of his wife he listened to her pathetic account of
Paulina's sad history, and then produced the letter to which he had
referred on first entering.

"This letter necessitates my riding into town immediately.  It is a
curious document in its way, therefore lend me your ear."

Opening it he began to read.  We give it _verbatim et literatim_:--

  "_To the brittish Cownsul algeers_.

  "7 _teenth Jully_, 18--

  "Sur i'm an irishman an a sailer an recked on the cost of boogia wid
  six of me messmaits hoo are wel an arty tho too was drowndid on landin
  an wan wos spiflikated be the moors which are born divls an no
  mistaik.  I rite to say that weer starvin but the Kaid as they cals
  the guvner Here says heel take a ransum for us of 150 spanish dolars
  the Kaid has past his word in yoor name to the moors for that sum or
  theyd hav spiflikate us too.  I hope yer onor has as much to spair in
  yer pokit, an will luke alive wid it, for if yoo don't its all up wid
  me mesmaits inkloodin yoor onors obedent humbil servint to comand ted
  flagan."

"Well, I hope, with poor Flaggan," said Mrs Langley laughingly, "that
you _have_ as much to spare in your `pokit,' for if not, it is plain
that the poor fellows will be led into captivity."

"I would readily advance a larger sum for so good an end," replied the
consul, folding the letter.  "I shall at once ride into town to make
arrangements, and as it is so late, will pass the night in our town
house.  I shall send our new attendant, Sidi Hassan, on this mission,
and leave you for the night under the guardianship of Rais Ali."

The consul left immediately, and next morning Sidi Hassan set out for
Bugia with the necessary ransom.

In regard to this we need say nothing more than that he accomplished his
purpose, paid the ransom, and received the seven British seamen,
accompanied by whom he commenced the return journey, he and his men
riding, and driving the sailors on foot before them as though they had
been criminals.  On the way, however, they were attacked, not far from
Algiers, by a body of predatory Arabs from the Jurjura mountains.

These bold villains, at the very first onset, killed more than half of
the Turkish escort, and put the rest to flight.  Six of the sailors they
captured and carried off, but Ted Flaggan, who was an exceedingly active
as well as powerful man, proved himself more than a match for them all.
During the melee he managed to throw himself in the way of one of the
best-mounted among the Arabs, who instantly charged him, but Ted sprang
aside and let him pass, ducking low to avoid a cut from his curved
sword.

Before he could turn, the Irishman ran close to his side, seized him by
the burnous, at the same time grasping his bridle, and pulled him out of
the saddle with such sudden violence that he fell headlong to the
ground, where he lay quite stunned by the fall.  Flaggan instantly
sprang into the saddle, as if he had been an accomplished cavalier,
though in reality he knew no more about horses than an Esquimaux.
However, a man who was accustomed to hold on to a top-sail-yard in a
gale was not to be easily shaken off by an Arab charger.  He clung to
the high saddle-bow with one hand, and with the other grasped his
clasp-knife, which he opened with his teeth.  Therewith he probed the
flanks of his fiery steed to such an extent that he not only distanced
all his Arab pursuers, but overtook and passed his own escort one by
one, until he reached Sidi Hassan himself.  He then attempted to pull
up, but the clasp-knife had fired the charger's blood in an unusual
degree.  With a wicked snort and fling that lifted Flaggan high out of
the saddle, it rushed madly on, left the pirate captain far behind, and
at length dashed through the Bab-Azoun gate of Algiers, despite the
frantic efforts of the guard to check or turn it.  Right onward it sped
through the street Bab-Azoun, scattering Turks, Moors, Jews, negroes,
and all the rest of them like chaff; passed the Dey's palace, straight
along the street Bab el-Oued; out at the water-gate, with similar
contempt of the guards; down into the hollow caused by the brook beyond;
up the slope on the other side, half-way towards the summit, on the
opposite side of Frais Vallon, and was not finally pulled up until it
had almost run down the British consul, who chanced to be riding
leisurely homeward at the time.

"You seem to have had a pretty sharp run, my man," said the consul,
laughing, as the Irishman thankfully jumped off, and grasped the bridle
of the now thoroughly winded horse.

"Faix an' I have, yer honour; an' if I haven't run down an' kilt half
the population o' that town, wotever's its name, no thanks to this
self-opiniated beast," replied Flaggan, giving the bridle a savage pull.

"You're an Irishman, I perceive," said the consul, smiling.

"Well, now, yer right, sur; though how ye came to persaive is more nor I
can understand."

"Where have you come from? and how in such a plight?" demanded the
consul in some surprise, observing that a troop of janissaries came
galloping up the winding road, near the top of which they stood.

"Sorrow wan o' me knows where we touched at last," replied the seaman in
some perplexity; "the names goes out o' me head like wather out of a
sieve.  All I'm rightly sure of is that I set sail four days ago from a
port they calls Boogee, or so'thin' like it, in company with a man
called Seedy Hassan; an' sure he'd ha bin seedy enough be now if his
horse hadn't bin a good 'un, for we wos attacked, and half his party
killed and took, forby my six messmates; but--"

"Your name is Ted Flaggan?" inquired the consul hastily.

"It is," said the seaman, in great surprise; "sure yer honour must be--"

The sentence was cut short by the arrival of the janissaries, who pulled
up with looks of considerable astonishment on finding the mad fugitive
engaged in quiet conversation with the British consul.

"Gentlemen," said Colonel Langley, with much urbanity of tone and
manner, "I suppose you wish to make a prisoner of this man?"

The soldiers admitted that such was their desire and intention.

"Then you will oblige me," continued the Colonel, "by allowing me to be
his jailer in the meantime.  He is a British subject, of whom I can give
a good account at the fitting time and place.  Sidi Hassan, under whose
charge he has been by my orders, will doubtless soon arrive in town, and
further enlighten you on this subject."

Without waiting for a reply the Colonel bowed, and wheeling his horse
round rode quietly away, followed by the Irishman, who regarded his new
jailer with a very puzzled look, while a touch of humour further tended
to wrinkle his remarkably expressive countenance.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TED FLAGGAN AND RAIS ALI PROCEED ON A MISSION, AND SEE IMPRESSIVE
SIGHTS.

Two days after the events narrated in the last chapter, Mrs Langley,
being seated on her favourite couch in the court under the small
banana-tree, sent Zubby into the garden to command the attendance of Ted
Flaggan.  That worthy was gifted with a rare capacity for taking the
initiative in all things, when permitted to do so, and had instituted
himself in the consul's mansion as assistant gardener, assistant cook
and hostler, assistant footman and nurseryman, as well as general
advice-giver and factotum, much to the amusement of all concerned, for
he knew little of anything, but was extremely good-humoured, helpful,
and apart from advice-giving--modest.

"Flaggan," said Mrs Langley, when the stout seaman appeared, hat in
hand, "I want you to accompany our interpreter, Rais Ali, into town, to
bring out a message from a gentleman named Sidi Omar.  Ali himself has
other duties to attend to, and cannot return till evening, so take
particular note of the way, lest you should miss it in returning."

"I will, ma'am," replied Ted, with a forecastle bow, "Does Mister Ally
onderstand English?"

"Oh yes," returned Mrs Langley, with a laugh.  "I forgot that he was
absent when you arrived.  You will find that he understands all you say
to him, though I'm not quite sure that you will understand all he says
to you.  Like some of the other Moors here, he has been in the British
navy, and has acquired a knowledge of English.  You'll find him a
pleasant companion, I doubt not.  Be so good as to tell him that I wish
to see him before he leaves."

Obedient to the summons, Rais Ali quickly appeared.  The interpreter was
a stout, tall, dignified man of about thirty-five, with a great deal of
self-assertion, and a dash of humour expressed in his countenance.

"Ali," said Mrs Langley, "you are aware that Sidi Omar is to be married
to-morrow.  I have been invited to the wedding, but have stupidly
forgotten the hour at which I was asked to see the bride dressed.  Will
you go to Sidi Omar, or some of his people, and find this out?  Take the
sailor, Mr Flaggan, with you, and send him back with the information as
soon as possible."

"Yis, mum," replied the interpreter; "an' please, mum, I was want too,
tree days' leave of absins."

"No doubt Colonel Langley will readily grant your request.  Have you
some particular business to transact, or do you merely desire a
holiday?"

"Bof," replied the Moor, with a mysterious smile.  "I'se got finished
the partikler bizziness of bein' spliced yesterdays, an' I wants littil
holiday."

"Indeed," said Mrs Langley in surprise, "you have been very quiet about
it."

"Ho yis, wery quiet."

"Where is your bride, Ali?  I should like so much to see her."

"Her's at 'ome, safe," said Rais Ali, touching a formidable key which
was stuck in his silken girdle.

"What! have you locked her up?"

"Yis--'bleeged to do so for keep her safe."

"Not alone, I hope?" said Mrs Langley.

"No, not 'lone.  Her's got a bootiflul cat, an' I means buy her a little
nigger boy soon."

Having arranged that Mrs Langley was to visit his bride on her way to
Sidi Omar's wedding the following day, Rais Ali set out on his mission,
accompanied by Mr Flaggan.

The Irishman soon discovered that the Moor was a conceited coxcomb and a
barefaced boaster, and ere long began to suspect that he was an arrant
coward.  He was, however, good-humoured and chatty, and Ted, being in
these respects like-minded, rather took a fancy to him, and slily
encouraged his weakness.

"Ye must have seed a power o' sarvice in the navy, now," he said, with
an air of interest; "how came you to git into it?"

"Ha! that wos cos o' me bein' sitch a strong, good-lookin' feller,"
replied Ali, with an air of self-satisfaction.

"Just so," said Flaggan; "but it's not common to hear of Moors bein'
taken aboard our men o' war, d'ee see.  It's that as puzzles me."

"Oh, that's easy to 'splain," returned Ali.  "The fac' is, I'd bin for
sev'l year aboord a Maltese trader 'tween Meddrainean an' Liverp'l, and
got so like a English tar you coodn't tell the one fro' the oder.  Spok
English, too, like natif."

"Ha!" exclaimed Ted, nodding his head gravely--"well?"

"Well, one night w'en we was all sleeperin' in port, in a 'ouse on
shore, the press-gang comes round an' nabs the whole of us.  We fight
like lions.  I knock seven men down, one before the tother, 'cause of
bein' very strong, an' had learn to spar a littil.  You know how to
spar?"

"Well," returned Ted, looking with a smile at his huge hands, "I can't
go for to say as I know much about the science of it, d'ee see; but I
can use my fists after a fashion."

"Good," continued the Moor.  "Well, then, we fights till all our eyes is
black, an' all our noses is red, an' some of our teeths is out, but the
sailirs wos too many for us.  We wos 'bleeged to gif in, for wot kin
courage do agin numbers? so we wos took aboord a friggit and 'zamined."

"An' what?" asked the seaman.

"'Zamined.  Overhauled," replied the Moor.

"Oh! examined, I see.  Well?"

"Well, I feels sure of git hoff, bein' a Algerine Moor, so w'en my turn
comes, I says to the hofficer wot 'zamined us, says I, `I's not a
Breetish man!'

"`Wot are you, then?' says the hofficer.

"`I's a Moor,' says I.

"`Moor's the pity,' says he."

Ted gave a short laugh at this.

"Now, that's strange," observed Ali, glancing at his companion in some
surprise; "that's 'zactly wot they all did, w'en the hofficer says that!
I've thought oftin 'bout it since, but never could see wot they laugh
at."

"Oh, it's just a way we've got," returned Flaggan, resuming his gravity;
"the English have a knack o' larfin', off and on, w'en they shouldn't
ought to.--Git along with your yarn."

"Well, that wos the finish.  I became a Breetish tar, an' fouted in all
the battils of the navy.  I 'spected to get promotion an' prize-money,
but nivir git none, 'cause of circumstances as wos never 'splained to
me.  Well, one night we come in our friggit to anchor in bay of Algiers.
I gits leave go ashore wi' tothers, runs right away to our Dey, who
gits awrful waxy, sends for Breetish cap'n, 'splain that I's the son of
a Turk by a Algerine moder an' wery nigh or'er the cap'n's head to be
cutted off."

"You don't say so?"

"Yis, it's troo.  Wery near declare war with England acause of that,"
said Ali, with an air of importance.  "But the Breetish consul he
interfere, goes down on hims knees, an' beg the Dey for to parding hims
nation."

"He must ha' bin a cowardly feller, that consul!"

"No," said the interpreter sternly, "him's not coward.  Him was my
master, Kurnil Langley, an' only do the right ting: humbil hisself to
our Dey w'en hims contry do wrong.--Now, here we is comin' to
Bab-el-Oued, that means the Water-gate in yoor lingo, w'ere the peepils
hold palaver."

This in truth appeared to be the case, for many of the chief men of the
city were seated under and near the gate, as the two drew near, smoking
their pipes and gossiping in the orthodox Eastern style.

The big Irishman attracted a good deal of notice as he passed through
the gates; but Turks are grave and polite by nature: no one interrupted
him or made audible comments upon his somewhat wild and unusual
appearance.

Passing onwards, they entered the town and traversed the main street
towards the Bab-Azoun gate, which Ali explained to his companion was the
Gate of Tears, and the place of public execution.

Here they came suddenly on the body of a man, the feet and limbs of
which were dreadfully mangled, showing that the miserable wretch had
perished under the bastinado.

At the time we write of, and indeed at all times during Turkish rule,
human life was held very cheap.  For the slightest offences, or
sometimes at the mere caprice of those in power, men were taken up and
bastinadoed in the open streets until they died from sheer agony, and
their relations did not dare to remove the bodies for burial until their
tyrants had left the scene.  Cruelty became almost the second nature of
the people.  Theft was checked by the amputation of the first joint of
the fore-finger of the right hand for the first offence.  For the
second, the whole hand was sacrificed, and for the third, the head
itself was forfeited.  Sometimes, in cases of capital punishment,
decapitation was performed by degrees! and other refinements too
horrible to mention were constantly practised.

While the interpreter was explaining to his companion as much of this as
he deemed it right for him to know, several of the sorrowing relations
of the dead man came forward and carried the body away.  Little notice
was taken of the incident, which, from beginning to end, scarcely
