bag is then sewn up, and the pemmican allowed to cool.  In this state it
may be eaten uncooked; but the _voyageurs_, who subsist on it when
travelling, mix it with a little flour and water, and then boil it; in
which state it is known throughout the country by the elegant name of
_robbiboo_.  Pemmican is good wholesome food, will keep fresh for a
great length of time, and were it not for its unprepossessing
appearance, and a good many buffalo hairs mixed with it, through the
carelessness of the hunters, would be very palatable.  After a time,
however, one becomes accustomed to those little peculiarities.

It was late in the afternoon when we left York Factory; and after
travelling a few miles up Hayes River, put ashore for the night.

We encamped upon a rough, gravelly piece of ground, as there was no
better in the neighbourhood; so that my first night in the woods did not
hold out the prospect of being a very agreeable one.  The huge log
fires, however, soon blazed cheerily up, casting a ruddy glow upon the
surrounding foliage and the wild uncouth figures of the _voyageurs_,
who, with their long dark hair hanging in luxuriant masses over their
bronzed faces, sat or reclined round the fires, smoking their pipes, and
chatting with as much carelessness and good-humour as if the long and
arduous journey before them never once entered their minds.  The tents
were pitched on the most convenient spot we could find; and when supper
was spread out, and a candle lighted (which, by the way, the strong
blaze of our camp-fire rendered quite unnecessary), and Mr Carles,
seating himself upon a pile of cloaks, blankets, and cushions, looked up
with a broad grin on his cheerful, good-humoured countenance, and called
me to supper, I began to think that if all travelling in Hudson Bay were
like this, a voyage of discovery to the North Pole would be a mere
pleasure trip!  Alas! in after-years I found it was not always thus.

Supper was soon disposed of, and having warmed ourselves at the fire,
and ventured a few rash prophecies on the probable weather of the
morrow, we spread our blankets over an oiled cloth, and lay lovingly
down together; Mr Carles to snore vociferously, and I to dream of home.

At the first blush of day I was awakened by the loud halloo of the
guide, who, with a voice of a Stentor, gave vent to a "_Leve!  Leve!
leve_!" that roused the whole camp in less than two minutes.  Five
minutes more sufficed to finish our toilet (for, be it known, Mr Carles
and I had only taken off our coats), tie up our blankets, and embark.
In ten minutes we were once more pulling slowly up the current of Hayes
River.

The missionaries turned out to be capital travellers, and never delayed
the boats a moment; which is saying a good deal for them, considering
the short space of time allowed for dressing.  As for the hardy
_voyageurs_, they slept in the same clothes in which they had wrought
during the day, each with a single blanket round him, in the most
convenient spot he could find.  A few slept in pairs, but all reposed
under the wide canopy of heaven.

Early morning is always the most disagreeable part of the traveller's
day.  The cold dews of the past night render the air chilly, and the
gloom of departing night tends greatly to depress the spirits.  As I
became acquainted with this mode of travelling, I became more knowing;
and, when there was not much probability of being interrupted by
portages, I used to spread out my blanket in the stern of the boat, and
snooze till breakfast-time.  The hour for breakfast used to vary,
according as we arrived late or early at an eligible spot.  It was
seldom earlier than seven, or later than nine o'clock.

Upon the occasion of our first breakfast in the woods, we were
fortunate.  The sun shone brightly on the surrounding trees and bushes;
the fires blazed and crackled; pots boiled, and cooks worked busily on a
green spot, at the side of a small bay or creek, in which the boats
quietly floated, scarce rippling the surface of the limpid water.  A
little apart from the men, two white napkins marked our breakfast-place,
and the busy appearance of our cook gave hopes that our fast was nearly
over.  The whole scene was indescribably romantic and picturesque, and
worthy of delineation by a more experienced pencil than mine.  Breakfast
was a repetition of the supper of the preceding night; the only
difference being, that we ate it by daylight, in the open air, instead
of by candlelight, under the folds of our canvas tent.  After it was
over, we again embarked, and proceeded on our way.

The men used to row for a space of time denominated a _pipe_; so called
from the circumstance of their taking a smoke at the end of it.  Each
_spell_ lasted for nearly two hours, during which time they rowed
without intermission.  The _smoke_ usually occupied five or ten minutes,
after which they pulled again for two hours more; and so on.  While
travelling in boats, it is only allowable to put ashore for breakfast;
so, about noon, we had a cold dinner in the boat: and, with appetites
sharpened by exposure to the fresh air, we enjoyed it pretty well.

In a couple of days we branched off into Steel River, and began its
ascent.  The current here was more rapid than in Hayes River; so rapid,
indeed, that, our oars being useless, we were obliged to send the men
ashore with the tracking-line.  Tracking, as it is called, is dreadfully
harassing work.  Half of the crew go ashore, and drag the boat slowly
along, while the other half go to sleep.  After an hour's walk, the
others then take their turn; and so on, alternately, during the whole
day.

The banks of the river were high, and very precipitous; so that the poor
fellows had to scramble along, sometimes close to the water's edge, and
sometimes high up the bank, on ledges so narrow that they could scarcely
find a footing, and where they looked like flies on a wall.  The banks,
too, being composed of clay or mud, were very soft, rendering the work
disagreeable and tiresome; but the light-hearted _voyageurs_ seemed to
be quite in their element, and laughed and joked while they toiled
along, playing tricks with each other, and plunging occasionally up to
the middle in mud, or to the neck in water, with as much nonchalance as
if they were jumping into bed.

On the fifth day after leaving York Factory, we arrived at the Rock
Portage.  This is the first on the route, and it is a very short one.  A
perpendicular waterfall, eight or ten feet high, forms an effectual
barrier to the upward progress of the boats by water; so that the only
way to overcome the difficulty is to carry everything across the flat
rock, from which the portage derives its name, and reload at the upper
end.

Upon arriving, a novel and animating scene took place.  Some of the men,
jumping ashore, ran briskly to and fro with enormous burdens on their
backs; whilst others hauled and pulled the heavy boats slowly up the
cataract, hallooing and shouting all the time, as if they wished to
drown the thundering noise of the water, which boiled and hissed
furiously around the rocks on which we stood.  In about an hour our
boat, and one or two others, had passed the falls; and we proceeded
merrily on our way, with spirits elevated in proportion to the elevation
of our bodies.

It was here that I killed my first duck; and well do I remember the
feeling of pride with which I contemplated the achievement.  That I had
shot her sitting about five yards from the muzzle of my gun, which was
loaded with an enormous charge of shot, is undeniable; but this did not
lessen my exultation a whit.  The sparrows I used to kill in days of
yore, with inexpressible delight, grew "small by degrees" and comically
less before the plump inhabitant of the marshes, till they dwindled into
nothing; and the joy and fuss with which I hailed the destruction of the
unfortunate bird can only be compared to, and equalled by, the crowing
and flurry with which a hen is accustomed to announce the production of
her first egg.

During the voyage, we often disturbed large flocks of geese, and
sometimes shot a few.  When we chanced to come within sight of them
before they saw us, the boats all put ashore; and L'Esperance, our
guide, went round through the bushes, to the place where they were, and
seldom failed in rendering at least one of the flock _hors de combat_.
At first I would as soon have volunteered to shoot a lion in Africa,
with a Bushman beside me, as have presumed to attempt to kill geese
while L'Esperance was present--so poor an opinion had I of my skill as a
marksman; but, as I became more accustomed to seeing them killed, I
waxed bolder; and at last, one day, having come in sight of a flock, I
begged to be allowed to try my hand.  The request was granted;
L'Esperance lent me his gun, and away I went cautiously through the
bushes.  After a short walk, I came close to where they were swimming
about in the water; and cocking my gun, I rushed furiously down the
bank, breaking everything before me, and tumbling over half a dozen
fallen trees in my haste, till I cleared the bushes; and then, scarcely
taking time to raise the gun to my shoulder, banged right into the
middle of the flock, just as they were taking wing.  All rose; but they
had not gone far when one began to waver a little, and finally sat down
in the water again--a sure sign of being badly wounded.  Before the
boats came up, however, he had swam to the opposite bank, and hid
himself among the bushes; so that, much to my disappointment, I had not
the pleasure of handling this new trophy of my prowess.

Upon one occasion, while sauntering along the banks of the river in
search of ducks and geese, while the boats were slowly ascending against
the strong current, I happened to cast my eyes across the stream, and
there, to my amazement, beheld a large black bear bounding over the
rocks with the ease and agility of a cat.  He was not within shot,
however, and I was obliged to content myself with seeing him run before
me for a quarter of a mile, and then turn off into the forest.

This was truly the happiest time I ever spent in the Nor'-West.
Everything was full of novelty and excitement.  Rapid succeeded rapid,
and portage followed portage in endless succession--giving me abundance
of opportunities to range about in search of ducks and geese, which were
very numerous, while the men were dragging the boats, and carrying the
goods over the portages.  The weather was beautiful, and it was just the
season of the year when the slight frost in the mornings and evenings
renders the blazing camp-fire agreeable, and destroys those little
wretches, the mosquitoes.  My friend Mr Carles was a kind and indulgent
companion, bearing good-naturedly with my boyish pranks, and cautioning
me, of course ineffectually, against running into danger.  I had just
left home and the restraint of school, and was now entering upon a wild
and romantic career.  In short, every thing combined to render this a
most agreeable and interesting voyage.  I have spent many a day of
amusement and excitement in the country, but on none can I look back
with so much pleasure as on the time spent in this journey to Red River.

The scenery through which we passed was pretty and romantic, but there
was nothing grand about it.  The country generally was low and swampy;
the highest ground being the banks of the river, which sometimes rose to
from sixty to seventy feet.  Our progress in Hill River was slow and
tedious, owing to the number of rapids encountered on the way.  The hill
from which the river derives its name is a small, insignificant mound,
and owes its importance to the flatness of the surrounding country.

Besides the larger wild-fowl, small birds of many kinds were very
numerous.  The most curious, and at the same time the most impudent,
among the latter were the whisky-jacks.  They always hovered round us at
breakfast, ready to snap up anything that came within their reach--
advancing sometimes to within a yard or two of our feet, and looking at
us with a very comical expression of countenance.  One of the men told
me that he had often caught them in his hand, with a piece of pemmican
for a bait; so one morning after breakfast I went a little to one side
of our camp, and covering my face with leaves, extended my hand with a
few crumbs in the open palm.  In five minutes a whisky-jack jumped upon
a branch over my head, and after reconnoitring a minute or so, lit upon
my hand, and began to breakfast forthwith.  You may be sure the _trap_
was not long in going off; and the screeching that Mr Jack set up on
finding my fingers firmly closed upon his toes was tremendous.  I never
saw a more passionate little creature in my life: it screamed,
struggled, and bit unceasingly, until I let it go; and even then it
lighted on a tree close by, and looked at me as impudently as ever.  The
same day I observed that when the men were ashore the whisky-jacks used
to eat out of the pemmican bags left in the boats; so I lay down close
to one, under cover of a buffalo-skin, and in three minutes had made
prisoner of another of these little inhabitants of the forest.  They are
of a bluish-grey colour, and nearly the size of a blackbird; but they
are such a bundle of feathers that when plucked they do not look much
larger than a sparrow.  They live apparently on animal food (at least,
they are very fond of it), and are not considered very agreeable eating.

We advanced very slowly up Hill River.  Sometimes, after a day of the
most toilsome exertions, during which the men were constantly pushing
the boats up long rapids, with poles, at a very slow pace, we found
ourselves only four or five miles ahead of the last night's encampment.
As we ascended higher up the country, however, travelling became more
easy.  Sometimes small lakes and tranquil rivers allowed us to use the
oars--and even the sails, when a puff of fair wind arose.  Occasionally
we were sweeping rapidly across the placid water; anon buffeting with,
and advancing against, the foaming current of a powerful river, whose
raging torrent seemed to bid defiance to our further progress: now
dragging boats and cargoes over rocks, and through the deep shades of
the forest, when a waterfall checked us on our way; and again dashing
across a lake with favouring breeze; and sometimes, though rarely, were
wind-bound on a small islet or point of land.

Our progress was slow, but full of interest, novelty, and amusement.  My
fellow-travellers seemed to enjoy the voyage very much; and even Mrs
Gowley, to whom hardships were new, liked it exceedingly.

On our way we passed Oxford House--a small outpost of York Factory
district.  It is built on the brow of a grassy hill, which rises
gradually from the margin of Oxford Lake.  Like most of the posts in the
country, it is composed of a collection of wooden houses, built in the
form of a square, and surrounded by tall stockades, pointed at the tops.
These, however, are more for ornament than defence.  A small flag-staff
towers above the buildings; from which, upon the occasion of an arrival,
a little red Hudson Bay Company's flag waves its folds in the gentle
current of an evening breeze.  There were only two or three men at the
place; and not a human being, save one or two wandering Indians, was to
be found within hundreds of miles of this desolate spot.  After a stay
here of about half an hour, we proceeded on our way.

Few things are more beautiful or delightful than crossing a lake in the
woods on a lovely morning at sunrise.  The brilliant sun, rising in a
flood of light, pierces through the thin haze of morning, converting the
countless myriads of dewdrops that hang on tree and bush into sparkling
diamonds, and burnishing the motionless flood of water, till a new and
mighty firmament is reflected in the wave; as if Nature, rising early
from her couch, paused to gaze with admiration on her resplendent image
reflected in the depths of her own matchless mirror.  The profound
stillness, too, broken only by the measured sweep of the oars, fills the
soul with awe; whilst a tranquil but unbounded happiness steals over the
heart of the traveller as he gazes out upon the distant horizon, broken
here and there by small verdant islets, floating as it were in air.  He
wanders back in thought to far-distant climes; or wishes, mayhap, that
it were possible to dwell in scenes like this with those he loves for
ever.

As the day advances, the scene, though slightly changed, is still most
beautiful.  The increasing heat, dispelling the mists, reveals in all
its beauty the deep blue sky speckled with thin fleecy clouds, and,
imparting a genial warmth to the body, creates a sympathetic glow in the
soul.  Flocks of snow-white gulls sail in graceful evolutions round the
boats, dipping lightly in the water as if to kiss their reflected
images; and, rising suddenly in long rapid flights, mount in circles up
high above the tranquil world into the azure sky, till small white
specks alone are visible in the distance.  Up, up they rise on sportive
wing, till the straining eye can no longer distinguish them, and they
are gone!  Ducks, too, whir past in rapid flight, steering wide of the
boats, and again bending in long graceful curves into their course.  The
sweet, plaintive cry of the whip-poor-will rings along the shore; and
the faint answer of his mate floats over the lake, mellowed by distance
to a long tiny note.  The air is motionless as the water; and the
enraptured eye gazes in dreamy enjoyment on all that is lovely and
peaceful in nature.

These are the _pleasures_ of travelling in the wilderness.  Let us
change the picture.

The sun no longer shines upon the tranquil scene.  Dark, heavy clouds
obscure the sky; a suffocating heat depresses the spirits and enervates
the frame; sharp, short gusts of wind now ruffle the inky waters, and
the floating islands sink into insignificance as the deceptive haze
which elevated them flies before the approaching storm.  The ducks are
gone, and the plaintive notes of the whip-poor-will are hushed as the
increasing breeze rustles the leafy drapery of the forest.  The gulls
wheel round still, but in more rapid and uncertain flight, accompanying
their motions with shrill and mournful cries, like the dismal wailings
of the spirit of the storm.  A few drops of rain patter on the boats, or
plump like stones into the water, and the distant melancholy growl of
thunder swells upon the coming gale.  Uneasy glances are cast, ever and
anon, towards clouds and shore, and grumbling sentences are uttered by
the men.  Suddenly a hissing sound is heard, a loud clap of thunder
growls overhead, and the gale, dashing the white spray wildly before it,
rushes down upon the boats.

"_A terre! a terre_!" shout the men.  The boats are turned towards the
shore, and the bending oars creak and groan as they pull swiftly on.
Hiss! whir! the gale bursts forth, dashing clouds of spray into the air,
twisting and curling the foaming water in its fury.  The thunder crashes
with fearful noise, and the lightning gleams in fitful lurid streaks
across the inky sky.  Presently the shore is gained, amid a deluge of
rain which saturates everything with water in a few minutes.  The tents
are pitched, but the fires will scarcely burn, and are at last allowed
to go out.  The men seek shelter under the oiled cloths of the boats;
while the travellers, rolled up in damp blankets, with the rain oozing
through the tents upon their couches, gaze mournfully upon the dismal
scene, and ponder sadly on the shortness of the step between happiness
and misery.

Nearly eighteen days after we left York Factory we arrived in safety at
the depot of Norway House.  This fort is built at the mouth of a small
and sluggish stream, known by the name of Jack River.  The houses are
ranged in the form of a square; none of them exceed one story in height,
and most of them are whitewashed.  The ground on which it stands is
rocky; and a small garden, composed chiefly of sand, juts out from the
stockades like a strange excrescence.  A large, rugged mass of rocks
rises up between the fort and Playgreen Lake, which stretches out to the
horizon on the other side of them.  On the top of these rocks stands a
flagstaff, as a beacon to guide the traveller; for Norway House is so
ingeniously hid in a hollow that it cannot be seen from the lake till
the boat almost touches the wharf.  On the left side of the building
extends a flat grassy park or green, upon which during the summer months
there is often a picturesque and interesting scene.  Spread out to dry
in the sun may be seen the snowy tent of the chief factor, lately
arrived.  A little further off, on the rising ground, stands a dark and
almost imperceptible wigwam, the small wreath of white smoke issuing
from the top proving that it is inhabited.  On the river bank three or
four boats and a north canoe are hauled up; and just above them a number
of sunburned _voyageurs_ and a few Indians amuse themselves with various
games, or recline upon the grass, basking in the sunshine.  Behind the
fort stretches the thick forest, its outline broken here and there by
cuttings of firewood or small clearings for farming.

Such was Norway House in 1841.  The rocks were crowded when we arrived,
and we received a hearty welcome from Mr Russ--the chief factor in
charge--and his amiable family.  As it was too late to proceed any
further that day, we determined to remain here all night.

From the rocks before mentioned, on which the flagstaff stands, we had a
fine view of Playgreen Lake.  There was nothing striking or bold in the
scene, the country being low and swampy, and no hills rose on the
horizon or cast their shadows on the lake; but it was pleasing and
tranquil, and enlivened by one or two boats sailing about on the water.

We spent an agreeable evening; and early on the following morning
started again on our journey, having received an agreeable addition to
our party in the person of Miss Jessie Russ, second daughter of Mr
Russ, from whom we had just parted.

On the evening of the first day after our departure from Norway House,
we encamped on the shores of Lake Winnipeg.  This immense body of fresh
water is about three hundred miles long by about fifty broad.  The
shores are generally flat and uninteresting, and the water shallow; yet
here and there a few pretty spots may be seen at the head of a small bay
or inlet, where the ground is a little more elevated and fertile.

Nothing particular occurred during our voyage along the shores of the
lake, except that we hoisted our sails oftener to a favourable breeze,
and had a good deal more night travelling than heretofore.  In about
five days after leaving Norway House we arrived at the mouth of Red
River; and a very swampy, sedgy, flat-looking mouth it was, covered with
tall bulrushes and swarming with water-fowl.  The banks, too, were low
and swampy; but as we ascended they gradually became more woody and
elevated, till we arrived at the Stone Fort--twenty miles up the river--
where they were tolerably high.

A few miles below this we passed an Indian settlement, the cultivated
fields and white houses of which, with the church spire in the midst,
quite refreshed our eyes, after being so long accustomed to the shades
of the primeval forest.

The Stone Fort is a substantial fortification, surrounded by high walls
and flanked with bastions, and has a fine appearance from the river.

Here my friend and fellow-traveller, Mr Carles, hearing of his wife's
illness, left us, and proceeded up the settlement on horseback.  The
missionaries also disembarked, and I was left alone, to be rowed slowly
to Fort Garry, nearly twenty miles further up the river.

The river banks were lined all the way along with the houses and farms
of the colonists, which had a thriving, cleanly appearance; and from the
quantity of live stock in the farmyards, the number of pigs along the
banks, and the healthy appearance of the children who ran out of the
cottages to gaze upon us as we passed, I inferred that the settlers
generally were well-to-do in the world.  The houses of some of the more
wealthy inhabitants were very handsome-looking buildings, particularly
that of Mr McAllum, where in a few hours I landed.  This gentleman was
the superintendent of the Red River Academy, where the children of the
wealthier colonists and those of the gentlemen belonging to the Hudson
Bay Company are instructed in the various branches of English
literature, and made to comprehend how the world was convulsed in days
of yore by the mighty deeds of the heroes of ancient Greece and Rome.

Here I was hospitably treated to an excellent breakfast, and then
proceeded on foot with Mr Carles--who rejoined me here--to Fort Garry,
which lay about two miles distant.  Upon arriving I was introduced to
Mr Finlayson, the chief factor in charge, who received me very kindly,
and introduced me to my fellow-clerks in the office.  Thus terminated my
first inland journey.



CHAPTER SIX.

RED RIVER SETTLEMENT--ORIGIN OF THE COLONY--OPPOSITION TIMES AND
ANECDOTES--THE FLOOD OF 1826--CLIMATE--BEING BROKEN-IN--MR. SIMPSON, THE
ARCTIC DISCOVERER--THE MACKENZIE RIVER BRIGADE.

Red River Settlement is, to use a high-flown expression, an oasis in the
desert, and may be likened to a spot upon the moon or a solitary ship
upon the ocean.  In plain English, it is an isolated settlement on the
borders of one of the vast prairies of North America.  It is situated
partly on the banks of Red River, and partly on the banks of a smaller
stream called the Assinaboine, in latitude 50 degrees, and extends
upwards of fifty miles along the banks of these two streams.  The
country around it is a vast treeless prairie, upon which scarcely a
shrub is to be seen; but a thick coat of grass covers it throughout its
entire extent, with the exception of a few spots where the hollowness of
the ground has collected a little moisture, or the meandering of some
small stream or rivulet enriches the soil, and covers its banks with
verdant shrubs and trees.

The banks of the Red and Assinaboine Rivers are covered with a thick
belt of woodland--which does not, however, extend far back into the
plains.  It is composed of oak, poplar, willows, etcetera, the first of
which is much used for fire-wood by the settlers.  The larger timber in
the adjacent woods is thus being rapidly thinned.

