"No--if I have understood him.  Perhaps the brainless walrus translated
his words wrongly."

"Is the thing he searches for something to eat?"

"Something to drink or wear?"

"No, I tell you.  It is _nothing_!  Yet he gives it a name.  He calls it
_Nort Pole_!"

Perhaps it is needless to remind the reader that Chingatok and his
mother conversed in their native tongue, which we have rendered as
literally as possible, and that the last two words were his broken
English for "North Pole!"

"Nort Pole!" repeated Toolooha once or twice contemplatively.  "Well, he
may search for nothing if he will, but that he cannot find."

"Nay, mother," returned the giant with a soft smile, "if he will search
for nothing he is sure to find it!"

Chingatok sighed, for his mother did not see the joke.

"Blackbeard," he continued with a grave, puzzled manner, "said that this
world on which we stand floats in the air like a bird, and spins round!"

"Then Blackbeard is a liar," said Toolooha quietly, though without a
thought of being rude.  She merely meant what she said, and said what
she meant, being a naturally candid woman.

"That may be so, mother, but I think not."

"How can the world float without wings?" demanded the old woman
indignantly.  "If it spinned should we not feel the spinning, and grow
giddy?"

"And Blackbeard says," continued the giant, regardless of the questions
propounded, "that it spins round upon this _Nort Pole_, which he says is
not a real thing, but only nothing.  I asked Blackbeard--How can a world
spin upon nothing?"

"And what said he to that?" demanded Toolooha quickly.

"He only laughed.  They all laughed when the brainless walrus put my
question.  There is one little boy--the son I think of Blackbeard--who
laughed more than all the rest.  He lay down on the ice to laugh, and
rolled about as if he had the bowel-twist."

"That son of Blackbeard must be a fool more than his father," said
Toolooha, casting a look of indignation at her innocent kettle.

"Perhaps; but he is not like his father," returned Chingatok meekly.
"There are two other chiefs among the Kablunets who seem to me fine men.
They are very young and wise.  They have learned a little of our tongue
from the Brainless One, and asked me some questions about the rocks, and
the moss, and the flowers.  They are tall and strong.  One of them is
very grave and seems to think much, like myself.  He also spoke of this
Nothing--this Nort Pole.  They are all mad, I think, about that thing--
that Nothing!"

The conversation was interrupted at this point by the sudden entrance of
the giant's little sister with the news that the Kablunets were observed
coming round the great cape, dragging a sledge.

"Is not the big oomiak with them?" asked her brother, rising quickly.

"No, we see no oomiak--no wings--no fire," answered Oblooria, "only six
men dragging a sledge."

Chingatok went out immediately, and Oblooria was about to follow when
her mother recalled her.

"Come here, little one.  There is a bit of blubber for you to suck.
Tell me, saw you any sign of madness in these white men when they were
talking with your brother about this--this--Nort Pole."

"No, mother, no," answered Oblooria thoughtfully, "I saw not madness.
They laughed much, it is true--but not more than Oolichuk laughs
sometimes.  Yes--I think again!  There was one who seems mad--the small
boy, whom brother thinks to be the son of Blackbeard--Benjay, they call
him."

"Hah!  I thought so," exclaimed Toolooha, evidently pleased at her
penetration on this point.  "Go, child, I cannot quit the lamp.  Bring
me news of what they say and do."

Oblooria obeyed with alacrity, bolting her strip of half-cooked blubber
as she ran; her mother meanwhile gave her undivided attention to the
duties of the lamp.

The white men and all the members of the Eskimo band were standing by
the sledge engaged in earnest conversation when the little girl came
forward.  Captain Vane was speaking.

"Yes, Chingatok," he said, looking up at the tall savage, who stood
erect in frame but with bent head and his hands clasped before him, like
a modest chief, which in truth he was.  "Yes, if you will guide me to
your home in the northern lands, I will pay you well--for I have much
iron and wood and such things as I think you wish for and value, and you
shall also have my best thanks and gratitude.  The latter may not indeed
be worth much, but, nevertheless, you could not purchase it with all the
wealth of the Polar regions."

Chingatok looked with penetrating gaze at Anders while he translated,
and, considering the nature of the communication, the so-called
Brainless One proved himself a better man than the giant gave him credit
for.

"Does Blackbeard," asked Chingatok, after a few seconds' thought,
"expect to find this Nothing--this Nort Pole, in my country?"

"Well, I cannot exactly say that I do," replied the Captain; "you see,
I'm not quite sure, from what you tell me, where your country is.  It
may not reach to the Pole, but it is enough for me that it lies in that
direction, and that you tell me there is much open water there.  Men of
my nation have been in these regions before now, and some of them have
said that the Polar Sea is open, others that it is covered always with
ice so thick that it never melts.  Some have said it is a `sea of
ancient ice' so rough that no man can travel over it, and that it is not
possible to reach the North Pole.  I don't agree with that.  I had been
led to expect to fall in with this sea of ancient ice before I had got
thus far, but it is not to be found.  The sea indeed is partly blocked
with ordinary ice, but there is nothing to be seen of this vast
collection of mighty blocks, some of them thirty feet high--this wild
chaos of ice which so effectually stopped some of those who went before
me."

This speech put such brains as the Brainless One possessed to a severe
test, and, after all, he failed to convey its full meaning to Chingatok,
who, however, promptly replied to such portions as he understood.

"What Blackbeard calls the sea of old ice does exist," he said; "I have
seen it.  No man could travel on it, only the birds can cross it.  But
ice is not land.  It changes place.  It is here to-day; it is there
to-morrow.  Next day it is gone.  We cannot tell where it goes to or
when it will come back.  The _very_ old ice comes back again and again.
It is slow to become like your Nort Pole--nothing.  But it melts at last
and more comes in its place--growing old slowly and vanishing slowly.
It is full of wonder--like the stars; like the jumping flames; like the
sun and moon, which we cannot understand."

Chingatok paused and looked upwards with a solemn expression.  His mind
had wandered into its favourite channels, and for the moment he forgot
the main subject of conversation, while the white men regarded him with
some surprise, his comrades with feelings of interest not unmingled with
awe.

"But," he continued, "I know where the sea of ancient ice-blocks is just
now.  I came past it in my kayak, and can guide you to it by the same
way."

"That is just what I want, Chingatok," said the Captain with a joyful
look, "only aid me in this matter, and I will reward you well.  I've
already told you that my ship is wrecked, and that the crew, except
those you see here, have left me; but I have saved all the cargo and
buried it in a place of security with the exception of those things
which I need for my expedition.  One half of these things are on this
sledge,--the other half on a sledge left behind and ready packed near
the wreck.  Now, I want you to send men to fetch that sledge here."

"That shall be done," said Chingatok.  "Thanks, thanks, my good fellow,"
returned the Captain, "and we must set about it at once, for the summer
is advancing, and you know as well as I do that the hot season is but a
short one in these regions."

"A moment more shall not be lost," said the giant.

He turned to Oolichuk, who had been leaning on a short spear, and gazing
open-mouthed, eyed, and eared, during the foregoing conversation, and
said a few words to him and to the other Eskimos in a low tone.

Oolichuk merely nodded his head, said "Yah!" or something similarly
significant, shouldered his spear and went off in the direction of the
Cape of Newhope, followed by nearly all the men of the party.

"Stay, not quite so fast," cried Captain Vane.

"Stop!" shouted Chingatok.

Oolichuk and his men paused.

"One of us had better go with them," said the Captain, "to show the
place where the sledge has been left."

"I will go, uncle, if you'll allow me," said Leo Vandervell.

"Oh! let me go too, father," pleaded Benjy, "I'm not a bit tired; do."

"You may both go.  Take a rifle with you, Leo.  There's no saying what
you may meet on the way."

In half-an-hour the party under Oolichuk had reached the extremity of
the cape, and Captain Vane observed that his volatile son mounted to the
top of an ice-block to wave a farewell.  He looked like a black speck,
or a crow, in the far distance.  Another moment, and the speck had
disappeared among the hummocks of the ice-locked sea.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

DIFFICULTIES ENCOUNTERED AND FACED.

They had not quite doubled the Cape of Newhope, and were about to round
the point which concealed the spot that had been named Wreck Bay, when
they suddenly found themselves face to face with a Polar bear!

Bruin was evidently out for an evening stroll, for he seemed to have
nothing particular to do.

Surprise lit up alike the countenances of the men and the visage of the
bear.  It was an unexpected meeting on both sides.  The distance between
them was not more than thirty feet.  Leo was the only one of the party
who carried a rifle.  More than once during the voyage had Leo seen and
shot a bear.  The sight was not new to him, but never before had he come
so suddenly, or so very close, upon this king of the Arctic Seas.  He
chanced at the time to be walking a few yards in advance of the party in
company with Oolichuk and Benjy.

The three stopped, stared, and stood as if petrified.

For one moment, then they uttered a united and half involuntary roar.

Right royally did that bear accept the challenge.  It rose, according to
custom, on its hind legs, and immediately began that slow, but deadly
war-dance with which the race is wont to preface an attack, while its
upper lip curled in apparent derision, exposing its terrible fangs.

Leo recovered self-possession instantly.  The rifle leaped to his
shoulder, the centre of the bear's breast was covered, and the trigger
pulled.

Only a snap resulted.  Leo had forgotten to load!  Benjy gasped with
anxiety.  Oolichuk, who had held himself back with a sparkling smile of
expectation at the prospect of seeing the Kablunet use his
thunder-weapon, looked surprised and disappointed, but went into action
promptly with his spear, accompanied by Akeetolik.  Leo's rifle, being a
breech-loader, was quickly re-charged, but as the rest of the party
stood leaning on their spears with the evident intention of merely
watching the combat, the youth resolved to hold his hand, despite
Benjy's earnest recommendation to put one ball between the bear's eyes,
and the other into his stomach.

It was but a brief though decisive battle.  Those Eskimos were well used
to such warfare.

Running towards the animal with levelled spears, the two men separated
on coming close, so that Bruin was forced to a state of indecision as to
which enemy he would assail first.  Akeetolik settled the point for him
by giving him a prick on the right side, thus, as it were, drawing the
enemy's fire on himself.  The bear turned towards him with a fierce
growl, and in so doing, exposed his left side to attack.  Oolichuk was
not slow to seize the opportunity.  He leaped close up, and drove his
spear deep into the animal's heart--killing it on the spot.

Next day the party returned to the Eskimo camp with the sledge-load of
goods, and the bear on the top.

While steaks of the same were being prepared by Toolooha, Captain Vane
and his new allies were busy discussing the details of the advance.

"I know that the difficulties will be great," he said, in reply to a
remark from the interpreter, "but I mean to face and overcome them."

"Ah!" exclaimed Alf, who was rather fond of poetry:--

  "To dare unknown dangers in a noble cause,
  Despite an adverse Nature and her tiresome Laws."

"Just so, Alf, my boy, stick at nothing; never give in; victory or
death, that's my way of expressing the same sentiment.  But there's one
thing that I must impress once more upon you all--namely, that each man
must reduce his kit to the very lowest point of size and weight.  No
extras allowed."

"What, not even a box of paper collars?" asked Benjy.

"Not one, my boy, but you may take a strait-waistcoat in your box if you
choose, for you'll be sure to need it."

"Oh! father," returned the boy, remonstratively, "you are severe.
However, I will take one, if you agree to leave your woollen comforter
behind.  You won't need that, you see, as long as I am with you."

"Of course," said Alf, "you will allow us to carry small libraries with
us?"

"Certainly not, my lad, only one book each, and that must be a small
one."

"The only book I possess is my Bible," said Leo, "and that won't take up
much room, for it's an uncommonly small one."

"If I only had my Robinson Crusoe here," cried Benjy, "I'd take it, for
there's enough of adventure in that book to carry a man over half the
world."

"Ay," said Alf, "and enough of mind to carry him over the other half.
For my part, if we must be content with one book each, I shall take
Buzzby's poems."

"Oh! horrible!" cried Benjy, "why, he's no better than a maudlin',
dawdlin', drawlin', caterwaulin'--"

"Come, Benjy, don't be insolent; he's second only to Tennyson.  Just
listen to this _morceau_ by Buzzby.  It is an Ode to Courage--

  "`High! hot! hillarious compound of--'"

"Stop! stop! man, don't begin when we're in the middle of our plans,"
interrupted Benjy, "let us hear what book Butterface means to take."

"I not take no book, massa, only take my flute.  Music is wot's de
matter wid me.  Dat is de ting what hab charms to soove de savage
beast."

"I wouldn't advise you try to soothe a Polar bear with it," said Leo,
"unless you have a rifle handy."

"Yes--and especially an unloaded one, which is very effective against
Polar bears," put in the Captain, with a sly look.  "Ah, Leo, I could
hardly have believed it of you--and you the sportsman of our party, too;
our chief huntsman.  Oh, fie!"

"Come, uncle, don't be too hard on that little mistake," said Leo, with
a slight blush, for he was really annoyed by the unsportsmanlike
oversight hinted at; "but pray, may I ask," he added, turning sharply on
the Captain, "what is inside of these three enormous boxes of yours
which take up so much space on the sledges?"

"You may ask, Leo, but you may not expect an answer.  That is my secret,
and I mean to keep it as a sort of stimulus to your spirits when the
hardships of the way begin to tell on you.  Ask Chingatok, Anders,"
continued the Captain, turning to the interpreter, "if he thinks we have
enough provisions collected for the journey.  I wish to start
immediately."

"We have enough," answered Chingatok, who had been sitting a silent, but
deeply interested observer--so to speak--of the foregoing conversation.

"Tell him, then, to arrange with his party, and be prepared to set out
by noon to-morrow."

That night, by the light of the midnight sun, the Eskimos sat round
their kettles of bear-chops, and went into the _pros_ and _cons_ of the
proposed expedition.  Some were enthusiastically in favour of casting in
their lot with the white men, others were decidedly against it, and a
few were undecided.  Among the latter was Akeetolik.

"These ignorant men," said that bold savage, "are foolish and useless.
They cannot kill bears.  The one named Lo, (thus was Leonard's name
reduced to its lowest denomination), is big enough, and looks very fine,
but when he sees bear he only stares, makes a little click with his
thunder-weapon, and looks stupid."

"Blackbeard explained that," said Oolichuk; "Lo made some mistake."

"That may be so," retorted Akeetolik, "but if you and me had not been
there, the _bear_ would not make a mistake."

"I will not go with these Kablunets," said Eemerk with a frown, "they
are only savages.  They are not taught.  No doubt they had a wonderful
boat, but they have not been able to keep their boat.  They cannot kill
bears; perhaps they cannot kill seals or walruses, and they ask us to
help them to travel--to show them the way!  They can do nothing.  They
must be led like children.  My advice is to kill them all, since they
are so useless, and take their goods."

This speech was received with marks of decided approval by those of the
party who were in the habit of siding with Eemerk, but the rest were
silent.  In a few moments Chingatok said, in a low, quiet, but
impressive tone: "The Kablunets are not foolish or ignorant.  They are
wise--far beyond the wisdom of the Eskimos.  It is Eemerk who is like a
walrus without brains.  He thinks that his little mind is outside of
everything, and so he has not eyes to perceive that he is ignorant as
well as foolish, and that other men are wise."

