
"Ain't it beautiful?" said a short, fat little seaman named Gurney, who
sat swinging his legs on the end of the windlass, and pointed, as he
spoke, with the head of his pipe to a more than usually brilliant burst
of sparks and flame that issued that moment from the works.

"Beautiful!" exclaimed a long-limbed, shambling fellow named Jim
Scroggles, "why, that ain't the word at all.  Now, I calls it
splendiferous."

Scroggles looked round at his comrades, as if to appeal to their
judgment as to the fitness of the word, but not receiving any
encouragement, he thrust down the glowing tobacco in his pipe with the
end of his little finger, and reiterated the word "splendiferous" with
marked emphasis.

"Did ye ever see that word in Johnson?" inquired Gurney.

"Who's Johnson?" said Scroggles, contemptuously.

"Wot, don't ye know who Johnson is?" cried Gurney, in surprise.

"In course I don't; how should I?" retorted Scroggles.  "There's ever so
many Johnsons in the world; which on 'em all do you mean?"

"Why, I mean Johnson wot wrote the diksh'nary--the great lexikragofer."

"Oh, it's _him_ you mean, is it?  In course I've knowed him ever since I
wos at school."

A general laugh interrupted the speaker.

"At school!" cried Nickel Sling, who approached the group at that moment
with a carving knife in his hand--he seldom went anywhere without an
instrument of office in his hand--"At school!  Wal now, that beats
creation.  If ye wos, I'm sartin ye only larned to forgit all ye orter
to have remembered.  I'd take a bet now, ye wosn't at school as long as
I've been settin' on this here windlass."

"Yer about right, Sling, it 'ud be unpossible for me to be as _long_ as
you anywhere, 'cause everybody knows I'm only five fut two, whereas
you're six fut four!"

"Hear, hear!" shouted Dick Barnes--a man with a huge black beard, who
the reader may perhaps remember was the first to "raise the oil."
"It'll be long before you make another joke like that, Gurney.  Come,
now, give us a song, Gurney, do; there's the cap'n's darter standin' by
the foremast, a-waitin' to hear ye.  Give us `Long, long ago.'"

"Ah! that's it, give us a song," cried the men.  "Come, there's a good
fellow."

"Well, it's so long ago since I sung that song, shipmates," replied
Gurney, "that I've bin and forgot it; but Tim Rokens knows it; where's
Rokens?"

"He's in the watch below."

In sea parlance, the men whose turn it is to take rest after their long
watch on deck are somewhat facetiously said to belong to the "watch
below."

"Ah! that's a pity; so we can't have that 'ere partickler song.  But
I'll give ye another, if ye don't object."

"No, no.  All right; go ahead, Gurney!  Is there a chorus to it?"

"Ay, in course there is.  Wot's a song without a chorus?  Wot's
plum-duff without the plums?  Wot's a ship without a 'elm?  It's my
opinion, shipmates, that a song without a chorus is no better than it
should be.  It's wus nor nothin'.  It puts them wot listens in the blues
an' the man wot sings into the stews--an' sarve him right.  I wouldn't,
no, I wouldn't give the fag-end o' nothin' mixed in bucket o' salt water
for a song without a chorus--that's flat; so here goes."

Having delivered himself of these opinions in an extremely vigorous
manner, and announced the fact that he was about to begin, Gurney
cleared his throat and drew a number of violent puffs from his pipe in
quick succession, in order to kindle that instrument into a glow which
would last through the first verse and the commencement of the chorus.
This he knew was sufficient, for the men, when once fairly started on
the chorus, would infallibly go on to the end with or without his
assistance, and would therefore afford him time for a few restorative
whiffs.

"It hain't got no name, lads."

"Never mind, Gurney--all right--fire away."

  "Oh, I once know'd a man as hadn't got a nose,
  An' this is how he come to hadn't--
  One cold winter night he went and got it froze--
  By the pain he was well-nigh madden'd.
  (_Chorus_.)  Well-nigh madden'd,
  By the pain he was well-nigh madden'd.

  "Next day it swoll up as big as my head,
  An' it turn'd like a piece of putty;
  It kivered up his mouth, oh, yes, so it did,
  So he could not smoke his cutty.
  (_Chorus_.)  Smoke his cutty,
  So he could not smoke his cutty.

  "Next day it grew black, and the next day blue,
  An' tough as a junk of leather;
  (Oh! he yelled, so he did, fit to pierce ye through)--
  An' then it fell off altogether!
  (_Chorus_.)  Fell off altogether,
  An' then it fell off altogether!

  "But the morial is wot you've now got to hear,
  An' it's good--as sure as a gun;
  An' you'll never forget it, my messmates dear,
  For this song it hain't got none!
  (_Chorus_.)  Hain't got none,
  For this song it hain't got none!"

The applause that followed this song was most enthusiastic, and
evidently gratifying to Gurney, who assumed a modest deprecatory air as
he proceeded to light his pipe, which had been allowed to go out at the
third verse, the performer having become so engrossed in his subject as
to have forgotten the interlude of puffs at that point.

"Well sung, Gurney.  Who made it?" inquired Phil Briant, an Irishman,
who, besides being a jack-of-all-trades and an able-bodied seaman, was
at that time acting-assistant to the cook and steward, the latter--a
half Spaniard and half negro, of Californian extraction--being unwell.

"I'm bound not to tell," replied Gurney, with a conscious air.

"Ah, then, yer right, my boy, for it's below the average entirely."

"Come, Phil, none o' yer chaff," cried Dick Barnes, "that song desarves
somethin' arter it.  Suppose now, Phil, that you wos to go below and
fetch the bread-kid."

"Couldn't do it," replied Phil, looking solemn, "on no account wotiver."

"Oh, nonsense, why not?"

"'Cause its unpossible.  Why, if I did, sure that surly compound o' all
sorts o' human blood would pitch into me with the carvin'-knife."

"Who?  Tarquin?" cried Dick Barnes, naming the steward.

"Ay, sure enough that same--Tarquin's his name, an it's kuriously
befittin' the haythen, for of all the cross-grained mixtures o' buffalo,
bear, bandicoot, and crackadile I iver seed, he's out o' sight--"

"Did I hear any one mention my name?" inquired the steward himself who
came aft at that moment.  He was a wild Spanish-like fellow, with a
handsome-enough figure, and a swart countenance that might have been
good-looking but for the thickish lips and nose and the bad temper that
marked it.  Since getting into the tropics, the sailors had modified
their costumes considerably, and as each man had in some particular
allowed himself a slight play of fancy, their appearance, when grouped
together, was varied and picturesque.  Most of them wore no shoes, and
the caps of some were, to say the least, peculiar.  Tarquin wore a
broad-brimmed straw hat, with a conical crown, and a red silk sash tied
round his waist.

"Yes, Tarquin," replied Barnes, "we _wos_ engaged in makin'
free-an'-easy remarks on you; and Phil Briant there gave us to
understand that you wouldn't let us have the bread--kid up.  Now, it's
my opinion you ain't goin' to be so hard on us as that; you will let us
have it up to comfort our hearts on this fine night, won't you?"

The steward, whose green visage showed that he was too ill to enter into
a dispute at that time, turned on his heel and walked aft, remarking
that they might eat the bottom out o' the ship, for all he cared.

"There now, you misbemannered Patlander, go and get it, or we'll throw
you overboard," cried Scroggles, twisting his long limbs awkwardly as he
shifted his position on the windlass.

"Now, then, shipmates, don't go for to ax it," said Briant, remaining
immovable.  "Don't I know wot's best for ye?  Let me spaake to ye now.
Did any of ye iver study midsin?"

"No!" cried several with a laugh.

"Sure I thought not," continued Phil, with a patronising air, "or ye'd
niver ask for the bread--kid out o' saisin.  Now I was in the medical
way meself wance--ay, ye may laugh, but it's thrue--I wos 'prentice to a
'pothecary, an' I've mixed up more midsins than would pisen the whole
popilation of owld Ireland--barrin' the praists, av coorse.  And didn't
I hear the convarse o' all the doctors in the place?  And wasn't the
word always--`Be rigglar with yer mails--don't ait, avic, more nor three
times a day, and not too much, now.  Be sparin'.'"

"Hah! ye long-winded grampus," interrupted Dick Barnes, impatiently.
"An' warn't the doctors right?  Three times a day for sick folk, and six
times--or more--for them wot's well."

"Hear, hear!" cried the others, while two of them seized Briant by the
neck, and thrust him forcibly towards the after-hatch.  "Bring up the
kid, now; an' if ye come without it, look out for squalls."

"Och! worse luck," sighed the misused assistant, as he disappeared.

In a few minutes Phil returned with the kid, which was a species of tray
filled with broken sea-biscuit, which, when afloat, goes by the name of
"bread."

This was eagerly seized, for the appetites of sailors are always sharp,
except immediately after meals.  A quantity of the broken biscuit was
put into a strainer, and fried in whale-oil, and the men sat round the
kid to enjoy their luxurious feast, and relate their adventures--all of
which were more or less marvellous, and many of them undoubtedly true.

The more one travels in this world of ours, and the more one reads of
the adventures of travellers upon whose narratives we can place implicit
confidence, the more we find that men do not now require, as they did of
old, to draw upon their imaginations for marvellous tales of wild,
romantic adventure, in days gone by, travellers were few; foreign lands
were almost unknown.  Not many books were written; and of the few that
were, very few were believed.  In the present day men of undoubted
truthfulness have roamed far and wide over the whole world, their books
are numbered by hundreds, and much that was related by ancient
travellers, but not believed, has now been fully corroborated.  More
than that, it is now known that men have every where received, as true,
statements which modern discovery has proved to be false, and on the
other hand they have often refused to believe what is now ascertained to
be literally true.

We would suggest, in passing, that a lesson might be learned from this
fact--namely, that we ought to receive a statement in regard to a
foreign land, not according to the probability or the improbability of
the statement itself, but according to the credibility of him who makes
it.  Ailie Dunning had a trustful disposition; she acted on neither of
the above principles.  She believed all she heard, poor thing, and
therefore had a head pretty well stored with mingled fact and nonsense.

While the men were engaged with their meal, Dr Hopley came on deck and
found her leaning over the stern, looking down at the waves which shone
with sparkling phosphorescent light.  An almost imperceptible breeze had
sprung up, and the way made by the vessel as she passed through the
water was indicated by a stream of what appeared lambent blue flame.

"Looking at the fish, Ailie, as usual?" said the doctor as he came up.
"What are they saying to you to-night?"

"I'm not looking at the fish," answered Ailie; "I'm looking at the
fire--no, not the fire; papa said it wasn't fire, but it's so like it, I
can scarcely call it anything else.  What _is_ it, doctor?"

"It is called phosphorescence," replied the doctor, leaning over the
bulwarks, and looking down at the fiery serpent that seemed as if it
clung to the ship's rudder.  "But I dare say you don't know what that
means.  You know what fire-flies and glow-worms are?"

"Oh! yes; I've often caught them."

"Well, there are immense numbers of very small and very thin jelly-like
creatures in the sea, so thin and so transparent that they can scarcely
be observed in the water.  These Medusae, as they are called, possess
the power of emitting light similar to that of the fire-fly.  In short,
Ailie, they are the fire-flies and glow-worms of the ocean."

The child listened with wonder, and for some minutes remained silent.
Before she could again speak, there occurred one of those incidents
which are generally spoken of as "most unexpected" and sudden, but
which, nevertheless, are the result of natural causes, and might have
been prevented by means of a little care.

The wind, as we have said, was light, so light that it did not distend
the sails; the boom of the spanker-sail hung over the stern, and the
spanker-braces lay slack along the seat on which Ailie and the doctor
knelt.  A little gust of wind came: it was not strong--a mere puff; but
the man at the wheel was not attending to his duty: the puff, light as
it was, caused the spanker to jibe--that is to fly over from one side of
the ship to the other--the heavy boom passed close over the steersman's
head as he cried, "Look out!"  The braces tautened, and in so doing they
hurled Dr Hopley violently to the deck, and tossed Ailie Dunning over
the bulwarks into the sea.

It happened at that moment that Glynn Proctor chanced to step on deck.

"Hallo! what's wrong?" cried the youth, springing forward, catching the
doctor by the coat, as he was about to spring overboard, and pulling him
violently back, under the impression that he was deranged.

The doctor pointed to the sea, and, with a look of horror, gasped the
word "Ailie."

In an instant Glynn released his hold, plunged over the stern of the
ship, and disappeared in the waves.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE RESCUE--PREPARATIONS FOR A STORM.

It is impossible to convey by means of words an adequate idea of the
terrible excitement and uproar that ensued on board the _Red Eric_ after
the events narrated in the last chapter.  From those on deck who
witnessed the accident there arose a cry so sharp, that it brought the
whole crew from below in an instant.  But there was no confusion.  The
men were well trained.  Each individual knew his post, and whale-men are
accustomed to a sudden and hasty summons.  The peculiarity of the
present one, it is true, told every man in an instant that something was
wrong, but each mechanically sprang to his post, while one or two
shouted to ascertain what had happened, or to explain.

But the moment Captain Dunning's voice was heard there was perfect
silence.

"Clear away the starboard-quarter-boat," he cried, in a deep, firm tone.

"Ay, ay, sir."

"Stand-by the falls--lower away!"

There was no occasion to urge the sailors; they sprang to the work with
the fervid celerity of men who knew that life or death depended on their
speed.  In less time than it takes to relate, the boat was leaping over
the long ocean swell, as it had never yet done in chase of the whale,
and, in a few seconds, passed out of the little circle of light caused
by the fires and into the gloom that surrounded the ship.

The wind had been gradually increasing during all these proceedings, and
although no time had been lost, and the vessel had been immediately
brought up into the wind, Ailie and Glynn were left struggling in the
dark sea a long way behind ere the quarter-boat could be lowered; and
now that it was fairly afloat, there was still the danger of its failing
to hit the right direction of the objects of which it was in search.

After leaping over the stern, Glynn Proctor, the moment he rose to the
surface, gave a quick glance at the ship, to make sure of her exact
position, and then struck out in a straight line astern, for he knew
that wherever Ailie fell, there she would remain struggling until she
sank.  Glynn was a fast and powerful swimmer.  He struck out with
desperate energy, and in a few minutes the ship was out of sight behind
him.  Then he paused suddenly, and letting his feet sink until he
attained an upright position, trod the water and raised himself
breast-high above the surface, at the same time listening intently, for
he began to fear that he might have overshot his mark.  No sound met his
straining ear save the sighing of the breeze and the ripple of the water
as it lapped against his chest.  It was too dark to see more than a few
yards in any direction.

Glynn knew that each moment lost rendered his chance of saving the child
terribly slight.  He shouted "Ailie!" in a loud, agonising cry, and swam
forward again with redoubled energy, continuing the cry from time to
time, and raising himself occasionally to look round him.  The
excitement of his mind, and the intensity with which it was bent on the
one great object, rendered him at first almost unobservant of the flight
of time.  But suddenly the thought burst upon him that fully ten minutes
or a quarter of an hour had elapsed since Ailie fell overboard, and that
no one who could not swim could exist for half that time in deep water.
He shrieked with agony at the thought, and, fancying that he must have
passed the child, he turned round and swam desperately towards the point
where he supposed the ship lay.  Then he thought, "What if I have turned
just as I was coming up with her?"  So he turned about again, but as the
hopelessness of his efforts once more occurred to him, he lost all
presence of mind, and began to shout furiously, and to strike out wildly
in all directions.

In the midst of his mad struggles his hand struck an object floating
near him.  Instantly he felt his arm convulsively grasped, and the next
moment he was seized round the neck in a gripe so violent that it almost
choked him.  He sank at once, and the instinct of self-preservation
restored his presence of mind.  With a powerful effort he tore Ailie
from her grasp, and quickly raised himself to the surface, where he swam
gently with his left hand, and held the struggling child at arm's-length
with his right.

The joy caused by the knowledge that she had still life to struggle
infused new energy into Glynn's well-nigh exhausted frame, and he
assumed as calm and cheerful a tone as was possible under the
