all right; he's done nothing:" on hearing which the Irishman loosened
his hold, and turned towards his friend.

"What's the matter, honey?" said Barney, in a soothing tone of voice, as
a mother might address her infant son.  The hermit whose composure had
not been in the slightest degree disturbed, here said--"The poor child
has been sucked by a vampire bat."

"Ochone!" groaned Barney, sitting down on the table, and looking at his
host with a face of horror.

"Yes, these are the worst animals in Brazil for sucking the blood of men
and cattle.  I find it quite impossible to keep my mules alive, they are
so bad."

Barney groaned.

"They have killed two cows which I tried to keep here, and one young
horse--a foal you call him, I think; and now I have no cattle remaining,
they are so bad."

Barney groaned again, and the hermit went on to enumerate the wicked
deeds of the vampire-bats, while he applied poultices of certain herbs
to Martin's toe, in order to check the bleeding, and then bandaged it
up; after which he sat down to relate to his visitors, the manner in
which the bat carries on its bloody operations.  He explained, first of
all, that the vampire-bats are so large and ferocious that they often
kill horses and cattle by sucking their blood out.  Of course they
cannot do this at one meal, but they attack the poor animals again and
again, and the blood continues to flow from the wounds they make long
afterwards, so that the creatures attacked soon grow weak and die.  They
attack men, too,--as Martin knew to his cost; and they usually fix upon
the toes and other extremities.  So gentle are they in their operations,
that sleepers frequently do not feel the puncture, which they make, it
is supposed, with the sharp hooked nail of their thumb; and the
unconscious victim knows nothing of the enemy who has been draining his
blood until he awakens, faint and exhausted, in the morning.

Moreover, the hermit told them that these vampire-bats have very sharp,
carnivorous teeth, besides a tongue, which is furnished with the curious
organs, by which they suck the lifeblood of their fellow-creatures; that
they have a peculiar, leaf-like, overhanging lip; and that he had a
stuffed specimen of a bat that measured no less than two feet across the
expanded wings, from tip to tip.

"Och, the blood-thirsty spalpeen!" exclaimed Barney, as he rose and
crossed the room to examine the bat in question, which was nailed
against the wall.  "Bad luck to them, they've ruined Martin intirely."

"O no," remarked the hermit with a smile.  "It will do the boy much
good, the loss of the blood; much good, and he will not be sick at all
to-morrow."

"I'm glad to hear you say so," said Martin, "for it would be a great
bore to be obliged to lie here when I've so many things to see.  In fact
I feel better already, and if you will be so kind as to give me a little
breakfast I shall be quite well."

While Martin was speaking, the obliging hermit--who, by the way, was now
habited in a loose short hunting-coat of brown cotton,--spread a
plentiful repast upon his table; to which, having assisted Martin to get
out of his hammock, they all proceeded to do ample justice: for the
travellers were very hungry after the fatigue of the previous day; and
as for the hermit, he looked like a man whose appetite was always sharp
set, and whose food agreed with him.

They had cold meat of several kinds, and a hot steak of venison just
killed that morning, which the hermit cooked while his guests were
engaged with the other viands.  There was also excellent coffee, and
superb cream, besides cakes made of a species of coarse flour or meal,
fruits of various kinds, and very fine honey.

"Arrah! ye've the hoith o' livin' here!" cried Barney, smacking his lips
as he held out his plate for another supply of a species of meat which
resembled chicken in tenderness and flavour.  "What sort o' bird or
baste may that be, now, av' I may ask ye, Mister--what's yer name?"

"My name is Carlos," replied the hermit, gravely; "and this is the flesh
of the armadillo."

"Arms-what-o?" inquired Barney.

"_Armadillo_," repeated the hermit.  "He is very good to eat but very
difficult to catch.  He digs down so fast we cannot catch him, and must
smoke him out of his hole."

"Have you many cows?" inquired Martin, as he replenished his cup with
coffee.

"Cows?" echoed the hermit, "I have got no cows."

"Where do you get such capital cream, then?" asked Martin in surprise.

The hermit smiled.  "Ah! my friends, that cream has come from a very
curious cow.  It is from a cow that grows in the ground."

"Grows!" ejaculated his guests.

"Yes, he grows.  I will show him to you one day."

The hermit's broad shoulders shook with a quiet internal laugh.  "I will
explain a little of that you behold on my table."

"The coffee I get from the trees.  There are plenty of them here.  Much
money is made in Brazil by the export of coffee,--very much.  The cakes
are made from the mandioca-root which I grow near my house.  The root is
dried and ground into flour, which, under the general name _farina_, is
used all over the country.  It is almost the only food used by the
Indians and Negroes."

"Then there are Injins and Niggers here, are there?" inquired Barney.

"Yes, a great many.  Most of the Negroes are slaves; some of the Indians
too; and the people who are descended from the Portuguese who came and
took the country long ago, they are the masters.--Well, the honey I get
in holes in the trees.  There are different kinds of honey here; some of
it is _sour_ honey.  And the fruits and roots, the plantains, and
bananas, and yams, and cocoa-nuts, and oranges, and plums, all grow in
the forest and much more besides, which you will see for yourselves if
you stay long here."

"It's a quare country, intirely," remarked Barney, as he wiped his mouth
and heaved a sigh of contentment.  Then, drawing his hand over his chin,
he looked earnestly in the hermit's face, and, with a peculiar twinkle
in his eye, said,--"I s'pose ye couldn't favour me with the lind of a
raazor, could ye?"

"No, my friend; I never use that foolish weapon."

"Ah, well, as there's only monkeys and jaguars, and sich like to see me,
it don't much signify; but my moustaches is gittin' mighty long, for
I've been two weeks already without a shave."

Martin laughed heartily at the grave, anxious expression of his
comrade's face.  "Never mind, Barney," he said, "a beard and moustache
will improve you vastly.  Besides, they will be a great protection
against mosquitoes; for you are such a hairy monster, that when they
grow nothing of your face will be exposed except your eyes and
cheek-bones.  And now," continued Martin, climbing into his hammock
again and addressing the hermit, "since you won't allow me to go out
a-hunting to-day, I would like very much if you would tell me something
more about this strange country."

"An' may be," suggested Barney, modestly, "ye won't object to tell us
something about yersilf--how you came for to live in this quare,
solitary kind of a way."

The hermit looked gravely from one to the other, and stroked his beard.
Drawing his rude chair towards the door of the hut he folded his arms,
and crossed his legs, and gazed dreamily forth upon the rich landscape.
Then, glancing again at his guests, he said, slowly; "Yes, I will do
what you ask,--I will tell you my story."

"An', if I might make so bould as to inquire," said Barney, with a
deprecatory smile, while he drew a short black pipe from his pocket,
"have ye got such a thing as 'baccy in them parts?"

The hermit rose, and going to a small box which stood in a corner,
returned with a quantity of cut tobacco in one hand, and a cigar not far
short of a foot long in the other!  In a few seconds the cigar was going
in full force, like a factory chimney; and the short black pipe glowed
like a miniature furnace, while its owner seated himself on a low stool,
crossed his arms on his breast, leaned his back against the door-post
and smiled,--as only an Irishman can smile under such circumstances.
The smoke soon formed a thick cloud, which effectually drove the
mosquitoes out of the hut, and though which Martin, lying in his
hammock, gazed out upon the sunlit orange and coffee-trees, and tall
palms with their rich festoons of creeping-plants, and sweet-scented
flowers, that clambered over and round the hut and peeped in at the open
door and windows, while he listened to the hermit who continued for at
least ten minutes to murmur slowly, between the puffs of his cigar,
"Yes, I will do it; I will tell you my story."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE HERMIT'S STORY.

"My ancestors," began the hermit, "were among the first to land upon
Brazil, after the country was taken possession of in the name of the
King of Portugal, in the year 1500.  In the first year of the century,
Vincent Vanez Pincon, a companion of the famed Columbus, discovered
Brazil; and in the next year, Pedro Alvarez Cabral, a Portuguese
commander, took possession of it in the name of the King of Portugal.
In 1503, Americus Vespucius discovered the Bay of All Saints, and took
home a cargo of Brazil-wood, monkeys and parrots; but no permanent
settlement was effected upon the shores of the new continent and the
rich treasures of this great country remained for some years longer
buried and unknown to many--for the wild Indians who lived here knew not
their value.

"It was on a dark and stormy night in the year 1510.  A group of swarthy
and naked savages encircled a small fire on the edge of the forest on
the east coast of Brazil.  The spot where their watch-fire was kindled
is now covered by the flourishing city of Bahia.  At that time it was a
wilderness.  Before them stretched the noble bay which is now termed
_Bahia de Todos Santos_,--All Saints' Bay.

"The savages talked earnestly and with excited looks as they stood upon
the shore, for the memory of the wondrous ships of the white men that
had visited them a few years before was deeply engraven on their minds;
and now, in the midst of the howling storm, another ship was seen
approaching their land.  It was a small vessel, shattered and
tempest-tossed, that drove into the Bahia de Todos Santos on that stormy
night.  Long had it battled with the waves of the Atlantic, and the
brave hearts that manned it had remained stanch to duty and strong in
hope, remembering the recent glorious example of Columbus.  But the
storm was fierce and the bark was frail.  The top-masts were broken and
the sails rent; and worst of all, just as land hove in sight and cheered
the drooping spirits of the crew, a tremendous wave dashed upon the
ship's stern and carried away the rudder.

"As they drove helplessly before the gale towards the shore, the naked
savages crowded down upon the beach and gazed in awe and astonishment at
the mysterious ship.  A few of them had seen the vessels of Americus
Vespucius and Cabral.  The rumour of the white men and their floating
castle had been wafted far and wide along the coast and into the
interior of Brazil, and with breathless wonder the natives had listened
to the strange account.  But now the vision was before them in reality.
On came the floating castle, the white foam dashing from her bows, and
the torn sails and ropes flying from her masts as she surged over the
billows and loomed through the driving spray.

"It was a grand sight to see that ship dashing straight towards the
shore at fearful speed; and those who looked on seemed to be impressed
with a vague feeling that she had power to spring upon the strand and
continue her swift career through the forest, as she had hitherto cleft
her passage through the sea.  As she approached, the savages shrank back
in fear.  Suddenly her frame trembled with a mighty shock.  A terrible
cry was borne to land by the gale, and all her masts went overboard.  A
huge wave lifted the vessel on its crest and flung her further on the
shore, where she remained firmly fixed, while the waves dashed in foam
around her and soon began to break her up.  Ere this happened, however,
a rope was thrown ashore and fastened to a rock by the natives.  By
means of this the crew were saved.  But it would have been well for
these bold navigators of Portugal if they had perished in the stormy
sea, for they were spared by the ocean, only to be murdered by the wild
savages, on whose shore they had been cast.

"All were slain save one,--Diego Alvarez Carreo, the captain of the
ship.  Before grasping the rope by which he reached the shore, he thrust
several cartridges into his bosom and caught up a loaded musket.
Wrapping the lock in several folds of cloth to keep it dry, he slid
along the rope and gained the beach in safety.  Here he was seized by
the natives, and would no doubt have been barbarously slain with his
unfortunate companions; but, being a very powerful man, he dashed aside
the foremost, and, breaking through their ranks, rushed towards the
wood.  The fleet savages, however, overtook him in an instant, and were
about to seize him when a young Indian woman interposed between them and
their victim.  This girl was the chief's daughter, and respect for her
rank induced them to hesitate for a moment; but in another instant the
Portuguese captain was surrounded.  In the scuffle that ensued, his
musket exploded, but fortunately wounded no one.  Instantly the
horrified savages fled in all directions leaving Carreo alone!

"The captain was quick-witted.  He knew that among hundreds of savages
it was madness to attempt either to fight or fly, and the happy effect
of the musket explosion induced him to adopt another course of action.
He drew himself up proudly to his full height, and beckoned the savages
to return.  This they did, casting many glances of fear at the dreaded
musket.  Going up to one who, from his bearing and ornaments, seemed to
be a chief, Carreo laid his musket on the sand, and, stepping over it so
that he left it behind him, held out his hand frankly to the chief.  The
savage looked at him in surprise, and suffered the captain to take his
hand and pat it; after which he began to examine the stranger's dress
with much curiosity.  Seeing that their chief was friendly to the white
man, the other savages hurried him to the camp-fire, where he soon
stripped off his wet clothes and ate the food which they put before him.
Thus Diego Carreo was spared.

"Next day, the Indians lined the beach and collected the stores of the
wrecked vessel.  While thus employed, Carreo shot a gull with his
musket; which so astonished the natives that they regarded him with fear
and respect, amounting almost to veneration.  A considerable quantity of
powder and shot was saved from the wreck, so that the captain was
enabled to keep his ascendency over the ignorant natives; and at length
he became a man of great importance in the tribe, and married the
daughter of the chief.  He went by the name of _Caramuru_,--`The man of
fire.'  This man founded the city of Bahia.

"The coasts of Brazil began soon after this to be settled in various
places by the Portuguese; who, however, were much annoyed by the
Spaniards, who claimed a share in the rich prize.  The Dutch and English
also formed settlements; but the Portuguese still retained possession of
the country, and continued to prosper.  Meanwhile Diego Caramuru, `the
man of fire,' had a son who in course of time became a prosperous
settler; and as his sons grew up he trained them to become cultivators
of the soil and traders in the valuable products of the New World.  He
took a piece of ground, far removed from the spot where his father had
been cast ashore, and a short distance in the interior of the country.
Here the eldest sons of the family dwelt laboured, and died, for many
generations.

"In the year 1808 Portugal was invaded by Napoleon Buonaparte, and the
sovereign of that kingdom, John the Sixth, fled to Brazil, accompanied
by his court and a large body of emigrants.  The king was warmly
received by the Brazilians, and immediately set about improving the
condition of the country.  He threw open its ports to all nations; freed
the land from all marks of colonial dependence; established newspapers;
made the press free, and did everything to promote education and
industry.  But although much was done, the good was greatly hindered,
especially in the inland districts, by the vice, ignorance, and
stupidity of many of the Roman Catholic priests, who totally neglected
their duties,--which, indeed, they were incompetent to perform,--and in
many instances, were no better than miscreants in disguise, teaching the
people vice instead of virtue.

"Foremost among the priests who opposed advancement, was a descendant of
the `man of fire.'  Padre Caramuru dwelt for some years with an English
merchant in the capital of Brazil, Rio de Janeiro.  The padre was not an
immoral man, but he was a fiery bigot and fiercely opposed everything
that tended to advance the education of the people.  This he did, firmly
believing that education was dangerous to the lower orders.  His church
taught him, too, that the Bible was a dangerous book; and whenever a
copy fell into his hands he immediately destroyed it.  During the
disturbances that took place after the time of King John's departure for
Portugal, and just before Brazil became an independent state under his
son, the Emperor Don Pedro the First, Padre Caramuru lost a beloved and
only brother.  He was quite a youth, and had joined the army only a few
months previously, at the desire of his elder brother the padre, who was
so overwhelmed by the blow that he ceased to take an active part in
church or political affairs and buried himself in a retired part of his
native valley.  Here he sought relief and comfort in the study of the
beauties of Nature, by which he was surrounded, but found none.

"Then he turned his mind to the doctrines of his church, and took
pleasure in verifying them from the Bible.  But, as he proceeded, he
