and before he could repeat it, the boy had dived.

The Dane was sensible of his error the instant he had tossed Alric away
from him, so he hastened to his boat, leaped into it, and ordered the
men to pull to the rocks near to which Alric had dived; but before they
could obey the order a loud ringing cheer burst from the cliffs, and in
another moment the form of Swart was seen on a ledge, high above, in the
act of hurling a huge mass of rock down on the boat.  The mass struck
the cliff in its descent, burst into fragments, and fell in a shower
upon the Danes.

At the same time Swart waved his hand as if to someone behind him, and
shouted with stentorian voice:

"This way, men!  Come on!  Down into the boats and give chase! huzza!"

The enemy did not await the result of the order, but pulled out into the
fiord as fast as possible, while Swart ran down to the edge of the water
and assisted Alric to land.  It was not until they heard both man and
boy utter a cheer of defiance, and burst into a fit of laughter, and saw
them hastening at full speed towards Horlingdal, that the vikings knew
they had been duped.  It was too late, however, to remedy the evil.
They knew, also, that they might now expect an immediate attack, so,
bending to the oars with all their might, they hastened off to warn
their comrades at the Springs.

"Now, Swart," said Erling, after hearing this tale to its conclusion,
"if ye are not too much exhausted to--"

"Exhausted!" cried Swart, springing up as though he had but risen from a
refreshing slumber.

"Well, I see thou art still fit for the fight.  Revenge, like love, is a
powerful stirrer of the blood.  Come along then; I will lead the way,
and do thou tread softly and keep silence.  Follow us, Alric, I have yet
more work for thee, lad."

Taking one of the numerous narrow paths that ran from Ulfstede to the
shores of the fiord, Erling led his companions to a grassy mound which
crowned the top of a beetling cliff whose base was laved by deep water.
Although the night was young--probably two hours short of midnight--the
sun was still high in the heavens, for in most parts of Norway that
luminary, during the height of summer, sinks but a short way below the
horizon--they have daylight all night for some time.  In the higher
latitudes the sun, for a brief period, shines all the twenty-four hours
round.  Erling could therefore see far and wide over the fiord, as well
as if it were the hour of noon.

"Nothing in sight!" he exclaimed in a tone of chagrin.  "I was a fool to
let thee talk so long, Swart; but there is still a chance of catching
the boat before it rounds the ness.  Come along."

Saying this hurriedly, the youth descended into what appeared to be a
hole in the ground.  A rude zigzag stair cut in the rock conducted them
into a subterranean cavern, which at first seemed to be perfectly dark;
but in a few seconds their eyes became accustomed to the dim light, and
as they advanced rapidly over a bed of pebbles, Swart, who had never
been there before, discovered that he was in an ocean-made cave, for the
sound of breaking ripples fell softly on his ears.  On turning round a
corner of rock the opening of the cave towards the sea suddenly appeared
with a dazzling light like a great white gem.

But another beautiful sight met his astonished gaze.  This was Erling's
ship of war, the Swan, which, with its figurehead erect, as though it
were a living thing, sat gracefully on the water, above its own
reflected image.

"All ready?" asked Erling, as a man stepped up to him.

"All ready," replied Thorer.

"Get on board, Swart," said Erling; "we will teach these Danes a lesson
they will not forget as long as the Springs flow.  Here, Alric--where
are ye, lad?"

Now, unfortunately for himself, as well as for his friend, Alric was
almost too self-reliant in his nature.  His active mind was too apt to
exert itself in independent thought in circumstances where it would have
been wiser to listen and obey.  Erling had turned with the intention of
telling his little brother that he had started thus quietly in order
that he might have the pleasure of capturing the scouting boat, and of
beginning the fight at the Springs with a small band of tried men, thus
keeping the enemy in play until reinforcements should arrive; for he
shrewdly suspected that if the whole valley were to go out at once
against the vikings, they would decline the combat and make off.  He had
intended, therefore, to have warned Alric to watch the Swan past a
certain point before sounding the alarm at Ulfstede.  But Alric had
already formed his own opinions on the subject, and resolved to act on
them.

He suspected that Erling, in his thirst for glory, meant to have all the
fun to himself, and to attack the Danes with his single boat's crew of
fifty or sixty men.  He knew enough of war to be aware that sixty men
against six hundred would have very small chance of success--in fact,
that the thing was sheer madness--so he resolved to balk, and by so
doing to save, his headstrong brother.

When Erling turned, as we have said, he beheld Alric running into the
cave at full speed.  Instantly suspecting the truth, he dashed after
him, but the boy was fleet, and Erling was heavily armed.  The result
was, that the former escaped, while the latter returned to the beach and
embarked in the Swan in a most unenviable state of mind.

Erling's "longship" was one of the smaller-sized war vessels of the
period.  It pulled twenty oars--ten on each side--and belonged to the
class named Snekiars, or cutters, which usually had from ten to twenty
rowers on a side.  To each oar three men were apportioned--one to row,
one to shield the rower, and one to throw missiles and fight, so that
her crew numbered over sixty men.  The forecastle and poop were very
high, and the appearance of height was still further increased by the
figurehead--the neck and head of a swan--and by a tail that rose from
the stern-post, over the steersman's head.  Both head and tail were
richly gilt; indeed, the whole vessel was gaudily painted.  All round
the gunwales, from stem to stern, hung a row of shining red and white
shields, which resembled the scaly sides of some fabulous creature, so
that when the oars, which gave it motion, and not inaptly represented
legs, were dipped, the vessel glided swiftly out of the cavern, like
some antediluvian monster issuing from its den and crawling away over
the dark blue sea.  A tall heavy mast rose from the centre of the ship.
Its top was also gilded, as well as the tips of the heavy yard attached
to it.  On this they hoisted a huge square sail, which was composed of
alternate stripes of red, white, and blue cloth.

It need scarcely be said that Erling's crew pulled with a will, and that
the waters of the fiord curled white upon the breast of the Swan that
night; but the vikings' boat had got too long a start of them, so that,
when they doubled the ness and pulled towards the Springs, they
discovered the enemy hurrying into their ships and preparing to push off
from the land.

Now, this did not fall in with Erling's purpose at all, for he was well
aware that his little Swan could do nothing against such an overwhelming
force, so he directed his course towards the mouth of a small stream,
beside which there was a spit of sand, and, just behind it, a piece of
level land, of a few acres in extent, covered with short grass.  The
river was deep at its mouth.  About a hundred yards upstream it flowed
out of a rugged pass in the mountains or cliffs which hemmed in the
fiord.  Into this dark spot the Northman rowed his vessel and landed
with his men.

The vikings were much surprised at this manoeuvre, and seemed at a loss
how to act, for they immediately ceased their hurried embarkation and
held a consultation.

"Methinks they are mad," said Skarpedin, on witnessing the movements of
the Swan.  "But we will give them occasion to make use of all the spirit
that is in them.  I had thought there were more men in the dale, but if
they be few they seem to be bold.  They have wisely chosen their ground.
Rocks, however, will not avail them against a host like ours.  Methinks
some of us will be in Valhalla to-night."

Saying this Skarpedin drew up his men in order of battle on the little
plain before referred to, and advanced to the attack.  Erling, on the
other hand, posted his men among the rocks in such a way that they could
command the approach to the pass, which their leader with a few picked
men defended.

On perceiving the intention of the Danes to attack him, Erling's heart
was glad, because he now felt sure that to some extent he had them in
his power.  If they had, on his first appearance, taken to their ships,
they might have easily escaped, or some of the smaller vessels might
have pulled up the river and attacked his ship, which, in that case,
would have had to meet them on unequal terms; but, now that they were
about to attack him on land, he knew that he could keep them in play as
long as he pleased, and that if they should, on the appearance of
reinforcements, again make for their ships, he could effectively harass
them, and retard their embarkation.

Meditating on these things the young Norseman stood in front of his men
leaning on his battle-axe, and calmly surveying the approaching foe
until they were within a few yards of him.

"Thorer," he said at length, raising his weapon slowly to his shoulder,
"take thou the man with the black beard, and leave yonder fellow with
the red hair to me."

Thorer drew his sword and glanced along its bright blade without
replying.  Indeed, there was scarce time for reply.  Next moment the
combatants uttered a loud shout and met with a dire crash.  For some
time the clash of steel, the yells of maddened men, the shrieks of the
wounded, and the wails of the dying, resounded in horrible commotion
among the echoing cliffs.  The wisdom of Erling's tactics soon became
apparent.  It was not until the onset was made, and the battle fairly
begun, that the men whom he had placed among the rocks above the
approach to the pass began to act.  These now sent down such a shower of
huge stones and masses of rock that many of the foe were killed, and by
degrees a gap was made, so that those who were on the plain dared not
advance to the succour of those who were fighting in the pass.

Seeing this, Erling uttered his war-cry, and, collecting his men
together, acted on the offensive.  Wherever his battle-axe swung, or
Thorer's sword gleamed, there men fell, and others gave way, till at
last they were driven completely out of the pass and partly across the
plain.  Erling took care, however, not to advance too far, although
Skarpedin, by retreating, endeavoured to entice him to do so; but drew
off his men by sound of horn, and returned to his old position--one man
only having been killed and a few wounded.

Skarpedin now held a council of war with his chiefs, and from the length
of time they were about it, Erling was led to suspect that they did not
intend to renew the attack at the same point or in the same manner.  He
therefore sent men to points of vantage on the cliffs to observe the
more distant movements of the enemy, while he remained to guard the
pass, and often gazed anxiously towards the ness, round which he
expected every minute to see sweeping the longships of Ulf and his
father.



CHAPTER SIX.

EVENING IN THE HALL--THE SCALD TELLS OF GUNDALF'S WOOING--THE FEAST
INTERRUPTED AND THE WAR CLOUDS THICKEN.

It is necessary now that we should turn backwards a little in our story,
to that point where Erling left the hall at Ulfstede to listen to the
sad tale of Swart.

Ulf and his friends, not dreaming of the troubles that were hanging over
them, continued to enjoy their evening meal and listen to the songs and
stories of the Scald, or to comment upon the doings of King Harald
Haarfager, and the prospects of good or evil to Norway that were likely
to result therefrom.

At the point where we return to the hall, Ulf wore a very clouded brow
as he sat with compressed lips beside his principal guest.  He grasped
the arm of his rude chair with his left hand, while his right held a
large and massive silver tankard.  Haldor, on the other hand, was all
smiles and good humour.  He appeared to have been attempting to soothe
the spirit of his fiery neighbour.

"I tell thee, Ulf, that I have as little desire to see King Harald
succeed in subduing all Norway as thou hast, but in this world wise men
will act not according to what they wish so much, as according to what
is best.  Already the King has won over or conquered most of the small
kings, and it seems to me that the rest will have to follow, whether
they like it or no.  Common sense teaches submission where conquest
cannot be."

"And does not patriotism teach that men may die?" said Ulf sternly.

"Aye, when by warring with that end in view anything is to be gained for
one's country; but where the result would be, first, the embroiling of
one's district in prolonged bloody and hopeless warfare, and, after
that, the depriving one's family of its head and of the King's favour,
patriotism says that to die would be folly, not wisdom."

"Tush, man; folk will learn to call thee Haldor the Mild.  Surely years
are telling on thee.  Was there ever anything in this world worth having
gained without a struggle?"

"Thou knowest, Ulf, that I am not wont to be far from the front wherever
or whenever a struggle is thought needful, but I doubt the propriety of
it in the present case.  The subject, however, is open to discussion.
The question is, whether it would be better for Norway that the kings of
Horlingdal should submit to the conqueror for the sake of the general
good, or buckle on the sword in the hope of retrieving what is lost.
Peace or war--that is the question."

"I say war!" cried Ulf, striking the board so violently with his
clenched fist that the tankards and platters leaped and rang again.

At this a murmur of applause ran round the benches of the friends and
housemen.

"The young blades are ever ready to huzza over their drink at the
thought of fighting; but methinks it will not strengthen thy cause much,
friend Ulf, thus to frighten the women and spill the ale."

Ulf turned round with a momentary look of anger at this speech.  The man
who uttered it was a splendid specimen of a veteran warrior.  His
forehead was quite bald, but from the sides and back of his head flowed
a mass of luxuriant silky hair which was white as the driven snow.  His
features were eminently firm and masculine, and there was a hearty
good-humoured expression about the mouth, and a genial twinkle in his
eyes, especially in the wrinkled corners thereof, that rendered the
stout old man irresistibly attractive.  His voice was particularly rich,
deep, and mellow, like that of a youth, and although his bulky frame
stooped a little from age, there was enough of his youthful vigour left
to render him a formidable foe, as many a poor fellow had learned to his
cost even in days but recently gone by.  He was an uncle of Ulf, and on
a visit to the stede at that time.  The frown fled from Ulf's brow as he
looked in the old man's ruddy and jovial countenance.

"Thanks, Guttorm," said he, seizing his tankard, "thanks for reminding
me that grey hairs are beginning to sprinkle my beard; come, let us
drink success to the right, confusion to the wrong! thou canst not
refuse that, Haldor."

"Nay," said Haldor, laughing; "nor will I refuse to fight in thy cause
and by thy side, be it right or wrong, when the Thing decides for war."

"Well said, friend! but come, drink deeper.  Why, I have taken thee down
three pegs already!" said Ulf, glancing into Haldor's tankard.  "Ho!
Hilda; fetch hither more ale, lass, and fill--fill to the brim."  The
toast was drunk with right good will by all--from Ulf down to the
youngest house-carle at the lowest end of the great hall.

"And now, Guttorm," continued Ulf, turning to the bluff old warrior,
"since thou hast shown thy readiness to rebuke, let us see thy
willingness to entertain.  Sing us a stave or tell us a saga, kinsman,
as well thou knowest how, being gifted with more than a fair share of
the scald's craft."

The applause with which this proposal was received by the guests and
house-carles who crowded the hall from end to end proved that they were
aware of Guttorm's gifts, and would gladly hear him.  Like a sensible
man he complied at once, without affecting that air of false diffidence
which is so common among modern songsters and story-tellers.

"I will tell you," said the old man--having previously wet his lips at a
silver tankard, which was as bluff and genuine as himself--"of King
Gundalf's wooing.  Many years have gone by since I followed him on
viking cruise, and Gundalf himself has long been feasting in Odin's
hall.  I was a beardless youth when I joined him.  King Gundalf of
Orkedal was a goodly man, stout and brisk, and very strong.  He could
leap on his horse without touching stirrup with all his war gear on; he
could fight as well with his left hand as with his right, and his
battle-axe bit so deep that none who once felt its edge lived to tell of
its weight.  He might well be called a Sea-king, for he seldom slept
under a sooty roof timber.  Withal he was very affable to his men,
open-hearted, and an extremely handsome man.

"One summer he ordered us to get ready to go on viking cruise.  When we
were all a-boun we set sail with five longships and about four hundred
men, and fared away to Denmark, where we forayed and fought a great
battle with the inhabitants.  King Gundalf gained the victory,
plundered, wasted, and burned far and wide in the land, and made
enormous booty.  He returned with this to Orkedal.  Here he found his
wife at the point of death, and soon after she died.  Gundalf felt his
loss so much that he had no pleasure in Raumsdal after that.  He
therefore took to his ships and went again a-plundering.  We herried
first in Friesland, next in Saxland, and then all the way to Flanders;
so sings Halfred the scald:--

  "`Gundalf's axe of shining steel
  For the sly wolf left many a meal.
  The ill-shaped Saxon corpses lay
  Heap'd up--the witch-wife's horses' prey.
  She rides by night, at pools of blood,
  Where Friesland men in daylight stood,
  Her horses slake their thirst, and fly
  On to the field where Flemings lie.'"

[Note.  Ravens were the witch-wife's horses.]

The old warrior half recited half sang these lines in a rich full voice,
and then paused a few seconds, while a slight murmur arose from the
earnest listeners around him.

"Thereafter," resumed Guttorm, "we sailed to England, and ravaged far
and wide in the land.  We sailed all the way north to Northumberland,
where we plundered, and thence to Scotland, where we marauded far and
wide.  Then we went to the Hebrides and fought some battles, and after
that south to Man, which we herried.  We ravaged far around in Ireland,
and steered thence to Bretland, which we laid waste with fire and
sword--also the district of Cumberland.  Then we went to Valland, [the
west coast of France] from which we fared away for the south coast of
England, but missed it and made the Scilly Isles.  After that we went to
Ireland again, and came to a harbour, into which we ran--but in a
friendly way, for we had as much plunder as our ships could carry.

"Now, while we were there, a summons to a Thing went through the
country, and when the Thing was assembled, a queen called Gyda came to
