
"Hallo!" exclaimed the latter, in stern tones, as they came up, "what
you bin about, sar? what you bin doin'?  Not'ing done since I was here
more an hour past--eh, sar?"

The midshipman explained, with a somewhat guilty look and blush, that he
had been resting in the bower, and that he had stayed much longer than
he had intended.

"You just hab, you rascal!  But I cure you ob dat," said the negro,
catching up a piece of cane that was lying on the ground, with which he
was about to administer condign chastisement to the idle slave, when his
master stopped him.

"Hurt him not," he said, raising his hand; "is not this his first
offence?"

"Yes, massa, de bery fust."

"Well, tell him that the rod shall be applied next time he is found
idling.  Enough, follow me!"

With a stately step the amiable Moor passed on.  With a much more
stately port Peter the Great followed him, but as he did so he bestowed
on Foster a momentary look so ineffably sly, yet solemn, that the latter
was obliged to seize the spade and dig like a very sexton in order to
check his tendency to laugh aloud.

Half an hour later the negro returned to him.

"What you bin do all dis time?" he asked in surprise.  "I was more'n
half t'ink you desarve a lickin'!"

"Perhaps I do, Peter," answered the young slave, in a tone so hearty and
cheerful that the negro's great eyes increased considerably in size.

"Well, Geo'ge," he said, with a sudden change in his expression, "I
wouldn't hab expeck it ob you; no, I wouldn't, if my own mudder was to
tell me!  To t'ink dat one so young, too, would go on de sly to de
rum-bottle!  But where you kin find 'im's more'n I kin tell."

"I have not been at the rum-bottle at all," returned the middy, resting
on his spade, "but I have had something to raise my spirits and brace my
energies, and take me out of myself.  Come, let us go to the bower, and
I will explain--that is, if we may safely go there."

"Go whar?"

"To the bower."

"Do you know, sar," replied Peter, drawing himself up and expanding his
great chest--"do you know, sar, dat I's kimmander-in-chief ob de army in
dis yar gardin, an' kin order 'em about whar I please, an' do what I
like?  Go up to de bower, you small Bri'sh officer, an' look sharp if
you don't want a whackin'!"

The slave obeyed with alacrity, and when the two were seated he
described his recent interview with Hester Sommers.

No words can do full justice to the varied expressions that flitted
across the negro's face as the midshipman's narrative went on.

"So," he said slowly, when it was concluded, "you's bin an' had a long
privit convissation wid one ob Ben-Ahmed's ladies!  My! you know what
dat means if it found out?"

"Well, Miss Sommers herself was good enough to tell me that it would
probably mean flogging to death."

"_Floggin'_ to deaf!" echoed Peter.  "P'r'aps so wid massa, for he's a
kind man; but wid most any oder man it 'ud mean roastin' alibe ober a
slow fire!  Geo'ge, you's little better'n a dead man!"

"I hope it's not so bad as that, for no one knows about it except the
lady and yourself."

"Das so; an' you're in luck, let me tell you.  Now you go to work, an'
I'll retire for some meditation--see what's to come ob all dis."

Truly the changes that take place in the feelings and mind of man are
not less sudden and complete than the physical changes which sometimes
occur in lands that are swept by the tornado and desolated by the
earthquake.  That morning George Foster had risen from his straw bed a
miserable white slave, hopeless, heartless, and down at spiritual zero--
or below it.  That night he lay down on the same straw bed, a free man--
in soul, if not in body--a hero of the most ardent character--up at
fever-heat in the spiritual thermometer, or above it, and all because
his heart throbbed with a noble purpose--because an object worthy of his
efforts was placed before him, and because he had made up his mind to do
or die in a good cause!

What that cause was he would have found it difficult to define clearly
in detail.  Sufficient for him that an unknown but stalwart father, with
Radical tendencies, and a well-known and lovely daughter, were at the
foundation of it, and that "Escape!" was the talismanic word which
formed a battery, as it were, with which to supply his heart with
electric energy.

He lived on this diet for a week, with the hope of again seeing Hester;
but he did not see her again for many weeks.

One morning Peter the Great came to him as he was going out to work in
the garden and said--

"You git ready and come wid me into town dis day."

"Indeed," returned Foster, as much excited by the order as if it had
been to go on some grand expedition.  "For what purpose?"

"You 'bey orders, sar, an' make your mind easy about purpisses."

In a few minutes Foster was ready.

No part of his original costume now remained to him.  A blue-striped
cotton jacket, with pants too short and too wide for him; a
broad-brimmed straw hat, deeply sunburnt face and hands, with a pair of
old boots two sizes too large, made him as unlike a British naval
officer as he could well be.  But he had never been particularly vain of
his personal appearance, and the high purpose by which he was now
actuated set him above all such trifling considerations.

"Is your business a secret?" asked Foster, as he and his companion
descended the picturesque road that led to the city.

"No, it am no secret, 'cause I's got no business."

"You seem to be in a mysterious mood this morning, Peter.  What do you
mean?"

"I mean dat you an' me's out for a holiday--two slabes out for a
holiday!  T'ink ob dat!"

The negro threw back his head, opened his capacious jaws, and gave vent
to an almost silent chuckle.

"That does indeed mound strange," returned Foster; "how has such a
wonderful event been brought about?"

"By lub, Geo'ge.  Di'n't I tell you before dat hub am eberyt'ing?"

"Yes; and my dear old mother told me, long before you did, that `love is
the fulfilling of the law.'"

"Well, I dun know much about law, 'xcep' dat I b'lieve it's a passel o'
nonsense, for what we's got here an't o' no use--leastwise not for
slabes."

"But my mother did not refer to human laws," returned Foster.  "She
quoted what the Bible says about God's laws."

"Oh! das a _bery_ diff'rent t'ing, massa, an' I s'pose your mudder was
right.  Anyway it was lub what obercame Ben-Ahmed.  You see, I put it to
'im bery tender like.  `Massa,' says I, `here I's bin wid you night an'
day for six year, an' you's nebber say to me yet, "Peter de Great, go
out for de day an' enjoy you'self."  Now, massa, I wants to take dat
small raskil Geo'ge Fuster to de town, an' show him a few t'ings as'll
make him do his work better, an' dat'll make you lub 'im more, an' so
we'll all be more comfrable.'  Das what I say; an' when I was sayin' it,
I see de wrinkles a-comin' round massa's eyes, so I feel sure; for w'en
dem wrinkles come to de eyes, it is all right.  An' massa, he say,
`Go'--nuffin more; only `Go;' but ob course das nuff for me, so I hoed;
an' now--we're bof goin'."

At this point in the conversation they came to a place where the road
forked.  Here they met a number of Arabs, hasting towards the town in a
somewhat excited frame of mind.  Following these very slowly on a mule
rode another Arab, whose dignified gravity seemed to be proof against
all excitement.  He might have been the Dey of Algiers himself, to judge
from his bearing and the calm serenity with which he smoked a cigar.
Yet neither his occupation nor position warranted his dignified air, for
he was merely a seller of oranges, and sat on a huge market-saddle,
somewhat in the lady-fashion--side-wise, with the baskets of golden
fruit on either side of him.

Going humbly towards this Arab, the negro asked him in Lingua Franca if
there was anything unusual going on in the town?

The Arab replied by a calm stare and a puff of smoke as he rode by.

"I 'ope his pride won't bust 'im," muttered Peter, as he fell behind and
rejoined his companion.

"Do you think anything has happened, then?"

"Dere's no sayin'.  Wonderful geese dey is in dis city.  Dey seem to
t'ink robbery on the sea is just, an' robbery ob de poor an' helpless is
just; but robbery ob de rich in Algiers--oh! dat awrful wicked! not to
be tololerated on no account wa'somever.  Konsikence is--de poor an' de
helpless git some ob de strong an' de clebber to go on dere side, an'
den dey bust up, strangle de Dey, rob de Jews, an' set up another
guv'ment."

"Rob the Jews, Peter!  Why do they do that?"

"Dun know, massa--"

"Please don't call me massa any more, Peter, for I'm _not_ massa in any
sense--being only your friend and fellow-slave."

"Well, I won't, Geo'ge.  I's a-goin' to say I s'pose dey plunder de Jews
'cause dey's got lots o' money an' got no friends.  Eberybody rob de
Jews w'en dere's a big rumpus.  But I don't t'ink dere's a row jus'
now--only a scare."

The scare, if there was one, had passed away when they reached the town.
On approaching the Bab-Azoun gate, Peter got ready their passports to
show to the guard.  As he did so, Foster observed, with a shudder, that
shreds of a human carcass were still dangling from the large hooks on
the wall.

Suddenly their steps were arrested by a shriek, and several men
immediately appeared on the top of the wall, holding fast a struggling
victim.  But the poor wretch's struggles were vain.  He was led to the
edge of the wall by four strong men, and not hurled, but dropped over,
so that he should not fail to be caught on one of the several hooks
below.

Another shriek of terror burst from the man as he fell.  It was followed
by an appalling yell as one of the hooks caught him under the armpit,
passed upwards right through his shoulder and into his jaws, while the
blood poured down his convulsed and naked limbs.  That yell was the poor
man's last.  The action of the hook had been mercifully directed, and
after a few struggles, the body hung limp and lifeless.

Oh! it is terrible to think of the cruelty that man is capable of
practising on his fellows.  The sight was enough, one would think, to
rouse to indignation a heart of stone, yet the crowds that beheld this
did not seem to be much affected by it.  True, there were several faces
that showed traces of pity, but few words of disapproval were uttered.

"Come, come!" cried our midshipman, seizing his companion by the arm and
dragging him away, "let us go.  Horrible!  They are not men but devils.
Come away."

They passed through the gate and along the main street of the city a
considerable distance, before Foster could find words to express his
feelings, and then he had difficulty in restraining his indignation on
finding that the negro was not nearly as much affected as he himself was
by the tragedy which they had just witnessed.

"We's used to it, you know," said Peter in self-defence.  "I's seen 'em
hangin' alibe on dem hooks for hours.  But dat's nuffin to what some on
'em do.  Look dar; you see dat ole man a-sittin' ober dere wid de small
t'ings for sale--him what's a-doin' nuffin, an' sayin' nuffin, an'
almost expectin' nuffin?  Well, I once saw dat ole man whacked for
nuffin--or next to nuffin--on de sole ob his foots, so's he couldn't
walk for 'bout two or t'ree mont's."

They had reached the market-square by that time, and Foster saw that the
man referred to was the identical old fellow with the blue coat and
hood, the white beard, and the miscellaneous old articles for sale, whom
he had observed on his first visit to the square.  The old Arab gave
Peter the Great a bright look and a cheerful nod as they passed.

"He seems to know you," remarked Foster.

"Oh yes.  He know me.  I used to carry him on my back ebery mornin' to
his place here dat time when he couldn't walk.  Bress you! dar's lots o'
peepil knows me here.  Come, I'll 'troduce you to some more friends, an'
we'll hab a cup o' coffee."

Saying this, he conducted our middy into a perfect labyrinth of narrow
streets, through which he wended his way with a degree of certainty that
told of intimate acquaintance.  Foster observed that he nodded
familiarly to many of those who crowded them--to Jews, Arabs,
water-carriers, and negroes, as well as to the dignified men who kept
little stalls and shops, many of which shops were mere niches in the
sides of the houses.  So close were the fronts of these houses to each
other that in many places they almost met overhead and obscured much of
the light.

At last the middy and his friend stopped in front of a stair which
descended into what appeared to be a dark cellar.  Entering it, they
found themselves in a low Arab coffee-house.



CHAPTER SIX.

OUR HERO SEES THE MOORS IN SEVERAL ASPECTS, AND MAKES A GREAT DISCOVERY.

Whatever may be said of Mohammedanism as a religion, there can be no
question, we should think, that it has done much among the Eastern
nations to advance the cause of Temperance.

We make no defence of Mohammed--very much the reverse--but we hold that
even a false prophet cannot avoid teaching a certain modicum of truth in
his system, and when Mohammed sternly put his foot down upon strong
drink, and enforced the principle of total abstinence therefrom, he did
signal service to a large portion of the human family.  Although, for
want of better teaching, Mohammedans cling to many vices, one never sees
them howling through the streets in a state of wild ferocity, or
staggering homewards in a condition of mild imbecility, from the effects
of intoxicating drink.

Instead of entering a low den where riot and revelry, with bad language
and quarrelling, might be expected to prevail, George Foster found
himself in a small white-washed apartment, where there sat several grave
and sedate men, wrapped in the voluminous folds of Eastern drapery,
sipping very small cups of coffee, and enjoying very large pipes of
tobacco.

The room was merely a cellar, the walls being thickly stuccoed and
white-washed, and the ceiling arched; but, although plain, the place was
reasonably clean and eminently quiet.  The drinkers did not dispute.
Conversation flowed in an undertone, and an air of respectability
pervaded the whole place.

At the further end of the apartment there was a curious-looking
fireplace, which seemed to have been formed without the use of square or
plummet, and around which were scattered and hung in comfortable
confusion the implements and utensils of cookery.  Nothing of the cook
was visible except his bare legs and feet, the rest of him being
shrouded in a recess.  Beside the fireplace an Arab sat cross-legged on
a bench, sipping his coffee.  Beyond him in a recess another Arab was
seated.  He appeared to be sewing while he conversed with a negro who
stood beside him.  Elsewhere, in more or less remote and dim distances,
other customers were seated indulging in the prevailing beverage.

"You sit down here, Geo'ge; drink an' say not'ing, but wait for me."

With this admonition Peter the Great whispered a few words to the man
who owned the establishment, and hurriedly left the place.

The middy naturally felt a little disconcerted at being thus left alone
among strangers, but, knowing that in the circumstances he was
absolutely helpless, he wisely and literally obeyed orders.  Sitting
down on a bench opposite the fire, from which point of observation he
could see the entrance-door and all that went on around him, he waited
and said nothing until the chief of the establishment presented him with
a white cup of coffee, so very small that he felt almost equal to the
swallowing of cup and coffee at one gulp.  With a gracious bow and
"Thank you," he accepted the attention, and began to sip.  The dignified
Arab who gave it to him did not condescend upon any reply, but turned to
attend upon his other customers.

Foster's first impulse was to spit out the sip he had taken, for to his
surprise the coffee was thick with grounds.  He swallowed it, however,
and wondered.  Then, on taking another sip and considering it, he
perceived that the grounds were not as grounds to which he had been
accustomed, but were reduced--no doubt by severe pounding--to a pasty
condition, which made the beverage resemble chocolate.  "Coffee-soup!
with sugar--but no milk!" he muttered, as he tried another sip.  This
third one convinced him that the ideas of Arabs regarding coffee did not
coincide with those of Englishmen, so he finished the cup at the fourth
sip, much as he would have taken a dose of physic, and thereafter amused
himself with contemplating the other coffee-sippers.

At the time when our hero first arrived at Ben-Ahmed's home, he had been
despoiled of his own garments while he was in bed--the slave costume
having been left in their place.  On application to his friend Peter,
however, his pocket-knife, pencil, letters, and a few other things had
been returned to him.  Thus, while waiting, he was able to turn his time
to account by making a sketch of the interior of the coffee-house, to
the great surprise and gratification of the negroes there--perhaps,
also, of the Moors--but these latter were too reticent and dignified to
express any interest by word or look, whatever they might have felt.

He was thus engaged when Peter returned.

"Hallo, Geo'ge!" exclaimed the negro, "what you bin up to--makin'
picturs?"

"Only a little sketch," said Foster, holding it up.
