a good deal to the poor girl, and found that she had got her feet firm
on the Rock of Ages.  She was very grateful, poor thing, and I never saw
one so unselfish.  She had little thought about herself, although dyin'
and in great sufferin'.  Her chief anxiety was about her old father, and
what he would do when she was gone.

"It was impossible for me to stay to the end, for no one could guess how
long the poor thing would hold out.  I did my best to comfort the
father, and then I left, bringing away a kind message to you, my poor
Rosebud.  She seems to have loved you dearly, and said you were very
kind to her at school."

Rose had covered her face with her hands, and with difficulty restrained
her tears.

"But you said the doctors had _some_ hope, father; didn't you?" she
asked.

"No, darling, the doctors had none--no more had I.  It was her poor
father who hoped against hope.  Death was written on her sweet face, and
it could not be far off.  I doubt not she is now with the Lord.  When I
was leaving, she gave me a small packet for you; but that, with
everything else in the _North Star_, has gone to the bottom.  But we
must be goin' now," continued the captain, rising.  "I see Jeff is
gettin' wearied--an' no wonder.  Besides, it won't do to keep you two up
here talkin' till daylight."

Jeff protested that he was not weary--that in such company it was
impossible for him to tire! but Rose was too much distressed by her
father's narrative to observe the compliment.

Still, in spite of his protest, there was something in our hero's manner
and look which belied his words; and when he returned to the coastguard
station that day, and was about to lie down for much-needed repose, his
friend and mate, David Bowers, was surprised to see him turn deadly
pale, stagger, and fall on his bed in a state of insensibility.

"Hallo!  Jeff, what's wrong?" exclaimed Bowers, starting up, seizing his
friend's arm, and giving him a shake, for he was much puzzled.  To see a
man knocked into a state of insensibility was nothing new or unfamiliar
to Bowers, but to see a powerful young fellow like Jeff go off in a
fainting fit like a woman was quite out of his experience.

Jeff, however, remained deaf to his mate's hallo! and when at last a
doctor was fetched, it was found that he had been seriously injured;
insomuch that the medical man stood amazed when he heard how he had
walked several miles and sat up for several hours after his exertions
and accident at the wreck.  That medical man, you see, happened to be an
old bachelor, and probably did not know what love can accomplish!

"I very much fear," he said to Captain Millet, after inspecting his
patient, "that the poor fellow has received some bad internal injuries.
The mast, or whatever it was, must have struck him a tremendous blow,
for his side is severely bruised, and two of his ribs are broken."

"Pretty tough ribs to break, too," remarked the captain, with a look of
profound distress.

"You are right," returned the doctor; "remarkably tough, but not quite
fitted to withstand such a powerful battering-ram as the mainmast of a
six-hundred-ton barque."

"Now, doctor, what's to be done with him?  You see, the poor young
fellow is not only my friend, but he has saved my life, so I feel bound
to look well after him; and this isn't quite the sort o' place to be ill
in," he added, looking round the somewhat bare apartment, whose walls
were adorned with carbines and cutlasses.

"The wisest thing for him to do is to go into hospital, where he will
receive the best of medical treatment and careful nursing."

"Wouldn't the nursing of an old lady that loves him like a mother, and a
comfortable cottage, do as well?"

"No doubt it would," said the doctor, with a smile, "if he also had
proper medical attendance--"

"Just so.  Well, that's all settled, then," interrupted the captain.
"I'll have him removed at once, and you'll attend him, doctor--who
better?--that is, if you can spare the time."

The doctor was quite ready to spare the time, and the captain bustled
off to tell his sister what was in store for her, and to order Rosebud
to pack up and return to school without delay, so as to make room for
the patient.

Great was his astonishment that his Rosebud burst into tears on
receiving the news.

"My Bud, my darling, don't cry," he said, tenderly drawing the fair head
to his rugged bosom.  "I know it must be a great disappointment to have
a week cut off your holidays, but I'll go down to Folkestone with you,
an' take a lodging there, an you an' I will have a jolly time of it
together--till I get another ship--"

"Oh! father, it's not _that_!" exclaimed poor Rose almost indignantly;
"it's--it's--"

Not being able to explain exactly what it was that ailed her, she took
refuge in another flood of tears.

"Oh!" she thought to herself, "if I might only stay and nurse him!" but
she blushed at the very thought, for she was well aware that she knew no
more about scientific nursing than a tortoiseshell cat!  Three months of
the most tender and careful nursing by Miss Millet failed, however, to
set Jeffrey Benson on his legs.  He was very patient and courageous.
Hope was strong, and he listened with approval and gratitude to his
nurse's teachings.

There came a day, however, which tried him.

"You think me not much better, doctor?" he asked, somewhat anxiously.

"Not much," returned the doctor, in a low, tender tone; "and I fear that
you must make up your mind never again to be quite the same man you
were."

"Never again?" exclaimed the youth, in startled surprise.

The doctor said nothing, but his look was--"never again."



CHAPTER SIX.

GOOD NEWS TO THE CAPTAIN--ALSO TO JEFF.

There is a period, probably, in the life of every man, when a feeling
akin to despair creeps over him, and the natural tendency of his heart
to rebel against his Maker becomes unquestionable.  There may be some on
whom this epoch descends gently--others, perhaps, who may even question
whether they have met with it at all; but there must be many, of whom
Jeff was one, on whom it comes like a thunderbolt, scathing for a time
all the finer qualities of heart and mind.

"If it had only come at a later period of life, or in some other form,
auntie," he said one day, as he lay on a sofa at the open window of the
cottage, looking out upon the sea; "but to be bowled over at my age,
when the world was all before me, and I was so well able--physically, at
least--to fight my way.  It is terrible, and seems so outrageous!  What
good can possibly come of rendering a young man helpless--a strong,
capable machine, that might do so much good in the world, useless?"

He spoke in an almost querulous tone, and looked inquiringly in his
nurse's face.  It did not occur to the youth, as he looked at her, that
the weak-bodied, soft, and gentle creature herself had been, and still
was, doing more good to the world than a hundred young men such as he!

Miss Millet's face was a wholesome one to look into.  She did not shake
her head and look solemn or shocked.  Neither did she laugh at his
petulance.  She merely said, with the sweetest of little smiles, "You
may live, Jeff, to be a very useful machine yet; if not _quite_ as
strong as you were--though even that is uncertain, for doctors are
fallible, you know.  Never forget that, Jeff--doctors are fallible.
Besides, your living at all shows that God has something for you to do
for Him."

"Nonsense, auntie.  If that is true of me, it is just as true of
hundreds of men who live and die without making the smallest attempt to
accomplish any work for God.  Yet He lets them live for many years."

"Quite true," returned Miss Millet; "and God _has_ work for all these
men to do, though many of them refuse to do it.  But I feel sure that
that won't be your case, Jeff.  He finds work just suited to our
capacities--at the time we need it, too, if we are only willing.  Why,
in my own very case, has He not sent you to me to be nursed, just as I
had finished organising the new night-classes for the usher-boys; and I
was puzzled--absolutely puzzled--as to what I should do next and here
you step in, requiring my assistance, and giving me full employment."

"That's it--that's it," returned Jeff hastily.  "I am without means, and
a burden on you and Captain Millet.  Oh! it is hard--very hard!"

"Yes, indeed, it _is_ hard to bear.  Of course that is what you mean,
for, as God has done it we cannot suppose anything that He does is
really hard.  If your illness had been the result of dissipation, now,
or through your own fault, you could not have said exactly it was God's
doing; but when it was the result of noble self-sacrifice--"

"Come, come, auntie; don't make me more vain than I am.  I'm bad enough
as it is, and--and--I'm _very_ weary."

The poor youth's head fell back on the pillow, and he sighed deeply as
his nurse brought him some strengthening food.  He needed it much, for
he was reduced to a mere shadow of his former self.

His fine eyes had become quite awful in their size and solemnity.  His
once ruddy cheeks were hollow.  His well-formed nose had become pinched,
and his garments hung on, rather than clothed, a huge skeleton.

During all Jeff's illness Captain Millet was unremitting in his
attentions, insomuch that a certain careworn expression began to take up
its settled abode on his countenance.  But this was not altogether owing
to sympathy with his friend, it was partly the consequence of his
financial affairs.

Having lost his situation, as he had expected, he found it difficult to
procure another, and was under the necessity of living on the small
capital which he had accumulated in the course of laborious years.  Had
his own subsistence been all his care, he would have had little trouble;
but Rose had to be supported and educated, his sister had to be
assisted, his charities had to be kept up, and now Jeff Benson had to be
maintained, and his doctor paid.  The worst of it all was, that he could
not talk on the subject to any of the three, which, to a sympathetic
soul, was uncommonly hard--but unavoidable.

"Yes, quite unavoidable," he muttered to himself one evening, when alone
in his lodging.  "They think I'm a rich old fellow, but I daren't say a
word.  If I did, Jeff would refuse to eat another bite, an' that would
kill him.  If I told Rosebud, it could do no good, and would only make
her miserable.  If I told Molly, I--I really don't know what she'd do.
She'd founder, I think.  No, I must go on sailin' under false colours.
It's a comfort, anyhow, to know that the funds will last some little
time yet, even at the present rate of expenditure; but it's perplexin'--
very."

He shook his head, wrinkled his brows, and then, rising, took a
well-worn pocket-Bible from a shelf, and sought consolation therein.

Some time after that Captain Millet was seated in the same room, about
the same hour, meditating on the same subject, with a few additional
wrinkles on his brow, when he received a letter.

"From Hong Kong," he muttered, opening it, and putting on his glasses.

The changes in his expressive face as he read were striking, and might
have been instructive.  Sadness first--then surprise--then blazing
astonishment--then a pursing of the mouth and a prolonged whistle,
followed by an expressive slap on the thigh.  Then, crumpling the letter
into his pocket he put on his glazed hat, sallied forth, and took the
way to his sister's cottage.

At that cottage, about the same time, a great change had taken place in
Jeff Benson--spiritually, not physically, though even in the latter
respect he was at all events not worse than usual.  Having gone from bad
to worse in his rebellion, he had at last reached that lowest depth
wherein he not only despaired of the doctor's power to cure him, and his
own power of constitution, but began silently, and in his own mind, to
charge his Maker with having made a complete failure in his creation.

"Life is a muddle, auntie, altogether!" he exclaimed when he reached
this point.  It was the lowest ebb--hopeless despair alike of himself
and his God.

"A muddle, Jeff?" said the little woman, raising her eyebrows slightly.
"How can that be possible in the work of a Perfect Creator, and a
Perfect Saviour who redeems from all evil--your supposed `muddle'
included?"

Our young coastguardsman was silent.  It was probably the great
turning-point when the Holy Spirit opened his eyes to see Jesus, and all
things in relation to Him.  For a long time he did not speak.  The lips
of his nurse were also silent, but her heart was not so.  At last Jeff
spoke--

"It _must_ be so.  Perfection is bound to work out perfection.  This
apparent evil _must_ be for good.  `He doeth all things well.'  Surely I
have read that somewhere!"

In a low clear voice his nurse said--

  "`He doeth all things well,'
  We say it now with tears;
  But we shall sing it with those we love
