
FLIGHT.

In the passage--Past the last door--Somebody coming--Across the lawn--A
footstep--The doctor!


As luck would have it, Harry's bed was near the door.  If he could but
get out of the dormitory unobserved by the boys, that would be at least
one rung mounted on the ladder of escape.  He was fully dressed, his
boots only being unlaced.  So taking them off, he crept towards the
door, and waiting cautiously, hidden by the now-welcome darkness, till
a fresh noisy onset was made by his assailants on the bed where they
supposed him to be, he stealthily lifted the latch and stood on the
stairs.  He was not long creeping down to the first landing--a narrow
carpeted passage, full of numerous doors, and terminating in a window
which looked over a shed where the boots and knives, etc., were
cleaned.  The stairs which led below, joined those of No. 7 dormitory
at one end of the passage, exactly opposite to the window, the distance
from the window to the stairs being about ten yards.  When Harry left
his room he had not the least notion how he was going to accomplish his
purpose.  He had only a vague idea that he was running away; and it was
not till he alighted at the end of the passage mentioned, and saw from
the other end the moonlight streaming in through the curtainless
window, that it entered his head that there he might find means of
escape.

So he stole cautiously along the passage, nervous, excited, fearing
lest he should disturb any of the sleepers in the various rooms he
passed.  The whole place was so still, he could almost hear his heart
thumping.  The only thing besides that stirred the silence was the
subdued monotonous snoring from the rooms.  A waft of fresh summer
night-air made his heart leap with delight and eagerness.  The window
was open.  The rest seemed easy.

The last door was passed, and he stood at the ledge looking out into
the moonlight.  How quiet everything was!  Far off, across the
playground, he saw a few lights burning in the different masters'
houses; but the Doctor's, in a wing of which he was, was quite dark.
Of course, he remembered, the Doctor was out.  How fortunate! and the
kitchen-windows looked the other way.  The roof of the boot-house was
about six feet below the window-ledge.  At the corner stood a
water-butt, and, against that, a large empty box turned up on end.
Everything appeared to be put there to further his escape.  The
boot-house stood in a yard, which opened into Dr Palmer's garden, and
from that he knew escape would be easy enough.

He had just tied his boots together, and by the aid of his
pocket-handkerchief dropped them on the roof.  His hands were already
on the window-ledge, and one leg over, when he heard a footstep on the
stairs below.  What should he do?  To stay as he was, motionless, would
be fatal.  He was full in the moonlight.  To crouch down in the corner,
where the moonlight did not shine, might possibly screen him.  Not a
second was to be lost.  His resolution was formed.  Over went the other
leg; and, hanging with his fingers to the outside of the window-ledge,
afraid to drop to the roof lest the noise should be heard, he clung
trembling, while he heard the step ascending to the top dormitory.  He
must be off,--right away, in a few minutes; for it would not now be
long before he was missed.  Down he dropped the remaining distance,
picked up his boots, scrambled down the water-butt, on to the box, and
there he was safe on the ground at last.  The gate from the yard into
the doctor's garden was always open.  He ran noiselessly through, on
his bootless feet, into the garden, and across the lawn; and, skirting
along where the laurels cast a dark pathway of shadow over the moonlit
grass, he made for a corner of the garden-wall, near which the high
road ran, and which some few days ago he had noticed was either lower
than elsewhere, or somewhat tumbled down.  Into the laurels he darted,
and soon found the spot he wished; and, then knowing he was quite
hidden, and, moreover, in a place where no one would dream of searching
for him, he sat down to regain his breath; and, as he put on his boots,
listened eagerly to catch the slightest sound that might warn him that
his absence was discovered.  Nor was it more than two or three minutes
before he heard voices in the playground, and the unlocking of various
doors, and lights shone suddenly in several windows.

[Illustration: "There he was, safe on the ground at last."--WILTON
SCHOOL, page 98]

No more waiting was to be thought of.  He must go on, if he meant
really to escape; or be caught, and so have all the trouble and fright
for nothing, or at least not for nothing.  He knew if he were caught,
his stay at school would only be a very short one; and better anything
than be caned, and afterwards expelled.

So he scrambled up the garden-wall, and his eyes brightened as he saw
the hard, highroad that would lead him away from this place of torture.

To right the road ran down towards the village: to left it led to the
school, and to the entrance of Doctor Palmer's house; and, further on,
to the neighbouring town.

He was preparing to jump down, when again the sound of a footstep
checked and terrified him.  If it were coming up from the village, the
passer-by would of course see him.  If it were coming from the school,
the same result would be fatal to him.  The only hope was, that it was
a retreating step of some one who had passed while his attention was
drawn off by the noise of those who were searching for him.

He stretched out his head and looked down the road.  No one there.  So
far he was safe.  He looked up the road; and there was a well-known
figure, magnified and looking very gaunt in the moonlight.  It was the
Doctor.  But--and Harry could scarcely believe his eyes for joy--he was
going away from where his runaway pupil crouched trembling on the wall.
He must have passed just before he climbed up.  The Doctor seemed to be
walking so perversely slow, actually strolling, Harry thought.  When
would he turn the corner?

Fainter, however, grew the footsteps, and at length the portly figure
disappeared.  And then, jumping hastily from the wall, with a slip on
to the road, and scrambling to pick himself up, Harry ran as hard as
his legs would carry him down towards Wilton village.




CHAPTER XIV.

AT SLEEP AT LAST.

Mingled feelings--Sore perplexity--Cherishing vengeance--'Ware the
dog--Want of reflection--In the churchyard--Footsteps--A strange bed.


He did not stop running till he had put nearly three-quarters of a mile
between him and the school.  And then two considerations brought him to
a standstill.  Firstly, he was out of breath; he could scarcely run a
step farther; and secondly, he was now close into the heart of the
village, and the groups of lounging figures he espied in the distance
warned him he must be careful how he proceeded.  About two hundred
yards in advance was a public house--"The Blue Anchor;" and here, of
course, was a goodly knot of men, some inside drinking, some outside
smoking, and all making a most disreputable noise.  There were also one
or two women in amongst the crowd, evidently searching for truant sons
or husbands, and Harry feared their inquisitive eyes even more than he
feared the men.  For he remembered he was covered with dust and dirt
from his scramble; his hair all rough; hatless, and generally untidy.
Besides, what business had a boy of his age and station in life to be
wandering about a village, alone, at half-past nine?

So he retraced his steps a short distance, until he came to a stile
leading to a lane which skirted the village; and which, running past
the farm and the church, as before-mentioned, joined the highroad at
the further end of the village.

Once in the lane, and safe from sight, he slackened his pace; and then,
with the feeling of comparative safety, came very mingled feelings of
exultation, loneliness, and fear--each striving to have the uppermost
in the poor boy's heart.

Hitherto the excitement of achieving that vague performance of running
away from school had pre-occupied him, and kept away all thoughts of
the future.  But the dangers of the escape were now all overcome, or at
least Harry thought they were.  What, then, was the next thing to be
done?  Should he go to Mrs Valentine?  If he went there, perhaps she
would send him back to school.  And besides, the farm would be shut up,
and every one gone to bed.  How should he attract Mrs Valentine's
attention; and make her come down and let him in?  The dog was always
loose at night, to keep intruders off.  He would be sure to fly at him,
if he attempted to go near the place.

So Harry was very sore perplexed, and began to think that running away
was not such an easy thing after all.  And he remembered that Egerton
was the cause of all this trouble.  Had it not been for him, he would
have been at school; motherless, it is true, but not in disgrace as he
was; sad at heart, but not hated and suspected by boys and masters.
Egerton!  Egerton had caused it all!  And Harry longed for revenge.  He
would treasure up his hatred, his thirst for vengeance, and some day,
perhaps, he would meet the one who had done him this wrong, and then
the debt should be paid off.  This feeling of revenge was already
firmly rooted in his heart, already beginning to be the one purpose of
his life.

He would go on towards the farm, at any rate, and see how things stood.
Perhaps the dog was not loose that night, or if it were, might
recognise him.

So, plucking up his spirits, he ran along the lane towards the little
farm, where he had been so happy with his dear dead mother, and towards
the quiet churchyard, whose coverlet of green was over her.

He was not long reaching the farm, and went cautiously up to the gate.
Not a sound! not a light in any window!  There was the great silver
moon making everything as bright almost as day, and there was the slow
munching of the cows in the adjoining orchard.  Harry's heart rose
higher.  No dog! not a sign of him!  He put his hand to open the gate.
The latch stuck.  He pushed harder; it flew open with a sharp click,
and he had not time to listen whether the sound had been heard or no,
when a dog's low growl solved the question.

He started back from the gate, which fell to with a loud crash.  It was
all up now.  Out rushed the dog, barking fiercely, and off rushed Harry
simultaneously.  And naturally enough, too.  It is not pleasant to be
mauled by a huge mastiff.

Had the idea struck him, he would have kept at a respectful distance,
and there waited in hopes that the baying of the dog would disturb the
inmates of the house, and that on their coming out to discover the
reason, he would gain his object of being let in.

But it is very doubtful whether a much older and, therefore, more
thoughtful person than Harry would have considered anything but the
fierceness of the dog, and the desirability of getting away as quickly,
and as far, as possible.

So Harry bolted down the lane at headlong speed, while the dog, seeing
the intruder depart, only uttered a few self-satisfied growls, and
returned to his mat in the porch, conscious that he had done his duty.
At the same moment, Mrs Valentine opened her window and put out a
night-capped head into the moonlight, and craning it all round, to see
what was the matter, and seeing nothing extraordinary, put it in again,
with a slight shiver.

Good soul! how little she dreamt of the apparently-trifling episode
enacted underneath her window!  How gladly would she have welcomed the
runaway frightened boy!  And how different that boy's after life would
have been had she but wakened sooner.

Meanwhile, Harry was stopping at the churchyard-gate.  He longed to go
in.  He hesitated.  On another occasion, and in his mother's lifetime,
he would not have dared to go inside the wicket after dark.  But now,
now he was going away, he knew not where!  Out into the world, and that
seemed a very long way off to Harry.  It was like another country.
Besides, what would hurt him while she was there, he asked himself?

So, without more ado, he passed through the creaking gate, up the
lime-tree avenue, heedless of the ghost-like shadows of the tombstones,
and the rustle of the fragrant leaves.

It was soon found, that little grassy mound in the corner by the
ivy-covered porch.  And then he could bear up no longer.  He burst into
tears, and throwing himself on the dewy moonlit sward, wept bitterly.

"Oh, mamma, mamma, why did you die? why did you die?  What shall I do?"
he sobbed in a low, excited tone, "I'm so lonely, mamma! mamma!"

And the quiet night stole on, and the soft winds of June whispered over
the motherless boy, weeping there alone in the churchyard.

The sound of footsteps!  Harry jumped up and listened, eager, and
frightened.  The churchyard wicket was opened and shut again, and then
he heard a steady measured tread of persons slowly approaching.  He was
riveted to the spot, and a cold perspiration broke upon his forehead.
The steps were nearing, and then, rounding the corner of the tower, the
new comers came into sight.

One look was enough, and Harry was off down the other path that led
from the churchyard to the further end of the village.

It was only a funeral of a drowned man who had been picked up the
previous night upon the shore of Wilton.  But the dark, slow-moving
figures of the bearers, and the flickering gleam of the lanthorns, made
dim by the moonshine, froze his heart with terror, and drove him away
from his mother's grave without one word of parting.  Perhaps it was
better so.  It saved him the difficulty and sorrow of having to decide
to say good-bye for ever to that grassy sleeping-place where slept the
one so dear to him.

Away he ran, heedless, frightened, through the straggling remainder of
the village.  Not a light was burning, not a person stirring, which was
fortunate, though he never paused to see; or think, but hastened on
till he fancied he had gone miles; and then, seeing an inviting barn
close by the roadside, turned in, and, worn out with fatigue and
excitement, soon slept heavily in a low, broken manger full of hay--a
strange but welcome bed.




CHAPTER XV.

THE BITERS BIT.

Excitement in school--Expecting a row--The doctor speaks--Deliberate
falsehood--The truth comes out--The two culprits--Manly confession--Mr
Franklyn speaks--Honest shame--Egerton convicted--The doctor's
speech--Warburton caned--Egerton birched--Justification.


The bright fresh summer hour of seven, the following morning, was very
different in the barn where Harry had taken up his abode to what it was
at the grammar-school.  In the former, it saw the tired lonely boy
sleeping heavily, his face stained with tears; in the latter, a great
stir and confusion.  Campbell had run away.  The search in the night
had been fruitless; and to add to the general excitement, that morning
the Examiner was to commence the _viva voce_ part of the examination.
The hour of preparation, from seven to eight, was not a very
industrious one.  Boys were too full of surmises, and Mr Prichard, who
happened that morning to be in charge of the school-room, was too much
disturbed about Harry's disappearance to pay much attention to the
whispers which were spreading through the room.  Breakfast, too, was by
no means the usual ordinarily quiet meal.

The only boys who betrayed any symptoms of nervousness or uneasiness
(all were excited, of course) were those who had joined Egerton and
Warburton in their assault on Harry the previous night.

These looked guilty; but their ringleaders preserved the utmost
coolness and indifference; and a casual observer, if asked, would have
said, "Well, if there are two boys more than any others who certainly
have nothing to do with the whole affair, those two are Egerton and
Warburton."

So much for guilt, and the mask it can so well assume.

Before the nine o'clock bell had ceased ringing, every boy was in his
place in the big school-room--a rare occurrence, indeed--waiting
eagerly for the appearance of the Doctor.  For boys like nothing better
than a "row" when they themselves are not implicated.  And remember,
those who were so implicated were but an exceedingly small fraction of
the whole number.  What the guilty ones felt will best be known by
those who have been in a similar position.

Dr Palmer entered with the Examiner, a fresh-coloured young man, in a
very new gown, and a very new hood, thrown jauntily over his shoulders.
The doctor was grave and stern, and looked at nobody.  The Examiner
played with his watch-chain, and looked at everybody, running his eyes
