_unnatural_, it follows that miracles are wrong." (1)

46. "Who is the man that has dared to call into _civilized_ alliance
the (_a_) (41) inhabitant of the woods, to delegate to the (_a_)
Indian the defence of our disputed rights?

     (_a_) Insert some antithetical or other epithets.

47. "A (_a_) _very_ (11) _small proportion_ indeed of those who have
attempted to solve this problem (_b_) (19) have succeeded in obtaining
even a plausible solution."

     (_a_) State what proportion succeeded, or, if you like, what
     failed: "not one in a hundred." (_b_) Begin, "Of all those that
     &c."

48. "_To be suddenly_ (_a_) (47 _a_) _brought into contact_ with a
system (8) _which_ forces one to submit to wholesale imposture, and
_to being_ (40 _a_) _barbarously ill-treated_, naturally repels (_a_)
(15 _a_) _one_."

     (_a_) Write, either (1) "Collision ... causes a natural
     repulsion," or (2) "When brought into contact ... one is
     naturally repelled," or (if "ill-treatment" is emphatic), (3)
     "One is naturally repelled by collision with &c."

49. "We annex a letter recently addressed by Mr. ----'s direction to
the Editor of the ----, in contradiction of statements, equally
untrue, which appeared in that periodical, _and_ (_a_) (9) _which_ the
editor has undertaken to insert in the next number.... I am sure that
all must regret that statements _so_ (_b_) (51) _utterly_ erroneous
should have (_c_) (23) _first_ appeared in a publication of such high
character."

     (_a_) What the writer intended to express was that the editor had
     undertaken to insert, not the "statements," but the
     "contradiction." (_b_) Omit either "so" or "utterly." (_c_)
     "appeared first," or, "for the first time."

50. "This is a book _which_ (10 _a_) _is_ short and amusing, _which_
(10 _a_) _can be easily_ (_a_) _understood, which_ (10 _a_) is
admirably adapted for _the purpose for which it_ (_b_) _was_ (54)
_written_; and (10 _e_) _which_ ought to be more popular than the last
work _which_ (10 _a_) _was_ published by the same author."

     (_a_) Express "which can be understood" in one adjective. (_b_)
     "Its purpose."

51. "When thousands are _left_ (19) without (40) _pity_ and without
(40) _attention_ (19) _on_ a field of battle, amid (40) the insults of
an enraged foe and (40) the trampling of horses, while the blood from
their wounds, freezing as it flows, binds them to the earth, and (40)
they are exposed to the piercing air, _it_ (15 _a_) _must be indeed a
painful scene_."

     The whole sentence must be remedied by (40).

52. "(_a_) The youth was naturally thoughtful, and disposed (19)
besides by his early training--(31) which had been conducted with
great care, the object of his parents being to _pave_ (14) _his way_
as far as possible over the _stormy_ (14) _sea of temptation_ and to
_lead_ him into the _harbour_ of virtue--to a sincere (_b_) (1)
_remorse_ (19) for the (_b_) (1) _crimes_ that he had committed in the
sight of heaven, and also for his recent (_b_) (1) _sin_ in breaking
the laws of his country."

     (_a_) First state the reasons for his being "disposed." "The
     youth was naturally thoughtful; moreover, his early training had
     been conducted with great care by his parents, whose &c. .... He
     was therefore disposed &c." (_b_) What is the difference between
     "remorse" and "repentance," between "sin" and "crime"?

53. "(_a_) _One day_ (54) _early in the morning_, the general was
approached by a messenger, (30) in the midst of the _entanglements and
perplexities_ which had _unexpectedly surprised_ him, when the
_perilous hour of_ (54) _danger_ was at hand, and (37), in spite of
their promises, even the tribes that were _well disposed_ (54) _and
friendly_, were threatening to _desert him, and_ (54) _leave him to
face the enemy_ (_b_) (23) _alone_."

     Condense the sentence by omitting some of the italicized words,
     _e.g._ (_a_) "Early one morning." (_b_) Though there is no real
     ambiguity (unless a wrong emphasis is placed on "enemy"), yet, in
     strictness, "alone" ought to qualify "enemy." Write therefore,
     "alone in the face of the enemy."

54. "_A man_ (_a_) (10 _d_) _who_ neglected the ordinary duties *of*
life, and, immersed in study, devoted himself to grand plans for the
benefit of mankind, (_b_) (44) _and_ refused to provide for the wants
of those dependent on him, and suffered his aged relatives to become
paupers because he would not help them, (_c_) would, in my opinion,
(34) be a bad man, and not altogether (_d_) (40 _a_) without
hypocrisy."

     (_a_) "If a man." (_b_) "if he refused," or "while he refused."
     (_c_) "such a man" or "he." (_d_) "to some extent a hypocrite."

55. "I cannot believe in the guilt of (_a_) _one_ (_b_) (10 _e_)
_who_, whatever may have been said to the contrary, can be shown, and
has been shown by competent testimony proceeding from those who are
said to have carefully examined the facts, _in spite_ (23) _of many
obstacles_, to have resisted all attempts to (29) induce him to leave
his situation, (_c_) (29) to consult his own interests and to (29)
establish a business of his own."

     (_a_) "his guilt;" (_b_) (1) "for, whatever &c.... it can be
     shown by &c.... that, in spite of &c., he resisted." Or (2)
     insert "in spite ... obstacles" between "have" and "carefully."
     (_c_) (1) "for the purpose of consulting ... and establishing."
     Or (2) write "and to consult his own interests by establishing
     &c."

56. "We must seek for the origin of our freedom, (_a_) (37)
prosperity, and (_a_) (37) glory, in _that and only_ (_b_) _that_[18]
portion of our annals, (30) though _it_ (_c_) _is_ sterile and
obscure. The great English people was (_d_) _then_ formed; the
notional (_e_) _disposition_ began (_d_) _then_ to exhibit those
peculiarities which it has ever since (_e_) _possessed_; and our
fathers (_d_) _then_ became emphatically islanders, (_f_) in their
politics, (_a_) feelings, and (_a_) manners, _and_ (30 _a_) _not
merely in their geographical position_."

     (_a_) Repeat the Pronominal Adjective, (_b_) Express the emphatic
     "only that" by beginning the sentence thus: "It is in that
     portion of our annals &c." (_c_) Omit. (_d_) "It was then that
     &c." (_e_) Use words implying something more _marked_ than
     "disposition," and more _forcible_ than "possessed;" in the
     latter case, "retained." (_f_) Repeat "islanders."

57. "(_a_) He was _the universal_ (54) _favourite of_ (54) _all_ (8)
_who knew him_, and cemented many friendships at this period, (_a_)
(33) (moving in the highest circle of society, and, _as he_ (_b_) (50)
_had a_ (4 _a_) _certain property, being independent_ of the profits
of literature), and soon completely extinguished the breath of slander
which at the outset of his career had threatened to sap the
foundations of his reputation."

     (_a_) Begin "Moving in &c." (_b_) "rendered independent of ... by
     &c." Show that Rule (14) is violated by the metaphors.

58. "The outward and material form of that city which, during the
brief period _which_ (10 _a_) _is_ comprised in our present book,
reached the highest pitch of military, artistic, and literary glory,
_was of this_ (_a_) (15) _nature_. The progress of _the_ (_b_) (5)
_first_ has been already traced."

     (_a_) Begin the sentence with "Such was." (_b_) By "the first" is
     meant "military glory."

59. "The detachment not only failed to take the fort, (30) spite of
their numbers and the weakness of the garrison, but also to capture
the small force that was encamped outside the town, and was, after
some sharp fighting, driven back with inconsiderable loss."

     Point out the ambiguity. Remedy it by inserting either "which,"
     or "the assailants."

60. "(_a_) (_b_) _Believing_ that these reforms can _only_ (_c_) (21)
be effected as public opinion is prepared for them, and that (5)
_this_ will be more or less advanced in different localities, the Bill
of the Association, (_a_) (31) which has been for _a_ (3)
_considerable period_ in draft, and will be introduced in the next
Session of Parliament, provides for _placing_ (_d_) (3) _the control
in regard to the points above-mentioned in the_ (3) _hands_ of the
ratepayers of each locality; the power to be exercised through
representative Licensing Boards to be periodically elected by them."

     (_a_) Place the parenthesis first, as an independent sentence:
     "The Bill of the Association has been ... Parliament." (_b_) What
     noun is qualified by "believing?" Write "In the belief." (_c_)
     "effected only so far as they are in accordance with public
     opinion, which &c." (_d_) "it, or, the Bill provides that the
     ratepayers ... shall receive control ... and shall exercise this
     control."

61. "I think they are very (1) _nice_ persons, for they kept me amused
for a _long_ (_a_) (11) _time together_ yesterday by their (1) _nice_
stories all about _what they_ (_b_) _have experienced_ in Japan, where
they had been for (_a_) _ever so long_, and (_c_) (43) where they said
that the natives ripped up _their_ (_d_) (5) stomachs."

     (_a_) Mention some time. (_b_) "experiences" or "adventures."
     (_c_) "among other things, they told us &c." (_d_) "their own."

62. "To contend for advantageous monopolies, which are regarded with a
dislike and a suspicion (_a_) _which daily_ (10 _a_) _increases_, (30)
_however natural it may be to be annoyed at the loss of that which one
has once possessed_, (15 _a_) is _useless_."

     (_a_) A compound adjective can be used, including "daily."

63. "Upon entering the rustic place of entertainment to partake of
some refreshment, my nerves were horrified by lighting on a number of
boisterous individuals who were singing some species of harvest song,
and simultaneously imbibing that cup which, if it cheers, also
inebriates; and when, banished from their society by the fumes of the
fragrant weed, I wended my way to the apartment which adjoined the one
in which I had hoped to rest my weary limbs, I found an interesting
assortment of the fairer sex, who were holding a separate
confabulation apart from the revels of their rougher spouses."

     Write "village inn," "next room," &c., for these absurd
     circumlocutions. See (3).

64. "When Burgoyne was born, in 1782, Napoleon and Wellington _were
both boys_ (11)."

     Napoleon studied at Brienne, Wellington at Eton. Mention this,
     and, in order to imply the _boyhood_, call Wellington "Arthur
     Wellesley."

65. "An honourable friend of mine, who is now, I believe, near
me--(38) to whom I never can on any occasion refer without feelings of
respect, and, on this subject, (36) feelings of the most grateful
homage; (38) whose abilities upon this occasion, as upon some former
ones, are not entrusted merely to the perishable eloquence of the
(_a_) day, but will live to be the admiration of that (_a_) hour when
all of us are mute and most of us forgotten: (_b_) (38) has told you
that prudence _is_ (52) the first of virtues, _and_ (52) can never be
used in the cause of vice."

     (_a_) Though "of the day" is a recognized expression for
     "ephemeral" or "transitory," yet to use "day" for a short time,
     and "hour" for a longer, is objectionable. Write _moment_ for
     _day_. Else write _future_ for _hour_. (_b_) "--this gentleman
     has told &c."

66. "To see the British artisan and his wife on the Sabbath, neat and
clean and cheerful, with their children by their sides, (_a_) (19)
_disporting_ themselves under the open canopy of heaven, _is_ (15)
_pleasant_."

     (_a_) There is no reasonable ground for mistaking the sense here,
     as the context makes it clear; but since Lord Shaftesbury was
     questioned whether he meant _disporting_ to qualify "artisan and
     his wife" or "children," write "and, by their sides, their
     children disporting &c."

67. "Even if (_a_) _it were_ attended with extenuating circumstances,
such conduct would deserve severe reprobation, (_b_) _and it_ is the
more called for because _it_ would seem that (_c_) _it_ was the
intention of _the author of the crime_, in perpetrating (_e_) _it_, to
inflict all the misery that was possible, upon his victim." See (5).

     (_a_) Omit "it were." (_b_) "which." (_c_) "to have been." (_d_)
     Express "author of the crime" in one word. (_e_) Use the noun.

68. "The (_a_) (1) _observance_ of the heavenly bodies must have been
attended with great difficulties, (_b_) (30) before the telescope was
(_a_) (1) _discovered_, and it is not to be wondered at if the
investigations of astronomers were often unsatisfactory, and failed to
produce complete (_a_) (1) _persuasion_, (30) (15, _a_) under these
disadvantages."

     (_a_) What is the difference between "observance" and
     "observation," "discover" and "invent," "persuasion" and
     "conviction"? (_b_) Begin "Before &c."

69. "He plunged into the sea once more, (30) not content with his
previous exertions. After a long and dangerous struggle, he succeeded
in reaching a poor woman that was crying piteously for help, and (_a_)
(35) was at last hauled safely to shore."

     (_a_) Point put and remedy the ambiguity by inserting "he" or by
     writing "who," according to the meaning.

70. "Sir John Burgoyne himself, face to face with Todleben, became
(_a_) (1) _conscious_ of the difference between the fortifications of
San Sebastian and of Sebastopol, (_b_) _which_ (10 _e_) was (_c_) (12)
_very weak_ compared with Metz or Paris."

     (_a_) What is the exact meaning of _conscious_? (_b_) Avoid the
     relative, by repeating the name, with a conjunction, (_c_)
     "weakness itself."

71. "Upon Richard's leaving the (_c_) stage, the Commonwealth was
again set up; and the Parliament which Cromwell had (_a_) _broken_ was
brought together; but the army and they fell into new disputes: so
they were again (_a_) _broken_ by the army: and upon that the nation
was like to fall into (_b_) (11) _great_ convulsions."

     (_a_) Modern Eng., "broken up." (_b_) "violently convulsed."
     (_c_) It is a question whether this metaphor is in good taste.
     The meaning is that Richard "retired from public life." It might
     be asserted that Richard, the Commonwealth, the Parliament are
     regarded as so many puppets on a "stage." But this is extremely
     doubtful. Make _Parliament_ the principal subject: "When Richard
     retired ... and when the Commonwealth &c.... the Parliament was
     ... but, falling into a dispute with &c., it was...." See (18)
     and (43).

72. "What a revolution in the military profession! He began with (_a_)
(11) _unnecessary formality_, and (_b_) (11) _inefficient weapons_,
and ended with (_c_) (_b_) (11) _greatly improved fire-arms_."

     (_a_) "pig-tail and pipe-clay." (_b_) "Six-pounders and
     flint-locks" are now inefficient compared with
     "twenty-four-pounders and breech-loaders." (_c_) Something is
     wanted antithetical to (_a_), perhaps "loose drill" or "open
     order."

73. "Children fear to go in the dark. Men fear death in the same way.
The fear of children is increased by tales. So is the fear of death.
The contemplation of death, as the 'wages of sin,' and passage to
another world, is holy and religious. The fear of it, as a tribute due
unto nature, is weak. In religious meditations on death there is
sometimes mixture of vanity and of superstition."

     Insert connecting adverbs or conjunctions. See (44).

74. "I have often heard him _reiterate_ (54) _repeatedly_ that he
would never again, if a _safe_ (54) _and secure path_ was open to him,
prefer the _perilous_ (54) _road of danger_, however _alluring_ (54)
_and attractive_ the latter might be."

75. "I thought in my dream that when my friend asked me whether I did
not observe anything curious in the conduct of the pigeons, I (_a_) (4
_a_) _remarked_ that if any one of the birds was so bold as to take an
atom from a heap of grain in the midst of them, (31) (which (_b_) a
detachment guarded, and which, being continually increased and never
eaten, seemed useless), all the rest turned against him and pecked him
to death for the (_c_) (50) _action_."

     (_a_) Point out the ambiguity. (_b_) This should come earlier in
     the sentence, and not as a parenthesis. "I noticed a heap of
     grain in the midst of them, guarded by ... Being continually ...,
     to all appearance, useless: yet." (_c_) "theft."

76. "If this low view of the royal office becomes generally adopted,
then sovereigns _who_ (8) have always hitherto commanded the respect
of Englishmen will by degrees fall into disrespect."

     Point out the ambiguity. Show how it might be removed (_a_) by
     punctuation, (_b_) by altering "who."

77. "I struck the man in self-defence. I explained this to the
magistrate. He would not believe me. Witnesses were called to support
my statements. He committed me to prison. He had the right to do this.
It is a right that is rarely exercised in such circumstances. I
remonstrated."

     See (44). Insert conjunctions or connecting adverbs.

78. "He attained a very distinguished position by mere (15)
perseverance and common sense, which (52) (10 _a_) qualities are
perhaps mostly underrated, (30) though he was deficient in tact and
not remarkable for general ability."

79. "_Vindictiveness, which_ (_a_) (50) _is a fault_, (_b_) _and_
which may be defined as _anger_ (10 _a_) _which is caused_ not by sin
nor by crime but by personal injury, ought to be carefully
distinguished from _resentment, which_ (_a_) (50) _is a virtue_,
(_b_) _and_ which is _anger_ (49) _which is natural and_ (_c_) _right_
caused by an act (_d_) which is unjust, because it is unjust, (30 _a_)
not because it is inconvenient."

     (_a_) "The fault of vindictiveness;" "the virtue of resentment."
     (_b_) Omit _(c_) "Right" cannot be used as an adjective, but
     "righteous" can. (_d_) "an act of injustice."

80. "(_a_) He told his friend that (_a_) _his_ brother was surprised
that (_a_) _he_ had given so small a contribution, for (_a_) _he_ was
(_b_) (12) _a very rich man_, in spite of (_a_) _his_ recent losses
and the bad state of trade, (19) (30) compared with himself."

     (_a_) Use (6). (_b_) What Asian king was proverbial for wealth?

81. "(_a_) (15 _b_) It must be indeed wrong to (_a_) _crucify_ a Roman
citizen if to (_b_) (32) _slay_ one is almost parricide, to (_b_)
_scourge_ him is a monstrous crime, and to (_b_) _bind_ him is an
outrage."


  (_a_) "What must it be...?"
  (_b_) See (40).


82. "The _universal_ (54) _opinion of all the_ citizens was that the
citadel _had been_ (15) _betrayed_, (30) having been captured in broad
daylight by a very small number of the enemy, and those unprovided
with scaling ladders, and admitted by a postern gate, (15 _a_) and
much wearied by a long march."

     In any case "betrayed" must come at the end of a sentence. The
     sentence may be converted into two sentences: "The citadel had
     been captured.... Naturally therefore ...;" or, "The opinion ...
     for it had been captured...." Else, if one sentence be used,
     write "As the citadel had been captured &c."

83. "This author surpassed all _those who were living_ (_a_) _at the
same time with him_ in the _forcible_ (_b_) _manner in_ which he could
_address_ (_c_) _an_ appeal to the popular sympathy, and in the ease
with which he could _draw towards_ (_a_) _himself_ the hearts of his
readers."

     (_a_) Express in one word. (_b_) "force with." (_c_) Omit.

84. "This great statesman was indeed a pillar of commerce, and a star
in the financial world. He guided or impelled the people from the
quicksands of Protection and false political economy to the safe
harbour of Free Trade; and (_a_) (14 _a_) saved the country several
millions."

     (_a_) It would be well to literalize the preceding metaphors.
     Else the literal statement must be changed into a metaphor.

85. "The ministers were most unwilling to meet the Houses, (_a_) (43)
(51) _because_ even the boldest of them (though their counsels were
_lawless_ (15) _and desperate_) had too much value for his (_b_) (11)
_personal safety_ to think of resorting to the (_c_) (12) unlawful
modes of extortion that had been familiar to the preceding age."

     (_a_) Begin a new sentence with "Lawless and desperate though
     their counsels had been &c." (_b_) "neck." (_c_) Insert some of
     these unlawful modes, "benevolences, ship-money, and the other
     &c."

86. "_We will not_ (_a_) (15) _pretend to guess what_ our
grandchildren may think of the character of Lord Byron, as exhibited
_in_ (15 _a_) _his poetry_." No writer ever had the whole eloquence of
scorn, misanthropy, _and_ (_a_) (15) _despair_ (15 _a_) _so completely
at his command_. That _fountain_ (_b_) (12) _of bitterness_ was never
dry."

     (_a_) "We will not pretend to guess" and "despair" are intended
     by the author to be emphatic. (_b_) "Marah."

87. "The captain asked to be allowed fifty men, a supply of food, and
one hundred and fifty breech-loaders. (44) The general replied coldly
that he could not let his subordinate have (_a_) (4) _anything_ that
he wanted. (44) The captain was forced to set out (34) with an
insufficient force, spite of the superabundance of soldiers doing
nothing in the camp (34), and with every obstacle put in his way by a
general who from the first had resolved not even to give him ordinary
assistance, (_b_) (10 _a'_) _which_ the captain had for some time
anticipated."

     (_a_) Point out and remove the ambiguity. (_b_) Write, according
     to the meaning, " ... assistance that" or " ... a resolution
     that."

88. "I am a practical man, and disbelieve in everything (8) _which_ is
not practical; theories (_a_) _which_ amuse philosophers and pedants
have no attractions for me, (30) _for this reason_."

     (_a_) What difference in the meaning would be caused by the use
     of "that" for the second "which"?

89. "Yet, when that discovery drew no other severity but the (11 _a_)
_turning_ (_a_) _him out of office_, and _the_ (11 _a_) _passing a
sentence_ (_b_) _condemning him to die for it_ (31) (which was
presently pardoned, and he was after a short confinement restored to
his liberty), all men _believed_ that the king knew of the letter,
(_c_) (43) and that (6 _b_) the pretended confession of the secretary
was only collusion to lay the jealousies of the king's (_d_) (11 _a_)
_favouring_ popery, (_e_) (43) which still hung upon him, (30)
notwithstanding his (_e_) _writing_ on the Revelation, and his (_e_)
_affecting_ to enter on all occasions into controversy, (_e_)
asserting in particular that the Pope was Antichrist."

     (_a_) "expulsion from." (_b_) "a pretended sentence to death--a
     pretence that was soon manifested by his pardon and liberation."
     (_c_) Begin a new sentence: "'The secretary's pretended
     confession,' it was said, 'was &c.'" (_d_) "the suspicion that
     the king favoured Popery." (_e_) The juxtaposition of the two
     verbal nouns, "writing" and "affecting," with the participle
     "asserting," is harsh. Write, "For, notwithstanding that he
     affected controversy, and attacked the Pope as Antichrist in his
     treatise on the Book of Revelation, the king was still
     suspected."

90. "The opinion that the sun is fixed was once too (_a_) (1)
_universal_ to be easily shaken, and a similar prejudice has often
(_b_) _rendered_ the progress of new inventions (15 _a_) _very slow_,
(19) arising from the numbers of the believers, and not (36) the
reasonableness of the belief."

     (_a_) Write "general." Show the absurdity of appending "too" to
     "universal." (_b_) What single word can be substituted for
     "rendered slow"?

91. "The rest of the generals were willing to surrender
unconditionally, (30) _depressed by this unforeseen calamity_; (4)
_only_ the young colonel, who retained his presence of mind,
represented to them that they were increasing the difficulties of a
position in itself very difficult (19) (15, _a_) _by their conduct_."

92. "To (_a_) (31) _an author who_ is, in his expression of any
sentiment, wavering between _the_ (_b_) _demands of_ perspicuity and
energy (of which _the_ (_c_) (40 _a_) _former of course_ requires the
first care, lest (40 _a_) he should fail of both), and (37) doubting
whether the (_d_) phrase _which_ (8) _has_ (_e_) _the_ most force and
brevity will be (_f_) readily _taken_ (_g_) _in, it may_ (_h_) (3) _be
recommended to use_ both (_d_) expressions; first, (_h_) _to expound_
the sense sufficiently to be clearly understood, and then (_i_) _to_
