binding post B'.

[Illustration: _Fig. 49._ ELECTRIC BELL]

The principle of the electric bell is this: In looking at Fig. 49, you
will note that the armature bar D is held against the end of the
adjusting screw by the small spring E. When a current is turned on, it
passes through the connections and conduits as follows: Wire K to the
magnets, wire M to the binding post J, and set screw I, then through the
armature to the post F, and from post F to the binding post B'.

[Illustration: _Fig. 50._ ARMATURE OF ELECTRIC BELL]

ELECTRIC BELL--HOW OPERATED.--The moment a current passes through the
magnets (C, C), the core is magnetized, and the result is that the
armature (D) is attracted to the magnets, as shown by the dotted lines
(O), when the clapper strikes the bell. But when the armature moves over
to the magnet, the connection is broken between the screw (I) and
armature (D), so that the cores of the magnets are demagnetized and lose
their pull, and the spring (E) succeeds in drawing back the armature.
This operation of vibrating the armature is repeated with great
rapidity, alternately breaking and re-establishing the circuit, by the
action of the current.

In making the bell, you must observe one thing, the binding posts (B,
B') must be insulated from each other, and the post J, or the post F,
should also be insulated from the base. For convenience we show the post
F insulated, so as to necessitate the use of wire (N) from post (F) to
binding post (B').

The foregoing assumes that you have used a cast metal base, as most
bells are now made; but if you use a wooden base, the binding posts (B,
B') and the posts (F, J) are insulated from each other, and the
construction is much simplified.

It is better, in practice, to have a small spring (P, Fig. 50) between
the armature (D) and the end of the adjusting screw (I), so as to give a
return impetus to the clapper. The object of the adjusting screw is to
push and hold the armature close up to the ends of the magnets, if it
seems necessary.

If two bells are placed on the base with the clapper mounted between
them, both bells will be struck by the swinging motion of the armature.

An easily removable cap or cover is usually placed over the coils and
armature, to keep out dust.

A very simple annunciator may be attached to the bell, as shown in the
following figures:

[Illustration: _Figs. 51-54._ ANNUNCIATOR]

ANNUNCIATORS.--Make a box of wood, with a base (A) 4" x 5" and 1/2 inch
thick. On this you can permanently mount the two side pieces (B) and two
top and bottom pieces (C), respectively, so they project outwardly
4-1/2 inches from the base. On the open front place a wood or metal
plate (D), provided with a square opening (D), as in Fig. 54, near its
lower end. This plate is held to the box by screws (E).

Within is a magnet (F), screwed into the base (A), as shown in Fig. 51;
and pivoted to the bottom of the box is a vertical armature (G), which
extends upwardly and contacts with the core of the magnet. The upper end
of the armature has a shoulder (H), which is in such position that it
serves as a rest for a V-shaped stirrup (I), which is hinged at J to the
base (C). This stirrup carries the number plate (K), and when it is
raised to its highest point it is held on the shoulder (H), unless the
electro-magnet draws the armature out of range of the stirrup. A spring
(L) bearing against the inner side of the armature keeps its upper end
normally away from the magnet core. When the magnet draws the armature
inwardly, the number plate drops and exposes the numeral through the
opening in the front of the box. In order to return the number plate to
its original position, as shown in Fig. 51, a vertical trigger (M)
passes up through the bottom, its upper end being within range of one of
the limbs of the stirrup.

This is easily made by the ingenious boy, and will be quite an
acquisition to his stock of instruments. In practice, the annunciator
may be located in any convenient place and wires run to that point.

[Illustration: _Fig. 55._ ALARM SWITCH ON WINDOW]

[Illustration: _Fig. 56._ BURGLAR ALARM ATTACHMENT TO WINDOW]

BURGLAR ALARM.--In order to make a burglar alarm connection with a bell,
push buttons or switches may be put in circuit to connect with the
windows and doors, and by means of the annunciators you may locate the
door or window which has been opened. The simplest form of switch for a
window is shown in the following figures:

The base piece (A), which may be of hard rubber or fiber, is 1/4 inch
thick and 1" x 1-1/2" in size.

[Illustration: _Fig. 57._ BURGLAR ALARM CONTACT]

At one end is a brass plate (B), with a hole for a wood screw (C), this
screw being designed to pass through the plate and also into the
window-frame, so as to serve as a means of attaching one of the wires
thereto. The inner end of the plate has a hole for a round-headed screw
(C') that also goes through the base and into the window-frame. It also
passes through the lower end of the heart-shaped metal switch-piece
(D).

The upper end of the base has a brass plate (E), also secured to the
base and window by a screw (F) at its upper end. The heart-shaped switch
is of such length and width at its upper end that when it is swung to
the right with one of the lobes projecting past the edge of the
window-frame, the other lobe will be out of contact with the plate (E).

[Illustration: _Fig. 58._ NEUTRAL POSITION OF CONTACT]

The window sash (G) has a removable pin (H), which, when the sash moves
upwardly, is in the path of the lobe of the heart-shaped switch, as
shown in Fig. 56, and in this manner the pin (H) moves the upper end of
the switch (D) inwardly, so that the other lobe contacts with the plate
(E), and establishes an electric circuit, as shown in Fig. 57. During
the daytime the pin (H) may be removed, and in order to protect the
switch the heart-shaped piece (D) is swung inwardly, as shown in Fig.
58, so that neither of the lobes is in contact with the plate (E).

WIRE CIRCUITING.--For the purpose of understanding fully the circuiting,
diagrams will be shown of the simple electric bell with two push
buttons; next in order, the circuiting with an annunciator and then the
circuiting necessary for a series of windows and doors, with annunciator
attachments.

[Illustration: _Fig. 59._ CIRCUITING FOR ELECTRIC BELL]

CIRCUITING SYSTEM WITH A BELL AND TWO PUSH BUTTONS.--Fig. 59 shows a
simple circuiting system which has two push buttons, although any number
may be used, so that the bell will ring when the circuit is closed by
either button.

THE PUSH BUTTONS AND THE ANNUNCIATOR BELLS.--Fig. 60 shows three push
buttons and an annunciator for each button. These three circuits are
indicated by A, B and C, so that when either button makes contact, a
complete circuit is formed through the corresponding annunciator.

[Illustration: _Fig. 60._ _Annunciators_]

[Illustration: _Fig. 61._ WIRING SYSTEM FOR A HOUSE]

WIRING UP A HOUSE.--The system of wiring up a house so that all doors
and windows will be connected to form a burglar alarm outfit, is shown
in Fig. 61. It will be understood that, in practice, the bell is mounted
on or at the annunciator, and that, for convenience, the annunciator
box has also a receptacle for the battery. The circuiting is shown
diagramatically, as it is called, so as fully to explain how the lines
are run. Two windows and a door are connected up with an annunciator
having three drops, or numbers 1, 2, 3. The circuit runs from one pole
of the battery to the bell and then to one post of the annunciator. From
the other post a wire runs to one terminal of the switch at the door or
window. The other switch terminal has a wire running to the other pole
of the battery.

A, B, C represent the circuit wires from the terminals of the window and
door switches, to the annunciators.

It is entirely immaterial which side of the battery is connected up with
the bell.

From the foregoing it will readily be understood how to connect up any
ordinary apparatus, remembering that in all cases the magnet must be
brought into the electric circuit.




CHAPTER VIII

ACCUMULATORS. STORAGE OR SECONDARY BATTERIES


STORING UP ELECTRICITY.--In the foregoing chapters we have seen that,
originally, electricity was confined in a bottle, called the Leyden jar,
from which it was wholly discharged at a single impulse, as soon as it
was connected up by external means. Later the primary battery and the
dynamo were invented to generate a constant current, and after these
came the second form of storing electricity, called the storage or
secondary battery, and later still recognized as accumulators.

THE ACCUMULATOR.--The term _accumulator_ is, strictly speaking, the more
nearly correct, as electricity is, in reality, "_stored_" in an
accumulator. But when an accumulator is charged by a current of
electricity, a chemical change is gradually produced in the active
element of which the accumulator is made. This change or decomposition
continues so long as the charging current is on. When the accumulator is
disconnected from the charging battery or dynamo, and its terminals are
connected up with a lighting system, or with a motor, for instance, a
reverse process is set up, or the particles re-form themselves into
their original compositions, which causes a current to flow in a
direction opposite to that of the charging current.

It is immaterial to the purposes of this chapter, as to the charging
source, whether it be by batteries or dynamos; the same principles will
apply in either case.

[Illustration: _Fig. 62._ ACCUMULATOR GRIDS]

ACCUMULATOR PLATES.--The elements used for accumulator plates are red
lead for the positive plates, and precipitated lead, or the well-known
litharge, for the negative plates. Experience has shown that the best
way to hold this material is by means of lead grids.

Fig. 62 shows the typical form of one of these grids. It is made of
lead, cast or molded in one piece, usually square, as at A, with a wing
or projection (B), at one margin, extending upwardly and provided with a
hole (C). The grid is about a quarter of an inch thick.

THE GRID.--The open space, called the grid, proper, comprises cross
bars, integral with the plate, made in a variety of shapes. Fig. 62
shows three forms of constructing these bars or ribs, the object being
to provide a form which will hold in the lead paste, which is pressed in
so as to make a solid-looking plate when completed.

THE POSITIVE PLATE.--The positive plate is made in the following manner:
Make a stiff paste of red lead and sulphuric acid; using a solution,
say, of one part of acid to two parts of water. The grid is laid on a
flat surface and the paste forced into the perforations with a stiff
knife or spatula. Turn over the grid so as to get the paste in evenly on
both sides.

The grid is then stood on its edge, from 18 to 20 hours, to dry, and
afterwards immersed in a concentrated solution of chloride of lime, so
as to convert it into lead peroxide. When the action is complete it is
thoroughly rinsed in cold water, and is ready to use.

THE NEGATIVE PLATE.--The negative plate is filled, in like manner, with
precipitated lead. This lead is made by putting a strip of zinc into a
standard solution of acetate of lead, and crystals will then form on the
zinc. These will be very thin, and will adhere together, firmly, forming
a porous mass. This, when saturated and kept under water for a short
time, may be put into the openings of the negative plate.

[Illustration: _Fig. 63._ ASSEMBLAGE OF ACCUMULATOR PLATES]

CONNECTING UP THE PLATES.--The next step is to put these plates in
position to form a battery. In Fig. 63 is shown a collection of plates
connected together.

For simplicity in illustrating, the cell is made up of glass, porcelain,
or hard rubber, with five plates (A), A, A representing the negative and
B, B the positive plates. A base of grooved strips (C, C) is placed in
the batteries of the cell to receive the lower ends of the plates. The
positive plates are held apart by means of a short section of tubing
(D), which is clamped and held within the plates by a bolt (E), this
bolt also being designed to hold the terminal strip (F).

In like manner, the negative plates are held apart by the two tubular
sections (G), each of which is of the same length as the section D of
the positives. The bolt (H) holds the negatives together as well as the
terminal (I). The terminals should be lead strips, and it would be well,
owing to the acid fumes which are formed, to coat all brass work,
screws, etc., with paraffine wax.

The electrolyte or acid used in the cell, for working purposes, is a
pure sulphuric acid, which should be diluted with about four times its
weight in water. Remember, you should always add the strong acid to the
water, and never pour the water into the acid, as the latter method
causes a dangerous ebullition, and does not produce a good mixture.

Put enough of this solution into the cell to cover the tops of the
plates, and the cell is ready.

[Illustration: _Fig. 64._ CONNECTING UP STORAGE BATTERY IN SERIES]

CHARGING THE CELLS.--The charge of the current must never be less than
2.5 volts. Each cell has an output, in voltage, of about 2 volts, hence
if we have, say, 10 cells, we must have at least 25 volts charging
capacity. We may arrange these in one line, or in series, as it is
called, so far as the connections are concerned, and charge them with a
dynamo, or other electrical source, which shows a pressure of 25 volts,
as illustrated in Fig. 64, or, instead of this, we may put them into two
parallel sets of 5 cells each, as shown in Fig. 65, and use 12.5 volts
to charge with. In this case it will take double the time because we are
charging with only one-half the voltage used in the first case.

The positive pole of the dynamo should be connected with the positive
pole of the accumulator cell, and negative with negative. When this has
been done run up the machine until it slightly exceeds the voltage of
the cells. Thus, if we have 50 cells in parallel, like in Fig. 64, at
least 125 volts will be required, and the excess necessary should bring
up the voltage in the dynamo to 135 or 140 volts.

[Illustration: _Fig. 65._ PARALLEL SERIES]

[Illustration: _Fig. 66._ CHARGING CIRCUIT]

THE INITIAL CHARGE.--It is usual initially to charge the battery from
periods ranging from 36 to 40 hours, and to let it stand for 12 or 15
hours, after which to re-charge, until the positive plates have turned
to a chocolate color, and the negative plates to a slate or gray color,
and both plates give off large bubbles of gas.

In charging, the temperature of the electrolyte should not exceed 100 deg.
Fahrenheit.

When using the accumulators they should never be fully discharged.

THE CHARGING CIRCUIT.--The diagram (Fig. 66) shows how a charging
circuit is formed. The lamps are connected up in parallel, as
illustrated. Each 16-candle-power 105-volt lamp will carry 1/2 ampere,
so that, supposing we have a dynamo which gives 110 volts, and we want
to charge a 4-volt accumulator, there will be 5-volt surplus to go to
the accumulator. If, for instance, you want the cell to have a charge of
2 amperes, four of these lamps should be connected up in parallel. If 3
amperes are required, use 6 lamps, and so on.




CHAPTER IX

THE TELEGRAPH


The telegraph is a very simple instrument. The key is nothing more or
less than a switch which turns the current on and off alternately.

The signals sent over the wires are simply the audible sounds made by
the armature, as it moves to and from the magnets.

MECHANISM IN TELEGRAPH CIRCUITS.--A telegraph circuit requires three
pieces of mechanism at each station, namely, a key used by the sender, a
sounder for the receiver, and a battery.

THE SENDING KEY.--The base of the sending instrument is six inches long,
four inches wide, and three-quarters of an inch thick, made of wood, or
any suitable non-conducting material. The key (A) is a piece of brass
three-eighths by one-half inch in thickness and six inches long. Midway
between its ends is a cross hole, to receive the pivot pin (B), which
also passes through a pair of metal brackets (C, D), the bracket C
having a screw to hold one of the line wires, and the other bracket
having a metal switch (E) hinged thereto. This switch bar, like the
