is continually drawing up the moisture in tiny invisible drops. This
moisture rises in the air and forms clouds. When the clouds get very
heavy, down comes the water which we call rain. In cold weather it is
changed into snow.

[Illustration: ELEPHANT IN THE "ZOO."]

Where there is no moisture there can be no rain, for the air cannot draw
up moisture to form clouds. Where there are many rivers there has been
much rain, and the soil is kept fertile. Plants will grow in it. Do you
see how our food, our clothing and our shelter are dependent upon
rainfall? Do you see how we are kept alive by rivers?


8

Think of the many, many uses of rivers. There are thousands of useful
rivers in the world.

What are the three great necessities of human life? How do rivers help
us to get _food_ and _clothing_ and to build our _homes_ and make them
comfortable?

SOME USES OF RIVERS

1. Water supply; washing and drinking.

2. Water power; flour, textile and planing mills.

3. Commerce; transportation.

4. Life; fish, plants.

5. Fertility of soil, rainfall.

6. Beauty of scenery.


9

Look at the map of our neighborhood. See the lines that represent the
river. Notice how it bends. Does it show where bridges cross it?


10

THE OCEAN

Have you ever stood on the beach and watched the big waves roll in? The
great _ocean_ stretches away as far as you can see. It seems to meet the
sky. The weaves roll and break, and roll and break from morning till
night forever. Where there are rocks along the shore the ocean dashes
against them. The sparkling snowy spray then leaps high into the air
with a boom and a swish!

    _Note to the Teacher._--See the details for studying about the
    oceans in Part II, Chapter I.


11

ISLANDS AND PENINSULAS

[Illustration: THE OCEAN.]

As you sail up the river you may see large portions of land lying right
out in the water. There are pieces of land lying out in the ocean too.
The water lies around them on all sides. We call such portions of land
_islands_. If you were standing on the shore how could you go to an
island which you saw out in the water? How could you get there if you
had no boat? Some islands are joined to the shores by bridges.

Many islands are no larger than this room. Others are so large that it
would take days to travel around them. Whether they are large or small
they have water entirely around them.

[Illustration: PART OF A ROCKY ISLAND.]

Some of us have been to a large island that has been built up into a
city. When the New York boys and girls want to leave their city they
must either go in a boat, or over a bridge, or through a tunnel far
under a river. Why? When you visit Atlantic City your train goes over a
bridge into the city. Why?


12

Look at some pictures of islands and notice how many kinds there are.
Some are all wooded. Others are covered with fields. Notice one that is
rocky and steep, and another that is level and built into a city.

Some islands are so large as to have many cities built upon them, and
there are many farms and dense woods besides upon the same islands. Some
have many rivers flowing through them.

If you were on a large island, how could you prove that it was an
island? If you wanted to leave it, how could you do so? Notice on the
map of our neighborhood whether a river with islands in it is shown.


13

Sometimes a piece of land has water flowing only part way around it. If
you take a boat and try to go all around it, you will come to a place
where the boat cannot go because there is land there. This land that is
nearly an island, but does not have the water completely around it, is
called a _peninsula_. Where have you seen a peninsula?




CHAPTER X

DIRECTION


A LESSON IN THE SCHOOL YARD AT NOON TIME

Face the sun. We are facing the south. Does the sun always lie south of
us? Where was it early this morning when it arose? That was east. Where
will it be at sunset? That is west. Move your hand to show the sun's
daily journey from east to south to west. The sun is south of us only at
noon time.

[Illustration]

Face your shadow. Now the sun is behind you. What direction is back of
you? You are facing north. Look at the shadows of the school, of the
fence, of the pole, and of all the other children. They are all falling
to the north. Can you make your shadow fall east or west or south? Why
not? When only will shadows fall north? Can you think of any time when
the shadows would fall east or west? Could they ever fall south? Why
not?


2

Draw this diagram on the yard pavement, and mark the parts that are
north, south, east and west. Stand at the middle of the cross. Face
north. What is behind you? What direction is at your right side and
which is at your left side? Learn these words:

"When I face the north the south is behind me; the east is at my right
hand and the west is at my left hand."

If you pass a weather vane on your way home, see if you can read the
letters on it and find out what they mean.


3

With soft chalk draw a line on your desk with one end toward the north
and one end toward the south. Mark N for north and S for south. Draw a
line across the middle of it, and mark E for east and W for west.

What is north of you, south of you, east of you and west of you?

In what direction from you is your teacher's desk?

On what side of you are the blackboards? On which side are the windows?

Walk toward the north, toward the east, toward the south, toward the
west.

Which boy or girl is north of you? Which pupil is west of you?

What is south of your room? What is east of it?

On what side of your room is the corridor? On which side is the street?
On which side is the school yard?

What is north of your teacher's desk? What is south of your teacher's
chair? What is west of the table? What is east of the windows?


4

[Illustration: POINTS OF THE COMPASS.]

Draw a plan of your desk. Mark north, south, east and west upon it. Hang
it up with north at the top. Draw a plan of your schoolroom. Mark the
north, south, east and west. Hang up the plan with north at the top.

Look at the plan of the town. We call it a map. North is at the top.
Find the rivers. At which side of the city are they?

Look at a plan of the entire school floor with all of the rooms and the
corridor. How shall we hang it?


5

Men have made plans of the city, the country, and the whole world. These
plans which show the land and water are called maps. On all maps north
is usually at the top.

Look at the map of the whole world. How can you tell which part means
land and which means water? What direction is at the top of the map, at
the bottom, at the right side, and at the left side?


6

See where we find the north-east, south-east, south-west and north-west.




PART TWO




CHAPTER I

THE EARTH AS A WHOLE


1

[Illustration]

Long ago wise men found out that the great earth on which we live is not
flat, but round like a ball. It is so very large, and we see so small a
part of it at one time, that it looks flat to us. Take a piece of paper
and tear out a small hole. Hold the hole over your globe so that a small
part of the surface shows through. Does the small piece of the globe
look very curved?

These men noticed ships sailing away across the water. When the ships
were far away the lower part of the boat could not be seen. More and
more disappeared till only the tops of the masts could be seen; and at
last they were gone too. If you make a little paper boat and let it sail
flat across your desk and then try it over the globe, you can see how
this proves that the earth is not flat.

Did you ever see an eclipse of the moon? The big curved shadow was the
earth's shadow. Why was the shadow round?

A globe shows the shape of the earth.


2

Look at all of the globes and maps in the room. Find how the land and
the water are shown. Can you see any islands, any peninsulas? A tiny dot
may mean the whole city with hundreds of homes, factories and other
buildings. Do you remember how we looked down on our town from a great
height and saw the many houses? Just think of a tiny dot meaning all of
our town.

[Illustration: WESTERN HEMISPHERE]

[Illustration: EASTERN HEMISPHERE]


3

How are the rivers drawn? Think of the great wide flowing river with its
wharves and its boats. It flows on for miles and miles. Some day all
of its water will reach the ocean. This little black line means all of
that great broad river.

Why do we have such tiny things to represent such great things?

See this land called North America. It would take five days and nights
in a fast express train to travel straight across it.


4

We can cut the globe in half and make a flat picture of the two parts as
they look when placed side by side.

Another name for the globe is sphere. "Hemi" means "half," so each half
of the globe is called a "hemisphere."

One half is called the Eastern Hemisphere and the other half the Western
Hemisphere.

In the Western Hemisphere we have the Western Continent, which is
America. This Western Continent is made of two grand divisions, North
America and South America. Why are they so named? We live in North
America. Find our city and the river nearest to it. North America was
joined to South America by a narrow strip of land called the _Isthmus of
Panama_. Look at the map and think why millions of dollars have been
spent through many years to cut through this isthmus. Now vessels can
pass through this Panama Canal.

Look at the map of the Western Hemisphere and notice what it contains
besides the Western Continent of America. There is more water than land.
This water forms the great oceans.
