grown-up and such a very pretty girl. Nora could give herself little
airs when occasion required. She could put on rather a killing grown-up
sort of would-be society manner. She never dared adopt it when Guy and
Harry were near, but she contrived to get Annie away by herself, and
then indulged in what the other children called her "high-falutin" talk.

It was nipped in the bud, however, by Annie herself. Annie Forest was
nothing if she was not frank and fearlessly matter-of-fact. She quickly
discovered how hollow and insufficient poor Nora's attempts to maintain
a worldly conversation really were. She crushed her by telling her that
she had never been in society herself in the whole course of her life,
that she knew nothing whatever of it or its ways, that she had just left
school, and that in all probability she would have to earn her bread in
the future.

"But, look here, Nora!" she exclaimed, suddenly, "why should we two
stand here chattering? I'm sure we ought to help the others."

"Oh, no; there's nothing really to be done," replied Nora, in a languid
voice. "I like picnics, but I hate the fuss of preparing the meals, and
as all the others adore it, I generally leave it for them to do. Won't
you sit here? There is a charming little peep between those two oak
trees. You can just see the Towers from there, and I think the Grange
also. Don't you think the Grange a very beautiful place?"

"Yes; but not half as beautiful as the Towers."

"Don't you, really? Well, I am surprised! Of course, the Towers is very
old. We are quite one of the very oldest of the county families round
here, but my father likes us to live quietly just at present. Molly and
I will have to be presented by-and-by. It is a pity father and mother
don't think more about society, but they'll have to when we are grown
up, and Molly is sixteen now. Hester will be very rich, and so will Nan.
I'm surprised that you prefer the Towers to the Grange."

"I beg your pardon," said Annie, "but did not the donkey-cart arrive
about half an hour ago?"

"Yes, of course."

"And two of your brothers with it?"

"Yes," replied Nora, suppressing a yawn, "Guy and Harry. How hot it is
to-day--the heat makes one dreadfully languid, does it not?"

"I must go and tell Hester that Boris has not come," exclaimed Annie.

She put wings to her feet as she spoke, and left the astonished and
indignant Nora to her own reflections.

Annie ran quickly through the wood. The sound of many voices floated on
the summer breeze to greet her. She had almost reached the party when
she suddenly came upon Kitty, who was standing alone. Kitty had just had
a furious quarrel with Nan, and was in consequence feeling considerably
out in the cold. Kitty knew that Boris was not of the party. She had
known this from the beginning, but in the excitement and fun of having
Nan Thornton to herself had been too selfish to mention the fact. Kitty
guessed why Boris had remained behind. She remembered the severe
punishment which Jane Macalister had inflicted upon him--a punishment
which Jane had doubtless forgotten, but which Boris himself remembered.

Kitty thought of Boris now as she stood by a blackberry-bush, and
pricked her finger on purpose against one of the thorns. Nan had been
very snubbing and very disagreeable, and Kitty cordially hated her for
the time being, and wished with all her heart that Boris was there. She
could snub Boris, who would never retort, but now there was no one for
her to play with.

"What is your name?" asked Annie, stopping and looking at her kindly;
"you are one of the Lorrimers, of course, but I have not caught your
name yet. Do you mind telling it to me?"

"I'm Kitty," answered the little girl; she raised her brown eyes and
looked full at Annie. She had never seen anyone so lovely as Annie
before. She had never even imagined that the world could contain anyone
so sparkling and so gay.

"You're Kitty; that is capital," replied Annie. "Then, Kitty, I am sure
you will do just as well as Hester. Can you tell me why your dear little
brother Boris has not come to the picnic?"

"I was thinking of him," said Kitty. Tears slowly welled up into her
eyes; her heart began to ache; she tried to prick her finger again to
relieve the pain inside.

"Boris has not come," she replied. "I'll tell you why. He spilt some
ink, and Jane Macalister said he must be punished by staying indoors for
a whole hour after lessons were over. I expect she forgot all about
Boris when we got a holiday so suddenly, but Boris didn't forget, and he
stayed behind."

"Dear little Boris!" exclaimed Annie; "dear, good, plucky little Boris!
The moment I looked at him I knew I should adore him. But see here,
Kitty, the hour is up now, isn't it?"

"Oh, yes, of course; some time ago."

"Then he'll follow us, won't he?"

"How can he? He can't come alone; it's nearly an hour's drive to Friar's
Wood."

"Of course he cannot walk," said Annie, impatiently; "but haven't you
got a trap or carriage, or horse, or something?"

"No, I'm afraid we haven't," said Kitty, looking very sorrowful.
"There's only old Rover, who draws the waggonette, and Dobbin the pony,
and Jacko the donkey. Of course, there's father's mare, she's quite a
beauty; but we are none of us allowed to have anything to do with her."

"Then we are not to have dear little Boris at the picnic?" said Annie;
"I declare I shan't enjoy it a bit. I want him to be my own special
knight."

"What do you want a knight for?" asked Kitty, looking up with interest.

"What do I want a knight for? You silly child, all fair ladies want
their own true knights."

"You are a very fair lady," said Kitty. "At least, I mean you're a very
lovely lady--very, very lovely; but can't you do with Guy or Harry for a
knight?"

"No; I have fallen in love with Boris, and I won't have anyone else.
Kitty, can't we manage to get him to the picnic?"

"I don't know, I'm sure. He could ride Harry's bicycle, but I don't
think it would once enter into his head."

"It would if I went back and told him to."

"How can you go back? You can't walk."

"Yes, I am a splendid walker. Besides, I am sure the road is longer than
by the fields, and you could take me part of the way and show me the
short cuts."

"It would take a long, long time," said Kitty, "and when you came back
dinner would be over, and you'd have lost quite half the fun."

"No, you dear little thing, I wouldn't. I mean to go and fetch Boris;
virtue shall be rewarded, and the knight shall be rescued by the lady.
Now, come with me part of the way and show me the short cuts. Why, I'm
as strong as a lion. You don't suppose a walk of a few miles tires me?
Come along, Kit, we are wasting time."

In reality, Kitty was charmed beyond words with any move which was to
bring Boris on the scene. The moment Boris seemed at all unattainable,
he became wonderfully precious in Kitty's eyes. She would, of course,
snub him in five minutes after he did arrive, but that really did not
matter. The fascination of Annie's secret mission also delighted her
much, and she skipped along now by the side of this beautiful lady in a
state of high good-humour.

"I'll show you a lovely short cut," she said. "It will take two miles
off the distance. There's a bog, and a sunken ditch, and a wire fence;
but you won't mind them, will you?"

"Not a bit," said Annie, laughter in her eyes.

"And there's farmer Granger's bull-dog, and perhaps the bull himself may
be in the four acre field; but you won't mind," continued Kitty.

"Not a bit, not a bit."

"Well, let's run down into this little dell. I'll start you from the
wicket gate at the end of the dell."

"It sounds quite Pilgrim's Progressy," said Annie.

"Annie," said Kitty, in an ecstatic whisper, "is it to be a secret?"

"Of course; if you dare to reveal it my knight shall execute vengeance
on you."

"Oh, Annie!" said Kitty, "I do love you; its so perfectly delicious to
have a secret."

"Well, see you keep this one faithfully. Now we have come to the wicket
gate. How shall I go? Can I see the bull from here?"

"No."

"Can I hear the bull-dog bark?"

"No."

"Kitty, you little wretch, you've been trying to frighten me with
imaginary dangers. Yes, I see my road. I follow the winding path
wherever it leads. Keep a bit of dinner for me, Kitty. I'll be back in a
couple of hours."

Kitty promised, and Annie started with great vigour on her long walk.

Kitty stood at the stile and watched her. Suddenly she raised a cry.

"Annie."

Annie turned.

"You'll find Nell at home, too, Annie."

"Is Nell another Lorrimer?"

"Yes; the ugly one of the family; the duckling, we call her most times."

"Well, the duckling shall come, too," shouted heedless Annie; and Kitty,
with the full weight and delirious importance of her secret radiating
all over her stout little person, slowly returned to the other members
of the picnic party.




CHAPTER VII.

THE STORY BOOK LADY.


Annie found the road hot and the way long. As she said, she was a very
good walker, and was never daunted by difficulties or dangers either
real or imaginary. She was impressed by Boris's bright little face, and
Kitty's story of his fidelity to the path of duty touched her quick and
affectionate nature. Annie Forest, the grown-up girl, was very like
Annie Forest, the child. She was still intensely impulsive, wayward, and
eager. Her faults were in a great manner subdued, but they were not
eradicated. She was intensely affectionate, brave, and true as steel;
but she was apt to be both heedless and thoughtless. When rushing away
to rescue Boris, it never once entered into her head that the secret of
her absence might prove very troublesome to poor Kitty, and that the
rest of the party might suffer uneasiness on her account. Without any
adventure from bull or bull-dog, without endangering her life in the
bog, which turned out to be almost non-existent at this time of year,
she reached the Towers at the most sultry time of the day, and appeared
upon the scene between one and two o'clock, a tired, flushed, and very
thirsty Annie. All during her walk she pictured Boris's state of
despair. She saw in her mind's eye a vision of his little, flushed,
tear-stained face. She thought of Nell, too, and imagined the rapture
with which the ugly duckling would greet her, the deliverer of the
oppressed.

Annie entered the Towers by a side entrance, and, skirting a pretty,
shady lawn, approached the house by the nearest way. As she did so, she
was attracted by voices which seemed to proceed from out of a clump of
trees. She stepped close to the spot from where the sound proceeded,
and, craning her neck, looked over the thick laurustinus bushes, which
enclosed a very tiny lawn or plot of grass.

Seated here, in the utmost peace and apparent contentment, were the poor
victims for whom she had exerted herself so terribly. Nell was lying
full length on her back on the grass. Boris was seated tailorwise on the
ground a little way off. Nell had a white rat curled up in her hair and
another nestling in her neck. Boris was feeding some white hares and
some pet rabbits. The children were eagerly talking to their animals,
and Annie had to own to herself that there was nothing in the least
unhappy or even morbid in the sound of either of the voices.

For a moment the children's perfect happiness almost vexed her. It
seemed provoking to have taken that long, exhausting walk for nothing,
and oh! how hungry and thirsty, how very hungry and thirsty she felt.

The next instant, however, her good-nature asserted itself. She said
"Hullo!" pushed her way through the laurustinus hedge, and stood in the
midst of the group.

Nell started into a sitting position, tumbling the white rats on to her
lap. She looked up at Annie. What a tumbled, dishevelled, hot, but oh,
what a pretty strange lady was this! Nell worshipped beauty with the
passion of a very hot and fervent little soul. She had scarcely noticed
Annie in the schoolroom, but now her heart went out to her with a great
throb.

"Who are you?" she said. "Where do you come from? What is your name?"

"Oh, I'm not a fairy, my good child!" said Annie. "I'm a poor, exhausted
girl, who thought she was performing a very heroic feat and finds
herself mistaken."

"Pray come in and take a seat," said Boris, who was always the soul of
gentlemanly politeness. He stood up as he spoke, tumbling his rabbits
and hares helter skelter in all directions, and tried to push back the
laurustinus hedge for Annie. She squeezed through, tearing her cotton
dress as she did so.

"Oh, dear, dear, your sweet dress is spoiled!" said Nell, in a tender
voice.

"Never mind," answered Annie; "one must lose something to attain to this
perfection."

"Won't you seat yourself?" said Boris.

He pointed to the grass, and Annie sat upon it with a sense of delight.

"How hot you are," said Nell. "What can we do for you? Would it soothe
you to stroke one of the rats? This darling, for instance. His name is
Crinklety."

Annie took the rat on her lap and looked at it reflectively.

"It's a darling," she said, "and so are the rabbits, and so are the
hares; but oh, I'm so hot and so thirsty! and oh, children, don't you
know what I've come about, and don't you know who I am?"

"No, I'm sure we don't," answered Boris. Nell stared solemnly; she did
not speak.

"Well," said Annie, "I see I must introduce myself. I am Annie Forest.
I'm Hester Thornton's friend, and I came here this morning with Hetty
and Nan, and we all started on a picnic, and when we came to Friar's
Wood, I found that you, Boris--you see I know your name--and you, Nell,
were left behind, and I could not stand it somehow; it seemed too cruel
and unfair, so I--I came back for you."

"How did you come?" asked Boris. "Did you drive back with Dobbin or
Jacko?"

"No; they will have plenty to do this evening, and why should I give
them double work, poor dears? No; I came back with these," she pushed
out her dainty, but very dusty, feet as she spoke.

"You mean that you _walked_?" said Nell. "You walked all that long way
just because of us two children that you knew nothing about. I didn't
believe it was true. I never believed anything so perfectly splendid
could be true out of a story book. Boris, do you hear? She walked from
Friar's Wood all by herself."

"Are you awfully dead beat?" asked Boris, standing in his sturdy
attitude in front of Annie and looking at her with immense attention.
