

When Silas Tripp went into his store the next day he was startled to
find a window in the rear was partially open.

"How did that window come open, Abel?" he asked, as Abel Wood entered
the store.

"I don't know, sir."

"It must have been you that opened it," said his employer, sternly.

"I didn't do it, Mr. Tripp, honest I didn't," declared Abel, earnestly.

"Then how did it come open, that's what I want to know?"

"I am sure I can't tell."

"Somebody might have come in during the night and robbed the store."

"So there might."

"It's very mysterious. Such things didn't happen when Chester was
here."

Abel made no answer, but began to sweep out the store, his first
morning duty.

When Silas spoke of the store being robbed he had no idea that such a
robbing had taken place, but he went to the money drawer and opened it
to make sure all was safe.

Instantly there was a cry of dismay.

"Abel!" he exclaimed, "I've been robbed. There's a lot of money
missing."

Abel stopped sweeping and turned pale.

"Is that so, Mr. Tripp?" he asked, faintly.

"Yes, there's--lemme see. There's been burglars here. Oh, this is
terrible!"

"Who could have done it, Mr. Tripp?"

"I dunno, but the store was entered last night. I never shall feel safe
again," groaned Silas.

"Didn't they leave no traces?"

"Ha! here's a handkerchief," said Mr. Tripp, taking the article from
the top of a flour barrel, "and yes, by gracious, it's marked Chester
Rand."

"You don't think he took the money?" ejaculated Abel, in open-eyed
wonder.

"Of course it must have been him! He knew just where I kept the money,
and he could find his way about in the dark, he knew the store so
well."

"I didn't think Chester would do such a thing."

"That's how he came by his five-dollar bill. He came in bold as brass
and paid me with my own money--the young rascal!"

"But how could he do it if the money was took last night? It was two or
three days ago he paid you the five-dollar bill."

This was a poser, but Mr. Tripp was equal to the emergency.

"He must have robbed me before," he said.

"You haven't missed money before, have you?"

"Not to my knowledge, but he must have took it. Abel, I want you to go
right over to the Widow Rand's and tell Chester I want to see him. I
dunno but I'd better send the constable after him."

"Shall I carry him his handkerchief?"

"No, and don't tell him it's been found. I don't want to put him on his
guard."

Abel put his broom behind the door and betook himself to the house of
Mrs. Rand.

The widow herself opened the door.

"Is Chester at home?" asked Abel.

"Yes, he's eating his breakfast. Do you want to see him?"

"Well, Mr. Tripp wants to see him."

"Possibly he wants Chester to give him a little extra help," she
thought.

"Won't you come in and take a cup of coffee while Chester is finishing
his breakfast?" she said.

"Thank you, ma'am."

Abel was a boy who was always ready to eat and drink, and he accepted
the invitation with alacrity.

"So Mr. Tripp wants to see me?" said Chester. "Do you know what it's
about?"

"He'll tell you," answered Abel, evasively.

Chester was not specially interested or excited. He finished his
breakfast in a leisurely manner, and then taking his hat, went out with
Abel. It occurred to him that Mr. Tripp might be intending to discharge
Abel, and wished to see if he would return to his old place.

"So you don't know what he wants to see me about?" he asked.

"Well, I have an idea," answered Abel, in a mysterious tone.

"What is it, then?"

"Oh, I dassn't tell."

"Look here, Abel, I won't stir a step till you do tell me. You are
acting very strangely."

"Well, somethin' terrible has happened," Abel ejaculated, in excited
tones.

"What's it?"

"The store was robbed last night."

"The store was robbed?" repeated Chester. "What was taken?"

"Oh, lots and lots of money was taken from the drawer, and the window
in the back of the store was left open."

"I'm sorry to hear it. I didn't know there was anybody in Wyncombe that
would do such things. Does Mr. Tripp suspect anybody?"

"Yes, he does."

"Who is it?"

"He thinks you done it."

Chester stopped abruptly and looked amazed.

"Why, the man must be crazy! What on earth makes him think I would
stoop to do such a thing?"

"'Cause your handkerchief was found on a flour barrel 'side of the
money drawer."

"My handkerchief! Who says it was my handkerchief?"

"Your name was on it--in one corner; I seed it myself."

Then a light dawned upon Chester. The tramp whom he and his mother had
entertained the evening before, must have picked up his handkerchief,
and left it in the store to divert suspicion from himself. The
detective instinct was born within Chester, and now he felt impatient
to have the investigation proceed.

"Come on, Abel," he said, "I want to see about this matter."

"Well, you needn't walk so plaguy fast, wouldn't if I was you."

"Why not?"

"'Cause you'll probably have to go to jail. I'll tell you what I'd do."

"Well?"

"I'd hook it."

"You mean run away?"

"Yes."

"That's the last thing I'd do. Mr. Tripp would have a right to think I
was guilty in that case."

"Well, ain't you?"

"Abel Wood, I have a great mind to give you a licking. Don't you know
me any better than that?"

"Then why did you leave the handkerchief on the flour barrel?"

"That'll come out in due time."

They were near the store where Mr. Tripp was impatiently waiting for
their appearance. He did not anticipate Abel's staying to breakfast,
and his suspicions were excited.

"I'll bet Chester Rand has left town with the money," he groaned. "Oh,
it's awful to have your hard earnin's carried off so sudden. I'll send
Chester to jail unless he returns it--every cent of it."

Here Abel entered the store, followed by Chester.




CHAPTER VIII.

A SCENE IN THE GROCERY STORE.


"So you've come, have you, you young thief?" said Silas, sternly, as
Chester entered the store. "Ain't you ashamed of yourself?"

"No, I'm not," Chester answered, boldly. "I've done nothing to be
ashamed of."

"Oh, you hardened young villain. Give me the money right off, or I'll
send you to jail."

"I hear from Abel that the store was robbed last night, and I suppose
from what you say that you suspect me."

"So I do."

"Then you are mistaken. I spent all last night at home as my mother can
testify."

"Then how came your handkerchief here?" demanded Silas, triumphantly,
holding up the article.

"It must have been brought here."

"Oho, you admit that, do you? I didn't know but you'd say it came here
itself."

"No, I don't think it did."

"I thought you'd own up arter a while."

"I own up to nothing."

"Isn't the handkerchief yours?"

"Yes."

"Then you stay here while Abel goes for the constable. You've got to be
punished for such doin's. But I'll give ye one chance. Give me back the
money you took--thirty-seven dollars and sixty cents--and I'll forgive
ye, and won't have you sent to jail."

"That is a very kind offer, Mr. Tripp, and if I had taken the money I
would accept it, and thank you. But I didn't take it."

"Go for the constable, Abel, and mind you hurry. You just stay where
you are, Chester Rand. Don't you go for to run away."

Chester smiled. He felt that he had the key to the mystery, but he
chose to defer throwing light upon it.

"On the way, Abel," said Chester, "please call at our house and ask my
mother to come to the store."

"All right, Chester."

The constable was the first to arrive.

"What's wanted, Silas?" he asked, for in country villages neighbors are
very apt to call one another by their Christian names.

"There's been robbery and burglary, Mr. Boody," responded Mr. Tripp.
"My store was robbed last night of thirty-seven dollars and sixty
cents."

"Sho, Silas, how you talk!"

"It's true, and there stands the thief!"

"I am sitting, Mr. Tripp," said Chester smiling.

"See how he brazens it out! What a hardened young villain he is!"

"Come, Silas, you must be crazy," expostulated the constable, who felt
very friendly to Chester. "Chester wouldn't no more steal from you than
I would."

"I thought so myself, but when I found his handkerchief, marked with
his name, on a flour barrel, I was convinced."

"Is that so, Chester?"

"Yes, the handkerchief is mine."

"It wasn't here last night," proceeded Silas, "and it was here this
morning. It stands to reason that it couldn't have walked here itself,
and so of course it was brought here."

By this time two other villagers entered the store.

"What do you say to that, Chester?" said the constable, beginning to be
shaken in his conviction of Chester's innocence.

"I agree with Mr. Tripp. It must have been brought here."

At this moment, Mrs. Rand and the minister whom she had met on the way,
entered the store.

"Glad to see you, widder," said Silas Tripp, grimly. "I hope you ain't
a-goin' to stand up for your son in his didoes."

"I shall certainly stand by Chester, Mr. Tripp. What is the trouble?"

"Only that he came into my store in the silent watches of last night,"
answered Silas, sarcastically, "and made off with thirty-seven dollars
and sixty cents."

"It's a falsehood, whoever says it," exclaimed Mrs. Rand, hotly.

"I supposed you'd stand up for him," sneered Silas.

"And for a very good reason. During the silent watches of last night,
as you express it, Chester was at home and in bed to my certain
knowledge."

"While his handkerchief walked over here and robbed the store,"
suggested Silas Tripp, with withering sarcasm, as he held up the
telltale evidence of Chester's dishonesty.

"Was this handkerchief found in the store?" asked Mrs. Rand, in
