barefooted young ones at Sabbath school; and she's forever riggin' and
onriggin' that dirty Simpson baby! She reminds me of a puppy that'll
always go to everybody that'll have him!"

It was thought very creditable to Mrs. Fogg that she sent for Clara
Belle to live with her and go to school part of the year. "She'll be
useful," said Mrs. Fogg, "and she'll be out of her father's way, and so
keep honest; though she's so awful homely I've no fears for her. A girl
with her red hair, freckles, and cross-eyes can't fall into no kind of
sin, I don't believe."

Mrs. Fogg requested that Clara Belle should be started on her journey
from Acreville by train and come the rest of the way by stage, and she
was disturbed to receive word on Sunday that Mr. Simpson had borrowed a
horse from a new acquaintance, and would himself drive the girl from
Acreville to Riverboro, a distance of thirty-five miles. That he would
arrive in their vicinity on the very night before the flag-raising was
thought by Riverboro to be a public misfortune, and several residents
hastily determined to deny themselves a sight of the festivities and
remain watchfully on their own premises.

On Monday afternoon the children were rehearsing their songs at the
meeting-house. As Rebecca came out on the broad wooden steps she
watched Mrs. Peter Meserve's buggy out of sight, for in front, wrapped
in a cotton sheet, lay the precious flag. After a few chattering
good-byes and weather prophecies with the other girls, she started on
her homeward walk, dropping in at the parsonage to read her verses to
the minister.

He welcomed her gladly as she removed her white cotton gloves (hastily
slipped on outside the door, for ceremony) and pushed back the funny
hat with the yellow and black porcupine quills--the hat with which she
made her first appearance in Riverboro society.

"You've heard the beginning, Mr. Baxter; now will you please tell me if
you like the last verse?" she asked, taking out her paper. "I've only
read it to Alice Robinson, and I think perhaps she can never be a poet,
though she's a splendid writer. Last year when she was twelve she wrote
a birthday poem to herself, and she made 'natal' rhyme with 'Milton,'
which, of course, it wouldn't. I remember every verse ended:--

  'This is my day so natal
  And I will follow Milton.'

Another one of hers was written just because she couldn't help it she
said.  This was it:--

  'Let me to the hills away,
  Give me pen and paper;
  I'll write until the earth will sway
  The story of my Maker.'"

The minister could scarcely refrain from smiling, but he controlled
himself that he might lose none of Rebecca's quaint observations. When
she was perfectly at ease, unwatched and uncriticised, she was a
marvelous companion.

"The name of the poem is going to be 'My Star,'" she continued, "and
Mrs. Baxter gave me all the ideas, but somehow there's a kind of
magicness when they get into poetry, don't you think so?" (Rebecca
always talked to grown people as if she were their age, or, a more
subtle and truer distinction, as if they were hers.)

"It has often been so remarked, in different words," agreed the
minister.

"Mrs. Baxter said that each star was a state, and if each state did its
best we should have a splendid country. Then once she said that we
ought to be glad the war is over and the States are all at peace
together; and I thought Columbia must be glad, too, for Miss Dearborn
says she's the mother of all the States. So I'm going to have it end
like this: I did n't write it, I just sewed it while I was working on
my star:--

  "For it's your star, my star, all the stars together,
  That make our country's flag so proud
  To float in the bright fall weather.
  Northern stars, Southern stars, stars of the East and West,
  Side by side they lie at peace
  On the dear flag's mother-breast."

"'Oh! many are the poets that are sown by Nature,'" thought the
minister, quoting Wordsworth to himself. "And I wonder what becomes of
them! That's a pretty idea, little Rebecca, and I don't know whether
you or my wife ought to have the more praise. What made you think of
the stars lying on the flag's 'mother-breast'? Were did you get that
word?"

"Why" (and the young poet looked rather puzzled), "that's the way it
is; the flag is the whole country--the mother--and the stars are the
states. The stars had to lie somewhere: 'lap' nor 'arms' wouldn't sound
well with 'West,' so, of course, I said 'breast,'" Rebecca answered,
with some surprise at the question; and the minister put his hand under
her chin and kissed her softly on the forehead when he said good-by at
the door.

Rebecca walked rapidly along in the gathering twilight, thinking of the
eventful morrow.

As she approached the turning on the left, called the old Milltown
road, she saw a white horse and wagon, driven by a man with a rakish,
flapping, Panama hat, come rapidly around the turn and disappear over
the long hills leading down to the falls. There was no mistaking him;
there never was another Abner Simpson, with his lean height, his bushy
reddish hair, the gay cock of his hat, and the long, piratical,
upturned mustaches, which the boys used to say were used as hat-racks
by the Simpson children at night. The old Milltown road ran past Mrs.
Fogg's house, so he must have left Clara Belle there, and Rebecca's
heart glowed to think that her poor little friend need not miss the
raising.

She began to run now, fearful of being late for supper, and covered the
ground to the falls in a brief time. As she crossed the bridge she
again saw Abner Simpson's team, drawn up at the watering-trough.

Coming a little nearer with the view of inquiring for the family, her
quick eye caught sight of something unexpected. A gust of wind blew up
a corner of a linen lap-robe in the back of the wagon, and underneath
it she distinctly saw the white-sheeted bundle that held the flag; the
bundle with a tiny, tiny spot of red bunting peeping out at one corner.
It is true she had eaten, slept, dreamed red, white, and blue for
weeks, but there was no mistaking the evidence of her senses; the
idolized flag, longed for, worked for, sewed for, that flag was in the
back of Abner Simpson's wagon, and if so, what would become of the
raising?

Acting on blind impulse, she ran toward the watering-trough, calling
out in her clear treble "Mr. Simpson! Oh, Mr. Simpson, will you let me
ride a little way with you and hear all about Clara Belle? I'm going
over to the Centre on an errand." (So she was; a most important
errand,--to recover the flag of her country at present in the hands of
the foe!)

Mr. Simpson turned round in his seat and cried heartily, "Certain sure
I will!" for he liked the fair sex, young and old, and Rebecca had
always been a prime favorite with him. "Climb right in! How's
everybody? Glad to see you! The folks talk 'bout you from sun-up to
sun-down, and Clara Belle can't hardly wait for a sight of you!"

Rebecca scrambled up, trembling and pale with excitement. She did not
in the least know what was going to happen, but she was sure that the
flag, when in the enemy's country, must be at least a little safer with
the State of Maine sitting on top of it! Mr. Simpson began a long
monologue about Acreville, the house he lived in, the pond in front of
it, Mrs. Simpson's health and various items of news about the children,
varied by reports of his personal misfortunes. He put no questions, and
asked no replies, so this gave the inexperienced soldier a few seconds
to plan a campaign. There were three houses to pass; the Browns' at the
corner, the Millikens', and the Robinsons' on the brow of the hill. If
Mr. Robinson were in the front yard she might tell Mr. Simpson she
wanted to call there and ask Mr. Robinson to hold the horse's head
while she got out of the wagon. Then she might fly to the back before
Mr. Simpson could realize the situation, and dragging out the precious
bundle, sit on it hard, while Mr. Robinson settled the matter of
ownership with Mr. Simpson.

This was feasible, but it meant a quarrel between the two men, who held
an ancient grudge against each other, and Mr. Simpson was a valiant
fighter, as the various sheriffs who had attempted to arrest him could
cordially testify. It also meant that everybody in the village would
hear of the incident and poor Clara Belle be branded again as the child
of a thief.

Another idea danced into her excited brain; such a clever one she could
hardly believe it hers. She might call Mr. Robinson to the wagon, and
when he came close to the wheels she might say, suddenly: "Please take
the flag out of the back of the wagon, Mr. Robinson. We have brought it
here for you to keep overnight." Then Mr. Simpson might be so surprised
that he would give up his prize rather than be suspected of stealing.

But as they neared the Robinsons' house there was not a sign of life to
be seen; so the last plan, ingenious though it was, was perforce
abandoned.

The road now lay between thick pine woods with no dwelling in sight. It
was growing dusk and Rebecca was driving along the lonely way with a
person who was generally called Slippery Simpson.

Not a thought of fear crossed her mind, save the fear of bungling in
her diplomacy, and so losing the flag. She knew Mr. Simpson well, and a
pleasanter man was seldom to be met. She recalled an afternoon when he
came home and surprised the whole school playing the Revolutionary War
in his helter-skelter dooryard, and the way in which he had joined the
British forces and impersonated General Burgoyne had greatly endeared
him to her. The only difficulty was to find proper words for her
delicate mission, for, of course, if Mr. Simpson's anger were aroused,
he would politely push her out of the wagon and drive away with the
flag. Perhaps if she led the conversation in the right direction an
opportunity would present itself. Clearing her throat nervously, she
began:--

"Is it likely to be fair to-morrow?"

"Guess so; clear as a bell. What's on foot; a picnic?"

"No; we're to have a grand flag-raising!" ("That is," she thought, "if
we have any flag to raise!")

"That so?  Where?"

"The three villages are to club together and have a rally, and raise
the flag at the Centre. There'll be a brass band, and speakers, and the
Mayor of Portland, and the man that will be governor if he's elected,
and a dinner in the Grange Hall, and we girls are chosen to raise the
flag."

"I want to know! That'll be grand, won't it?" (Still not a sign of
consciousness on the part of Abner.)

"I hope Mrs. Fogg will take Clara Belle, for it will be splendid to
look at! Mr. Cobb is going to be Uncle Sam and drive us on the stage.
Miss Dearborn--Clara Belle's old teacher, you know is going to be
Columbia; the girls will be the States of the Union, and oh, Mr.
Simpson, I am the one to be the State of Maine!" Mr. Simpson flourished
the whipstock and gave a loud, hearty laugh. Then he turned in his seat
and regarded Rebecca curiously.

"You're kind o' small, ain't ye, for so big a state as this one?" he
asked.

"Any of us would be too small," replied Rebecca with dignity, "but the
committee asked me, and I am going to try hard to do well."
