
It is necessary here to describe the Spaniard's hut, which was peculiar
as to its architecture.  It was a mere shed made of bamboo canes closely
placed together, and roofed with large cocoa and other leaves.  The
floor was of rough boards covered with matting.  The whole structure
stood on the top of a number of strong posts about twelve or fourteen
feet from the ground, and the entrance was gained by a ladder which
could be drawn up at night.  The object of this great elevation and the
ladder, was protection from the nocturnal visit of wild beasts such as
tigers or jaguars, as well as monkeys of a large size.  In the door of
this hut there was a hole of about two feet square, at which the host
stationed himself with the muzzle of his gun thrust through it.  Two
smaller holes in the walls, which served for windows, were used on the
present occasion as loopholes by Will Osten and Bunco.

Perfect silence was maintained for about half an hour.  The sky was
cloudless and the moon full.  Not a breath of wind stirred a leaf of the
forest that encircled the small clearing.  The buzz of mosquitoes, or
the flapping about of a huge bat alone disturbed the silence of the
night, and the watchers were beginning to fear it would turn out to be a
false alarm, when the cattle in the yard began to low in a quick yet
mournful tone.  They knew full well that their enemy was at hand!  A few
minutes, that appeared an age, of anxiety followed.  Then some bullocks
that had been purposely fastened near the hut began to bellow furiously.
Another instant, and the tiger cleared the fence with a magnificent
bound, alighted in the yard, and crouched for a spring.  The moon shone
full in his glaring eyeballs, making his head a splendid target.  Three
shots crashed out in one report, and with a roar that would have done
credit to the monarch of the African wilderness, this king of the
western forest fell down and died.

He was a full-grown tiger with a beautifully marked skin, which Bunco
was not long in stripping from the carcass, while the Spaniard, who was
highly delighted by this success, set about preparing breakfast.  They
were all too much excited to think of going to bed again; and, besides,
it was within an hour of daybreak.

During the morning Will Osten persuaded his host to give him one of his
old guns in exchange for a beautiful silver-mounted hunting knife, which
was the only article of value that he happened to possess.  With this
useful addition to their arms, the travellers resumed their journey
shortly after dawn, being convoyed several miles on their way by their
amiable host.  They parted from him, finally, with much regret and many
professions of gratitude and esteem, especially from Larry, who, in the
fulness of his impulsive nature, reiterated his pressing invitation to
pay him a visit in his "swait little cabin in the bog of Clonave, County
Westmeath, ould Ireland!"

We will not drag the reader through every step of the rough and
adventurous journey which was accomplished by our travellers in the
succeeding week, during which they became so familiar with tigers, that
Muggins thought no more of their roaring than he did of the mewing of
cats, while Larry actually got the length of kicking the "sarpints" out
of his way, although he did express his conviction, now and then, that
the "counthry wos mightily in want of a visit from Saint Patrick."  They
travelled steadily and surely under the guidance of the faithful Bunco,
through tangled brake, and wild morass, and dense forest, and many a
mile of sandy plain, until at length they reached the small town and
port of _Tacames_, into which they entered one sultry afternoon,
footsore and weary, with their clothes torn almost to tatters, and
without a single coin--of any realm whatever--in their pockets.

"Well, here we are at last," said Will Osten, with a sigh.

"True for ye," responded Larry.

"That's so," said Muggins.

"It's all well as ends well, which wos Billy Cowper's opinion," observed
Old Peter.

Bunco made no remark, but he gave a quiet grunt, which might have meant
anything--or nothing--as they entered the town.



CHAPTER NINE.

DESCRIBES A SURGICAL OPERATION, AND RECORDS THE DELIBERATIONS OF A
COUNCIL.

The town of Tacames, in the republic of Ecuador, is not large, neither
is it important to the world, but it appeared both large and important
in the eyes of our hero and his comrades.  In their circumstances any
town would have been regarded as a city of refuge, and their joy on
arriving was not much, if at all, marred by the smallness and the poor
appearance of the town, which, at that time, consisted of about twenty
houses.  They were built on the top of posts about twelve or fourteen
feet from the ground--like the hut of the Spaniard already described--
because, being closely walled in by a dense jungle, tigers and huge
monkeys were bold enough to pay the inhabitants nocturnal and unwelcome
visits very frequently.

"A curious-looking place," observed Will Osten, as they drew near.

"So would the natives obsarve of London or Liverpool," said Old Peter.

"With less cause, however," replied Will.

"That depends on taste," retorted Old Peter.

"Be no manes," put in Larry; "it neither depinds on taste, nor smell,
but feelin'--see now, here's how it is.  We being in Tickamis, _feels_
it coorious; well av the natives here wos in London _they_ would feel it
coorious.  It's all a matter o' feelin' d'ye see--wan o' the five
senses."

"Wot a muddlehead you are, Larry," growled Muggins; "ye don't even know
that there's six senses."

"Only five," said the Irishman firmly--"seein', hearin', tastin',
smellin', and feelin'; wot's the sixth sense?"

"One that you are chock full of--it's non-sense," replied Muggins.

"Think o' that, now!" exclaimed Larry, with a broad grin; "sure I wint
an' forgot it, an' the sevinth wan, too, called common sense, of which,
Muggins, you haven't got no more in yer skull than a blue-faced baboon.
Hallo! wot's that?  Is it a wild baist on its hind-legs or only a mad
man?"

He pointed as he spoke to a man who approached them from the town, and
whose appearance as well as his actions were well calculated to surprise
them.  He was a fine-looking man of gigantic size, with a poncho over
his shoulders and a Spanish-looking sombrero on his head, but the most
curious thing about him was his gait.  At one moment he sauntered,
holding his face between both hands, next moment he bent double and
appeared to stamp with his feet.  Then he hurried forward a few paces
but paused abruptly, bent down and stamped again.  Presently he caught
sight of the travellers.  At once his antics ceased.  He raised himself
erect, and advancing quickly, lifted his sombrero and saluted them with
the air of a prince.

Will Osten addressed him in English, and, to his surprise as well as
gratification, the Spaniard replied in the same tongue, which he spoke,
however, in a most remarkable way, having learned it chiefly from the
skippers of those vessels that touched at the port.

"I sall be happy to offer you hospitabilities, gentelmans," said Don
Diego--(for so he styled himself).  "If you vill come to meen house you
vill grub there."

The grin of unnatural ferocity which Don Diego put on while he spoke,
surprised and perplexed the travellers not a little, but he suddenly
explained the mystery by clutching his hair, setting his teeth and
muttering wildly while he gave a quick stamp with his foot--

"Skuse me, gentelmans, I got most desperable 'tack of toothick!"

Will Osten attempted to console Don Diego by telling him that he was a
surgeon, and that if he could only obtain a pair of pincers he would
soon remedy that evil; but the Spaniard shook his head and assured him
that there was a miserable man in the town calling himself a vendor of
physic, who had already nearly driven him mad by attempting several
times to pull the tooth, but in vain.

"Indeed," said the Don, "the last time he have try, I 'fraid I shut up
won of his days light--it _was_ so sore!"

Will Osten ultimately persuaded the Spaniard, however, to consent to an
operation, and the whole party accompanied him to his house, which was
the most substantial in the town.  Leaving his comrades there, Will went
with Bunco in search of the apothecary, whom he soon found, and who
readily lent him a pair of forceps, with which he returned to the
residence of Don Diego.  Considering his size, Will deemed it advisable
to have Larry and Muggins standing by ready to hold him if he should
prove obstreperous.  This was a wise precaution, for, the moment Will
began to pull at the obstinate grinder, the gigantic Don began to roar
and then to struggle.  The tooth was terribly firm.  Will did not wonder
that the native dentist had failed.  The first wrench had no effect on
it.  The second--a very powerful one--was equally futile, but it caused
Don Diego to roar hideously and to kick, so Will gave a nod to his
assistants, who unceremoniously seized the big man in their iron gripe
and held him fast.  Then our hero threw all his strength into a final
effort, and the tooth came out with a crash, and, along with it, a
terrible yell from Don Diego, who sent Larry and Muggins staggering
against the wall!  The relief experienced by the poor man was almost
instantaneous; as soon as he could speak he thanked Will in fervid
Spanish, and with genuine gratitude.

It is interesting to observe how often matters of apparently slight
moment in human affairs form turning-points which lead to important
results.  The incident which we have just related caused Don Diego to
entertain such kindly feelings towards Will Osten, that he not only
invited him to stay at his house with his companions during their
residence in Tacames, but insisted on his accepting a very large fee for
the service he had rendered him.  Of course this was not objected to in
the circumstances, but a still better piece of good fortune than this
befell the wanderers.  Will found that a number of the inhabitants had
been attacked with dysentery, and that the ignorance of the vendor of
physic was so great, that he could do nothing for them, except make a
few daring experiments, which were eminently unsuccessful.  To these
poor invalids our embryo doctor was so useful, that after a few days
dosing with proper medicine, their health and spirits began to improve
rapidly, and their gratitude was such that they heaped upon him every
delicacy that the place afforded, such as bananas, plantains, oranges,
lemons, pumpkins, melons, sweet potatoes, beef, goat's flesh, venison,
and pork, besides filling his pockets with doubloons!  Thus it came to
pass, that from absolute destitution Will and his comrades suddenly
leaped into a condition of comparative affluence.

At the end of a week a council was called, to discuss future
proceedings.  The council chamber was, as usual, the forest, and Spanish
cigarettes assisted the deliberations.  Will being called to the chair,
which was a tree stump, opened the proceedings by propounding the
question, "What shall we do now, for of course we must not trespass too
long on the hospitality of Don Diego?"

"I don't see why we shudn't," said Larry, "p'raps he'll have another
touch o' toothache, an' 'll want another grinder tuck out."

"That may be, nevertheless it behoves us to fix our future plans without
delay.  As there are no vessels in port just now, and we cannot tell
when any will arrive, it is worth while considering whether we cannot
travel by land; also, we must decide whether California or England is to
be our destination."

"I vote for Callyforny," said Larry O'Hale with much energy.  "`Goold
for ever,' is my motto!  Make our fortunes right off, go home, take
villas in ould Ireland, an' kape our carriages, wid flunkeys an'
maid-servants an' such like.  Sure av we can't get by say, we can walk."

"If I had wings, which is wot I haven't," said Muggins, with slow
precision of utterance, "I might fly over the Andes, likewise the
Atlantic, to England, or if I had legs ten fathoms long I might walk to
Callyforny; but, havin' only short legs, more used to the sea than to
the land, I votes for stoppin' where we are for some time, an', p'raps,
a sail will heave in sight an' take us off, d'ye see?"

"Ho!" exclaimed Bunco, with a nod of approval, "and wees kin go huntin'
for amoosement in de meaninwhiles."

"It's my opinion, sir," observed Old Peter, "that as we're all dependent
on the money earned by yourself, the least we can do, is to leave you to
settle the matter of when we start, and where we go.  What say you,
mates?"

A general assent being given to this, Will Osten decided that they
should remain where they were for a week or a fortnight longer, in the
hope of a vessel arriving, and that, in the meantime, as suggested by
Bunco, they should amuse themselves by going on a hunting expedition.

In accordance with this plan they immediately set about making
preparation for a start by borrowing from their host two small canoes,
each made of the trunk of a large tree hollowed out.  Bunco acted as
steersman in one of these.  Will Osten, after a few hours' practice,
deemed himself sufficiently expert to take the post of honour in the
other, and then, bidding adieu to Don Diego, and embarking with their
guns and a large supply of ammunition and provisions, they commenced the
ascent of the river Tacames, little thinking that some of the party
would never descend that river or see Don Diego again!



CHAPTER TEN.

HUNTING IN THE WILDS OF ECUADOR.

There is something very delightful and exhilarating in the first start
on a hunting expedition into a wild and almost unknown region.  After
one gets into the thick of it the thoughts are usually too busy and too
much in earnest with the actual realities in hand to permit of much
rambling into the regions of romance--we say _much_ because there is
always _some_ rambling of this sort--but, during the first day, before
the actual work has well begun, while the adventures are as yet only
anticipated, and the mind is free to revel in imaginings of what is
possible and probable, there is a wild exultation which swells the heart
and induces an irresistible tendency to shout.  Indeed, on the present
occasion, some of the party did shout lustily in order to vent their
feelings; and Larry O'Hale, in particular, caused the jungle to echo so
loudly with the sounds of his enthusiasm that the affrighted apes and
jaguars must have trembled in their skins if they were possessed of
ordinary feelings.

The scenery, with its accompaniments, was most beautiful and
interesting.  The river, a narrow one, flowed through a dense and
continuous forest; rich and lofty trees over-arched it, affording
agreeable shade, and on the branches were to be seen great numbers of
kingfishers, parrots, and other birds of rich plumage, which filled the
air at least with sound, if not with melody.  The concert was further
swelled by the constant cries of wild beasts--such as the howl of a
tiger or the scream of a monkey.  But there is no pleasure without some
alloy.  On this river mosquitoes were the alloy!  These tormenting
creatures persecuted the hunters by night as well as by day, for they
are amongst the few insects which indulge in the pernicious habit of
never going to bed.  We cannot indeed say, authoritatively, that
mosquitoes never sleep, but we can and do say that they torment human
beings, and rob them of _their_ sleep, if possible, without
intermission.  Larry O'Hale being of a fiery nature, was at first driven
nearly to distraction, and, as he said himself, he did little else than
slap his own face day and night in trying to kill "the little varmints."
Muggins bore up stoically, and all of them became callous in course of
time.  Fish of many kinds were seen in the clear water, and their first
success in the sporting way was the spearing of two fine mullet.  Soon
after this incident, a herd of brown deer were seen to rush out of the
jungle and dash down an open glade, with noses up and antlers resting
back on their necks.  A shot from Bunco's gun alarmed but did not hit
them, for Bunco had been taken by surprise, and was in an unstable
canoe.  Before the deer had disappeared, two or three loud roars were
heard.

"Quick! go ashore," whispered Bunco, running his canoe in among the
overhanging bushes, and jumping out.

Three tigers bounded at that moment from the jungle in pursuit of the
deer.  Bunco took rapid aim, but his old flint gun missed fire.
Luckily, Will Osten, having followed his example, was ready.  He fired,
and one of the tigers fell, mortally wounded.  Before he could wriggle
into the jungle Bunco ran up and put a bullet into his brain.

This was a splendid beginning, and the hunters were loud in their
congratulations of each other, while Bunco skinned the tiger.  But the
reader must not suppose that we intend to chronicle every incident of
this kind.  We record this as a specimen of their work during the
