
The calms, although frequent in this latitude, did not last long.  Light
breezes sprang up now and then, and for several days carried our
travellers to the north.  But not fast enough, for the sun still kept
ahead of them.  During this period, they saw great variety of wonderful
scenery, had several small adventures, and enjoyed themselves extremely.

Fred Temple usually began each calm day by jumping out of bed, rushing
upon deck and going over the side, head-foremost into the water.  He was
generally followed by Sam Sorrel; but Sam was inclined to be lazy, and
did not always follow his friend's lead.  Grant never followed it.  He
was inveterately lazy in the morning, although at all other times he was
as active as a mountain goat.

Our Highlander was particularly successful about this time with his gun.
The number of birds that he shot and stuffed was enormous.  Whenever a
calm prevailed, he took the light little Norse boat that had been
purchased at Bergen, and went off to the nearest island with his gun.
On these occasions he was usually accompanied by Sam, whose love for
sketching was quite equal to that of his companion for bird-shooting and
stuffing.  Fred, of course went to keep them company, and was wont to
carry with him a rod, as well as a gun, for he was passionately fond of
fishing.  On these occasions, too, they took Hans Ericsson with them, to
assist in rowing, and to pilot them when they felt inclined to leave the
yacht out of sight behind.

One day they were out on an excursion of this kind, and had rowed
towards the mainland, and up a fiord.  Fred and Sam were reclining in
the stern of the boat; the former smoking a meerschaum pipe, the latter
making a drawing of a range of hills which were so rugged that the tops
appeared like the teeth of a saw.  Grant and Hans were rowing.

"Do you know what o'clock it was when we left the yacht?" inquired Fred.

"What o'clock?" echoed Sam; "no; well, let me see.  We went to bed last
night at five o'clock this morning."

"You mean that we turned in for our _night's rest_ at five this morning,
I suppose," said Temple.

"My dear Fred," retorted Sam, "never mind what I mean; only attend to
what I say.  Don't be too particular.  It's a bad habit being too
particular.  I once had a friend who was too particular in his
attentions to a young lady, and the result was that he was obliged to
marry her."

"Then, Sam," returned Temple, "I should say that the habit of being too
particular is a good one, if it leads to such a good thing as marriage.
But to return to the point, what time of day or night do you think it is
_now_?"

"Have not the least idea," said Sam; "I think it's some time or other in
the evening, but this perpetual daylight confuses me.  You know that
when you and Grant were away last week after the gulls, I went to bed on
Thursday forenoon at ten o'clock by mistake, thinking it was ten at
night.  How I ever came to do it I can't tell, but I suppose that I had
sat so long stuffing that great eagle for Grant that my brains had got
obfuscated.  It was cloudy, too (not unlike what it is just now), so
that I could not see the sun.  Whatever was the cause, there is no doubt
of the fact that I lost a day somehow, and my ideas have got such a
twist that I fear they will never recover it."

"A most unfortunate state of things, truly," said Fred, laughing.
"Perhaps you'll recover when we return to low latitudes.  If not, there
are plenty lunatic asylums.  But we must not spend more than a few hours
longer on this excursion, for I've a notion that we are somewhere about
Saturday just now, and you know it's against our rules to run the risk
of shooting or fishing into Sunday."

"Very true," replied Sam, as he continued his sketch.  "I say, Grant, do
you happen to have your watch with you?"

"Not I," cried Grant from the bow of the boat.  "Since day and night
took to being the same I let it run down.  I have no regard for time
now."

"D'ye know what day it is?"

"No."

"Humph, it's lucky that we can depend upon the Captain for keeping us
right in regard to Sunday.  Well, let's go ashore and try the mouth of
yonder stream.  I'll warrant me there are sea-trout there, perhaps
salmon, and the ground hereabouts seems a likely place for grouse and
ptarmigan.  Pull hard, Hans, thou son of Eric, and shove the boat into
yonder creek."

Hans Ericsson bent his strong back, and a bright smile crossed his
sunburnt face as the head of the boat flew round.

"Hallo, Hans! steady, my lad!" cried Grant, giving his oar a pull that
sent the head of the boat spinning round in the opposite direction.
Then the sturdy Norseman and the stalwart Scot gave a pull together with
all their might, and sent the boat like an arrow into the creek, where,
in a few seconds, her keel grated on the shore.

For several hours after that the three friends were busy with their
favourite pursuits.  Grant soon bagged several brace of grouse.  Fred
caught a basket of splendid sea-trout, some of which were over three
pounds' weight, and a small salmon of about ten pounds; while Sam Sorrel
sat down on a rock and painted an elaborate picture of the scenery.  Of
course their different occupations separated them from each other, but
Hans kept close to Fred's elbow--for he had not only conceived a strong
friendship for the young Englishman, but he was immensely delighted with
fly-fishing, which he had never before witnessed.  The astonishment of
Hans was great when he beheld heavy trout landed by means of a slender
rod and an almost invisible line.  But when Fred hooked the salmon the
excitement of the Norseman knew no bounds.  After nearly half an hour's
playing of the fish, Fred drew it close to the bank, and told Hans to
strike the gaff-hook into it, and lift it out of the water.  Hans in his
excitement missed his aim, and the terrified fish darted away.  But Fred
was prepared for this, and let out line.  Soon he brought his fish once
more to the side, exhausted and rolling over.  Hans made a second
attempt and was successful in landing the silvery salmon on the bank.

When they returned to the schooner after that excursion, Captain McNab
was leaning over the side with a grim smile on his wooden countenance.
Bob Bowie was beside him with a beaming smile on his jolly red face.

"Good-day, Captain," cried Fred, as the boat drew near.  "Well, Bowie,
we're desperately hungry, I hope you've got supper ready for us."

"I've got breakfast, sir," replied the steward.

"Eh? ah! well, call it what you like, only let us have it soon."  (They
clambered up the side.) "Why, Captain, what day is it, and what time of
day?"

"It's Friday mornin', sir, and eight o'clock."

Fred opened his eyes in astonishment.

"Why, then, comrades, it seems that we have been shooting, sketching,
and fishing all night by daylight, and the sun has set and risen again
without our being aware of the fact!  So much for perpetual day and a
cloudy sky.  Come, Bob Bowie, look alive with break--, ah! supper, I
mean, for whatever it may be to you, it is supper to us.  Meanwhile,
I'll have a bathe to refresh me."

So our hardy adventurers bathed that morning, over the side, then they
supped, after which they turned in and slept all day, and rose again at
six o'clock in the evening to breakfast!



CHAPTER SEVEN.

A SUNDAY ON SHORE.

Only once during their voyage along the rugged coast of Norway did our
three friends go to church!  It must not be supposed, however, that
therefore they were heathens.  Far from it.  Fred and his companions
were truly Christian men.  That is to say, they not only called
themselves Christians, but they made it their earnest aim to walk after
the example of Christ, and to exhibit their Christianity by their deeds.
But only once during their trip had they the opportunity of visiting a
church on a Sunday forenoon when service was going on.

It happened to be on a bright calm Sunday.  There was just enough of
wind to urge the _Snowflake_ through the water at the rate of two miles
an hour.  Fred's usual custom was to get to a secure anchorage on
Saturdays, so as to be able to spend the Sabbath as a day of rest.  But
this was not always practicable, because the water was so deep close
inshore that no bottom could be found in many places, and often they
were obliged to continue their voyage on Sunday.  This, however, was a
matter of small importance, because the working of the yacht required so
little attention--especially in fine weather--that it did not interfere
with the services or the rest of the day.  Fred made a point of
assembling the crew and reading the Church of England service every
Sunday forenoon, and a chapter or two from the Bible in the evening.

On the present occasion they were all assembled on the quarterdeck
joining in the morning service.  The breeze was steady, and the
steersman was the only man on duty, but he was not thereby prevented
from attending to what was being read.  The vessel was gliding along
close under a precipice which towered high above the mast, and, at a
short distance ahead, extended out in a bold promontory or headland.
Elsewhere mountainous islands hemmed them in.

When they reached the promontory Fred was reading that beautiful Psalm,
the 95th,--which appeared somewhat appropriate to the occasion.

"O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the
strength of our salvation.

"Let us come before His presence with thanksgiving, and shew ourselves
glad in Him with psalms.

"For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

"In His hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the
hills is His also.

"The sea is His, and He made it: and His hands prepared the dry land.

"O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our
Maker."

Fred happened to look up at the last words, and an exclamation of wonder
broke from him as he pointed towards the shore.  The schooner had just
doubled the towering promontory, and a new scene had been suddenly
opened up to view.

Just beyond the promontory the coast-line took an abrupt bend to the
right, at the end of which was a sequestered little bay, with a beach of
yellow sand, and a cluster of grassy mounds behind, of the brightest
emerald green.  The bay and the green mounds and the strip of yellow
sand were all exceedingly small, and were surrounded by a mass of rugged
rocks of a cold, whitish-grey colour.  Beyond these were the great
purple mountains of the mainland.  Ahead and in front towered the
islands of the coast.  The whole of the surrounding scenery was wild,
rugged, and barren.  This one little spot alone was soft and lovely; it
shone out like a bright jewel from its dark setting.  All round the bay
were clustering cottages, with white walls and red roofs,--some on the
sides of the mounds, others perched on rocks that projected out into the
sea.  On the highest of these mounds stood a church, and in the bay
floated a large Norwegian vessel and numerous small boats.

The promontory round which the _Snowflake_ had just passed completely
sheltered this bay, so that the water was like a sheet of glass, in
which everything--boats, rocks, mounds, cottages, and church--was
clearly reflected.

The church-bell was ringing.  It was a small bell, and its sweet sound
came floating softly over the sea to the ears of our voyagers like an
old familiar hymn.  The interest of this scene was further enhanced by
the assembling of the people to church.  Boats were seen pushing off
from every island, issuing from every creek, rowing over the calm water,
and all converging towards the little bay with the yellow strand.  Each
boat was crowded with men, women, and children; and as the men wore red
caps, and the women white kerchiefs on their heads, their appearance was
quite brilliant.  In other respects, their clothes being all homespun
and of one dark colour, their aspect was sombre enough.  So numerous
were the boats, and so suddenly did they make their appearance, that it
seemed as if the land were being invaded by a foreign host.

All this was taken in at a glance by the yacht party as they doubled the
promontory, and glided slowly into the bay.

"This is our anchorage," said the Captain.

"Very well, let go the anchor, and we will finish the service after it
is down," said Temple, rising and taking up the telescope to examine the
groups of people on shore.

As each boat discharged its load on the little stone pier, the males and
females separated into two distinct bands and walked slowly and sedately
towards the church, at the door of which the whole congregation
assembled, still keeping in two separate bands, to await the arrival of
the clergyman.

In a few minutes the rattle of the chain announced that the anchor was
down.  The sails were dewed up, and service was continued.

"Now," said Fred, when he had concluded, "lower the boat, Captain--I
will go to church.  Will any one of you join me?"

"What's the use of my going?" said Sam Sorrel; "I won't understand a
word."

"You're not sure of that," said Grant.  "Besides it is so long since
we've been to church, that I feel as if I should enjoy it whether I
understand it or not."

"If it don't do you no good, sir, it can't do you no harm," urged Bob
Bowie, who was evidently anxious to get ashore.

"Come along," cried Fred, jumping into the boat, and taking his seat in
the stern-sheets.

He was quickly followed by his companions and by honest Bob, whose
delight in a ramble on shore was only equalled by his love for a voyage
on the sea!

"Ain't it an xtroar'nary church, sir?" said Bob, sidling up to Temple
and touching his hat, as they ascended the green mound on which the
building stood.

"It is, Bob, most remarkable," replied Fred.

To say truth, there could not be two opinions on this point.  The church
was of very peculiar and curious form.  It was more like a number of
dove-cots placed together than anything else; those dove-cots, I mean,
which have sloping roofs, and are frequently seen nailed against the
sides of houses in country places.  Take four such dove-cots and place
them back to back so as to form a sort of square; on the top of these
place three more dove-cots, also back to back; above these set up two
more dove-cots, and one on the top of all, with a short steeple above
it, and a spire with an enormous weathercock on the top of that, and the
building will not be a bad model of a Norwegian church, especially if
you paint the sides white, and the gabled roofs blackish-red.

Inside, this church was found to be exceedingly plain, but very clean.
The pews and galleries and walls were of unpainted fir, and the ceiling
was whitewashed.  The entire building was utterly devoid of ornament,
except round the altar, above which there was a large crucifix and a few
candles, and other things somewhat resembling those used in Roman
Catholic worship.

The service had begun some time before the arrival of our friends.  It
was a Lutheran church, and the ceremonial resembled that of the English
Church in some respects, that of the Roman Catholic in others.

The entrance of so many strangers of course created some sensation, even
although they entered as quietly as possible and sat down on the first
seats they found vacant.  The people seemed to have native politeness in
them.  They could not, indeed, resist the temptation to look round, but
they did it modestly, and only indulged in glances, as if they felt that
it was rude to stare at strangers.

Unfortunately Bob Bowie had not been warned that it is the custom in
Norway for the men to sit together on one side of the church and the
women on the other side, and, being rather a stupid man in some matters,
he did not observe that the door by which he entered led to the women's
pews.  Being by nature a modest man, he cast down his eyes on entering,
and did not again raise them until he found himself seated beside a
Norwegian female in a black gown and a white head-dress, with a baby in
her arms, which also wore a black gown and a white head-dress.  Bob sat
with a solemn look on his bluff visage, and wiped his bald forehead
gently for some time ere he discovered that he was the only male being
in the midst of a crowd of two hundred women and girls and female
infants!

On making this discovery honest Bob's body became exceedingly warm and
his face uncommonly red.  He glanced round uneasily, blew his nose, rose
suddenly, and, putting on his hat with the back to the front, went out
of the church on tip-toe as quietly as possible, and was not again seen,
until, an hour afterwards, he was discovered seated on the sunny side of
a rock near the boat calmly smoking his pipe!

Bob was somewhat ashamed of this little adventure, and did not like to
