compressed, as if he were trying to keep back the words which were ready
to rush out.  When he spoke, the soft tones of a deep bass voice helped
to secure attention, so that you could have heard a pin drop.

At once the lame man launched into a most thrilling description of a
scene of peril and rescue.  He told of a gallant ship battling with a
furious gale: of her striking on a shoal: of the masts going over the
side: of wreck and ruin all around, and the wild waves bursting over
passengers and crew, and gradually breaking up the ship--"No hope--no
hope--only cries for mercy--shrieks of despair!"

As the lame man spoke, his eyes seemed to flash.  His cheeks were no
longer pale.  The rough men before him frowned and gazed as if their
anxiety had been roused.  The women leaned forward with eager looks of
sympathy.  Even the children were spellbound.  One hulking fellow, with
a broken nose and a black eye, sat clutching both knees with his
muscular hands, and gazed open-mouthed and motionless at the speaker,
who went on to say that when things were at their worst, and death
stared the perishing people in the face, a beautiful object seemed
suddenly to rise out of the raging sea; its colour was a mixture of pure
white and bright blue!

It was the lifeboat, which sheered alongside and took them on board one
by one.

"Some there were," said the lame man impressively, "who hung back, and
some who at first did not believe in the lifeboat, and _refused_ to
leave the doomed ship.  There was _no hope_ for those who refused--none
whatever; but they gave in at last.  God put it into their hearts to
_trust_ the lifeboat, and so the whole were rescued and brought in
safety to the land."

"Well done!" burst from the hulking man with the broken nose, and a deep
sigh of relief escaped from many of the women; but there was instant
silence again, for the speaker's hand was up, his eyes were glittering,
and his lips compressed.  Every one knew that more was coming, and they
bent forward.

Then, in a low soft voice, he began to tell of a dark but quiet night,
and a slumbering city; of a little spark, which like sin in a child, was
scarcely visible at first, but soon grew fierce and spread, until it
burst out in all the fury of an unquenchable fire.  He told of the
alarm, the shouts of "_Fire_!" the rushing to the rescue, and the
arrival of the engines and the fire-escape.  Then he described the
horror of a young woman in the burning house, who, awaking almost too
late, found herself on the very edge of destruction, with the black
smoke circling round and the impassable gulf of flame below.  Just then
the head of the fire-escape approached her, and a man with extended arms
was seen a few feet below her, calling out, "Come!"

Like some of those in the shipwreck, she did not at first believe in the
fire-escape.  She could not _trust_.  She _would not_ leap.  While in
that condition there was no hope for her, but God put it into her heart
to trust.  She leaped, and was saved!

The speaker stopped.  Again there was a sigh of relief and a tendency to
cheer on the part of the hulking man, but once more the sparkling eyes
and compressed lips riveted the people and tied their tongues.  In
another moment the missionary had them on a battlefield, which he
described with thrilling power, passing rapidly from the first bugle
call through all the fight, until the foe was finally put to flight amid
the shouts of "Victory!"

"Men and women," he said in conclusion, "I am painting no fancy
pictures.  The things I have told to you did really happen, and four
dear brothers of my own were chief actors in the scenes described.  They
helped to rescue the perishing from the sea and from the fire, and
joined in the shout of Victory! on the battlefield.  Now, friends, you
are in a worse case than any I have yet described.  The tempest of sin
is roaring round and in you.  This world is sinking beneath you, but
Jesus Christ, our Lifeboat, is alongside.  Will you come?  The fire is
burning under your very feet; there is no deliverance from the flames of
God's wrath, except by the Great Escape.  Jesus is at hand to save.
Will you come?  The battle is raging.  Don't you _know_ it?  Do you
forget that awful combat with the tempter when you fought your way past
the gin-shop, but were beaten and turned back?  Or that terrible
assault, when passion after a deadly struggle laid you helpless on your
back?  Oh! may God's Holy Spirit open your eyes to see Jesus--the
Captain of your Salvation--at your elbow this moment, waiting at the
door of your heart and knocking till you will open and let Him in to
lead you on to--Victory!"

Here the speaker dropped his voice again, and spoke tenderly of the love
of Jesus to the chief of sinners, and as he spoke, tears were seen
trickling down many a dirty face, and sobs broke the solemn stillness.

As the lame man was going home that night, a young girl ran after him
and seized his arm.  Her eyes were swollen with weeping.

"Oh, sir," she cried in a low voice that trembled with emotion, "can--
will--Jesus save the like of me?"

"Assuredly, my poor girl.  He says `Come unto me,' and `Whosoever
_will_,' let him come.  If _you_ are willing, there is no doubt about
_His_ willingness.  The difficulty only lies with you, not with Him.
Where do you live?"

"I have no home," sobbed the girl; "I have run away from my home, and
have no place to lay my head in here.  But oh! sir, I want to be saved!"

The lame man looked with the deepest commiseration into the appealing
eyes.  "Come," he said, "walk with me.  I will tell you of One who had
no place where to lay His head."

She took his arm without a word, and the two hurried through the still
crowded streets.  Arrived at his own door, the lame man knocked.  It was
opened by a fair, soft, and exceedingly pretty little woman of about
thirty years of age, whose fresh face was the very personification of
goodness.

"Why, Jim!" she exclaimed, looking at the girl in surprise.

"Here we are, Molly," exclaimed the lame man, bustling into a snug room
in which a fire was blazing, and cheering preparations for tea were
going on, "and I've brought a friend to spend the night with us.
There's plenty of room on your floor for a shake-down, eh?  This is my
sister," he added turning to the girl, "Mary Thorogood, but we always
call her Molly.  She has come to visit me this Christmas--much against
her will, I believe, she's so fond of the old folk at home.  Come now,
take her into your room, Molly; make her comfortable, and then we'll
have tea."

Molly took the girl into her room.  Returning a moment later for
something forgotten, she was touched on the shoulder by her brother, who
whispered low in her ear:--

"A brand, Molly dear, plucked from the burning."

Molly turned her eyes upon her brother with a glad smile as she
re-entered her little room, and shut the door.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

Twelve months passed away, and Christmas came again, with its frost and
snow and sunshine--its blazing fires, its good cheer, and its merry
greetings.

Many a Christmastide had now passed over the head of our blacksmith,
John Thorogood, and his excellent wife Mary, but Time had touched them
lightly in its flight.  They both looked young and hale, and full of
vigour.  The only difference in them was a wrinkle or two at the corners
of the eyes, and a few grey hairs mingling with the brown.  Perhaps John
was a little more corpulent than when he was a youth; but he could wield
the fore-hammer as easily and powerfully as ever.

A cloud, however, had been gathering over their happy home during the
past year.  Molly--the sweet active girl who had never known a day's
illness from her childhood--had fallen into bad health.  Her step had
lost its spring, but her cheerful spirit was unsubdued.

"You're better to-day, Molly darling?" asked the smith, in a tone which
showed he was not sure of the answer.

"Yes, father, much better."  Molly did not use endearing terms, but the
sweetness of her looks and voice rendered such needless.

She was pale and thin, and could not check the touch of sadness in her
tones.

"Fred is sure to come, darling," said Mrs Thorogood, stopping in her
preparations for supper to smooth her daughter's fair head.

"Oh yes, mother, I know that Fred is sure to come," returned Molly, with
a laugh and a little blush.  "No fear of _him_.  I was not thinking of
him, but of Jim.  It is the first Christmas we shall have spent without
him.  Dear Jim!  I wonder what company he will have to spend it with him
in the backwoods."

"Whatever company it may be," returned the mother, "they'll only have
his body and mind--his spirit will be here."

"Well said, old Moll; we shall have the best part of him to-night in
spite of the Atlantic Ocean," cried the blacksmith, who was seated on a
stool making fun with the terrier, the cat, and the kitten--not the
original animals, of course, but the lineal descendants of those which
were introduced at the beginning of our tale.

"I hope they won't be late," remarked Mrs Thorogood, looking with some
anxiety into a big pot which rested on the roaring fire.

"The boys are never late, Moll," remarked the smith, giving the cat a
sly poke on the nose, which it resented with a fuff, causing the terrier
to turn its head on one side inquiringly.

As he spoke the front door opened, and feet were heard in the passage
stamping off the snow.

"There they are!" exclaimed old Moll, slipping the lid on the big pot,
and wiping her hands hastily.

"No, it is too soon for them yet; they're always sharp to time.  It is
Fred," said Molly with a quiet smile.

She was right.  Fred Harper, a fine strapping young fellow--a
carpenter--had met Molly in London, and got engaged to her.  She offered
to let him off when she became ill and delicate, but he would not be let
off.  "Molly," this enthusiast had said, "if you were to become so thin
that all your flesh were to disappear, I'd be proud to marry your
skeleton!"

Fred sat down by her side, but had scarcely begun to make earnest
inquiries after her health, when the outer door again opened, and
another stamping of feet was heard in the passage.  It was a tremendous
stamping, and accompanied with strong, loud, manly voices.

"No mistake now!" said the smith, rising and opening the door, when in
walked four such men as any father and mother might be proud of.  It was
not that they were big--plenty of blockheads are big: nor was it that
they were handsome--plenty of nincompoops are well-favoured; but,
besides being tall, and strong, and handsome, they were free, and
hearty, and sensible, and wise--even in their joviality--and so
thorough-going in word, sentiment, and act, that it was quite a pleasure
merely to sit still and watch them, and listen.

"I told 'ee they'd come in their togs, old woman," said the smith, as
his son Tom appeared, dusting the snow from his Coastguard uniform, on
the breast of which was displayed the gold medal of the Royal National
Lifeboat Institution.

"You might be sure of that, mother, seeing that we had promised," said
Dick, the blithe and hearty man-of-war's man, as he printed a kiss on
his mother's cheek that might have been heard, as he truly said, "from
the main truck to the keelson."  At the same time bushy-browed Harry,
with the blue coat and brass epaulettes of the fire-brigade, was paying
a similar tribute of affection to his sister, while fiery Bob,--the old
uniform on his back and the Victoria Cross on his breast,--seized his
father's hand in both of his with a grip that quite satisfied that son
of Vulcan, despite the absence of two of the fingers.

They were all deep-chested, strong-voiced men in the prime of life; and
what a noise they did make, to be sure!

"You're not too soon, boys," said the smith; "old Moll has been quite
anxious about a mysterious _something_ in the big pot there."

"Let me help you to take it off the fire, mother," said the gallant tar,
stepping forward.

"Nay, that's my duty," cried Harry, leaping to the front, and seizing
the pot, which he dragged from the flames with professional ability.

When the _something_ was displayed, it was found to be a gorgeous
meat-pudding of the most tempting character--round and heavy like a
cannon-ball.  Of course it did not flourish alone.  Old Moll had been
mysteriously engaged the greater part of that day over the fire, and the
result was a feast worthy, as her husband said, "of the King of the
Cannibal Islands."

"Talking of Cannibal Islands," said Dick, the sailor, during a pause in
the feast, "you've no idea what a glorious place that Pacific Ocean is,
with its coral islands, palm-groves, and sunshine.  It would be just the
place to make you well again, Molly.  You'd grow fat in a month."

"Ha; get fat, would she," growled Bob, the soldier, "so as to be ready
for the first nigger-chief that took a fancy to have her cooked for
supper--eh?  Never fear, Molly, we won't let you go to the Cannibal
Islands.  Give us another cut o' that cannon-ball, mother.  It's better
eating than those I've been used to see skipping over the battlefield."

"But they're not _all_ Cannibal Islands, man," returned Dick; "why,
wherever the missionaries go, there the niggers get to be as
well-behaved as you are.  D'you know, Molly, I've really been thinking
of cutting the service, and emigrating somewhere, if you and Fred would
go with me."

"It would be charming!" replied Molly, with a sweet though languid
smile.  "We'd live in a wooden hut, roofed with palm-leaves, and while
you and Fred were away hunting for dinner, I would milk the buffaloes,
and boil the cocoa-nuts!"

"Ah, Molly," said Tom, the Coastguardsman, stroking his bushy beard,
"the same idea has been running in my head, as well as in Dick's, ever
since we got that letter from Jim, telling us of the beauty of his new
home, and urging us all to emigrate.  I've more than half a mind to join
him out there, if you and the old folk will consent to go."

"You're not serious, are you, Tom?" asked Harry, the fireman, laying
down his knife and fork.

"Indeed I am."

"Well, you might do worse.  I would join you myself, if there were only
houses enough to insure a fire or two every month."

