
Gascoyne turned on his heel, and the man slunk into the boat with an
aspect very unlike that of a bold British seaman.

"Here is another man I want," said Montague, laying his hand on the
shoulder of John Bumpus.

"I trust, sir, that you will not take that man," said Gascoyne
earnestly.  "I cannot afford to lose him; I would rather you should take
any three of the others."

"Your liberality leads me to think that you could without much
difficulty supply the place of the men I take--but three are too many.
I shall be satisfied with this one.  Go into the boat, my lad."

Poor John Bumpus, whose heart had been captivated by the beauties of the
island, obeyed the order with a rueful countenance; and Gascoyne bit his
lip and turned aside to conceal his anger.  In two minutes more the boat
rowed away from the schooner's side.

Not a word was spoken by any one in the boat until a mile had separated
it from the schooner.  They had just turned a point which shut the
vessel out of view, when surly Dick suddenly recovered his
self-possession and his tongue, and, starting up in an excited manner,
exclaimed to Montague--

"The schooner you have just left, sir, is a pirate.  I tell the truth,
though I should swing for it."

The crew of the boat ceased rowing, and glanced at each other in
surprise on hearing this.

"Ha! say you so," exclaimed Montague, quickly.

"It's a fact, sir; ask my comrade there, and he'll tell you the same
thing."

"He'll do nothin' o' the sort," sharply returned honest Bumpus, who,
having been only a short time previously engaged by Gascoyne, could
perceive neither pleasure nor justice in the idea of being hanged for a
pirate, and who attributed Dick's speech to an ill-natured desire to get
his late commander into trouble.

"Which of you am I to believe?" said Montague, hastily.

"W'ich ever you please," observed Bumpus, with an air of indifference.

"It's no business o' mine," said Dick, sulkily; "if you choose to let
the blackguard escape, that's your own look out."

"Silence, you scoundrel," cried Montague, who was as much nettled by a
feeling of uncertainty how to act as by the impertinence of the man.

Before he could decide as to the course he ought to pursue, the report
of one of the guns of his own vessel boomed loud and distinct in the
distance.  It was almost immediately followed by another.

"Ha! that settles the question; give way, my lads, give way."

In another moment the boat was cleaving her way swiftly through the dark
water in the direction of the _Talisman_.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

MASTER CORRIE CAUGHT NAPPING--SNAKES IN THE GRASS.

The Sabbath morning which succeeded the events we have just narrated
dawned on the settlement of Sandy Cove in unclouded splendour, and the
deep repose of nature was still unbroken by the angry passions and the
violent strife of man, although from the active preparations of the
previous night it might have been expected that those who dwelt on the
island would not have an opportunity of enjoying the rest of that day.

Everything in and about the settlement was eminently suggestive of
peace.  The cattle lay sleepily in the shade of the trees; the sea was
still calm like glass.  Men had ceased from their daily toil; and the
only sounds that broke the quiet of the morning were the chattering of
the parrots and other birds in the cocoanut groves; and the cries of
seafowl, as they circled in the air, or dropt on the surface of the sea
in quest of fish.

The British frigate lay at anchor in the same place which she had
hitherto occupied, and the _Foam_ still floated in the sequestered bay
on the other side of the island.  In neither vessel was there the
slightest symptom of preparation; and to one who knew not the true state
of matters, the idea of war being about to break forth was the last that
would have occurred.

But this deceitful quiet was only the calm that precedes the storm.  On
every hand men were busily engaged in making preparation to break that
Sabbath day in the most frightful manner, or were calmly, but
resolutely, awaiting attack.  On board the ship-of-war, indeed, there
was little doing, for, her business being to fight, she was always in a
state of readiness for action.  Her signal guns, fired the previous
night, had recalled Montague to tell him of the threatened attack by the
savages.  A few brief orders were given, and they were prepared for
whatever might occur.  In the village, too, the arrangements to repel
attack having been made, white men and native converts alike rested with
their arms placed in convenient proximity to their hands.

In a wild and densely-wooded part of the island, far removed from those
portions which we have yet had occasion to describe, a band of
fiendish-looking men were making arrangements for one of those
unprovoked assaults which savages are so prone to make on those who
settle near them.

They were all of them in a state of almost complete nudity, but the
complicated tattooing on their dark skins gave them the appearance of
being more clothed than they really were.  Their arms consisted chiefly
of enormous clubs of hardwood, spears, and bows; and, in order to
facilitate their escape should they chance to be grasped in a
hand-to-hand conflict, they had covered their bodies with oil, which
glistened in the sunshine as they moved about their village.

Conspicuous among these truly savage warriors was the form of Keona,
with his right arm bound up in a sort of sling.  Pain and disappointed
revenge had rendered this man's face more than usually diabolical as he
went about among his fellows, inciting them to revenge the insult and
injury done to them through his person by the whites.  There was some
reluctance, however, on the part of a few of the chiefs to renew a war
that had been terminated, or rather, been slumbering, only for a few
months.

Keona's influence, too, was not great among his kindred, and had it not
been that one or two influential chiefs sided with him, his own efforts
to relight the still smoking torch of war would have been unavailing.

As it was, the natives soon worked themselves up into a sufficiently
excited state to engage in any desperate expedition.  It was while all
this was doing in the native camp, that Keona, having gone to the
nearest mountain top to observe what was going on in the settlement, had
fallen in with and been chased by some of those men belonging to the
_Foam_, who had been sent on shore to escape being pressed into the
service of the king of England.

The solitary exception to this general state of preparation for war was
the household of Frederick Mason.  Having taken such precautionary steps
the night before as he deemed expedient, and having consulted with Ole
Thorwald, the general commanding, who had posted scouts in all the
mountain passes, and had seen the war-canoes drawn up in a row on the
strand, the pastor retired to his study and spent the greater part of
the night in preparing to preach the gospel of peace on the morrow, and
in committing the care of his flock and his household to Him who is the
"God of battles" as well as the "Prince of peace."

It is not to be supposed that Mr Mason contemplated the probable
renewal of hostilities without great anxiety.  For himself, we need
scarcely say, he had no fears, but his heart sank when he thought of his
gentle Alice falling into the hands of savages.  As the night passed
away without any alarms, his anxiety began to subside, and when Sunday
morning dawned, he lay down on a couch to snatch a few hours' repose
before the labours of the day began.

The first object that greeted the pastor's eyes on awaking in the
morning was a black visage, and a pair of glittering eyes gazing at him
through the half open door with an expression of the utmost
astonishment.

He leaped up with lightning, speed and darted towards the intruder, but
checked himself suddenly and smiled, as poor Poopy uttered a scream,
and, falling on her knees, implored for mercy.

"My poor girl, I fear I have frightened you by my violence," said he,
sitting down on his couch and yawning sleepily; "but I was dreaming,
Poopy; and when I saw your black face peeping at me, I took you at first
for one of the wild fellows on the other side of the mountains.  You
have come to sweep and arrange my study, I suppose."

"Why, mass'r, you no hab go to bed yet," said Poopy, still feeling and
expressing surprise at her master's unwonted irregularity.  "Is you
ill?"

"Not at all, my good girl, only a little tired.  It is not a time for me
to take much rest when the savages are said to be about to attack us."

"When is they coming?" inquired the girl, meekly.  The pastor smiled as
he replied,--"That is best known to themselves, Poopy.  Do you think it
likely that murderers or thieves would send to let us know when they
were coming?"

"Hee! hee!" laughed Poopy, with an immense display of teeth and gums.

"Is Alice awake?" inquired Mr Mason.

"No, her be sound 'sleep wid her two eye shut tight up, dis fashion, and
her mout' wide open--so."

The representations of Alice's condition, as given by her maid, although
hideously unlike the beautiful object they were meant to call up to the
father's mind, were sufficiently expressive and comprehensible.

"Go wake her, my girl, and let us have breakfast as soon as you can.
Has Will Corrie been here this morning?"

"Hims bin here all night," replied the girl, with a broad grin--(and the
breadth of Poopy's _broad_ grin was almost appalling!)

"What mean you? has he slept in this house all night?"

"Yes--eh! no," said Poopy.

"Yes, no," exclaimed Mr Mason.  "Come, Poopy, don't be stupid, explain
yourself."

"Hee! hee! hee! yes, ho! ho!" laughed Poopy, as if the idea of
explaining herself was about the richest joke she had listened to since
she was born.  "Hee! hee! me no can 'splain, but you com here and see."

So saying, she conducted her wondering master to the front door of the
cottage, where, across the threshold, directly under the porch, lay the
form of the redoubted Corrie, fast asleep, and armed to the teeth!

In order to explain the cause of this remarkable apparition, we think it
justifiable to state to the reader, in confidence, that young Master
Corrie was deeply in love with the fair Alice.  With all his reckless
drollery of disposition, the boy was intensely romantic and
enthusiastic; and, feeling that the unsettled condition of the times
endangered the welfare of his lady-love, he resolved, like a true
knight, to arm himself and guard the threshold of her door with his own
body.

In the deep silence of the night he buckled on a sabre, the blade of
which, by reason of its having been broken, was barely eight inches
long, and the hilt whereof was battered and rusty.  He also stuck a huge
brass-mounted cavalry pistol in his belt, in the virtue of which he had
great faith, having only two days before shot with it a green-headed
parrot at a distance of two yards.  The distance was not great, to be
sure, but it was enough for his purpose--intending, as he did, to meet
his foe, when the moment of action should come, in close conflict, and
thrust the muzzle of his weapon down the said foe's throat before
condescending to draw the trigger.

Thus prepared for the worst, he sallied out on tiptoe, intending to
mount guard at the missionary's door, and return to his own proper couch
before the break of day.

But alas for poor Corrie's powers of endurance! no sooner had he
extended his chubby form on the door-mat, earnestly wishing, but not
expecting, that Alice would come out and find him there, than he fell
fast asleep, while engaged in the hopeless task of counting the starry
host--a duty which he had imposed on himself in the hope that he might
thereby be kept awake.  Once asleep he slept on, as a matter of course,
with his broad little chest heaving gently; his round little visage
beaming upwards like a terrestrial moon; his left arm under his head in
lieu of a pillow, (by consequence of which _it_ was fast asleep also,)
and his right hand grasping the hilt of the broken sabre.

As for Corrie's prostrate body affording protection to Alice--the entire
savage population might have stepped across it, one by one, and might
have stepped back again, bearing away into slavery the fair maiden, with
her father and all the household furniture to boot, without in the least
disturbing the deep slumbers of the youthful knight.  At least we may
safely come to this conclusion from the fact that Mr Mason shook him,
first gently and then violently, for full five minutes before he could
get him to speak; and even then he only gave utterance, in very sleepy
tones, and half-formed words, to the remark--

"Oh! don' borer me.  It aint b'kfust-t'm' yet?"

"Ho!  Corrie, Corrie," shouted Mr Mason, giving the victim a shake that
threatened to dislocate his neck, "get up, my boy--rouse up!"

"Hallo! hy! murder!  Come on you vill--eh!  Mr Mason--I beg pardon,
sir," stammered Corrie, as he at length became aware of his condition,
and blushed deeply; "I--I really, Mr Mason, I merely came to watch
while you were all asleep, as there are savages about, you know--and ha!
ha! ha!--oh! dear me!"  (Corrie exploded at this point, unable to
contain himself at the sight of the missionary's gaze of astonishment,)
"Wot a sight for a Sunday mornin' too!"

The hilarity of the boy was catching, for at this point a vociferous
"hee! hee!" burst from the sable Poopy; the clear laugh of Alice, too,
came ringing through the passage, and Mr Mason himself finally joined
in the chorus.

"Come, sir knight," exclaimed the latter, on recovering his gravity,
"this is no guise for a respectable man to be seen in on Sunday morning;
come in and lay down your arms.  You have done very well as a soldier
for this occasion; let us see if you can do your duty equally well as a
church-officer.  Have you the keys."

"No, they are at home."

"Then run and get them, my boy, and leave your pistol behind you.  I
dare say the savages won't attack during the daytime."

Corrie did as he was desired, and the pastor went, after breakfast, to
spend a short time with Alice on a neighbouring eminence, from which
could be obtained a fine view of the settlement, with its little church
and the calm bay on which floated the frigate, sheltered by the
encircling coral reef from the swell of the ocean.

Here it was Mr Mason's wont to saunter with Alice every Sunday morning,
to read a chapter of the Bible together, and converse about that happy
land where one so dear to both of them now dwelt with their Saviour.
Here, also, the child's maid was sometimes privileged to join them.  On
this particular morning, however, they were not the only spectators of
the beautiful view from that hill, for, closely hidden in the bushes--
not fifty yards from the spot where they sat--lay a band of armed
savages who had escaped the vigilance of the scouts, and had come by an
unguarded pass to the settlement.

They might easily have slain or secured the missionary and his household
without alarming the people in the village, but their plan of attack
forbade such a premature proceeding.  The trio therefore finished their
chapter and their morning prayer undisturbed, little dreaming of the
number of glittering eyes that watched their proceedings.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A SURPRISE--A BATTLE AND A FIRE.

The sound of the Sabbath bell fell sweetly on the pastor's ear as he
descended to his dwelling to make a few final preparations for the
duties of the day, and from every hut in Sandy Cove trooped forth the
native Christians--young and old--to assemble in the house of God.

With great labour and much pains had this church been built, and pastor
and people alike were not a little proud of their handiwork.  The former
had drawn the plans and given the measurements, leaving it to Henry
Stuart to see them properly carried out in detail, while the latter did
the work.  They cut and squared the timbers, gathered the coral, burnt
it for lime and plastered the building.  The women and children carried
the lime from the beach in baskets, and the men dragged the heavy logs
from the mountains--in some cases for several miles--the timber in the
immediate neighbourhood not being sufficiently large for their purpose.

The poor natives worked with heart and soul--for love, and the desire to
please and to be pleased, had been awakened within them.  Besides this,
the work had for them all the zest of novelty.  They wrought at it with
somewhat of the feelings of children at play,--pausing frequently in the
midst of their toil to gaze in wonder and admiration at the growing
edifice, which would have done no little credit to a professional
architect and to more skilled workmen.

The white men of the place also lent a willing hand; for although some
of them were bad men, yet they were constrained to respect the
consistent character and blameless life of the missionary, who not
unfrequently experienced the fulfilment of that word:

"When a man's ways please the Lord, he maketh even his enemies to be at
peace with him."  Besides this, all of them, however unwilling they
might be to accept Christianity for themselves, were fully alive to the
advantages they derived from its introduction among the natives.

With so many willing hands at work, the little church was soon finished;
and, at the time when the events we are describing occurred, there was
nothing to be done to it except some trifling arrangements connected
with the steeple, and the glazing of the windows.  This latter piece of
work was, in such a climate, of little importance.

Long before the bell had ceased to toll, the church was full of natives,
whose dark, eager faces were turned towards the door, in expectation of
the appearance of their pastor.  The building was so full, that many of
the people were content to cluster round the door, or the outside of the
unglazed windows.  On this particular Sunday, there were strangers
there, who roused the curiosity and attracted the attention of the
congregation.  Before Mr Mason arrived, there was a slight bustle at
the door as Captain Montague, with several of his officers and men,
entered, and were shewn to the missionary's seat by Master Corrie, who,
with his round visage elongated as much as possible, and his round eyes
expressing a look of inhuman solemnity, in consequence of his attempt to
affect a virtue which he did not possess, performed the duties of
door-keeper.  Montague had come on shore to ascertain from Mr Mason
what likelihood there was of an early attack by the natives.

"Where's Alice," whispered the boy to Poopy, as the girl entered the
church, and seated herself beside a little midshipman, who looked at her
with a mingled expression of disgust and contempt, and edged away.

"Got a little headache, hee! hee!"

"Don't laugh in church, you monster," said Corrie, with a frown.

"I'se not larfin," retorted Poopy, with an injured look.

Just then the boy caught sight of a gigantic figure entering the church,
and darted away to usher the stranger into the pastor's seat; but
