the port of Hermoso, at the west end of San Domingo.  Here he remained
several days, and then, after touching at some small islands off Jamaica
swept by the current, he reached a group near the coast of Honduras, one
of which he called the Isla de Pinos, now known as Guanaja, or Bonacca.

The Adelantado, on landing on its beautiful and fertile shore, saw an
immense canoe approaching, eight feet wide, and of great length, though
formed of the trunk of a single tree.  Under a canopy of palm-leaves sat
a cacique, with his wives and children, rowed by twenty-five Indians.

The canoe was filled with all kinds of articles of manufacture and
natural production.  The Indians, without fear, came alongside the
Admiral's caravel.  He was delighted to obtain, without trouble,
specimens of so many important articles of this part of the New World.
Among them were hatchets formed of copper, wooden swords with channels
on each side of the blade, in which sharp flints were firmly fixed by
cords formed of the intestines of fishes, such as were afterwards found
among the Mexicans.  There were bells and other articles of copper, and
clay utensils; cotton shirts worked, and dyed with various colours;
great quantities of cacao, a fruit as yet unknown to the Spaniards, and
a beverage resembling beer, extracted from Indian corn.  Their
provisions consisted of maize bread, and roots of various kinds.  Many
of the articles they willingly exchanged for European trinkets.  The
women were wrapped in mantles like the female Moors of Grenada, and the
men had cloths of cotton round their loins.  From their being clothed,
and from the superiority of their manufactures, the Admiral believed
that he was approaching more civilised nations.

The natives stated that they had just arrived from a rich cultivated
country, with the wealth and magnificence of which they endeavoured to
impress him.  His mind, however, being bent on the discovery of the
strait, and believing that he could easily visit them at some future
period, he determined to seek the mainland, and keep steadily on until
he reached the opening between it and Paria.

Had he followed the advice of his visitors he might have discovered
Mexico, and even the Southern Ocean might have been disclosed to him.
He was encouraged to persist in the course he had designed by hearing
from an old man, whom he had detained as pilot, that there were many
places farther on abounding in gold.

Reaching the mainland on Sunday, the 14th of August, he and his
officers, and many of the men, landed, and Mass was performed under the
trees.  On the 17th the Adelantado went ashore near the mouth of a
river, and took possession of the country in the name of their Catholic
Majesties.  At this place upwards of a hundred Indians appeared, laden
with bread, maize, fish, fowl, vegetables, and fruits.

These they laid down as presents, and then, without speaking a word,
drew back.  The Adelantado distributed among them various trinkets,
which so pleased them that they came with still more abundant supplies.
These natives had higher foreheads than those of the islands.  Some were
entirely naked and had their bodies tatooed, some wore coverings about
the loins, and others short cotton jerkins without sleeves.  The
chieftains had coats of white or coloured cotton.  The Indian guide
asserted that some of them were cannibals.

Day after day, exposed to storms, drenching rains, and currents,
Columbus made his way along the coast of Honduras, often gaining only a
league or two in the day.  Though suffering from gout, he still attended
to his duty, having had a small cabin fitted on deck from which he could
keep a look-out.  Often he was so ill that he thought his end was
approaching.

At length, after two months of continued gales, fine weather returned,
and he doubled the Cape, to which he gave the name of Gracias a Dios, or
Thanks to God.  He next sailed along what is now called the Mosquito
shore, seeing many rivers in which grew enormous reeds, abounding with
fish, alligators, and turtles.

While the squadron was anchored near a river and the boats were on shore
to obtain wood and water, a bore, or swell of the sea, occurred, by
which one of them was swallowed up, and all on board perished.  The
name, therefore, of El Rio del Desastro was given to the river.

The next place at which the ships dropped anchor was between a beautiful
island, which Columbus called La Huerta, or The Garden, and the
mainland, where some way up was a native village named Cariari.  The
inhabitants, seeing the ships, quickly gathered on the shore, prepared
to defend their country; but when the Spaniards made no attempt to land,
their hostility ceased, and, waving their mantles, they invited the
strangers on shore.  Swimming off, they brought mantles of cotton and
ornaments of guanin.

The Admiral, though he made them presents, would take nothing in
exchange, and the savages, supposing that their proffered gifts were
despised, retaliated, pretending indifference to the things offered
them, and, on returning on shore, tied all the European articles up and
left them on the beach.

The following day, while a boat cautiously approached the shore to
procure water, a venerable-looking Indian appeared, bearing a white
banner on the end of a staff, and leading a girl of fourteen, and
another of about eight years of age.  These he made signs were to be
detained as hostages while the Spaniards were on shore.  They were taken
on board, and being kept under the care of the Admiral, were clothed and
adorned with various ornaments, and on the following morning were
restored to their friends, who appeared grateful for the kind way in
which they had been treated, but returned all the presents they had
received.

On the Adelantado approaching the beach, two of the principal natives,
wading into the water, carried him ashore in their arms.  Wishing to
collect information, he ordered the notary of the squadron to write down
their replies; but no sooner did they see the pen, ink, and paper than,
supposing he was working some necromantic spell, they fled in terror.
After some time they returned, scattering a fragrant powder in the air,
intended, apparently, to counteract it.  The Spaniards, equally
ignorant, also fancied that the Indians were performing some magic rite;
indeed, Columbus asserts that they believed all the hardships and foul
winds they had experienced on the coast were owing to the witchcraft of
the natives.

On leaving this place, Columbus carried off two of the natives, to serve
as guides, promising that he would restore them, with ample
remuneration, on his return.

The squadron then sailed along the coast now known as Costa Rica, and
anchored in a large bay, full of islands, called Caribaro, the
neighbourhood of which, the natives of Cariari had asserted, abounded
with gold.  The islands were covered with groves, which sent forth the
fragrance of fruits and flowers; and so deep and narrow were the
channels, that the spars of the vessels, as they passed on, brushed the
overhanging branches.  The natives were at first afraid, but, encouraged
by the guides, advanced with confidence.  They wore numerous ornaments
of pure gold, and one of them exchanged a plate of gold, valued at ten
ducats, for three hawks' bells.

The country on the mainland was hilly, the villages perched on the
heights.  As the boats proceeded to the bottom of the bay, they met ten
canoes, the Indians in which had their heads decorated with garlands of
flowers, and coronets formed of the claws of beasts and the quills of
birds, while most of them wore plates of gold about their necks.
Although they refused to part with the gold, they told the Spaniards it
was to be had in abundance within the distance of two days' journey,
mentioning, among other places, Veragua.

Columbus, eager to discover the strait, cared, at this time, very little
for the gold, and sailing along the coast, now known as that of Veragua,
came off the mouth of a large river.  Here the natives rushed into the
water, brandishing their weapons; but were quickly pacified, and
bartered away seventeen plates of gold, worth one hundred and fifty
ducats, for a few toys.

When the Spaniards next day went on shore, the natives exhibited a
hostile disposition, but a bolt from a crossbow wounding one of them,
and a cannon being fired, they fled with terror; and on being pursued,
threw down their weapons, and, gentle as lambs, brought three plates of
gold, meekly receiving the articles given in exchange.  A similar scene
was enacted at the next place, and nineteen plates of pure gold were
obtained.  Here, for the first time, Columbus met with signs of solid
architecture, which he believed indicated his approach to civilised
lands.  As he ran along the coast, but was unable to land on account of
the heavy sea, the guides pointed out numerous towns where gold
abounded, one of them being Veragua, where they said the plates of gold
were fabricated, and near which were the rich mines.

Soon after this he arrived opposite a village, where he was told the
country of gold terminated, but still believing that he should discover
a strait, he pushed on.  He understood from the Indians that there was a
magnificent country called Ciguare, situated at about ten days' journey
to the west, where the people wore crowns and bracelets and necklets of
gold, and used it for all domestic purposes; that they were armed like
the Spaniards, with swords, bucklers, and cuirasses.  He also fancied
they said that the sea continued round to Ciguare, and that ten days
beyond it was the Ganges.  Probably they were describing Mexico or Peru.

The country was everywhere beautiful and fertile in the extreme.  On the
2nd of November the squadron anchored in a commodious harbour, to which
Columbus gave the name of Puerto Bello, which it still retains.  They
were delayed here ten days by heavy rains and stormy weather, but the
painted natives brought off provisions, though few had ornaments of
gold.

Again sailing eastward, they passed the point now known as Nombre de
Dios, but being driven back, anchored in a harbour, which, from the
large fields of Indian corn, fruits, and vegetables, was called the Port
of Provision.  They here remained until the 23rd, endeavouring to repair
their vessels, which were fearfully pierced by the teredo.  Misled by
the seamen, always eager to get on shore, who went to sound it, he
entered a small harbour, which he called The Cabinet.  It was infested
with alligators, which filled the air with a musky odour.

The natives gathered in large numbers, and at first treated their
visitors with hospitality; but the rough seamen soon committed excesses
which aroused their hosts to vengeance.  In a short time the natives
were seen approaching to attack the vessels.  Not until some shotted
guns were fired among them did they take to flight.

The seamen now began to murmur at the continuance of the tempestuous
weather, declaring that the looked-for straits would never be found.
Columbus might have begun to suspect the same, and, to the great joy of
his men, he expressed his intention of relinquishing his search for the
present.  Sailing on the 5th of December from the Cabinet, he steered in
search of the gold-mines of Veragua.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

LAST VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS, CONCLUDED--A.D. 1503-6.

The squadron encounters fearful storms--Returns to Veragua--The
Adelantado visits the cacique Quibian--Vessels nearly lost by a bore in
the river--The Adelantado sets off for the gold-mines--During a second
excursion collects much gold--Columbus resolves to form a colony--The
vessels prevented from crossing the bar--Eighty men engaged in building
a fort--Diego Mendez goes on a scouting expedition, and discovers the
treacherous designs of Quibian--Visits the village of the cacique--The
Adelantado undertakes to capture Quibian--He succeeds--The cacique
escapes on his way down the river--Is supposed to be lost--Columbus
prepares to sail--Indians attack the settlement--Driven off--Tristan
goes up the river for water--He and his party destroyed by the Indians--
Settlement again attacked--The Spaniards entrench themselves--No
communication possible with the ships--Fearful tragedy on board--Gallant
conduct of Ledesma--The settlement abandoned--The ships, pierced by the
teredo, unseaworthy--One abandoned at Puerto Bello--Stands across to
Cuba--A tempest--Narrow escape--In vain endeavouring to get westward,
steers for Jamaica--The caravels run on shore and prepared for defence--
Diego Mendez obtains provisions--Crosses in a canoe to Hispaniola--
Mutiny of Porras and others--They put to sea in canoes--Driven back by a
storm--Misconduct on shore--Instigate the Indians to withhold
provisions--Columbus predicts an eclipse of the moon--A second mutiny--
Arrival of Escobar--Refuses to take Columbus away--Adventures of
Mendez--Porras persists in his rebellion--Porras captured by the
Adelantado--Vessels arrive--Columbus reaches San Domingo--Reaction in
his favour--Returns with his brother to Spain--His last illness and
death.

The vessels put into Puerto Bello, then once more stood westward; but
the wind, again heading them, began to blow with such terrible violence,
that they were obliged once more to run back towards the port they had
left; but before they could reach it, they were driven out to sea by a
terrific gale.  Here for days they were tossed about, while the rain
poured down in a perfect deluge, and to add to the terror of the seamen
a waterspout was seen approaching, from which they narrowly escaped.
For a short time the tempest ceased, but again raged with greater fury
than before.  No serious damage, however, having occurred, the vessels
at length, on the 3rd of February, 1503, came to an anchor off the river
Yebra, which was within a league of another river known as the Veragua,
running through the country said to abound in gold-mines.

Both rivers were sounded, and the Yebra, or Belen as Columbus called it,
being somewhat the deepest, the caravels entered it at high tide.  At
first the natives assumed a menacing attitude, but assured by the guides
of the pacific intentions of the Spaniards, they received them in a
friendly way.  Besides a quantity of fish and provisions, they brought
also numerous golden ornaments,--objects delighting the greedy eyes of
the Spaniards.  The Adelantado lost no time in ascending the river in a
well-armed boat to the residence of Quibian, the principal cacique of
the country.

The chief, a tall powerful warrior, received him in a friendly manner,
and presented him with various golden ornaments.  The following day
Quibian visited the Admiral, by whom he was hospitably entertained.

Suddenly, on the 24th of January, a vast mass of water came rushing down
the river, forcing the ships from their anchors, and dashing them
against each other with such violence that the foremast of the Admiral's
vessel was carried away, and the squadron placed in great danger; a
furious storm and the heavy surf on the bar preventing them from running
out to sea.

When the weather moderated, the Adelantado paid another visit up the
river to Quibian, who came down to meet him with a large train of his
subjects unarmed, making signs of peace.  The chief was naked, and
painted after the fashion of the country.  Seated on a stone, he
received the Adelantado with great courtesy, and acceding to his wishes
to visit the interior of his dominions, supplied him with three guides
to conduct him to the mines.

Leaving a party to guard the boats, the Adelantado set off on foot with
the remainder, sleeping one night on the road.  After travelling about
six leagues, they entered a forest, where the guides informed them the
mines were situated.  The whole soil indeed seemed to be impregnated
with gold, and in the space of two hours each Spaniard had collected a
considerable quantity from among the roots of the trees.

Reaching the top of a hill, the guides pointed out to the Adelantado a
wide forest region, which they assured him, for a distance of twenty
leagues, abounded with gold.  It appeared, however, that by the
directions of Quibian they had deceived him, and taken him to the mines
of a neighbouring cacique, with whom he was at war, and that the real
mines of Veragua were nearer and far more wealthy.

After this the indefatigable Adelantado made another exploring
expedition along the coast and through the interior, from which he
returned well laden with gold.  Columbus, satisfied that the mines of
Veragua and those of the Aurea Chersonesus were identical, considered
that this would be a suitable place to found a colony and establish a
mart which should become the emporium of a vast tract of mines.  The
Adelantado agreed with him, and offered to remain with the greater part
of the people while the Admiral should return to Spain for
reinforcements and supplies.

Eighty men were selected to remain, and they immediately set about
building dwellings and a store-house within bowshot of the river Belen.
Columbus endeavoured to conciliate the good-will of the Indians, that
they might bring provisions to the colony, and he made many presents to
Quibian to reconcile him to this intrusion into his territories.

When an attempt was made, however, to carry the vessels over the bar, it
was found there was not sufficient water for them.  They had to wait for
the periodical swelling of the river before this could be accomplished.

Columbus was satisfied with the good disposition of the natives, but the
chief notary, Diego Mendez, his attached friend, had some doubts about
the matter, and offered to sally forth and visit a large Indian camp
which it was discovered had been formed in the neighbourhood.

Rowing up the river in a strongly-armed boat, he suddenly came upon a
thousand or more Indians evidently on a warlike expedition.  Landing
alone, he offered to accompany them.  This proposition was received in a
suspicious manner, and he returned to his boat.  Watching narrowly
during the night, he perceived that they went back to Veragua.

Hastening to the Admiral, he expressed his opinion that the Indians
intended to surprise the settlement.  Further to ascertain the
intentions of Quibian, he undertook to penetrate to his head-quarters.
Accompanied by one Rodrigo Escobar, he made his way to the mouth of the
Veragua, where he induced two Indians to convey him and his companion up
the river.

On reaching the village of the chief, the two Spaniards observed a
bustle of warlike preparation, and heard that Quibian was confined to
his house by a wound.  Mendez on this announced that he was a surgeon,
and offered to cure the chief of his wound.  Making his way towards the
chief's residence, he came upon an open space where he saw raised on
posts the heads of three hundred enemies of the tribe slain in battle.

As he approached the house, a powerful Indian--son of the cacique--
rushed out and struck him a blow; but Mendez producing a box of
ointment, pacified him.  Though unable to gain access to the cacique, he
escaped without further injury to the boat, and he and his companion
made their way down to the harbour.

It was evident that the natives intended hostilities, and from an Indian
who had become attached to the Spaniards they learned that Quibian
intended to surprise the Spaniards by night, to burn the vessels and
houses, and make a general massacre.  To prevent him carrying out his
plan, the Adelantado offered to go up the river and capture him and his
principal chiefs and family during the night, and to bring them in
chains on board.

Taking Diego Mendez, with seventy men and an interpreter, he set off on
the 30th of March.  Reaching the neighbourhood of the village, he left
the rest of his people, and, accompanied by Diego Mendez and four
others, went forward.  The remainder, two and two, climbed the hill.  It
was arranged that upon the discharge of an arquebus they were to
surround the dwelling and suffer no one to escape.

As the Adelantado approached, Quibian came out to meet him, and seated
himself in the porch; Don Bartholomew telling Mendez and his companions
to remain at a little distance, and that when they should see him take
the cacique by the arm, to rush immediately to his assistance.

He then advanced with his Indian interpreter, and after a short
conversation, pretending to examine the cacique's wound, he took him by
the arm.

At the concerted signal four of the Spaniards rushed forward, the fifth
discharged his arquebus.  The cacique attempted to get loose, but was
held firm in the iron grasp of the Adelantado.  A violent struggle
ensued, but Diego Mendez and the rest coming up, Quibian was bound hand
and foot; and at the report of the arquebus the main body of the
Spaniards surrounded the house and seized all who were within, the wives
and children of Quibian included.  When the savages saw their chief a
captive, with loud cries they implored his liberty, offering a rich
treasure as his ransom.

The Adelantado, deaf to their entreaties, carried off Quibian and the
other prisoners to the boat, committing them to the charge of Juan
Sanchez, the principal pilot, while he remained on shore with part of
his men to secure the Indians who had escaped.

The night was dark, and as the boats proceeded down the river Quibian
pretended that the cord which bound him to a bench hurt his limbs, and
the pilot loosed it.

The wily Indian, watching his opportunity, plunged into the water, and
in the darkness and confusion it was not known whether he sank or
reached the bank.  Sanchez, crestfallen, returned in the boats to the
ships.

The next morning the Adelantado, seeing from the nature of the country
that it would be impossible to overtake the fugitives, contented himself
with carrying off all the coronets, necklaces, and plates of gold found
in the cacique's mansion, to the value of three hundred ducats, and got
safely on board.

Columbus, believing that Quibian had perished and that the vigorous
measures of the Adelantado had succeeded in quelling the natives, made
preparations for sailing.  The river having swollen, he got three of the
caravels over the bar by landing their cargoes, but left the fourth for
the use of the settlement.  Taking leave of his brother, and making his
final arrangements, he set sail.  The wind, however, continued adverse,
and on the 6th of April, wishing to communicate with his brother, he
sent a boat on shore under the command of Diego Tristan, captain of one
of the caravels.

As Tristan approached the shore he found his countrymen, some on board
the caravel, some on the sea-shore looking at the ships, and others
scattered about the houses, when suddenly a vast number of Indians
rushed forward with yells and howls, launching their javelins through
the windows and roofs, or thrusting them through the crevices of the
woodwork, wounding some of those who were within.

At the first alarm the Adelantado, seizing a lance, sallied forth with
seven or eight men, and being joined by Diego Mendez and others, they
drove the enemy into the forest, killing and wounding many of them.  In
spite of their furious sallies the savages could not withstand the keen
edge of the Spanish swords and the attacks of a fierce bloodhound, and
fled howling through the forest, leaving a number dead on the field,
having, however, killed one Spaniard and wounded eight, among the latter
of whom was the Adelantado.

Tristan had been afraid to approach the land lest his countrymen should
spring on board and sink the boat, and when the Indians had been put to
flight he proceeded up the river in quest of fresh water, disregarding
the warnings of his friends on shore.  He had get up some way, and was
passing through a narrow channel between high, rocky, and wooded banks,
when he was suddenly assailed by showers of darts and arrows.  As the
crew, losing all presence of mind, made no attempt to row away, only
covering themselves with their bucklers, in a short time he and the
whole of them, with the exception of one man, were massacred.  The
survivor, springing overboard, gained the bank of the river unperceived,
and made his way down to the settlement with the tidings of the death of
his captain and comrades.

The Spaniards were dismayed.  They were few in number in the midst of
exasperated savages.  The Admiral, ignorant of their misfortunes, they
said, would sail away, and leave them to perish.  In vain the Adelantado
remonstrated.  They insisted on embarking in the caravel and following
Columbus.  The water, however, had fallen, and she could not be got over
the bar.  They attempted to put off in the boat, but a heavy surf
rolling on the shore made this impossible.

In the meantime the Indians, instigated by Quibian, who had escaped,
again attacked the Spaniards, rushing out from their coverts in the
woods, and hurling their javelins and darts.  As the huts were so near
the woods that they might at any moment be surprised, a spot was chosen
on the shore, where a breastwork was thrown up formed of the boats,
casks, and cases, in the embrasures of which were placed two small
pieces of artillery.  Here, when the Indians came on, they were received
with so warm a fire from the arquebuses and guns that they quickly took
to flight.  The little garrison knew, however, that before long their
ammunition would fail and their provisions be exhausted, and that they
could anticipate nothing but destruction in the end.

Columbus all this time was not aware what was taking place on shore.  He
became anxious, however, at the non-appearance of Diego Tristan and his
party, but as there was one boat only remaining, he was afraid of
sending her off lest she should be overwhelmed by the surf breaking on
the beach.

A fearful circumstance now occurred.  The prisoners were confined at
night in the forecastle of the caravel, the hatchway of which was
generally secured by a strong chain and padlock.  Several of the crew
slept on this hatchway, and as it was so high as to be considered out of
the reach of those beneath, they neglected to fasten the chain.

The Indians, discovering their negligence, made a heap of stones from
the ballast directly under the hatchway.  Several of their most powerful
warriors then mounting on the top, and bending their backs, by a sudden
effort forced up the hatch.  In an instant the greater part of the
Indians sprang forth, some plunging into the sea and swimming for the
shore.  Several were seized and forced back into the forecastle, when
the hatchway was chained down and a guard was set for the remainder of
the night.

In the morning the Spaniards, on lifting the hatch, found to their
horror that their captives were all dead.  Some had hanged themselves
with the ends of ropes, their knees touching the floor, while others lay
strangled, having drawn the ropes tight with their feet.  Columbus,
fearing that the prisoners who had escaped would stimulate their
countrymen to some act of vengeance, was anxious to communicate with his
brother.  It still seemed impossible for the boat to reach the shore,
when Pedro Ledesma, a pilot of Seville, volunteered to swim to the beach
if the boat would carry him outside the breakers and wait his return.

Stripping himself, he plunged into the sea, and buffeting the surges,
reached the shore.  He here found the intended settlers verging on
despair, and also heard the fate of Diego Tristan.

With a message from the Adelantado, the brave pilot made his way back to
the boat.  Columbus, on receiving the alarming intelligence brought by
the pilot, was thrown into a state of the greatest anxiety.  Rather than
allow the settlement to be broken up, he would have joined the
Adelantado with all his people; but how, then, could he send tidings of
his important discovery to the sovereigns?  After much trouble of mind
he resolved to embark the people and abandon the settlement.

Bad weather and a heavy sea rendered this for a long time impossible.
At length the wind going down, the sea became calm, and he was able to
send the boat on shore.  Every exertion was at once made to bring off
the people.  The zealous Diego Mendez had been actively employed in
making sacks to hold the biscuit.  He also constructed a raft, which
greatly facilitated the conveyance of the stores, arms, and ammunition.

The caravel was also dismantled.  Her provisions and stores were got
off, so that nothing remained but her hull.  The joy of the Spaniards
when they found themselves safe on board was unbounded, and the Admiral,
as a reward for his services, gave the command of the caravel, vacant by
the death of the unfortunate Diego Tristan, to the zealous Diego Mendez.

By the end of April, with a favourable wind, Columbus left the
disastrous shores of Veragua; but his ships, honeycombed by the teredo,
could with difficulty be kept afloat.  To the surprise of his pilots,
instead of standing northwards towards Hispaniola, he steered due east,
knowing that the the current, which has a strong set into the Caribbean
Sea, would have swept him far away out of his intended course.

He continued on to Puerto Bello, where he found that one of his caravels
was so pierced by the teredo that he was compelled to leave her behind,
and to divide her crew between the two remaining vessels.  He then
proceeded on as far as what is now known as the Gulf of Darien.

Having struggled in vain against contrary winds and currents, he on the
ist of May stood northward in quest of Hispaniola.  As the wind was
easterly, with a strong current setting to the west, he kept as near the
wind as possible.  So ignorant were the pilots that they fancied all
this time that they were to the east of the Caribbean Islands, whereas
the Admiral feared truly that he should fall to the westward of
Hispaniola.

Sailing across the Caribbean Sea, he at length sighted two small islands
to the north-west of Hispaniola, which he called the Tortugas, from the
quantity of turtles seen about them, though now known as the Caymans.
Passing west of these, he found himself among the islands to the south
of Cuba which he had called the Queen's Gardens.  Here he cast anchor.
His crews were almost worn out, and the only provisions left were a
little biscuit, oil, and vinegar, while they were obliged to labour
incessantly at the pumps.

Suddenly a tempest burst upon them.  Three of their anchors were lost,
and the vessels, driving together, nearly knocked each other to pieces.
With the greatest difficulty they were separated, and the Admiral's ship
anchored with his sole remaining cable, which in the morning was found
nearly worn asunder.  At the end of six days, the weather moderating, he
sailed eastwards for Hispaniola.

Contrary winds, however, compelled him at length to stand across for
Jamaica, where, on the 23rd of June, the caravels put into Puerto Bueno,
now called Dry Harbour.  No natives being found, the following day they
sailed eastward, and entered another harbour, called Porta Santa Gloria.
Here, at length, Columbus was compelled to give up his arduous struggle
against the elements; his ships, reduced to mere wrecks, could no longer
be kept afloat, and he ordered them to be run aground within bowshot of
the shore, and fastened side by side.  Here they soon filled with water
to the deck.  Cabins were therefore erected at the bow and stern, for
the accommodation of the crews, and the vessels were placed in the best
possible state of defence against any sudden attack of the natives.

To prevent his men roving about the neighbourhood, he ordered that no
one should go on shore without a special licence, and every other
possible precaution was taken to prevent giving offence to the Indians.
Scarcely had these arrangements been made, than the natives appeared in
vast numbers, bringing provisions to barter.  That no disputes might
arise, two persons were appointed to superintend all such trading
transactions.  It was feared, however, that the food thus furnished
would soon fall short, in which case the Spaniards would be reduced to
famine.  In this emergency, Diego Mendez, with his accustomed zeal,
offered to set off with three men on a foraging expedition.  He was
everywhere treated with the utmost kindness by the natives, who supplied
him and his companions with meat and drink; and he made arrangements
with the cacique of a numerous tribe that his subjects should hunt and
fish, and bring cassava bread every day to the harbour.  They were to
receive, in exchange, various articles which they most valued.

This arrangement being made, Mendez dispatched a message to apprise the
Admiral, and then proceeded upon his journey, during which he visited
three different caciques, who all agreed to his proposals.

Having now sent back his companions, Mendez made his way to the eastern
end of the island, where he found a powerful cacique, named Ameyro.  He
won over this chief by his ingratiating manner, and, having purchased a
canoe, induced him to send six Indians to navigate it.  He made a
successful trip, and when he rejoined the Admiral, he found that the
canoes of the friendly chief had already arrived with abundance of
provisions.

The great desire of Columbus was now to get from the island.  But his
ships were like sieves, and he had but one small boat.  The idea
occurred to him that he might send Diego Mendez, in the canoe lately
obtained, to Hispaniola.  He broached the subject to his worthy
follower, who at once agreed to perform the hazardous voyage, provided
no better man was to be found to undertake it.

All were perfectly ready to let Mendez go.  He accordingly embarked, the
Admiral's despatches being ready, with one Spaniard and six Indians.
The brave officer at first paddled to the east end of the island, where
he remained waiting for calm weather.  When here, he and his men were
seized by a party of savages, who were about to kill them, when Mendez,
