clear out the rest of the pool."  Good man! nothing can put him out.
Gradually the bottom is cleared of stones, (excepting the big one), and
levelled, and the embankment is built to a sufficient height.

"Now for the finishing touch!" cries George; "bring the turf; Fred--I'm
ready!"  The water of the burn is rushing violently through the narrow
outlet in the "dike."  A heavy stone is dropped into the gap, and turf
is piled on.

"More turf! more stones! quick, look alive!--it'll burst everything--
there, that's it!"

All hands toil and work at the opening, to smother it up.  The angry
element leaks through, bursts, gushes--is choked back with a ready turf;
and squirts up in their faces.  Mother is stunned to see the power of so
small a stream when the attempt is made to check it thoroughly; she is
not mechanically-minded by nature, and has learned nothing in that way
by education.  It is stopped at last, however.

For a quarter of an hour the waters from above are cut off from those
below, as completely as were those of the Jordan in days of old.  They
all stand panting and silent, watching the rising of the water, while
George keeps a sharp eye on the dike to detect and repair any weakness.
At last it is full, and the surplus runs over in a pretty cascade, while
the accommodating stream piles mud and stones against the dike, and thus
unwittingly strengthens the barrier.  The pool is formed, full three
feet deep by twenty broad.  Jacky wants to bathe at once.

"But the pool is like pea-soup, my pet--wait until it clears."

"I won't--let me bathe!"

"O Jacky, my darling!"

He does; for in his struggles he slips on the bank, goes in head
foremost, and is fished out in a disgusting condition!

So the bathing-pool was made.  It was undoubtedly a "great institution;"
they did not know at the time, that, like many such institutions, it was
liable to destruction; but they lived to see it.

Meanwhile, to return from this long digression, Lucy, Tilly, and Jacky
bathed, while Mrs Brown watched and scolded.  This duty performed, they
returned to the house, where they found the remainder of the party ready
for a journey on foot to Lake "What-you-may-call-it," which lake Lucy
named the Lake of the Clouds, its Gaelic cognomen being quite
unpronounceable.



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 9.

A GRAND EXCURSION OVER THE MOUNTAINS.

Little did good Mr Sudberry think what an excursion lay before him that
day, when, in the pride of untried strength and unconquerable spirits,
he strode up the mountain-side, with his dutiful family following like a
"tail" behind him.  There was a kind of narrow sheep-path, up which they
marched in single file.  Father first, Lucy next, with her gown prettily
tucked-up; George and Fred following, with large fishing-baskets stuffed
with edibles; Jacky next, light and active, but as yet quiescent;
timorous Peter bringing up the rear.  He, also, was laden, but not
heavily.  Mr Sudberry carried rod and basket, for he had been told that
there were large trout in the Lake of the Clouds.

Ever and anon the party halted and turned round to wave hats and
kerchiefs to Mrs Sudberry, Tilly, and Mrs Brown, who returned the
salute with interest, until the White House appeared a mere speck in the
valley below, and Mrs Brown became so small, that Jacky, for the first
time in his life, regarded her as a contemptible _little_ thing!  At
last a shoulder of the hill shut out the view of the valley, and they
began to _feel_ that they were in a deep solitude, surrounded by wild
mountain peaks.

It is a fact, that there is something peculiarly invigorating in
mountain air.  What that something is we are not prepared to say.
Oxygen and ozone have undoubtedly something to do with it, but in what
proportions we know not.  Scientific men could give us a learned
disquisition on the subject, no doubt; we therefore refer our readers to
scientific men, and confine our observations to the simple statement of
the fact, that there is something extremely invigorating in mountain
air.  Every mountaineer knows it; Mr Sudberry and family proved it that
day beyond dispute, excepting, by the way, poor Peter, whose unfortunate
body was not adapted for rude contact with the rough elements of this
world.

The whole party panted and became very warm as they toiled upwards; but,
instead of growing fatigued, they seemed to gather fresh strength and
additional spirit at every step--always excepting Peter, of course.
Soon a wild spirit came over them.  On gaining a level patch of springy
turf, father gave a cheer, and rushed madly, he knew not, and cared not,
whither.  Sons and daughters echoed the cheer, and followed his example.
The sun burst forth at the moment, crisping the peaks, gorges, and
clouds--which were all mingled together--with golden fires.  Each had
started off without definite intention, and they were scattered far and
wide in five minutes, but each formed the natural resolve to run to the
nearest summit, in order to devour more easily the view.  Thus they all
converged again and met on a neighbouring knoll that overtopped a
terrific precipice which over hung a small lake.

"The--Lake--of the--Clouds!" exclaimed Lucy, as she came up, breathless
and beaming.

"Impossible!" cried her father; "McAllister says it is on the other side
of the ridge, and we're not near the top yet.  Where are Peter and
Jacky?"

"I cannot see them!" said George and Fred, in a breath.

"No more can I," cried Lucy.

No more could anybody, except a hunter or an eagle, for they were seated
quietly among grey rocks and brown ferns, which blended with their
costume so as to render them all but invisible.

The party on the knoll were, however, the reverse of invisible to Jacky
and his exhausted companion.  They stood out, black as ink, against the
bright blue sky, and were so sharply defined that Jacky declared he
could see the "turn-up of Lucy's nose."

The reader must not suppose that Master Jacky was exhausted, like his
slender companion.  A glance at his firm lip, flushed cheek, sturdy
little limbs, and bright eyes, would have made that abundantly plain.
No, Jacky was in a _peculiar_ frame of mind--that was all.  He chose to
sit beside Peter, and, as he never condescended to give a reason for his
choice, we cannot state one.  He appeared to be meditatively inclined
that day.  Perhaps he was engaged in the concoction of some excruciating
piece of wickedness--who knows?

Suddenly Jacky turned with a look of earnest gravity towards his
companion, who was a woebegone spectacle of exhaustion.  "I say, we'd
better go on, don't you think?"

Peter looked up languidly, sighed heavily, and laid his hand on the
fishing-basket full of sandwiches, which constituted his burden.  It was
small and light, but to the poor boy it felt like a ton.  Jacky's eyes
became still more owlishly wide, and his face graver than ever.  He had
never seen him in this condition before--indeed, Jacky's experience of
life beyond the nursery being limited, he had never seen any one in such
a case before.

"I say, Peter, are you desprit blow'd?"

"Desprit," sighed Peter.

Jacky paused and gazed at his companion for nearly a minute.

"I say, d'ye think you could walk if you tried?"

"Oh, yes!"  (with a groan and a smile;) "come, I'll try to push ahead
now."

"Here, give me the basket," cried Jacky, starting up with sudden and
tremendous energy, and wrenching the basket out of Peter's hand.  He did
it with ease, although the small clerk was twice the size of the imp.

Peter remonstrated, but in vain.  Mrs Brown, a woman of powerful frame
and strong mind, could not turn Jacky from his purpose--it was not
likely, therefore, that an amiable milk-and-water boy, in a state of
exhaustion, could do it.  Jacky swung the basket over his shoulder with
an amount of exertion that made him stagger, and, commanding Peter to
follow, marched up the hill with compressed lips and knitted brows.

It was an epoch in the mental development of Jacky--it was a new
sensation to the child.  Hitherto he had known nothing but the feeling
of dependence.  Up to this point he had been compelled by the force of
circumstances to look up to everyone--and, alas! he had done so with a
very bad grace.  He had never known what it was to help any one.  His
mother had thoroughly spoiled him.  Strange infatuation in the mother!
She had often blamed the boy for spoiling his toys; but she had never
blamed herself for spoiling the boy.  "Darling Jacky! don't ask the
child to do anything for you--he's too young yet."  So Jacky was never
asked to help any one in any way, except by Mrs Brown, who did not
"ask," but commanded, and, although she never rewarded obedience with
the laurel, either literally or figuratively, she invariably punished
disobedience with the _palm_.  Little Tilly always did everything she
wanted done herself; and could never do enough for Jacky, so that she
afforded no opportunity for her brother to exercise amiable qualities.
Thus was Jacky trained to be a selfish little imp, and to this training
he superadded the natural wickedness of his own little heart.  But now,
for the first time, the tables were turned.  Jacky felt that Peter was
dependent on him--that he could not get on without him.

"Poor Peter, I'll help him--he's a weak skinny chap, and I'm strong as a
lion--as a elephant--as a crokindile--anything!  Come on, Peter, are you
getting better now?"  Thus they went up the hill together.

"Ha! there they are at last, close under this mound.  Why, I do believe
that Jacky's carrying the basket!"

Mr Sudberry was bereft of breath at this discovery; so was everyone
else.  When the boy stumped up the hill and flung down the basket with
an emphatic, "there!" his father turned to the small clerk--

"How now, sir, did you bid Jacky carry that?"

"Please, sir--no, sir;" (whimpering), "but Master Jacky forced it out of
my hand, sir, and insisted on carrying it.  He saw that I was very
tired, sir--and so I am, but I would not have asked him to carry it, if
I had been ever so tired--indeed I would not, sir."

"I'm not displeased, my boy," said Mr Sudberry, kindly, patting him on
the head; "I only wanted to know if _he offered_."

"Of course I did," cried the imp, stoutly, with his arms akimbo--"and
why not?  Don't you see that the poor boy is dead beat; and was I goin'
to stand by and see him faint by his-self; all alone on the mountain?"

"Certainly not!" and Mr Sudberry seized Jacky and whirled him round
till he was quite giddy, and fell on the heather with a cheer, and
declared that he would not budge from that spot until they had lunched.
Need we say that Mr Sudberry himself was the subject of a new sensation
that day,--a sensation of a peculiarly hopeful nature,--as he gazed at
his youngest son; while that refined little creature crammed himself
with sandwiches and ginger-bread, and besmeared his hands and visage
with a pot of jam, that had been packed away by his mother for her own
darling's special use?

"My poor lad, you must not come any farther with us.  I had no idea you
were so much fatigued.  Remain here by the provisions, and rest in the
sunshine till we return."

So Mr Sudberry gave Peter a plaid that had been carried up to serve as
a table-cloth, and told him to wrap well up in it, lest he should catch
cold.  They left him there on the knoll, refreshed and happy, and with a
new feeling in his breast in regard to Jacky, whom, up to that day, he
had regarded as an imp of the most hopelessly incorrigible description.

"Over the mountain and over the moor" the Sudberrys wandered.  The ridge
was gained, and a new world of mountains, glens, gorges, and peaks was
discovered on the other side of it, with the Lake of the Clouds lying,
like a bright diamond, far below them.  They descended into this new
world with a cheer.  A laugh or a cheer was their chief method of
conversation now--their spirits as well as their bodies being so high.
"Not a house to be seen! not a sign of man! the untrodden wilderness!"
cried Mr Sudberry.

"Robinson Crusoe!  Mungo Park!  Pooh!" shouted George.  "Hooray!" yelled
Jacky.  The whole party laughed again, and down the slope they went, at
such a pace that it was a miracle they did not terminate their career in
the lake with the poetic name.

At this point everyone was suddenly "seized."  Mr Sudberry and George
were seized with an irresistible desire to fish; Fred was seized with a
burning desire to sketch; Lucy was seized with a passionate desire to
gather wild flowers; and Jacky was seized with a furious desire to wet
himself and _wade with his shoes on_.  He did it too, and, in the course
of an hour, tumbled into so many peat-bogs, and besmeared himself with
so much coffee-coloured mud, that his own mother would have failed to
recognise him.  He was supremely happy--so was his father.  At the very
first cast he, (the father), hooked a trout of half a pound weight, and
lost it, too! but that was nothing.  The next cast he caught one of
nearly a pound.  George was equally successful.  Fortune smiled.  Before
evening began to close, both baskets were half full of splendid trout;
Lucy's basket was quite full of botanical specimens; Fred's sketch was a
success, and Jacky was as brown as a Hottentot from head to foot.  They
prepared to return home, rejoicing.

Haste was needful now.  A short cut round the shoulder of the ridge was
recommended by George, and taken.  It conducted them into a totally
different gap from the one which led to their own valley.  If followed
out, this route would have led them to a spot ten miles distant from
their Highland home; but they were in blissful ignorance of the fact.
All gaps and gorges looked much the same to them.  Suddenly Mr Sudberry
paused:--

"Is this the way we came?"

Grave looks, but no reply.

"Let us ascend this ridge, and make sure that we are right."

They did so, and made perfectly certain that they were wrong.
Attempting to correct their mistake, they wandered more hopelessly out
of their way, but it was not until the shades of night began to fall
that Mr Sudberry, with a cold perspiration on his brow, expressed his
serious belief that they were "lost!"



STORY ONE, CHAPTER 10.

LOST ON THE MOUNTAINS.

Did ever the worthy London merchant, in the course of his life, approach
to the verge of the region of despair, it was on that eventful night
when he found himself and his family lost among the mountains of
Scotland.

"It's dreadful," said he, sitting down on a cold grey rock, and
beginning slowly to realise the utter hopelessness of their condition.

"My poor Lucy, don't be cast down," (drawing her to his breast), "after
all, it will only be a night of wandering.  But we _must_ keep moving.
We must not venture to lie down in our wet clothes.  We must not even
rest long at a time, lest a chill should come upon you."

"But I'm quite warm, papa, and only a very little tired.  I could walk
for miles yet."  She said this cheerily, but she could not help looking
anxious.  The night was so dark, however, that no one could see her
looks.

"Do let me go off alone, father," urged George; "I am as fresh as
possible, and could run over the hills until I should fall in with--"

"Don't mention it, George; I feel that our only hope is to keep
together.  Poor Peter! what will become of that boy?"

Mr Sudberry became almost, desperate as he thought of the small clerk.
He started up.  "Come, we must keep moving.  You are not cold, dear? are
you _sure_ you are not cold?"

"Quite sure, papa; why are you so anxious?"

"Because I have a flask of brandy, which I mean to delay using until we
break down and cannot get on without it.  Whenever you begin to get
chilled I must give you brandy.  Not till then, however; spirits are
hurtful when there is hard toil before you, but when you break down
there is no resource left.  Rest, food, sleep, would be better; but
these we have no chance of getting to-night.  Poor Jacky! does he keep
warm, George?"

"No fear of him," cried George, with forced gaiety.  "He's all right."

Jack had broken down completely soon after nightfall.  Vigorously,
manfully had he struggled to keep up; but when his usual hour for going
to bed arrived, nature refused to sustain him.  He sank to the ground,
and then George wrapped him up in his shooting-coat, in which he now
lay, sound asleep, like a dirty brown bundle, on his brother's
shoulders.

"I'll tell you what," said Fred, after they had walked, or rather
stumbled, on for some time in silence.  "Suppose you all wait here for
ten minutes while I run like a greyhound to the nearest height and see
if anything is to be seen.  Mamma must have alarmed the whole
neighbourhood by this time; and if they are looking for us, they will be
sure to have lanterns or torches."

"A good idea, my boy.  Go, and pause every few minutes to shout, so that
we may not lose you.  Keep shouting, Fred, and we will wait here and
reply."

Fred was off in a moment, and before he had got fifty yards away was
floundering knee-deep in a peat-bog.  So much for reckless haste,
thought he, as he got out of the bog and ran forward with much more
caution.  Soon those waiting below heard his clear voice far up the
heights.  A few minutes more, and it rang forth again more faintly.  Mr
Sudberry remarked that it sounded as if it came from the clouds: he put
his hands to his mouth sailor fashion, and replied.  Then they listened
intently for the next shout.  How still it was while they sat there!
What a grand, gloomy solitude!  They could hear no sound but the beating
of their own hearts.  Solemn thoughts of the Creator of these mighty
hills crept into their minds as they gazed around and endeavoured to
pierce the thick darkness.  But this was impossible.  It was one of
those nights in which the darkness was so profound that no object could
be seen even indistinctly at the distance of ten yards.  Each could see
the other's form like a black marble statue, but no feature could be
traced.  The mountain peaks and ridges could indeed be seen against the
dark sky, like somewhat deeper shadows; but the crags and corries, the
scattered rocks and heathery knolls, the peat-bogs and the tarns of the
wild scene which these circling peaks enclosed--all were steeped in
impenetrable gloom.  There seemed something terrible, almost unnatural,
in this union of thick darkness with profound silence.  Mr Sudberry was
startled by the sound of his own voice when he again spoke.

"The boy must have gone too far.  I cannot hear--"

"Hush!"

"Hi!" in the far distance, like a faint echo.  They all breathed more
freely, and Mr Sudberry uttered a powerful response.  Presently the
shout came nearer--nearer still; and soon Fred rejoined them, with the
disheartening information that he had gained the summit of the ridge,
and could see nothing whatever!

"Well, my children," said Mr Sudberry, with an assumption of
cheerfulness which he was far from feeling, "nothing now remains but to
push straight forward as fast as we can.  We _must_ come to a road of
some sort in the long-run, which will conduct to somewhere or other, no
doubt.  Come, cheer up; forward!  Follow close behind me, Lucy.  George,
do you take the lead--you are the most active and sharp-sighted among
us; and mind the bogs."

"What if we walk right over a precipice!" thought Fred.  He had almost
said it, but checked himself for fear of alarming the rest
unnecessarily.  Instead of cautioning George, he quietly glided to the
front, and took the lead.

Slowly, wearily, and painfully they plodded on, stumbling at times over
a rugged and stone-covered surface, sometimes descending a broken slope
that grew more and more precipitous until it became dangerous, and then,
fearing to go farther--not knowing what lay before--they had to retrace
their steps and search for a more gradual descent.  Now crossing a level
patch that raised their hopes, inclining them to believe that they had
reached the bottom of the valley; anon coming suddenly upon a steep
ascent that dashed their hopes, and induced them to suppose they had
turned in the wrong direction, and were re-ascending instead of
descending the mountain.  All the time Jacky slept like a top, and
George, being a sturdy fellow, carried him without a murmur.  Several
times Fred tried to make him give up his burden, but George was
inexorably obstinate.  So they plodded on till nearly midnight.

"Is that a house?" said Fred, stopping short, and pointing to a dark
object just in front of them.  "No, it's a lake."

"Nonsense, it's a mountain."

A few more steps, and Fred recoiled with a cry of horror.  It was a
precipice full a hundred feet deep--the dark abyss of which had assumed
such varied aspects in their eyes!

A long _detour_ followed, and they reached the foot in safety.  Here the
land became boggy.

Each step was an act fraught with danger, anxiety, and calculation.
Whether they should step knee-deep into a hole full of water, or trip
over a rounded mass of solid turf, was a matter of absolute uncertainty
until the step was taken.

"Oh that we had only a gleam of moonshine," said Lucy with a sigh.
Moonshine!  How often had George in the course of his life talked with
levity, almost amounting to contempt, of things being "all a matter of
moonshine!"  What would he not have given to have had only a tithe of
the things which surrounded him at that time converted into "moonshine!"

