"Come with me," she said; "you shall have a hat, though I hardly think
it will fit you with the bandage round your head."

She led me downstairs, and, after some searching, she fished out a hat
from an old closet, and it did as well as another. She asked me many
questions as she searched. How long had I known the poor lady upstairs?
and where did I meet her? She would have made a famous cross-questioner.
I answered her with such frankness that she seemed to take a fancy to
me.

"Some say that the poor lady upstairs is demented," she volunteered.

"Whoever says so lies," I replied. "She has more sense than nine-tenths
of the people you meet."

"And then, again, some say she can mesmerize folks." Then, seeing that
the information failed to interest me, "What do you think of them--the
mesmerizers?"

"I think nothing of them. If they could mesmerize me, I should like to
see them do it."

"Oh, would you, you poor young man," she said, with a strange smile.
"How would you know that you were mesmerized, and how would you help
yourself?"

I know not what reply I made. A fit of dejection had seized me, and I
could think of nothing but Jane Ryder. "You mustn't think of that young
lady upstairs as hating you," said the woman, after she had brushed the
hat and had asked me if I felt strong enough to walk a mile or more.
"All she means is that she hates your principles. She hates secession,
and she hates Secessionists. But something has upset her of late; she
is not herself at all. I'm telling you the truth."

"She hates me; you may depend on that; but her hate makes no difference
to me. I love her, and I'd love her if she were to cut my throat."

"Is that true? Are you honest? May I tell her so some time--not
now--but some time when you are far away?"

"To what end?" I asked. "She would tear her hair out if she knew it;
she would never be happy again."

"You don't happen to love her well enough to join her side, do you?"
This question was put hesitatingly, and, as I thought, with some shy
hope that it would receive consideration.

"Madam, you have tried to be kind to me in your way, and therefore I
will say nothing to wound your feelings; but if a man were to ask me
that question he would receive an answer that would prevent him from
repeating it in this world."

"Humpty-dumpty jumped over the wall!" exclaimed the woman with a laugh.
"I knew what you'd say, but I had my reasons for asking the question;
you must go now; and bear in mind," she went on with a sudden display
of feeling, "that the war has made such devil's hags of the women, and
such devil's imps of the men, that everything is in a tangle. You'll
know where you are when you go in the next room. And you must forgive
me. I am Jane Ryder's mother."

And, sure enough, I was in the tavern in the woods, and sitting by the
hearth was Whistling Jim. To say that he was glad to see me would
hardly describe the outward manifestation of his feelings. Someone in
the camp, he didn't know who, had sent him word that he'd find me at
this house, and he had been waiting for more than an hour, the last
half of it with many misgivings. He and Harry had escaped without any
trouble, and my horse had followed them so closely that they thought I
was on his back. But when they saw that he was riderless, they thought
that I had either been captured or killed. Once at camp, Harry Herndon
drummed up as many of the Independents as would volunteer, and they had
gone in search of me; Whistling Jim heard them riding along the road as
he was coming to the tavern.

The faithful negro had a hundred questions to ask, but I answered him
in my own way. I was determined that none but those directly concerned
should ever know that I had been held a prisoner or that Miss Ryder had
a hand in the night's work; and I wished a thousand times over that I
had not known it myself. The old saying, worn to a frazzle with
repetition, came to me with new force, and I was sadly alive to the
fact that where ignorance is bliss 'tis folly to be wise.

The night was now far advanced, and once at my quarters I flung myself
on the rude bed that had been provided for me, and all the troubles and
tangles in this world dissolved and disappeared in dreamless slumber.
When morning broke I felt better. My head was sore, but the surgeon
removed the bandage, clipped the hair about the wound, took a stitch or
two that hurt worse than the original blow, and in an hour I had
forgotten the sabre-cut.

Singular uneasiness pervaded my thoughts. More than once I caught
myself standing still as if expecting to hear something. I tried in
vain to shake off the feeling, and at last I pretended to trace it to
feverishness resulting from the wound in the scalp; but I knew this was
not so--I knew that one of the great things of life was behind it all;
I knew that I had come to the hour that young men hope for and older
men dread; I knew that for good or evil my future was wrapped in the
mystery and tangle of which Jane Ryder was the centre. My common-sense
tried to picture her forth as the spider waiting in the centre of her
web for victims, but my heart resented this and told me that she
herself had been caught in the web and found it impossible to get away.

I wandered about the camp and through the town with a convalescent's
certificate in my pocket and the desperation of a lover in my heart;
and at the very last, when night was falling, it was Jasper Goodrum, of
the Independents, who gave me the news I had been looking for all day.

"You'd better pick up and go with us, Shannon; our company is going to
raid the tavern to-night, and to-morrow we take the road. Oh, you are
not hurt bad," he said, trying to interpret the expression on my face;
"you can go and I think I can promise you a little fun. They say a spy
is housed there, and we propose to smoke him out to-night. Get your
horse; we start in half an hour."

He went off down the street, leaving me staring at him open-mouthed.
When he was out of sight I turned and ran toward the camp as if my life
depended on it.




IX


I knew no more what I intended to do than the babe unborn. What I did
know was that Jane Ryder was in that house, in all probability; and
that fact stung me. She had aided me to escape, even though she had had
a hand in my capture, and I felt that the least I could do would be to
take her away from there, willingly if she could come, forcibly if she
hesitated.

On the way to the camp I met Whistling Jim, and he stopped me. He was
astride his horse and leading mine. "Dey er gwine on a ride now
terreckly, Marse Cally, an' I lowed maybe you'd want ter go 'long wid
um."

For answer I swung myself on my horse and, bidding the negro to follow
if he desired, put spurs to the sorrel and went flying in the direction
of the tavern. I did not turn my head to see whether Whistling Jim was
following, but rode straight ahead. It strikes me as curious, even yet,
that the darkness should have fallen so suddenly on that particular
day. When Goodrum spoke to me I supposed that the sun was still
shining; when I turned into the road that led to the house it was dark.
I reached the place in the course of a quarter of an hour, and as I
leaped from my horse I heard the negro coming close behind me. I waited
for him to come up and dismount, and then I bade him knock at the door,
and when it was opened I told him to stand by the horses.

The door was opened by the woman who had spoken so kindly with me. "You
here again?" she cried with an air of surprise. "You would make it very
hard for her if she were here, but I think she is gone. You'll not see
her again, my dear, and I, for one, am glad of it. There's no one here
but myself and my son."

"Your son is the one I want," I replied. "Tell him to come at once. I
have news for him." The woman had no need to call him, however, for the
inner door opened as I spoke, and out came Jane Ryder in the garb of a
man--cloak, boots, and all.

I had an idea that she would shrink from me or show some perturbation;
but I was never more mistaken in my life. In a perfectly easy and
natural manner--the manner of a young man--she came up and held out her
hand. "I think this is Mr. Shannon; Miss Ryder told me your name. I
have to thank you for some recent kindness to her."

I shook her hand very cordially, saying that nothing I could do for
Miss Ryder would be amiss. "As it happens," I went on, "I can do
something for you now. Will you come with me?"

For one fleeting moment her woman's hesitation held her, and then her
woman's curiosity prevailed. "With pleasure," she said.

As we started for the door the woman interfered. "I wouldn't go with
him," she declared with some bluntness. "You don't have to go and you
sha'n't. You don't know what he's up to."

This failed to have the effect I feared it would. "Don't you suppose I
can take care of myself, mother?"

"I know what I know," replied the woman, sullenly, "and it wouldn't
take much to make me tell it."

"Then, for heaven's sake, say what you have to say and be done with
it," I exclaimed. "Only a very few minutes lie between this person and
safety. If you have anything to tell out with it."

"Your blue eyes and baby face fooled me once, but they'll not fool me
again. You know more than you pretend to know," said the woman.

"I know this: if this person remains here ten minutes longer he will
regret it all the days of his life. Now, trust me or not, just as you
please. If he is afraid to come with me let him say so, and I will bid
him farewell forever and all who are connected with him. Do you trust
me?" I turned to Jane Ryder and held out my hand.

"I do," she replied. She came nearer, but did not take my hand.

"Then, in God's name, come with me!" I cried. She obeyed my gesture and
started for the door.

"Where are you going?" wailed the mother. "Tell me--tell me!"

I was sorry for her, but I made her no answer.

I anticipated this scene as little as I did the fact that Jane Ryder
would come with me. I was prepared to carry her off if she refused, but
I was ill prepared for the rumpus that this quiet-looking woman kicked
up. She followed us to the door and stood wailing while I tried to
persuade Jane Ryder to mount my horse. She hesitated, but I fairly
lifted her into the saddle. The stirrup-straps were too short, but that
made no difference. I sprang on the horse behind her, and, reaching
forward, seized the reins and turned the horse's head in a direction
that would bring us into the town by a detour, so that we should miss
the Independents, who would follow the road that I had followed in
coming.

"Where are you taking me?" inquired Jane Ryder.

"To safety," I replied. "The house is to be raided to-night, and I
decided to bring you away. You saved me from a prison, and now I
propose to save you."

"I saved you? You are mistaken; it was that foolish woman, Miss Ryder."

"Well, she said that you are her dearest friend, and I'm saving you to
please her."

"You needn't hold me so tight. I'm in no danger of falling off. Where
are you taking me?"

"To General Forrest." She caught her breath, and then did her utmost to
fling herself from the horse. When she found that her strength was not
equal to the task of removing my arms or lifting them so she could slip
from the saddle, she began to use her tongue, which has ever been
woman's safest weapon.

"You traitor!" she cried; "oh, you traitor! I wish I had died before I
ever saw you."

"But this is the safest course," I insisted. "You will see, and then
you will thank me for bringing you away."

"And I thought you were a gentleman; I took you for an honest man. Oh,
if hate could kill you you would fall dead from this horse. What have I
done that I should come in contact with such a villain?"

[Illustration: "If hate could kill you, you would fall dead from this
horse."]

"You have a pistol," I said--I had felt it against my arm--"and it is
easy for you to use it. If you think so meanly of me why not rid the
earth of such a villain?"

"Do you know who I am?" she asked with a gasp of apprehension.

"Why, certainly," I answered. "Do you think I'd be taking the trouble
to save you else?"

"Trouble to save me? Save me? Why, I hope your savage General will hang
me as high as Haman."

"He would if he were a savage," I said, "and he would if you were a
man. And he may put you in prison as it is; you would certainly go
there if captured by the Forty Thieves. I am taking one chance in a
thousand. But better for you to be in prison, where you will be safe,
than for you to be going around here masquerading as a man and
subjecting yourself to the insults of all sorts of men."

"You are the only man that has ever insulted me. Do you hear?
You--gentleman!" she hissed. "Can't you see that I despise you? Won't
you believe it? Does it make no difference?"

"Not the least in the world," I replied. "Now, you must compose
yourself; you can be brave enough when you will--I think you are the
bravest woman I ever saw----"

"I wish I could say you are a brave man; but you are an arrant coward:
you, the soldier that plans to capture women."

"You must compose yourself," I repeated.

"In a few minutes we shall be in the presence of General Forrest, and I
should like to see you as calm as possible. I don't know, but I think
you will be safe. It was our only chance." The nearer we drew to
headquarters the more my anxiety rose; yes, and my sympathy. "By the
living Lord," I cried, "you _shall_ be safe!"

"Noble gentleman! to entrap a woman and then declare she shall not be
entrapped! To gain whatever honor there may be in a woman's capture by
running ahead of his ruffians and capturing her himself! This is
Southern manliness--this is Southern chivalry! I am glad I know it for
what it really is. Do you know," she went on, "that I really
thought--that--I--I---- You are the first man I was ever deceived
in--I----"

"Come now," said I, not unmoved, for my feelings ran far ahead of hers
and I knew what she would say and how hurt she was; "come now, you must
be calm. Everything depends on that--everything."

Near General Forrest's headquarters I dismounted and walked by the side
of my horse. Then when Whistling Jim came up, and I would have helped
her from the saddle, "Don't touch me!" she exclaimed. She jumped from
the saddle to the ground and stood before me, and for the first time I
was ashamed and afraid. "This way," I said. Then to the guard at the
door, "Private Shannon, of Captain Forrest's company, to see the
General."

"He's right in there," said the guard with good-natured informality. I
rapped at the inner door, and heard the well-known voice of General
Forrest bidding me to enter.

I saluted, and he made some motion with his hand, but his eye wandered
over me and rested on my companion. Then, after a moment, they returned
to me. "What's the matter, Shannon?"

"I have brought to you here one who came to my rescue last night when I
had been captured by a scouting party. We had gone to see the young
fellow who, you will remember, was wounded in our last affair at the
river--you saw him in the cabin. He was carried away the next day by
his friends, but grew so ill that he could be taken no farther than the
house on the turnpike two miles from town."

"You didn't let 'em git you just dry so, did you?" he asked. And then I
gave him the details of the affair from beginning to end. "I thought
Herndon was mighty keen to go," he remarked with a laugh. "You say this
young fellow fixed it so you could git away? And then you went back and
captured him? That don't look fair, does it?" He regarded me with
serious countenance.

"It is a lady, General, and I did not want her to fall in rough hands."
He uttered an exclamation of impatience and surprise, and made an
indignant gesture. "Now, look here, Shannon, that is a matter that I
won't tolerate. I've a great mind to----" He paused, hearing the voice
of his wife, who was visiting him. "Go back in there and tell Mrs.
Forrest to come in here a minute, and do you stay out till I call you.
I'm going to look into this business, and if it ain't perfectly square
all the way through you'll pay for it."

I hunted for Mrs. Forrest, hat in hand, and soon found her. I must have
had a queer expression on my face, for she observed it. "You must be
frightened," she said.

"I am, madam, for another as well as myself," and then I told her, as
we walked along very slowly, just how the matter lay. She regarded me
very seriously for a moment, and then smiled. She was a handsome lady,
and this smile of hers, full of promise as it was, made her face the
most beautiful I have ever seen before or since. It is a large saying,
but it is true.

I remember that I remained in the corridor cooling my heels a weary
time, but finally Mrs. Forrest came out. "You may go in now," she said.
"It is all right; I'm glad I was called; I think I have made the
General understand everything as I do. There are some things that men
do not understand as well as women, and it is just as well that they do
not. I am sure you will be very kind to that little woman in there."

I tried to thank her, but there is a gratitude that cannot be expressed
in words, and I could but stand before her mumbling with my head bent.
"I know what you would say," she remarked, graciously. "The General and
I have perfect confidence in you."

I went into the room where General Forrest and Jane Ryder were.
"Shannon, what are you and Herndon up to? What do you mean by going on
in this way?" He spoke with some severity, but there was a humorous
twinkle in his blue-gray eyes. "More than that, you took occasion to
prejudice the jury. What did you say to Mrs. Forrest?"

"I simply asked her to be kind to the lady in here."

"Well, she was all of that," said the General, "and she threatened me
with her displeasure if I wasn't kind to you, and as she's the only
human being that I'm really afeared of, I reckon I'll have to let you
off this time. Oh, you needn't look so smiling; you are to be punished,
and that heavily. You are to be responsible for this young woman. You
are to take charge of her and restore her to her own people--mind you,
to her own people. You are responsible to me, and I reckon you know
what that means; if you don't you can just ask somebody that knows me."

I knew what it meant well enough, and I knew what his words meant. "The
lady is as safe with me, General, as if she were in her mother's arms."

"Now, that's the way to talk, and I believe you," said General Forrest.

All this time Jane Ryder had said not a word. She sat very quietly, but
there was not a sign of gloom or dejection in her face. But uneasiness
looked from her eyes. She spoke presently, while General Forrest was
looking through a large morocco memorandum-book that was a little the
worse for wear. "If you please," she said, "I should like to go back to
my friends to-night, if they are not all killed. They can do you no
harm even if they are alive. They are only a couple of women."

"Well, they are not killed," replied General Forrest without looking
up. "Wimmen make war on me and do a lot of damage, but I don't make war
on them. I'm letting you off on a technicality, Miss Ryder. You are not
a spy; you have never been inside my lines until to-night; and yet you
were in a fair way to find out a good many things that the other side
would like to know."

"I never found out as much as I'd like to know," she replied; "and
since he came bothering me I haven't found out anything."

Apparently General Forrest ignored the remark. He turned to me with a
slip of paper in his hand. "You'll have to change your name, Shannon.
This passport is made out to someone else. Read it."

He handed it to me, and I read aloud: "The bearer of this, Captain
Francis Leroy, is authorized to pass in and out the Federal lines,
night or day, without let or hindrance." It was signed by a great man
at Washington and counter-signed by one almost as great.

"Why, that belongs to me," said Jane Ryder; "where did you find it?"

"I reckon it's just a duplicate," said the General, smiling. "I've had
it some time."
