touched before.

Having set the little one on her feet, the Sioux stepped across the main
room to the window from which most of their observations had been made
on that floor. Melville followed him, and noticed that the smoke had
vanished, so that the sentinel on the hill was in sight again.

Red Feather thrust his hand through the windows, so that his fingers
projected slightly beyond. This was done to ascertain the direction of
the wind.

"Oogh!" he muttered, with a curious expression on his countenance "_wind
blow oder way!_ Great Spirit hear what pappoose say."

"Can it be possible?" asked the awed Melville.

There was no doubt of it; the slight breeze, which had been coming
directly from the barn toward the house had changed, and was now blowing
in exactly the opposite direction.

The chief and the youth passed into the smaller apartment which was
nearest the chimney. The former pressed his ear against the logs to help
his hearing. Had they caught the flames from the barn, which was still
burning furiously, he could not have failed to detect the fact. A
moment's attention told him that up to the present the building was
safe.

But it was not in the nature of things that the Sioux should refrain
because their first effort failed. They were not the ones to give up on
a single trial.

Several noteworthy things took place during the latter part of this
eventful afternoon. First of all, there was such a decided lowering of
the temperature that a fire would have felt comfortable to the occupants
of the building. It looked indeed to Melville as though one of those
fearful storms known in the west as "blizzards" was approaching.

This was hardly possible, for it was summer-time, but the plains of
Texas and many portions of the west are often swept by what are termed
"northers" during the warm season. These winds are accompanied by such
cutting cold that people and animals often perish, the suddenness of
the visitation shutting them out from securing refuge.

Red Feather offered his blanket to Dot, but she shook her head. "It's
too dirty," she said, noticing the soot which the owner did not seem to
mind; "I can use a blanket from the bed, for mamma did not take them all
with her."

Had Melville suspected the thought in the mind of his little sister, he
would have checked its utterance through fear of offending the
chieftain, but there was no need of that: one of the impossibilities was
for Dot to hurt his feelings.

The next most interesting event was the second failure of the Sioux to
set fire to the house. This was singular, for there seemed no reason why
they should not have succeeded with such facilities at command.

The barn burned so readily that long before dusk it was reduced to a
mass of smoking ruins.

From these, it would have appeared, enough brands could have been
collected to make a bonfire of the structure.

Several of the Sioux gathered fuel at one corner of the building, and
made an attempt to fire it. The sounds which reached those within left
no doubt of what was going on, and you may be sure they listened with
anxiety.

It was while matters were in this critical shape that Melville put the
direct question to Red Feather as to what he would do in the event of
the house being fired. The chieftain replied that, when he saw there was
no saving the building, he intended to take Dot in his arms and walk out
of the door among his own warriors. The lad was to follow immediately,
and he would insist that the lives of the children should be spared
because of the promise made by him to them.

Pressed further, the chief admitted that the plan was likely to be only
partially successful. He was confident he could save Dot, because of her
sex and years; but there was little hope for Melville. Unless prevented
by the care of the little girl, Red Feather was willing to join in the
fight which the youth would have to make for his life with scarcely an
earthly prospect of winning.

But the attempt to fire the log structure came to naught, and, strangest
of all, the Sioux gave it up--at least for a time, for it would have
been contrary to Indian nature had they abandoned the effort to destroy
their enemies so long as there was a chance of success.

Thus matters stood until the shadows of night began closing over the
prairie. During the interval, many glimpses of the Sioux had been
caught, as they moved backward and forward at will, sometimes mounted
and often on foot. The sentinel kept his place on the crest of the hill,
or rather, he exchanged it with one of his brother warriors, who walked
about, sat down, smoked his pipe, and used every means at his command to
cause the time to pass comfortably to him.

The failure of the arrival of help caused not only surprise but distress
to Melville Clarendon; for there was but one way of interpreting it:
something had befallen his parents by which they were prevented from
reaching the settlement.

The youth had tried all through the afternoon to drive away the
misgivings which had troubled him on this score; but he could do so no
longer. It was in keeping with the tactics of the Indians that, after
arranging to attack the home of Clarendons, they should circle to the
northward, so as to approach it from the direction of the settlement.
Had they done this, with a view of shutting off all escape to Barwell,
it was more than likely they did it early enough in the day to meet the
pioneer and his wife hurrying from the place of danger.

Had this meeting taken place, nothing could have saved the couple.
Melville secured some consolation from the belief that, if such an awful
calamity had overtaken his parents, the Sioux would give evidence of the
fact. That is to say, they would have taken possession of the horses and
enough of the property for the lad to see them on the first survey of
the assailants.

The fact that he did not detect anything of the kind might be accepted
as proof that no meeting had taken place with the particular party under
the leadership of Red Feather.

But that question was easily answered by Red Feather himself. He assured
Melville that he and his warriors had come from the south, arriving on
the spot only a short time before the appearance of the brother and
sister on the other bank of the stream. He had waved his blanket at the
children as a taunt, not supposing they would come any closer after
seeing him; but, riding over the hill, he peeped cautiously back, and
learned that Melville, not catching the meaning of the gesture, was
approaching his home. Thereupon the chief called back his men who were
riding off, and arranged to secure the young birds returning to the nest
from which the parents had flown.

All the comfort that the youth might have got from this story was
spoiled by the declaration of the chief that he believed an encounter
had taken place between Mr. Clarendon and the other party of Sioux which
reached the spot later in the afternoon. These were under the lead of
Tall Bear, a rival of Red Feather, between whom a jealousy amounting to
bitter enmity existed.

Had Red Feather not seen Tall Bear among the group he would have
adopted a course which the presence of that rival prevented. He would
have gone out among his own warriors, and insisted on his rights with a
vigor that could hardly have failed of success. Though his men were not
afraid of dispute with him, yet they were not likely to invite violence.
When they saw he was fully resolved they would yield. The conclusion to
be reached from this statement is that Red Feather after all did not
make half as determined an argument in behalf of his friends as he
appeared to have done. Melville, therefore, was right in his first
suspicion, though he was too thoughtful to say so.

[Illustration: "Something unusual was going on among the Sioux
outside."]

Darkness had not fully come when it became clear to the watchers within
the building that something unusual was going on among the Sioux
outside. Nearly the entire party came together on the crest of the hill,
where they were only dimly visible in the gathering gloom. They could be
seen walking back and forth, making many gestures, and talking so loud
that their voices were clearly heard.

[Illustration: "Red Feather strained his hearing to catch some words."]

Leaning against the side of the window, Red Feather strained his hearing
to catch some words that would give him an inkling of what it all meant.

The heart of the youth throbbed with the hope that the long-expected
help was in sight at last. It seemed to him the Sioux were acting just
as they would do in case they detected the approach of hostile horsemen.

But the sorely-tried lad could only wait until Red Feather should answer
the question on his tongue, or until it should be answered by the events
themselves.




CHAPTER EIGHT

TALL BEAR AND HIS WARRIORS--A SURPRISING DISCOVERY


You will recall that when Red Feather wedged himself in the narrow
window he said, in answer to the sharp questioning of Melville
Clarendon, that the Muddy Creek band of Sioux were so far off that
nothing was to be feared from them.

The original band of marauders numbered over a score, and were under the
joint leadership of Tall Bear and Red Feather, both of whom were eager
to sweep along the thin line of settlements like a cyclone, scattering
death and destruction in their path. It may strike you that so small a
force was hardly equal to the task of such a raid; but I have only to
remind you that the famous Geronimo and his Apaches, who made their home
among the alkali deserts and mountain fastnesses of Arizona and New
Mexico, numbered few warriors at times, and yet they baffled for years a
regiment of United States cavalry. It was only when the chieftain chose
to come in and surrender himself under the pledge of good treatment that
hostilities ended.

The twenty-odd horsemen under the leadership of Red Feather and Tall
Bear were fitting types of that savage horde which in the early summer
of 1876 blotted out General Custer and his troops. It so happened,
however, with the smaller party that they found no such favoring
circumstances to help them. At the first settler's cabin assailed they
discovered the inmates ready for them. In some way or other, several
families had learned of their danger in time to prepare for their
assailants.

It was clear to the Indians that the settlers in that section had taken
the alarm, and Red Feather proposed they should abandon their first plan
and push northward towards Barwell, attacking the isolated homes to the
south of that settlement. Tall Bear opposed so warmly, and with such
slurs on his rival, that a personal conflict was narrowly averted.

The end of the quarrel was that Red Feather, with five of his followers,
drew off from the rest and rode northward. The result of this separation
was unsatisfactory to both parties.

The friendly Indian who had hastened toward Barwell to warn the pioneers
of their danger did his work so well that hardly one was neglected. The
inmates of the first cabin attacked by Red Feather were awaiting him.
Only a few shots were exchanged, when the wrathful chieftain withdrew,
and, pushing to the northward, next swooped down on the dwelling of
Archibald Clarendon.

No resistance was encountered there, for, as you know, the inmates had
left some time before. For some reason never fully explained, Red
Feather did not fire the buildings at once. Shortly after, Melville
Clarendon and his sister appeared on the scene, and the incidents which
followed have already been told.

Meanwhile, Tall Bear and his warriors met with no better success than
the smaller party. The proof became so strong that the whole district
was on the alert that he abruptly changed his mind and led his warriors
at a sweeping gallop to the northward over the trail of Red Feather and
his warriors.

When he arrived on the scene he heard the curious story the five
warriors had to tell. A dwelling at last had been found in which the
occupants were not fully prepared, or rather, were so insignificant in
strength that no company of Sioux, however small, could consent to a
repulse.

But there stood the cabin defying them. Red Feather had forced his way
partly through the window and then was caught so fast that, but for the
mercy of the sturdy youth within, he would have been killed without
being able to use a finger to defend himself.

Among the whole party who heard the remarkable narrative, there was not
one who would have thought of keeping a promise made under such
circumstances as was that of the chief. No pledge could have been more
solemn, and yet those are the very ones that are first repudiated by the
red man.

To Tall Bear and his band the action of Red Feather in descending the
chimney was natural. The bitterest enemy of the chieftain never
questioned his courage, and, knowing how chagrined he must feel over his
mishap, they could understand the desperate feeling that prompted the
deed, the like of which was seldom if ever known before.

There was little said about Red Feather's wish to keep his agreement
with Melville, for the reason I have already hinted--his proposal to do
so was not earnest enough to mislead them.

But to the Sioux outside it looked very much as if the descent of the
chimney by the chief had marked the end of his career. Among all the
warriors there was not one who believed the truth--that he had been
changed from the fiercest enemy into the most beloved friend of the boy
and girl.

The tantalizing shout of Melville from the window was proof to the
warriors that Red Feather had been slain by the boy, though, as I have
said, no report of a gun was heard from within the building.

The chieftain's course, after proving himself a friend of the brother
and sister, showed his desire to keep his presence in the house
unsuspected by his own people. He took care that no glimpse of him was
caught through the windows, and he refrained from firing when he had any
number of chances to bring down an Indian.

Doubtless there were several reasons for this forbearance. Such a shot
would be credited to Melville, and might excite the Sioux to an attack
too furious to be resisted. At the same time, it is hardly to be
supposed that Red Feather's feelings had so changed, because of his wish
to save Dot and her brother, that he was ready to turn about and begin
shooting at the very ones whom he had led on this raid.

It cannot be said that Tall Bear grieved any more over the loss of his
rival leader than did most of the warriors. He prudently uttered some
words of sympathy, but they hardly deceived those who heard them. They
agreed with him, however, in declaring that his fall must be avenged,
and that the boy who had caused his death, as well as his little sister,
must suffer torture-punishment for the deed.

Several circuits around the building proved that it could hardly be
carried by the most determined assault in their power. All the windows
were too narrow to be used as a means of entrance, even if any one was
brave enough to repeat the disastrous experiment of the other chief. The
single door had already resisted the strongest shock they could give it,
and no weak point was visible.

True, the path used by Red Feather when he finally succeeded in gaining
the interior was open to the rest; but it is no reflection on their
courage to say that among the whole party there was not one willing to
head the procession down the chimney, even though but a solitary boy and
a single rifle stood in the way.

Clearly there was one means at the command of Tall Bear and his Sioux
which was not only terrible, but effective. They could set fire to the
building and reduce it to ashes.

The lookout on the hill reported the horizon clear in every direction;
and, since his wide sweep of vision extended toward every point of the
compass, he was able to discover the approach of hostile horsemen a good
while before they could reach the spot. He knew that if help came it
would be from the northward, where Barwell lay, whither Mr. Clarendon
and his wife had hurried on the first alarm. The prairie for a couple of
miles was under a scrutiny that would let nothing escape.

The circumstances were so favorable that Tall Bear and his party decided
to indulge in a feast. Enough poultry were wandering about the premises
to afford a fine meal for a larger band than he had with him, and it
took only a short time to wring the necks of more than a score of ducks
and chickens.

The Sioux gathered to the westward of the barn and ate like so many wild
animals until all were satisfied. The meal finished, they gave their
attention to the serious business before them. Had the incidents I am
relating taken place half a century ago, the red men would have been
obliged to resort to the old-fashioned flint and steel with which our
forefathers used to start a fire; but they were abreast of these modern
times to that extent that nearly every one carried more or less
lucifer-matches.

The favoring wind led to the barn being fired, under the belief that the
flames would quickly communicate with the house but a short distance
off; but, as you have learned, Providence favored the threatened ones to
that extent that the breeze changed its course, and for a time Dot and
Melville were saved.

[Illustration: "His attention was drawn to the sentinel on the
hill."--Page 86]

Tall Bear and the Sioux waited till, to their disappointment and
surprise, they saw the barn sink into blazing ruins and leave the house
intact.

The next proceeding was to gather what embers they could and pile them
against the dwelling, where they speedily burst into flames. It now
looked certain that the structure was doomed; but the heavy logs,
although dry on the outside, were damp within. It takes such timber a
long time to part with its natural moisture, and, fortunately for our
friends, a driving rain-storm less than a week previous had so soaked
the wood that only an intense and long-continued heat could set it
aflame. The logs were charred and scorched, and more than once appeared
to be on the point of breaking into a roaring blaze; but the brands
piled against the end of the house finally sank down to embers and
ashes, and though considerable smoke arose, the house stood really as
firm and as strong as at the first.

This was a keener disappointment than Tall Bear had yet met, for it
looked as though the most potent if not the only means at his command
was powerless to bring the boy to terms.

The chieftain himself examined the logs which had been subjected to the
fire. He dug his hunting-knife into them, and soon discovered why they
resisted the fire so effectually. Then he tested other parts of the
house in the same manner and with the same result.

For the first time since his arrival on the spot he was forced to see
the probability of another failure. His career from the hour he bounded
upon his pony and entered so eagerly on the raid had been a continual
disappointment. He was angered and resentful toward the supposed dead
Red Feather, because he allowed himself to be baffled at the beginning
by a solitary boy.

Tall Bear's pride was stirred, and he was unwilling to confess himself
beaten after openly blaming his predecessor for failing to capture the
place with less than one-third of his force.

But there seemed to be no help for it, unless he should persevere with
the fire until the logs of the house were forced into combustion. They
must yield in time, if the effort was kept up; and he was on the point
of renewing the attempt on a larger scale than before when his attention
was drawn to the sentinel on the hill, who uttered the startling cry
that horsemen were in sight to the northward.

[Illustration: "More Sioux comin'--open door quick."--Page 90]

The chief and the warriors who were not already on the spot hurried
thither to learn what it meant.

As I have explained elsewhere, this discovery did not take place until
