Indians were taking them toward the Ohio River. He knew he must catch
them before they crossed it and went to the Indian towns in the north.

The white men left their canoe. They traveled all day through the deep
woods. Then they made camp and waited for the long night to end. At
daylight they started out again.

Boone took short cuts through the woods, but he always found the trail.
His sharp eyes saw what the girls had left for him to see. One had dug
her heels into the soft mud. Another had left bits of her dress here
and there.

Boone led the young men straight through the heart of the forest to
Jemima and her friends. About noon the men caught sight of the girls.
The Indians had stopped with them for their noon meal. The white men
crept up. Bang! Bang! Bang! went their guns.

"It's Father!" Jemima cried.

"Fall flat on your faces, girls!" Daniel Boone shouted.

The white men ran toward the Indians. They shot their guns as they ran.

The Indians were taken by surprise. One Indian threw his tomahawk. It
almost hit the girls. Two Indians were shot. The others ran away.

The men took the three girls back to Boonesborough. Later the three
girls married the three young men.




The Fort Is Saved


Boone became known far and wide as the greatest man in the Kentucky
Wilderness. One winter, about a year after he had saved the girls from
the Indians, he went with some other men to a place where there were
salt springs. These were called salt licks because the wild animals
liked to lick the salt. The men planned to camp there several weeks.
They would boil the water in big kettles until there was only salt
left. Then they would take the salt back to the people at
Boonesborough.

One day Boone went out hunting alone. Suddenly he was surprised by
Indians. They were a war party led by Chief Blackfish. They were on
their way to Boonesborough. These Shawnee Indians came from north of
Kentucky. They felt that Henderson had no right to claim their hunting
grounds. Certainly _they_ had not sold Kentucky to him. They might not
have been so warlike if the American Revolution had not started. The
British were making friends with the Indians everywhere and helping
them fight the settlers.

Boone knew how the Shawnees felt about having to share their hunting
ground with the white men. But he knew also that he must find a way to
save the fort.

"Don't go to Boonesborough now," he told the Indians. "You don't have a
big enough war party. Boonesborough is far too strong for you to
capture."

This was not true at all. There were not many men at the fort. But
Daniel hoped to stall off the Shawnees until Boonesborough had time to
send for help.

"Wait until spring," he went on. "Then you won't have to fight. The
people will come willingly. I will bring them north to you. Right now
it is too cold for the women and the children to travel. But in the
spring they will come with you."

Chief Blackfish was delighted to find that Boone was so friendly. He
had admired Boone for a long time. He did not know that Boone was
trying hard to fool him.

"What about your men?" Chief Blackfish asked.

Boone thought quickly. He knew the Indians had seen the men at the salt
licks.

"I will lead you to my men," he told Chief Blackfish, "if you will
promise not to kill them."

Chief Blackfish promised. Boone took the Indians to his men.

"We are in great danger," he whispered to them. "We must go north with
the Indians, or they will kill us. The fort is in danger too. But
perhaps we can escape and warn our families."

At the end of the long journey the Indians and their prisoners reached
the Shawnee towns in the north. There, Chief Blackfish told Boone that
he wanted him for a son. He made Boone go through a long adoption
ceremony and gave him the name of Big Turtle.

Boone liked Chief Blackfish, but he did not really want to be a
Shawnee. He pretended to be pleased about becoming the Chief's son, but
he only pretended.

One day the Indians went hunting. While they were gone, Boone ran away
and started for Boonesborough.

The Indians followed him, but he was too clever for them. They lost his
trail. In four days he traveled one hundred and sixty miles.

Finally he reached Boonesborough.

"The Indians are on the way! Get ready to fight!" he told the people.

Soon Chief Blackfish came with over four hundred Shawnees. He called
Boone to come outside the fort. Daniel Boone went out bravely.

"Why did you run away?" Chief Blackfish asked Boone.

"I wanted to see my wife and my children," Boone answered.

"You have seen them," the Chief replied. "Now come back with me. You
and all your people."

"Give me a little time to think it over," Boone said.

He hoped that help would come from other forts. He waited and waited,
