will see great pastures fenced in with coyote-proof wire--pastures to be
used in lambing time so the young creatures will be safe from
prairie-dogs."

"Do you have coyotes on the range?"

"Do we? Do we? Folks would know you for a tenderfoot right off if they
heard you ask that question! The coyote, I'd have you know, is the pest
of the sheepman. He's the meanest critter--but there, why be talking?
You'll see for yourself soon enough. The government has spent thousands
of dollars killing coyotes on these ranges."

"To help the sheep-raisers?"

"So."

"Well, I don't wonder my father wanted Crescent Ranch to pay its full
share for permits. Since we are getting all these advantages, we ought
to bear our part of the expense, oughtn't we?" said Donald.

"That's my feeling. We ought to be proud, too, we are bearing it. It's a
grand country! I wasn't born here, like you, but I came here as a child,
and the bones of my people are here. I mean to live in America and take
what it offers, and wouldn't I be the churl not to give the little I
can in return! I haven't money, but I can live up to the laws. Scotchman
though I be 'twill no hinder me from making a good American of myself."

"Bully for you, Sandy!" cried Donald. Then he added soberly: "I am going
to be a better American when I get back home."

"Dinna wait till then, laddie--be a better one now!"

Sandy chanced to be deftly cutting the outline of a thistle on a spruce
staff he was carving for the boy. Donald watched him in silence as he
worked in the fading light. The sun had set behind the chain of near
hills, and the plateau where they were camping was gray with shadows.
Through the dusk they could see the flock lazily browsing among the
junipers.

Suddenly there was a cry from Sandy.

He threw down the staff and sprang to his feet.

"The herd!" he shouted. "They're off!"

Sure enough! Without a cry the leaders had started for the rimrock, and
in their wake--straight for the face of the precipice--was running the
entire flock.

"They're startled!" gasped Sandy. "We must head 'em off. Run for your
life! We must get between the brainless creatures and the cliff before
they go over."

Donald ran. He had never run so before. His training as a track sprinter
stood him in good stead now. But he had never been a long-distance
runner. Two hundred yards was his limit. Moreover he was not in
training. But he ran--ran as he did not know he could run. He gained on
the sheep. Sandy, in the meantime, was waving his arms to the dogs who,
understanding his slightest motion, now dashed ahead. The sheep,
however, were far in advance by this time. On they sped in mad panic.
Donald could run no more. He began to lag, his heart beating like a
hammer. Even Sandy, who from the opposite direction was racing for the
edge of the rock, slackened his pace.

The race was a hopeless one.

Then without warning, out of the trees at the left side of the field
rode a horseman at full gallop. With flying hoofs he cut in ahead of
the herd just as they neared the face of the rock.

The leaders swerved, circled, and turned about. The gait of the
stampeding flock lessened. The dogs skilfully steered the approaching
sheep out to one side where Sandy scattered them that they might not
collide with the ranks coming toward them. Gradually the fears of the
flock became quieted. Falling into a walk they worked their way into
their customary places and turned about, feeding as they went.

Immediately when Sandy saw them safe he pressed forward to the side of
the horseman where he beckoned Donald to join him.

"I spied your plight from the ridge above, Sandy McCulloch," called the
rider. "The rest of the Crescent herd has gone in to the Reserve and I
have had my eye out for you for days. I thought it was about time that
you were coming along."

"It's a good turn you've done me this day, Sargeant," Donald heard Sandy
say.

"You have done many a favor for me."

"Dinna be talking. It is little I ever did for you. An errand or two
perhaps, or carrying a message--but what is that? Any man would be glad
to do the same. To-night, though, you have saved my whole herd. We
should not have had a sheep left. Here is Master Donald Clark, the son
of our owner," went on Sandy, as Donald came nearer. "Let him thank you.
Don, this soldier is one of the government rangers."

Leaning from his saddle the horseman put out his hand.

"I am proud," he said, "to meet one of the owners of Crescent Ranch. If
you are learning about the range, Master Clark, you cannot be in better
company than to be with Sandy McCulloch. There is little about sheeping
that he doesn't know; nor is there a cleaner-handed herder to be found.
We never need to see his permit or count his sheep. He is no
lawbreaker!"

"I hope none of our men are," replied Donald, shyly.

"Crescent Ranch has always had the reputation of being run on the
square. We have no complaint to make," was the ranger's answer.

"We--my father means that it shall be," the boy asserted modestly.

"I do not doubt he does. You will have trouble, though, I fear, in
finding another manager who can match Old Angus--or even Johnson. They
were rare men who were famed throughout the county for their honesty and
common sense."

"We shall try to find some other manager as good."

"May you be so fortunate. Good luck to you!"

With a wave of his hand the ranger cantered into the darkness and was
soon lost from sight.

"You see, don't you, Don, that the rangers are not our natural born
enemies after all," said Sandy, with a good-humored smile that bared his
glistening teeth.

"I should say not!"

"They are all like that if we but live up to our part of the bargain. I
never yet met a ranger who was not friendly and kind. But you cannot
have folks for your friends if you do not meet them half-way."

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII

DONALD HAS A SURPRISE


It was something of a disappointment when one morning a week or two
later the camp-tender, who had scrambled up over the rimrock, informed
Donald that he was to return to the central camp where his father would
meet him, and take him back to Crescent.

"The ponies are tethered just below, so you can ride down along with
me," said the Mexican. "There is nothing the matter, only your father
has more than he can do with but Thornton and Green to help him. He
needs you for a while. He told me to tell you that in a few weeks you
might come back."

Donald looked regretfully at Sandy.

"I'm sorry to go, Sandy. I promised, though, that I would return to
Crescent whenever father wanted me; of course I am anxious to help him
all I can. I cannot realize that it is June, and that I have been two
months on the range. What a jolly time we have had! It seems a pity to
go and leave you here by yourself."

"It would not be the first time I have been alone in the hills," smiled
Sandy.

"He'll not be by himself either," put in Pete, the Mexican, "for Tobin
came up over the trail with me and is to bear Sandy company."

Donald's face brightened.

"I know you'll not be lonely, Sandy," he said, "but suppose anything
happened to you--what if you happened to be hurt as Johnson was?"

"Aye, poor Johnson! What do they hear from him, Pete?"

"Mr. Clark has been to Glen City a number of times to see him. He is
getting on finely! The ribs are mending and the hip, too. His heart is
the trouble now; he is breaking his heart for Crescent and the range.
The doctor says that he will never be able to come back to the ranch.
Mr. Clark is going to settle him and his wife on a farm of their own in
California, where their son is."

"Oh, I am very glad!" cried Donald. "Father said he should always look
out for Johnson because he had been so faithful."

"It is like your father to do it--and like your grandfather, too, Don.
May you be as good a man! Now get your traps together and be off with
Pete. It's many a time I'll be thinking of you after you are gone,
laddie."

"But you know I am coming back in a few weeks, Sandy."

"There's long weeks and short weeks; it all depends on what you're
doing," was Sandy's whimsical answer. "Now be off. Why, you'd think I
was seeing you to India instead of just down to the lowlands!"

As he dropped over the rimrock, Donald tried to laugh. It was not until
he was mounted upon the little Mexican pony that he gained courage to
look up. Outlined against the sky Sandy was standing on a point of rock,
waving his sombrero. That was the last Donald saw of him.

Chatting as they rode down the mountainside the boy and Pete pressed
forward over the trail. At noon they dismounted and lunched on salt-pork
and pilot bread. Then off they cantered again. The tiny ponies,
sure-footed as mules, made their way over the steep inclines of the
hilly country with astonishing daintiness, but although they maintained
a fair and even speed it was sunset when the white top of the prairie
schooner came into sight, drawn up beside a stream and sheltered by a
group of great trees. Several Mexican ponies were pastured near it. The
curtains at the end of the wagon were parted and fastened back and
inside Donald could catch a glimpse of Manuel, the Mexican cook, busily
preparing the food. A curl of faint smoke rose from the tin pipe which
protruded through the canvas, arching the top of the wagon. Then as
Donald looked, into the clearing came the erect figure of his father.

[Illustration: THE PANTING PONY STOOD STILL]

The boy gave a shrill whistle on his fingers and touched the spurs to
his horse's flank.

"Father!" he called.

Another moment and the panting pony stood still near the wagon, his
sides heaving.

Donald dismounted and ran to meet his father.

"Well, well!" was Mr. Clark's first exclamation. "How is this? I sent a
pale-faced American boy to the range and I get an Indian in exchange!"

"I suppose I am tanned," laughed Donald. "I know my hands are. As for my
face--I have not seen it since I started. We don't have looking-glasses
in the hills."

"And you enjoyed your trip?"

"I had the time of my life, father! It is simply bully up there. I wish
you had been along."

"I am planning to go back with you in two or three weeks. It seemed a
pity to bring you down, but I did need you, Don. If it had only been
that I missed you I should not have sent, no matter how much I wanted to
see you."

"I was glad to come, sir. How is everything at Crescent?"

"Going well. We are getting in a big crop of alfalfa from the south
meadow. That is why I wanted you. You will now have to turn farmer and
pitch hay for a while."

"All right!"

And that was what Donald did. For the next few weeks he was busy helping
his father harvest the first crop of alfalfa grass, drying it, and
storing it away in the great sprawling barn of the home ranch for winter
feed. Days of hard work were succeeded by nights of heavy slumber. Life
was very real. The boy was doing something--something that
told--something that was of use to other persons; he had a place to
fill, duties for which he was responsible. Continually he found himself
speaking of "our ranch" and suggesting to his father that "we" do such
and such things.

Mr. Clark rubbed his hands with satisfaction. Although he and Donald had
always preserved a close comradeship no experience had ever drawn them
so near together as had this common interest. It was happiness to each
of them. From the time the boy tumbled out of bed in the early morning
until he tumbled in again at dusk his whistle could be heard shrill
above the click of mowing-machines, and the tramp of horses' hoofs.

At last came the day when the last load of alfalfa was housed under
cover; then Mr. Clark said to Thornton:

"Well, Thornton, there seems to be nothing more for which we shall be
needed at present. You can deal out the rations and send them to the
three central camps without me; you can also order necessary supplies
from Glen City. Some repairs remain for you to oversee, but I am sure
you fully understand about them, and can manage them without my help.
To-morrow, therefore, if the day is fine, Donald and I will set out for
the range, I think."

Donald threw his hat into the air.

"To join Sandy, father?" he asked eagerly.

"That is my plan."

"Hurrah!"

Mr. Clark looked amused at his enthusiasm.

"One would think you a born shepherd, Don, instead of a boy who has only
been out on the range with a herder."

"Why do you call Sandy just a herder, father?" Donald asked, seeming to
fear that the term was a slight to his friend the Scotchman.

"Because he is a herder, son. A shepherd is a man who herds or tends his
own sheep--sheep that belong to him; a herder, on the contrary, is a man
hired to care for other people's sheep. There is a great difference, you
see. Generally speaking, a shepherd will take more pains with a flock
than a herder will on the principle that we are more interested in our
own possessions than in those which are not our own."

"No one could take better care of sheep, father, than Sandy does."

"I feel sure of that," agreed his father, gravely. "In fact all our
herders are honest men--I am convinced of it. After the next shearing I
mean to give to each man a small band of sheep for his own. He may run
them with the flocks, sell the wool, and keep the money as a nest-egg.
The men deserve a share in the profits of Crescent Ranch and I should
like them to have it in return for their splendid spirit of loyalty."

"Even Thornton?"

Mr. Clark hesitated.

"I have been watching Thornton," he admitted slowly. "That is why I kept
him with me, and why I stayed behind."

"Why, I never thought of that being the reason!"

"It was my chief reason."

"But now you are going off and leaving Thornton alone," Donald said,
somewhat puzzled.

"Yes, and I am leaving him in a position of trust, too. The supplies and
much of our business is in his hands. He knows it. If he proves himself
worthy, I shall appoint him, when we leave here, as manager in Johnson's
place; if he abuses the confidence I am placing in him he will force me
to appoint some one else. I wish to be perfectly fair."

"But I do not like Thornton," declared Donald.

"We must never be guided by our prejudices, Don."

"And anyway," went on the boy, "I don't see how you will know what he is
doing. You will be miles away in the hills. He could do almost anything
he chose. Have you left some one to watch him, father?"

"No, indeed, son. That would be a mean method; don't you think so? To
set a trap for a man, or to spy upon him would be contemptible!"

Donald hung his head, ashamed of the suggestion.

"No," continued Mr. Clark less severely, "I have left no one on guard
over Thornton but himself. I am really trusting him."

"You will never find out what he does, then."

"Yes, I shall."

"I don't see how."

"Thornton himself shall tell me."

Donald gasped.

"He never will tell you, father!" announced the boy positively.

"Wait and see. Now let us think no more of Thornton, for it is of Sandy
that we are to talk. He has a great surprise for you."

"A surprise for me!"

"Yes."

Mr. Clark studied the lad's mystified expression with pleasure.

"A surprise for me!" repeated Donald. "What can it be!"

"You will see."

"Aren't you going to tell me?"

"No, not a word. It would spoil Sandy's fun."

"A surprise!" reiterated Donald over and over.

As they rode from the central camp up over the rough trail Don
speculated constantly as to what could be in store for him. It seemed a
long journey for he was impatient to solve the waiting enigma. What
surprise could Sandy have concocted? At the border of the Reserve they
met the ranger who chanced to be patrolling that portion of the
government line. He remembered Donald very well and greeted him kindly;
he also had a cordial word for Mr. Clark. Donald, however, begrudged
even this brief delay and was glad when they plunged into the woods and
were on their way through the National Forest.

Pete, the Mexican camp-tender who had come with them as guide, knew the
country as an American boy knows his A B C's. He hunted out sheltered
nooks where they could camp at night, taking great care to build the
fire on a rocky base that it might not set ablaze the brush and litter
of pine-needles about them.

"Many a careless shepherd sets a forest fire through being thoughtless,"
he said. "Acres of timber will be burned off a hillside by one person
who did not put out his fire, or scattered sparks in the dried
underbrush. Old Angus trained us Crescent men always to build our fires
on a flat rock if we could; then there is no danger of our doing damage
in the reserve or elsewhere."

"It is a wise plan," Mr. Clark said heartily. "I wish all herders were
as careful."

So they journeyed on--now in the sunlight of the plateaus, now in the
shadows of the forest. Then one morning they suddenly emerged into an
emerald meadow glowing with sunshine. There a beautiful sight met
Donald's eye.

Spread out like a fan the herd was grazing on the rich herbage of the
mountain pasture, their backs to the brilliant light as was their wont.
But of these details Donald was not conscious. What held him spellbound
was the miracle that had happened in his absence. Now he knew the
surprise that Sandy had for him! Beside every ewe in the flock stood a
tiny white lamb!

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX

A SECOND ADVENTURE


Donald's delight at being back on the range was equaled only by Sandy's
pleasure at having him there. The first thing, of course, was to display
the lambs to the boy and Mr. Clark.

With no little pride the Scotchman led the newcomers over the pasture,
pointing out the finest blooded creatures in the flock.

"One would think, Sandy, that you were a mother hen with a brood of
chicks!" laughed Donald's father. "Well, you have a right to be pleased
with your herd. You have a fine lot of lambs."

"They are no so handsome just now, sir," Sandy chuckled. "But give them
time! A few weeks more, and a winsome sight they'll be."

"Are--are--lambs always so long-legged?" queried Donald timidly, anxious
not to hurt Sandy's feelings. "These seem to have no bodies at all--just
legs."

"That is their nature, lad. They have only enough body to keep their
legs alive. Young lambs are ever like that. Later they fill out. It is
their strong legs that enable them to travel with the flock as soon as
they are three or four weeks old. But I am proud of them--legs or no
legs. Now that they are here, our next task is to bring them through
alive. We have lost but a few thus far. Luckily we had several sets of
twins, so we have been able to give a lamb to every mother sheep that
lost her baby. We fasten the strange lamb inside the skin of the dead
one, and the mother is as well pleased as if she had her own back
again."

"What a funny idea!" Donald said.

"Yes, isn't it? You see sheep recognize their young merely by scent. The
power of smell is remarkably keen in all sheep. They can tell their
babies no other way. We do not want any of the ewes grieving because
they have no lamb--they do grieve, poor things--so we have to fool them
a little. It is a fair thing to do because the ewes with twins do not
need two. They are just as happy with one," explained Sandy.

"And now you will have a big, big flock to take care of, won't you,
Sandy?"

"Aye! There is much more to do now. I am glad you have come back, Don,
for I can put you to work."

"You must put me to work also, Sandy," Mr. Clark observed, smiling.

Sandy shook his head.

"Well, I reckon not. It would be a fine thing for me to be asking a
gentleman like you to put your hand to anything, now wouldn't it!"

Evidently the idea amused the herder.

