had chosen. It was where the water was quite deep.

"There mustn't be the least chance that the ice will ever get
thick enough too close up my doorway, said he, "and I'm sure it
never will here. I must make the foundations strong and the walls
thick. I must have plenty of mud to plaster with, and inside, up
above the water, I must have the snuggest, warmest room where I
can sleep in comfort. This is the place to build it, and it is
high time I was at work."

With that Paddy swam over to the place where he had cut the trees
for his dam, and his heart was light, for he had long ago learned
that the surest way to be happy is to be busy.



CHAPTER X  Paddy Starts His House.

Jerry Muskrat was very much interested when he found that Paddy
the Beaver, who you know, is his cousin, was building a house.
Jerry is a house-builder himself, and down deep in his heart he
very much doubted if Paddy could build as good a house as he
could. His house was down in the Smiling Pool, and Jerry thought
it a very wonderful house indeed, and was very proud of it. It
was built of mud and sod and little alder and willow twigs and
bulrushes. Jerry had spent one winter in it, and he had decided
to spend another there after he had fixed it up a little. So, as
long as he didn't have to build a brand-new house, he could
afford the time to watch his cousin Paddy. Perhaps he hoped that
Paddy would ask his advice.

But Paddy did nothing of the kind. He had seen Jerry Muskrat's
house, and he had smiled. But he  had taken great pains not to
let Jerry see that smile. He wouldn't have hurt Jerry's feelings
for the world. He is too polite and good-natured to do anything
like that. So Jerry sat on the end of an old log and watched
Paddy work. The first thing to build was the foundation. This was
of mud and grass with sticks worked into it to hold it together.
Paddy dug the mud from the bottom of his new pond. And because
the pond was new, there was a great deal of grassy sod there,
which was just what Paddy needed. It was very convenient.

Jerry watched a little while and then, because Jerry is a worker
himself, he just had to get busy and help. Rather timidly he told
his big cousin that he would like to have a share in building the
new house.

"All right," replied Paddy, "that will be fine. You can bring mud
while I am getting the sticks and grass."

So Jerry dived down to the bottom of the pond and dug up mud and
piled it on the foundation and was happy. The little stars looked
down and twinkled merrily as they watched the two workers. So the
foundation grew and grew down under the water. Jerry was very
much surprised at the size of it. It was ever and ever so much
bigger than the foundation for his own house. You see, he had
forgotten how much bigger Paddy is.

Each night Jerry and Paddy worked, resting during the daytime.
Occasionally Bobby Coon or Reddy Fox or Unc' Billy Possum or
Jimmy Skunk would come to the edge of the pond to see what was
going on. Peter Rabbit came every night. But they couldn't see
much because, you know, Paddy and Jerry were working under water.

But at last Peter was rewarded. There, just above the water, was
a splendid platform of mud and grass and sticks. A great many
sticks were carefully laid as soon as the platform was above the
water, for Paddy was very particular about this. You see, it was
to be the floor for the splendid room he was planning to build.
When it suited him, he began to pile mud in the very middle.

Jerry puzzled and puzzled over this. Where was Paddy's room going
to be, if he piled up the mud that way? But he didn't like to ask
questions, so he kept right on helping. Paddy would dive down to
the bottom and then come up with double handfuls of mud, which he
held against his chest. He would scramble out onto the platform
and waddle over to the pile in the middle, where he would put the
mud and pat it down. Then back to the bottom for more.

And so the mud pile grew and grew, until it was quite two feet
high.

"Now," said Paddy, "I'll build the walls, and I guess you can't
help me much with those. I'm going to begin them tomorrow night.
Perhaps you will like to see me do it, Cousin Jerry."

"I certainly will," replied Jerry, still puzzling over that pile
of mud in the middle.



CHAPTER XI  Peter Rabbit and Jerry Muskrat Are Puzzled.

Jerry Muskrat was more and more sure that his big cousin, Paddy
the Beaver, didn't know quite so much as he might about
house-building. Jerry would have liked to offer some suggestions,
but he didn't quite dare. You see, he was very anxious not to
displease his big cousin. But he felt that he simply had got to
speak his mind to someone, so he swam across to where he had seen
Peter Rabbit almost every night since Paddy began to build. Sure
enough, Peter was there, sitting up very straight and staring
with big round eyes at the platform of mud and sticks out in the
water where Paddy the Beaver was at work.

"Well, Peter, what do you think of it?" asked Jerry

"What is it?" asked Peter innocently. "Is it another dam?"

Jerry threw back his head and laughed and laughed.

Peter looked at him suspiciously. "I don't see anything to laugh
at," said he.

"Why, it's a house, you stupid. It's Paddy's new house," replied
Jerry, wiping the tears of laughter from his eyes.

"I'm not stupid!" retorted Peter. "How was I to know that that
pile of mud and sticks is meant for a house? It certainly doesn't
look it. Where is the door?"

"To tell you the truth, I don't think it is much of a house
myself," replied Jerry. "It has got a door, all right. In fact it
has got three. You can't see them because they are under water,
and there is a passage from each right up through that platform
of mud and sticks, which is the foundation of the house. It
really is a very fine foundation, Peter; it really is. But what
I can't understand is what Paddy is thinking of by building that
great pile of mud right in the middle. When he gets his walls
built, where will his bedroom be? There won't be any room at all.
It won't be a house at all--just a big useless pile of sticks and
mud.

Peter scratched his head and then pulled his whiskers thoughtfully
as he gazed out at the pile in the water where Paddy the Beaver
was at work.

"It does look foolish, that's a fact," said he. "Why don't you
point out to him the mistake he is making, Jerry? You have built
such a splendid house yourself that you ought to be able to help
Paddy and show him his mistakes."

Jerry had smiled a very self-satisfied smile when Peter mentioned
his fine house, but he shook his head at the suggestion that he
should give Paddy advice.

"I--I don't just like to," he confessed. "You know, he might not
like it and--and it doesn't seem as if it would be quite polite.

Peter sniffed. "That wouldn't trouble me any if he were my
cousin," said he.

Jerry shook his head, "No, I don't believe it would," he replied,
"but it does trouble me and--and--well, I think I'll wait
awhile."

Now all this time Paddy had been hard at work. He was bringing
the longest branches which he had cut from the trees out of which
he had built his dam, and a lot of slender willow and alder
poles. He pushed these ahead of him as he swam. When he reached
the foundation of his house, he would lean them against the pile
of mud in the middle with their big ends resting on the
foundation.  So he worked all the way around until by and by the
mud pile in the middle couldn't be seen. It was completely
covered with sticks, and they were cunningly fastened together at
the tops.



CHAPTER  XII  Jerry Muskrat Learns Something

     If you think you know it all
     You are riding for a fall.
     Use your ears and use your eyes,
     But hold your tongue and you'll be wise.

Jerry Muskrat will tell you that is as true as true can be. Jerry
knows. He found it out for himself. Now he is very careful what
he says about other people or what they are doing. But he wasn't
so careful when his cousin, Paddy the Beaver, was building his
house. No, Sir, Jerry wasn't so careful then. He though he knew
more about building a house than Paddy did. He was sure of it
when he watched Paddy heap up a great pile of mud right in the
middle where his room ought to be, and then build a wall of
sticks around it. He said as much to Peter Rabbit.

Now it is never safe to say anything to Peter Rabbit that you
don't care to have others know. Peter has a great deal of respect
for Jerry Muskrat's opinion on house-building. You see, he very
much admires Jerry's snug house in the Smiling Pool. It really is
a very fine house, and Jerry may be excused for being proud of
it. But that doesn't excuse Jerry for thinking that he knows all
there is to know about house-building. Of course Peter told
everyone he met that Paddy the Beaver was making a foolish
mistake in building his house, and that Jerry Muskrat, who ought
to know, said so.

So whenever they got the chance, the little people of the Green
Forest and Green Meadows would steal up to the shore of Paddy's
new pond and chuckle as they looked out at the great pile of
sticks and mud which Paddy had built for a house, but in which he
had forgotten to make a room. At least they supposed that he had
forgotten this very important thing. He must have, for there
wasn't any room. It was a great joke. They laughed a lot about
it, and they lost a great deal of the respect for Paddy which
they had had since he built his wonderful dam.
