"I wish you were going with me," said Paul.

"Sometimes when I think that I am all alone it discourages me. It would
be so much pleasanter to have some one with me."

"I shall come sometime," said John, "when I am a little older. I heard
father say something the other day about my going into a store in the
city. So we may meet again."

"I hope we shall."

They were just turning a bend of the road, when Paul chanced to look
backward. About a quarter of a mile back he descried a horse and wagon
wearing a familiar look. Fixing his eyes anxiously upon them, he was
soon made aware that his suspicions were only too well founded. It was
Mr. Mudge, doubtless in quest of him.

"What shall I do?" he asked, hurriedly of his companion.

"What's the matter?"

This was quickly explained.

John was quickwitted, and he instantly decided upon the course proper
to be pursued. On either side of the road was a growth of underbrush so
thick as to be almost impenetrable.

"Creep in behind there, and be quick about it," directed John, "there is
no time to lose."

"There," said he, after Paul had followed his advice, "if he can see you
now he must have sharp eyes."

"Won't you come in too?"

"Not I," said John, "I am anxious to see this Mr. Mudge, since you have
told me so much about him. I hope he will ask me some questions."

"What will you tell him?"

"Trust me for that. Don't say any more. He's close by."




X.

MR. MUDGE MEETS HIS MATCH.


John lounged along, appearing to be very busily engaged in making a
whistle from a slip of willow which he had a short time before cut from
the tree. He purposely kept in the middle of the road, apparently quite
unaware of the approach of the vehicle, until he was aroused by the
sound of a voice behind him.

"Be a little more careful, if you don't want to get run over."

John assumed a look of surprise, and with comic terror ran to the side
of the road.

Mr. Mudge checked his horse, and came to a sudden halt.

"I say, youngster, haven't you seen a boy of about your own size walking
along, with a bundle in his hand?"

"Tied up in a red cotton handkerchief?" inquired John.

"Yes, I believe so," said Mr. Mudge, eagerly, "where did you----"

"With a blue cloth cap?"

"Yes, where----"

"Gray jacket and pants?"

"Yes, yes. Where?"

"With a patch on one knee?"

"Yes, the very one. When did you see him?" said Mr. Mudge, getting ready
to start his horse.

"Perhaps it isn't the one you mean," continued John, who took a
mischievous delight in playing with the evident impatience of Mr. Mudge;
"the boy that I saw looked thin, as if he hadn't had enough to eat."

Mr. Mudge winced slightly, and looked at John with some suspicion.
But John put on so innocent and artless a look that Mr. Mudge at once
dismissed the idea that there was any covert meaning in what he said.
Meanwhile Paul, from his hiding-place in the bushes, had listened with
anxiety to the foregoing colloquy. When John described his appearance so
minutely, he was seized with a sudden apprehension that the boy meant
to betray him. But he dismissed it instantly. In his own singleness of
heart he could not believe such duplicity possible. Still, it was not
without anxiety that he waited to hear what would be said next.

"Well," said Mr. Mudge, slowly, "I don't know but he is a little PEAKED.
He's been sick lately, and that's took off his flesh."

"Was he your son?" asked John, in a sympathizing tone; "you must feel
quite troubled about him."

He looked askance at Mr. Mudge, enjoying that gentleman's growing
irritation.

"My son? No. Where----"

"Nephews perhaps?" suggested the imperturbable John, leisurely
continuing the manufacture of a whistle.

"No, I tell you, nothing of the kind. But I can't sit waiting here."

"Oh, I hope you'll excuse me," said John, apologetically. "I hope you
won't stop on my account. I didn't know you were in a hurry."

"Well, you know it now," said Mr. Mudge, crossly. "When and where did
you see the boy you have described? I am in pursuit of him."

"Has he run away?" inquired John in assumed surprise.

"Are you going to answer my question or not?" demanded Mr. Mudge,
angrily.

"Oh, I beg your pardon. I shouldn't have asked so many questions, only I
thought he was a nice-looking boy, and I felt interested in him."

"He's a young scamp," said Mr. Mudge, impetuously, "and it's my belief
that you're another. Now answer my question. When and where did you see
this boy?"

This time Mr. Mudge's menacing look warned John that he had gone far
enough. Accordingly he answered promptly, "He passed by our farm this
morning."

"How far back is that?"

"About three miles."

"Did he stop there?"

"Yes, he stopped a while to rest."

"Have you seen him since?"

"Yes, I saw him about half a mile back."

"On this road?"

"Yes, but he turned up the road that branches off there."

"Just what I wanted to find out," said Mr. Mudge, in a tone of
satisfaction, "I'm sure to catch him."

So saying, he turned about and put his horse to its utmost speed,
determined to make up for lost time. When he was fairly out of sight,
Paul came forth from his hiding-place.

"How could you do so!" he asked in a reproachful tone.

"Could I do what?" asked John, turning a laughing face towards Paul.
"Didn't I tell old Mudge the exact truth? You know you did turn up that
road. To be sure you didn't go two rods before turning back. But he
didn't stop to ask about that. If he hadn't been in such a hurry,
perhaps I should have told him. Success to him!"

"You can't think how I trembled when you described me so particularly."

"You didn't think I would betray you?" said John, quickly.

"No, but I was afraid you would venture too far, and get us both into
trouble."

"Trust me for that, Paul; I've got my eyes wide open, and ain't easily
caught. But wasn't it fun to see old Mudge fuming while I kept him
waiting. What would he have said if he had known the bird was so near at
hand? He looked foolish enough when I asked him if you were his son."

John sat down and gave vent to his pent-up laughter which he had felt
obliged to restrain in the presence of Mr. Mudge. He laughed so heartily
that Paul, notwithstanding his recent fright and anxiety, could not
resist the infection. Together they laughed, till the very air seemed
vocal with merriment.

John was the first to recover his gravity.

"I am sorry, Paul," he said, "but I must bid you good-by. They will miss
me from the house. I am glad I have got acquainted with you, and I hope
I shall see you again some time before very long. Good-by, Paul."

"Good-by, John."

The two boys shook hands and parted. One went in one direction, the
other in the opposite. Each looked back repeatedly till the other was
out of sight. Then came over Paul once more a feeling of sadness and
desolation, which the high spirits of his companion had for the time
kept off. Occasionally he cast a glance backwards, to make sure that
Mr. Mudge was not following him. But Paul had no cause to fear on that
score. The object of his dread was already some miles distant in a
different direction.

For an hour longer, Paul trudged on. He met few persons, the road not
being very much frequented. He was now at least twelve miles from his
starting-place, and began to feel very sensibly the effects of heat
and fatigue combined. He threw himself down upon the grass under the
overhanging branches of an appletree to rest. After his long walk repose
seemed delicious, and with a feeling of exquisite enjoyment he stretched
himself out at full length upon the soft turf, and closed his eyes.

Insensibly he fell asleep. How long he slept he could not tell. He was
finally roused from his slumber by something cold touching his cheek.
Starting up he rubbed his eyes in bewilderment, and gradually became
aware that this something was the nose of a Newfoundland dog, whose keen
scent had enabled him to discover the whereabouts of the small stock
of provisions with which Paul had been supplied by his late companion.
Fortunately he awoke in time to save its becoming the prey of its canine
visitor.

"I reckon you came nigh losing your dinner," fell upon his ears in a
rough but hearty tone.

At the same time he heard the noise of wheels, and looking up, beheld a
specimen of a class well known throughout New England--a tin pedler. He
was seated on a cart liberally stocked with articles of tin ware. From
the rear depended two immense bags, one of which served as a receptacle
for white rags, the other for bits of calico and whatever else may fall
under the designation of "colored." His shop, for such it was, was
drawn at a brisk pace by a stout horse, who in this respect presented a
contrast to his master, who was long and lank. The pedler himself was
a man of perhaps forty, with a face in which shrewdness and good humor
seemed alike indicated. Take him for all in all, you might travel some
distance without falling in with a more complete specimen of the Yankee.

"So you came nigh losing your dinner," he repeated, in a pleasant tone.

"Yes," said Paul, "I got tired and fell asleep, and I don't know when I
should have waked up but for your dog."

"Yes, Boney's got a keen scent for provisions," laughed the pedler.
"He's a little graspin', like his namesake. You see his real name is
Bonaparte; we only call him Boney, for short."

Meanwhile he had stopped his horse. He was about to start afresh, when a
thought struck him.

"Maybe you're goin' my way," said he, turning to Paul; "if you are,
you're welcome to a ride."

Paul was very glad to accept the invitation. He clambered into the cart,
and took a seat behind the pedler, while Boney, who took his recent
disappointment very good-naturedly, jogged on contentedly behind.

"How far are you goin'?" asked Paul's new acquaintance, as he whipped up
his horse.

Paul felt a little embarrassed. If he had been acquainted with the names
of any of the villages on the route he might easily have answered. As it
was, only one name occurred to him.

"I think," said he, with some hesitation, "that I shall go to New York."

"New York!" repeated the pedler, with a whistle expressive of his
astonishment.

"Well, you've a journey before you. Got any relations there?"

"No."

"No uncles, aunts, cousins, nor nothing?"

Paul shook his head.

"Then what makes you go? Haven't run away from your father and mother,
hey?" asked the pedler, with a knowing look.

"I have no father nor mother," said Paul, sadly enough.

"Well, you had somebody to take care of you, I calculate. Where did you
live?"

"If I tell you, you won't carry me back?" said Paul, anxiously.

"Not a bit of it. I've got too much business on hand for that."

Relieved by this assurance, Paul told his story, encouraged thereto
by frequent questions from his companion, who seemed to take a lively
interest in the adventures of his young companion.

"That's a capital trick you played on old Mudge," he said with a hearty
laugh which almost made the tins rattle. "I don't blame you a bit for
running away. I've got a story to tell you about Mrs. Mudge. She's a
regular skinflint."




XI.

WAYSIDE GOSSIP.


This was the pedler's promised story about Mrs. Mudge.

"The last time I was round that way, I stopped, thinking maybe they
might have some rags to dispose of for tin-ware. The old lady seemed
glad to see me, and pretty soon she brought down a lot of white rags.
I thought they seemed quite heavy for their bulk,--howsomever, I wasn't
looking for any tricks, and I let it go. By-and-by, when I happened to
be ransacking one of the bags, I came across half a dozen pounds or more
of old iron tied up in a white cloth. That let the cat out of the bag. I
knew why they were so heavy, then, I reckon I shan't call on Mrs. Mudge
next time I go by."

"So you've run off," he continued, after a pause, "I like your
spunk,--just what I should have done myself. But tell me how you managed
to get off without the old chap's finding it out."

Paul related such of his adventures as he had not before told, his
companion listening with marked approval.

"I wish I'd been there," he said. "I'd have given fifty cents, right
out, to see how old Mudge looked, I calc'late he's pretty well tired
with his wild-goose chase by this time."

It was now twelve o'clock, and both the travelers began to feel the
pangs of hunger.

"It's about time to bait, I calc'late," remarked the pedler.

The unsophisticated reader is informed that the word "bait," in New
England phraseology, is applied to taking lunch or dining.

At this point a green lane opened out of the public road, skirted on
either side by a row of trees. Carpeted with green, it made a very
pleasant dining-room. A red-and-white heifer browsing at a little
distance looked up from her meal and surveyed the intruders with mild
attention, but apparently satisfied that they contemplated no invasion
of her rights, resumed her agreeable employment. Over an irregular stone
wall our travelers looked into a thrifty apple-orchard laden with fruit.
They halted beneath a spreading chestnut-tree which towered above its
neighbors, and offered them a grateful shelter from the noonday sun.

From the box underneath the seat, the pedler took out a loaf of bread,
a slice of butter, and a tin pail full of doughnuts. Paul, on his side,
brought out his bread and gingerbread.

"I most generally carry round my own provisions," remarked the pedler,
between two mouthfuls. "It's a good deal cheaper and more convenient,
too. Help yourself to the doughnuts. I always calc'late to have some
with me. I'd give more for 'em any day than for rich cake that ain't
fit for anybody. My mother used to beat everybody in the neighborhood on
making doughnuts. She made 'em so good that we never knew when to stop
eating. You wouldn't hardly believe it, but, when I was a little shaver,
I remember eating twenty-three doughnuts at one time. Pretty nigh killed
me."

"I should think it might," said Paul, laughing.

"Mother got so scared that she vowed she wouldn't fry another for three
months, but I guess she kinder lost the run of the almanac, for in less
than a week she turned out about a bushel more."

All this time the pedler was engaged in practically refuting the saying,
that a man cannot do two things at once. With a little assistance from
Paul, the stock of doughnuts on which he had been lavishing encomiums,
diminished rapidly. It was evident that his attachment to this homely
article of diet was quite as strong as ever.

"Don't be afraid of them," said he, seeing that Paul desisted from his
efforts, "I've got plenty more in the box."

Paul signified that his appetite was already appeased.

"Then we might as well be jogging on. Hey, Goliah," said he, addressing
the horse, who with an air of great content, had been browsing while his
master was engaged in a similar manner. "Queer name for a horse, isn't
it? I wanted something out of the common way, so I asked mother for a
name, and she gave me that. She's great on scripture names, mother
is. She gave one to every one of her children. It didn't make much
difference to her what they were as long as they were in the Bible. I
believe she used to open the Bible at random, and take the first name
she happened to come across. There are eight of us, and nary a decent
name in the lot. My oldest brother's name is Abimelech. Then there's
Pharaoh, and Ishmael, and Jonadab, for the boys, and Leah and Naomi, for
the girls; but my name beats all. You couldn't guess it?"

Paul shook his head.

"I don't believe you could," said the pedler, shaking his head in comic
indignation. "It's Jehoshaphat. Ain't that a respectable name for the
son of Christian parents?"

Paul laughed.

"It wouldn't be so bad," continued the pedler, "if my other name was
longer; but Jehoshaphat seems rather a long handle to put before Stubbs.
I can't say I feel particularly proud of the name, though for use it'll
do as well as any other. At any rate, it ain't quite so bad as the name
mother pitched on for my youngest sister, who was lucky enough to die
before she needed a name."

"What was it?" inquired Paul, really curious to know what name could be
considered less desirable than Jehoshaphat.

"It was Jezebel," responded the pedler.

"Everybody told mother 'twould never do; but she was kind of
superstitious about it, because that was the first name she came to
in the Bible, and so she thought it was the Lord's will that that name
should be given to the child."

As Mr. Stubbs finished his disquisition upon names, there came in sight
a small house, dark and discolored with age and neglect. He pointed this
out to Paul with his whip-handle.

"That," said he, "is where old Keziah Onthank lives. Ever heard of him?"

Paul had not.

"He's the oldest man in these parts," pursued his loquacious companion.
"There's some folks that seem a dyin' all the time, and for all that
manage to outlive half the young folks in the neighborhood. Old Keziah
Onthank is a complete case in p'int. As long ago as when I was cutting
my teeth he was so old that nobody know'd how old he was. He was so
bowed over that he couldn't see himself in the looking-glass unless you
put it on the floor, and I guess even then what he saw wouldn't pay
him for his trouble. He was always ailin' some way or other. Now it was
rheumatism, now the palsy, and then again the asthma. He had THAT awful.

"He lived in the same tumble-down old shanty we have just passed,--so
poor that nobody'd take the gift of it. People said that he'd orter go
to the poorhouse, so that when he was sick--which was pretty much all
the time--he'd have somebody to take care of him. But he'd got kinder
attached to the old place, seein' he was born there, and never lived
anywhere else, and go he wouldn't.

"Everybody expected he was near his end, and nobody'd have been
surprised to hear of his death at any minute. But it's strange how some
folks are determined to live on, as I said before. So Keziah, though he
looked so old when I was a boy that it didn't seem as if he could look
any older, kept on livin,' and livin', and arter I got married to Betsy
Sprague, he was livin' still.

"One day, I remember I was passin' by the old man's shanty, when I heard
a dreadful groanin', and thinks I to myself, 'I shouldn't wonder if the
old man was on his last legs.' So in I bolted. There he was, to be sure,
a lyin', on the bed, all curled up into a heap, breathin' dreadful hard,
and lookin' as white and pale as any ghost. I didn't know exactly
