Mr. Peter Craig thinks he saw the Family Ghost on Christmas Eve. But
the rest of us think all he saw was the white calf with the red tail.
(PETER, MUTTERING SULKILY:--"It's a queer calf that would walk up on end
and wring its hands.")

Miss Cecily King spent the night of Dec. 20th with Miss Kitty Marr. They
talked most of the night about new knitted lace patterns and their beaus
and were very sleepy in school next day. (CECILY, SHARPLY:--"We never
mentioned such things!")

Patrick Grayfur, Esq., was indisposed yesterday, but seems to be
enjoying his usual health to-day.

The King family expect their Aunt Eliza to visit them in January. She
is really our great-aunt. We have never seen her but we are told she is
very deaf and does not like children. So Aunt Janet says we must make
ourselves scarece when she comes.

Miss Cecily King has undertaken to fill with names a square of the
missionary quilt which the Mission Band is making. You pay five cents
to have your name embroidered in a corner, ten cents to have it in
the centre, and a quarter if you want it left off altogether. (CECILY,
INDIGNANTLY:--"That isn't the way at all.")


ADS.

WANTED--A remedy to make a fat boy thin. Address, "Patient Sufferer,
care of Our Magazine."

(FELIX, SOURLY:--"Sara Ray never got that up. I'll bet it was Dan. He'd
better stick to his own department.")


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Mrs. Alexander King killed all her geese the twentieth of December. We
all helped pick them. We had one Christmas Day and will have one every
fortnight the rest of the winter.

The bread was sour last week because mother wouldn't take my advice. I
told her it was too warm for it in the corner behind the stove.

Miss Felicity King invented a new recete for date cookies recently,
which everybody said were excelent. I am not going to publish it though,
because I don't want other people to find it out.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER:--If you want to remove inkstains place the stain
over steam and apply salt and lemon juice. If it was Dan who sent this
question in I'd advise him to stop wiping his pen on his shirt sleeves
and then he wouldn't have so many stains.

                                     FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT



F-l-x:--Yes, you should offer your arm to a lady when seeing her home,
but don't keep her standing too long at the gate while you say good
night.

(FELIX, ENRAGED:--"I never asked such a question.")

C-c-l-y:--No, it is not polite to use "Holy Moses" or "dodgasted" in
ordinary conversation.

(Cecily had gone down cellar to replenish the apple plate, so this
passed without protest.)

S-r-a:--No, it isn't polite to cry all the time. As to whether you
should ask a young man in, it all depends on whether he went home with
you of his own accord or was sent by some elderly relative.

F-l-t-y:--It does not break any rule of etiquette if you keep a button
off your best young man's coat for a keepsake. But don't take more than
one or his mother might miss them.

                                          DAN KING.


FASHION NOTES

Knitted mufflers are much more stylish than crocheted ones this winter.
It is nice to have one the same colour as your cap.

Red mittens with a black diamond pattern on the back are much run after.
Em Frewen's grandma knits hers for her. She can knit the double diamond
pattern and Em puts on such airs about it, but I think the single
diamond is in better taste.

The new winter hats at Markdale are very pretty. It is so exciting to
pick a hat. Boys can't have that fun. Their hats are so much alike.

                                       CECILY KING.


FUNNY PARAGRAPHS

This is a true joke and really happened.

There was an old local preacher in New Brunswick one time whose name was
Samuel Clask. He used to preach and pray and visit the sick just like a
regular minister. One day he was visiting a neighbour who was dying and
he prayed the Lord to have mercy on him because he was very poor and
had worked so hard all his life that he hadn't much time to attend to
religion.

"And if you don't believe me, O Lord," Mr. Clask finished up with, "just
take a look at his hands."

                                        FELIX KING.


GENERAL INFORMATION BUREAU

DAN:--Do porpoises grow on trees or vines?

Ans. Neither. They inhabit the deep sea.

                                        FELIX KING.


(DAN, AGGRIEVED:--"Well, I'd never heard of porpoises and it sounded
like something that grew. But you needn't have gone and put it in the
paper."

FELIX:--"It isn't any worse than the things you put in about me that I
never asked at all."

CECILY, SOOTHINGLY:--"Oh, well, boys, it's all in fun, and I think Our
Magazine is perfectly elegant."

FELICITY, FAILING TO SEE THE STORY GIRL AND BEVERLEY EXCHANGING WINKS
BEHIND HER BACK:--"It certainly is, though SOME PEOPLE were so opposed
to starting it.")


What harmless, happy fooling it all was! How we laughed as we read and
listened and devoured apples! Blow high, blow low, no wind can ever
quench the ruddy glow of that faraway winter night in our memories. And
though Our Magazine never made much of a stir in the world, or was the
means of hatching any genius, it continued to be capital fun for us
throughout the year.




CHAPTER VI. GREAT-AUNT ELIZA'S VISIT


It was a diamond winter day in February--clear, cold, hard, brilliant.
The sharp blue sky shone, the white fields and hills glittered, the
fringe of icicles around the eaves of Uncle Alec's house sparkled. Keen
was the frost and crisp the snow over our world; and we young fry of the
King households were all agog to enjoy life--for was it not Saturday,
and were we not left all alone to keep house?

Aunt Janet and Aunt Olivia had had their last big "kill" of market
poultry the day before; and early in the morning all our grown-ups set
forth to Charlottetown, to be gone the whole day. They left us many
charges as usual, some of which we remembered and some of which we
forgot; but with Felicity in command none of us dared stray far out of
line. The Story Girl and Peter came over, of course, and we all agreed
that we would haste and get the work done in the forenoon, that we might
have an afternoon of uninterrupted enjoyment. A taffy-pull after dinner
and then a jolly hour of coasting on the hill field before supper were
on our programme. But disappointment was our portion. We did manage to
get the taffy made but before we could sample the result satisfactorily,
and just as the girls were finishing with the washing of the dishes,
Felicity glanced out of the window and exclaimed in tones of dismay,

"Oh, dear me, here's Great-aunt Eliza coming up the lane! Now, isn't
that too mean?"

We all looked out to see a tall, gray-haired lady approaching the house,
looking about her with the slightly puzzled air of a stranger. We had
been expecting Great-aunt Eliza's advent for some weeks, for she was
visiting relatives in Markdale. We knew she was liable to pounce down on
us any time, being one of those delightful folk who like to "surprise"
people, but we had never thought of her coming that particular day. It
must be confessed that we did not look forward to her visit with any
pleasure. None of us had ever seen her, but we knew she was very deaf,
and had very decided opinions as to the way in which children should
behave.

"Whew!" whistled Dan. "We're in for a jolly afternoon. She's deaf as a
post and we'll have to split our throats to make her hear at all. I've a
notion to skin out."

"Oh, don't talk like that, Dan," said Cecily reproachfully. "She's old
and lonely and has had a great deal of trouble. She has buried three
husbands. We must be kind to her and do the best we can to make her
visit pleasant."

"She's coming to the back door," said Felicity, with an agitated glance
around the kitchen. "I told you, Dan, that you should have shovelled the
snow away from the front door this morning. Cecily, set those pots
in the pantry quick--hide those boots, Felix--shut the cupboard door,
Peter--Sara, straighten up the lounge. She's awfully particular and ma
says her house is always as neat as wax."

To do Felicity justice, while she issued orders to the rest of us,
she was flying busily about herself, and it was amazing how much was
accomplished in the way of putting the kitchen in perfect order during
the two minutes in which Great-aunt Eliza was crossing the yard.

"Fortunately the sitting-room is tidy and there's plenty in the pantry,"
said Felicity, who could face anything undauntedly with a well-stocked
larder behind her.

Further conversation was cut short by a decided rap at the door.
Felicity opened it.

"Why, how do you do, Aunt Eliza?" she said loudly.

A slightly bewildered look appeared on Aunt Eliza's face. Felicity
perceived she had not spoken loudly enough.

"How do you do, Aunt Eliza," she repeated at the top of her voice.
"Come in--we are glad to see you. We've been looking for you for ever so
long."

"Are your father and mother at home?" asked Aunt Eliza, slowly.

"No, they went to town today. But they'll be home this evening."

"I'm sorry they're away," said Aunt Eliza, coming in, "because I can
stay only a few hours."

"Oh, that's too bad," shouted poor Felicity, darting an angry glance at
the rest of us, as if to demand why we didn't help her out. "Why, we've
been thinking you'd stay a week with us anyway. You MUST stay over
Sunday."

"I really can't. I have to go to Charlottetown tonight," returned Aunt
Eliza.

"Well, you'll take off your things and stay to tea, at least," urged
Felicity, as hospitably as her strained vocal chords would admit.

"Yes, I think I'll do that. I want to get acquainted with my--my nephews
and nieces," said Aunt Eliza, with a rather pleasant glance around our
group. If I could have associated the thought of such a thing with my
preconception of Great-aunt Eliza I could have sworn there was a twinkle
in her eye. But of course it was impossible. "Won't you introduce
yourselves, please?"

Felicity shouted our names and Great-aunt Eliza shook hands all round.
She performed the duty grimly and I concluded I must have been mistaken
about the twinkle. She was certainly very tall and dignified and
imposing--altogether a great-aunt to be respected.

Felicity and Cecily took her to the spare room and then left her in the
sitting-room while they returned to the kitchen, to discuss the matter
in family conclave.

"Well, and what do you think of dear Aunt Eliza?" asked Dan.

"S-s-s-sh," warned Cecily, with a glance at the half-open hall door.

"Pshaw," scoffed Dan, "she can't hear us. There ought to be a law
against anyone being as deaf as that."

"She's not so old-looking as I expected," said Felix. "If her hair
wasn't so white she wouldn't look much older than your mother."

"You don't have to be very old to be a great-aunt," said Cecily. "Kitty
Marr has a great-aunt who is just the same age as her mother. I expect
it was burying so many husbands turned her hair white. But Aunt Eliza
doesn't look just as I expected she would either."

"She's dressed more stylishly than I expected," said Felicity. "I
thought she'd be real old-fashioned, but her clothes aren't too bad at
all."

"She wouldn't be bad-looking if 'tweren't for her nose," said Peter.
"It's too long, and crooked besides."

"You needn't criticize our relations like that," said Felicity tartly.

"Well, aren't you doing it yourselves?" expostulated Peter.

"That's different," retorted Felicity. "Never you mind Great-aunt
Eliza's nose."

"Well, don't expect me to talk to her," said Dan, "'cause I won't."

"I'm going to be very polite to her," said Felicity. "She's rich. But
how are we to entertain her, that's the question."

"What does the Family Guide say about entertaining your rich, deaf old
aunt?" queried Dan ironically.

"The Family Guide says we should be polite to EVERYBODY," said Cecily,
with a reproachful look at Dan.

"The worst of it is," said Felicity, looking worried, "that there isn't
a bit of old bread in the house and she can't eat new, I've heard father
say. It gives her indigestion. What will we do?"

"Make a pan of rusks and apologize for having no old bread," suggested
the Story Girl, probably by way of teasing Felicity. The latter,
however, took it in all good faith.

"The Family Guide says we should never apologize for things we can't
help. It says it's adding insult to injury to do it. But you run over
home for a loaf of stale bread, Sara, and it's a good idea about the
rusks. I'll make a panful."

"Let me make them," said the Story Girl, eagerly. "I can make real good
