if he were called back to the throne of Samavia, the interminable wars
and bloodshed would reach an end.

The Rat had begun to bite his nails fast.

"Do you believe he's found?" he asked feverishly.  "DON'T YOU? I do!"

"I wonder where he is, if it's true?  I wonder!  Where?" exclaimed
Marco.  He could say that, and he might seem as eager as he felt.

The Squad all began to jabber at once.  "Yus, where wos'e? There is no
knowin'.  It'd be likely to be in some o' these furrin places.
England'd be too far from Samavia.  'Ow far off wos Samavia?  Wos it in
Roosha, or where the Frenchies were, or the Germans?  But wherever 'e
wos, 'e'd be the right sort, an' 'e'd be the sort a chap'd turn and
look at in the street."

The Rat continued to bite his nails.

"He might be anywhere," he said, his small fierce face glowing.

"That's what I like to think about.  He might be passing in the street
outside there; he might be up in one of those houses," jerking his head
over his shoulder toward the backs of the inclosing dwellings.
"Perhaps he knows he's a king, and perhaps he doesn't.  He'd know if
what you said yesterday was true--about the king always being made
ready for Samavia."

"Yes, he'd know," put in Marco.

"Well, it'd be finer if he did," went on The Rat.  "However poor and
shabby he was, he'd know the secret all the time.  And if people
sneered at him, he'd sneer at them and laugh to himself.  I dare say
he'd walk tremendously straight and hold his head up.  If I was him,
I'd like to make people suspect a bit that I wasn't like the common lot
o' them."  He put out his hand and pushed Marco excitedly.  "Let's work
out plots for him!" he said.  "That'd be a splendid game!  Let's
pretend we're the Secret Party!"

He was tremendously excited.  Out of the ragged pocket he fished a
piece of chalk.  Then he leaned forward and began to draw something
quickly on the flagstones closest to his platform.  The Squad leaned
forward also, quite breathlessly, and Marco leaned forward.  The chalk
was sketching a roughly outlined map, and he knew what map it was,
before The Rat spoke.

"That's a map of Samavia," he said.  "It was in that piece of magazine
I told you about--the one where I read about Prince Ivor.  I studied it
until it fell to pieces.  But I could draw it myself by that time, so
it didn't matter.  I could draw it with my eyes shut.  That's the
capital city," pointing to a spot. "It's called Melzarr.  The palace is
there.  It's the place where the first of the Maranovitch  killed the
last of the Fedorovitch--the bad chap that was Ivor's  father.  It's
the palace Ivor wandered out of singing the shepherds'  song that early
morning.  It's where the throne is that his descendant would sit upon
to be crowned--that he's GOING to sit upon.  I believe  he is!  Let's
swear he shall!"  He flung down his piece of chalk and  sat up. "Give
me two sticks.  Help me to get up."

Two of the Squad sprang to their feet and came to him.  Each snatched
one of the sticks from the stacked rifles, evidently knowing what he
wanted.  Marco rose too, and watched with sudden, keen curiosity.  He
had thought that The Rat could not stand up, but it seemed that he
could, in a fashion of his own, and he was going to do it.  The boys
lifted him by his arms, set him against the stone coping of the iron
railings of the churchyard, and put a stick in each of his hands.  They
stood at his side, but he supported himself.

"'E could get about if 'e 'ad the money to buy crutches!" said one
whose name was Cad, and he said it quite proudly.  The queer thing that
Marco had noticed was that the ragamuffins were proud of The Rat, and
regarded him as their lord and master.  "--'E could get about an' stand
as well as any one," added the other, and he said it in the tone of one
who boasts.  His name was Ben.

"I'm going to stand now, and so are the rest of you," said The Rat.
"Squad!  'Tention!  You at the head of the line," to Marco.   They were
in line in a moment--straight, shoulders back, chins up.   And Marco
stood at the head.

"We're going to take an oath," said The Rat.  "It's an oath of
allegiance.  Allegiance means faithfulness to a thing--a king or a
country.  Ours means allegiance to the King of Samavia.  We don't know
where he is, but we swear to be faithful to him, to fight for him, to
plot for him, to DIE for him, and to bring him back to his throne!"
The way in which he flung up his head when he said the word "die" was
very fine indeed.  "We are the Secret Party.  We will work in the dark
and find out things--and run risks--and collect an army no one will
know anything about until it is strong enough to suddenly rise at a
secret signal, and overwhelm the Maranovitch and Iarovitch, and seize
their forts and citadels.  No one even knows we are alive.  We are a
silent, secret thing that never speaks aloud!"

Silent and secret as they were, however, they spoke aloud at this
juncture.  It was such a grand idea for a game, and so full of possible
larks, that the Squad broke into a howl of an exultant cheer.

"Hooray!" they yelled.  "Hooray for the oath of 'legiance! 'Ray! 'ray!
'ray!"

"Shut up, you swine!" shouted The Rat.  "Is that the way you keep
yourself secret?  You'll call the police in, you fools! Look at HIM!"
pointing to Marco.  "He's got some sense."

Marco, in fact, had not made any sound.

"Come here, you Cad and Ben, and put me back on my wheels," raged the
Squad's commander.  "I'll not make up the game at all. It's no use with
a lot of fat-head, raw recruits like you."

The line broke and surrounded him in a moment, pleading and urging.

"Aw, Rat!  We forgot.  It's the primest game you've ever thought out!
Rat!  Rat!  Don't get a grouch on!  We'll keep still, Rat! Primest lark
of all 'll be the sneakin' about an' keepin' quiet. Aw, Rat!  Keep it
up!"

"Keep it up yourselves!" snarled The Rat.

"Not another cove of us could do it but you!  Not one!  There's no
other cove could think it out.  You're the only chap that can think out
things.  You thought out the Squad!  That's why you're captain!"

This was true.  He was the one who could invent entertainment for them,
these street lads who had nothing.  Out of that nothing he could create
what excited them, and give them something to fill empty, useless,
often cold or wet or foggy, hours.  That made him their captain and
their pride.

The Rat began to yield, though grudgingly.  He pointed again to Marco,
who had not moved, but stood still at attention.

"Look at HIM!" he said.  "He knows enough to stand where he's put until
he's ordered to break line.  He's a soldier, he is--not a raw recruit
that don't know the goose-step.  He's been in barracks before."

But after this outburst, he deigned to go on.

"Here's the oath," he said.  "We swear to stand any torture and submit
in silence to any death rather than betray our secret and our king.  We
will obey in silence and in secret.  We will swim through seas of blood
and fight our way through lakes of fire, if we are ordered.  Nothing
shall bar our way.  All we do and say and think is for our country and
our king.  If any of you have anything to say, speak out before you
take the oath."

He saw Marco move a little, and he made a sign to him.

"You," he said.  "Have you something to say?"

Marco turned to him and saluted.

"Here stand ten men for Samavia.  God be thanked!" he said.  He dared
say that much, and he felt as if his father himself would have told him
that they were the right words.

The Rat thought they were.  Somehow he felt that they struck home.  He
reddened with a sudden emotion.

"Squad!" he said.  "I'll let you give three cheers on that. It's for
the last time.  We'll begin to be quiet afterward."

And to the Squad's exultant relief he led the cheer, and they were
allowed to make as much uproar as they liked.  They liked to make a
great deal, and when it was at an end, it had done them good and made
them ready for business.

The Rat opened the drama at once.  Never surely had there ever before
been heard a conspirator's whisper as hollow as his.

"Secret Ones," he said, "it is midnight.  We meet in the depths of
darkness.  We dare not meet by day.  When we meet in the daytime, we
pretend not to know each other.  We are meeting now in a Samavian city
where there is a fortress.  We shall have to take it when the secret
sign is given and we make our rising. We are getting everything ready,
so that, when we find the king, the secret sign can be given."

"What is the name of the city we are in?" whispered Cad.

"It is called Larrina.  It is an important seaport.  We must take it as
soon as we rise.  The next time we meet I will bring a dark lantern and
draw a map and show it to you."

It would have been a great advantage to the game if Marco could have
drawn for them the map he could have made, a map which would have shown
every fortress--every stronghold and every weak place. Being a boy, he
knew what excitement would have thrilled each breast, how they would
lean forward and pile question on question, pointing to this place and
to that.  He had learned to draw the map before he was ten, and he had
drawn it again and again because there had been times when his father
had told him that changes had taken place.  Oh, yes! he could have
drawn a map which would have moved them to a frenzy of joy.  But he sat
silent and listened, only speaking when he asked a question, as if he
knew nothing more about Samavia than The Rat did.  What a Secret Party
they were!  They drew themselves together in the closest of circles;
they spoke in unearthly whispers.

"A sentinel ought to be posted at the end of the passage," Marco
whispered.

"Ben, take your gun!" commanded The Rat.

Ben rose stealthily, and, shouldering his weapon, crept on tiptoe to
the opening.  There he stood on guard.

"My father says there's been a Secret Party in Samavia for a hundred
years," The Rat whispered.

"Who told him?" asked Marco.

"A man who has been in Samavia," answered The Rat.  "He said it was the
most wonderful Secret Party in the world, because it has worked and
waited so long, and never given up, though it has had no reason for
hoping.  It began among some shepherds and charcoal-burners who bound
themselves by an oath to find the Lost Prince and bring him back to the
throne.  There were too few of them to do anything against the
Maranovitch, and when the first lot found they were growing old, they
made their sons take the same oath.  It has been passed on from
generation to generation, and in each generation the band has grown.
No one really knows how large it is now, but they say that there are
people in nearly all the countries in Europe who belong to it in dead
secret, and are sworn to help it when they are called.  They are only
waiting.  Some are rich people who will give money, and some are poor
ones who will slip across the frontier to fight or to help to smuggle
in arms.  They even say that for all these years there have been arms
made in caves in the mountains, and hidden there year after year.
There are men who are called Forgers of the Sword, and they, and their
fathers, and grandfathers, and great-grandfathers have always made
swords and stored them in caverns no one knows of, hidden caverns
underground."

Marco spoke aloud the thought which had come into his mind as he
listened, a thought which brought fear to him.  "If the people in the
streets talk about it, they won't be hidden long."

"It isn't common talk, my father says.  Only very few have guessed, and
most of them think it is part of the Lost Prince legend," said The Rat.
"The Maranovitch and Iarovitch laugh at it.  They have always been
great fools.  They're too full of their own swagger to think anything
can interfere with them."

"Do you talk much to your father?" Marco asked him.

The Rat showed his sharp white teeth in a grin.

"I know what you're thinking of," he said.  "You're remembering that I
said he was always drunk.  So he is, except when he's only HALF drunk.
And when he's HALF drunk, he's the most splendid talker  in London.  He
remembers everything he has ever learned or read or heard since he was
born.  I get him going and listen.  He wants to talk and I want to
hear.  I found out almost everything I know in that way.  He didn't
know he was teaching me, but he was.  He goes back into being a
gentleman when he's half drunk."

"If--if you care about the Samavians, you'd better ask him not to tell
people about the Secret Party and the Forgers of the Sword," suggested
Marco.

The Rat started a little.

"That's true!" he said.  "You're sharper than I am.  It oughtn't to be
blabbed about, or the Maranovitch might hear enough to make them stop
and listen.  I'll get him to promise. There's one queer thing about
him," he added very slowly, as if he were thinking it over, "I suppose
it's part of the gentleman that's left in him.  If he makes a promise,
he never breaks it, drunk or sober."

"Ask him to make one," said Marco.  The next moment he changed the
subject because it seemed the best thing to do.  "Go on and tell us
what our own Secret Party is to do.  We're forgetting," he whispered.

The Rat took up his game with renewed keenness.  It was a game which
attracted him immensely because it called upon his imagination and held
his audience spellbound, besides plunging him into war and strategy.

"We're preparing for the rising," he said.  "It must come soon.  We've
waited so long.  The caverns are stacked with arms. The Maranovitch and
the Iarovitch are fighting and using all their soldiers, and now is our
time."  He stopped and thought, his elbows on his knees.  He began to
bite his nails again.

"The Secret Signal must be given," he said.  Then he stopped again, and
the Squad held its breath and pressed nearer with a softly shuffling
sound.  "Two of the Secret Ones must be chosen by lot and sent forth,"
he went on; and the Squad almost brought ruin and disgrace upon itself
by wanting to cheer again, and only just stopping itself in time.
"Must be chosen BY LOT," The Rat repeated, looking from one face to
another.  "Each one will take his life in his hand  when he goes forth.
He may have to die a thousand deaths, but he must go.  He must steal in
silence and disguise from one country to another.  Wherever there is
one of the Secret Party, whether he is in a hovel or on a throne, the
messengers must go to him in darkness and stealth and give him the
sign.  It will mean, 'The hour has come.  God save Samavia!'"

"God save Samavia!" whispered the Squad, excitedly.  And, because they
saw Marco raise his hand to his forehead, every one of them saluted.

They all began to whisper at once.

"Let's draw lots now.  Let's draw lots, Rat.  Don't let's 'ave no
waitin'."

The Rat began to look about him with dread anxiety.  He seemed to be
examining the sky.

"The darkness is not as thick as it was," he whispered. "Midnight has
passed.  The dawn of day will be upon us.  If any one has a piece of
paper or a string, we will draw the lots before we part."

Cad had a piece of string, and Marco had a knife which could be used to
cut it into lengths.  This The Rat did himself.  Then, after shutting
his eyes and mixing them, he held them in his hand ready for the
drawing.

"The Secret One who draws the longest lot is chosen.  The Secret One
who draws the shortest is chosen," he said solemnly.

The drawing was as solemn as his tone.  Each boy wanted to draw either
the shortest lot or the longest one.  The heart of each thumped
somewhat as he drew his piece of string.

When the drawing was at an end, each showed his lot.  The Rat had drawn
the shortest piece of string, and Marco had drawn the longest one.

"Comrade!" said The Rat, taking his hand.  "We will face death and
danger together!"

"God save Samavia!" answered Marco.

And the game was at an end for the day.  The primest thing, the Squad
said, The Rat had ever made up for them.  "'E wos a wonder, he wos!"



VII

"THE LAMP IS LIGHTED!"

On his way home, Marco thought of nothing but the story he must tell
his father, the story the stranger who had been to Samavia had told The
Rat's father.  He felt that it must be a true story and not merely an
invention.  The Forgers of the Sword must be real men, and the hidden
subterranean caverns stacked through the centuries with arms must be
real, too.  And if they were real, surely his father was one of those
who knew the secret.  His thoughts ran very fast.  The Rat's boyish
invention of the rising was only part of a game, but how natural it
would be that sometime--perhaps before long--there would be a real
rising! Surely there would be one if the Secret Party had grown so
strong, and if many weapons  and secret friends in other countries were
ready and waiting.  During all these years, hidden work and preparation
would have been going on continually, even though it was preparation
for an unknown day.  A party which had lasted so long--which passed its
oath on from generation to generation--must be of a deadly
determination.

What might it not have made ready in its caverns and secret
meeting-places!  He longed to reach home and tell his father, at once,
all he had heard.  He recalled to mind, word for word, all that The Rat
had been told, and even all he had added in his game, because--well,
because that seemed so real too, so real that it actually might be
useful.

But when he reached No. 7 Philibert Place, he found Loristan and
Lazarus very much absorbed in work.  The door of the back sitting-room
was locked when he first knocked on it, and locked again as soon as he
had entered.  There were many papers on the table, and they were
evidently studying them.  Several of them were maps.  Some were road
maps, some maps of towns and cities, and some of fortifications; but
they were all maps of places in Samavia.  They were usually kept in a
strong box, and when they were taken out to be studied, the door was
always kept locked.

Before they had their evening meal, these were all returned to the
strong box, which was pushed into a corner and had newspapers piled
upon it.

"When he arrives," Marco heard Loristan say to Lazarus, "we can show
