
"So you were Ida's nurse," she said, gently.

"Yes, ma'am," said the stranger. "I hope the dear child is well."

"Perfectly well. How much her mother must have suffered from the
separation!"

"Indeed, you may say so, ma'am. It came near to break her heart."

"So it must," said sympathizing Mrs. Crump. "There is one thing I would
like to ask," she continued, hesitating and reddening. "Don't answer it
unless you please. Was--is Ida the child of shame?"

"She is not," answered the nurse.

Mrs. Crump looked relieved. It removed a thought from her mind which
would now and then intrude, though it had never, for an instant,
lessened her affection for the child.

At this point in the conversation, the cooper entered the house. He had
just come home on an errand.

"It is my husband," said Mrs. Crump, turning to her visitor, by way of
explanation. "Timothy, will you come in a moment?"

Mr. Crump regarded his wife's visitor with some surprise. His wife
hastened to introduce her as Mrs. Hardwick, Ida's nurse, and handed to
the astonished cooper the letter which the latter had brought with her.

He was not a rapid reader, and it took him some time to get through the
letter. He laid it down on his knee, and looked thoughtful. The nurse
regarded him with a slight uneasiness.

"This is, indeed, unexpected," he said, at last. "It is a new
development in Ida's history. May I ask, Mrs. Hardwick, if you have
any further proof. I want to be prudent with a child that I love as my
own,--if you have any further proof that you are what you claim to be?"

"I judged that this letter would be sufficient," said the nurse; moving
a little in her chair.

"True; but how can we be sure that the writer is Ida's mother?"

"The tone of the letter, sir. Would anybody else write like that?"

"Then you have read the letter?" said the cooper, quickly.

"It was read to me, before I set out."

"By----"

"By Ida's mother. I do not blame you for your caution," she continued.
"You must be so interested in the happiness of the dear child of whom
you have taken such (sic) excelent care, I don't mind telling you that I
was the one who left her at your door eight years ago, and that I never
left the neighborhood until I found that you had taken her in."

"And it was this, that enabled you to find the house, to-day."

"You forget," said the nurse, "that you were not then living in this
house, but in another, some rods off, on the left-hand side of the
street."

"You are right," said the cooper. "I am disposed to believe in the
genuineness of your claim. You must pardon my testing you in such a
manner, but I was not willing to yield up Ida, even for a little time,
without feeling confident of the hands she was falling into."

"You are right," said the nurse. "I don't blame you in the least. I
shall report it to Ida's mother, as a proof of your attachment to your
child."

"When do you wish Ida to go with you?" asked Mrs. Crump.

"Can you let her go this afternoon?"

"Why," said Mrs. Crump, hesitating, "I should like to have a chance to
wash out some clothes for her. I want her to appear as neat a possible,
when she meets her mother."

The nurse hesitated.

"I do not wish to hurry you. If you will let me know when she will be
ready, I will call for her."

"I think I can get her ready early to-morrow morning."

"That will answer excellently. I will call for her then."

The nurse rose, and gathered her shawl about her.

"Where are you going, Mrs. Hardwick?" asked the cooper's wife.

"To a hotel," was the reply.

"We cannot allow that," said Mrs. Crump, kindly. "It is a pity if we
cannot accommodate Ida's old nurse for one night, or ten times as long,
for that matter."

"My wife is quite right," said the cooper; "we must insist upon your
stopping with us."

The nurse hesitated, and looked irresolute. It was plain she would have
preferred to be elsewhere, but a remark which Mrs. Crump made, decided
her to accept the invitation.

It was this. "You know, Mrs. Hardwick, if Ida is to go with you, she
ought to have a little chance to get acquainted with you before you go."

"I will accept your kind invitation," she said; "but I am afraid I shall
be in your way."

"Not in the least. It will be a pleasure to us to have you here. If you
will excuse me now, I will go out and attend to my dinner, which I am
afraid is getting behindhand."

Left to herself, the nurse behaved in a manner which might be regarded
as singular. She rose from her seat, and approached the mirror. She took
a full survey of herself as she stood there, and laughed a short, hard
laugh.

Then she made a formal courtesy to her own reflection, saying, "How do
you do, Mrs. Hardwick?"

"Did you speak?" asked the cooper, who was passing through the entry on
his way out.

"No," said the nurse, a little awkwardly. "I believe I said something to
myself. It's of no consequence."

"Somehow," thought the cooper, "I don't fancy the woman's looks, but I
dare say I am prejudiced. We're all of us as God made us."

While Mrs. Crump was making preparations for the noon-day meal, she
imparted to Rachel the astonishing information, which has already been
detailed to the reader.

"I don't believe a word of it," said Rachel, resolutely.

"She's an imposter. I knew she was the very first moment I set eyes on
her."

This remark was so characteristic of Rachel, that Mrs. Crump did not
attach any special importance to it. Rachel, of course, had no grounds
for the opinion she so confidently expressed. It was consistent,
however, with her general estimate of human nature.

"What object could she have in inventing such a story?"

"What object? Hundreds of 'em," said Rachel, rather indefinitely. "Mark
my words, if you let her carry off Ida, it'll be the last you'll ever
see of her."

"Try to look on the bright side, Rachel. Nothing is more natural than
that her mother should want to see her."

"Why couldn't she come herself?" muttered Rachel.

"The letter explains."

"I don't see that it does."

"It says that the same reasons exist for concealment as ever."

"And what are they, I should like to know? I don't like mysteries, for
my part."

"We won't quarrel with them, at any rate, since they enable us to keep
Ida with us."

Aunt Rachel shook her head, as if she were far from satisfied.

"I don't know," said Mrs. Crump, "but I ought to invite Mrs. Hardwick in
here. I have left her alone in the front room."

"I don't want to see her," said Aunt Rachel. Then changing her mind,
suddenly, "Yes, you may bring her in. I'll find out whether she is an
imposter or not."

Mrs. Crump returned with the nurse. "Mrs. Hardwick," said she, "this is
my sister, Miss Rachel Crump."

"I am glad to make your acquaintance, ma'am," said the nurse.

"Aunt Rachel, I will leave you to entertain Mrs. Hardwick," said Mrs.
Crump. "I am obliged to be in the kitchen."

Rachel and the nurse eyed each other with mutual dislike.

"I hope you don't expect me to entertain you," said Rachel. "I never
expect to entertain anybody again. This is a world of trial and
tribulation, and I've had my share. So you've come after Ida, I hear?"
with a sudden change of subject.

"At her mother's request," said the nurse.

"She wants to see her, then?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"I wonder she didn't think of it before," said Aunt Rachel, sharply.
"She's good at waiting. She's waited eight years."

"There are circumstances that cannot be explained," commenced the nurse.

"No, I dare say not," said Rachel, dryly. "So you were her nurse?"

"Yes, ma'am," said Mrs. Hardwick, who evidently did not relish this
cross-examination.

"Have you lived with the mother ever since?"

"No,--yes," stammered the nurse. "Some of the time," she added,
recovering herself.

"Umph!" grunted Rachel, darting a sharp glance at her.

"Have you a husband living?" inquired Rachel, after a pause.

"Yes," said Mrs. Hardwick. "Have you?"

"I!" repeated Aunt Rachel, scornfully. "No, neither living nor dead. I'm
thankful to say I never married. I've had trials enough without that.
Does Ida's mother live in the city?"

"I can't tell you," said the nurse.

"Humph, I don't like mystery."

"It isn't my mystery," said the nurse. "If you have any objection to
make against it, you must make it to Ida's mother."

The two were not likely to get along very amicably. Neither was gifted
with the best of tempers, and perhaps it was as well that there should
have been an interruption as there was.



CHAPTER IX. A JOURNEY.



"OH, mother," exclaimed Ida, bounding into the room, fresh from school.

She stopped short, in some confusion, on seeing a stranger.

"Is this my own dear child, over whose infancy I watched so tenderly?"
exclaimed the nurse, rising, her harsh features wreathed into a smile.

"It is Ida," said Mrs. Crump.

Ida looked from one to the other in silent bewilderment.

"Ida," said Mrs. Crump, in a little embarrassment, "this is Mrs.
Hardwick, who took care of you when you were an infant."

"But I thought you took care of me, mother," said Ida, in surprise.

"Very true," said Mrs. Crump, evasively, "but I was not able to have the
care of you all the time. Didn't I ever mention Mrs. Hardwick to you?"

"No, mother."

"Although it is so long since I have seen her, I should have known her
anywhere," said the nurse, applying a handkerchief to her eyes. "So
pretty as she's grown up, too!"

Mrs. Crump, who, as has been said, was devotedly attached to Ida,
glanced with pride at the beautiful child, who blushed at the
compliment.

"Ida," said Mrs. Hardwick, "won't you come and kiss your old nurse?"

Ida looked at the hard face, which now wore a smile intended to express
affection. Without knowing why, she felt an instinctive repugnance to
her, notwithstanding her words of endearment.

She advanced timidly, with a reluctance which she was not wholly able to
conceal, and passively submitted to a caress from the nurse.

There was a look in the eyes of the nurse, carefully guarded, yet not
wholly concealed, which showed that she was quite aware of Ida's feeling
towards her, and resented it. But whether or not she was playing a part,
she did not betray this feeling openly, but pressed the unwilling child
more closely to her bosom.

Ida breathed a sigh of relief when she was released, and walked quietly
away, wondering what it was that made her dislike the woman so much.

"Is my nurse a good woman?" she asked, thoughtfully, when alone with
Mrs. Crump, who was setting the table for dinner.

"A good woman! What makes you ask that?" queried her adopted mother, in
surprise.

"I don't know," said Ida.

"I don't know anything to indicate that she is otherwise," said Mrs.
Crump. "And, by the way, Ida, she is going to take you on a little
excursion, to-morrow."

"She going to take me?" exclaimed Ida. "Why, where are we going?"

"On a little pleasure trip, and perhaps she may introduce you to a
pleasant lady, who has already become interested in you, from what she
has told her."

"What could she say of me?" inquired Ida, "she has not seen me since I
was a baby."

"Why," said the cooper's wife a little puzzled, "she appears to have
thought of you ever since, with a good deal of affection."

"Is it wicked," asked Ida, after a pause, "not to like those that like
us?"

"What makes you ask?"

"Because, somehow or other, I don't like this Mrs. Hardwick at all, for
all she was my old nurse, and I don't believe ever shall."
