to feel discouraged. But the tide turned after that. Several Sloane
homesteads came next, where they got liberal subscriptions, and from
that to the end they fared well, with only an occasional snub. Their
last place of call was at Robert Dickson's by the pond bridge. They
stayed to tea here, although they were nearly home, rather than risk
offending Mrs. Dickson, who had the reputation of being a very "touchy"
woman.

While they were there old Mrs. James White called in.

"I've just been down to Lorenzo's," she announced. "He's the proudest
man in Avonlea this minute. What do you think? There's a brand new boy
there . . . and after seven girls that's quite an event, I can tell you."
Anne pricked up her ears, and when they drove away she said.

"I'm going straight to Lorenzo White's."

"But he lives on the White Sands road and it's quite a distance out of
our way," protested Diana. "Gilbert and Fred will canvass him."

"They are not going around until next Saturday and it will be too late
by then," said Anne firmly. "The novelty will be worn off. Lorenzo
White is dreadfully mean but he will subscribe to ANYTHING just now. We
mustn't let such a golden opportunity slip, Diana." The result justified
Anne's foresight. Mr. White met them in the yard, beaming like the
sun upon an Easter day. When Anne asked for a subscription he agreed
enthusiastically.

"Certain, certain. Just put me down for a dollar more than the highest
subscription you've got."

"That will be five dollars . . . Mr. Daniel Blair put down four," said
Anne, half afraid. But Lorenzo did not flinch.

"Five it is . . . and here's the money on the spot. Now, I want you
to come into the house. There's something in there worth seeing . . .
something very few people have seen as yet. Just come in and pass YOUR
opinion."

"What will we say if the baby isn't pretty?" whispered Diana in
trepidation as they followed the excited Lorenzo into the house.

"Oh, there will certainly be something else nice to say about it," said
Anne easily. "There always is about a baby."

The baby WAS pretty, however, and Mr. White felt that he got his five
dollars' worth of the girls' honest delight over the plump little
newcomer. But that was the first, last, and only time that Lorenzo White
ever subscribed to anything.

Anne, tired as she was, made one more effort for the public weal that
night, slipping over the fields to interview Mr. Harrison, who was as
usual smoking his pipe on the veranda with Ginger beside him. Strickly
speaking he was on the Carmody road; but Jane and Gertie, who were not
acquainted with him save by doubtful report, had nervously begged Anne
to canvass him.

Mr. Harrison, however, flatly refused to subscribe a cent, and all
Anne's wiles were in vain.

"But I thought you approved of our society, Mr. Harrison," she mourned.

"So I do . . . so I do . . . but my approval doesn't go as deep as my
pocket, Anne."

"A few more experiences such as I have had today would make me as much
of a pessimist as Miss Eliza Andrews," Anne told her reflection in the
east gable mirror at bedtime.




VII

The Pointing of Duty


Anne leaned back in her chair one mild October evening and sighed. She
was sitting at a table covered with text books and exercises, but the
closely written sheets of paper before her had no apparent connection
with studies or school work.

"What is the matter?" asked Gilbert, who had arrived at the open kitchen
door just in time to hear the sigh.

Anne colored, and thrust her writing out of sight under some school
compositions.

"Nothing very dreadful. I was just trying to write out some of my
thoughts, as Professor Hamilton advised me, but I couldn't get them to
please me. They seem so still and foolish directly they're written down
on white paper with black ink. Fancies are like shadows . . .  you can't
cage them, they're such wayward, dancing things. But perhaps I'll learn
the secret some day if I keep on trying. I haven't a great many spare
moments, you know. By the time I finish correcting school exercises and
compositions, I don't always feel like writing any of my own."

"You are getting on splendidly in school, Anne. All the children like
you," said Gilbert, sitting down on the stone step.

"No, not all. Anthony Pye doesn't and WON'T like me. What is worse, he
doesn't respect me . . . no, he doesn't. He simply holds me in contempt
and I don't mind confessing to you that it worries me miserably. It
isn't that he is so very bad . . . he is only rather mischievous, but no
worse than some of the others. He seldom disobeys me; but he obeys with
a scornful air of toleration as if it wasn't worthwhile disputing the
point or he would . . . and it has a bad effect on the others. I've tried
every way to win him but I'm beginning to fear I never shall. I want to,
for he's rather a cute little lad, if he IS a Pye, and I could like him
if he'd let me."

"Probably it's merely the effect of what he hears at home."

"Not altogether. Anthony is an independent little chap and makes up his
own mind about things. He has always gone to men before and he says girl
teachers are no good. Well, we'll see what patience and kindness
will do. I like overcoming difficulties and teaching is really very
interesting work. Paul Irving makes up for all that is lacking in the
others. That child is a perfect darling, Gilbert, and a genius into the
bargain. I'm persuaded the world will hear of him some day," concluded
Anne in a tone of conviction.

"I like teaching, too," said Gilbert. "It's good training, for one
thing. Why, Anne, I've learned more in the weeks I've been teaching the
young ideas of White Sands than I learned in all the years I went to
school myself. We all seem to be getting on pretty well. The Newbridge
people like Jane, I hear; and I think White Sands is tolerably satisfied
with your humble servant . . . all except Mr. Andrew Spencer. I met Mrs.
Peter Blewett on my way home last night and she told me she thought it
her duty to inform me that Mr. Spencer didn't approve of my methods."

"Have you ever noticed," asked Anne reflectively, "that when people
say it is their duty to tell you a certain thing you may prepare for
something disagreeable? Why is it that they never seem to think it a
duty to tell you the pleasant things they hear about you? Mrs. H. B.
DonNELL called at the school again yesterday and told me she thought
it HER duty to inform me that Mrs. Harmon Andrew didn't approve of
my reading fairy tales to the children, and that Mr. Rogerson thought
Prillie wasn't coming on fast enough in arithmetic. If Prillie would
spend less time making eyes at the boys over her slate she might do
better. I feel quite sure that Jack Gillis works her class sums for her,
though I've never been able to catch him red-handed."

"Have you succeeded in reconciling Mrs. DonNELL's hopeful son to his
saintly name?"

"Yes," laughed Anne, "but it was really a difficult task. At first, when
I called him 'St. Clair' he would not take the least notice until I'd
spoken two or three times; and then, when the other boys nudged him, he
would look up with such an aggrieved air, as if I'd called him John or
Charlie and he couldn't be expected to know I meant him. So I kept
him in after school one night and talked kindly to him. I told him his
mother wished me to call him St. Clair and I couldn't go against her
wishes. He saw it when it was all explained out . . . he's really a very
reasonable little fellow . . . and he said _I_ could call him St. Clair
but that he'd 'lick the stuffing' out of any of the boys that tried it.
Of course, I had to rebuke him again for using such shocking language.
Since then _I_ call him St. Clair and the boys call him Jake and all
goes smoothly. He informs me that he means to be a carpenter, but Mrs.
DonNELL says I am to make a college professor out of him."

The mention of college gave a new direction to Gilbert's thoughts, and
they talked for a time of their plans and wishes . . . gravely, earnestly,
hopefully, as youth loves to talk, while the future is yet an untrodden
path full of wonderful possibilities.

Gilbert had finally made up his mind that he was going to be a doctor.

"It's a splendid profession," he said enthusiastically. "A fellow has to
fight something all through life . . . didn't somebody once define man
as a fighting animal? . . . and I want to fight disease and pain and
ignorance . . . which are all members one of another. I want to do my
share of honest, real work in the world, Anne . . .  add a little to the
sum of human knowledge that all the good men have been accumulating
since it began. The folks who lived before me have done so much for me
that I want to show my gratitude by doing something for the folks who
will live after me. It seems to me that is the only way a fellow can get
square with his obligations to the race."

"I'd like to add some beauty to life," said Anne dreamily. "I don't
exactly want to make people KNOW more . . . though I know that IS the
noblest ambition . . . but I'd love to make them have a pleasanter time
because of me . . . to have some little joy or happy thought that would
never have existed if I hadn't been born."

"I think you're fulfilling that ambition every day," said Gilbert
admiringly.

And he was right. Anne was one of the children of light by birthright.
After she had passed through a life with a smile or a word thrown across
it like a gleam of sunshine the owner of that life saw it, for the time
being at least, as hopeful and lovely and of good report.

Finally Gilbert rose regretfully.

"Well, I must run up to MacPhersons'. Moody Spurgeon came home from
Queen's today for Sunday and he was to bring me out a book Professor
Boyd is lending me."

"And I must get Marilla's tea. She went to see Mrs. Keith this evening
and she will soon be back."

Anne had tea ready when Marilla came home; the fire was crackling
cheerily, a vase of frost-bleached ferns and ruby-red maple leaves
adorned the table, and delectable odors of ham and toast pervaded the
air. But Marilla sank into her chair with a deep sigh.

"Are your eyes troubling you? Does your head ache?" queried Anne
anxiously.

"No. I'm only tired . . . and worried. It's about Mary and those children
 . . . Mary is worse . . . she can't last much longer. And as for the
twins, _I_ don't know what is to become of them."

"Hasn't their uncle been heard from?"

"Yes, Mary had a letter from him. He's working in a lumber camp and
'shacking it,' whatever that means. Anyway, he says he can't possibly
take the children till the spring. He expects to be married then and
will have a home to take them to; but he says she must get some of the
neighbors to keep them for the winter. She says she can't bear to ask
any of them. Mary never got on any too well with the East Grafton people
and that's a fact. And the long and short of it is, Anne, that I'm
sure Mary wants me to take those children . . . she didn't say so but she
LOOKED it."

"Oh!" Anne clasped her hands, all athrill with excitement. "And of
course you will, Marilla, won't you?"

"I haven't made up my mind," said Marilla rather tartly. "I don't rush
into things in your headlong way, Anne. Third cousinship is a pretty
slim claim. And it will be a fearful responsibility to have two children
of six years to look after . . . twins, at that."

Marilla had an idea that twins were just twice as bad as single
children.

"Twins are very interesting . . . at least one pair of them," said Anne.
"It's only when there are two or three pairs that it gets monotonous.
And I think it would be real nice for you to have something to amuse you
when I'm away in school."

"I don't reckon there'd be much amusement in it . . . more worry and
bother than anything else, I should say. It wouldn't be so risky if they
were even as old as you were when I took you. I wouldn't mind Dora so
much . . . she seems good and quiet. But that Davy is a limb."

Anne was fond of children and her heart yearned over the Keith twins.
The remembrance of her own neglected childhood was very vivid with
her still. She knew that Marilla's only vulnerable point was her stern
devotion to what she believed to be her duty, and Anne skillfully
marshalled her arguments along this line.

"If Davy is naughty it's all the more reason why he should have good
training, isn't it, Marilla? If we don't take them we don't know who
will, nor what kind of influences may surround them. Suppose Mrs.
Keith's next door neighbors, the Sprotts, were to take them. Mrs. Lynde
says Henry Sprott is the most profane man that ever lived and you can't
believe a word his children say. Wouldn't it be dreadful to have the
twins learn anything like that? Or suppose they went to the Wiggins'.
Mrs. Lynde says that Mr. Wiggins sells everything off the place that can
be sold and brings his family up on skim milk. You wouldn't like your
relations to be starved, even if they were only third cousins, would
you? It seems to me, Marilla, that it is our duty to take them."

"I suppose it is," assented Marilla gloomily. "I daresay I'll tell Mary
I'll take them. You needn't look so delighted, Anne. It will mean a good
deal of extra work for you. I can't sew a stitch on account of my eyes,
so you'll have to see to the making and mending of their clothes. And
you don't like sewing."

"I hate it," said Anne calmly, "but if you are willing to take those
children from a sense of duty surely I can do their sewing from a sense
of duty. It does people good to have to do things they don't like . . . in
moderation."




VIII

Marilla Adopts Twins


Mrs. Rachel Lynde was sitting at her kitchen window, knitting a quilt,
just as she had been sitting one evening several years previously when
Matthew Cuthbert had driven down over the hill with what Mrs. Rachel
called "his imported orphan." But that had been in springtime; and this
was late autumn, and all the woods were leafless and the fields sere and
brown. The sun was just setting with a great deal of purple and golden
pomp behind the dark woods west of Avonlea when a buggy drawn by a
comfortable brown nag came down the hill. Mrs. Rachel peered at it
eagerly.

"There's Marilla getting home from the funeral," she said to her
husband, who was lying on the kitchen lounge. Thomas Lynde lay more on
the lounge nowadays than he had been used to do, but Mrs. Rachel, who
was so sharp at noticing anything beyond her own household, had not as
yet noticed this. "And she's got the twins with her, . . . yes, there's
Davy leaning over the dashboard grabbing at the pony's tail and Marilla
jerking him back. Dora's sitting up on the seat as prim as you please.
She always looks as if she'd just been starched and ironed. Well, poor
Marilla is going to have her hands full this winter and no mistake.
Still, I don't see that she could do anything less than take them, under
the circumstances, and she'll have Anne to help her. Anne's tickled
to death over the whole business, and she has a real knacky way with
children, I must say. Dear me, it doesn't seem a day since poor Matthew
brought Anne herself home and everybody laughed at the idea of Marilla
bringing up a child. And now she has adopted twins. You're never safe
from being surprised till you're dead."

The fat pony jogged over the bridge in Lynde's Hollow and along the
Green Gables lane. Marilla's face was rather grim. It was ten miles from
East Grafton and Davy Keith seemed to be possessed with a passion for
perpetual motion. It was beyond Marilla's power to make him sit still
and she had been in an agony the whole way lest he fall over the back
of the wagon and break his neck, or tumble over the dashboard under the
pony's heels. In despair she finally threatened to whip him soundly when
she got him home. Whereupon Davy climbed into her lap, regardless of
the reins, flung his chubby arms about her neck and gave her a bear-like
hug.

"I don't believe you mean it," he said, smacking her wrinkled cheek
affectionately. "You don't LOOK like a lady who'd whip a little boy just
'cause he couldn't keep still. Didn't you find it awful hard to keep
still when you was only 's old as me?"

"No, I always kept still when I was told," said Marilla, trying to speak
sternly, albeit she felt her heart waxing soft within her under Davy's
impulsive caresses.

"Well, I s'pose that was 'cause you was a girl," said Davy, squirming
back to his place after another hug. "You WAS a girl once, I s'pose,
though it's awful funny to think of it. Dora can sit still . . . but there
ain't much fun in it _I_ don't think. Seems to me it must be slow to be
