"If you say we can take a dinner away from Bowser the Hound, I suppose
we can," said Reddy, "though I don't see how. But if we can, let's do
it right away. I'm hungry enough to dare almost anything for the sake of
something to put in my stomach. It is so empty that little bit of fish
we divided is shaking around as if it were lost. Gracious, I could eat
a million fish the size of that one! Have you thought of Fanner Brown's
hens, Granny?"

"Of course, Reddy! Of course! What a silly question!" replied Granny.
"We may have to come to them yet."

"I wish I was at them right now," interrupted Reddy with a sigh.

"But you know what I have told you," went on Granny. "The surest way of
getting into trouble is to steal hens. I'm not feeling quite up to being
chased by Bowser the Hound just now, and if we came right home we would
give away the secret of where we live and might be smoked out, and that
would be the end of us. Besides, those hens will be hard to get this
weather, because they will stay in their house, and there is no way for
us to get in there unless we walk right in, in broad daylight, and that
would never do. It will be a great deal better to take Bowser's dinner
away from him. In the first place, if we are careful, no one but Bowser
will know about it, and as long as he is chained up, we will have
nothing to worry about from him. Besides, we will enjoy getting even
with him for the times he has spoiled our chances of catching a fat
chicken and for the way he has hunted us. Most decidedly it will be
better and safer to try for Bowser's dinner than to try for one of those
hens."

"Just as you say, Granny; just as you say," returned Reddy. "You know
best. But how under the sun we can do it beats me."

"It is very simple," replied Granny, "very simple indeed. Most things
are simple enough when you find out how to do them. Neither of us could
do it alone, but together we can do it without the least bit of risk.
Listen."

Granny went close to Reddy and whispered to him, although there wasn't
a soul within hearing. A slow grin spread over Reddy's face as he
listened. When she had finished, he laughed right out.

"Granny, you are a wonder!" he exclaimed admiringly. "I never should
have thought of that. Of course we can do it. My, won't Bowser be
surprised! And how mad he'll be! Come on, let's be starting!"

"All right," said Granny, and the two started towards Farmer Brown's.



CHAPTER XVIII: Why Bowser The Hound Didn't Eat His Dinner

   The thing you've puzzled most about
   Is simple once you've found it out.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Bowser The Hound dearly loves to hunt just for the pleasure of the
chase. It isn't so much the desire to kill as it is the pleasure of
using that wonderful nose of his and the excitement of trying to catch
some one, especially Granny or Reddy Fox. Farmer Brown's boy had put
away his dreadful gun because he no longer wanted to kill the little
people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows, but rather to make
them his friends. Bowser had missed the exciting hunts he used to enjoy
so much with Farmer Brown's boy. So Bowser had formed the habit of
slipping away alone for a hunt every once in a while. When Farmer
Brown's boy discovered this, he got a chain and chained Bowser to his
little house to keep him from running away and hunting on the sly.

Of course Bowser wasn't kept chained all the time. Oh, my, no! When his
master was about, where he could keep an eye on Bowser, he would let him
go free. But whenever he was going away and didn't want to take Bowser
with him, he would chain Bowser up. Now Bowser always had one good big
meal a day. To be sure, he had scraps or a bone now and then besides,
but once a day he had one good big meal served to him in a large tin
pan. If he happened to be chained, it was brought out to him. If not, it
was given to him just outside the kitchen door.

Granny Fox knew all about this. Sly old Granny makes it her business to
know the affairs of other people around her because there is no telling
when such knowledge may be of use to her. So Granny had watched Bowser
the Hound when he and his master had no idea at all that she was
anywhere about, and she had found out his ways, the usual hour for his
dinner and just how far that chain would allow him to go. It was such
things which she had stored away in that shrewd old head of hers that
made her so sure she and Reddy could take Bowser's dinner away from him.
It was just about Bowser's dinner-time when Granny and Reddy trotted
across the snow-covered fields and crept behind the barn until they
could peep around the corner. No one was in sight, not even Bowser, who
was inside his warm little house at the end of the long shed back of
Farmer Brown's house. Granny saw that he was chained and a sly grin
crept over her face.

"You stay right here and watch until his dinner is brought out to him,"
said she to Reddy. "As soon as whoever brings it has gone back to the
house you walk right out where Bowser will see you. At the sight of you,
he'll forget all about his dinner. Sit right down where he can see you
and stay there until you see that I have got that dinner, or until you
hear somebody coming, for you know Bowser will make a great racket. Then
slip around back of the barn and join me back of that shed."

So Reddy sat down to watch, and Granny left him. By and by Mrs. Brown
came out of the house with a pan full of good things. She put it down
in front of Bowser's little house and called to him. Then she turned and
hurried back, for it was very cold. Bowser came out of his little house,
yawned and stretched lazily.

It was time for Reddy to do his part. Out he walked and sat down right
in front of Bowser and grinned at him. Bowser stared for a minute as
if he doubted his own eyes. Such impudence! Bowser growled. Then with a
yelp he sprang towards Reddy.

Now the chain that held him was long, but Reddy had taken care not to
get too near, and of course Bowser couldn't reach him. He tugged with
all his might and yelped and barked frantically, but Reddy just sat
there and grinned in the most provoking manner. It was great fun to
tease Bowser this way.

Meanwhile old Granny Fox had stolen out from around the corner of the
shed behind Bowser. Getting hold of the edge of the pan with her teeth
she pulled it back with her around the corner and out of sight. If she
made any noise, Bowser didn't hear it. He was making too much noise
himself and was too excited. Presently Reddy heard the sound of an
opening door. Mrs. Brown was coming to see what all the fuss was about.
Like a flash Reddy darted behind the barn, and all Mrs. Brown saw was
Bowser tugging at his chain as he whined and yelped excitedly.

"I guess he must have seen a stray cat or something," said Mrs. Brown
and went back in the house. Bowser continued to whine and tug at his
chain for a few minutes. Then he gave it up and, growling deep in his
throat, turned to eat his dinner. But there wasn't any dinner! It had
disappeared, pan and all! Bowser couldn't understand it at all.

Back of the shed Granny and Reddy Fox licked that pan clean; licked
it until it was polished. Then, with little sighs of satisfaction, and
every once in a while a chuckle, they trotted happily home.



CHAPTER XIX: Old Man Coyote Does A Little Thinking

   Investigate and for yourself find out
   Those things which most you want to know about.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Never in all his life had Reddy Fox enjoyed a dinner more than that one
he and Granny had stolen from Bowser the Hound. Of course it would have
tasted delicious anyway, because they were so dreadfully hungry, but to
Reddy it tasted better still because it had been intended for Bowser.
Bowser has hunted Reddy so often that Reddy has no love for him at all,
and it tickled him almost to death to think that they had taken his
dinner from almost under his nose.

With that good dinner in their stomachs, Reddy and Granny Fox felt so
much better that the Great World no longer seemed such a cold and cruel
place. Funny how differently things look when your stomach is full from
the way those same things look when it is empty. Best of all they knew
they could play the same sharp trick again and steal another dinner
from Bowser if need be. It is a comforting feeling, a very comforting
feeling, to know for a certainty where you can get another meal. It is
a feeling that Granny and Reddy Fox and many other little people of the
Green Meadows and the Green Forest seldom have in winter. As a rule,
when they have eaten one meal, they haven't the least idea where the
next one is coming from. How would you like to live that way?

The very next day Granny and Reddy went up to Farmer Brown's at Bowser's
dinner hour. But this time Farmer Brown's boy was at work near the barn,
and Bowser was not chained. Granny and Reddy stole away as silently as
they had come. On the day following they found Bowser chained and stole
another dinner from him; then they went away laughing until their sides
ached as they heard Bowser's whines of surprise and disappointment when
he discovered that his dinner had vanished. They knew by the sound of
his voice that he hadn't the least idea what had become of that dinner.

Now there was some one else roaming over the snow-covered meadows and
through the Green Forest and the Old Pasture these days with a stomach
so lean and empty that he couldn't think of anything else. It was
Old Man Coyote. You know he is very clever, is Old Man Coyote, and he
managed to find enough food of one kind and another to keep him alive,
but never enough to give him that comfortable feeling of a full stomach.
While he wasn't actually starving, he was always hungry. So he spent all
the time when he wasn't sleeping in hunting for something to eat.

Of course he often ran across the tracks of Granny and Reddy Fox, and
once in a while he would meet them. It struck Old Man Coyote that they
didn't seem as thin as he was. That set him to thinking. Neither of
them was a smarter hunter than he. In fact, he prided himself on being
smarter than either of them. Yet when he met them, they seemed to be in
the best of spirits and not at all worried because food was so scarce.
Why? There must be a reason. They must be getting food of which he knew
nothing.

"I'll just keep an eye on them," muttered Old Man Coyote.

So very slyly and cleverly Old Man Coyote followed Granny and Reddy Fox,
taking the greatest care that they should not suspect that he was doing
it. All one night he followed them through the Green Forest and over the
Green Meadows, and when at last he saw them go home, appearing not at
all worried because they had caught nothing, he trotted off to his own
home to do some more thinking.

"They are getting food somewhere, that is sure," he muttered, as he
scratched first one ear and then the other. Somehow he could think
better when he was scratching his ears. "If they don't get it in the
night, and they certainly didn't get anything this night, they must get
it in the daytime. I've done considerable hunting myself in the daytime,
and I haven't once met them in the Green Forest or seen them on the
Green Meadows or up in the Old Pasture. I wonder if they are stealing
Farmer Brown's hens and haven't been found out yet. I've kept away from
there myself, but if they can steal hens and not be caught, I certainly
can. There never was a Fox yet smart enough to do a thing that a Coyote
cannot do if he tries. I think I'll slip up where I can watch Farmer
Brown's and see what is going on up there. Yes, Sir, that's what I'll
do."

With this, Old Man Coyote grinned and then curled himself up for a short
nap, for he was tired.



CHAPTER XX: A Twice Stolen Dinner

   No one ever is so smart that some one else
   may not prove to be smarter still.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Listen and you shall hear all about three rogues. Two were in red and
were Granny and Reddy Fox. And one was in gray and was Old Man Coyote.
They were the slyest, smartest rogues on all the Green Meadows or in all
the Green Forest. All three had started out to steal the same dinner,
but the funny part is they didn't intend to steal it from the same
person. And still funnier is it that one of them didn't even know where
that dinner was or what kind of a dinner it would be.

True to his resolve to know what Granny and Reddy Fox were getting to
eat, and where they were getting it, Old Man Coyote hid where he could
see what was going on about Farmer Brown's, for it was there he felt
sure that Granny and Reddy were getting food. He had waited only a
little while when along came Granny and Reddy Fox past the place where
Old Man Coyote was hiding. They didn't see him. Of course not. He took
care that they should have no chance. But anyway, they were not thinking
of him. Their thoughts were all of that dinner they intended to have,
and the smart trick by which they would get it.

So with their thoughts all on that dinner they slipped up behind the
barn and prepared to work the trick which had been so successful before.
Old Man Coyote crept after them. He saw Reddy Fox lie down where he
could peep around the corner of the barn to watch Bowser the Hound and
to see that no one else was about. He saw Granny leave Reddy there and
hurry away. Old Man Coyote's wits worked fast.

"I can't be in two places at once," thought he, "so I can't watch both
Granny and Reddy. As I can watch but one, which one shall it be? Granny,
of course. Granny is the smartest of the two, and whatever they are up
to, she is at the bottom of it. Granny is the one to follow."

So, like a gray shadow, crafty Old Man Coyote stole after Granny Fox and
saw her hide behind the corner of the shed at the end of which was the
little house of Bowser the Hound. He crept as near as he dared and then
lay flat down behind a little bunch of dead grass close to the shed. For
some time nothing happened, and Old Man Coyote was puzzled. Every once
in a while Granny Fox would look behind and all about to be sure that no
danger was near, but she didn't see Old Man Coyote. After what seemed to
him a long time, he heard a door open on the other side of the shed. It
was Mrs. Brown carrying Bowser's dinner out to him. Of course, Old Man
Coyote didn't know this. He knew by the sounds that some one had come
out of the house, and it made him nervous. He didn't like being so
close to Farmer Brown's house in broad daylight. But he kept his eyes
on Granny Fox, and he saw her ears prick up in a way that he knew meant
that those sounds were just what she had been waiting for.

"If she isn't afraid, I don't need to be," thought he craftily. After a
few minutes he heard a door close and knew that whoever had come out had
gone back into the house. Almost at once Bowser the Hound began to yelp
and whine. Swiftly Granny Fox disappeared around the corner of the shed.
Just as swiftly Old Man Coyote ran forward and peeped around the corner.
There was Bowser the Hound tugging at his chain, and just beyond his
reach was Reddy Fox, grinning in the most provoking manner. And there
was Granny Fox, backing and dragging after her Bowser's dinner. In a
flash Old Man Coyote understood the plan, and he almost chuckled aloud
at the cleverness of it. Then he hastily backed behind the shed and
