eyes of the enchanted multitude, there grew under her skillful fingers
an American flag done in red, white, and blue chalk, every star in its
right place, every stripe fluttering in the breeze. Beside this
appeared a figure of Columbia, copied from the top of the cigar box
that held the crayons.

Miss Dearborn was delighted. "I propose we give Rebecca a good
hand-clapping for such a beautiful picture--one that the whole school
may well be proud of!"

The scholars clapped heartily, and Dick Carter, waving his hand, gave a
rousing cheer.

Rebecca's heart leaped for joy, and to her confusion she felt the tears
rising in her eyes. She could hardly see the way back to her seat, for
in her ignorant lonely little life she had never been singled out for
applause, never lauded, nor crowned, as in this wonderful, dazzling
moment. If "nobleness enkindleth nobleness," so does enthusiasm beget
enthusiasm, and so do wit and talent enkindle wit and talent. Alice
Robinson proposed that the school should sing Three Cheers for the Red,
White, and Blue! and when they came to the chorus, all point to
Rebecca's flag. Dick Carter suggested that Living Perkins and Rebecca
Randall should sign their names to their pictures, so that the visitors
would know who drew them. Huldah Meserve asked permission to cover the
largest holes in the plastered walls with boughs and fill the water
pail with wild flowers. Rebecca's mood was above and beyond all
practical details. She sat silent, her heart so full of grateful joy
that she could hardly remember the words of her dialogue. At recess she
bore herself modestly, notwithstanding her great triumph, while in the
general atmosphere of good will the Smellie-Randall hatchet was buried
and Minnie gathered maple boughs and covered the ugly stove with them,
under Rebecca's direction.

Miss Dearborn dismissed the morning session at quarter to twelve, so
that those who lived near enough could go home for a change of dress.
Emma Jane and Rebecca ran nearly every step of the way, from sheer
excitement, only stopping to breathe at the stiles.

"Will your aunt Mirandy let you wear your best, or only your buff
calico?" asked Emma Jane.

"I think I'll ask aunt Jane," Rebecca replied. "Oh! if my pink was only
finished! I left aunt Jane making the buttonholes!"

"I'm going to ask my mother to let me wear her garnet ring," said Emma
Jane. "It would look perfectly elergant flashing in the sun when I
point to the flag. Good-by; don't wait for me going back; I may get a
ride."

Rebecca found the side door locked, but she knew that the key was under
the step, and so of course did everybody else in Riverboro, for they
all did about the same thing with it. She unlocked the door and went
into the dining-room to find her lunch laid on the table and a note
from aunt Jane saying that they had gone to Moderation with Mrs.
Robinson in her carryall. Rebecca swallowed a piece of bread and
butter, and flew up the front stairs to her bedroom. On the bed lay the
pink gingham dress finished by aunt Jane's kind hands. Could she, dare
she, wear it without asking? Did the occasion justify a new costume, or
would her aunts think she ought to keep it for the concert?

"I'll wear it," thought Rebecca. "They're not here to ask, and maybe
they wouldn't mind a bit; it's only gingham after all, and wouldn't be
so grand if it wasn't new, and hadn't tape trimming on it, and wasn't
pink."

She unbraided her two pig-tails, combed out the waves of her hair and
tied them back with a ribbon, changed her shoes, and then slipped on
the pretty frock, managing to fasten all but the three middle buttons,
which she reserved for Emma Jane.

Then her eye fell on her cherished pink sunshade, the exact match, and
the girls had never seen it. It wasn't quite appropriate for school,
but she needn't take it into the room; she would wrap it in a piece of
paper, just show it, and carry it coming home. She glanced in the
parlor looking-glass downstairs and was electrified at the vision. It
seemed almost as if beauty of apparel could go no further than that
heavenly pink gingham dress! The sparkle of her eyes, glow of her
cheeks, sheen of her falling hair, passed unnoticed in the
all-conquering charm of the rose-colored garment. Goodness! it was
twenty minutes to one and she would be late. She danced out the side
door, pulled a pink rose from a bush at the gate, and covered the mile
between the brick house and the seat of learning in an incredibly short
time, meeting Emma Jane, also breathless and resplendent, at the
entrance.

"Rebecca Randall!" exclaimed Emma Jane, "you're handsome as a picture!"

"I?" laughed Rebecca "Nonsense! it's only the pink gingham."

"You're not good looking every day," insisted Emma Jane; "but you're
different somehow. See my garnet ring; mother scrubbed it in soap and
water. How on earth did your aunt Mirandy let you put on your bran' new
dress?"

"They were both away and I didn't ask," Rebecca responded anxiously.
"Why? Do you think they'd have said no?"

"Miss Mirandy always says no, doesn't she?" asked Emma Jane.

"Ye--es; but this afternoon is very special--almost like a
Sunday-school concert."

"Yes," assented Emma Jane, "it is, of course; with your name on the
board, and our pointing to your flag, and our elergant dialogue, and
all that."

The afternoon was one succession of solid triumphs for everybody
concerned. There were no real failures at all, no tears, no parents
ashamed of their offspring. Miss Dearborn heard many admiring remarks
passed upon her ability, and wondered whether they belonged to her or
partly, at least, to Rebecca. The child had no more to do than several
others, but she was somehow in the foreground. It transpired afterwards
at various village entertainments that Rebecca couldn't be kept in the
background; it positively refused to hold her. Her worst enemy could
not have called her pushing. She was ready and willing and never shy;
but she sought for no chances of display and was, indeed, remarkably
lacking in self-consciousness, as well as eager to bring others into
whatever fun or entertainment there was. If wherever the MacGregor sat
was the head of the table, so in the same way wherever Rebecca stood
was the centre of the stage. Her clear high treble soared above all the
rest in the choruses, and somehow everybody watched her, took note of
her gestures, her whole-souled singing, her irrepressible enthusiasm.

Finally it was all over, and it seemed to Rebecca as if she should
never be cool and calm again, as she loitered on the homeward path.
There would be no lessons to learn to-night, and the vision of helping
with the preserves on the morrow had no terrors for her--fears could
not draw breath in the radiance that flooded her soul. There were thick
gathering clouds in the sky, but she took no note of them save to be
glad that she could raise her sunshade. She did not tread the solid
ground at all, or have any sense of belonging to the common human
family, until she entered the side yard of the brick house and saw her
aunt Miranda standing in the open doorway. Then with a rush she came
back to earth.



IX

ASHES OF ROSES

"There she is, over an hour late; a little more an' she'd 'a' been
caught in a thunder shower, but she'd never look ahead," said Miranda
to Jane; "and added to all her other iniquities, if she ain't rigged
out in that new dress, steppin' along with her father's dancin'-school
steps, and swingin' her parasol for all the world as if she was
play-actin'. Now I'm the oldest, Jane, an' I intend to have my say out;
if you don't like it you can go into the kitchen till it's over. Step
right in here, Rebecca; I want to talk to you. What did you put on that
good new dress for, on a school day, without permission?"

"I had intended to ask you at noontime, but you weren't at home, so I
couldn't," began Rebecca.

"You did no such a thing; you put it on because you was left alone,
though you knew well enough I wouldn't have let you."

"If I'd been CERTAIN you wouldn't have let me I'd never have done it,"
said Rebecca, trying to be truthful; "but I wasn't CERTAIN, and it was
worth risking. I thought perhaps you might, if you knew it was almost a
real exhibition at school."

"Exhibition!" exclaimed Miranda scornfully; "you are exhibition enough
by yourself, I should say. Was you exhibitin' your parasol?"

"The parasol WAS silly," confessed Rebecca, hanging her head; "but it's
the only time in my whole life when I had anything to match it, and it
looked so beautiful with the pink dress! Emma Jane and I spoke a
dialogue about a city girl and a country girl, and it came to me just
the minute before I started how nice it would come in for the city
girl; and it did. I haven't hurt my dress a mite, aunt Mirandy."

"It's the craftiness and underhandedness of your actions that's the
worst," said Miranda coldly. "And look at the other things you've done!
It seems as if Satan possessed you! You went up the front stairs to
your room, but you didn't hide your tracks, for you dropped your
handkerchief on the way up. You left the screen out of your bedroom
window for the flies to come in all over the house. You never cleared
away your lunch nor set away a dish, AND YOU LEFT THE SIDE DOOR
UNLOCKED from half past twelve to three o'clock, so 't anybody could
'a' come in and stolen what they liked!"

Rebecca sat down heavily in her chair as she heard the list of her
transgressions. How could she have been so careless? The tears began to
flow now as she attempted to explain sins that never could be explained
or justified.

"Oh, I'm so sorry!" she faltered. "I was trimming the schoolroom, and
got belated, and ran all the way home. It was hard getting into my
dress alone, and I hadn't time to eat but a mouthful, and just at the
last minute, when I honestly--HONESTLY--would have thought about
clearing away and locking up, I looked at the clock and knew I could
hardly get back to school in time to form in the line; and I thought
how dreadful it would be to go in late and get my first black mark on a
Friday afternoon, with the minister's wife and the doctor's wife and
the school committee all there!"

"Don't wail and carry on now; it's no good cryin' over spilt milk,"
answered Miranda. "An ounce of good behavior is worth a pound of
repentance. Instead of tryin' to see how little trouble you can make in
a house that ain't your own home, it seems as if you tried to see how
much you could put us out. Take that rose out o' your dress and let me
see the spot it's made on your yoke, an' the rusty holes where the wet
pin went in. No, it ain't; but it's more by luck than forethought. I
ain't got any patience with your flowers and frizzled-out hair and
furbelows an' airs an' graces, for all the world like your Miss-Nancy
father."

Rebecca lifted her head in a flash. "Look here, aunt Mirandy, I'll be
as good as I know how to be. I'll mind quick when I'm spoken to and
never leave the door unlocked again, but I won't have my father called
names. He was a p-perfectly l-lovely father, that's what he was, and
it's MEAN to call him Miss Nancy!"

"Don't you dare answer me back that imperdent way, Rebecca, tellin' me
I'm mean; your father was a vain, foolish, shiftless man, an' you might
as well hear it from me as anybody else; he spent your mother's money
and left her with seven children to provide for."

"It's s-something to leave s-seven nice children," sobbed Rebecca.

"Not when other folks have to help feed, clothe, and educate 'em,"
responded Miranda. "Now you step upstairs, put on your nightgown, go to
bed, and stay there till to-morrow mornin'. You'll find a bowl o'
crackers an' milk on your bureau, an' I don't want to hear a sound from
you till breakfast time. Jane, run an' take the dish towels off the
line and shut the shed doors; we're goin' to have a turrible shower."

"We've had it, I should think," said Jane quietly, as she went to do
her sister's bidding. "I don't often speak my mind, Mirandy; but you
ought not to have said what you did about Lorenzo. He was what he was,
and can't be made any different; but he was Rebecca's father, and
Aurelia always says he was a good husband."

Miranda had never heard the proverbial phrase about the only "good
Indian," but her mind worked in the conventional manner when she said
grimly, "Yes, I've noticed that dead husbands are usually good ones;
but the truth needs an airin' now and then, and that child will never
amount to a hill o' beans till she gets some of her father trounced out
of her. I'm glad I said just what I did."

"I daresay you are," remarked Jane, with what might be described as one
of her annual bursts of courage; "but all the same, Mirandy, it wasn't
good manners, and it wasn't good religion!"

The clap of thunder that shook the house just at that moment made no
such peal in Miranda Sawyer's ears as Jane's remark made when it fell
with a deafening roar on her conscience.

Perhaps after all it is just as well to speak only once a year and then
speak to the purpose.

Rebecca mounted the back stairs wearily, closed the door of her
bedroom, and took off the beloved pink gingham with trembling fingers.
Her cotton handkerchief was rolled into a hard ball, and in the
intervals of reaching the more difficult buttons that lay between her
shoulder blades and her belt, she dabbed her wet eyes carefully, so
that they should not rain salt water on the finery that had been worn
at such a price. She smoothed it out carefully, pinched up the white
ruffle at the neck, and laid it away in a drawer with an extra little
sob at the roughness of life. The withered pink rose fell on the floor.
Rebecca looked at it and thought to herself, "Just like my happy day!"
Nothing could show more clearly the kind of child she was than the fact
that she instantly perceived the symbolism of the rose, and laid it in
the drawer with the dress as if she were burying the whole episode with
all its sad memories. It was a child's poetic instinct with a dawning
hint of woman's sentiment in it.

She braided her hair in the two accustomed pig-tails, took off her best
shoes (which had happily escaped notice), with all the while a fixed
resolve growing in her mind, that of leaving the brick house and going
back to the farm. She would not be received there with open
arms,--there was no hope of that,--but she would help her mother about
the house and send Hannah to Riverboro in her place. "I hope she'll
like it!" she thought in a momentary burst of vindictiveness. She sat
by the window trying to make some sort of plan, watching the lightning
play over the hilltop and the streams of rain chasing each other down
the lightning rod. And this was the day that had dawned so joyfully! It
had been a red sunrise, and she had leaned on the window sill studying
her lesson and thinking what a lovely world it was. And what a golden
morning! The changing of the bare, ugly little schoolroom into a bower
of beauty; Miss Dearborn's pleasure at her success with the Simpson
twins' recitation; the privilege of decorating the blackboard; the
happy thought of drawing Columbia from the cigar box; the intoxicating
moment when the school clapped her! And what an afternoon! How it went
on from glory to glory, beginning with Emma Jane's telling her, Rebecca
Randall, that she was as "handsome as a picture."

She lived through the exercises again in memory, especially her
dialogue with Emma Jane and her inspiration of using the bough-covered
stove as a mossy bank where the country girl could sit and watch her
flocks. This gave Emma Jane a feeling of such ease that she never
recited better; and how generous it was of her to lend the garnet ring
to the city girl, fancying truly how it would flash as she furled her
parasol and approached the awe-stricken shepherdess! She had thought
aunt Miranda might be pleased that the niece invited down from the farm
had succeeded so well at school; but no, there was no hope of pleasing
her in that or in any other way. She would go to Maplewood on the stage
next day with Mr. Cobb and get home somehow from cousin Ann's. On
second thoughts her aunts might not allow it. Very well, she would slip
away now and see if she could stay all night with the Cobbs and be off
next morning before breakfast.

Rebecca never stopped long to think, more 's the pity, so she put on
her oldest dress and hat and jacket, then wrapped her nightdress, comb,
and toothbrush in a bundle and dropped it softly out of the window. Her
room was in the L and her window at no very dangerous distance from the
ground, though had it been, nothing could have stopped her at that
moment. Somebody who had gone on the roof to clean out the gutters had
left a cleat nailed to the side of the house about halfway between the
window and the top of the back porch. Rebecca heard the sound of the
sewing machine in the dining-room and the chopping of meat in the
kitchen; so knowing the whereabouts of both her aunts, she scrambled
out of the window, caught hold of the lightning rod, slid down to the
helpful cleat, jumped to the porch, used the woodbine trellis for a
ladder, and was flying up the road in the storm before she had time to
arrange any details of her future movements.

Jeremiah Cobb sat at his lonely supper at the table by the kitchen
window. "Mother," as he with his old-fashioned habits was in the habit
of calling his wife, was nursing a sick neighbor. Mrs. Cobb was mother
only to a little headstone in the churchyard, where reposed "Sarah Ann,
beloved daughter of Jeremiah and Sarah Cobb, aged seventeen months;"
but the name of mother was better than nothing, and served at any rate
as a reminder of her woman's crown of blessedness.

The rain still fell, and the heavens were dark, though it was scarcely
five o'clock. Looking up from his "dish of tea," the old man saw at the
open door a very figure of woe. Rebecca's face was so swollen with
tears and so sharp with misery that for a moment he scarcely recognized
her. Then when he heard her voice asking, "Please may I come in, Mr.
Cobb?" he cried, "Well I vow! It's my little lady passenger! Come to
call on old uncle Jerry and pass the time o' day, hev ye? Why, you're
wet as sops. Draw up to the stove. I made a fire, hot as it was,
thinkin' I wanted somethin' warm for my supper, bein' kind o' lonesome
without mother. She's settin' up with Seth Strout to-night. There,
we'll hang your soppy hat on the nail, put your jacket over the chair
rail, an' then you turn your back to the stove an' dry yourself good."

Uncle Jerry had never before said so many words at a time, but he had
caught sight of the child's red eyes and tear-stained cheeks, and his
big heart went out to her in her trouble, quite regardless of any
circumstances that might have caused it.

Rebecca stood still for a moment until uncle Jerry took his seat again
at the table, and then, unable to contain herself longer, cried, "Oh,
Mr. Cobb, I've run away from the brick house, and I want to go back to
the farm. Will you keep me to-night and take me up to Maplewood in the
stage? I haven't got any money for my fare, but I'll earn it somehow
afterwards."

"Well, I guess we won't quarrel 'bout money, you and me," said the old
man; "and we've never had our ride together, anyway, though we allers
meant to go down river, not up."

"I shall never see Milltown now!" sobbed Rebecca.

"Come over here side o' me an' tell me all about it," coaxed uncle
Jerry. "Jest set down on that there wooden cricket an' out with the
whole story."

Rebecca leaned her aching head against Mr. Cobb's homespun knee and
recounted the history of her trouble. Tragic as that history seemed to
her passionate and undisciplined mind, she told it truthfully and
without exaggeration.



X

RAINBOW BRIDGES

Uncle Jerry coughed and stirred in his chair a good deal during
Rebecca's recital, but he carefully concealed any undue feeling of
sympathy, just muttering, "Poor little soul! We'll see what we can do
for her!"

"You will take me to Maplewood, won't you, Mr. Cobb?" begged Rebecca
piteously.

"Don't you fret a mite," he answered, with a crafty little notion at
the back of his mind; "I'll see the lady passenger through somehow. Now
take a bite o' somethin' to eat, child. Spread some o' that tomato
preserve on your bread; draw up to the table. How'd you like to set in
mother's place an' pour me out another cup o' hot tea?"

Mr. Jeremiah Cobb's mental machinery was simple, and did not move very
smoothly save when propelled by his affection or sympathy. In the
present case these were both employed to his advantage, and mourning
his stupidity and praying for some flash of inspiration to light his
path, he blundered along, trusting to Providence.

Rebecca, comforted by the old man's tone, and timidly enjoying the
dignity of sitting in Mrs. Cobb's seat and lifting the blue china
teapot, smiled faintly, smoothed her hair, and dried her eyes.

"I suppose your mother'll be turrible glad to see you back again?"
queried Mr. Cobb.

A tiny fear--just a baby thing--in the bottom of Rebecca's heart
stirred and grew larger the moment it was touched with a question.

"She won't like it that I ran away, I s'pose, and she'll be sorry that
I couldn't please aunt Mirandy; but I'll make her understand, just as I
did you."

"I s'pose she was thinkin' o' your schoolin', lettin' you come down
here; but land! you can go to school in Temperance, I s'pose?"

"There's only two months' school now in Temperance, and the farm 's too
far from all the other schools."

"Oh well! there's other things in the world beside edjercation,"
responded uncle Jerry, attacking a piece of apple pie.

"Ye--es; though mother thought that was going to be the making of me,"
returned Rebecca sadly, giving a dry little sob as she tried to drink
her tea.

"It'll be nice for you to be all together again at the farm--such a
house full o' children!" remarked the dear old deceiver, who longed for
