
"These creatures are of no benefit to the world," said the Prince of
the Knooks; "we must destroy them."

"Their lives are devoted only to evil deeds," said the Prince of the
Ryls.  "We must destroy them."

"They have no conscience, and endeavor to make all mortals as bad as
themselves," said the Queen of the Fairies.  "We must destroy them."

"They have defied the great Ak, and threaten the life of our adopted
son," said beautiful Queen Zurline.  "We must destroy them."

The Master Woodsman smiled.

"You speak well," said he.  "These Awgwas we know to be a powerful
race, and they will fight desperately; yet the outcome is certain.  For
we who live can never die, even though conquered by our enemies, while
every Awgwa who is struck down is one foe the less to oppose us.
Prepare, then, for battle, and let us resolve to show no mercy to the
wicked!"

Thus arose that terrible war between the immortals and the spirits of
evil which is sung of in Fairyland to this very day.

The King Awgwa and his band determined to carry out the threat to
destroy Claus.  They now hated him for two reasons: he made children
happy and was a friend of the Master Woodsman.  But since Ak's visit
they had reason to fear the opposition of the immortals, and they
dreaded defeat.  So the King sent swift messengers to all parts of the
world to summon every evil creature to his aid.

And on the third day after the declaration of war a mighty army was at
the command of the King Awgwa.  There were three hundred Asiatic
Dragons, breathing fire that consumed everything it touched.  These
hated mankind and all good spirits.  And there were the three-eyed
Giants of Tatary, a host in themselves, who liked nothing better than
to fight.  And next came the Black Demons from Patalonia, with great
spreading wings like those of a bat, which swept terror and misery
through the world as they beat upon the air.  And joined to these were
the Goozzle-Goblins, with long talons as sharp as swords, with which
they clawed the flesh from their foes.  Finally, every mountain Awgwa
in the world had come to participate in the great battle with the
immortals.

The King Awgwa looked around upon this vast army and his heart beat
high with wicked pride, for he believed he would surely triumph over
his gentle enemies, who had never before been known to fight.  But the
Master Woodsman had not been idle.  None of his people was used to
warfare, yet now that they were called upon to face the hosts of evil
they willingly prepared for the fray.

Ak had commanded them to assemble in the Laughing Valley, where Claus,
ignorant of the terrible battle that was to be waged on his account,
was quietly making his toys.

Soon the entire Valley, from hill to hill, was filled with the little
immortals.  The Master Woodsman stood first, bearing a gleaming ax that
shone like burnished silver.  Next came the Ryls, armed with sharp
thorns from bramblebushes.  Then the Knooks, bearing the spears they
used when they were forced to prod their savage beasts into submission.
The Fairies, dressed in white gauze with rainbow-hued wings, bore
golden wands, and the Wood-nymphs, in their uniforms of oak-leaf green,
carried switches from ash trees as weapons.

Loud laughed the Awgwa King when he beheld the size and the arms of his
foes.  To be sure the mighty ax of the Woodsman was to be dreaded, but
the sweet-faced Nymphs and pretty Fairies, the gentle Ryls and crooked
Knooks were such harmless folk that he almost felt shame at having
called such a terrible host to oppose them.

"Since these fools dare fight," he said to the leader of the Tatary
Giants, "I will overwhelm them with our evil powers!"

To begin the battle he poised a great stone in his left hand and cast
it full against the sturdy form of the Master Woodsman, who turned it
aside with his ax.  Then rushed the three-eyed Giants of Tatary upon
the Knooks, and the Goozzle-Goblins upon the Ryls, and the
firebreathing Dragons upon the sweet Fairies.  Because the Nymphs were
Ak's own people the band of Awgwas sought them out, thinking to
overcome them with ease.

But it is the Law that while Evil, unopposed, may accomplish terrible
deeds, the powers of Good can never be overthrown when opposed to Evil.
Well had it been for the King Awgwa had he known the Law!

His ignorance cost him his existence, for one flash of the ax borne by
the Master Woodsman of the World cleft the wicked King in twain and rid
the earth of the vilest creature it contained.

Greatly marveled the Tatary Giants when the spears of the little Knooks
pierced their thick walls of flesh and sent them reeling to the ground
with howls of agony.

Woe came upon the sharp-taloned Goblins when the thorns of the Ryls
reached their savage hearts and let their life-blood sprinkle all the
plain.  And afterward from every drop a thistle grew.

The Dragons paused astonished before the Fairy wands, from whence
rushed a power that caused their fiery breaths to flow back on
themselves so that they shriveled away and died.

As for the Awgwas, they had scant time to realize how they were
destroyed, for the ash switches of the Nymphs bore a charm unknown to
any Awgwa, and turned their foes into clods of earth at the slightest
touch!

When Ak leaned upon his gleaming ax and turned to look over the field
of battle he saw the few Giants who were able to run disappearing over
the distant hills on their return to Tatary.  The Goblins had perished
every one, as had the terrible Dragons, while all that remained of the
wicked Awgwas was a great number of earthen hillocks dotting the plain.

And now the immortals melted from the Valley like dew at sunrise, to
resume their duties in the Forest, while Ak walked slowly and
thoughtfully to the house of Claus and entered.

"You have many toys ready for the children," said the Woodsman, "and
now you may carry them across the plain to the dwellings and the
villages without fear."

"Will not the Awgwas harm me?" asked Claus, eagerly.

"The Awgwas," said Ak, "have perished!"


Now I will gladly have done with wicked spirits and with fighting and
bloodshed.  It was not from choice that I told of the Awgwas and their
allies, and of their great battle with the immortals.  They were part
of this history, and could not be avoided.



8.  The First Journey with the Reindeer

Those were happy days for Claus when he carried his accumulation of
toys to the children who had awaited them so long.  During his
imprisonment in the Valley he had been so industrious that all his
shelves were filled with playthings, and after quickly supplying the
little ones living near by he saw he must now extend his travels to
wider fields.

Remembering the time when he had journeyed with Ak through all the
world, he know children were everywhere, and he longed to make as many
as possible happy with his gifts.

So he loaded a great sack with all kinds of toys, slung it upon his
back that he might carry it more easily, and started off on a longer
trip than he had yet undertaken.

Wherever he showed his merry face, in hamlet or in farmhouse, he
received a cordial welcome, for his fame had spread into far lands.  At
each village the children swarmed about him, following his footsteps
wherever he went; and the women thanked him gratefully for the joy he
brought their little ones; and the men looked upon him curiously that
he should devote his time to such a queer occupation as toy-making.
But every one smiled on him and gave him kindly words, and Claus felt
amply repaid for his long journey.

When the sack was empty he went back again to the Laughing Valley and
once more filled it to the brim.  This time he followed another road,
into a different part of the country, and carried happiness to many
children who never before had owned a toy or guessed that such a
delightful plaything existed.

After a third journey, so far away that Claus was many days walking the
distance, the store of toys became exhausted and without delay he set
about making a fresh supply.

From seeing so many children and studying their tastes he had acquired
several new ideas about toys.

The dollies were, he had found, the most delightful of all playthings
for babies and little girls, and often those who could not say "dolly"
would call for a "doll" in their sweet baby talk.  So Claus resolved to
make many dolls, of all sizes, and to dress them in bright-colored
clothing.  The older boys--and even some of the girls--loved the images
of animals, so he still made cats and elephants and horses.  And many
of the little fellows had musical natures, and longed for drums and
cymbals and whistles and horns.  So he made a number of toy drums, with
tiny sticks to beat them with; and he made whistles from the willow
trees, and horns from the bog-reeds, and cymbals from bits of beaten
metal.

All this kept him busily at work, and before he realized it the winter
season came, with deeper snows than usual, and he knew he could not
leave the Valley with his heavy pack.  Moreover, the next trip would
take him farther from home than every before, and Jack Frost was
mischievous enough to nip his nose and ears if he undertook the long
journey while the Frost King reigned.  The Frost King was Jack's father
and never reproved him for his pranks.

So Claus remained at his work-bench; but he whistled and sang as
merrily as ever, for he would allow no disappointment to sour his
temper or make him unhappy.

One bright morning he looked from his window and saw two of the deer he
had known in the Forest walking toward his house.

Claus was surprised; not that the friendly deer should visit him, but
that they walked on the surface of the snow as easily as if it were
solid ground, notwithstanding the fact that throughout the Valley the
snow lay many feet deep.  He had walked out of his house a day or two
before and had sunk to his armpits in a drift.

So when the deer came near he opened the door and called to them:

"Good morning, Flossie!  Tell me how you are able to walk on the snow
so easily."

"It is frozen hard," answered Flossie.

"The Frost King has breathed on it," said Glossie, coming up, "and the
surface is now as solid as ice."

"Perhaps," remarked Claus, thoughtfully, "I might now carry my pack of
toys to the children."

"Is it a long journey?" asked Flossie.

"Yes; it will take me many days, for the pack is heavy," answered Claus.

"Then the snow would melt before you could get back," said the deer.
"You must wait until spring, Claus."

Claus sighed.  "Had I your fleet feet," said he, "I could make the
journey in a day."

"But you have not," returned Glossie, looking at his own slender legs
with pride.

"Perhaps I could ride upon your back," Claus ventured to remark, after
a pause.

"Oh no; our backs are not strong enough to bear your weight," said
Flossie, decidedly.  "But if you had a sledge, and could harness us to
it, we might draw you easily, and your pack as well."

"I'll make a sledge!" exclaimed Claus.  "Will you agree to draw me if I
do?"

"Well," replied Flossie, "we must first go and ask the Knooks, who are
our guardians, for permission; but if they consent, and you can make a
sledge and harness, we will gladly assist you."

"Then go at once!" cried Claus, eagerly.  "I am sure the friendly
Knooks will give their consent, and by the time you are back I shall be
ready to harness you to my sledge."

Flossie and Glossie, being deer of much intelligence, had long wished
to see the great world, so they gladly ran over the frozen snow to ask
the Knooks if they might carry Claus on his journey.

Meantime the toy-maker hurriedly began the construction of a sledge,
using material from his wood-pile.  He made two long runners that
turned upward at the front ends, and across these nailed short boards,
to make a platform.  It was soon completed, but was as rude in
appearance as it is possible for a sledge to be.

The harness was more difficult to prepare, but Claus twisted strong
cords together and knotted them so they would fit around the necks of
the deer, in the shape of a collar.  From these ran other cords to
fasten the deer to the front of the sledge.

Before the work was completed Glossie and Flossie were back from the
Forest, having been granted permission by Will Knook to make the
journey with Claus provided they would to Burzee by daybreak the next
morning.

"That is not a very long time," said Flossie; "but we are swift and
strong, and if we get started by this evening we can travel many miles
during the night."

Claus decided to make the attempt, so he hurried on his preparations as
fast as possible.  After a time he fastened the collars around the
necks of his steeds and harnessed them to his rude sledge.  Then he
placed a stool on the little platform, to serve as a seat, and filled a
sack with his prettiest toys.

"How do you intend to guide us?" asked Glossie.  "We have never been
out of the Forest before, except to visit your house, so we shall not
know the way."

Claus thought about that for a moment.  Then he brought more cords and
fastened two of them to the spreading antlers of each deer, one on the
right and the other on the left.

"Those will be my reins," said Claus, "and when I pull them to the
right or to the left you must go in that direction.  If I do not pull
the reins at all you may go straight ahead."

"Very well," answered Glossie and Flossie; and then they asked: "Are
you ready?"

Claus seated himself upon the stool, placed the sack of toys at his
feet, and then gathered up the reins.

"All ready!" he shouted; "away we go!"

The deer leaned forward, lifted their slender limbs, and the next
moment away flew the sledge over the frozen snow.  The swiftness of the
motion surprised Claus, for in a few strides they were across the
Valley and gliding over the broad plain beyond.

The day had melted into evening by the time they started; for, swiftly
as Claus had worked, many hours had been consumed in making his
preparations.  But the moon shone brightly to light their way, and
Claus soon decided it was just as pleasant to travel by night as by day.

The deer liked it better; for, although they wished to see something of
the world, they were timid about meeting men, and now all the dwellers
in the towns and farmhouses were sound asleep and could not see them.

Away and away they sped, on and on over the hills and through the
valleys and across the plains until they reached a village where Claus
had never been before.

Here he called on them to stop, and they immediately obeyed.  But a new
difficulty now presented itself, for the people had locked their doors
when they went to bed, and Claus found he could not enter the houses to
leave his toys.

"I am afraid, my friends, we have made our journey for nothing," said
he, "for I shall be obliged to carry my playthings back home again
without giving them to the children of this village."

"What's the matter?" asked Flossie.

"The doors are locked," answered Claus, "and I can not get in."

Glossie looked around at the houses.  The snow was quite deep in that
village, and just before them was a roof only a few feet above the
sledge.  A broad chimney, which seemed to Glossie big enough to admit
Claus, was at the peak of the roof.

"Why don't you climb down that chimney?" asked Glossie.

Claus looked at it.

"That would be easy enough if I were on top of the roof," he answered.

"Then hold fast and we will take you there," said the deer, and they
gave one bound to the roof and landed beside the big chimney.

"Good!" cried Claus, well pleased, and he slung the pack of toys over
his shoulder and got into the chimney.

There was plenty of soot on the bricks, but he did not mind that, and
by placing his hands and knees against the sides he crept downward
until he had reached the fireplace.  Leaping lightly over the
smoldering coals he found himself in a large sitting-room, where a dim
light was burning.

From this room two doorways led into smaller chambers.  In one a woman
lay asleep, with a baby beside her in a crib.

Claus laughed, but he did not laugh aloud for fear of waking the baby.
Then he slipped a big doll from his pack and laid it in the crib.  The
little one smiled, as if it dreamed of the pretty plaything it was to
find on the morrow, and Claus crept softly from the room and entered at
the other doorway.

Here were two boys, fast asleep with their arms around each other's
neck.  Claus gazed at them lovingly a moment and then placed upon the
bed a drum, two horns and a wooden elephant.

He did not linger, now that his work in this house was done, but
climbed the chimney again and seated himself on his sledge.

"Can you find another chimney?" he asked the reindeer.

"Easily enough," replied Glossie and Flossie.

Down to the edge of the roof they raced, and then, without pausing,
leaped through the air to the top of the next building, where a huge,
old-fashioned chimney stood.

"Don't be so long, this time," called Flossie, "or we shall never get
back to the Forest by daybreak."

Claus made a trip down this chimney also and found five children
sleeping in the house, all of whom were quickly supplied with toys.

When he returned the deer sprang to the next roof, but on descending
the chimney Claus found no children there at all.  That was not often
the case in this village, however, so he lost less time than you might
suppose in visiting the dreary homes where there were no little ones.

When he had climbed down the chimneys of all the houses in that
village, and had left a toy for every sleeping child, Claus found that
his great sack was not yet half emptied.

"Onward, friends!" he called to the deer; "we must seek another
village."

So away they dashed, although it was long past midnight, and in a
surprisingly short time they came to a large city, the largest Claus
had ever visited since he began to make toys.  But, nothing daunted by
