counterfeit money. Ought he to have submitted, and so avoided all these
perils?

"No!" he finally decided; "I won't give up the ship yet. I am about as
badly off as I can be; I am without a cent, and don't know where my
next meal is to come from. But my luck may turn--it must turn--it has
turned!" he exclaimed with energy, as his wandering glance suddenly fell
upon a silver quarter of a dollar, nearly covered up with the dust of
the street. "That shall prove a good omen!"

He stooped over and picked up the coin, which he put in his vest pocket.

It was wonderful how the possession of this small sum of money restored
his courage and raised his spirits. He was sure of a dinner now, at all
events. It looked as if Providence was smiling on him.

Two miles farther on Carl overtook a boy of about his own age trudging
along the road with a rake over his shoulder. He wore overalls, and was
evidently a farmer's boy.

"Good-day!" said Carl, pleasantly, noticing that the boy regarded him
with interest.

"Good-day!" returned the country lad, rather bashfully.

"Can you tell me if there is any place near where I can buy some
dinner?"

"There ain't no tavern, if that's what you mean. I'm goin' home to
dinner myself."

"Where do you live?"

"Over yonder."

He pointed to a farmhouse about a dozen rods away.

"Do you think your mother would give me some dinner?"

"I guess she would. Mam's real accommodatin'."

"Will you ask her?"

"Yes; just come along of me."

He turned into the yard, and followed a narrow path to the back door.

"I'll stay here while you ask," said Carl.

The boy entered the house, and came out after a brief absence.

"Mam says you're to come in," he said.

Carl, glad at heart, and feeling quite prepared to eat fifty cents'
worth of dinner, followed the boy inside.

A pleasant-looking, matronly woman, plainly but neatly attired, came
forward to greet him.

"Nat says you would like to get some dinner," she said.

"Yes," answered Carl. "I hope you'll excuse my applying to you, but your
son tells me there is no hotel near by."

"The nearest one is three miles away from here."

"I don't think I can hold out so long," said Carl, smiling.

"Sit right down with Nat," said the farmer's wife, hospitably. "Mr.
Sweetser won't be home for half an hour. We've got enough, such as it
is."

Evidently Mrs. Sweetser was a good cook. The dinner consisted of boiled
mutton, with several kinds of vegetables. A cup of tea and two kinds of
pie followed.

It was hard to tell which of the two boys did fuller justice to the
meal. Nat had the usual appetite of a healthy farm boy, and Carl, in
spite of his recent anxieties, and narrow escape from serious peril, did
not allow himself to fall behind.

"Your mother's a fine cook!" said Carl, between two mouthfuls.

"Ain't she, though?" answered Nat, his mouth full of pie.

When Carl rose from the table he feared that he had eaten more than his
little stock of money would pay for.

"How much will it be, Mrs. Sweetser?" he asked.

"Oh, you're quite welcome to all you've had," said the good woman,
cheerily. "It's plain farmer's fare."

"I never tasted a better dinner," said Carl.

Mrs. Sweetser seemed pleased with the compliment to her cooking.

"Come again when you are passing this way," she said. "You will always
be welcome to a dinner."

Carl thanked her heartily, and pressed on his way. Two hours later, at
a lonely point of the road, an ill-looking tramp, who had been reclining
by the wayside, jumped up, and addressed him in a menacing tone:

"Young feller, shell over all the money you have got, or I'll hurt you!
I'm hard up, and I won't stand no nonsense."

Carl started and looked into the face of the tramp. It seemed to him
that he had never seen a man more ill-favored, or villainous-looking.



CHAPTER XI.

THE ARCHERY PRIZE.


Situated as he was, it seemed, on second thought, rather a joke to Carl
to be attacked by a robber. He had but twenty-five cents in good money
about him, and that he had just picked up by the merest chance.

"Do I look like a banker?" he asked, humorously. "Why do you want to rob
a boy?"

"The way you're togged out, you must have something," growled the tramp,
"and I haven't got a penny."

"Your business doesn't seem to pay, then?"

"Don't you make fun of me, or I'll wring your neck! Just hand over your
money and be quick about it! I haven't time to stand fooling here all
day."

A bright idea came to Carl. He couldn't spare the silver coin, which
constituted all his available wealth, but he still had the counterfeit
note.

"You won't take all my money, will you?" he said, earnestly.

"How much have you got?" asked the tramp, pricking up his ears.

Carl, with apparent reluctance, drew out the ten-dollar bill.

The tramp's face lighted up.

"Is your name Vanderbilt?" he asked. "I didn't expect to make such a
haul."

"Can't you give me back a dollar out of it? I don't want to lose all I
have."

"I haven't got a cent. You'll have to wait till we meet again. So long,
boy! You've helped me out of a scrape."

"Or into one," thought Carl.

The tramp straightened up, buttoned his dilapidated coat, and walked off
with the consciousness of being a capitalist.

Carl watched him with a smile.

"I hope I won't meet him after he has discovered that the bill is a
counterfeit," he said to himself.

He congratulated himself upon being still the possessor of twenty-five
cents in silver. It was not much, but it seemed a great deal better than
being penniless. A week before he would have thought it impossible
that such a paltry sum would have made him feel comfortable, but he had
passed through a great deal since then.

About the middle of the afternoon he came to a field, in which something
appeared to be going on. Some forty or fifty young persons, boys and
girls, were walking about the grass, and seemed to be preparing for some
interesting event.

Carl stopped to rest and look on.

"What's going on here?" he asked of a boy who was sitting on the fence.

"It's a meeting of the athletic association," said the boy.

"What are they doing?"

"They try for prizes in jumping, vaulting, archery and so on."

This interested Carl, who excelled in all manly exercises.

"I suppose I may stay and look on?" he said, inquiringly.

"Why, of course. Jump over the fence and I'll go round with you."

It seemed pleasant to Carl to associate once more with boys of his own
age. Thrown unexpectedly upon his own resources, he had almost forgotten
that he was a boy. Face to face with a cold and unsympathizing world, he
seemed to himself twenty-five at least.

"Those who wish to compete for the archery prize will come forward,"
announced Robert Gardiner, a young man of nineteen, who, as Carl
learned, was the president of the association. "You all understand the
conditions. The entry fee to competitors is ten cents. The prize to the
most successful archer is one dollar."

Several boys came forward and paid the entrance fee.

"Would you like to compete?" asked Edward Downie, the boy whose
acquaintance Carl had made.

"I am an outsider," said Carl. "I don't belong to the association."

"I'll speak to the president, if you like."

"I don't want to intrude."

"It won't be considered an intrusion. You pay the entrance fee and take
your chances."

Edward went to the president and spoke to him in a low voice. The result
was that he advanced to Carl, and said, courteously:

"If you would like to enter into our games, you are quite at liberty to
do so."

"Thank you," responded Carl. "I have had a little practice in archery,
and will enter my name for that prize."

He paid over his quarter and received back fifteen cents in change. It
seemed rather an imprudent outlay, considering his small capital; but he
had good hopes of carrying off the prize, and that would be a great lift
for him. Seven boys entered besides Carl. The first was Victor Russell,
a lad of fourteen, whose arrow went three feet above the mark.

"The prize is mine if none of you do better than that," laughed Victor,
good-naturedly.

"I hope not, for the credit of the club," said the president. "Mr.
Crawford, will you shoot next?"

"I would prefer to be the last," said Carl, modestly.

"John Livermore, your turn now."

John came a little nearer than his predecessor, but did not distinguish
himself.

"If that is a specimen of the skill of the clubmen," thought Carl, "my
chance is a good one."

Next came Frank Stockton, whose arrow stuck only three inches from the
center of the target.

"Good for Fred!" cried Edward Downie. "Just wait till you see me shoot!"

"Are you a dangerous rival?" asked Carl, smiling.

"I can hit a barn door if I am only near enough," replied Edward.

"Edward Downie!" called the president.

Edward took his bow and advanced to the proper place, bent it, and the
arrow sped on its way.

There was a murmur of surprise when his arrow struck only an inch to the
right of the centre. No one was more amazed than Edward himself, for he
was accounted far from skillful. It was indeed a lucky accident.

"What do you say to that?" asked Edward, triumphantly.

"I think the prize is yours. I had no idea you could shoot like that,"
said Carl.

"Nor I," rejoined Edward, laughing.

"Carl Crawford!" called the president.

Carl took his position, and bent his bow with the greatest care. He
exercised unusual deliberation, for success meant more to him than to
any of the others. A dollar to him in his present circumstances would
be a small fortune, while the loss of even ten cents would be sensibly
felt. His heart throbbed with excitement as he let the arrow speed on
its mission.

His unusual deliberation, and the fact that he was a stranger,
excited strong interest, and all eyes followed the arrow with eager
attentiveness.

There was a sudden shout of irrepressible excitement.

Carl's arrow had struck the bull's-eye and the prize was his.

"Christopher!" exclaimed Edward Downie, "you've beaten me, after all!"

"I'm almost sorry," said Carl, apologetically, but the light in his eyes
hardly bore out the statement.

"Never mind. Everybody would have called it a fluke if I had won,"
said Edward. "I expect to get the prize for the long jump. I am good at
that."

"So am I, but I won't compete; I will leave it to you."

"No, no. I want to win fair."

Carl accordingly entered his name. He made the second best jump, but
Edward's exceeded his by a couple of inches, and the prize was adjudged
to him.

"I have my revenge," he said, smiling. "I am glad I won, for it wouldn't
have been to the credit of the club to have an outsider carry off two
prizes."

"I am perfectly satisfied," said Carl; "I ought to be, for I did not
expect to carry off any."

Carl decided not to compete for any other prize. He had invested twenty
cents and got back a dollar, which left him a profit of eighty cents.
This, with his original quarter, made him the possessor of a dollar and
five cents.

"My luck seems to have turned," he said to himself, and the thought gave
him fresh courage.

It was five o'clock when the games were over, and Carl prepared to start
again on his journey.

"Where are you going to take supper?" asked Downie.

"I--don't--know."

"Come home with me. If you are in no hurry, you may as well stay
overnight, and go on in the morning."

"Are you sure it won't inconvenience you?"

"Not at all."

"Then I'll accept with thanks."



CHAPTER XII.

AN ODD ACQUAINTANCE.


After breakfast the next morning Carl started again on his way. His new
friend, Edward Downie, accompanied him for a mile, having an errand at
that distance.

"I wish you good luck, Carl," he said, earnestly. "When you come this
way again, be sure to stop in and see me."

"I will certainly do so, but I hope I may find employment."

"At any rate," thought Carl, as he resumed his journey alone, "I am
better off than I was yesterday morning. Then I had but twenty-five
cents; now I have a dollar."

This was satisfactory as far as it went, but Carl was sensible that he
was making no progress in his plan of earning a living. He was simply
living from hand to mouth, and but for good luck he would have had to go
hungry, and perhaps have been obliged to sleep out doors. What he wanted
was employment.

It was about ten o'clock when, looking along the road, his curiosity was
excited by a man of very unusual figure a few rods in advance of him.
He looked no taller than a boy of ten; but his frame was large, his
shoulders broad, and his arms were of unusual length. He might properly
be called a dwarf.

"I am glad I am not so small as that," thought Carl. "I am richer
than he in having a good figure. I should not like to excite attention
wherever I go by being unusually large or unusually small."

Some boys would have felt inclined to laugh at the queer figure, but
Carl had too much good feeling. His curiosity certainly was aroused, and
he thought he would like to get acquainted with the little man, whose
garments of fine texture showed that, though short in stature, he was
probably long in purse. He didn't quite know how to pave the way for an
acquaintance, but circumstances favored him.

The little man drew out a handkerchief from the side pocket of his
overcoat. With it fluttered out a bank bill, which fell to the ground
apparently unobserved by the owner.

Carl hurried on, and, picking up the bill, said to the small stranger as
he touched his arm: "Here is some money you just dropped, sir."

The little man turned round and smiled pleasantly.

"Thank you. Are you sure it is mine?"

"Yes, sir; it came out with your handkerchief."

"Let me see. So it is mine. I was very careless to put it loose in my
pocket."

"You were rather careless, sir."

"Of what denomination is it?'

"It is a two-dollar note."

"If you had been a poor boy," said the little man, eying Carl keenly,
"you might have been tempted to keep it. I might not have known."

Carl smiled.

"What makes you think I am not a poor boy?" he said.

"You are well dressed."

"That is true; but all the money I have is a dollar and five cents."

"You know where to get more? You have a good home?"

"I had a home, but now I am thrown on my own exertions," said Carl,
soberly.

"Dear me! That is bad! If I were better acquainted, I might ask more
particularly how this happens. Are you an orphan?"

"No, sir; my father is living."

"And your mother is dead?"

"Yes, sir."

"Is your father a poor man?"

"No, sir; he is moderately rich."

"Yet you have to fight your own way?"

"Yes, sir. I have a stepmother."

"I see. Are you sure you are not unreasonably prejudiced against your
stepmother? All stepmothers are not bad or unkind."

"I know that, sir."

"Yours is, I presume?"

"You can judge for yourself."

