
The plain was covered with thick green grass, and beautiful spreading
trees grew on it. There was a richly draped platform for King Amor's
gold and ivory chair, but when the people gathered about he stood up
before them, a beautiful young giant with eyes like fixed stars and head
held high. And he read his law in a voice which, wonderful to relate,
was heard by every man, woman, and child--even by the little cripple
crouching alone in the grass on the very outskirts of the crowd and not
expecting to hear or see anything.

This is what he read:

"In my pleasaunce on the mountain top there grows a Blue Flower. One of
my brothers, the birds, brought me its seed from an Emperor's hidden
garden. It is as beautiful as the sky at dawn. It has a strange power.
It dispels evil fortune and the dark thoughts which bring it. There is
no time for dark thoughts--there is no time for evil. Listen to my Law.
Tomorrow seeds will be given to every man, woman, and child in my
kingdom--even to the newborn. Every man, woman, and child--even the
newborn--is commanded by the law to plant and feed and watch over the
Blue Flower. It is the work of each to make it grow. The mother of the
newborn can hold its little hand and make it drop the seeds into the
earth. As the child grows she must show it the green shoots when they
pierce the brown soil. She must babble to it of its Blue Flower. By the
time it is pleased by color it will love the blossoms, and the spell of
happiness and good fortune will begin to work for it. It is not one
person here and there who must plant the flower, but each and every one.
To those who have not land about them, all the land is free. You may
plant by the roadside, in a cranny of a wall, in an old box or glass or
tub, in any bare space in any man's field or garden. But each must plant
his seeds and watch over and feed them. Next year when the Blue Flower
blossoms I shall ride through my kingdom and bestow my rewards. This is
my Law."

"What will befall if some of us do not make them grow?" groaned some of
the Afraid Ones.

"There is no time to think of that!" shouted the boy who was clever.
"Plant them!"

When the Prime Minister and his followers told the King that larger and
stronger prisons must be built for the many criminals, and that heavier
taxes must be laid upon the people to rescue the country from poverty,
his answer to them was: "Wait until the blooming of the Blue Flower."

In a short time every one was working in the open air, digging in the
soil--tiny children as well as men and women. Drunkards and thieves and
idlers who had never worked before came out of their dark holes and
corners into the light of the sun. It was not a hard thing to plant a
few flower seeds, and because the King Amor looked so much more powerful
than other men, and had eyes so wonderful and commanding, they did not
know what punishment he would invent for them and were afraid to disobey
him. But somehow, after they had worked in the sweet-scented earth for a
while and had seen others working, the light of the sun and the
freshness of the air made them feel in better humor; the wind blew away
their evil fancies and their headaches, and because there was so much
talk and wondering about the magic of the Blue Flower they became
interested, and wanted to see what it would do for them when it
blossomed. Scarcely any of them had ever tried to make a flower grow
before and they gradually thought of it a great deal. There was less
quarreling because conversation with neighbors all about a Blue Flower
gave no reason for hard words. The worst and idlest were curious about
it and every one tried experiments of his own. The children were
delighted and actually grew happy and rosy over their digging and
watering and care-taking. Gradually all sorts of curious things
happened. People who were growing Blue Flowers began to keep the ground
around about them in order. They did not like to see bits of paper and
rubbish lying about, so they cleared them away. One quite new thing
which occurred was that sometimes people even helped each other a
little. Cripples and those who were weak actually found that there were
stronger ones who would do things for them when their backs ached, and
it was hard to carry water or dig up weeds. No one in King Mordreth's
Land had ever helped another before.

The boy who was clever did more than all the rest. He gathered together
all the children he could and formed them into a band using the
passwords. In time it became quite like a little army. They called
themselves The Band of the Blue Flower, and each boy and girl was bound
to remember the passwords and apply them to all they did. So, often,
when a number of people were together and things began to go wrong, a
clear young voice would cry out somewhere like a silver battle cry:

"There is no time for anger!" or "There is no time for hate!" or "There
is no time to fret! There is no time."

Among the great and rich people also singular things came to pass. Those
who had wasted their days loitering or rioting were obliged to get up in
the morning to work in their gardens, and finding that exercise and
fresh air improved their health and spirits they began to like it. Court
ladies found it good for their complexions and tempers; busy merchants
discovered that it made their heads clearer; ambitious students found
that after an hour spent evening and morning over their Blue Flower beds
they could study twice as long without fatigue. The children of the
princes and nobles became so full of work and talk of their soil and
their seeds that they quite forgot to squabble and be jealous of each
other's importance at Court. Never in one story could it be told how
many unusual, interesting, and wonderful things occurred in the once
gloomy King Mordreth's Land just because every person in it, rich and
poor, old and young, good and bad, had to plant and care for and live
every day of life with a Blue Flower. Oh! the corners and crannies and
queer places it was planted in; and oh! the thrill of excitement
everywhere when the first tender green shoots thrust their way through
the earth! And the wave of excitement which passed over the whole land
when the first buds showed themselves. By that time every one was so
interested that even the Afraid Ones had forgotten to ask each other
what King Amor would do to them if they had no Blue Flower. Somehow,
people had gained courage and they knew the Blue Flower would grow--and
they knew there was no time to stop working while they worried and said
"Suppose it didn't." There was no time.

Sometimes the young King was on the mountain top with the wind and the
eagle and the stars, and sometimes he was in his palace in the city, but
he was always working and thinking for his people. He was not seen by
the people, however, until a splendid summer day came when it was
proclaimed by heralds in the streets that he would begin his journey
through the land by riding through the capital city to see the
blossoming of the Blue Flowers, and there would be a feast once more
