lay his orchard.

The velvet sky over it was still starry; but the water of the harbour
was beginning to grow silvery in the reflection of the dawn that was
breaking in the east.

"Her misfortune will only make her dearer to me. I cannot realize that a
month ago I did not know her. It seems to me that she has been a part of
my life for ever. I wonder if she was grieved that I did not go to the
orchard last night--if she waited for me. If she does, she does not know
it herself yet. It will be my sweet task to teach her what love means,
and no man has ever had a lovelier, purer, pupil."

At the annual school meeting, the next afternoon, the trustees asked
Eric to take the Lindsay school for the following year. He consented
unhesitatingly.

That evening he went to Mrs. Williamson, as she washed her tea dishes in
the kitchen.

"Mrs. Williamson, I am going back to the old Connors orchard to see
Kilmeny again to-night."

She looked at him reproachfully.

"Well, Master, I have no more to say. I suppose it wouldn't be of any
use if I had. But you know what I think of it."

"I intend to marry Kilmeny Gordon if I can win her."

An expression of amazement came into the good woman's face. She looked
scrutinizingly at the firm mouth and steady gray eyes for a moment. Then
she said in a troubled voice,

"Do you think that is wise, Master? I suppose Kilmeny is pretty; the egg
peddler told me she was; and no doubt she is a good, nice girl. But she
wouldn't be a suitable wife for you--a girl that can't speak."

"That doesn't make any difference to me."

"But what will your people say?"

"I have no 'people' except my father. When he sees Kilmeny he will
understand. She is all the world to me, Mrs. Williamson."

"As long as you believe that there is nothing more to be said," was
the quiet answer, "I'd be a little bit afraid if I was you, though. But
young people never think of those things."

"My only fear is that she won't care for me," said Eric soberly.

Mrs. Williamson surveyed the handsome, broad-shouldered young man
shrewdly.

"I don't think there are many women would say you 'no', Master. I wish
you well in your wooing, though I can't help thinking you're doing
a daft-like thing. I hope you won't have any trouble with Thomas and
Janet. They are so different from other folks there is no knowing. But
take my advice, Master, and go and see them about it right off. Don't go
on meeting Kilmeny unbeknownst to them."

"I shall certainly take your advice," said Eric, gravely. "I should have
gone to them before. It was merely thoughtlessness on my part. Possibly
they do know already. Kilmeny may have told them."

Mrs. Williamson shook her head decidedly.

"No, no, Master, she hasn't. They'd never have let her go on meeting
you there if they had known. I know them too well to think of that for a
moment. Go you straight to them and say to them just what you have said
to me. That is your best plan, Master. And take care of Neil. People say
he has a notion of Kilmeny himself. He'll do you a bad turn if he can,
I've no doubt. Them foreigners can't be trusted--and he's just as much
a foreigner as his parents before him--though he HAS been brought up on
oatmeal and the shorter catechism, as the old saying has it. I feel that
somehow--I always feel it when I look at him singing in the choir."

"Oh, I am not afraid of Neil," said Eric carelessly. "He couldn't help
loving Kilmeny--nobody could."

"I suppose every young man thinks that about his girl--if he's the right
sort of young man," said Mrs. Williamson with a little sigh.

She watched Eric out of sight anxiously.

"I hope it'll all come out right," she thought. "I hope he ain't making
an awful mistake--but--I'm afraid. Kilmeny must be very pretty to have
bewitched him so. Well, I suppose there is no use in my worrying over
it. But I do wish he had never gone back to that old orchard and seen
her."



CHAPTER XI. A LOVER AND HIS LASS

Kilmeny was in the orchard when Eric reached it, and he lingered for a
moment in the shadow of the spruce wood to dream over her beauty.

The orchard had lately overflowed in waves of old-fashioned caraway, and
she was standing in the midst of its sea of bloom, with the lace-like
blossoms swaying around her in the wind. She wore the simple dress of
pale blue print in which he had first seen her; silk attire could not
better have become her loveliness. She had woven herself a chaplet
of half open white rosebuds and placed it on her dark hair, where the
delicate blossoms seemed less wonderful than her face.

When Eric stepped through the gap she ran to meet him with outstretched
hands, smiling. He took her hands and looked into her eyes with an
expression before which hers for the first time faltered. She looked
down, and a warm blush strained the ivory curves of her cheek and
throat. His heart bounded, for in that blush he recognized the banner of
love's vanguard.

"Are you glad to see me, Kilmeny?" he asked, in a low significant tone.

She nodded, and wrote in a somewhat embarrassed fashion,

"Yes. Why do you ask? You know I am always glad to see you. I was afraid
you would not come. You did not come last night and I was so sorry.
Nothing in the orchard seemed nice any longer. I couldn't even play. I
tried to, and my violin only cried. I waited until it was dark and then
I went home."

"I am sorry you were disappointed, Kilmeny. I couldn't come last night.
Some day I shall tell you why. I stayed home to learn a new lesson. I am
sorry you missed me--no, I am glad. Can you understand how a person may
be glad and sorry for the same thing?"

She nodded again, with a return of her usual sweet composure.

"Yes, I could not have understood once, but I can now. Did you learn
your new lesson?"

"Yes, very thoroughly. It was a delightful lesson when I once understood
it. I must try to teach it to you some day. Come over to the old bench,
Kilmeny. There is something I want to say to you. But first, will you
give me a rose?"

She ran to the bush, and, after careful deliberation, selected a perfect
half-open bud and brought it to him--a white bud with a faint, sunrise
flush about its golden heart.

"Thank you. It is as beautiful as--as a woman I know," Eric said.

A wistful look came into her face at his words, and she walked with a
drooping head across the orchard to the bench.

"Kilmeny," he said, seriously, "I am going to ask you to do something
for me. I want you to take me home with you and introduce me to your
uncle and aunt."

She lifted her head and stared at him incredulously, as if he had asked
her to do something wildly impossible. Understanding from his grave face
that he meant what he said, a look of dismay dawned in her eyes. She
shook her head almost violently and seemed to be making a passionate,
instinctive effort to speak. Then she caught up her pencil and wrote
with feverish haste:

"I cannot do that. Do not ask me to. You do not understand. They would
be very angry. They do not want to see any one coming to the house. And
they would never let me come here again. Oh, you do not mean it?"

He pitied her for the pain and bewilderment in her eyes; but he took her
slender hands in his and said firmly,

"Yes, Kilmeny, I do mean it. It is not quite right for us to be meeting
each other here as we have been doing, without the knowledge and consent
of your friends. You cannot now understand this, but--believe me--it is
so."

She looked questioningly, pityingly into his eyes. What she read there
seemed to convince her, for she turned very pale and an expression of
hopelessness came into her face. Releasing her hands, she wrote slowly,

"If you say it is wrong I must believe it. I did not know anything so
pleasant could be wrong. But if it is wrong we must not meet here any
more. Mother told me I must never do anything that was wrong. But I did
not know this was wrong."

"It was not wrong for you, Kilmeny. But it was a little wrong for me,
because I knew better--or rather, should have known better. I didn't
stop to think, as the children say. Some day you will understand fully.
Now, you will take me to your uncle and aunt, and after I have said
to them what I want to say it will be all right for us to meet here or
anywhere."

She shook her head.

"No," she wrote, "Uncle Thomas and Aunt Janet will tell you to go away
and never come back. And they will never let me come here any more.
Since it is not right to meet you I will not come, but it is no use to
think of going to them. I did not tell them about you because I knew
that they would forbid me to see you, but I am sorry, since it is so
wrong."

"You must take me to them," said Eric firmly. "I am quite sure that
things will not be as you fear when they hear what I have to say."

Uncomforted, she wrote forlornly,

"I must do it, since you insist, but I am sure it will be no use. I
cannot take you to-night because they are away. They went to the store
at Radnor. But I will take you to-morrow night; and after that I shall
not see you any more."

Two great tears brimmed over in her big blue eyes and splashed down
on her slate. Her lips quivered like a hurt child's. Eric put his arm
impulsively about her and drew her head down upon his shoulder. As she
cried there, softly, miserably, he pressed his lips to the silky black
hair with its coronal of rosebuds. He did not see two burning eyes which
were looking at him over the old fence behind him with hatred and mad
passion blazing in their depths. Neil Gordon was crouched there, with
clenched hands and heaving breast, watching them.

"Kilmeny, dear, don't cry," said Eric tenderly. "You shall see me again.
I promise you that, whatever happens. I do not think your uncle and aunt
will be as unreasonable as you fear, but even if they are they shall not
prevent me from meeting you somehow."

Kilmeny lifted her head, and wiped the tears from her eyes.

"You do not know what they are like," she wrote. "They will lock me into
my room. That is the way they always punished me when I was a little
girl. And once, not so very long ago, when I was a big girl, they did
it."

"If they do I'll get you out somehow," said Eric, laughing a little.

She allowed herself to smile, but it was a rather forlorn little effort.
She did not cry any more, but her spirits did not come back to her. Eric
talked gaily, but she only listened in a pensive, absent way, as if she
scarcely heard him. When he asked her to play she shook her head.

"I cannot think any music to-night," she wrote, "I must go home, for my
head aches and I feel very stupid."

"Very well, Kilmeny. Now, don't worry, little girl. It will all come out
all right."

Evidently she did not share his confidence, for her head drooped again
as they walked together across the orchard. At the entrance of the wild
cherry lane she paused and looked at him half reproachfully, her eyes
filling again. She seemed to be bidding him a mute farewell. With an
impulse of tenderness which he could not control, Eric put his arm about
her and kissed her red, trembling mouth. She started back with a little
cry. A burning colour swept over her face, and the next moment she fled
swiftly up the darkening lane.

The sweetness of that involuntary kiss clung to Eric's lips as he went
homeward, half-intoxicating him. He knew that it had opened the gates of
womanhood to Kilmeny. Never again, he felt, would her eyes meet his with
their old unclouded frankness. When next he looked into them he knew
that he should see there the consciousness of his kiss. Behind her in
the orchard that night Kilmeny had left her childhood.



CHAPTER XII. A PRISONER OF LOVE

When Eric betook himself to the orchard the next evening he had to
admit that he felt rather nervous. He did not know how the Gordons would
receive him and certainly the reports he had heard of them were not
encouraging, to say the least of it. Even Mrs. Williamson, when he had
told her where he was going, seemed to look upon him as one bent on
bearding a lion in his den.

"I do hope they won't be very uncivil to you, Master," was the best she
could say.

He expected Kilmeny to be in the orchard before him, for he had been
delayed by a call from one of the trustees; but she was nowhere to be
seen. He walked across it to the wild cherry lane; but at its entrance
he stopped short in sudden dismay.

Neil Gordon had stepped from behind the trees and stood confronting him,
with blazing eyes, and lips which writhed in emotion so great that at
first it prevented him from speaking.

With a thrill of dismay Eric instantly understood what must have taken
place. Neil had discovered that he and Kilmeny had been meeting in the
orchard, and beyond doubt had carried that tale to Janet and Thomas
Gordon. He realized how unfortunate it was that this should have
happened before he had had time to make his own explanation. It would
probably prejudice Kilmeny's guardians still further against him. At
this point in his thoughts Neil's pent up passion suddenly found vent in
a burst of wild words.

"So you've come to meet her again. But she isn't here--you'll never see
her again! I hate you--I hate you--I hate you!"

His voice rose to a shrill scream. He took a furious step nearer Eric
as if he would attack him. Eric looked steadily in his eyes with a calm
defiance, before which his wild passion broke like foam on a rock.

"So you have been making trouble for Kilmeny, Neil, have you?" said Eric
contemptuously. "I suppose you have been playing the spy. And I suppose
that you have told her uncle and aunt that she has been meeting me here.
Well, you have saved me the trouble of doing it, that is all. I was
going to tell them myself, tonight. I don't know what your motive in
doing this has been. Was it jealousy of me? Or have you done it out of
malice to Kilmeny?"

His contempt cowed Neil more effectually than any display of anger could
have done.

"Never you mind why I did it," he muttered sullenly. "What I did or
why I did it is no business of yours. And you have no business to come
sneaking around here either. Kilmeny won't meet you here again."

"She will meet me in her own home then," said Eric sternly. "Neil, in
behaving as you have done you have shown yourself to be a very foolish,
undisciplined boy. I am going straightway to Kilmeny's uncle and aunt to
explain everything."

Neil sprang forward in his path.

"No--no--go away," he implored wildly. "Oh, sir--oh, Mr. Marshall,
please go away. I'll do anything for you if you will. I love Kilmeny.
I've loved her all my life. I'd give my life for her. I can't have you
coming here to steal her from me. If you do--I'll kill you! I wanted to
kill you last night when I saw you kiss her. Oh, yes, I saw you. I was
watching--spying, if you like. I don't care what you call it. I had
followed her--I suspected something. She was so different--so changed.
She never would wear the flowers I picked for her any more. She seemed
to forget I was there. I knew something had come between us. And it was
you, curse you! Oh, I'll make you sorry for it."

He was working himself up into a fury again--the untamed fury of the
Italian peasant thwarted in his heart's desire. It overrode all the
restraint of his training and environment. Eric, amid all his anger and
annoyance, felt a thrill of pity for him. Neil Gordon was only a boy
still; and he was miserable and beside himself.

"Neil, listen to me," he said quietly. "You are talking very foolishly.
It is not for you to say who shall or shall not be Kilmeny's friend.
Now, you may just as well control yourself and go home like a decent
fellow. I am not at all frightened by your threats, and I shall know how
to deal with you if you persist in interfering with me or persecuting
Kilmeny. I am not the sort of person to put up with that, my lad."

The restrained power in his tone and look cowed Neil. The latter turned
sullenly away, with another muttered curse, and plunged into the shadow
of the firs.

Eric, not a little ruffled under all his external composure by this
most unexpected and unpleasant encounter, pursued his way along the lane
which wound on by the belt of woodland in twist and curve to the Gordon
homestead. His heart beat as he thought of Kilmeny. What might she not
be suffering? Doubtless Neil had given a very exaggerated and distorted
account of what he had seen, and probably her dour relations were very
angry with her, poor child. Anxious to avert their wrath as soon as
might be, he hurried on, almost forgetting his meeting with Neil. The
threats of the latter did not trouble him at all. He thought the angry
outburst of a jealous boy mattered but little. What did matter was that
Kilmeny was in trouble which his heedlessness had brought upon her.

Presently he found himself before the Gordon house. It was an old
building with sharp eaves and dormer windows, its shingles stained a
dark gray by long exposure to wind and weather. Faded green shutters
hung on the windows of the lower story. Behind it grew a thick wood
of spruces. The little yard in front of it was grassy and prim and
flowerless; but over the low front door a luxuriant early-flowering
rose vine clambered, in a riot of blood-red blossom which contrasted
strangely with the general bareness of its surroundings. It seemed to
fling itself over the grim old house as if intent on bombarding it with
an alien life and joyousness.

Eric knocked at the door, wondering if it might be possible that Kilmeny
should come to it. But a moment later it was opened by an elderly
woman--a woman of rigid lines from the hem of her lank, dark print dress
to the crown of her head, covered with black hair which, despite its few
gray threads, was still thick and luxuriant. She had a long, pale face
somewhat worn and wrinkled, but possessing a certain harsh comeliness
of feature which neither age nor wrinkles had quite destroyed; and
her deep-set, light gray eyes were not devoid of suggested kindliness,
although they now surveyed Eric with an unconcealed hostility. Her
figure, in its merciless dress, was very angular; yet there was about
her a dignity of carriage and manner which Eric liked. In any case, he
preferred her unsmiling dourness to vulgar garrulity.

He lifted his hat.

"Have I the honour of speaking to Miss Gordon?" he asked.

"I am Janet Gordon," said the woman stiffly.

"Then I wish to talk with you and your brother."

"Come in."

She stepped aside and motioned him to a low brown door opening on the
right.

"Go in and sit down. I'll call Thomas," she said coldly, as she walked
out through the hall.

Eric walked into the parlour and sat down as bidden. He found himself
in the most old-fashioned room he had ever seen. The solidly made chairs
and tables, of some wood grown dark and polished with age, made even
Mrs. Williamson's "parlour set" of horsehair seem extravagantly modern
by contrast. The painted floor was covered with round braided rugs.
On the centre table was a lamp, a Bible and some theological volumes
contemporary with the square-runged furniture. The walls,
wainscoted half way up in wood and covered for the rest with a dark,
diamond-patterned paper, were hung with faded engravings, mostly of
clerical-looking, bewigged personages in gowns and bands.

But over the high, undecorated black mantel-piece, in a ruddy glow of
sunset light striking through the window, hung one which caught and
held Eric's attention to the exclusion of everything else. It was the
enlarged "crayon" photograph of a young girl, and, in spite of the
crudity of execution, it was easily the center of interest in the room.

Eric at once guessed that this must be the picture of Margaret Gordon,
for, although quite unlike Kilmeny's sensitive, spirited face in
general, there was a subtle, unmistakable resemblance about brow and
chin.

The pictured face was a very handsome one, suggestive of velvety dark
eyes and vivid colouring; but it was its expression rather than its
beauty which fascinated Eric. Never had he seen a countenance indicative
of more intense and stubborn will power. Margaret Gordon was dead
and buried; the picture was a cheap and inartistic production in an
impossible frame of gilt and plush; yet the vitality in that face
dominated its surroundings still. What then must have been the power of
such a personality in life?

Eric realized that this woman could and would have done whatsoever she
willed, unflinchingly and unrelentingly. She could stamp her desire on
everything and everybody about her, moulding them to her wish and will,
in their own despite and in defiance of all the resistance they might
make. Many things in Kilmeny's upbringing and temperament became clear
to him.

"If that woman had told me I was ugly I should have believed her," he
thought. "Ay, even though I had a mirror to contradict her. I should
never have dreamed of disputing or questioning anything she might have
said. The strange power in her face is almost uncanny, peering out as it
does from a mask of beauty and youthful curves. Pride and stubbornness
are its salient characteristics. Well, Kilmeny does not at all resemble
her mother in expression and only very slightly in feature."

His reflections were interrupted by the entrance of Thomas and Janet
Gordon. The former had evidently been called from his work. He nodded
without speaking, and the two sat gravely down before Eric.

"I have come to see you with regard to your niece, Mr. Gordon," he said
abruptly, realizing that there would be small use in beating about the
bush with this grim pair. "I met your--I met Neil Gordon in the Connors
orchard, and I found that he has told you that I have been meeting
Kilmeny there."

He paused. Thomas Gordon nodded again; but he did not speak, and he
did not remove his steady, piercing eyes from the young man's flushed
countenance. Janet still sat in a sort of expectant immovability.

"I fear that you have formed an unfavourable opinion of me on this
account, Mr. Gordon," Eric went on. "But I hardly think I deserve it.
I can explain the matter if you will allow me. I met your niece
accidentally in the orchard three weeks ago and heard her play. I
thought her music very wonderful and I fell into the habit of coming to
the orchard in the evenings to hear it. I had no thought of harming her
in any way, Mr. Gordon. I thought of her as a mere child, and a child
who was doubly sacred because of her affliction. But recently I--I--it
occurred to me that I was not behaving quite honourably in encouraging
her to meet me thus. Yesterday evening I asked her to bring me here and
introduce me to you and her aunt. We would have come then if you had
been at home. As you were not we arranged to come tonight."

