"So this is to be my room, is it?" asked our hero.

"Yes. How do you like it?"

"I don't see any wash-stand, or any chance to wash."

"Come, that's rich!" said Mr. Tucker, appearing to be very much amused.
"You didn't think you was stoppin' in the Fifth Avenoo Hotel, did you?"

"This don't look like it."

"We ain't used to fashionable boarders, and we don't know how to take
care of 'em. You'll have to go downstairs and wash in the trough, like
the rest of the paupers do."

"And wipe my face on the grass, I suppose?" said Philip coolly, though
his heart sank within him at the thought of staying even one night in a
place so squalid and filthy.

"Come, that's goin' too far," said Mr. Tucker, who felt that the
reputation of the boarding-house was endangered by such insinuations.
"We mean to live respectable. There's two towels a week allowed, and
that I consider liberal."

"And do all your boarders use the same towel?" asked Phil, unable to
suppress an expression of disgust.

"Sartain. You don't think we allow 'em one apiece, do you!"

"No, I don't," said Philip decidedly.

He had ceased to expect anything so civilized in Mr. Tucker's
establishment.

"Now you're safe in your room, I reckon I'd better go downstairs," said
Tucker.

"I will go with you."

"Not much you won't! We ain't a-goin' to give you a chance of runnin'
away just yet!"

"Do you mean to keep me a prisoner?" demanded Philip.

"That's just what we do, at present," answered his genial host.

"It won't be for long, Mr. Tucker."

"What's that you say? I'm master here, I'd have you to know!"

Just then a shrill voice was heard from below:

"Come down, Joe Tucker! Are you goin' to stay upstairs all day?"

"Comin', Abigail!" answered Mr. Tucker hastily, as he backed out of the
room, locking the door behind him. Philip heard the click of the key as
it turned in the lock, and he realized, for the first time in his life,
that he was a prisoner.



CHAPTER XII. A PAUPER'S MEAL



Half an hour later Philip heard a pounding on the door of his room.

He was unable to open it, but he called out, loud enough for the
outsider to hear:

"Who is it?"

"It's me--Zeke," was the answer that came back.

"Did you tell the Dunbars where I was?" asked Philip eagerly.

"Yes."

"I shouldn't think you had time to go there and back," said Philip,
fearing that Zeke had pocketed his money and then played him false. But,
as we know, he was mistaken in this.

"I didn't go there," shouted Zeke. "I met Frank on the bridge."

"What did he say?"

"He was mad," answered Zeke, laughing. "I thought he would be."

"Did he send any message to me?" asked Philip.

"No; he stopped fishin' and went home." Here the conversation was
interrupted. The loud tones in which Zeke had been speaking, in order to
be heard through the door, had attracted attention below.

His father came to the foot of the attic stairs and demanded
suspiciously:

"What you doin' there, Zeke?"

"Tryin' to cheer up Phil Gray," answered Zeke jocosely.

"He don't need any cheerin' up. He's all right. I reckon you're up to
some mischief."

"No, I ain't."

"Come along down."

"All right, dad, if you say so. Lucky he didn't hear what I was sayin'
about seein' Frank Dunbar," thought Zeke. "He'd be mad."

Presently there was another caller at Philip's room, or, rather, prison.
This time it was Mr. Tucker himself. He turned the key in the lock and
opened the door. Philip looked up inquiringly.

"Supper's ready," announced Joe. "You can come down if you want to."

Philip was provided with an appetite, but he did not relish the idea of
going downstairs and joining the rest of Mr. Tucker's boarders. It would
seem like a tacit admission that he was one of their number. Of course,
he couldn't do without eating, but he had a large apple in his pocket
when captured, and he thought that this would prevent his suffering from
hunger for that night, at least, and he did not mean to spend another at
the Norton poorhouse. The problem of to-morrow's supply of food might be
deferred till then.

"I don't care for any supper," answered Philip.

"Perhaps you expect your meals will be brought up to you?" said Mr.
Tucker, with a sneer.

"I haven't thought about it particularly," said Philip coolly.

"You may think you're spitin' me by not eatin' anything," observed Mr.
Tucker, who was rather alarmed lest Philip might have made up his mind
to starve himself.

This would be embarrassing, for it would make an investigation
necessary.

"Oh, no," answered Philip, smiling; "that never came into my mind."

"I don't mind bringin' you up your supper for once," said Tucker. "Of
course, I can't do it reg'lar, but this is the first night."

"I suppose I shall be better able to make my escape if I eat," thought
Philip. "Probably the most sensible thing is to accept this offer."

"How much are you to get for my board, Mr. Tucker?" he asked.

"Only sixty cents," grumbled Tucker. "It ain't enough, but the town
won't pay any more. You've no idea what appetites them paupers has."

"You made a mistake when you agreed to take me," said Philip gravely.
"I'm very hearty, you'll be sure to lose money on me."

Mr. Tucker looked uneasy.

"Well, you see I expect to have you earn part of your board by doin'
chores," he said, after a pause.

"That will give me a good chance to run away," remarked Philip calmly.
"You'll have to let me out of this room to work, you know."

"You wouldn't dare to run away!" said Tucker, trying to frighten Philip
by a blustering manner.

"That shows you don't know me, Mr. Tucker!" returned our hero. "I give
you fair warning that I shall run away the first chance I get."

Philip's tone was so calm and free from excitement that Mr. Tucker could
not help seeing that he was in earnest, and he looked perplexed.

"You don't look at it in the right light," he said, condescending to
conciliate his new boarder. "If you don't make no trouble, you'll have
a good time, and I'll let you off, now an' then, to play with Zeke. He
needs a boy to play with."

Philip smiled, for the offer did not attract him very much.

"You are very kind," he said, "but I don't think that even that will
reconcile me to staying here with you. But, if you'll agree to let me
pay you for the supper, you may bring me up some."

"The town will pay me," said Tucker.

"That's just what I don't want the town to do," said Philip quickly. "I
will make you an offer. At sixty cents a week the meals for one day
will not cost over ten cents. I'll pay you ten cents for supper and
breakfast."

"You're a cur'us boy," said Tucker. "You want to pay for your vittles in
a free boardin'-house."

"It isn't free to me. At any rate, I don't want it to be. What do you
say?"

"Oh, I ain't no objections to take your money," said Tucker, laughing.
"I didn't know you was so rich."

"I am not rich, but I think I can pay my board as long as I stay here."

This Philip said because he had decided that his stay should be a very
brief one.

"Just as you say!" chuckled Mr. Tucker.

As he went downstairs he reflected:

"I can take the boy's money and charge his board to the town, too.
There's nothin' to hen-der, and it'll be so much more in my pocket. I
wish the rest of the paupers would foller his example."

He went downstairs and explained to Mrs. Tucker that he wanted Philip's
supper.

"Tell him to come down to the table like the rest of the folks!"
retorted Mrs. Tucker. "He ain't too lazy, is he?"

"No; but it's safer to keep him in his room for the first twenty-four
hours. He's a desperate boy, but I reckon he'll get tamed after a
while."

"I'll desperate him!" said Mrs. Tucker scornfully. "I don't believe in
humorin' him."

"Nor I, Abigail. He'd like to come down, but I won't let him. We can
manage him between us."

"I should smile if we couldn't," said Mrs. Tucker. "If you want any
supper for him, you can get it yourself. I've got too much to do. No,
Widder Jones, you can't have another cup of tea, and you needn't beg for
it. One clip's plenty for you, and it's all we can afford."

"Only this once," pleaded the poor old woman. "I've got a headache."

"Then another cup of tea would only make it worse. If you've got through
your supper, go back to your seat and give more room for the rest."

While Mrs. Tucker was badgering and domineering over her regular
boarders, her husband put two slices of dry bread on a plate, poured out
a cup of tea, not strong enough to keep the most delicate child awake,
and surreptitiously provided an extra luxury in the shape of a thin
slice of cold meat. He felt that, as he was to receive double price, he
ought to deal generously by our hero.

He carried this luxurious supper to the third story, and set it down
before Philip.

Philip promptly produced a dime, which Mr. Tucker pocketed with
satisfaction. He waited till his young guest had finished his repast, in
order himself to carry down the dishes.

There was no butter for the bread, and the tea had been sweetened
scantily. However, Philip had the appetite of a healthy boy, and he ate
and drank everything that had been provided.

"I'll be up in the morning," said Mr. Tucker. "We go to bed early here.
The paupers go to roost at seven, and me and my wife and Zeke at eight.
You'd better go to bed early, too."



CHAPTER XIII. A FRIENDLY MISSION.



Philip was glad to hear that all in the almshouse went to bed so early.
He had not yet given up the hope of escaping that night, though he had
as yet arranged no definite plan of escape.

Meanwhile, he had an active friend outside. I refer, of course, to Frank
Dunbar. Frank had no sooner heard of his friend's captivity than he
instantly determined, if it were a possible thing, to help him to
escape.

He would not even wait till the next day, but determined after it was
dark to visit the poor-house and reconnoiter. First, he informed his
parents what had befallen Phil. Their indignation was scarcely less than
his.

"Squire Pope is carrying matters with a high hand," said the farmer.
"According to my idea, he has done no less than kidnap Philip, without
the shadow of a legal right."

"Can't he be prosecuted?" asked Frank eagerly.

"I am not sure as to that," answered his father, "but I am confident
that Philip will not be obliged to remain, unless he chooses, a
dependent upon the charity of the town."

"It is outrageous!" said Mrs. Dunbar, who was quite as friendly to
Philip as her husband and son.

"In my opinion," said Mr. Dunbar, "Squire Pope has done a very unwise
thing as regards his own interests. He desires to remain in office, and
the people will not be likely to reelect him if his policy is to make
paupers of those who wish to maintain themselves. Voters will be apt to
think that they are sufficiently taxed already for the support of those
who are actually unable to maintain themselves."

"If I were a voter," exclaimed Frank indignantly, "I wouldn't vote
for Squire Pope, even for dog-catcher! The meanest part of it is the
underhanded way in which he has taken Phil. He must have known he was
acting illegally, or he would have come here in open day and required
Phil to go with him."

"I agree with you, Frank. Squire Pope may be assured that he has lost
my vote from henceforth. Hitherto I have voted for him annually for
selectman, knowing that he wanted the office and considering him fairly
faithful."

"Father," said Frank, after a thoughtful pause, "do you think Philip
would be justified in escaping from the poorhouse?"

"I do," answered Mr. Dunbar. "In this free country I hold that no one
ought to be made an object of charity against his will."

"Philip is strong enough and smart enough to earn his own living," said
Frank.

"That is true. I will myself give him his board and clothes if he will
stay with me and work on the farm."

"I wish he would. He would be a splendid companion for me; but I think
he wants to leave Norton, and try his fortune in some larger place."

"I can't blame him. If his father were living and he had a good home,
I should not think it wise; but, as matters stand, it may not be a bad
plan for him."

"Father," said Frank, after supper, "I am going out and I may not be
back very early."

"Are you going to see Philip?"

"Yes; but I want to see him alone. If possible, I will see him without
attracting the attention of Joe Tucker."

"You won't get into any trouble, Frank?" said his mother anxiously.

"No, mother; I don't know what trouble I can get into."

"You may very likely fail to see Philip," suggested his father. "I hear
that Tucker and his boarders go to bed very early."

"So much the better!" said Frank, in a tone of satisfaction. "The only
one I want to see is Philip, and he isn't likely to go to sleep very
early."

Mr. Dunbar smiled to himself.

"Frank has got some plan in his head," he thought. "I won't inquire what
it is, for he has good common sense, and won't do anything improper."

About eight o'clock, Frank, after certain preparations, which will
hereafter be referred to, set out for the poorhouse, which was about a
mile distant.



CHAPTER XIV. PHILIP MAKES HIS ESCAPE.



It grew darker and darker in Philip's chamber, but no one came to bring
him a light. It was assumed that he would go to bed before he required
one.

By seven o'clock the paupers had settled themselves for the night, and
when eight o'clock struck, Mr. and Mrs. Tucker sought their beds. It
was no particular trial for Joe Tucker to go to bed early, for he was
naturally a lazy man, and fond of rest; while his wife, who worked a
great deal harder than he, after being on her feet from four o'clock in
the morning, found it a welcome relief to lie down and court friendly
sleep. Zeke wasn't always ready to go to bed. In fact, he would much
rather have gone up to the village now and then, but if he had done so
he would have had to stay out all night. There was one thing his parents
were strict about, and that was retiring at eight o'clock.

Philip, however, did not retire at that hour. It was earlier than his
usual hour for bed. Besides, he was in hopes his friend Frank would make
his appearance, and help him, though he didn't exactly understand how,
to make his escape.

At half-past eight it was dark. The stars were out, and the moon was
just making its appearance. Philip had opened his window softly, and was
looking out, when all at once he saw a boyish figure approaching.

Couldn't be Frank Dunbar.

He hoped so, but in the indistinct light could not be quite certain.

The boy, whoever it might be, approached cautiously, till he stood
within fifty feet of the house.

Then Philip saw that it was indeed Frank, and his heart beat joyfully.
It was something to see a friend, even though they were separated by
what seemed to him to be an impassable gulf.

About the same time, Frank recognized his friend, in the boyish figure
at the window.

"Is that you, Phil?" he asked, in a guarded voice, yet loud enough to be
heard.

"Yes, Frank; I have been expecting you. I knew you wouldn't desert me."

"I should think not. I didn't come before, because I didn't want to be
seen by any of Tucker's folks."

"They are all abed now, and I hope asleep."

"Can't you come downstairs, and steal away?"

"No; my chamber door is locked on the outside."

"That's what I thought."

"Can't you help me in any way?"
