shall not harm you."

It was the voice of George Melville. The tramp turned swiftly and stared
in ill-disguised dismay at Melville and Herbert.

"What business is it of yours?" he demanded, in a blustering tone.

"We make it our business to defend this lady from your thievish
designs," said Melville.

"You!" exclaimed the tramp, contemptuously. "Why, I could twist either
of you round my little finger."

"You'd better not try it!" said Melville, not showing the least
trepidation. "Mrs. Cole, has this man anything of yours in his
possession?"

"He has my spoons and I have just handed him ten dollars."

George Melville turned to the tramp.

"Be kind enough to lay the spoons on the table," he said, "and give back
the ten dollars Mrs. Cole handed you."

"You must think I'm a fool!" said the tramp.

"No; but I think you are a prudent man. If you do as I say we will let
you go; if not--"

"Well, if not?" blustered the tramp.

"If not, you may regret it."

All this time George Melville had spoken in his usual tone of voice, and
the tramp was puzzled to know whether he had any weapon with him. For
himself, he was unarmed, and this made him feel rather ill at ease,
notwithstanding his superiority in physical strength. He was rather
disposed to think that George Melville had a pistol, for he could not
understand how otherwise he should dare to confront a man of twice his
size and strength.

"I don't care for the spoons," he said, "but I will take the money."

"No, you will return the money," said Melville, calmly.

"Who will make me?" demanded the tramp, defiantly.

"I will."

"We'll see about that!" said the tramp, desperately, and he sprang
towards Melville, who had in the meantime entered the house and stood
only six feet distant.

"Stay where you are!" exclaimed Melville, resolutely, and he drew a
pistol, which he leveled at his formidable antagonist.

"That settles it, stranger!" said the tramp, "You've got the advantage
of me this time. Just wait till we meet again."

"I am willing to wait for some time," said Melville, shrugging his
shoulders. "I have no desire to cultivate your acquaintance, my friend."

"There are the spoons!" said the tramp, throwing them down on the table.

"Now for the money!"

The tramp looked at George Melville. Melville still held the pistol in
his hand leveled at his breast. The thief was a large man, but he was
not a brave one. He cowered before the resolute glance of his small
opponent.

"Won't you interfere with me if I give back the money?" he asked.

"No."

"Will you let me go without firing at me?"

"Yes."

"Perhaps you won't keep your agreement," suggested the tramp, nervously.

"I am a man of my word," said Melville, calmly.

His calm, resolute tone, free from all excitement, impressed the tramp
with confidence. He drew the notes from his vest pocket, where he had
thrust them, and threw them on the table.

"Now, may I go?" he said.

In answer, George Melville, who stood between him and the door, drew
aside, still, however, holding the pistol in position, and the tramp
passed out, not sorry, it may be said, to get out of range of the
weapon.

They watched him striding through the yard, and when he was fairly gone
Mrs. Cole said:

"Oh, how can I thank you for saving me from this wretch?"

"I am glad to have been the instrument of deliverance," said Melville,
politely.

"It was fortunate you had the pistol with you, Mr. Melville," said
Herbert.

"Well, yes, perhaps it was," said Melville, smiling.

"Pray, put it up, Mr. Melville," said the farmer's wife, "it always
makes me nervous to see a loaded pistol."

Melville bowed, and put back the pistol in his pocket.

"As your unpleasant visitor has gone," he said, "I may as well relieve
your fears by saying that the pistol is not loaded."

"Not loaded!" exclaimed Herbert and Tom Tripp in concert.

"No; it has not been loaded to my knowledge for a year."

"Then how could you stand up against that man?" asked the farmer's wife,
in wonder.

"He thought it was loaded!" replied Melville, "and that answered the
purpose. I should be very reluctant to use a loaded pistol, for I have
a high idea of the sacredness of human life, but I have no objection to
playing upon the fears of a man like that."

Melville and Herbert remained at the farmhouse for half an hour, till
the return of the farmer, when they resumed their river trip. They
returned about noon. When they were walking through the main street,
Herbert saw the town constable approaching with the air of a man who had
business with him.

"Did you wish to speak to me, Mr. Bruce?" he asked.

"Yes, Herbert. I have a warrant for your arrest."

"For my arrest!" exclaimed Herbert, in amazement. "What for?"

"On complaint of Eben Graham, for abstracting postage stamps and money
from the post office last evening."




CHAPTER XI. TRIED FOR THEFT.



Herbert stared at the constable in blank amazement.

"I am charged with stealing stamps and money from the post office?" he
said.

"Yes."

"Who makes the charge?" demanded Herbert, in great excitement.

"Eben Graham."

"I don't know what it means," said our hero, turning to George Melville.

"It means," said Melville, "that the fellow is envious of you, and angry
because he cannot supersede you with me. He evidently wants to do you an
injury."

"It must be so; but I did not imagine that Eben could be so mean. Mr.
Bruce, do you believe that I am a thief?"

"No, I don't, Herbert," said the constable, "and it was very much
against my will that I started out to arrest you, you may be sure."

"When do you want me to go with you?" asked Herbert.

"You will go before Justice Slocum at two o'clock."

"Is it necessary for me to go to the lockup?" asked Herbert, shrinking,
with natural repugnance, from entering the temporary house of tramps and
law breakers.

"No, Herbert," answered the constable, in a friendly tone. "I'll take it
upon myself to let you go home to dinner. I will call for you at quarter
of two. Of course I shall find you ready to accompany me?"

"Yes, Mr. Bruce, I am impatient to meet Eben Graham, and tell him to his
face that he has been guilty of a mean and contemptible falsehood, in
charging me with theft. Not a person in the village who knows me will
believe it."

"I will also call at your house, Herbert," said George Melville, "and
accompany you to the office of the justice. I shall ask leave to give
the details of Eben Graham's visit to me last evening."

"Thank you, Mr. Melville," said Herbert, "I am glad you do not believe a
word of this story."

"I am not so easily deceived, Herbert. It is quite possible that stamps
and money have been stolen, but, if so, it is your false friend and
accuser who is guilty."

Of course Herbert had to tell his mother what had happened. She was
agitated and alarmed, but became calmer when Herbert told her what was
Eben's probable motive in making the charge.

"How can he behave so shamefully!" exclaimed the indignant parent.

"I didn't think him capable of it, myself, mother, although I had a poor
opinion of him."

"Suppose that you can't prove that you are innocent, Herbert?" said Mrs.
Carr, anxiously.

"It is for him to prove that I am guilty, mother," answered Herbert, who
knew this much of law.

At a quarter of two Constable Bruce and Mr. Melville walked to the house
together.

The door was opened for them by Herbert himself.

"So you haven't taken leg bail, Herbert," said the constable, jocosely.

"No, Mr. Bruce, I am on hand; I am in a hurry to meet Mr. Eben Graham
and see whether he can look me in the face after his shameful behavior."

"Oh, Mr. Bruce, I never thought you would call at my home on such an
errand," said Mrs. Carr, on the point of breaking down.

"Don't worry, Mrs. Carr," said the constable; "anybody may be charged
with theft, however innocent. Your son has good friends who won't see
him treated with injustice."

Herbert's mother was desirous of accompanying them to the office of the
justice, but was persuaded to remain behind. Herbert knew that in her
indignation she would not be able to be silent when she saw Eben Graham.

Justice Slocum was an elderly man, with a mild face and gray hair. When
Herbert entered he greeted him in a friendly way.

"I am sorry to see you here, my boy," he said, "but I am sure there is
some mistake. I have known you ever since you were a baby, and I don't
believe you are guilty of theft now."

"I submit, Judge Slocum," said Eben Graham, who sat in a corner, his
mean features looking meaner and more insignificant than usual, "I
submit that you are prejudging the case."

"Silence, sir!" said Judge Slocum, warmly. "How dare you impugn my
conduct? Though Herbert were my own son, I would give you a chance to
prove him guilty."

"I hope you'll excuse me, judge," said Eben, cringing. "I am as sorry as
you are to believe the boy guilty of stealing."

"Do your worst and say your worst, Eben Graham!" said Herbert,
contemptuously, "but be very careful that you do not swear falsely."

"I don't need any instructions from you, Herbert Carr, considering that
you are a criminal on trial," said Eben, maliciously.

"You are mistaken, sir," said George Melville. "To be under arrest does
not make a man or boy a criminal."

"I am sure I am much obliged for the information, Mr. Melville," said
Eben, spitefully. "You've chosen a nice companion."

"There you are right," said Melville, gravely. "I have done much better
than if I had hired you."

Eben winced, but did not reply.

George Melville whispered to Herbert:

"Are you willing to accept me as your lawyer? I am not much of one, to
be sure, but this case is very simple."

"I am very grateful for your offer, and accept it," said Herbert.

I do not propose to record the whole scene in detail, but only to give a
general idea of the proceedings.

Eben Graham was sworn as a witness, and deposed that he had left Herbert
in charge of the post office the previous evening. On his return he
examined the stamps and contents of the money drawer, and found, to his
surprise, that five dollars in money and six dollars' worth of stamps
were missing.

"How did you know they were missing?" asked Melville.

"Because I knew precisely how much money was in the drawer and how many
stamps were there."

"Then you counted them just before you went out?"

"Yes, sir."

"That was rather a singular time to make the count, was it not?"

"I don't know that it was, sir."

"I should suppose the end of the day would be a more appropriate time."

"I don't think so," answered Eben, shortly.

"Were you led to make the count because you suspected Herbert's
honesty?" asked Mr. Melville.

"That was the very reason I did it," said Eben, with a malicious glance
at Herbert.

"Isn't it a little curious that you should have selected a boy whose
honesty you doubted, to fill your place?" asked George Melville,
carelessly.

"There wasn't anybody else; he knew all about post-office work."
answered Eben.

"Very good! Now, Mr. Graham, if you have no objection, will you tell why
you wanted to get away from the post office last evening?"

Eben fidgeted, for he saw what was coming, and it made him nervous.

"I wanted a little rest," he answered, after a pause.

"Where did you go?"

"Why do you ask me that question?" asked Eben, moving about uneasily.

"Because I desire an answer."

"You know where I went," returned Eben, sullenly.

"Yes, but I wish you to tell me."

"Answer the question, witness!" said the judge, briefly.

"I went to the hotel," replied Eben, evasively.

"On whom did you call?"

"On you!" answered Eben, reluctantly.

"We have come to it at last. Now, what was your business with me?"

"To tell you that Herbert would not suit you as a companion," said the
witness, who thought this answer rather a clever one.

"Whom did you recommend in his place?" pursued the questioner,
relentlessly.

Eben hesitated, but his cleverness came again to his aid.

"I told you that I would be willing to come just to oblige you," he
said.

"Did Herbert know that you were going to make this proposal?"

"No."

"You asked him, then, to remain in the post office while you absented
yourself with a view of depriving him of the position he had just
secured in my employ?"

"I would have got father to take him again in the store and post
office," said Eben, defending himself from the implied charge of
treachery.

"Yes, you told me so."

Eben nodded triumphantly. Even Melville had to admit that he was not
treating Herbert meanly.

"By the way," said Melville, "isn't it rather strange that you should
have been ready to recommend in your place a boy whose honesty you
doubted?"

"I didn't know he was a thief," said Eben, somewhat abashed.

"No, but you suspected his honesty. That was your reason for counting
the money and stamps before you left the office. At least, that is the
reason you have given."

"He had been in the office before I was there," said Eben, uneasily.

"While he was there, were any stamps missing? Was he suspected of taking
any stamps or money?"

"Not that I know of."

"Now, Mr. Graham, what answer did I make to your application?"

"What application?"

"To take you into my employ instead of Herbert."

"You wanted to keep him," said the witness, sullenly.

