business hours," explained Harry. "It's one of the customs of the
place."

Just then, to his astonishment, Grant saw his employer, Mr.
Reynolds, pursuing his hat, which was rolling over the floor. He was
about to run to his assistance, but Harry stopped him.

"No interference is allowed," he said. "Leave them to their fun. I
used to think it strange myself, when I first came into the
Exchange, but I'm used to it now. Now we may as well go back to the
office."

There is no occasion to follow the boys through the day's routine.
Grant found his companion very obliging, and very ready to give him
the information he needed. Many boys would have been supercilious
and perhaps been disposed to play tricks on a country boy, but Harry
was not one of them. He took a friendly interest in Grant, answered
all his questions, and did his best to qualify him for the position
he was to assume.

Before the office closed, Grant and his new friend went to the bank
to make a deposit of money and checks. The deposit amounted to about
twenty thousand dollars.

"There must be plenty of money in New York," said Grant. "Why, up in
Colebrook, if a man were worth twenty thousand dollars he would be
considered a rich man."

"It takes a good deal more than that to make a man rich in New York.
In the stock business a man is likely to do a larger business in
proportion to his capital than in the mercantile business."

On their way back from the bank, Grant came face to face with Tom
Calder. Tom was busily engaged in talking to a companion, some years
older than himself, and didn't observe Grant. Grant was by no means
prepossessed in favor of this young man, whose red and mottled face,
and bold glance made him look far from respectable.

"Do you know those fellows?" asked Harry Becker.

"The youngest one is from Colebrook."

"He is in bad company. I hope he is not an intimate friend of
yours?"

"Far from it. Still, I know him, and am sorry to see him with such a
companion."

At four o'clock Mr. Reynolds proposed to go home. He beckoned to
Grant to accompany him.



CHAPTER XI -- GRANT MAKES A FRIEND



"What do you think of your first day in Wall Street?" asked Mr.
Reynolds, kindly.

"I have found it very interesting," answered Grant.

"Do you think you shall like the business?"

"Yes, sir, I think so."

"Better than if you had been able to carry out your original plan,
and go to college?"

"Yes, sir, under the circumstances, for I have a better prospect of
helping the family."

"That feeling does you credit. Have you any brothers and sisters?"

"One of each, sir."

"I have but one boy, now nine years old. I am sorry to say he is not
strong in body, though very bright and quick, mentally. I wish he
were more fond of play and would spend less time in reading and
study."

"I don't think that is a common complaint among boys, sir."

"No, I judge not from my own remembrance and observation. My wife is
dead, and I am such a busy man that I am not able to give my boy as
much attention as I wish I could. My boy's health is the more
important to me because I have no other child."

Grant's interest was excited, and he looked forward to meeting his
employer's son, not without eagerness. He had not long to wait.

The little fellow was in the street in front of the house when his
father reached home. He was a slender, old-fashioned boy in
appearance, who looked as if he had been in the habit of keeping
company with grown people. His frame was small, but his head was
large. He was pale, and would have been plain, but for a pair of
large, dark eyes, lighting up his face.

"Welcome home, papa," he said, running up to meet Mr. Reynolds.

The broker stooped over and kissed his son. Then he said: "I have
brought you some company, Herbert. This is Grant Thornton, the boy I
spoke to you about."

"I am glad to make your acquaintance," said the boy, with
old-fashioned courtesy, offering his hand.

"And I am glad to meet you, Herbert," responded Grant, pleasantly.

The little boy looked up earnestly in the face of his father's
office boy.

"I think I shall like you," he said.

Mr. Reynolds looked pleased, and so did Grant.

"I am sure we shall be very good friends," said our hero.

"Herbert," said his father, "will you show Grant the room he is to
occupy?"

"It is next to mine, isn't it, papa?"

"Yes, my son."

"Come with me," said Herbert, putting his hand in Grant's. "I will
show you the way."

Grant, who was only accustomed to the plain homes in his native
village, was impressed by the evidence of wealth and luxury
observable in the house of the stock broker. The room assigned to
him was small, but it was very handsomely furnished, and he almost
felt out of place in it. But it was not many days, to anticipate
matters a little, before he felt at home.

Herbert took Grant afterward into his own room.

"See my books," he said, leading the way to a bookcase, containing
perhaps a hundred volumes, the majority of a juvenile character, but
some suited to more mature tastes. "Do you like reading?" asked
Grant.

"I have read all the books you see here," answered Herbert, "and
some of papa's besides. I like to read better than to play."

"But you ought to spend some of your time in play, or you will not
grow up healthy."

"That is what papa says. I try to play some, but I don't care much
about it."

Grant was no longer surprised at the little boy's delicacy. It was
clear that he needed more amusement and more exercise. "Perhaps," he
thought, "I can induce Herbert to exercise more."

"When do you take dinner?" he asked.

"At half-past six. There is plenty of time."

"Then suppose we take a little walk together. We shall both have a
better appetite."

"I should like to," replied Herbert; "that is, with you. I don't
like to walk alone."

"How far is Central Park from here?"

"A little over a mile."

"I have never seen it. Would you mind walking as far as that?"

"Oh, no."

So the two boys walked out together. They were soon engaged in an
animated conversation, consisting, for the most part, of questions
proposed by Grant, and answers given by Herbert.

Not far from the park they came to a vacant lot where some boys were
playing ball.

"Now, if we only had a ball, Herbert," said Grant, "we might have a
little amusement."

"I've got a ball in my pocket, but I don't use it much."

"Let me see it."

Herbert produced the ball, which proved to be an expensive one,
better than any Grant had ever owned.

"There, Herbert, stand here, and I will place myself about fifty
feet away. Now, throw it to me, no matter how swiftly."

They were soon engaged in throwing the ball to each other. Grant was
a good ball player, and he soon interested the little boy in the
sport. Our hero was pleased to see Herbert's quiet, listless manner
exchanged for the animation which seemed better suited to a boy.

"You are improving, Herbert," he said, after a while. "You would
make a good player in time."

"I never liked it before," said the little boy. "I never knew there
was so much fun in playing ball."

"We shall have to try it every day. I suppose it is about time to go
home to supper."

"And we haven't been to Central Park, after all."

"That will do for another day. Are boys allowed to play ball in the
park?"

"Two afternoons in the week, I believe, but I never played there."

"We shall have to try it some day."

"I should like to play--with you."

They reached home in full time for dinner. At the dinner table Mr.
Reynolds was struck by the unusually bright and animated face of his
son, and his good appetite.

"What have you been doing to make you so hungry, Herbert?" he asked.

"I took a walk with Grant, and we had a fine game of ball."

"I am glad to hear it," said the broker, much pleased. "If you want
to become stout and strong like Grant, that is the best thing for
you to do."

"I never liked playing ball before, papa."

"That is a compliment to you, Grant," said the broker, smiling.

"I think," he said to the prim, elderly lady who presided over the
household, acting as housekeeper, "Herbert will be the better for
having a boy in the house."

"I don't know about that," said Mrs. Estabrook, stiffly. "When he
came into the house he had mud on his clothes. He never did that
till this boy came."

"I won't complain of that, if his health is improved."

Mrs. Estabrook, who was a poor relation of Herbert's mother, pursed
up her mouth, but did not reply. In her eyes, it was more important
that a boy should keep his clothes whole and clean than to have
color in his cheeks, and health in his frame.

"I hope that boy won't stay here long," she thought, referring, of
course, to Grant. "He'll quite spoil Herbert by making him rough and
careless of his appearance."

"Well, Herbert, and how do you like Grant?" asked Mr. Reynolds, as
his son was bidding him good-night before going to bed.

"I am so glad you brought him here, papa. I shall have good times
now. You'll let him stay all the time, won't you?"

"I'll see about it, Herbert," answered his father, smiling.



CHAPTER XII -- MRS. ESTABROOK'S PLANS



Grant was going home with Mr. Reynolds at the close of the fourth
day, when it occurred to him to say what had been in his mind for
some time: "Isn't it time, Mr. Reynolds, for me to be looking out
for a boarding place?"

The broker smiled, and said with assumed concern: "Are you
dissatisfied with your present boarding place?"

"How could I be, sir?" returned Grant, earnestly. "But you told me I
could stay with you a week, while I was looking about for a suitable
place to board."

"That is true. Now, however, there is a difficulty about your making
a change."

"What is that, sir?"

"Herbert would not give his consent. The fact is, Grant, Herbert
finds so much pleasure in your society, and derives so much
advantage from the increased exercise you lead him to take, that I
think you will have to make up your mind to stay."

Grant's face showed the pleasure he felt.

"I shall be very glad to stay, Mr. Reynolds," he answered, "if you
are willing to have me."

"I had this in view from the first," said the broker, "but I wanted
to see how you and Herbert got along. I wished to be sure, also,
that your influence on him would be good. Of that I can have no
doubt, and I am glad to receive you as a member of my family."

There was one member of the household, however, who was not so well
pleased with the proposed arrangement. This was Mrs. Estabrook, the
housekeeper.

As the week drew to a close, she said, one evening after the boys
had retired:

"How much longer is the office boy to stay here, Mr. Reynolds?"

"Why do you ask?" inquired the broker.

"Only with reference to domestic arrangements," answered the
housekeeper, disconcerted.

"He will remain for a considerable time, Mrs. Estabrook."

"I--I thought he was only going to stay a week."

"He is company for Herbert, and I think it desirable to keep him."

"Herbert soils his clothes a deal more now than he used to do," said
the housekeeper, discontentedly. "I am sure I don't know where the
other boy carries him."

"Nor I, but I am not afraid to trust him with Grant. As to the
clothes, I consider them of very small account, compared with my
boy's health."

Mrs. Estabrook knitted in silence for five minutes. She was by no
means pleased with her employer's plan, having taken a dislike to
Grant, for which, indeed, her chief reason was jealousy. She had a
stepson, a young man of twenty-one, in Mr. Reynolds' office, whom
she would like to have in the house in place of Grant. But Mr.
Reynolds had never taken notice of her occasional hints to that
effect. The housekeeper's plans were far-reaching. She knew that
Herbert was delicate, and doubted if he would live to grow up. In
that case, supposing her stepson had managed to ingratiate himself
with the broker, why might he not hope to become his heir? Now this
interloper, as she called Grant, had stepped into the place which
her own favorite--his name was Willis Ford--should have had. Mrs.
Estabrook felt aggrieved, and unjustly treated, and naturally
incensed at Grant, who was the unconscious cause of her
disappointment. She returned to the charge, though, had she been
wiser, she would have foreborne.

"Do you think a poor boy like this Grant Thornton is a suitable
companion for a rich man's son, Mr. Reynolds? Excuse me for
suggesting it, but I am so interested in dear Herbert."

"Grant Thornton is the son of a country minister, and has had an
excellent training," said the broker, coldly. "The fact that he is
poor is no objection in my eyes. I think, Mrs. Estabrook, we will
dismiss the subject. I think myself competent to choose my son's
associates."

"I hope you will excuse me," said the housekeeper, seeing that she
had gone too far. "I am so attached to the dear child."

"If you are, you will not object to the extra trouble you may have
with his clothes, since his health is benefited."

"That artful young beggar has wound his way into his employer's
confidence," thought Mrs. Estabrook, resentfully, "but it may not be
always so."

A few minutes later, when the housekeeper was in her own
sitting-room, she was told that Willis Ford wanted to see her.

Mrs. Estabrook's thin face lighted up with pleasure, for she was
devotedly attached to her stepson.

"Bring him up here at once," she said.

A minute later the young man entered the room. He was a thin,
sallow-complexioned young man, with restless, black eyes, and a
discontented expression--as of one who thinks he is not well used by
the world.

"Welcome, my dear boy," said the housekeeper, warmly. "I am so glad
to see you."

Willis submitted reluctantly to his stepmother's caress, and threw
himself into a rocking chair opposite her.

"Are you well, Willis?" asked Mrs. Estabrook, anxiously.

"Yes, I'm well enough," muttered the young man.

"I thought you looked out of sorts."

"I feel so."

"Is anything the matter?"

"Yes; I'm sick of working at such starvation wages."

"I thought fifteen dollars a week a very good salary. Only last
January you were raised three dollars."

"And I expected to be raised three dollars more on the first of
July."

"Did you apply to Mr. Reynolds?"

"Yes, and he told me I must wait till next January."

"I think he might have raised you, if only on account of the
connection between our families."

"Perhaps he would if you would ask him, mother."

"I will when there is a good opportunity. Still, Willis, I think
