more by my farmyard than you ever will by the forest."

"Humphrey has nothing to do with the poultry and eggs, has he, Edward?
they belong to Edith and me, and Jacob shall take them to Lymington and
sell them for us, and get us some new clothes for Sunday, for these
begin to look rather worn--and no wonder."

"No, dearest, the poultry are yours, and I will sell them for you as
soon as you please, and buy what you wish with the money," replied
Jacob. "Let Humphrey make all the money he can with his pigs."

"Yes; and the butter belongs to me, if I make it," said Alice.

"No no," replied Humphrey; "that's not fair; I find cows, and get
nothing for them. We must go halves Alice."

"Well, I've no objection to that," said Alice "because you find the
cows and feed them. I made a pound of butter yesterday, just to try
what I could do; but it's not firm, Jacob. How is that?"

"I have seen the women make butter, and know how, Alice; so next time I
will be with you. I suppose you did not wash your butter-milk well out,
nor put any salt in it?"

"I did not put any salt in it."

"But you must, or the butter will not keep."

It was arranged that Edward should stay at home to assist in collecting
the acorns for the pigs, and that Jacob should cross the forest alone
to see after the puppies, and he set off the next morning. He was away
two days, and then returned; said that he had a promise of two puppies,
and that he had chosen them; they were of the same breed as Smoker, but
they were only a fortnight old, and could not be taken from the mother
yet awhile, so that he had arranged to call again when they were three
or four months old, and able to follow him across the forest. Jacob
also said that he was very near being hurt by a stag that had made at
him--for at that season of the year the stags were very dangerous and
fierce--but that he had fired, and struck off one of the animal's
horns, which made it turn.

"You must be careful, Edward, how you go about the forest now."

"I have no wish to go," replied Edward; "as we can not hunt, it is no
use; but in November we shall begin again."

"Yes," replied Jacob, "that will be soon enough. To-morrow I will help
you with the acorns, and the day afterward, if I am spared, I will take
Alice's poultry to Lymington for her."

"Yes, and when you come back you will help me to churn for then I shall
have a good deal of cream."

"And don't forget to buy the kitten, Jacob," said Edith.

"What's the good of a kitten?" said Humphrey, who was very busy making
a bird-cage for Edith, having just finished one for Alice; "she will
only steal your cream and eat up your birds."

"No, she won't; for we'll shut the door fast where the milk and cream
are, and we'll hang the cages so high that Miss Puss won't be able to
get at them."

"Well, then, a kitten will be useful," said Edward, "for she will teach
you to be careful."

"My coat is a little the worse for wear, and so is yours, Edward. We
must try if we can not, like Alice, find means to pay for another."

"Humphrey," said Jacob, "I'll buy all you want, and trust to you for
paying me again as soon as you can."

"That's just what I want," replied Humphrey. "Then you must buy me a
gun and a new suit of clothes first; when I've paid for them, I shall
want some more tools, and some nails and screws, and two or three other
things; but I will say nothing about them just now. Get me my gun, and
I'll try what the forest will do for me--especially after I have my
dog."

"Well, we shall see; perhaps you'll like to come out with me sometimes
and learn woodcraft, for Edward knows as much as I do now, and can go
out by himself."

"Of course I will, Jacob: I want to learn every thing."

"Well, there's a little money left in the bag yet, and I will go to
Lymington to-morrow. Now I think it is time we were in bed; and if you
are all as tired as I am, you will sleep soundly."

Jacob put into the cart the next day about forty of the chickens which
Alice had reared; the others were kept to increase the number in the
poultry-yard. They had cost little or nothing bringing up; for when
quite young, they only had a little oatmeal cake, and afterward, with
the potatoes which were left, they found themselves, as fowls can
always do when they have a great range of ground to go over.

Jacob came back at sunset, with all the articles. He brought a new suit
for Alice and Edith, with some needles and thread, and worsted, and
gave her some money which was left from the sale of the chickens, after
he had made the purchases. He also bought a new suit for Edward and
Humphrey, and a gun, which was much approved of by Humphrey, as it had
a larger bore and carried a heavier bullet than either Jacob's or
Edward's; and there was a white kitten for Alice and Edith. There was
no news, only that the Levelers had opposed Cromwell, and he had put
them down with the other troops, and Jacob said that it appeared that
they were all squabbling and fighting with each other.

Time passed; the month of November came on without any thing to disturb
the daily employments of the family in the forest: when one evening,
Jacob, who had returned from hunting with Edward (the first time they
had been out since the season commenced) told Alice that she must do
all she could to give them a good dinner the next day, as it was to be
a feast.

"Why so, Jacob?"

"If you can not guess, I won't tell you till the time comes," replied
Jacob.

"Well then, Humphrey must help us," replied Alice, "and we will do what
we can. I will try, now that we have some meat, to make a grand dinner."

Alice made all the preparations, and had for dinner the next day a
piece of baked venison, a venison stew, a pair of roast chickens, and
an apple pie--which, for them, was a very grand dinner indeed. And it
was very well dressed: for Jacob had taught her to cook, and by degrees
she improved upon Jacob's instruction. Humphrey was quite as clever at
it as she was; and little Edith was very useful, as she plucked the
fowls, and watched the things while they were cooking.

"And now I'll tell you," said Jacob, after saying grace, "why I asked
you for a feast this day. It is because exactly on this day twelvemonth
I brought you all to the cottage. Now you know."

"I did not know it, certainly, but I dare say you are right," replied
Edward.

"And now, children, tell me," said Jacob, "has not this year passed
very quickly and very happily--quite as quickly and quite as happily as
if you had been staying at Arnwood?"

"Yes, more so," replied Humphrey; "for then very often I did not know
what to do to amuse myself, and since I have been here the days have
always been too short."

"I agree with Humphrey," said Edward.

"And I am sure I do," replied Alice; "I'm always busy and always happy,
and I'm never scolded about dirtying my clothes or tearing them, as I
used to be."

"And what does little Edith say?"

"I like to help Alice, and I like to play with the kitten," replied
Edith.

"Well, my children," said Jacob, "depend upon it, you are most happy
when your days pass quickest, and that is only the case when you have
plenty to do. Here you are in peace and safety; and may it please God
that you may continue so! We want very few things in this world--that
is, we really want very few things, although we wish and sigh for many.
You have health and spirits, which are the greatest blessings in life.
Who would believe, to look at you all, that you were the same children
that I brought away from Arnwood? You were then very different from
what you are now. You are strong and healthy, rosy and brown, instead
of being fair and delicate. Look at your sisters, Edward. Do you think
that any of your former friends--do you think that Martha, who had the
care of them, would know them?"

Edward smiled, and said, "Certainly not; especially in their present
dresses."

"Nor would, I think, Humphrey be known again. You, Edward, were always
a stout boy; and, except that you have grown very much, and are more
brown, there is no great difference. You would be known again, even in
your present forester's dress; but what I say is, that we ought to be
thankful to the Almighty that you, instead of being burned in your
beds, have found health, and happiness, and security, in a forester's
hut; and I ought to be, and am, most thankful to Heaven, that it has
pleased it to spare my life, and enable me to teach you all to the
present, how to gain your own livelihoods after I am called away. I
have been able so far to fulfill my promise to your noble father; and
you know not what a heavy load on my mind is every day lessened, as I
see each day that you are more and more able to provide for yourselves.
God bless you, dear children, and may you live to see many returns, and
happy returns, of the day;" and Jacob was so much moved as he said
this, that a tear was seen rolling down his furrowed cheek.

The second winter now came on. Jacob and Edward went out hunting
usually about twice a-week; for the old forester complained of
stiffness and rheumatism, and not feeling so active as he used to be.
Humphrey now accompanied Edward perhaps one day in the week, but not
more, and they seldom returned without having procured venison, for
Edward knew his business well, and no longer needed the advice of
Jacob. As the winter advanced, Jacob gave up going out altogether. He
went to Lymington to sell the venison and procure what was necessary
for the household, such as oatmeal and flour, which were the principal
wants, but even these journeys fatigued him, and it was evident that
the old man's constitution was breaking fast. Humphrey was always busy.
One evening he was making something which puzzled them all. They asked
him what it was for, but he would not tell them.

"It's an experiment that I am trying," said he as he was bending a
hazel stick. "If it answers, you shall know: if it does not, I've only
had a little trouble for nothing. Jacob, I hope you will not forget the
salt to-morrow when you go to Lymington, for my pigs are ready for
killing, and we must salt the greatest part of the pork. After the legs
and shoulders have lain long enough in salt, I mean to try if I can not
smoke them, and if I do, I'll then smoke some bacon. Won't that be
jolly, Alice? Won't you like to have a great piece of bacon hanging up
there, and only to have to get on a stool to cut off what you want,
when Edward and I come home hungry, and you've nothing to give us to
eat?"

"I shall be very glad to have it, and I think so will you too, by the
way you talk."

"I shall, I assure you. Jacob, didn't you say the ash sticks were the
best to smoke bacon with?"

"Yes, boy: when you are ready, I'll tell you how to manage. My poor
mother used to smoke very well up this very chimney."

"I think that will do," said Humphrey, letting his hazel stick spring
up, after he had bent it down, "but to-morrow I shall find out."

"But what is it for, Humphrey?" said Edith.

"Go away, puss, and play with your kitten," replied Humphrey, putting
away his tools and his materials in a corner; "I've a great deal on my
hands now, but I must kill my pigs before I think of any thing else."

The next day Jacob took the venison into Lymington, and brought back
the salt and other articles required. The pigs wore then killed, and
salted down under Jacob's directions; his rheumatism did not allow him
to assist, but Humphrey and Edward rubbed in the salt, and Alice took
the pieces of pork away to the tub when they were finished. Humphrey
had been out the day before with the unknown article he had been so
long about. The next morning he went out early before breakfast and
when he returned, he brought a hare in his hand, which he laid on the
table.

"There," said he, "my spring has answered, and this is the first fruits
of it. Now I'll make some more, and we will have something by way of a
change for dinner."

They were very much pleased with Humphrey's success, and he was not a
little proud of it.

"How did you find out how to make it?"

"Why, I read in the old book of travels which Jacob brought home with
him last summer, of people catching rabbits and hares in some way like
this; I could not make it out exactly, but it gave me the idea."

We ought to have told the reader that Jacob had more than once brought
home an old book or two which he had picked up, or had given him, and
that these had been occasionally looked into by Humphrey and Edward,
but only now and then, as they had too much to do to find much time for
reading, although sometimes, in the evening, they did take them up.
When it is considered how young they were, and what a practical and
busy life they led, this can not be surprising.




CHAPTER VII.


Humphrey was now after something else. He had made several traps, and
brought in rabbits and hares almost every day. He had also made some
bird-traps, and had caught two goldfinches for Alice and Edith, which
they put in the cages he had made for them. But, as we said, Humphrey
was about something else; he was out early in the morning, and in the
evening, when the moon was up, he came home late, long after they had
all gone to bed; but they never knew why, nor would he tell them. A
heavy fall of snow took place, and Humphrey was more out than ever. At
last, about a week after the snow had laid on the ground, one morning
he came in with a hare and rabbit in his hand, and said,

"Edward, I have caught something larger than a hare or a rabbit, and
you must come and help me, and we must take our guns. Jacob, I suppose
your rheumatism is too bad to let you come too?"

"No; I think I can manage. It's the damp that hurts me so much. This
frosty air will do me good, perhaps. I have been much' better since the
snow fell. Now, then, let us see what you have caught."

"You will have to walk two miles," said Humphrey, as they went out.

"I can manage it, Humphrey, so lead the way."

Humphrey went on till they came close to a clump of large trees, and
then brought them to a pitfall which he had dug, about six feet wide
and eight feet long, and nine feet deep.

"There's my large trap," said Humphrey, "and see what I have caught in
it."

They looked down into the pit and perceived a young bull in it. Smoker,
who was with him, began to bark furiously at it.

"Now, what are we to do? I don't think it is hurt. Can we get it out?"
said Humphrey.

"No, not very well. If it was a calf, we might; but it is too heavy,
and if we were to get it out alive, we must kill it after ward, so we
had better shoot it at once."

"So I think," replied Humphrey.

"But how did you catch him?" said Edward.

"I read of it in the same book I did about the traps for hares,"
replied Humphrey. "I dug out the pit and covered it with brambles, and
then put snow at the top. This is the thicket that the herd comes to
chiefly in winter time; it is large and dry, and the large trees
shelter it; so that is why I chose this spot. I took a large bundle of
hay, put some on the snow about the pit, and then strewed some more
about in small handfuls, so that the cattle must find it, and pick it
up, which I knew they would be glad to do, now that the snow is on the
ground. And now, you see, I have succeeded."

"Well, Humphrey, you beat us, I will say," said Edward. "Shall I shoot
him?"

"Yes, now that he is looking up."

Edward shot his ball through the forehead of the animal, which fell
dead: but they were then obliged to go home for the pony and cart, and
ropes to get the animal out of the pit, and a hard job they had of it
too; but the pony helped them, and they did get it out at last.

"I will do it easier next time," said Humphrey. "I will make a windlass
as soon as I can, and we will soon hoist out another, like they turn a
bucket of water up from a well."

"It's nice young meat," said Jacob, who was skinning the bull, "not
above eighteen months old, I should think. Had it been a full-grown
one, like that we shot, it must have remained where it was, for we
never could have got it out."

"Yes, Jacob, we should, for I should have gone down and cut it up in
the pit, so that we would have handed it out by bits, if we could not
have managed him whole."

They loaded the cart with the skin and quarters of the animal, and then
drove home.

"This will go far to pay for the gun, Humphrey," said Jacob, "if it
don't pay for more."

"I am glad of it," said Humphrey, "but I hope it will not be the last
which I take."

"That reminds me, Humphrey, of one thing; I think you must come back
with the cart and carry away all the entrails of the beast, and remove
all the blood which is on the snow, for I've observed that cattle are
very scared with the smell and sight of blood. I found that out by once
or twice seeing them come to where I have cut the throat of a stag, and
as soon as they have put their noses down to where the blood was on the
ground, they have put their tails up and galloped away, bellowing at a
terrible rate. Indeed, I've heard say, that if a murder has been
committed in a wood, and you want to find the body, that a herd of
cattle drove into it will serve you better than even a bloodhound."

"Thank you for telling me that, Jacob, for I should never have supposed
it, and I'll tell you what I'll also do; I'll load the cart with fern
litter, and put it at the bottom of the pit, so that if I could get a
heifer or calf worth taking, it may not be hurt by the fall."

"It must have taken you a long while to dig that pit, Humphrey."

"Yes, it did, and as I got deeper the work was harder, and then I had
to carry away all the earth and scatter it about. I was more than a
month about it from the time that I began till it was finished, and I
had a ladder to go up and down by at last, and carried the baskets of
earth up, for it was too deep to throw it out."

"Nothing like patience and perseverance, Humphrey. You've more than I
have."

"I'm sure he has more than I have, or shall ever have, I'm afraid,"
replied Edward.

During this winter, which passed rapidly way very few circumstances of
any consequence occurred. Old Jacob was more or less confined to the
cottage by the rheumatism, and Edward hunted either by himself or
occasionally with Humphrey. Humphrey was fortunate enough to take a
bull and a cow calf in his pitfall, both of them about a year or
fifteen months old, and by a rude invention of his, by way of windlass,
contrived, with the assistance of Edward, to hoist them uninjured out
of the pit. They were put into the yard, and after having been starved
till they were tamed, they followed the example of the heifer and calf,
and became quite tame. These were an important addition to their stock,
as may well be imagined. The only mishap under which they labored was,
old Jacob's confinement to the cottage, which, as the winter advanced,
prevented him from going to Lymington; they could not, therefore, sell
any venison; and Humphrey, by way of experiment, smoked some venison
hams, which he hung up with the others. There was another point on
which they felt anxiety, which was, that Jacob could not cross the
forest to get the puppies which had been promised them, and the time
was passed, for it was now January, when he was to have called for
them. Edward and Humphrey pressed the old man very hard to let one of
them go, but the only answer they could obtain was "that he'd be better
soon." At last, finding that he got worse instead of better, he
consented that Edward should go. He gave directions how to proceed, the
way he was to take, and a description of the keeper's lodge; cautioned
him to call himself by the name of Armitage, and describe himself as
his grandson. Edward promised to obey Jacob's directions, and the next
morning he set off, mounted upon White Billy, with a little money in
his pocket in case he should want it.

"I wish I was going with you," said Humphrey, as he walked by the side
of the pony.

"I wish you were, Humphrey: for my part, I feel as if I were a slave
set at liberty. I do justice to old Jacob's kindness and good will, and
acknowledge how much we are indebted to him; but still to be housed up
here in the forest, never seeing or speaking to any one, shut out from
the world, does not sun Edward Beverley. Our father was a soldier, and
a right good one, and if I were old enough I think even now I should
escape and join the royal party, broken as it may be and by all
accounts is, at this moment. Deer stalking is all very well, but I fly
at higher game."

"I feel the same as you do," replied Humphrey: "but recollect, Edward,
that the old man's very infirm, and what would become of our sisters if
we were to leave them?"
