No sooner was he in than he saw that the great revolving wheel in the
sky was the princess's spinning wheel, near the other end of the room,
turning very fast.  He could see no sky or stars any more, but the
wheel was flashing out blue--oh, such lovely sky-blue light!--and
behind it of course sat the princess, but whether an old woman as thin
as a skeleton leaf, or a glorious lady as young as perfection, he could
not tell for the turning and flashing of the wheel.

'Listen to the wheel,' said the voice which had already grown dear to
Curdie: its very tone was precious like a jewel, not as a jewel, for no
jewel could compare with it in preciousness.

And Curdie listened and listened.

'What is it saying?' asked the voice.

'It is singing,' answered Curdie.

'What is it singing?'

Curdie tried to make out, but thought he could not; for no sooner had
he got hold of something than it vanished again.

Yet he listened, and listened, entranced with delight.

'Thank you, Curdie, said the voice.

'Ma'am,' said Curdie, 'I did try hard for a while, but I could not make
anything of it.'

'Oh yes, you did, and you have been telling it to me!  Shall I tell you
again what I told my wheel, and my wheel told you, and you have just
told me without knowing it?'

'Please, ma'am.'

Then the lady began to sing, and her wheel spun an accompaniment to her
song, and the music of the wheel was like the music of an Aeolian harp
blown upon by the wind that bloweth where it listeth. Oh, the sweet
sounds of that spinning wheel!  Now they were gold, now silver, now
grass, now palm trees, now ancient cities, now rubies, now mountain
brooks, now peacock's feathers, now clouds, now snowdrops, and now
mid-sea islands.  But for the voice that sang through it all, about
that I have no words to tell.  It would make you weep if I were able to
tell you what that was like, it was so beautiful and true and lovely.
But this is something like the words of its song:


  The stars are spinning their threads,
  And the clouds are the dust that flies,
  And the suns are weaving them up
  For the time when the sleepers shall rise.

  The ocean in music rolls,
  And gems are turning to eyes,
  And the trees are gathering souls
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  The weepers are learning to smile,
  And laughter to glean the sighs;
  Burn and bury the care and guile,
  For the day when the sleepers shall rise.

  Oh, the dews and the moths and the daisy red,
  The larks and the glimmers and flows!
  The lilies and sparrows and daily bread,
  And the something that nobody knows!


The princess stopped, her wheel stopped, and she laughed.  And her
laugh was sweeter than song and wheel; sweeter than running brook and
silver bell; sweeter than joy itself, for the heart of the laugh was
love.

'Come now, Curdie, to this side of my wheel, and you will find me,' she
said; and her laugh seemed sounding on still in the words, as if they
were made of breath that had laughed.

Curdie obeyed, and passed the wheel, and there she stood to receive
him!--fairer than when he saw her last, a little younger still, and
dressed not in green and emeralds, but in pale blue, with a coronet of
silver set with pearls, and slippers covered with opals that gleamed
every colour of the rainbow.  It was some time before Curdie could take
his eyes from the marvel of her loveliness. Fearing at last that he was
rude, he turned them away; and, behold, he was in a room that was for
beauty marvellous!  The lofty ceiling was all a golden vine, Whose
great clusters of carbuncles, rubies, and chrysoberyls hung down like
the bosses of groined arches, and in its centre hung the most glorious
lamp that human eyes ever saw--the Silver Moon itself, a globe of
silver, as it seemed, with a heart of light so wondrous potent that it
rendered the mass translucent, and altogether radiant.

The room was so large that, looking back, he could scarcely see the end
at which he entered; but the other was only a few yards from him--and
there he saw another wonder: on a huge hearth a great fire was burning,
and the fire was a huge heap of roses, and yet it was fire.  The smell
of the roses filled the air, and the heat of the flames of them glowed
upon his face.  He turned an inquiring look upon the lady, and saw that
she was now seated in an ancient chair, the legs of which were crusted
with gems, but the upper part like a nest of daisies and moss and green
grass.

'Curdie,' she said in answer to his eyes, 'you have stood more than one
trial already, and have stood them well: now I am going to put you to a
harder.  Do you think you are prepared for it?'

'How can I tell, ma'am,' he returned, 'seeing I do not know what it is,
or what preparation it needs?  Judge me yourself, ma'am.'

'It needs only trust and obedience,' answered the lady.

'I dare not say anything, ma'am.  If you think me fit, command me.'

'It will hurt you terribly, Curdie, but that will be all; no real hurt
but much good will come to you from it.'

Curdie made no answer but stood gazing with parted lips in the lady's
face.

'Go and thrust both your hands into that fire,' she said quickly,
almost hurriedly.

Curdie dared not stop to think.  It was much too terrible to think
about.  He rushed to the fire, and thrust both of his hands right into
the middle of the heap of flaming roses, and his arms halfway up to the
elbows.  And it did hurt!  But he did not draw them back. He held the
pain as if it were a thing that would kill him if he let it go--as
indeed it would have done.  He was in terrible fear lest it should
conquer him.

But when it had risen to the pitch that he thought he could bear it no
longer, it began to fall again, and went on growing less and less until
by contrast with its former severity it had become rather pleasant.  At
last it ceased altogether, and Curdie thought his hands must be burned
to cinders if not ashes, for he did not feel them at all.  The princess
told him to take them out and look at them.  He did so, and found that
all that was gone of them was the rough, hard skin; they were white and
smooth like the princess's.

'Come to me,' she said.

He obeyed and saw, to his surprise, that her face looked as if she had
been weeping.

'Oh, Princess!  What is the matter?' he cried.  'Did I make a noise and
vex you?'

'No, Curdie, she answered; 'but it was very bad.'

'Did you feel it too then?'

'Of course I did.  But now it is over, and all is well.  Would you like
to know why I made You put your hands in the fire?' Curdie looked at
them again--then said:

'To take the marks of the work off them and make them fit for the
king's court, I suppose.'

'No, Curdie,' answered the princess, shaking her head, for she was not
pleased with the answer.  'It would be a poor way of making your hands
fit for the king's court to take off them signs of his service.  There
is a far greater difference on them than that.  Do you feel none?'

'No, ma'am.'

'You will, though, by and by, when the time comes.  But perhaps even
then you might not know what had been given you, therefore I will tell
you.  Have you ever heard what some philosophers say--that men were all
animals once?'

'No, ma'am.'

'It is of no consequence.  But there is another thing that is of the
greatest consequence--this: that all men, if they do not take care, go
down the hill to the animals' country; that many men are actually, all
their lives, going to be beasts.  People knew it once, but it is long
since they forgot it.'

'I am not surprised to hear it, ma'am, when I think of some of our
miners.'

'Ah!  But you must beware, Curdie, how you say of this man or that man
that he is travelling beastward.  There are not nearly so many going
that way as at first sight you might think.  When you met your father
on the hill tonight, you stood and spoke together on the same spot; and
although one of you was going up and the other coming down, at a little
distance no one could have told which was bound in the one direction
and which in the other.  Just so two people may be at the same spot in
manners and behaviour, and yet one may be getting better and the other
worse, which is just the greatest of all differences that could
possibly exist between them.'

'But ma'am,' said Curdie, 'where is the good of knowing that there is
such a difference, if you can never know where it is?'

'Now, Curdie, you must mind exactly what words I use, because although
the right words cannot do exactly what I want them to do, the wrong
words will certainly do what I do not want them to do. I did not say
you can never know.  When there is a necessity for your knowing, when
you have to do important business with this or that man, there is
always a way of knowing enough to keep you from any great blunder.  And
as you will have important business to do by and by, and that with
people of whom you yet know nothing, it will be necessary that you
should have some better means than usual of learning the nature of them.

'Now listen.  Since it is always what they do, whether in their minds
or their bodies, that makes men go down to be less than men, that is,
beasts, the change always comes first in their hands--and first of all
in the inside hands, to which the outside ones are but as the gloves.
They do not know it of course; for a beast does not know that he is a
beast, and the nearer a man gets to being a beast the less he knows it.
Neither can their best friends, or their worst enemies indeed, see any
difference in their hands, for they see only the living gloves of them.
But there are not a few who feel a vague something repulsive in the
hand of a man who is growing a beast.

'Now here is what the rose-fire has done for you: it has made your
hands so knowing and wise, it has brought your real hands so near the
outside of your flesh gloves, that you will henceforth be able to know
at once the hand of a man who is growing into a beast; nay, more--you
will at once feel the foot of the beast he is growing, just as if there
were no glove made like a man's hand between you and it.

'Hence of course it follows that you will be able often, and with
further education in zoology, will be able always to tell, not only
when a man is growing a beast, but what beast he is growing to, for you
will know the foot--what it is and what beast's it is. According, then,
to your knowledge of that beast will be your knowledge of the man you
have to do with.  Only there is one beautiful and awful thing about it,
that if any one gifted with this perception once uses it for his own
ends, it is taken from him, and then, not knowing that it is gone, he
is in a far worse condition than before, for he trusts to what he has
not got.'

'How dreadful!' Said Curdie.  'I must mind what I am about.'

'Yes, indeed, Curdie.'

'But may not one sometimes make a mistake without being able to help
it?'

'Yes.  But so long as he is not after his own ends, he will never make
a serious mistake.'

'I suppose you want me, ma'am, to warn every one whose hand tells me
that he is growing a beast--because, as you say, he does not know it
himself.'

The princess smiled.

'Much good that would do, Curdie!  I don't say there are no cases in
which it would be of use, but they are very rare and peculiar cases,
and if such come you will know them.  To such a person there is in
general no insult like the truth.  He cannot endure it, not because he
is growing a beast, but because he is ceasing to be a man.  It is the
dying man in him that it makes uncomfortable, and he trots, or creeps,
or swims, or flutters out of its way--calls it a foolish feeling, a
whim, an old wives' fable, a bit of priests' humbug, an effete
superstition, and so on.'

'And is there no hope for him?  Can nothing be done?  It's so awful to
think of going down, down, down like that!'

'Even when it's with his own will?'

'That's what seems to me to make it worst of all,' said Curdie.

'You are right,' answered the princess, nodding her head; 'but there is
this amount of excuse to make for all such, remember--that they do not
know what or how horrid their coming fate is. Many a lady, so delicate
and nice that she can bear nothing coarser than the finest linen to
touch her body, if she had a mirror that could show her the animal she
is growing to, as it lies waiting within the fair skin and the fine
linen and the silk and the jewels, would receive a shock that might
possibly wake her up.'

'Why then, ma'am, shouldn't she have it?'

The princess held her peace.

'Come here, Lina,' she said after a long pause.

From somewhere behind Curdie, crept forward the same hideous animal
which had fawned at his feet at the door, and which, without his
knowing it, had followed him every step up the dove tower.  She ran to
the princess, and lay down flat at her feet, looking up at her with an
expression so pitiful that in Curdie's heart it overcame all the
ludicrousness of her horrible mass of incongruities.  She had a very
short body, and very long legs made like an elephant's, so that in
lying down she kneeled with both pairs.  Her tail, which dragged on the
floor behind her, was twice as long and quite as thick as her body.
Her head was something between that of a polar bear and a snake.  Her
eyes were dark green, with a yellow light in them.  Her under teeth
came up like a fringe of icicles, only very white, outside of her upper
lip.  Her throat looked as if the hair had been plucked off.  It showed
a skin white and smooth.

'Give Curdie a paw, Lina,' said the princess.

The creature rose, and, lifting a long foreleg, held up a great doglike
paw to Curdie.  He took it gently.  But what a shudder, as of terrified
delight, ran through him, when, instead of the paw of a dog, such as it
seemed to his eyes, he clasped in his great mining fist the soft, neat
little hand of a child!  He took it in both of his, and held it as if
he could not let it go.  The green eyes stared at him with their yellow
light, and the mouth was turned up toward him with its constant half
grin; but here was the child's hand!  If he could but pull the child
out of the beast! His eyes sought the princess.  She was watching him
with evident satisfaction.

'Ma'am, here is a child's hand!' said Curdie.

'Your gift does more for you than it promised.  It is yet better to
perceive a hidden good than a hidden evil.'

'But,' began Curdie.

'I am not going to answer any more questions this evening,' interrupted
the princess.  'You have not half got to the bottom of the answers I
