the dreaded grizzly bear.

Such a meeting would have startled an experienced hunter, and it was
therefore with no steady nerve that he hastily brought his piece to
his shoulder and fired.

The shot struck the bear in the body, doing just what his shot at the
buffalo had done some time before. It thoroughly angered him, without
inflicting anything like a serious wound. With a growl of fury the
brute made straight for him.

What would the boy have given, as he sped down the mountain side, were
he now in his wagon, whirled over the prairie at a rate which would
enable him to laugh to scorn any such speed as that of the brute.

At first he had hopes of reaching his refuge, but he was not long in
seeing that it was impossible, and found that if he escaped he must
find some refuge very speedily.

When he suddenly found himself beneath a goodly-sized tree it looked
like a providential indication to him, and throwing his gun to the
ground, he ascended the tree in the shortest time that he had ever
made.

He was none too soon as it was, for the bear was so close beneath him
that he felt the brush of its claws along his feet, as he nervously
jerked them beyond its reach.

Hastily scrambling to the very top of the tree, he secured himself
among the limbs, and then glanced down to see what his enemy was
doing. Great was his relief to find him sitting on his haunches,
contenting himself with merely casting wistful glances upward.

The sensation of even temporary safety was a relief, but when a full
hour had dragged by, with scarcely a single change of position upon
the part of the brute, Johnny began to ask himself what was to be the
end of all this.

It looked as though the grizzly had resolved in making his dinner upon
the youngster who had dared to fire a shot at him. The patience of an
animal is proverbially greater than that of a human being, and that of
the bear certainly exceeded to a great degree that of his expected
prey who crouched in the limbs above.



                    CHAPTER XII. THE GRIZZLY BEAR.

FROM WHERE young Brainerd was perched on the tree it was impossible to
catch a glimpse of the steam man, so patiently awaiting his return.
The distance was also too great for him to make himself beard by the
miners, who were hard at work twenty miles away.

Fruitful in expedients, it was not long before the boy found a
resource in his trouble. Tearing a large strip from his coat, he tore
this into smaller strips, until he had secured a rope half a dozen
yards in length. Upon the end of this he placed a loop, and then,
descending to the lowest limb, he devoted himself to the task of
drooping it over the end of his gun. It fortunately had fallen in such
a manner that the muzzle was somewhat elevated, so that here was a
good opportunity for the exercise of his skill and patience.

When the first attempt was made the bear suddenly clawed at it and
tore it from the boy's hand before he could jerk it beyond his reach.
So he was compelled to make another one.

Nothing discouraged, the boy soon had this completed, and it was
dropped down more cautiously than before. When the grizzly made a
lunge at it, it was deftly twitched out of his way.

This was repeated several times, until the brute became disgusted with
the sport, and dropping down behind the tree, let the boy do all the
fishing he chose.

Now was his time, but the boy did not allow his eagerness to overcome
the steadiness of his nerves. It required no little skill, but he
finally succeeded in dropping the noose over the muzzle of the gun and
jerked it up taut.

With a heart beating high with hope, Johnny saw it lifted clear of the
ground, and he began carefully drawing it up. The grizzly looked
curiously at his maneuvers, and once made as if to move toward the
dangling rifle; but, ere his mind was settled, it was drawn beyond his
reach, and the cold muzzle was grasped in the hand of the eagerly
waiting boy.

While drawing it up, he had been debating with himself as to the best
means of killing the brute. Remembering that his first shot had done
no harm, he sensibly concluded that he had not yet learned the
vulnerable part of the monster.

His gun was loaded very carefully, and when everything was ready he
made a noise, to attract the attention of the brute. The bear looked
up instantly, when the gun was aimed straight at his right eye.

Ere the grizzly could withdraw his gaze, the piece was discharged, and
the bullet sped true, crashing into the skull of the colossal brute.
With a howling grunt, he rose upon his hind feet, clawed the air a few
moments, and then dropped dead.

Young Brainerd waited until he was certain that the last spark of life
had fled, when he cautiously descended the tree, scarcely able to
realize the truth that he had slain a grizzly bear, the monarch of the
western wilderness. But such was the fact, and he felt more pride at
the thought than if he had slain a dozen buffaloes.

'If I only had him in the wagon,' he reflected, 'I'd take him into
camp, for they will never believe I killed a grizzly bear.'

However, it occurred to him that he might secure some memento, and
accordingly he cut several claws and placed them in his pocket. This
done, he concluded that, as the afternoon was well advanced, it was
time he started homeward.

His hurried flight from the ferocious brute had bewildered him
somewhat, and, when he took the direction he judged to be the right
one, he found nothing familiar or remembered, from which fact he
concluded he was going astray.

But a little computation on his part, and he soon righted himself, and
was walking along quite hopefully, when he received another severe
shock of terror, at hearing the unmistakable whoop of an Indian,
instantly followed by several others.

Immediately he recalled the warning given by the trapper, and looked
furtively about, to make sure that he was not already in their hands.
His great anxiety now was to reach the steam man and leave the
neighborhood, which was rapidly becoming untenable.

So he began stealing forward as rapidly as possible, at the same time
keeping a sharp lookout for danger. It required a half-hour,
proceeding at this rate, before reaching the base of the mountain. The
moment he did so, he looked all around in quest of the steam man, whom
he had been compelled to desert for so long a time.

He discovered it standing several hundred yards away; but, to his
dismay, there were fully a dozen Indians standing and walking about
it, examining every portion with the greatest curiosity.

Here was a dilemma indeed, and the boy began to believe that he had
gotten himself into an inextricable difficulty, for how to reach the
steam man and renew the fire, under the circumstances, was a question
which might well puzzle an older head to answer.

It was unfortunate that the machine should have been taken at this
great disadvantage, for it was stripping it of its terror to those
Indians, who were such inveterate enemies to the whites. They had
probably viewed it with wonder and fear at first; but finding it
undemonstrative, had gradually gathered courage, until they had
congregated around it, and made as critical a scrutiny as they know
how.

Whatever fear or terror they had felt at first sight was now gone; for
they seemed on the most familiar terms with it.

Several climbed into the wagon, others passed in and around the helpless
giant, and one valiant follow bit him a thwack on the stomach with his
tomahawk.

This blow hurt the boy far more than it did the iron man, and he could
hardly repress a cry of pain, as he looked upon the destruction of his
wonderful friend as almost inevitable.

The savage, however, contented himself with this demonstration, and
immediately after walked away toward the mountain. The observant boy
knew what this meant, and he withdrew from his temporary hiding-place,
and started to watch him.

The fact that the Indian followed precisely the path taken by him, did
not remove the uneasiness, and he made up his mind that nothing but
danger was to come to him from this proceeding.

When the Indian had reached the spot where the dead grizzly bear lay,
he paused in the greatest wonderment. Here was something which he did
not understand.

The dead carcass showed that somebody had slain him, and the shot in
the eye looked as though it had been done by an experienced hunter. A
few minutes' examination of the ground showed further that he who had
fired the shot was in the tree at the time, after which he had
descended and fled.

All this took but a few minutes for the savage to discover, when he
gave a whoop of triumph at his success in probing the matter, and
started off on the trail.

Unluckily, this led straight toward the bowlder behind which the boy
had concealed himself; and ere he could find a new hiding-place the
Indian was upon him.

At sight of the boy, the savage gave a whoop, and raised his tomahawk;
but the youngster was expecting this, and instantly raising his gun,
he discharged it full into his heart.

As he heard the shriek of the Indian, and saw him throw up his arms,
he did not wait to bear or see anything else, but instantly fled with
might and main, scarcely looking or knowing whither he was going.

A short time after he found himself at the base of the mountain, very
near the spot where he had first come, and glancing again toward the
steam man, he saw him standing motion less, as before, and with not a
single Indian in sight!



                  CHAPTER XIII. AN APPALLING DANGER.

NOT a second was to be lost. The next moment the boy had run across
the intervening space and pulled open the furnace door of the steam
man. He saw a few embers yet smoldering in the bottom, enough to
rekindle the wood. Dashing in a lot from the wagon, he saw it begin
blazing up. He pulled the valve wide open, so that there might not be
a moment's delay in starting, and held the water in the boiler at a
proper level. The smoke immediately began issuing from the pipe or
hat, and the hopes of the boy rose correspondingly.

The great danger was that the Indians would return before he could
start. He kept glancing behind him, and it was with a heart beating
with despair that he heard several whoops, and saw at the same instant
a number of red-skins coming toward him.

The boy gave a jolt to the wagon, which communicated to the steam man,
and it instantly started, at quite a moderate gait, but rapidly
increased to its old-fashioned run.

It was just in the nick of time, for two minutes later the savages
would have been upon him. As it was, when they saw the giant moving
off they paused for a moment in amazement.

But their previous acquaintance with the apparatus had robbed it of
all its supernatural attributes, and their halt lasted but a few
seconds. The next moment they understood that there was some human
agency about it, and uttering their blood-curdling yells, they started
in full pursuit. But by this time the steam gentleman was getting down
to his regular pace, and was striding over the prairie like a
dromedary. For a time the Indians gained, then the intervening
distance became stationary, and then he began pulling steadily away
from them.

Still the savages maintained the chase until satisfied of its
hopelessness, when they gave it up and sullenly withdrew in the
direction of the mountains.

The young fellow, in his triumph, could not avoid rising in the wagon,
shouting and waving his hat defiantly at his baffled pursuers. The
daring act came near costing his life, for it was instantly followed
by the discharge of several guns, and the singing of the bullets about
his ears caused him to duck back into his seat as suddenly as he had
risen from it.

The afternoon was now quite well advanced, and besides feeling hungry,
Johnny Brainerd was anxious to get back to camp.

The intervening distance was rapidly passed, and the sun was just
setting as he slacked up within a short distance of Wolf Ravine.

For some unaccountable reason, the nearer he approached 'camp,' as it
was called, a feeling akin to fear came over him. It was a
presentiment of coming evil, which he found it impossible either to
shake off or to define, and that was why he halted some distance away.

From where he stood it was impossible to see his two friends at work,
but at that time of day he knew they were accustomed to stop work and
come out upon the prairie for the purpose of enjoying the cool breeze
of evening. At the same time, when such constant danger threatened,
they were accustomed to have one of their number, either all or a part
of the time, on the ground above, where the approach of enemies could
be detected.

The absence of anything like a sentinel increased the boy's
apprehensions, and when he had waited some fifteen minutes without
seeing anything of his friends he became painfully uneasy.

'What if they had been killed? What if they were prisoners? What if a
hundred Indians were at that moment in the possession of Wolf Ravine?

Such and similar were the questions which the affrighted boy asked
himself, and which, with all his shrewdness, he was unable to answer.

In the hope of attracting attention he set up a shrieking with the
whistle, which sounded so loud on the still evening air that it must
have gone miles away over the level prairie.

There being no response to this he kept it up for some time, but it
still failed, and all this confirmed him in the belief that 'something
was up.'

What that particular something was it was impossible to say, so long
as he sat in the wagon, and for five minutes he endeavored to decide
whether it was best to get out and make a reconnoissance on his own
hook or remain where, in case of danger, he could seek safety in
flight.

As the day wore rapidly away, and he still failed to see or hear
anything of his friends, he finally concluded to get out and make an
examination of the ravine.

Accordingly he sprung lightly to the ground, but had scarcely alighted
when a peculiar signal, something resembling a tremulous whistle, reached
his ear, and he instantly clambered back again, fully satisfied that
the whistle was intended as a signal, and that it concerned him,
although whether from friend or foe he could only conjecture.

However, his alarm was such that he moved a hundred yards or so
further away from the ravine, where there was less likelihood of being
surprised by any sudden rush upon the part of the thieving red-skins.

From this standpoint he carefully scanned what could be seen of the
ravine. It descended quite gradually from the edge of the bank, so
that he gained a partial view of the rocks and bowlders upon the
opposite side. Some of the trees growing in the narrow valley rose to
such a height that one-half or two-thirds of them were exposed to
view.

It was while the boy was gazing at these that he detected a peculiar
movement in one of the limbs, which instantly arrested his attention.

A moment showed him that the peculiar waving motion was made by human
agency, and he strained his eyes in the hope of detecting the cause of
the curious movement.

The gathering darkness made his vision quite uncertain; but he either
saw, or fancied he saw, a dark object among the limbs which resembled
the form of Baldy Bicknell, the trapper.

Johnny Brainerd would have given almost anything in the world could he
have understood what it all meant.

But the vary fact of these singular demonstrations was prima facie
evidence of the most unquestionable kind; and, after a moment's
consultation with himself, he began moving away, just as the sharp
crack of several rifles notified him of the fearful peril which he had
escaped.



                    CHAPTER XIV. THE HUGE HUNTER.

SIMULTANEOUS with the report of the rifles came the pinging of the
bullets about the ears of young Brainerd, who, having started the
steam man, kept on going until he was a considerable distance from the
ravine.

All the time he kept looking back, but could see nothing of his
enemies, nor could he detect the point from which the rifle-shots were
fired.

Now, as night descended over the prairie, and the retreat of his
friends became shrouded in impenetrable darkness, he fully appreciated
the fact that not only were they in great danger, but so was he
himself.

The heathenish terror with which the steam man had at first inspired
the savages had rapidly worn away, the circumstances unfortunately
having been such that they had very speedily learned that it was
nothing more than a human invention, which of itself could accomplish
little or no harm.

He could but reflect, as the man glided slowly along, that if he had
the three friends beside him, how easily they could glide away in the
darkness and leave all danger behind.

But they were in the extremity of peril already, and, reflect and
cogitate as much as he chose, he could see no earthly way of assisting
them out of their difficulty.

Besides the concern which he naturally felt regarding his friends,
there was a matter that more clearly related to himself that demanded
his attention.

The water in the tank was at its lowest ebb, and it would be dangerous
for him to attempt to run more than one hour or so longer before
replenishing it. Consequently he was unable to stand anything like
another chase from the Indians.

As the part of prudence, therefore, he turned toward the river,
following slowly along the bank, in quest of some place where it would
be easy and safe for him to secure the much-needed water.

It was a long and discouraging hunt. The banks were so high that he
could find no point where it was safe for him to descend to the
water's edge. There was too great a risk of 'upsetting his cart,' a
calamity which, in all probability, would be irreparable.

At length, however, when he had wandered about a mile distant from the
Wolf Ravine, he discovered a place, where the bank had about six feet
elevation, and sloped down gradually to the river.

Here he paused, and with a small vessel, descended to the stream,
muttering to himself as he did so:

'Why didn't I think and put a pumping arrangement to the machine? I
could have done it as well as not, and it would have saved me a good
deal of trouble.'

But regrets were now unavailing, and he lost no time in useless
lamentations, setting to work at once. It was tedious labor, carrying
up the water in a small vessel, and emptying it in the tank, but he
persevered, and at the end of a couple of hours the task was
completed.

'I can make the wood stand me another day,' he added, as he stood
looking at the greatly diminished pile, 'although, if I knew where to
get it, I would load up now, and then I should be prepared.'

He suddenly paused, for scarcely a dozen yards away, coming up the
margin of the river, straight toward him, he descried the figure of a
man fully six feet and a half high.

Young Brainerd's first impulse was to spring into the wagon and start
away at full speed; but a second glance showed him that it was not an
Indian, but a white man, in the garb of a hunter.

'Hullo, boss, thar, what yer doin'?'

He was at a loss what reply to make, and therefore made none. The next
moment the giant hunter was beside him.

'B'ars and bufflers! younker, what ye got thar?' he demanded, eyeing
the steam man with an expression of the most amazed wonder. 'I say,
what do yer call that thing?'

'That,' laughed Johnny, who could not avoid a feeling of strong
apprehension at the singular appearance of the strange hunter, 'is a
sort of peregrinating locomotive.'

'Paggyratin' locomotive, what's that?' he asked, in a gruff voice, and
with an expression of great disgust at the unfamiliar words employed.

