placed to keep watch. But the jaguars have also an aldermanic gout for
turtles, which they gratify in a very systematic manner, as related by
Humboldt, who was shown large shells of turtles emptied by them.

They follow the turtles toward the beach, where the laying of eggs is
to take place, surprise them on the sand, and in order to devour them
at their ease, adroitly turn them on their backs; and as they turn
many more than they can devour in one night, the Indians often profit
by their cunning. The jaguar pursues the turtle quite into the water,
and when not very deep, digs up the eggs; they, with the alligator,
the heron, and the gallinago vulture ore the most formidable enemies
the little turtles have. Humboldt justly remarks, When we reflect on
the difficulty that the naturalist finds in getting out the body of
the turtle, without separating the upper and the under shell, we
cannot enough admire the suppleness of the jaguar's paw, which empties
the double armor of the _arraus_, as if the adhering parts of the
muscles had been cut by a surgical instrument.

The rivers of South America swarm with alligators, and these wage
perpetual war with the jaguars. It is said, that when the jaguar
surprises the alligator asleep on the hot sandbank, he attacks him in
a vulnerable part under the tail, and often kills him, but let the
alligator only get his antagonist into the water, and the tables are
turned, for the jaguar is held under the water until he is drowned.

The onset of the jaguar is always made from behind, partaking of the
stealthy treacherous character of his tribe; if a herd of animals, or
a party of men be passing, it is the last that is always the object of
his attack. When he has made choice of his victim, he springs upon the
neck, and placing one paw upon the back of the head, while he seizes
the muzzle with the other twists the head round with a sudden jerk
which dislocates the spine, and deprives it instantaneously of life:
sometimes, especially when satiated with food, he is indolent and
cowardly, skulking in the gloomiest depths of the forest, and scared
by the most trifling causes, but when urged by the cravings of hunger,
the largest quadrupeds, and man himself, are attacked with fury and
success.

Mr. Darwin has given an interesting account of the habits of the
jaguar: the wooded banks of the great South American rivers appear to
be their favorite haunt, but south of the Plata they frequent the
reeds bordering the lakes; wherever they are they seem to require
water. They are particularly abundant on the isles of the Payana,
their common prey being the carpincho, so that it is generally said,
that where carpinchos are plentiful, there is little fear of the
jaguar; possibly, however, a jaguar which has tasted human flesh, may
afterwards become dainty, and like the lions of South Africa, and the
tigers of India, acquire the dreadful character of maneaters, from
preferring that food to all others.

It is not many years ago since a very large jaguar found his way into
a church in Santa Fe; soon afterward a very corpulent padre entering,
was at once killed by him: His equally stout coadjutor, wondering what
had detained the padre, went to look after him, and also fell a victim
to the jaguar; a third priest, marveling greatly at the unaccountable
absence of the others, sought them, and the jaguar having by this time
acquired a strong clerical taste, made at him also, but he, being
fortunately of the slender order, dodged the animal from pillar to
post, and happily made his escape; the beast was destroyed by being
shot from a corner of the building, which was unroofed, and thus paid
the penalty of his sacrilegious propensities.

On the Parana, they have even entered vessels by night. One dark
evening the mate of a vessel, hearing a heavy but peculiar footstep on
deck, went up to see what it was, and was immediately met by a jaguar,
who had come on board, seeking what he could devour; a severe struggle
ensued, assistance arrived, and the brute was killed, but the man lost
the use of the arm which had been ground between his teeth.

The Gauchos say that the jaguar, when wandering about at night, is
much tormented by the foxes yelping as they follow him: this may
perhaps serve to alarm his prey, but must be as teasing to him as the
attentions of swallows are to an owl, who happens to be taking a
daylight promenade; and if owls ever swear, it is under these
circumstances.

Mr. Darwin, when hunting on the banks of the Uruguay, was shown three
well-known trees to which the jaguars constantly resort, for the
purpose, it is said, of sharpening their claws. Every one must be
familiar with the manner in which cats, with out-stretched legs and
extended claws, will card the legs of chairs and of men; so with the
jaguar; and of these trees the bark was worn quite smooth in front; on
each side there were deep grooves, extending in an oblique line nearly
a yard in length. The scars were of different ages, arid the
inhabitants could always tell when a jaguar was in the neighborhood,
by his recent autograph on one of these trees.




The Indian Parents.


Captain William Wells was a noted hunter and ranger in the western
country. He was captured by the Indians when but a child, and raised
among them. When the Indians defeated the United States troops, who
were under the command of Generals Harmer and St. Clair, Captain Wells
fought among the red men, and distinguished himself by his courage and
skill. But when General Wayne was placed at the head of the United
States forces in the west.

Captain Wells came over to the side of the whites, and received the
command of a company of rangers, or woodmen, who acted as spies and
scouts for General Wayne. The captain performed many daring exploits,
and caused the Indians to feel that in losing him they had gained a
terrible enemy.

Captain Wells was desperate in battle, but he often displayed much
kindness and generosity. On one of his excursions with a party of
rangers, through the Indian country, he came to the bank of the river
St. Mary, and discovered some Indians in canoes coming across the
stream. The captain dismounted, and concealed his men near the bank of
the river, while he went to the bank in open view, and called to the
Indians to come over. As he was dressed nearly in the Indian style,
and spoke to them in their own language, the Indians, without
suspicion of danger came across the river. The moment the first canoe
struck the shore, Wells heard the clicking of the locks of his
comrades' rifles, as they prepared to shoot the Indians. But who
should be in the canoe, but his Indian father, mother, and their
children! As his comrades were coming forward with their rifles
cocked, ready to pour in the deadly storm, Wells called upon them to
hold their hands. He then informed them who the Indians were, and
solemnly declared, that the man who would attempt to injure one of
them should receive a ball in his head. He continued, "That family fed
me when I was hungry, clothed me when I was naked, and kindly nursed
me when I was sick. In every respect they were as kind and
affectionate to me as they were to their own children. No one
belonging to them shall be hurt." But four men were with the Indian
party, and they did not attempt hostility. The short, pathetic speech
of Captain Wells found its way to the hearts of his comrades. They
entered into his feelings, threw down their rifles and tomahawks, went
to the canoe, and shook hands with the trembling Indians in the most
friendly manner.

Captain Wells assured the red men that they had nothing to fear from
him, and after talking with them to dispel their dread, he said, that
General Wayne was approaching with an overwhelming force; that the
best thing that the Indians could do was to make peace; that the white
men did not wish to continue the war. He urged his Indian father to
keep out of danger for the future. The Indians appeared very grateful
for his clemency. After the captain bade them farewell, they pushed
off their canoe, and went down the river as fast as they could paddle.

Wells's conduct on this occasion proved him to be as generous as he
was brave. This famous ranger was killed near Chicago, at the
commencement of the war of 1812, in an attempt to save an American
garrison. At that time sixty-four whites were attacked by four hundred
red men, and all killed or captured. The Indians were very glad to get
the scalp of Captain Wells. He was as wild a spirit as ever shouldered
a rifle or wielded a tomahawk.




Attack on Captain Ward's Boat


About 1784 and '85, boats ascending the Ohio river were often fired
upon by the Indians, and sometimes the crew were all killed or made
prisoners. A t that time, the whites had no settlements on either side
of the Ohio. But Kentucky contained several very important stations.
In 1785, Captain James Ward descended the river, under circumstances,
which rendered a meeting with the Indians peculiarly to be dreaded.

The captain with half a dozen others, one of them his nephew, embarked
in a crazy boat, about forty-five long, and eight feet wide, with no
other bulwark than a single pine plank, above each gunnel. The boat
was much encumbered with baggage, and seven horses were on board.
Having seen no enemy for several days, they had become secure and
careless, and permitted the boat to drift within fifty yards of the
Ohio shore. Suddenly several Indians showed themselves on the bank,
and opened heavy fire upon the boat. The astonishment of the crew may
be conceived. Captain Ward and his nephew were at the oars when the
enemy appeared, and the captain knowing that their safety depended
upon their ability to regain the middle of the river, kept his seat
firmly, and exerted his utmost powers at the oar, but his nephew
started up at the sight of the enemy, seized his rifle and was in the
act of levelling it, when he received a ball in the breast, and fell
dead in the bottom of the boat. Unfortunately, his oar fell into the
river, and the Captain having no one to pull against him, rather urged
the boat nearer to the hostile shore than otherwise. He quickly seized
a plank, however, and giving his own oar to another of the crew, he
took the station which his nephew had held, and unhurt by the bullets
which flew around him, continued to exert himself, until the boat had
reached a more respectable distance. He then, for the first time,
looked around him in order to observe the condition of the crew. His
nephew lay in his blood, perfectly lifeless,--the horses had been all
killed or mortally wounded. Some had fallen overboard--others were
struggling violently, and causing their frail bark to dip water so as
to excite the most serious apprehensions.

But the crew presented the most singular spectacle. A captain, who had
served with reputation in the continental army, seemed now totally
bereft of his faculties. He lay upon his back in the bottom of the
boat, with hands uplifted, and a countenance in which terror was
personified, exclaiming in a tone of despair, "Oh, Lord! Oh, Lord!" A
Dutchman, whose weight might amount at about three hundred pounds, was
busily engaged in endeavoring to find shelter for his bulky person,
which, from the lowness of the gunnels, was a very difficult
undertaking. In spite of his utmost efforts, a portion of his
posterial luxuriance, appeared above the gunnel, and afforded a mark
to the enemy, which brought a constant shower of balls around it. In
vain he shifted his position. The lump still appeared, and the balls
still flew around it, until the Dutchman, losing all patience, raised
his head above the gunnel, and in a tone of querulous remonstrance,
called out, "Oh, now I git tat nonsense, tere,--will you!" Not a shot
was fired from the boat.

At one time, after they had partly reined the current, Captain Ward
attempted to bring his rifle to bear upon them, but so violent was the
agitation of the boat, from the furious struggles of the horses, that
he could not steady his piece within twenty yards of the enemy, and
quickly laying it aside returned to the oar. The Indians followed them
down the river for more than an hour, but having no canoes, they did
not attempt to board; and as the boat was at length transferred to the
opposite side of the river, they finally abandoned the pursuit and
disappeared. None of the crew, save the young man already mentioned,
were hurt, although the Dutchman's seat of honor served as a target
for the space of an hour, and the continental captain was deeply
mortified at the sudden, and, as he said, "unaccountable" panic which
had seized him. Captain Ward himself was protected by a post, which
had been fastened to the gunnel, and behind which he sat while rowing.




Massy Herbeson and her Family


During the settlement of the interior of Pennsylvania, the Indians
were almost constantly hostile. Houses were burned, fields desolated,
and the poor, hard-working settlers were killed, or carried into a
dreadful captivity. The sufferings of some of these captives can
scarcely be described. The following narrative will give some idea of
savage nature.

On the 22nd of May, 1792, Massy Herbeson and her children were taken
from their house, within two hundred yards of Reed's blockhouse, and
about twenty-five miles from Pittsburg. Mr. Herbeson, being one of the
spies, was from home; two of the scouts lodged with her that night,
but had left her house about sunrise, in order to go to the
blockhouse, and had left the door standing wide open. Shortly after
the two scouts went away, a number of Indians came into the house, and
drew her out of bed by the feet; the two eldest children, who also lay
in another bed were drawn out in the same manner; a younger child,
about one year old slept with Mrs. Herbeson. The Indians then
scattered the articles about in the house.

Whilst they were at this work, Mrs. Herbeson went out of the house,
and hallooed to the people in the blockhouse; one of the Indians then
ran up and stopped her mouth, another ran up with his tomahawk drawn,
and a third ran and seized the tomahawk and called her his squaw; this
last Indian claimed her as his, and continued by her. About fifteen of
the Indians then ran down towards the blockhouse and fired their guns
at the block and store-house, in consequence of which one soldier was
killed and another wounded, one having been at the spring, and the
other in coming or looking out of the store-house. Mrs. Herbeson told
the Indians there were about forty men in the blockhouse, and each man
had two guns, the Indians then went to those that were firing at the
blockhouse, and brought them back.

They then began to drive Mrs. Herbeson and her children away; but a
boy, about three years old, being unwilling to leave the house, they
took it by the heels, and dashed it against the house, then stabbed
and scalped it. They then took Mrs. Herbeson and the two other
children to the top of the hill, where they stopped until they tied up
the plunder they had got. While they were busy about this, Mrs.
Herbeson counted them, and the number amounted to thirty-two,
including two white men, that were with them, painted like the
Indians. Several of the Indians could speak English, and she knew
several of them very well, having often seen them go up and down the
Alleghany river; two of them she knew to be Senecas, and two Munsees,
who had got their guns mended by her husband about two years ago.

They sent two Indians with her, and the others took their course
towards Puckty. She, the children, and the two Indians had not gone
above two hundred yards, when the Indians caught two of her uncle's
horses, put her and the youngest child on one, and one of the Indians
and the other child on the other. The two Indians then took her and
the children to the Alleghany river, and took them over in bark
canoes, as they could not get the horses to swim the river. After they
had crossed the river, the oldest child, a boy about five years of
age, began to mourn for his brother, when one of the Indians
tomahawked and scalped him. They travelled all day very hard, and that
night arrived at a large camp, covered with bark, which, by
appearance, might hold fifty men. That night they took her about three
hundred yards from the camp, into a large dark bottom, bound her arms,
gave her some bed clothes, and lay down one on each side of her.

The next morning they took her into a thicket, on the hill side, and
one remained with her till the middle of the day, while the other went
to watch the path, lest some white people should follow them. They
then exchanged places during the remainder of the day. She got a piece
of dry venison, about the size of an egg, that day, and a piece about
the same size the day they were marching; that evening, (Wednesday,
23d) they moved her to a new place, and secured her as the night
before. During the day of the 23'd, she made several attempts to get
the Indian's gun or tomahawk, that was guarding her, and, had she
succeeded, she would have put him to death. She was nearly detected in
trying to get the tomahawk from his belt.

The next morning one of the Indians went out, as on the day before, to
watch the path. The other lay down and fell asleep. When she found he
was sleeping, she stole her short gown, handkerchief, a child's frock,
and then made her escape; the sun was then about half an hour
high--she took her course from the Alleghany, in order to deceive the
Indians, as they would naturally pursue her that way; that day she
travelled along Conequenessing creek. The next day she altered her
course, and, as she believes, fell upon the waters of Pine Creek,
which empties into the Alleghany. Thinking this not her best course,
she took over some dividing ridges,--lay on a dividing ridge on Friday
night, and on Saturday came to Squaw run--continued down the run until
an Indian, or some other person, shot a deer; she saw the person about
one hundred and fifty yards from her--the deer running and the dog
pursuing it, which, from the appearance, she supposed to be an Indian
dog.

She then altered her course, but again came to the same run, and
continued down until she got so tired that she was obliged to lie
down, it having rained on her all that day and the night before; she
lay there that night; it rained constantly. On Sunday morning, she
proceeded down the run until she came to the Alleghany river, and
continued down the river till she came opposite to Carter's house, on
the inhabited side, where she made a noise, and James Closier brought
her over the river to Carter's house.

Such outrages were frequent upon the frontier, in time of war with the
Indians. Many instances of the generosity and hospitality of the red
men are recorded. But when we remember that they made war and the
chase the business of their lives, and that they never would be
content to till the ground, as the neighbors of the whites we cannot
regret that they have disappeared from our vicinity.




A Nocturnal Adventure with Six Lions


Mr. Cumming, whose adventures we have already found so entertaining,
had a method of hunting for wild beasts, and especially lions, which
was quite curious. He dug holes near the fountains or streams, where
the animals were accustomed to resort at night for water, and
concealed himself and his companions in them, to wait for their
approach. The following is a specimen of this kind of adventure.

On the afternoon of the 4th I deepened my hole and watched the water.
As the sun went down two graceful springboks and a herd of pallah came
and drank, when I shot the best pallah in the troop. At night I
watched the water with Kleinboy: very soon a cow black rhinoceros came
and drank, and got off for the present with two balls in her. A little
afterwards two black rhinoceroses and two white ones came to the
waterside. We both fired together at the finest of the two black
rhinoceroses; she ran three hundred yards, and fell dead. Soon after
this the other black rhinoceros came up again and stood at the
waterside; I gave her one ball after the shoulder; she ran a hundred
yards and fell dead. In half an hour a third old borele appeared, and,
having inspected the two dead ones, he came up to the waterside. We
fired together; he ran two hundred yards and fell dead. I felt
satisfied with our success, and gave it up for the night.

By the following evening the natives had cleared away the greater part
of the two rhinoceroses which lay right in the way of the game
approaching the water; I, however, enforced their leaving the third
rhinoceros, which had fallen on the bare rising ground, almost
opposite to my hiding-place, in the hope of attracting a lion, as I
intended to watch the water at night. Soon after the twilight had died
away, I went down to my hole with Kleinboy and two natives, who lay
concealed in another hole, with Wolf and Boxer ready to slip, in the
event of wounding a lion.

On reaching the water I looked towards the carcase of the rhinoceros,
and, to my astonishment, I beheld the ground alive with large
creatures, as though a troop of zebras were approaching the fountain
to drink. Kleinboy remarked to me that a troop of zebras were standing
on the height. I answered, "Yes," but I knew very well that zebras
would not be capering around the carcase of a rhinoceros. I quickly
arranged my blankets, pillow, and guns, in the hole, and then lay down
to feast my eyes on the interesting sight before me. It was bright
moonlight, as clear as I need wish, and within one night of being full
moon. There were six large lions, about twelve or fifteen hyaenas, and
from twenty to thirty jackals, feasting on and around the carcases of
the three rhinoceroses. The lions feasted peacefully, but the hyenas
and jackals fought over every mouthful, and chased one another round
and round the carcases, growling, laughing, screeching, chattering,
and howling without any intermission. The hyaenas did not seem afraid
of the lions, although they always gave way before them; for I
observed that they followed them in the most disrespectful manner, and
stood laughing, one or two on either side, when any lions came after
their comrades to examine pieces of skin or bones which they were
dragging away. I had lain watching this banquet for about four hours,
