
"Oh!" continued Katy, "Aunt Izzie put on her glasses too, and screwed up
her eyes--you know the way she does, and she and the judge read a little
bit of it; that part at the first, you remember, where Bop steals the
blue-pills, and the Wizard tries to throw him into the sea. You can't
think how funny it was to hear Aunt Izzie reading 'Edwitha' out loud--"
and Katy went into convulsions at the recollection "where she got to 'Oh
Bop--my angel Bop--' I just rolled under the table, and stuffed the
table-cover in my mouth to keep from screaming right out. By and by I
heard her call Debby, and give her the papers, and say: 'Here is a mass
of trash which I wish you to put at once into the kitchen fire.' And she
told me afterward that she thought I would be in an insane asylum before
I was twenty. It was too bad," ended Katy half laughing and half
crying, "to burn up the new chapter and all. But there's one good
thing--she didn't find 'The Fairy of the Dry Goods Box,' that was
stuffed farther back in the seat.

"And now," continued the mistress of ceremonies, "we will begin. Miss
Hall will please rise."

"Miss Hall," much flustered at her fine name, got up with very
red cheeks.

"It was once upon a time," she read, "Moonlight lay on the halls of the
Alhambra, and the knight, striding impatiently down the passage, thought
she would never come."

"Who, the moon?" asked Clover.

"No, of course not," replied Cecy, "a lady he was in love with. The next
verse is going to tell about her, only you interrupted.

"She wore a turban of silver, with a jewelled crescent. As she stole
down the corregidor the beams struck it and it glittered like stars.

"'So you are come, Zuleika?'

"'Yes, my lord.'

"Just then a sound as of steel smote upon the ear, and Zuleika's
mail-clad father rushed in. He drew his sword, so did the other. A
moment more, and they both lay dead and stiff in the beams of the moon.
Zuleika gave a loud shriek, and threw herself upon their bodies. She was
dead, too! And so ends the Tragedy of the Alhambra."

"That's lovely," said Katy, drawing a long breath, "only very sad! What
beautiful stories you do write, Cecy! But I wish you wouldn't always
kill the people. Why couldn't the knight have killed the father,
and--no, I suppose Zuleika wouldn't have married him then. Well, the
father might have--oh, bother! why must anybody be killed, anyhow? why
not have them fall on each other's necks, and make up?"

"Why, Katy!" cried Cecy, "it wouldn't have been a tragedy then. You know
the name was A _Tragedy_ of the Alhambra."

"Oh, well," said Katy, hurriedly, for Cecy's lips were beginning to
pout, and her fair, pinkish face to redden, as if she were about to cry;
"perhaps it _was_ prettier to have them all die; only I thought, for
a change, you know!--What a lovely word that was--. 'Corregidor'--what
does it mean?"

"I don't know," replied Cecy, quite consoled. "It was in the 'Conquest
of Granada.' Something to walk over, I believe."

"The next," went on Katy, consulting her paper, "is 'Yap,' a Simple
Poem, by Clover Carr."

All the children giggled, but Clover got up composedly, and recited the
following verses:

  "Did you ever know Yap?
    The best little dog
  Who e'er sat on lap
    Or barked at a frog.

  "His eyes were like beads,
    His tail like a mop,
  And it waggled as if
    It never would stop.

  "His hair was like silk
    Of the glossiest sheen,
  He always ate milk,
    And once the cold-cream

  "Off the nursery bureau
    (That line is too long!)
  It made him quite ill,
    So endeth my song.

  "For Yappy he died
    Just two months ago,
  And we oughtn't to sing
    At a funeral, you know."

The "Poem" met with immense applause; all the children laughed, and
shouted, and clapped, till the loft rang again. But Clover kept her face
perfectly, and sat down as demure as ever, except that the little
dimples came and went at the corners of her mouth; dimples, partly
natural, and partly, I regret to say, the result of a pointed
slate-pencil, with which Clover was in the habit of deepening them every
day while she studied her lessons.

"Now," said Katy, after the noise had subsided, "now come 'Scripture
Verses,' by Miss Elsie and Joanna Carr. Hold up your head, Elsie, and
speak distinctly; and oh, Johnnie, you _mustn't_ giggle in that way
when it comes your turn!"

But Johnnie only giggled the harder at this appeal, keeping her hands
very tight across her mouth, and peeping out over her fingers. Elsie,
however, was solemn as a little judge, and with great dignity began:

  "An angel with a fiery sword,
  Came to send Adam and Eve abroad
  And as they journeyed through the skies
  They took one look at Paradise.
  They thought of all the happy hours
  Among the birds and fragrant bowers,
  And Eve she wept, and Adam bawled,
  And both together loudly squalled."

Dorry snickered at this, but sedate Clover hushed him.

"You mustn't," she said; "it's about the Bible, you know. Now John, it's
your turn."

But Johnnie would persist in holding her hands over her mouth, while her
fat little shoulders shook with laughter. At last, with a great effort,
she pulled her face straight, and speaking as fast as she possibly
could, repeated, in a sort of burst:

  "Balaam's donkey saw the Angel,
    And stopped short in fear.
  Balaam didn't see the Angel,
    Which is very queer."

After which she took refuge again behind her fingers, while Elsie went
on--

  "Elijah by the creek,
    He by ravens fed,
  Took from their horny beak
    Pieces of meat and bread."

"Come, Johnnie," said Katy, but the incorrigible Johnnie was shaking
again, and all they could make out was--

  "The bears came down, and ate------and ate."

These "Verses" were part of a grand project on which Clover and Elsie
had been busy for more than a year. It was a sort of rearrangement of
Scripture for infant minds; and when it was finished, they meant to have
it published, bound in red, with daguerreotypes of the two authoresses
on the cover. "The Youth's Poetical Bible" was to be the name of it.
Papa, much tickled with the scraps which he overheard, proposed,
instead, "The Trundle-Bed Book," as having been composed principally in
that spot, but Elsie and Clover were highly indignant, and would not
listen to the idea for a moment.

After the "Scripture Verses," came Dorry's turn. He had been allowed to
choose for himself, which was unlucky, as his taste was peculiar, not
to say gloomy. On this occasion he had selected that cheerful hymn
which begins--

  "Hark, from the tombs a doleful sound."

And he now began to recite it in a lugubrious voice and with great
emphasis, smacking his lips, as it were, over such lines as--

  "Princes, this clay _shall_ be your bed,
    In spite of all your towers."

The older children listened with a sort of fascinated horror, rather
enjoying the cold chills which ran down their backs, and huddling close
together, as Dorry's hollow tones echoed from the dark corners of the
loft. It was too much for Philly, however. At the close of the piece he
was found to be in tears.

"I don't want to st-a-a-y up here and be groaned at," he sobbed.

"There, you bad boy!" cried Katy, all the more angry because she was
conscious of having enjoyed it herself, "that's what you do with your
horrid hymns, frightening us to death and making Phil cry!" And she gave
Dorry a little shake. He began to whimper, and as Phil was still
sobbing, and Johnnie had begun to sob too, out of sympathy with the
others, the _Feet_ in the Loft seemed likely to come to a sad end.

"I'm goin' to tell Aunt Izzie that I don't like you," declared Dorry,
putting one leg through the opening in the floor.

"No, you aren't," said Katy, seizing him, "you are going to stay,
because _now_ we are going to have the Feast! Do stop, Phil; and
Johnnie, don't be a goose, but come and pass round the cookies."

The word "Feast" produced a speedy effect on the spirits of the party.
Phil cheered at once, and Dorry changed his mind about going. The black
bottle was solemnly set in the midst, and the cookies were handed about
by Johnnie, who was now all smiles. The cookies had scalloped edges and
caraway seeds inside, and were very nice. There were two apiece; and as
the last was finished, Katy put her hand in her pocket, and amid great
applause, produced the crowning addition to the repast--seven long,
brown sticks of cinnamon.

"Isn't it fun?" she said. "Debby was real good-natured to-day, and let
me put my own hand into the box, so I picked out the longest sticks
there were. Now, Cecy, as you're company, you shall have the first drink
out of the bottle."

The "something delicious" proved to be weak vinegar-and-water. It was
quite warm, but somehow, drank up there in the loft, and out of a
bottle, it tasted very nice. Beside, they didn't _call_ it
vinegar-and-water--of course not! Each child gave his or her swallow a
different name, as if the bottle were like Signor Blitz's and could pour
out a dozen things at once. Clover called her share "Raspberry Shrub,"
Dorry christened his "Ginger Pop," while Cecy, who was romantic, took
her three sips under the name of "Hydomel," which she explained was
something nice, made, she believed, of beeswax. The last drop gone, and
the last bit of cinnamon crunched, the company came to order again, for
the purpose of hearing Philly repeat his one piece,--

  "Little drops of water,"

which exciting poem he had said every Saturday as far back as they could
remember. After that Katy declared the literary part of the "Feet" over,
and they all fell to playing "Stagecoach," which, in spite of close
quarters and an occasional bump from the roof, was such good fun, that a
general "Oh dear!" welcomed the ringing of the tea-bell. I suppose
cookies and vinegar had taken away their appetites, for none of them
were hungry, and Dorry astonished Aunt Izzie very much by eyeing the
table in a disgusted way, and saying: "Pshaw! _only_ plum sweatmeats and
sponge cake and hot biscuit! I don't want any supper."

"What ails the child? he must be sick," said Dr. Carr; but Katy
explained.

"Oh no, Papa, it isn't that--only we've been having a feast in
the loft."

"Did you have a good time?" asked Papa, while Aunt Izzie gave a
dissatisfied groan. And all the children answered at once:
"Splendiferous!"




CHAPTER VI

INTIMATE FRIENDS


"Aunt Izzie, may I ask Imogen Clark to spend the day here on Saturday?"
cried Katy, bursting in one afternoon.

"Who on earth is Imogen Clark? I never heard the name before,"
replied her aunt.

"Oh, the _loveliest_ girl! She hasn't been going to Mrs. Knight's school
but a little while, but we're the greatest friends. And she's perfectly
beautiful, Aunt Izzie. Her hands are just as white as snow, and no
bigger than _that_. She's got the littlest waist of any girl in school,
and she's real sweet, and so self-denying and unselfish! I don't believe
she has a bit good times at home, either. Do let me ask her!"

"How do you know she's so sweet and self-denying, if you've known her
such a short time?" asked Aunt Izzie, in an unpromising tone.

"Oh, she tells me everything! We always walk together at recess now. I
know all about her, and she's just lovely! Her father used to be real
rich, but they're poor now, and Imogen had to have her boots patched
twice last winter. I guess she's the flower of her family. You can't
think how I love her!" concluded Katy, sentimentally.

"No, I can't," said Aunt Izzie. "I never could see into these sudden
friendships of yours, Katy, and I'd rather you wouldn't invite this
Imogen, or whatever her name is, till I've had a chance to ask somebody
about her."

Katy clasped her hands in despair. "Oh, Aunt Izzie!" she cried, "Imogen
knows that I came in to ask you, and she's standing at the gate at this
moment, waiting to hear what you say. Please let me, just this once! I
shall be so dreadfully ashamed not to."

"Well," said Miss Izzie, moved by the wretchedness of Katy's face, "if
you've asked her already, it's no use my saying no, I suppose. But
recollect, Katy, this is not to happen again. I can't have you inviting
girls, and then coming for my leave. Your father won't be at all
pleased. He's very particular about whom you make friends with. Remember
how Mrs. Spenser turned out."

Poor Katy! Her propensity to fall violently in love with new people was
always getting her into scrapes. Ever since she began to walk and talk,
"Katy's intimate friends" had been one of the jokes of the household.

Papa once undertook to keep a list of them, but the number grew so great
that he gave it up in despair. First on the list was a small Irish
child, named Marianne O'Riley. Marianne lived in a street which Katy
passed on her way to school. It was not Mrs. Knight's, but an ABC
school, to which Dorry and John now went. Marianne used to be always
making sand-pies in front of her mother's house, and Katy, who was about
five years old, often stopped to help her. Over this mutual pastry they
grew so intimate, that Katy resolved to adopt Marianne as her own little
girl, and bring her up in a safe and hidden corner.

