"Hush!" whispered the learned grain, in the most solemn manner.
"Something is going to happen. Something like this happened to somebody
belonging to me long ago. I seem to remember it when I think very hard. I
seem to remember something about one of my family being sown."

"What is sown?" demanded the other grain.

"It is being thrown into the earth," began the learned grain.

Oh, what a passion the proud grain got into! "Into the earth?" she
shrieked out. "Into the common earth? The earth is nothing but dirt,
and I am _not_ a common grain of wheat. I won't be sown! I will _not_
be sown! How dare anyone sow me against my will! I would rather stay in
the sack."

But just as she was saying it, she was thrown out with the learned grain
and some others into another dark place, and carried off by the farmer,
in spite of her temper; for the farmer could not hear her voice at all,
and wouldn't have minded if he had, because he knew she was only a grain
of wheat, and ought to be sown, so that some good might come of her.

Well, she was carried out to a large field in the pouch which the farmer
wore at his belt. The field had been ploughed, and there was a sweet
smell of fresh earth in the air; the sky was a deep, deep blue, but the
air was cool and the few leaves on the trees were brown and dry, and
looked as if they had been left over from last year. "Ah!" said the
learned grain. "It was just such a day as this when my grandfather, or my
father, or somebody else related to me, was sown. I think I remember that
it was called Early Spring."

"As for me," said the proud grain, fiercely, "I should like to see the
man who would dare to sow me!"

At that very moment, the farmer put his big, brown hand into the bag and
threw her, as she thought, at least half a mile from them.

He had not thrown her so far as that, however, and she landed safely in
the shadow of a clod of rich earth, which the sun had warmed through and
through. She was quite out of breath and very dizzy at first, but in a
few seconds she began to feel better and could not help looking around,
in spite of her anger, to see if there was anyone near to talk to. But
she saw no one, and so began to scold as usual.

"They not only sow me," she called out, "but they throw me all by
myself, where I can have no company at all. It is disgraceful."

Then she heard a voice from the other side of the clod. It was the
learned grain, who had fallen there when the farmer threw her out of
his pouch.

"Don't be angry," it said, "I am here. We are all right so far. Perhaps,
when they cover us with the earth, we shall be even nearer to each other
than we are now."

"Do you mean to say they will cover us with the earth?" asked the
proud grain.

"Yes," was the answer. "And there we shall lie in the dark, and the rain
will moisten us, and the sun will warm us, until we grow larger and
larger, and at last burst open!"

"Speak for yourself," said the proud grain; "I shall do no such thing!"

But it all happened just as the learned grain had said, which showed what
a wise grain it was, and how much it had found out just by thinking hard
and remembering all it could.

Before the day was over, they were covered snugly up with the soft,
fragrant, brown earth, and there they lay day after day.

One morning, when the proud grain wakened, it found itself wet through
and through with rain which had fallen in the night, and the next day
the sun shone down and warmed it so that it really began to be afraid
that it would be obliged to grow too large for its skin, which felt a
little tight for it already.

It said nothing of this to the learned grain, at first, because it was
determined not to burst if it could help it; but after the same thing had
happened a great many times, it found, one morning, that it really was
swelling, and it felt obliged to tell the learned grain about it.

"Well," it said, pettishly, "I suppose you will be glad to hear that you
were right, I _am_ going to burst. My skin is so tight now that it
doesn't fit me at all, and I know I can't stand another warm shower like
the last."

"Oh!" said the learned grain, in a quiet way (really learned people
always have a quiet way), "I knew I was right, or I shouldn't have said
so. I hope you don't find it very uncomfortable. I think I myself shall
burst by to-morrow."

"Of course I find it uncomfortable," said the proud grain. "Who wouldn't
find it uncomfortable, to be two or three sizes too small for one's self!
Pouf! Crack! There I go! I have split up all up my right side, and I must
say it's a relief."

"Crack! Pouf! so have I," said the learned grain. "Now we must begin to
push up through the earth. I am sure my relation did that."

"Well, I shouldn't mind getting out into the air. It would be a change
at least."

So each of them began to push her way through the earth as strongly as
she could, and, sure enough, it was not long before the proud grain
actually found herself out in the world again, breathing the sweet air,
under the blue sky, across which fleecy white clouds were drifting, and
swift-winged, happy birds darting.

"It really is a lovely day," were the first words the proud grain said.
It couldn't help it. The sunshine was so delightful, and the birds
chirped and twittered so merrily in the bare branches, and, more
wonderful than all, the great field was brown no longer, but was covered
with millions of little, fresh green blades, which trembled and bent
their frail bodies before the light wind.

"This _is_ an improvement," said the proud grain.

Then there was a little stir in the earth beside it, and up through the
brown mould came the learned grain, fresh, bright, green, like the rest.

"I told you I was not a common grain of wheat," said the proud one.

"You are not a grain of wheat at all now," said the learned one,
modestly. "You are a blade of wheat, and there are a great many others
like you."

"See how green I am!" said the proud blade.

"Yes, you are very green," said its companion. "You will not be so green
when you are older."

The proud grain, which must be called a blade now, had plenty of change
and company after this. It grew taller and taller every day, and made a
great many new acquaintances as the weather grew warmer. These were
little gold and green beetles living near it, who often passed it, and
now and then stopped to talk a little about their children and their
journeys under the soil. Birds dropped down from the sky sometimes to
gossip and twitter of the nests they were building in the apple-trees,
and the new songs they were learning to sing.

Once, on a very warm day, a great golden butterfly, floating by on his
large lovely wings, fluttered down softly and lit on the proud blade, who
felt so much prouder when he did it that she trembled for joy.

"He admires me more than all the rest in the field, you see," it said,
haughtily. "That is because I am so green."

"If I were you," said the learned blade, in its modest way, "I believe I
would not talk so much about being green. People will make such
ill-natured remarks when one speaks often of one's self."

"I am above such people," said the proud blade "I can find nothing more
interesting to talk of than myself."

As time went on, it was delighted to find that it grew taller than any
other blade in the field, and threw out other blades; and at last there
grew out at the top of its stalk ever so many plump, new little grains,
all fitting closely together, and wearing tight little green covers.

"Look at me!" it said then. "I am the queen of all the wheat. I
have a crown."

"No." said its learned companion. "You are now an ear of wheat."

And in a short time all the other stalks wore the same kind of crown, and
it found out that the learned blade was right, and that it was only an
ear, after all.

And now the weather had grown still warmer and the trees were covered
with leaves, and the birds sang and built their nests in them and laid
their little blue eggs, and in time, wonderful to relate, there came baby
birds, that were always opening their mouths for food, and crying "peep,
peep," to their fathers and mothers. There were more butterflies floating
about on their amber and purple wings, and the gold and green beetles
were so busy they had no time to talk.

"Well!" said the proud ear of wheat (you remember it was an ear by this
time) to its companion one day. "You see, you were right again. I am not
so green as I was. I am turning yellow--but yellow is the colour of gold,
and I don't object to looking like gold."

"You will soon be ripe," said its friend.

"And what will happen then?"

"The reaping-machine will come and cut you down, and other strange things
will happen."

"There I make a stand," said the proud ear, "I will _not_ be cut down."

But it was just as the wise ear said it would be. Not long after a
reaping-machine was brought and driven back and forth in the fields, and
down went all the wheat ears before the great knives. But it did not hurt
the wheat, of course, and only the proud ear felt angry.

"I am the colour of gold," it said, "and yet they have dared to cut me
down. What will they do next, I wonder?"

What they did next was to bunch it up with other wheat and tie it
and stack it together, and then it was carried in a waggon and laid
in the barn.

Then there was a great bustle after a while. The farmer's wife and
daughters and her two servants began to work as hard as they could.

"The threshers are coming," they said, "and we must make plenty of things
for them to eat."

So they made pies and cakes and bread until their cupboards were full;
and surely enough the threshers did come with the threshing-machine,
which was painted red, and went "Puff! puff! puff! rattle! rattle!" all
the time. And the proud wheat was threshed out by it, and found itself in
grains again and very much out of breath.

"I look almost as I was at first," it said; "only there are so many of
me. I am grander than ever now. I was only one grain of wheat at first,
and now I am at least fifty."

When it was put into a sack, it managed to get all its grains together in
one place, so that it might feel as grand as possible. It was so proud
that it felt grand, however much it was knocked about.

It did not lie in the sack very long this time before something else
happened. One morning it heard the farmer's wife saying to the
coloured boy:

"Take this yere sack of wheat to the mill, Jerry. I want to try it when I
make that thar cake for the boarders. Them two children from Washington
city are powerful hands for cake."

So Jerry lifted the sack up and threw it over his shoulder, and carried
it out into the spring-waggon.

"Now we are going to travel," said the proud wheat "Don't let us be
separated."

At that minute, there were heard two young voices, shouting:--

"Jerry, take us in the waggon! Let us go to mill, Jerry. We want to
go to mill."

And these were the very two boys who had played in the granary and made
so much noise the summer before. They had grown a little bigger, and
their yellow hair was longer, but they looked just as they used to, with
their strong little legs and big brown eyes, and their sailor hats set so
far back on their heads that it was a wonder they stayed on. And
gracious! how they shouted and ran.

"What does yer mar say?" asked Jerry.

"Says we can go!" shouted both at once, as if Jerry had been deaf, which
he wasn't at all--quite the contrary.

So Jerry, who was very good-natured, lifted them in, and cracked his
whip, and the horses started off. It was a long ride to the mill, but
Lionel and Vivian were not too tired to shout again when they reached it.
They shouted at sight of the creek and the big wheel turning round and
round slowly, with the water dashing and pouring and foaming over it.

"What turns the wheel?" asked Vivian.

"The water, honey," said Jerry.

"What turns the water?"

"Well now, honey," said Jerry, "you hev me thar. I don't know nuffin
'bout it. Lors-a-massy, what a boy you is fur axin dif'cult questions."

Then he carried the sack in to the miller, and said he would wait until
the wheat was ground.

"Ground!" said the proud wheat. "We are going to be ground. I hope it is
agreeable. Let us keep close together."

They did keep close together, but it wasn't very agreeable to be poured
into a hopper and then crushed into fine powder between two big stones.

"Makes nice flour," said the miller, rubbing it between his fingers.

"Flour!" said the wheat--which was wheat no longer. "Now I am flour, and
I am finer than ever. How white I am! I really would rather be white than
green or gold colour. I wonder where the learned grain is, and if it is
as fine and white as I am?"

But the learned grain and her family had been laid away in the granary
for seed wheat.

Before the waggon reached the house again, the two boys were fast asleep
in the bottom of it, and had to be helped out just as the sack was, and
carried in.

The sack was taken into the kitchen at once and opened, and even in its
wheat days the flour had never been so proud as it was when it heard the
farmer's wife say--

"I'm going to make this into cake."

"Ah!" it said; "I thought so. Now I shall be rich, and admired by
everybody."

The farmer's wife then took some of it out in a large white bowl, and
after that she busied herself beating eggs and sugar and butter all
together in another bowl: and after a while she took the flour and beat
it in also.

"Now I am in grand company," said the flour. "The eggs and butter are the
colour of gold, the sugar is like silver or diamonds. This is the very
society for me."

"The cake looks rich," said one of the daughters.

"It's rather too rich for them children," said her mother. "But Lawsey, I
dunno, neither. Nothin' don't hurt 'em. I reckon they could eat a panel
of rail fence and come to no harm."

"I'm rich," said the flour to itself. "That is just what I intended from
the first. I am rich and I am a cake."

Just then, a pair of big brown eyes came and peeped into it. They
belonged to a round little head with a mass of tangled curls all over
it--they belonged to Vivian.

"What's that?" he asked.

"Cake."

"Who made it?"

"I did."

"I like you," said Vivian. "You're such a nice woman. Who's going to eat
any of it? Is Lionel?"

"I'm afraid it's too rich for boys," said the woman, but she laughed and
kissed him.

"No," said Vivian. "I'm afraid it isn't."

"I shall be much too rich," said the cake, angrily. "Boys, indeed. I was
made for something better than boys."

After that, it was poured into a cake-mould, and put into the oven,
where it had rather an unpleasant time of it. It was so hot in there
that if the farmer's wife had not watched it carefully, it would have
been burned.

"But I am cake," it said, "and of the richest kind, so I can bear it,
even if it is uncomfortable."

When it was taken out, it really was cake, and it felt as if it was quite
satisfied. Everyone who came into the kitchen and saw it, said--

"Oh, what a nice cake! How well your new flour has done!"

But just once, while it was cooling, it had a curious, disagreeable
feeling. It found, all at once, that the two boys, Lionel and Vivian,
had come quietly into the kitchen and stood near the table, looking at
the cake with their great eyes wide open and their little red mouths
open, too.

