

CHAPTER XIII
A STARTLING EVENT


Though Ben had failed in the main object of his expedition, he
returned to Pentonville in excellent spirits.  He felt that he had
been a favorite of fortune, and with good reason.  In one day he had
acquired a sum equal to five weeks' wages.  Added to the dollar Mr.
Crawford had contributed toward his expenses, he had been paid
twenty-one dollars, while he had spent a little less than two.  It is
not every country boy who goes up to the great city who returns with
an equal harvest.  If Squire Davenport had not threatened to foreclose
the mortgage, he would have felt justified in buying a present for his
mother.  As it was, he feared they would have need of all the money
that came in to meet contingencies.

The train reached Pentonville at five o'clock, and about the usual
time Ben opened the gate and walked up to the front door of his modest
home.  He looked so bright and cheerful when he entered her presence
that Mrs. Barclay thought be must have found and been kindly received
by the cousin whom he had gone up to seek.

"Did you see Mr. Peters?" she asked anxiously.

"No, mother; he is in Europe."

A shadow came over the mother's face.  It was like taking from her her
last hope.

"I was afraid you would not be repaid for going up to the city," she
said.

"I made a pretty good day's work of it, nevertheless, mother.  What do
you say to this?" and he opened his wallet and showed her a roll of
bills.

"Is that Mr. Crawford's money?" she asked.

"No, mother, it is mine, or rather it is yours, for I give it to you."

"Did you find a pocketbook, Ben?  If so, the owner may turn up."

"Mother, the money is mine, fairly mine, for it was given me in return
for a service I rendered a lady in New York."

"What service could you have possibly rendered, Ben, that merited such
liberal payment?" asked his mother in surprise.

Upon this Ben explained, and Mrs. Barclay listened to his story with
wonder.

"So you see, mother, I did well to go to the city," said Ben, in
conclusion.

"It has turned out so, and I am thankful for your good fortune.  But I
should have been better pleased if you had seen Mr. Peters and found
him willing to help us about the mortgage."

"So would I, mother, but this money is worth having.  When supper is
over I will go to the store to help out Mr. Crawford and report my
purchase of goods.  You know the most of our trade is in the evening."

After Ben had gone Mrs. Barclay felt her spirits return as she thought
of the large addition to their little stock of money.

"One piece of good fortune may be followed by another," she thought.
"Mr. Peters may return from Europe in time to help us.  At any rate,
we have nearly three months to look about us, and God may send us
help."

When the tea dishes were washed and put away Mrs. Barclay sat down to
mend a pair of Ben's socks, for in that household it was necessary to
make clothing last as long as possible, when she was aroused from her
work by a ringing at the bell.

She opened the door to admit Squire Davenport.

"Good-evening," she said rather coldly, for she could not feel
friendly to a man who was conspiring to deprive her of her modest home
and turn her out upon the sidewalk.

"Good-evening, widow," said the squire.

"Will you walk in?" asked Mrs. Barclay, not over cordially.

"Thank you, I will step in for five minutes.  I called to see if you
had thought better of my proposal the other evening."

"Your proposal was to take my house from me," said Mrs. Barclay.  "How
can you suppose I would think better of that?"

"You forget that the house is more mine than yours already, Mrs.
Barclay.  The sum I have advanced on mortgage is two-thirds of the
value of the property."

"I dispute that, sir."

"Let it pass," said the squire, with a wave of the hand.  "Call it
three-fifths, if you will.  Even then the property is more mine than
yours.  Women don't understand business, or you would see matters in a
different light."

"I am a woman, it is true, but I understand very well that you wish to
take advantage of me," said the widow, not without excusable
bitterness.

"My good lady, you forget that I am ready to cancel the mortgage and
pay you three hundred and fifty dollars for the house.  Now, three
hundred and fifty dollars is a handsome sum--a very handsome sum.  You
could put it in the savings bank and it would yield you quite a
comfortable income."

"Twenty dollars, more or less," said Mrs. Barclay.  "Is that what you
call a comfortable income?  How long do you think it would keep us
alive?"

"Added, of course, to your son's wages.  Ben is now able to earn good
wages."

"He earns four dollars a week, and that is our main dependence."

"I congratulate you.  I didn't suppose Mr. Crawford paid such high
wages."

"Ben earns every cent of it."

"Very possibly.  By the way, what is this that Tom was telling me
about Ben being sent to New York to buy goods for the store?"

"It is true, if that is what you mean."

"Bless my soul!  It is very strange of Crawford, and I may add, not
very judicious."

"I suppose Mr. Crawford is the best judge of that, sir."

"Even if the boy were competent, which is not for a moment to be
thought of, it is calculated to foster his self-conceit."

"Ben is not self-conceited," said Mrs. Barclay, ready to resent any
slur upon her boy.  "He has excellent business capacity, and if he
were older I should not need to ask favors of anyone."

"You are a mother, and naturally set an exaggerated estimate upon your
son's ability, which, I presume, is respectable, but probably not
more.  However, let that pass.  I did not call to discuss Ben but to
inquire whether you had not thought better of the matter we discussed
the other evening."

"I never shall, Squire Davenport.  When the time comes you can
foreclose, if you like, but it will never be done with my consent."

"Ahem!  Your consent will not be required."

"And let me tell you, Squire Davenport, if you do this wicked thing,
it won't benefit you in the end."

Squire Davenport shrugged his shoulders.

"I am not at all surprised to find you so unreasonable, Mrs. Barclay,"
he said.  "It's the way with women.  I should be glad if you would
come to look upon the matter in a different light; but I cannot
sacrifice my own interests in any event.  The law is on my side."

"The law may be on your side, but the law upholds a great deal that is
oppressive and cruel."

"A curious set of laws we should have if women made them," said the
squire.

"They would not bear so heavily upon the poor as they do now."

"Well, I won't stop to discuss the matter.  If you come to entertain
different views about the house, send word by Ben, and we will arrange
the details without delay.  Mr. Kirk is anxious to move his family as
soon as possible, and would like to secure the house at once."

"He will have to wait three months at least," said Mrs. Barclay
coldly.  "For that time, I believe the law protects me."

"You are right there; but at the end of that tine you cannot expect as
liberal terms as we are now prepared to offer you."

"Liberal!" repeated the widow, in a meaning tone.

"So I regard it," said the squire stiffly.  "Good-evening."

An hour later Mrs. Barclay's reflections were broken in upon by the
ominous clang of the engine bell.  This is a sound which always
excites alarm in a country village.

"Where's the fire?" she asked anxiously, of a boy who was running by
the house.

"It's Crawford's store!" was the startling reply.  "It's blazin' up
like anything.  Guess it'll have to go."

"I hope Ben'll keep out of danger," thought Mrs. Barclay, as she
hurriedly took her shawl and bonnet and started for the scene of
excitement.




CHAPTER XIV
BEN SHOWS HIMSELF A HERO


A fire in a country village, particularly where the building is a
prominent one, is sure to attract a large part of the resident
population.  Men, women, and children, as well as the hook and ladder
company, hurried to the scene of conflagration.  Everybody felt a
personal interest in Crawford's.  It was the great emporium which
provided all the families in the village with articles of prime and
secondary necessity.  If Paris can be called France, then Crawford's
might be called Pentonville.

"Crawford's on fire!" exclaimed old Captain Manson.  "Bless my soul!
It cannot be true.  Where's my cane?"

"You don't mean to say you're goin' to the fire, father?" asked his
widowed daughter in surprise, for the captain had bowed beneath the
weight of eighty-six winters, and rarely left the domestic hearth.

"Do you think I'd stay at home when Crawford's was a-burning?"
returned the captain.

"But remember, father, you ain't so young as you used to be.  You
might catch your death of cold."

"What!  at a fire?" exclaimed the old man, laughing at his own joke.

"You know what I mean.  It's dreadfully imprudent.  Why, I wouldn't go
myself."

"Shouldn't think you would, at your time of life!" retorted her
father, chuckling.

So the old man emerged into the street, and hurried as fast as his
unsteady limbs would allow, to the fire.

"How did it catch?" the reader will naturally ask.

The young man who was the only other salesman besides Ben and the
proprietor, had gone down cellar smoking a cigar.  In one corner was a
heap of shavings and loose papers.  A spark from his cigar must have
fallen there.  Had he noticed it, with prompt measures the incipient
fire might have been extinguished.  But he went up stairs with the
kerosene, which he had drawn for old Mrs. Watts, leaving behind him
the seeds of destruction.  Soon the flames, arising, caught the wooden
flooring of the upper store.  The smell of the smoke notified Crawford
and his clerks of the impending disaster.  When the door communicating
with the basement was opened, a stifling smoke issued forth and the
crackling of the fire was heard.

"Run, Ben; give the alarm!" called Mr. Crawford, pale with dismay and
apprehension.  It was no time then to inquire how the fire caught.
There was only time to save as much of the stock as possible, since it
was clear that the fire had gained too great a headway to be put out.

Ben lost no time, and in less than ten minutes the engine, which,
fortunately, was housed only ten rods away, was on the ground.  Though
it was impossible to save the store, the fire might be prevented from
spreading.  A band of earnest workers aided Crawford in saving his
stock.  A large part, of course, must be sacrificed; but, perhaps, a
quarter was saved.

All at once a terrified whisper spread from one to another:

"Mrs. Morton's children!  Where are they?  They must be in the third
story."

A poor woman, Mrs. Morton, had been allowed, with her two children, to
enjoy, temporarily, two rooms in the third story.  She had gone to a
farmer's two miles away to do some work, and her children, seven and
nine years of age, had remained at home.  They seemed doomed to
certain death.

But, even as the inquiry went from lip to lip, the children appeared.
They had clambered out of a third story window upon the sloping roof
of the rear ell, and, pale and dismayed, stood in sight of the shocked
and terrified crowd, shrieking for help!

"A ladder!  A ladder!" exclaimed half a dozen.

But there was no ladder at hand--none nearer than Mr. Parmenter's,
five minutes' walk away.  While a messenger was getting it the fate of
the children would be decided.

"Tell 'em to jump!" exclaimed Silas Carver.

"They'd break their necks, you fool!" returned his wife.

"Better do that than be burned up!" said the old man.

No one knew what to do--no one but Ben Barclay.

He seized a coil of rope, and with a speed which surprised even
himself, climbed up a tall oak tree, whose branches overshadowed the
roof of the ell part.  In less than a minute he found himself on a
limb just over the children.  To the end of the rope was fastened a
strong iron hook.

Undismayed by his own danger, Ben threw his rope, though he nearly
lost his footing while he was doing it, and with an aim so precise
that the hook caught in the smaller girl's dress.

"Hold on to the rope, Jennie, if you can!" he shouted.

The girl obeyed him instinctively.

Drawing the cord hand over hand, the little girl swung clear, and was
lowered into the arms of Ebenezer Strong, who detached the hook.

"Save the other, Ben!" shouted a dozen.

Ben needed no spur to further effort.

Again he threw the hook, and this time the older girl, comprehending
what was required, caught the rope and swung off the roof, scarcely in
time, for her clothing had caught fire.  But when she reached the
ground ready hands extinguished it and the crowd of anxious spectators
breathed more freely, as Ben, throwing down the rope, rapidly
descended the tree and stood once more in safety, having saved two
lives.

Just then it was that the poor mother, almost frantic with fear,
arrived on the ground.

"Where are my darlings?  Who will save them?" she exclaimed, full of
anguish, yet not comprehending that they were out of peril.

"They are safe, and here is the brave boy who saved their lives," said
Ebenezer Strong.

"God bless you, Ben Barclay!" exclaimed the poor mother.  "You have
saved my life as well as theirs, for I should have died if they had
burned."

Ben scarcely heard her, for one and another came up to shake his hand
and congratulate him upon his brave deed.  Our young hero was
generally self-possessed, but he hardly knew how to act when he found
himself an object of popular ovation.

"Somebody else would have done it if I hadn't," he said modestly.

"You are the only one who had his wits about him," said Seth Jones.
"No one thought of the rope till you climbed the tree.  We were all
looking for a ladder and there was none to be had nearer than Mr.
Parmenter's."

"I wouldn't have thought of it myself if I hadn't read in a daily
paper of something like it," said Ben.

"Ben," said Mr. Crawford, "I'd give a thousand dollars to have done
what you did.  You have shown yourself a hero."

"Oh, Ben, how frightened I was when I saw you on the branch just over
the burning building," said a well-known voice.

Turning, Ben saw it was his mother who spoke.

"Well, it's all right now, mother," he said, smiling.  "You are not
sorry I did it?"

"Sorry!  I am proud of you."

"I am not proud of my hands," said Ben.  "Look at them."

They were chafed and bleeding, having been lacerated by his rapid
descent from the tree.

"Come home, Ben, and let me put some salve on them.  How they must
pain you!"

"Wait till the fire is all over, mother."

The gallant firemen did all they could, but the store was doomed.
They could only prevent it from extending.  In half an hour the engine
was taken back, and Ben went home with his mother.

"It's been rather an exciting evening, mother," said Ben.  "I rather
think I shall have to find a new place."



