
"That's grim humor, Tayoga, but if it's the way you feel, Robert and I
are with you."

Later in the afternoon they saw smoke rising beyond the ridge and
they knew the warriors had built a great fire before which they were
probably lying and gorging themselves, after their fashion when they
had plenty of food, and little else to do. Yet the three remained
defiantly all that day and all through the following night. The next
morning, with ample supplies in their packs, they turned their faces
southward, and cautiously climbed the ridge in that direction, once
more passing into the region of the peaks. To their surprise they
struck several comparatively fresh trails in the passes, and they were
soon forced to the conclusion that the hostile forces were still all
about them. Near midday they stopped in a narrow gorge between high
peaks and listened to calls of the inhabitants of the forest, the
faint howls of wolves, and once or twice the yapping of a fox.

"The warriors signaling to one another!" said Willet.

"It is so," said Tayoga. "I think they have noticed our tracks in
the earth, too slight, perhaps, to tell who we are, but they will
undertake to see."

"I hear the call of a moose directly ahead," said Robert, "although I
know it is no moose that makes it. Our way there is cut off."

"And there is the howl of the wolf behind us," said Tayoga. "We cannot
go back."

"Then," said Robert, "I suppose we must climb the mountain. It's lucky
we've got our strength again."

They scaled a lofty summit once more, fortunately being able to climb
among rocks, where they left no trail, and, crouched at the crest in
dense bushes, they saw two bands meet in the valley below, evidently
searching for the fugitives. There was no white man among them, but
Robert knew a gigantic figure to be that of Tandakora, seeking them
with the most intense and bitter hatred. The muzzle of his rifle began
to slide forward, but Willet put out a detaining hand.

"No, Robert, lad," he said. "He deserves it, but his time hasn't come
yet. Besides your shot would bring the whole crowd up after us."

"And he belongs to me," added Tayoga. "When he falls it is to be by my
hand."

"Yes, he belongs to you, Tayoga," said Willet "Now they've concluded
that we continued toward the south, and they're going on that way."

As they felt the need of the utmost caution they spent the remainder
of the day and the next night on the crest. Robert kept the late
watch, and he saw the dawn come, red and misty, a huge sun shining
over the eastern mountains, but shedding little warmth. He was hopeful
that Tandakora and his warriors had passed on far into the south, but
he heard a distant cry rising in the clear air east of the peak and
then a reply to the west. His heart stood still for a moment. He
knew that they were the whoops of the savages and he felt that they
signified a discovery. Perhaps chance had disclosed their trail. He
listened with great intentness, but the shouts did not come again.
Nevertheless the omen was bad.

He awoke Willet and the Onondaga, who had been sleeping soundly,
and told them what had happened, both agreeing that the shouts were
charged with import.

"I think it likely that we will be attacked," said the hunter. "Now we
must take another look at our position."

The peak, luckily for them, was precipitous, and its crest did not
cover an area of more than twenty or thirty square yards. On the three
sides the ascent was so steep that a man could not climb up except
with extreme difficulty, but on the fourth, by which they had come,
the slope was more gradual. The gentle climb faced the east, and it
was here that the hunter and Robert watched, while Tayoga, for the
sake of utmost precaution, kept an eye on the steep sides.

Knowing that it was wise to economize and even to increase their
strength, they ate abundantly of the bear steaks, afterward craving
water, which they were forced to do without--the one great flaw in
their position, since the warriors might hold them there to perish of
thirst.

Robert soon forgot the desire for water in the tenseness of watching
and waiting. But even the anxiety and the peril to his life did not
keep him from noticing the singularity of his situation, upon the
slender peak of a high mountain far in the wilderness. The sun, full
of splendor but still cold, touched with gold all the surrounding
crests and ridges and filled with a yellow but luxurious haze every
gorge and ravine. He was compelled to admire its wintry beauty, a
beauty, though, that he knew to be treacherous, surcharged as it was
with savage wile and stratagem, and a burning desire for their lives.

A time that seemed incredible passed without demonstration from the
enemy. But he realized that it was only about two hours. He did not
expect to see any of the warriors creeping up the slopes toward them,
but too wise to watch for their faces he did expect to notice the
bushes move ever so slightly under their advance. He and Willet
remained crouched in the same positions in the shelter of high rocks.
Tayoga, who had been moving about the far side, came to them and
whispered:

"I am going down the northern face of the cliff!"

"Why, it's sheer insanity, Tayoga!" said the astonished hunter.

"But I'm going."

"What'll you achieve after you've gone? You'll merely walk into
Tandakora's hands!"

"I go, Great Bear, and I will return in a half hour, alive and well."

"Is your mind upset, Tayoga?"

"I am quite sane. Remember, Great Bear, I will be back in a half hour
unhurt."

Then he was gone, gliding away through the low vegetation that covered
the crest, and Robert and the hunter looked at each other.

"There is more in this than the eye sees," said young Lennox. "I never
knew Tayoga to speak with more confidence. I think he will be back
just as he says, in half an hour."

"Maybe, though I don't understand it. But there are lots of things one
doesn't understand. We must keep our eyes on the slope, and let Tayoga
solve his own problem, whatever it is."

There was no wind at all, but once Robert thought he saw the shrubs
halfway down the steep move, though he was not sure and nothing
followed. But, intently watching the place where the motion had
occurred, he caught a gleam of metal which he was quite sure came from
a rifle barrel.

"Did you see it?" he whispered to the hunter.

"Aye, lad," replied Willet. "They're there in that dense clump, hoping
we've relaxed the watch and that they can surprise us. But it may be
two or three hours before they come any farther. Always remember in
your dealings with Indians that they have more time than anything
else, and so they know how to be patient. Now, I wonder what Tayoga is
doing! That boy certainly had something unusual on his mind!"

"Here he is, ready to speak for himself, and back inside his promised
half hour."

Tayoga parted the bushes without noise, and sat down between them
behind the big rocks. He offered no explanation, but seemed very
content with himself.

"Well, Tayoga," said Willet, "did you go down the side of the
mountain?"

"As far as I wished."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I have been engaged in a very pleasant task, Great Bear."

"What pleasure can you find in scaling a steep and rocky slope?"

"I have been drinking, Great Bear, drinking the fresh, pure water of
the mountains, and it was wonderfully cool and good to my dry throat."

The two gazed at him in astonishment, and he laughed low, but with
deep enjoyment.

"I took one drink, two drinks, three drinks," he said, "and when the
time comes I shall take more. The fountain also awaits the lips of the
Great Bear and of Dagaeoga."

"Tell it all," said Robert.

"When I looked down the steep side a long time I thought I caught a
gleam as of falling water in the bushes. It was only twenty or thirty
yards below us, and, when I descended to it, I found a little fountain
bursting from a crevice in the rock. It was but a thread, making
a tiny pool a few inches across, before it dropped away among the
bushes, but it is very cool, very clear, and there is always plenty of
it for many men."

"Is the descent hard?" asked Willet.

"Not for one who is strong and cautious. There are thick vines and
bushes to which to hold, and remember that the splendid water is at
the end of the journey."

"Then, Robert, you go," said the hunter, "and mind, too, that you get
back soon, because my throat is parching. I'd like to have one deep
drink before the warriors attack."

Robert followed Tayoga, and, obeying his instructions, was soon at the
fountain, where he drank once, twice, thrice, and then once more
of the finest water he could recall. Then, deeply grateful for the
Onondaga's observation, he climbed back, and the hunter took his turn.

"It was certainly good, Tayoga," he said, when he was back in
position. "Some men don't think much of water, but none of us can live
without it. You've saved our lives."

"Perhaps, O Great Bear," responded the Onondaga, "but if the bushes
below continue to shake as they are doing we shall have to save them
again. Ah!"

The exclamation, long drawn but low, was followed by the leap of his
rifle to the shoulder, and the pressing of his finger on the trigger.
A stream of fire sprang from the muzzle of the long barrel to be
followed by a yell in one of the thickets clustering on the slope. A
savage rose to his feet, threw up his arms and fell headlong, his body
crashing far below on the rocks. Robert shut his eyes and shivered.

"He was dead before he touched earth, lad," said the hunter. "Now the
others are ready to scramble back. Look how the bushes are shaking
again!"

Robert had shut his eyes only for a moment, and now he saw the scrub
shaking more violently than ever. Then he had a fleeting glimpse of
brown bodies as all the warriors descended rapidly. Anyone of the
three might have fired with good aim, but they did not raise their
rifles. Since their enemies were retreating they would let them
retreat.

"They're all back in the valley now," said the hunter after a little
while, "and they'll think a lot before they try the steep ascent a
second time. Now it's a question of patience, and they hope we'll
become so weak from thirst that we'll fall into their hands."

"Tandakora and his warriors would be consumed with anger if they knew
of our spring," said Tayoga.

"They'll find out about it soon," said Robert.

"I think not," said Tayoga. "I noticed when I was at the fountain that
the rivulet ran back into the cliff about a hundred feet below, and
one can see the water only from the crest. If Areskoui has allowed us
to be besieged here, he at least has created much in our favor."

He looked toward the east, where the great red sun was shining, and
worshiped silently. It seemed to Robert that his young comrade stared
unwinking for a long time into the eye of the Sun God, though perhaps
it was only a few seconds. But his form expanded and his face was
illumined. Robert knew that the Onondaga's confidence had become
supreme, and he shared in it.

The hunter and Tayoga kept the watch after a while, and young Lennox
was free to wander about the crest as he wished. He examined carefully
the three sides they had left unguarded, but was convinced that no
warrior, no matter how skillful and tenacious, could climb up there.
Then he wandered back toward the sentinels, and, sitting down under a
tree, began to study the distant slopes across the gorge.

He saw the warriors gather by-and-by in a deep recess out of rifle
shot, light a fire and begin to cook great quantities of game, as
if they meant to stay there and keep the siege until doomsday, if
necessary. He saw the gigantic figure of Tandakora approach the fire,
eat voraciously for a while and then go away. After him came a white
man in French uniform. He thought at first it was St. Luc and his
heart beat hard, but he was able to discern presently that it was an
officer not much older than himself, in a uniform of white faced with
violet and a black, three-cornered hat. Finally he recognized young De
Galissonniere, whom he had met in Quebec, and whom he had seen a few
days since in the French camp.

As he looked De Galissonniere left the recess, descended into the
valley and then began to climb their slope, a white handkerchief held
aloft on the point of his small sword. Young Lennox immediately joined
the two watchers at the brink.

"A flag of truce! Now what can he want!" he exclaimed.

"We'll soon see," replied Willet. "He's within good hearing now, and
I'll hail him."

He shouted in powerful tones that echoed in the gorge:

"Below there! What is it?"

"I have something to say that will be of great importance to you,"
replied De Galissonniere.

"Then come forward, while we remain here. We don't trust your allies."

Robert saw the face of the young Frenchman flush, but De
Galissonniere, as if knowing the truth, and resolved not to quibble
over it, climbed steadily. When he was within twenty feet of the
crest the hunter called to him to halt, and he did so, leaning easily
against a strong bush, while the three waited eagerly to hear what he
had to say.




CHAPTER IV


THE GODS AT PLAY

De Galissonniere gazed at the three faces, peering at him over the
brink, and then drew himself together jauntily. His position, perched
on the face of the cliff, was picturesque, and he made the most of it.

"I am glad to see you again Mr. Willet, Mr. Lennox and Tayoga, the
brave Onondaga," he said. "It's been a long time since we met in
Quebec and much water has flowed under that bridge of Avignon, of
which we French sing, but I can't see that any one of you has changed
much."

"Nor you," said Robert, catching his tone and acting as spokesman
for the three. "The circumstances are unusual, Captain Louis de
Galissonniere, and I'm sorry I can't invite you to come up on our
crest, but it wouldn't be military to let you have a look at our
fortifications."

"I understand, and I do very well where I am. I wish to say first that
I am sorry to see you in such a plight."
