newspaper; and one or two were feeding their horses with bits of hay,
and giving them a drink of water. We pulled up in the rank at the back
of the last cab. Two or three men came round and began to look at me and
pass their remarks.

"Very good for a funeral," said one.

"Too smart-looking," said another, shaking his head in a very wise way;
"you'll find out something wrong one of these fine mornings, or my name
isn't Jones."

"Well," said Jerry pleasantly, "I suppose I need not find it out till it
find me out, eh? And if so, I'll keep up my spirits a little longer."

Then there came up a broad-faced man, dressed in a great gray coat with
great gray capes and great white buttons, a gray hat, and a blue
comforter loosely tied around his neck; his hair was gray, too; but he
was a jolly-looking fellow, and the other men made way for him. He
looked me all over, as if he had been going to buy me; and then
straightening himself up with a grunt, he said, "He's the right sort for
you, Jerry; I don't care what you gave for him, he'll be worth it." Thus
my character was established on the stand. This man's name was Grant,
but he was called "Gray Grant," or "Governor Grant." He had been the
longest on that stand of any of the men, and he took it upon himself to
settle matters and stop disputes.

The first week of my life as a cab horse was very trying. I had never
been used to London, and the noise, the hurry, the crowds of horses,
carts, and carriages, that I had to make my way through, made me feel
anxious and harassed; but I soon found that I could perfectly trust my
driver, and then I made myself easy, and got used to it.

[Illustration]

Jerry was as good a driver as I had ever known; and what was better, he
took as much thought for his horses as he did for himself. He soon found
out that I was willing to work and do my best; and he never laid the
whip on me, unless it was gently drawing the end of it over my back,
when I was to go on; but generally I knew this quite well by the way in
which he took up the reins; and I believe his whip was more frequently
stuck up by his side than in his hand.

In a short time I and my master understood each other, as well as horse
and man can do. In the stable, too, he did all that he could for our
comfort. The stalls were the old-fashioned style, too much on the slope;
but he had two movable bars fixed across the back of our stalls, so that
at night, when we were resting, he just took off our halters and put up
the bars, and thus we could turn about and stand whichever way we
pleased, which is a great comfort.

Jerry kept us very clean, and gave us as much change of food as he
could, and always plenty of it; and not only that, but he always gave us
plenty of clean fresh water, which he allowed to stand by us both night
and day, except of course when we came in warm. Some people say that a
horse ought not to drink all he likes; but I know if we are allowed to
drink when we want it we drink only a little at a time, and it does us a
great deal more good than swallowing down half a bucketful at a time
because we have been left without till we are thirsty and miserable.
Some grooms will go home to their beer and leave us for hours with our
dry hay and oats and nothing to moisten them; then of course we gulp
down too much at once, which helps to spoil our breathing and sometimes
chills our stomachs. But the best thing that we had here was our Sundays
for rest! we worked so hard in the week, that I do not think we could
have kept up to it, but for that day; besides, we had then time to enjoy
each other's company.




CHAPTER XIII


DOLLY AND A REAL GENTLEMAN

The winter came in early, with a great deal of cold and wet. There was
snow, or sleet, or rain, almost every day for weeks, changing only for
keen driving winds or sharp frosts. The horses all felt it very much.
When it is a dry cold, a couple of good thick rugs will keep the warmth
in us; but when it is soaking rain, they soon get wet through and are no
good. Some of the drivers had a waterproof cover to throw over, which
was a fine thing; but some of the men were so poor that they could not
protect either themselves or their horses, and many of them suffered
very much that winter. When we horses had worked half the day we went to
our dry stables, and could rest; while they had to sit on their boxes,
sometimes staying out as late as one or two o'clock in the morning, if
they had a party to wait for.

[Illustration]

When the streets were slippery with frost or snow, that was the worst of
all for us horses; one mile of such traveling with a weight to draw, and
no firm footing, would take more out of us than four on a good road;
every nerve and muscle of our bodies is on the strain to keep our
balance; and, added to this, the fear of falling is more exhausting than
anything else. If the roads are very bad, indeed, our shoes are roughed,
but that makes us feel nervous at first.

One cold windy day, Dolly brought Jerry a basin of something hot, and
was standing by him while he ate it. He had scarcely begun, when a
gentleman, walking toward us very fast, held up his umbrella. Jerry
touched his hat in return, gave the basin to Dolly, and was taking off
my cloth, when the gentleman, hastening up, cried out, "No, no, finish
your soup, my friend; I have not much time to spare, but I can wait till
you have done, and set your little girl safe on the pavement."

So saying, he seated himself in the cab. Jerry thanked him kindly, and
came back to Dolly. "There, Dolly, that's a gentleman; that's a real
gentleman, Dolly; he has got time and thought for the comfort of a poor
cabman and a little girl."

[Illustration]

Jerry finished his soup, set the child across, and then took his orders
to drive to Clapham Rise. Several times after that, the same gentleman
took our cab. I think he was very fond of dogs and horses, for whenever
we took him to his own door, two or three dogs would come bounding out
to meet him. Sometimes he came round and patted me saying in his quiet,
pleasant way: "This horse has got a good master, and he deserves it." It
was a very rare thing for any one to notice the horse that had been
working for him. I have known ladies to do it now and then, and this
gentleman, and one or two others have given me a pat and a kind word;
but ninety-nine out of a hundred would as soon think of patting the
steam engine that drew the train.

One day, he and another gentleman took our cab; they
stopped at a shop in R---- Street, and while his friend went in, he
stood at the door. A little ahead of us on the other side of the street,
a cart with two very fine horses was standing before some wine vaults;
the carter was not with them, and I cannot tell how long they had been
standing, but they seemed to think they had waited long enough, and
began to move off. Before they had gone, many paces, the carter came
running out and caught them. He seemed furious at their having moved,
and with whip and rein punished them brutally, even beating them about
the head. Our gentleman saw it all, and stepping quickly across the
street, said in a decided voice: "If you don't stop that directly, I'll
have you arrested for leaving your horses, and for brutal conduct."

The man, who had clearly been drinking, poured forth some abusive
language, but he left off knocking the horses about, and taking the
reins, got into his cart; meantime our friend had quietly taken a
notebook from his pocket, and looking at the name and address painted on
the cart, he wrote something down.

"What do you want with that?" growled the carter, as he cracked his whip
and was moving on. A nod and a grim smile was the only answer he got.

On returning to the cab, our friend was joined by his companion, who
said laughing, "I should have thought, Wright, you had enough business
of your own to look after, without troubling yourself about other
people's horses and servants."

Our friend stood still for a moment, and throwing his head a little
back, "Do you know why this world is as bad as it is?"

"No," said the other.

"Then I'll tell you. It is because people think only about their own
business, and won't trouble themselves to stand up for the oppressed,
nor bring the wrong-doer to light. I never see a wicked thing like this
without doing what I can, and many a master has thanked me for letting
him know how his horses have been used."

"I wish there were more gentlemen like you, sir," said Jerry, "for they
are wanted badly enough in this city."




CHAPTER XIV


POOR GINGER

One day, while our cab and many others were waiting outside one of the
parks where music was playing, a shabby old cab drove up beside ours.
The horse was an old worn-out chestnut, with an ill-kept coat, and bones
that showed plainly through it, the knees knuckled over, and the
fore-legs were very unsteady. I had been eating some hay, and the wind
rolled a little lock of it that way, and the poor creature put out her
long thin neck and picked it up, and then turned round and looked about
for more. There was a hopeless look in the dull eye that I could not
help noticing, and then, as I was thinking where I had seen that horse
before, she looked full at me and said, "Black Beauty, is that you?"

It was Ginger! but how changed! The beautifully arched and glossy neck
was now straight, and lank, and fallen in; the clean, straight legs and
delicate fetlocks were swelled; the joints were grown out of shape with
hard work; the face, that was once so full of spirit and life, was now
full of suffering, and I could tell by the heaving of her sides, and her
frequent cough, how bad her breath was.  Our drivers were standing
together a little way off, so I sidled up to her a step or two, that we
might have a little quiet talk. It was a sad tale that she had to tell.

After a twelvemonth's run off at Earlshall, she was considered to be fit
for work again, and was sold to a gentleman. For a little while she got
on very well, but after a longer gallop than usual, the old strain
returned, and after being rested and doctored she was again sold. In
this way she changed hands several times, but always getting lower down.

[Illustration]

"And so at last," said she, "I was bought by a man who keeps a number of
cabs and horses, and lets them out. You look well off, and I am glad of
