Example: If you are telling a dream you had about your aged aunt:

     Methought I heard her say
     My child you have so useful been
     You need not sew today.

This is a good example one way, but too unlikely, woe is me!

This afternoon I was walking over to the store to buy molasses, and as
I came off the bridge and turned up the hill, I saw lots and lots of
heelprints in the side of the road, heelprints with little spike holes
in them.

"Oh! The river drivers have come from up country," I thought, "and
they'll be breaking the jam at our falls tomorrow." I looked everywhere
about and not a man did I see, but still I knew I was not mistaken for
the heelprints could not lie. All the way over and back I thought about
it, though unfortunately forgetting the molasses, and Alice Robinson
not being able to come out, I took playtime to write a story. It is
the first grown-up one I ever did, and is intended to be like Cora the
Doctor's Wife, not like a school composition. It is written for Mr. Adam
Ladd, and people like him who live in Boston, and is the printed kind
you get money for, to pay off a mortgage.

* * * * *

LANCELOT OR THE PARTED LOVERS

A beautiful village maiden was betrothed to a stallwart river driver,
but they had high and bitter words and parted, he to weep into the
crystal stream as he drove his logs, and she to sigh and moan as she
went about her round of household tasks.

At eventide the maiden was wont to lean over the bridge and her tears
also fell into the foaming stream; so, though the two unhappy lovers did
not know it, the river was their friend, the only one to whom they told
their secrets and wept into.

The months crept on and it was the next July when the maiden was passing
over the bridge and up the hill. Suddenly she spied footprints on the
sands of time.

"The river drivers have come again!" she cried, putting her hand to
her side for she had a slight heart trouble like Cora and Mrs. Peter
Meserve, that doesn't kill.

"They HAVE come indeed; ESPECIALLY ONE YOU KNOW," said a voice, and
out from the alder bushes sprung Lancelot Littlefield, for that was the
lover's name and it was none other than he. His hair was curly and like
living gold. His shirt, white of flannel, was new and dry, and of a
handsome color, and as the maiden looked at him she could think of
nought but a fairy prince.

"Forgive," she mermered, stretching out her waisted hands.

"Nay, sweet," he replied. "'Tis I should say that to you," and bending
gracefully on one knee he kissed the hem of her dress. It was a rich
pink gingham check, ellaborately ornamented with white tape trimming.

Clasping each other to the heart like Cora and the Doctor, they stood
there for a long while, till they heard the rumble of wheels on the
bridge and knew they must disentangle.

The wheels came nearer and verily! it was the maiden's father.

"Can I wed with your fair daughter this very moon," asked Lancelot, who
will not be called his whole name again in this story.

"You may," said the father, "for lo! she has been ready and waiting for
many months." This he said not noting how he was shaming the maiden,
whose name was Linda Rowenetta.

Then and there the nuptial day was appointed and when it came, the
marriage knot was tied upon the river bank where first they met; the
river bank where they had parted in anger, and where they had again
scealeld their vows and clasped each other to the heart. And it was very
low water that summer, and the river always thought it was because no
tears dropped into it but so many smiles that like sunshine they dried
it up.

R.R.R.

Finis

* * * * *


CAREERS

November, 187--

Long ago when I used to watch Miss Ross painting the old mill at
Sunnybrook I thought I would be a painter, for Miss Ross went to Paris
France where she bought my bead purse and pink parasol and I thought
I would like to see a street with beautiful bright-colored things
sparkling and hanging in the store windows.

Then when the missionaries from Syria came to stay at the brick house
Mrs. Burch said that after I had experienced religion I must learn music
and train my voice and go out to heathen lands and save souls, so I
thought that would be my career. But we girls tried to have a branch and
be home missionaries and it did not work well. Emma Jane's father would
not let her have her birthday party when he found out what she had done
and Aunt Jane sent me up to Jake Moody's to tell him we did not mean
to be rude when we asked him to go to meeting more often. He said all
right, but just let him catch that little dough-faced Perkins young one
in his yard once more and she'd have reason to remember the call, which
was just as rude and impolite as our trying to lead him to a purer and a
better life.

Then Uncle Jerry and Mr. Aladdin and Miss Dearborn liked my
compositions, and I thought I'd better be a writer, for I must be
something the minute I'm seventeen, or how shall we ever get the
mortgage off the farm? But even that hope is taken away from me now,
for Uncle Jerry made fun of my story Lancelot Or The Parted Lovers and I
have decided to be a teacher like Miss Dearborn.

The pathetic announcement of a change in the career and life purposes of
Rebecca was brought about by her reading the grown-up story to Mr. and
Mrs. Jeremiah Cobb after supper in the orchard. Uncle Jerry was the
person who had maintained all along that Riverboro people would not make
a story; and Lancelot or The Parted Lovers was intended to refute that
assertion at once and forever; an assertion which Rebecca regarded
(quite truly) as untenable, though why she certainly never could have
explained. Unfortunately Lancelot was a poor missionary, quite unfitted
for the high achievements to which he was destined by the youthful
novelist, and Uncle Jerry, though a stage-driver and no reading man, at
once perceived the flabbiness and transparency of the Parted Lovers the
moment they were held up to his inspection.

"You see Riverboro people WILL make a story!" asserted Rebecca
triumphantly as she finished her reading and folded the paper. "And it
all came from my noticing the river drivers' tracks by the roadside, and
wondering about them; and wondering always makes stories; the minister
says so."

"Ye-es," allowed Uncle Jerry reflectively, tipping his chair back
against the apple tree and forcing his slow mind to violent and
instantaneous action, for Rebecca was his pride and joy; a person, in
his opinion, of superhuman talent, one therefore to be "whittled into
shape" if occasion demanded.

"It's a Riverboro story, sure enough, because you've got the river
and the bridge and the hill and the drivers all right there in it; but
there's something awful queer bout it; the folks don't act Riverboro,
and don't talk Riverboro, cordin' to my notions. I call it a reg'lar
book story."

"But," objected Rebecca, "the people in Cinderella didn't act like us,
and you thought that was a beautiful story when I told it to you."

"I know," replied Uncle Jerry, gaining eloquence in the heat of
argument. "They didn't act like us, but 't any rate they acted like
'emselves! Somehow they was all of a piece. Cinderella was a little too
good, mebbe, and the sisters was most too thunderin' bad to live on the
face o' the earth, and that fayry old lady that kep' the punkin' coach
up her sleeve--well, anyhow, you jest believe that punkin' coach, rats,
mice, and all, when you're hearin' bout it, fore ever you stop to think
it ain't so.

"I don' know how tis, but the folks in that Cinderella story seem to
match together somehow; they're all pow'ful onlikely--the prince feller
with the glass slipper, and the hull bunch; but jest the same you kind
o' gulp em all down in a lump. But land, Rebecky, nobody'd swaller that
there village maiden o' your'n, and as for what's-his-name Littlefield,
that come out o' them bushes, such a feller never 'd a' be'n IN bushes!
No, Rebecky, you're the smartest little critter there is in this
township, and you beat your Uncle Jerry all holler when it comes to
usin' a lead pencil, but I say that ain't no true Riverboro story! Look
at the way they talk! What was that' bout being BETROTHED'?"

"Betrothed is a genteel word for engaged to be married," explained the
crushed and chastened author; and it was fortunate the doting old man
did not notice her eyes in the twilight, or he might have known that
tears were not far away.

"Well, that's all right, then; I'm as ignorant as Cooper's cow when
it comes to the dictionary. How about what's-his-name callin' the girl
'Naysweet'?"

"I thought myself that sounded foolish,:" confessed Rebecca; "but it's
what the Doctor calls Cora when he tries to persuade her not to quarrel
with his mother who comes to live with them. I know they don't say it in
Riverboro or Temperance, but I thought perhaps it was Boston talk."

"Well, it ain't!" asserted Mr. Cobb decisively. "I've druv Boston men
up in the stage from Milltown many's the time, and none of em ever
said Naysweet to me, nor nothin'like it. They talked like folks, every
mother's son of em! If I'd a' had that what's-his-name on the harricane
deck' o' the stage and he tried any naysweetin' on me, I'd a' pitched
him into the cornfield, side o' the road. I guess you ain't growed up
enough for that kind of a story, Rebecky, for your poetry can't be beat
in York County, that's sure, and your compositions are good enough to
read out loud in town meetin' any day!"

Rebecca brightened up a little and bade the old couple her usual
affectionate good night, but she descended the hill in a saddened mood.
When she reached the bridge the sun, a ball of red fire, was setting
behind Squire Bean's woods. As she looked, it shone full on the broad,
still bosom of the river, and for one perfect instant the trees on the
shores were reflected, all swimming in a sea of pink. Leaning over the
rail, she watched the light fade from crimson to carmine, from carmine
to rose, from rose to amber, and from amber to gray. Then withdrawing
Lancelot or the Parted Lovers from her apron pocket, she tore the pages
into bits and dropped them into the water below with a sigh.

"Uncle Jerry never said a word about the ending!" she thought; "and that
was so nice!"

And she was right; but while Uncle Jerry was an illuminating critic when
it came to the actions and language of his Riverboro neighbors, he had
no power to direct the young mariner when she "followed the gleam," and
used her imagination.

OUR SECRET SOCIETY

November, 187--

Our Secret society has just had a splendid picnic in Candace Milliken's
barn.

Our name is the B.O.S.S., and not a single boy in the village has been
able to guess it. It means Braid Over Shoulder Society, and that is the
sign. All the members wear one of their braids over the right shoulder
in front; the president's tied with red ribbon (I am the president) and
all the rest tied with blue.

To attract the attention of another member when in company or at a
public place we take the braid between the thumb and little finger and
stand carelessly on one leg. This is the Secret Signal and the password
is Sobb (B.O.S.S. spelled backwards) which was my idea and is thought
rather uncommon.

One of the rules of the B.O.S.S. is that any member may be required to
tell her besetting sin at any meeting, if asked to do so by a majority
of the members.

This was Candace Milliken's idea and much opposed by everybody, but when
it came to a vote so many of the girls were afraid of offending Candace
that they agreed because there was nobody else's father and mother
who would let us picnic in their barn and use their plow, harrow,
grindstone, sleigh, carryall, pung, sled, and wheelbarrow, which we did
and injured hardly anything.

They asked me to tell my besetting sin at the very first meeting, and it
nearly killed me to do it because it is such a common greedy one. It is
that I can't bear to call the other girls when I have found a thick spot
when we are out berrying in the summer time.

After I confessed, which made me dreadfully ashamed, every one of the
girls seemed surprised and said they had never noticed that one but had
each thought of something very different that I would be sure to think
was my besetting sin. Then Emma Jane said that rather than tell hers she
would resign from the Society and miss the picnic. So it made so
much trouble that Candace gave up. We struck out the rule from the
constitution and I had told my sin for nothing.

The reason we named ourselves the B.O.S.S. is that Minnie Smellie has
had her head shaved after scarlet fever and has no braid, so she can't
be a member.

I don't want her for a member but I can't be happy thinking she will
feel slighted, and it takes away half the pleasure of belonging to the
Society myself and being president.

That, I think, is the principal trouble about doing mean and unkind
things; that you can't do wrong and feel right, or be bad and feel good.
If you only could you could do anything that came into your mind yet
always be happy.

Minnie Smellie spoils everything she comes into but I suppose we
other girls must either have our hair shaved and call ourselves The
Baldheadians or let her be some kind of a special officer in the
B.O.S.S.

She might be the B.I.T.U.D. member (Braid in the Upper Drawer), for
there is where Mrs. Smellie keeps it now that it is cut off.

WINTER THOUGHTS

March, 187--

It is not such a cold day for March and I am up in the barn chamber with
my coat and hood on and Aunt Jane's waterproof and my mittens.

After I do three pages I am going to hide away this book in the haymow
till spring.

Perhaps they get made into icicles on the way but I do not seem to have
any thoughts in the winter time. The barn chamber is full of thoughts in
warm weather. The sky gives them to me, and the trees and flowers, and
the birds, and the river; but now it is always gray and nipping, the
branches are bare and the river is frozen.

It is too cold to write in my bedroom but while we still kept an open
fire I had a few thoughts, but now there is an air-tight stove in the
dining room where we sit, and we seem so close together, Aunt Miranda,
Aunt Jane and I that I don't like to write in my book for fear they will
ask me to read out loud my secret thoughts.

I have just read over the first part of my Thought Book and I have
outgrown it all, just exactly as I have outgrown my last year's drab
cashmere.

It is very queer how anybody can change so fast in a few months, but I
remember that Emma Jane's cat had kittens the day my book was bought at
Watson's store. Mrs. Perkins kept the prettiest white one, Abijah Flagg
drowning all the others.

It seems strange to me that cats will go on having kittens when they
know what becomes of them! We were very sad about it, but Mrs. Perkins
said it was the way of the world and how things had to be.

I cannot help being glad that they do not do the same with children, or
John and Jenny Mira Mark and me would all have had stones tied to our
necks and been dropped into the deepest part of Sunny Brook, for Hannah
and Fanny are the only truly handsome ones in the family.

Mrs. Perkins says I dress up well, but never being dressed up it does
not matter much. At least they didn't wait to dress up the kittens to
see how they would improve, before drowning them, but decided right
away.

Emma Jane's kitten that was born the same day this book was is now quite
an old cat who knows the way of the world herself, and how things have
to be, for she has had one batch of kittens drowned already.

So perhaps it is not strange that my Thought Book seems so babyish and
foolish to me when I think of all I have gone through and the millions
of things I have learned, and how much better I spell than I did ten
months ago.

My fingers are cold through the mittens, so good-bye dear Thought Book,
friend of my childhood, now so far far behind me!

I will hide you in the haymow where you'll be warm and cosy all the long
winter and where nobody can find you again in the summer time but your
affectionate author,

Rebecca Rowena Randall.




Fourth Chronicle. A TRAGEDY IN MILLINERY


I

Emma Jane Perkins's new winter dress was a blue and green Scotch plaid
poplin, trimmed with narrow green velvet-ribbon and steel nail-heads.
She had a gray jacket of thick furry cloth with large steel buttons
up the front, a pair of green kid gloves, and a gray felt hat with an
encircling band of bright green feathers. The band began in front with
a bird's head and ended behind with a bird's tail, and angels could have
desired no more beautiful toilette. That was her opinion, and it was
shared to the full by Rebecca.

