surprised. As it happened, however, he did not even know that his
stepbrother had been summoned to the doctor's study. Had he met Herbert,
the later would have told him; but after receiving his list, it so
chanced that he and his friend did not meet.

The fact was that a young man employed as tutor in mathematics in the
academy, while taking an afternoon walk, had seen Mark and James Carson
leaving the liquor saloon, and, as in duty bound, had reported the same
to the principal.

Mr. Triangle, however, had not been observed by either of the two boys,
and therefore they were led off on a false scent.

"What do you think the old man will say?" asked Mark, uneasily, as they
ascended the stairs to the principal's study.

"He'll give us a raking down, I suppose," said James. "He will come
down heavy on us."

"I wish I were out of it."

"Oh, it's not worth minding! We haven't committed murder, have we?
What's the harm in a game of billiards?"

"Not much, perhaps; but the drinking and betting are certainly
objectionable."

The boys knocked at the door, and the full, deep voice of Dr. Brush was
heard to say: "Come in!"




CHAPTER XII

SUSPENDED


Dr. Brush was seated at a table covered with papers, in a large
armchair. He was an elderly man of dignified presence, not a petty
tyrant such as is sometimes found in a similar position, but a man who
commanded respect, without an effort.

Mark Manning and James Carson entered his presence a little nervously.

"Young gentlemen," said the doctor, gravely, "I am informed that you
have violated one of the rules of the academy by frequenting a billiard
saloon where liquor is sold."

"Who told you, sir?" asked Mark.

"That is not to the purpose," said the principal, gravely.

"But I should like to know who informed on me," persisted Mark.

"Whoever did so acted as your true friend, Manning; but there is no
occasion for you to know who it was. Is it true?"

Mark would have been glad to deny the charge, and would not have felt
any scruples about doing so, if it would have done any good. But it was
clear, even to him, that he would not be believed, and that denial would
only make his position worse. So he made a virtue of necessity, and
answered:

"I have been in once or twice, sir."

"Exactly how many times have you been to the saloon?"

"Three times."

"What did you do there?'

"We played billiards."

"Did you order anything at the bar?"

"Yes, sir," said Mark, reluctantly.

"Carson, you accompanied Manning, did you not?" said Dr. Brush, turning
to Mark's companion.

"Yes, sir."

"And I suppose you also played billiards and drank?"

"Well, yes, sir, I believe I did."

"You were aware, were you not, that it was against the regulations of
the school?"

"I suppose it must have slipped my mind," answered James, trying to look
as innocent as possible.

Dr. Brush frowned, for he saw clearly that this was but a subterfuge.

"If this were true," he continued, "it would be no excuse. As students,
it is your duty to make yourselves acquainted with the rules that govern
the institution. In point of fact, I cannot believe that either of you
is ignorant of the rule forbidding students to frequent places where
liquor is sold. It is hardly necessary for me to defend the propriety of
this rule. Intemperance is a fruitful source of vice and crime, and I
cannot allow the youth under by charge to form habits of indulgence
which may blast all their prospects, and lead to the most ruinous
consequences."

"We didn't drink much," said Mark.

"I shall not inquire how much you drank. In drinking a single glass, you
violated the rule of the school, and I cannot pass over it."

"What is he going to do with us, I wonder?" thought Mark.

He was not required to wonder long.

"As this is your first offense, so far as I know," proceeded the
principal, "I will not be severe. You are both suspended from the
institution for the remainder of the term, and are required to leave
Bridgeville by the early train to-morrow morning for your respective
homes. I shall write to your parents, explaining the cause of your
suspension."

But a week remained of the term, and the punishment was mild, but both
boys were mortified and left the study crestfallen.

Mark was the first to recover his spirits.

"It is not so bad, James," he said. "To-morrow will be Saturday, and I
should go home, anyway. I don't mind staying at home next week."

"What will your father say?"

"Oh, I'll make it all right with him! I don't mind much what he says. I
guess he got into scrapes himself when he was a boy."

"My father isn't so easily managed. Just as likely as not, he'll cut off
my allowance for a month; and that'll be no joke!"

"My father won't do that," said Mark. "If he did, I would raise a fuss."

"Would that do any good?"

"I'll bet it would!"

Frank, who was quite ignorant of Mark's trouble, was surprised when the
latter approached him a little later with a frown and said, harshly:

"You won't make anything by what you have done, Frank Courtney!"

"Will you be kind enough to tell me what I have done?" asked Frank,
calmly.

"You've been to Dr. Brush and told him about our playing billiards."

"You are entirely mistaken, Mark. I did not suppose he knew."

"It must have been you. He told us some one had informed him, and you
were the only one who knew. It's a mean trick, isn't it, Carson?"

"Awfully mean!"

"I have already told you that the information did not come from me. It
may be the best thing for you that it has been found out, for it was
doing you no good to frequent such places."

"I don't want to hear any of your preaching, Frank Courtney. I guess I
can manage my own affairs without any advice from you."

"I don't care to intrude any advice," said Frank. "I have not much
reason to feel interested in you."

"You'd better look out how you treat me, though," said Mark, insolently.
"I know very well you dislike me, but it won't be safe for you to show
it while you are a dependent on my father."

"I don't propose to be a dependent on him long," said Frank, quietly.
"The truth of it is, you and your father are dependent upon property
which of right belongs to me. The time may come when I shall be able to
show this."

"What does he mean?" thought Mark, uneasily. "Will he contest the
will?"

It was perhaps an evidence of Mark's shrewdness that he had some doubts
about the validity of the will under which his father inherited.




CHAPTER XIII

MR. MANNING'S NEW PLAN


Mark so represented his school difficulty to his father that he incurred
but slight censure.

Indeed, Mr. Manning was so absorbed in plans for getting the greatest
enjoyment out of the estate of which he had obtained possession by
doubtful means that he didn't care to be disturbed about such a trifle
as his son's suspension.

He felt more disposed to blame Frank, whom Mark charged with betraying
him.

"What does Frank say about it?" asked Mr. Manning.

"Of course he denies it," said Mark, "but it can't be any one else."

"He is acting very unwisely," said Mr. Manning, compressing his thin
lips.

"So I told him, but he said he didn't mean to be a dependent on you
long."

"How is he going to avoid it?'

"I don't know."

"I have had some intimation from Col. Vincent, who appears to be in his
confidence. He wants to leave us."

"To go away?"

"Yes."

"But you won't let him?"

"I have been thinking about that, Mark, and I may give my permission.
The fact is, he stands in the way of some plans I have formed. I am
thinking of traveling."

"Not without me?" said Mark, hastily.

"No; you shall go with me, but I don't care to take Frank."

"You might leave him at school."

"I might, but how do I know that he might not hatch some mischief while
we are gone?"

"He might make some fuss about the property," suggested Mark.

"Has he hinted anything of that kind to you?" asked his father, quickly.

"Yes. Only yesterday he said that the property belonged by right to
him."

Mr. Manning looked thoughtful, and watched Mark narrowly to see if from
his manner he could divine the boy's intentions.

Later that same evening, Mark having retired early in consequence of a
headache, Frank found himself alone with his stepfather, and took
advantage of the opportunity to speak of the plan he had formed.

"Mr. Manning," he said, "if you are at leisure, I should like to speak
with you a few minutes."

"Proceed," said his stepfather, waving his hand.

"But a week remains of the school term. Did you propose that I should
return there at the end of the vacation?"

"Humph! I had not thought much on the subject."

"It has all along been intended that I should go to college when
prepared, but I don't think I care much about it."

"In that case," said his stepfather, with alacrity, "you would only be
throwing away time and money by going."

He was quite ready to agree to Frank's surrender of the college plan for
two reasons.

A college course would be expensive. Again, should he turn his attention
to the law, he might hereafter give him trouble about the estate.

"I don't think I should throw away my time, for, if I went to college, I
should go there to work faithfully; but I have a fancy for a more
stirring life."

"It might be a good plan for you to learn a trade," said Mr. Manning,
reflectively.

"Learn a trade!" exclaimed Frank, in surprise.

"Yes; it would always enable you to earn a living."

"Do you intend Mark to learn a trade?" asked Frank, quickly.

"No; his case is very different from yours."

"Why it is different?"

"It is not necessary for me to explain," answered his stepfather,
stiffly.

"If there were any need of it, Mr. Manning, I would not object to learn
a trade," said Frank. "I have no false pride on the subject. But my
tastes are more for mercantile business."

"I may be able to find you a place somewhere. I have a friend in the
dry-goods business, who would receive you at my recommendation."

"Thank you!" said Frank, hastily. "But if you will allow me, I would
prefer to look around for myself."

"What is it you want, then?"

"Your permission to go out into the world, and try to make a living."

"And if you don't," said Mr. Manning, "I suppose you expect me to
defray your expenses?"

"If I did have such an expectation, I think I should be justified, in
view of the large property which my mother left," said Frank, pointedly.

"She left it to me," said his stepfather.

"So it appears, at any rate. But I shall not call upon you to pay my
board. Give me your permission to go where I please, with a small sum of
money to start me, and I shall be satisfied."

"And what will the world say? That I, your stepfather, to whom you have
a right to look for maintenance, had driven you out to earn your living!
It would be unjust, of course, but the world is ever unjust."

And Mr. Manning assumed a look of wronged innocence, which would have
imposed on anyone who knew him but slightly.

"I shall defend you from any such charge," said Frank. "I shall say that
you were only yielding to my request."

"I will think of it, my dear boy," said Mr. Manning, graciously. "I
already feel inclined to grant it, because it is your request. I shall
be sorry to be separated from you; but I am willing to sacrifice my own
feelings, if it will give you pleasure."

This did not impose upon Frank, who had a correct idea of the degree of
fondness which Mr. Manning had for his society, but he was too well
satisfied with the prospect of obtaining the permission he desired to
imply any doubts.

"Again," continued his stepfather, "whatever you may say to the
contrary, I know that the world will censure me; but I shall have the
approval of my own conscience, and with that I can defy the world."

Mr. Manning certainly did look like a righteous man when he said this,
and he beamed upon his stepson with a glance that was actually
affectionate.

"Go back to school," ho said, "and when you return I shall be able to
give you a definite answer."

Indeed, nothing could have suited Mr. Manning's plans better. He would
get rid of the care and nearly the whole expense of his obnoxious
stepson, while with his son Mark he would be spending the revenues of
the estate which belonged to Frank.

During the coming week he arranged his plans for a prolonged absence
from the Cedars. He wrote to New York to engage passage on a steamer
bound for Liverpool, and quietly waited for the end of Frank's school
term to release him from a care which had grown burdensome.

Frank returned to the Bridgeville Academy without Mark. As may be
supported, however, he did not feel the loss of his society.

He at once communicated to his chosen friend, Herbert Grant, his
probable departure from school.

