It required but a short time, when he reached his hand to the lad, and
shook it for the third or fourth time, smiling at the same time in his old
jolly way, as he rose rather unsteadily upon his pins.

"I'll have to wait a while till the kink gets out of me legs, before I
give ye the Donnybrook jig, but I make the engagement wid ye, and the
thing is down for performance, do ye mind that? And now, me laddy, we must
thravel. Are ye hungry?"

"Yes."

"I have a bite saved that'll do ye till the morrow. When ye waltzed out
the cave and left me to meself, I felt there was no knowing how long I'd
have to stay behind, so I knocked off both eating and drinking, with the
idea of getting used to going without anything."

As they were able to talk more understandingly, the two explained their
experiences since they had parted. They could not fail to be interesting
in both cases. When they had finished, Mickey O'Rooney had about recovered
from the terrible strain he had undergone in clambering out the cave,
barring a little ache in his arms and legs.

"Now, me laddy, we must emigrate, as there ain't anything to be gained by
loafing round here, as the gals used to tell the chaps when they tried to
cut me out. The first thing to larn is whether the hoss that I lift some
distance away is still there cropping the grass. If he is, then we shall
have small work in making our way back to New Boston; but if he has
emigrated ahead of us thar, we must hunt for others."

"There's no need of going that far."

"Why not?"

"Because the mustangs of the Apaches are right over yonder behind those
rocks."

"That's good; let's take a look at the same."

They hurried over to the spot where the half dozen mustangs were tethered.
They were lying upon the ground, taking their sleep, having finished a
bounteous meal. The intelligent creatures showed their training by
throwing up their heads the instant the two came in sight, and several
gave utterance to whinneys, no doubt with the purpose of apprising their
masters of the approach of strangers. None of them rose to their feet,
however, and Mickey and Fred moved about, inspecting them as best they
could in the moonlight, with the purpose of selecting the best.

"They're all a fine lot, as the neighbors used to say, after inspicting me
father's family, and it's hard to make up your mind which is the best, but
here is one that shtrikes me fancy. Get up wid ye."

The steed, spoken to in this peremptory manner, leaped to his feet, and
stood in all his graceful and beautiful proportions, an equine gem, which
could not fail to command admiration.

"I think he'll suit," said the Irishman, after a careful examination. "I
think he can run as well as any of 'em. I'll tell you what we'll do, me
laddy. We'll both mount this one, and ride till we reach the place where I
lift mine, when we'll have one apiece."

"But if yours isn't there?"

"Then we'll kaap this one betwaan us, as the gals used to say, when they
quarreled over me."

"Hadn't I better take one of the horses, and if we find yours, why, we can
turn one of these loose, and we shall be all right, no matter how the
things turn out?"

"It's not a bad idaa," assented the Irishman. "Pick yours out, and then
we'll turn the others loose."

"Why will you do that?"

"What's the use of laving them here? Them spalpeens will find their way
out of the cave before long, and then they will strike straight for these
animals, and, if they happen to get out pretty soon, they'll make trouble
with us. We might as well let 'em walk awhile."

"How are they going to get out?"

"Didn't ye lave the lasso hanging down into the cave?"

"I declare, I never thought of that!" exclaimed the affrighted lad. "Why
didn't you tell me?"

And he started to repair the oversight, when Mickey caught his arm and
checked him.

"Not so, me son; lave it as it is. If we should go away and lave the
spalpeens down there without the rope, they might never find the way out,
and would starve to death, and it would always grieve me to think I had
starved six Apaches to death, instead of affording meself some enjoyment
by cracking 'em over the head wid a shillelah."

"I should be sorry to do that," replied Fred, who comprehended the cruelty
of leaving the poor fellows to perish, as they were likely to do if left
without the means of escape; "but, if we leave the rope hanging there, the
whole party will be up here before we can get out of the way, and then
what shall we do?"

"Niver fear, niver fear," said Mickey, with a wave of his hand and a
magisterial shake of the head. "The spalpeens have got enough of climbing
up there for a while. They've gone off on a hunt through the cavern for
the place where you crawled out, and they'll kaap at that till morning,
and then, if there's no show for 'em, they'll come back, and begin to fool
around the rope again."

The lad had little difficulty in deciding upon his steed, which was a
coal-black mustang, lithe and willowy, and apparently of a good
disposition, although that was necessarily a matter of conjecture, for the
present. There were no saddles upon any of the horses, and nothing but the
rudest kind of bridle, consisting of a thong of twisted bull's hide, and
reaching away to some limb or tree, so as to give the animal plenty of
grazing area. The lariats of the other four were cut--so that, when they
arose, they would find themselves at liberty to go whither they
chose--after which the two approached their respective prizes and prepared
to mount.

Both were good riders, although, being compelled to go it bareback, they
felt some misgivings as to the result. Fred's mustang was rather under
size, so that he was able to vault upon him from the ground without
difficulty. After patting him on the neck and speaking soothingly to him,
with a view to disarming him of all timidity, the lad leaped lightly upon
his back.

The steed showed at once that he did not like this familiarity, and reared
and plunged and shook his head in a vicious way, but he toned down
somewhat after a time, and seemed disposed to compromise matters until he
learned something about his rider.

"Ye're going to become a good rider--that is, in the course of twenty or
thirty years," remarked Mickey, who had been watching his young friend
closely, "if ye practice aich day in those thirty years; but I want you to
observe _my_ shtyle--note how complately I bring the animal under, how
docile he becomes, how mild, how gentle, how lamblike."

And with these rather pompous observations, he laid his hand upon the mane
of his mustang, and at one bound bestrode him, catching the lariat after
the manner of one who was determined to have no nonsense about it.

"Now note how quick I'll subdue him, how afeard he'll be, you can't goad
him into trying to throw me. Talk about Rarey breaking that old horse
Cruiser, that used to ate his keeper every day for breakfast, he couldn't
compare wid mesilf."

Before Mickey had time to finish his observation, the heels of the mustang
went up almost perpendicularly in the air, and with such suddenness that
Mickey was thrown a dozen feet over his head, alighting upon his hands and
knees.

Fred was amused beyond expression at the discomfiture of his boasting
friend, who was not a little astonished at the manner in which he had been
overthrown.

"Turns up," he said, as he gathered himself on his feet again, "that I was
a little mistook. Such accidents will happen now and then, and it isn't
very kind for a spalpeen like yourself to laugh at me sorrow."

"I can't help it, Mickey, but I'm afraid I can't stick to the back of this
horse. He seems scared and mad, and his back feels mighty slippery without
any saddle or blanket."

"Maybe, if I get on wid ye, the weight of us both will hold him down."

The mustang which hard thrown the Irishman continued to flourish his heels
and disport himself in such a lively style, that his spirit became
contagious, and the four, who were yet upon the ground, now came to their
feet, and after some plunging and rearing, made a rush down the slope, and
were soon out of sight.

The animal ridden by the lad showed a disposition to join them, but the
rider resisted, and managed to hold him, until at the opportune moment,
Mickey placed himself on his back, and, as he was really a good horseman,
and used vigorous means, he speedily managed to bring him under control.
Turning his head toward the ridge, they started him forward, pausing near
the mouth of the cavern long enough to gather up one of the blankets lying
there, as it was likely to be useful at no distant time.




CHAPTER XI.

THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS.


The moon was high in the sky, and it was near midnight. O'Rooney, who had
taken upon himself the task of guiding the mustang, continued him on up
the ridge, directly toward the spot where Fred had lain so long watching
the action of the Apaches gathered around the opening of the cave.

The mustang walked along quite obediently, seeming to feel the load no
more than if it was only one half as great. But those animals are like
their native masters--cunning and treacherous, ready to take advantage of
their riders whenever it happens to come in their way.

"Which is the raison I cautions ye to be riddy for a fall," said Mickey,
after referring to some of the peculiarities of these steeds of the
Southwest. "The minute he gits it into his head that we ain't paying
attention, he'll rear up on his fore-feet, and walk along that way for
half a mile. Not having any saddle, we'll have to slide over his neck,
unless I can brace me feet agin his ears, and ride along standing straight
up."

The constant expectation of being flung over the head of a horse is not
the most comforting sensation that one can have, and the lad clung fast to
his friend in front, determined not to go, unless in his company. Upon
reaching the top of the ridge, the horse was reined up for a few minutes,
as Mickey, like the mariner at sea, was desirous of taking an observation,
so as to prevent himself going astray.

"Can you remember how you were placed?" asked the lad, after he had spent
several minutes in the survey; "that is, do you know which way to go for
the horse you left eating grass?"

"I was a little puzzled at first, as me father obsarved to the
school-teacher when he said I had been a good boy, but I see how it is
now. It must have been that I got a little turned round when I was down in
the basemint of these mountains, but I see how it is now. Right yonder,"
he added, pointing toward the Northwest, "is where I left my hoss, and
there is where I hope I'll find him again."

"Is the road so that we can ride the mustang all the way there, or must we
walk?"

"I remember I come right along some kind of a path, made by animals, after
leaving the beast. I s'pose it's the route taken by the crathurs in going
to the water, for there's a splendid spring right there, and the path that
I was just tilling you 'bout leads straight to it."

"Then keep the horse from throwing us off, and we're all right. After we
find your horse, Mickey, or don't find him, what are we to do, then?"

"Set sail for New Boston."

"But we can't ride through these mountains, if we don't find the pass."

"And the same is what we're going to do, barring that it hasn't been lost
yet."

"Are you sure you know the way to it from where you left your horse? I've
been hunting for it for hours, but couldn't any more tell where it was
than the man in the moon. What course would you have to take to reach it?"

"Right off yonder," replied Mickey, pointing to the left.

"And I was sure that it was here," said Fred, pointing his hand in nearly
an opposite direction.

"Which the same is a good raison why you're wrong. When you git lost, and
think you're on the right way, ye may be sure that ye're wrong; and after
figuring the whole thing over, and getting sartin of the right coorse, all
you've got to do is not to take it, and ye're sartin of saving yerself."

"Then, according to that, you ought not to take the route which you have
said is the right one."

"I'm spaking for lost spalpeens like yoursilf," said Mickey, severely. "I
haven't been lost since I parted company with Soot Simpson, and, begorrah,
that minds me that we ought to saa something of him. Just look around and
obsarve whether he is standing anywhere beckoning to us."

Both used their eyes to the extent of their ability, but were unable to
discover anything that bore a suspicious resemblance to a man.

So far as they could judge, they were entirely alone in this vast
solitude.

"Do you expect to meet Sut very soon?"'

"Av coorse I do; why shouldn't I?"

"But he went another way from you altogether after Lone Wolf."

"That's just it. He wint another way, and wint wrong, and he has been gone
long 'nough to find out the same."

"When he will turn back and follow you?"

"As soon as he finds he's wrong, he'll go right, and as I wint right,
he'll be on my heels."

"But you know both of us have strayed a good deal off the track, and we
have traveled in many places, where we haven't made the slightest trail.
How is he going to follow us then?"

The Irishman gave utterance to a scornful exclamation.

"I've been with that Soot Simpson long enough to learn something. I've
saan some specimens of what he kin do. Rocks don't make no difference to
him. When he gits on the track of a wild bird, if it don't take extra
pains to dodge and double, he'll foller its trail through the air. Oh,
he's there all the time, and the wonder with me is that he hasn't turned
up before."

"What would he have done had he come along and found us both in the cave,
and the Apaches watching?"

"He would have tracked that wolf back to his hole, come in and fetched us
out, and then slipped up behind the six, and tumbled them all in like so
many tenpins."

"If he's such a wonderful man as that, it's a pity we couldn't have kept
him with us all the time, and if we do run against him, we can afford to
stop thinking about Apaches, as they will be of no account."

"Yees are right; but the trouble is to find him, as the man said when the
British Government condemned John Mitchel, and him thousands of miles away
in Ameriky. This thramping about at night in the mountains isn't the
aisiest way to diskiver a man, and it's him that will have to find us,
instead of we him. But we'll keep it up."

If the Apache mustang which they were riding meditated any mischief, he
seemed to be of the opinion that the occasion was not the most suitable.
He walked along with great docility and care, picking his way with a skill
that was wonderful. Several times they approached places where it seemed
impossible for an equine to go forward, but the horse scarcely hesitated,
toiling onward like an Alpine chamois, until, at last, they drew up in a
small valley, through the middle of which ran a small stream, that
sparkled brightly in the moonlight.

"Here we are," said Mickey. "here's the spot where I left my cratur a
couple of days ago, and where I don't see him just now. Use your eyes a
bit, and tell me whether you obsarve him."

Fred was scarcely less anxious than his friend to recover the steed, for,
recalling his experience in that line, he had good reason to mistrust
Indian horses. It would be very awkward, when they should find a party of
