again, Tayoga?" he asked.

"No, the danger is too great," replied the Onondaga. "They know now that
we're watching."

An hour passed without any further sign from the foe. The rain decreased
somewhat in violence, but, as the wind rose, its rush and sweep made as
much sound as ever. Then the waiting was broken by scattering shots,
accompanied by detached war whoops, as if different bands were near.
From their shelter they watched the red dots that marked the discharges
from the rifles, but only one bullet came near them, and after chipping
a piece of stone over their heads it dropped harmlessly to the floor.

"That was the one chance out of a hundred," said Willet, "and now we're
safe from the next ninety-nine bullets."

"I trust the rule will work," said Robert.

"I wish you'd hold my left hand in a firm grip," said Willet.

"I will, but why?" returned the youth.

"If I get a chance I'm going to drag up some of that dead and floating
wood and lay it along the edge of the shelf. In the dark the savages
can't pick us off, but we'll need a barrier in the morning."

"You're right, Dave, of course. I'm sorry I didn't think of it myself."

"One of us thought of it, and that's enough. Hold my hand hard, Robert.
Don't let your grip slip."

By patient waiting and help from the others Willet was able to draw up
two logs of fair size, and some smaller pieces which they placed
carefully on the edge of the stone shelf. Lying flat behind them, they
would be almost hidden, and now they could await the coming of daylight
with more serenity.

A long time passed. The three ate strips of the deer meat, and Robert
even slept for a short while. He awoke to find a further decrease in the
rain, although the river was still rising, and Tayoga and Willet were of
the opinion that it would stop soon, a belief that was justified in an
hour. Robert soon afterward saw the clouds move away, and disclose a
strip of dark blue sky, into which the stars began to come one by one.

"The night will grow light soon," said Tayoga, "then it will darken
again for a little time before the coming of the day."

"And we've built our breastwork none too soon," said Willet. "There'll
be so many stars by and by that those fellows can pick out our place and
send their bullets to it. What do you think, Tayoga? Is it just a band
taking the chance to get some scalps, or are they sent out by the
Governor General of Canada to do wicked work in the forest and then be
disowned if need be?"

"I cannot tell," replied the Onondaga. "Much goes on in the land of
Onontio at Stadacona (Quebec). He talks long in whispers with the
northern chiefs, and often he does not let his left ear know what the
right ear hears. Onontio moves in the night, while Corlear sleeps."

"That may be so, Tayoga, but whether it's so or not I like our
straightforward English and American way best. We may blunder along for
a while and lose at first, but to be open and honest is to be strong."

"I did not say the ways of Corlear would prevail. It is not the talk of
Corlear that will keep the Hodenosaunee faithful to the English side,
but it is the knowledge of the fifty sachems that when Onontio is
speaking in a voice of honey he is to be trusted the least."

Willet laughed.

"I understand, Tayoga," he said. "You're for us not because you have so
much faith in Corlear, but because you have less in Onontio. Well, it's
a good enough reason, I suppose. But all Frenchmen are not tricksters.
Most of 'em are brave, and when they're friends they're good and true.
About all I've got to say against 'em is that they're willing to shut
their eyes to the terrible things their allies do in their name. But
I've had a lot to do with 'em on the border, and you can get to like
'em. Now, that St. Luc we met was a fine upstanding man."

"But if an enemy, an enemy to be dreaded," said Tayoga with his usual
gravity.

"I wouldn't mind that if it came to war. In such cases the best men make
the best enemies, I suppose. He had a sharp eye. I could see how he
measured us, and reckoned us up, but he looked most at Robert here."

"His sharp eye recognized that I was the most important of the three,"
said Robert lightly.

"Every fellow is mighty important to himself," said Willet, "and he
can't get away from it. Tayoga, do you think you see figures moving on
the other bank there, up the stream?"

"Two certainly, others perhaps, Great Bear," replied the Onondaga. "I
might reach one with my rifle."

"Don't try it, Tayoga. We're on the defense, and we'll let 'em make all
the beginnings. The sooner they shoot away their ammunition the better
it will be for us. I think they'll open fire pretty soon now, because
the night is growing uncommon bright. The stars are so big and shining,
and there are so many of them they all look as if they had come to a
party. Flatten yourselves down, boys! I can see a figure kneeling by a
bowlder and that means one shot, if not more."

They lay close and Robert was very thankful now for the logs they had
dragged up from the water, as they afforded almost complete shelter. The
crouching warrior farther up the stream fired, and his bullet struck the
hollow above their heads.

"A better aim than they often show," said Willet.

More shots were fired, and one buried itself in the log in front of
Robert. He heard the thud made by the bullet as it entered, and once
more he was thankful for their rude breastwork. But it was the only one
that struck so close and presently the savages ceased their fire,
although the besieged three were still able to see them in the brilliant
moonlight among the bowlders.

"They're getting a bit too insolent," said the hunter. "Maybe they think
it's a shorter distance from them to us than it is from us to them, and
that our bullets would drop before they got to 'em. I think, Tayoga,
I'll prove that it's not so."

"Choose the man at the edge of the water," said Tayoga. "He has fired
three shots at us, and we should give him at least one in return."

"I'll pay the debt, Tayoga."

Robert saw the warrior, his head and shoulders and painted chest
appearing above the stone. The distance was great for accuracy, but the
light was brilliant, and the rifle of the hunter rose to his shoulder.
The muzzle bore directly upon the naked chest, and when Willet pulled
the trigger a stream of fire spurted from the weapon.

The savage uttered a cry, shot forward and fell into the stream. His
lifeless body tossed like dead wood on the swift current, reappeared and
floated by the little fortress of the three. Robert shuddered as he saw
the savage face again, and then he saw it no more.

The savages uttered a shout of grief and rage over the loss of the
warrior, but the besieged were silent. Willet, as he reloaded his rifle,
gave it an affectionate little pat or two.

"It's a good weapon," he said, "and with a fair light I was sure I
wouldn't miss. We've given 'em fair warning that they've got a nest of
panthers here to deal with, and that when they attack they're taking
risks. Can you see any of 'em now, Tayoga?"

"All have taken to cover. There is not one among them who is willing to
face again the rifle of the Great Bear."

Willet smiled with satisfaction at the compliment. He was proud of his
sharp-shooting, and justly so, but he said modestly:

"I had a fair target, and it will do for a warning. I think we can look
for another long rest now."

The dark period that precedes the dawn came, and then the morning
flashed over the woods. Robert, from the hollow, looking across the far
shore, saw lofty, wooded hills and back of them blue mountains. Beads of
rain stood on the leaves, and the wilderness seemed to emerge, fresh and
dripping, from a glorious bath. Pleasant odors of the wild came to him,
and now he felt the sting of imprisonment there among the rocks. He
wished they could go at once on their errand. It was a most unfortunate
chance to have been found there by the Indians and to be held
indefinitely in siege. The flooded river would have borne them swiftly
in their canoe toward the St. Lawrence.

"Mourning, Robert?" said Willet who noticed his face.

"For the moment, yes," admitted young Lennox, "but it has passed. I
wanted to be going on this lively river and through the green wood, but
since I have to wait I can do it."

"I feel the same way about it, and we're lucky to have such a fort as
the one we are in. I think the savages will hang on here for a long
while. Indians always have plenty of time. That's why they're more
patient than white men. Like as not we won't get a peep out of them all
the morning."

"Lennox feels the beauty of the day," said Tayoga, "and that's why he
wants to leave the hollow and go into the woods. But if Lennox will only
think he'll know that other days as fine will come."

The eye of the young Onondaga twinkled as he delivered his jesting
advice.

"I'll be as patient as I can," replied Robert in the same tone, "but
tomorrow is never as good as today. I wait like you and Dave only
because I have to do so."

"In the woods you must do as the people who live there do," said the
hunter philosophically. "They learn how to wait when they're young. We
don't know how long we'll be here. A little more of the deer, Tayoga.
It's close to the middle of the day now and we must keep our strength. I
wish we had better water than that of a flooded and muddy river to
drink, but it's water, anyhow."

They ate, drank and refreshed themselves and another long period of
inaction followed. The warriors--at intervals--fired a few shots but
they did no damage. Only one entered the hollow, and it buried itself
harmlessly in their wooden barrier. They suffered from nothing except
the soreness and stiffness that came from lying almost flat and so long
in one position. The afternoon, cloudless and brilliant, waned, and the
air in the recess grew warm and heavy. Had it not been for the necessity
of keeping guard Robert could have gone to sleep again. The flood in the
river passed its zenith and was now sinking visibly. No more trees or
bushes came floating on the water. Willet showed disappointment over the
failure of the besiegers to make any decided movement.

"I was telling you, Robert, a while ago," he said, "that Indians mostly
have a lot of time, but I'm afraid the band that's cornered us here has
got too much. They may send out a warrior or two to hunt, and the others
may sit at a distance and wait a week for us to come out. At least it
looks that way to a 'possum up a tree. What do you think of it, Tayoga?"

"The Great Bear is right," replied the Onondaga. "He is always right
when he is not wrong."

"Come now, Tayoga, are you making game of me?"

"Not so, my brother, because the Great Bear is nearly always right and
very seldom wrong. It is given only to Manitou never to be wrong."

"That's better, Tayoga. If I can keep up a high average of accuracy I'm
satisfied."

Tayoga's English was always precise and a trifle bookish, like that of a
man speaking a language he has learned in a school, which in truth was
the case with the Onondaga. Like the celebrated Thayendanegea, the
Mohawk, otherwise known as Joseph Brant, he had been sent to a white
school and he had learned the English of the grammarian. Willet too
spoke in a manner much superior to that of the usual scout and hunter.

"If the Indians post lines out of range and merely maintain a watch what
will we do?" asked Robert. "I, for one, don't want to stay here
indefinitely."

"Nor do any of us," replied Willet. "We ought to be moving. A long delay
here won't help us. We've got to think of something."

The two, actuated by the same impulse, looked at Tayoga. He was very
thoughtful and presently glanced up at the heavens.

"What does the Great Bear think of the sky?" he asked.

"I think it's a fine sky, Tayoga," Willet replied with a humorous
inflection. "But I've always admired it, whether it's blue or gray or
just black, spangled with stars."

Tayoga smiled.

"What does the Great Bear think of the sky?" he repeated. "Do the signs
say to him that the coming night will be dark like the one that has just
gone before?"

"They say it will be dark, Tayoga, but I don't believe we'll have the
rain again."

"We do not want the rain, but we do want the dark. Tonight when the moon
and stars fail to come we must leave the hollow."

"By what way, Tayoga?"

The Onondaga pointed to the river.

"We have the canoe," he said.

"But if they should hear or see us we'd make a fine target in it," said
Robert.

"We won't be in it," said the Onondaga, "although our weapons and
clothes will."

"Ah, I understand! We're to launch the canoe, put in it everything
including our clothes, except ourselves, and swim by the side of it.
Three good swimmers are we, Tayoga, and I believe we can do it."

The Onondaga looked at Willet, who nodded his approval.

"The chances will favor us, and we'd better try it," he said, "that is,
if the night is dark, as I think it will be."

"Then it is agreed," said Robert.

"It is so," said Tayoga.

No more words were needed, and they strengthened their hearts for the
daring attempt, waiting patiently for the afternoon to wane and die into
the night, which, arrived moonless and starless and heavy with dark, as
they had hoped and predicted. Just before, a little spasmodic firing
came from the besiegers, but they did not deign to answer. Instead they
waited patiently until the night was far advanced and then they prepared
quickly for running the gauntlet, a task that would require the greatest
skill, courage and presence of mind. Robert's heart beat hard. Like the
others he was weary of the friendly hollow that had served them so well,
and the murmuring of the river, as it flowed, invited them to come on
and use it as the road of escape.

The three took off all their clothing and disposed everything carefully
in the canoe, laying the rifles on top where they could be reached with
a single swift movement of the arm. Then they stared up and down the
stream, and listened with all their powers of hearing. No savage was to
be seen nor did anyone make a sound that reached the three, although
Robert knew they lay behind the rocks not so very far away.

"They're not stirring, Tayoga," whispered the hunter. "Perhaps they
think we don't dare try the river, and in this case as in most others
the boldest way is the best. Take the other end of the canoe, and we'll
lift it down gently."

He and the Onondaga lowered the canoe so slowly that it made no splash
when it took the water, and then the three lowered themselves in turn,
sinking into the stream to their throats.

"Keep close to the bank," whispered the hunter, "and whatever you do
don't make any splash as you swim."

The three were on the side of the craft next to the cliff and their
heads did not appear above its side. Then the canoe moved down the
stream at just about the speed of the current, and no human hands
appeared, nor was any human agency visible. It was just a wandering
little boat, set adrift upon the wilderness waters, a light shell, but
with an explorer's soul. It moved casually along, keeping nearest to the
cliff, the safest place for so frail a structure, hesitating two or
three times at points of rocks, but always making up its mind to go on
once more, and see where this fine but strange river led.

Luckily it was very dark by the cliff. The shadows fell there like black
blankets, and no eye yet rested upon the questing canoe which kept its
way, idly exploring the reaches of the river. Gasna Gaowo, this bark
canoe of red elm, was not large, but it was a noble specimen of its
kind, a forest product of Onondaga patience and skill. On either side
near the prow was painted in scarlet a great eagle's eye, and now the
two large red eyes of the canoe gazed ahead into the darkness, seeking
to pierce the unknown.

The canoe went on with a gentle, rocking motion made by the current,
strayed now and then a little way from the cliff, but always came back
to it. The pair of great red eyes stared at the cliff so close and at
the other cliff farther away and at the middle of the stream, which was
now tranquil and unruffled by the wreckage of the forest blown into the
water by the storm. The canoe also looked into one or two little coves,
and seeing nothing there but the river edge bubbling against the stone,
went on, came to a curve, rounded it in an easy, sauntering but skillful
fashion, and entered a straight reach of the stream.

So far the canoe was having a lone and untroubled journey. The river
widening now and flowing between descending banks was wholly its own,
but clinging to the habit it had formed when it started it still hung to
the western bank. The night grew more and more favorable to the
undiscovered voyage it wished to make. Masses of clouds gathered and
hovered over that particular river, as if they had some especial object
in doing so, and they made the night so dark that the red eyes of the
canoe, great in size though they were, could see but a little way down
the stream. Yet it kept on boldly and there was a purpose in its course.
Often it seemed to be on the point of recklessly running against the
rocky shore, but always it sheered off in time, and though its advance
