muscles.

"You know the boys that will go to school. Is there any one that can
master you?" asked his visitor.

"No, I don't think there is," answered James, with a smile.

"Then you'll do. Let 'em know you are not afraid of them the first day.
That's the best advice I can give you."

"I shouldn't like to get into a fight with a pupil," said James,
slowly.

"You'll have to run the risk of it unless you teach a girls' school. I
guess you wouldn't have any trouble there."

"Not of that kind, probably. What wages do you pay?"

"Twelve dollars a month and board. Of course, you'll board round."

Twelve dollars a month would not be considered very high wages now, but
to James it was a consideration. He had earned as much in other ways,
but he was quite anxious to try his luck as a teacher. That might be his
future vocation, not teaching a district school, of course, but this
would be the first round of the ladder that might lead to a college
professorship. The first step is the most difficult, but it must be
taken, and the Ledge Hill School, difficult as it probably would be, was
to be the first step for the future President of Hiram College.

All these considerations James rapidly revolved in his mind, and then he
came to a decision.

"When does the school commence?" he asked.

"Next Monday."

"I accept your offer. I'll be on hand in time."

       *       *       *       *       *

The news quickly reached the Ledge Hill district that "Jim Garfield," as
he was popularly called, was to be their next teacher.

"Have you heard about the new master?" asked Tom Bassett, one of the
hard cases, of a friend.

"No. Who is it?"

"Jim Garfield."

The other whistled.

"You don't mean it?"

"Yes, I do."

"How did you hear?"

"Mr. ----," naming the committee-man, "told me."

"Then it must be so. We'll have a high old time if that's so."

"So we will," chuckled the other. "I'm anxious for school to begin."

"He's only a boy like us."

"That's so."

"He knows enough for a teacher; but knowing isn't everything."

"You're right. We can't be expected to mind a boy like ourselves that
we've known all our lives."

"Of course not."

"I like Jim well enough. He's a tip-top feller; but, all the same, he
aint goin' to boss me round."

"Nor me, either."

This conversation between Tom Bassett and Bill Stackpole (for obvious
reasons I use assumed names) augured ill for the success of the young
teacher. They determined to make it hot for him, and have all the fun
they wanted.

They thought they knew James Garfield, but they made a mistake. They
knew that he was of a peaceable disposition and not fond of quarreling,
and although they also knew that he was strong and athletic, they
decided that he would not long be able to maintain his position. If they
had been able to read the doubts and fears that agitated the mind of
their future preceptor, they would have felt confirmed in their belief.

The fact was, James shrank from the ordeal that awaited him.

"If I were only going among strangers," he said to his mother, "I
wouldn't mind it so much; but all these boys and girls have known me
ever since I was a small boy and went barefoot."

"Does your heart fail you, my son?" asked his mother, who sympathized
with him, yet saw that it was a trial which must come.

"I can't exactly say that, but I dread to begin."

"We must expect to encounter difficulties and perplexities, James. None
of our lives run all smoothly. Shall we conquer them or let them conquer
us?"

The boy's spirit was aroused.

"Say no more, mother," he replied. "I will undertake the school, and if
success is any way possible, I will succeed. I have been shrinking from
it, but I won't shrink any longer."

"That is the spirit that succeeds, James."

James laughed, and in answer quoted Campbell's stirring lines with
proper emphasis:

  "I will victor exult, or in death be laid low,
  With my face to the field and my feet to the foe."

So the time passed till the eventful day dawned on which James was to
assume charge of his first school. He was examined, and adjudged to be
qualified to teach; but that he anticipated in advance.

The building is still standing in which James taught his first school.
It is used for quite another purpose now, being occupied as a
carriage-house by the thrifty farmer who owns the ground upon which it
stands. The place where the teacher's desk stood, behind which the boy
stood as preceptor, is now occupied by two stalls for carriage-horses.
The benches which once contained the children he taught have been
removed to make room for the family carriage, and the play-ground is now
a barnyard. The building sits upon a commanding eminence known as Ledge
Hill, and overlooks a long valley winding between two lines of hills.

This description is furnished by the same correspondent of the Boston
_Herald_ to whom I am already indebted for Henry Boynton's reminiscences
contained in the last chapter.

When James came in sight, and slowly ascended the hill in sight of the
motley crew of boys and girls who were assembled in front of the
school-house on the first morning of the term, it was one of the most
trying moments of his life. He knew instinctively that the boys were
anticipating the fun in store for them in the inevitable conflict which
awaited him, and he felt constrained and nervous. He managed, however,
to pass through the crowd, wearing a pleasant smile and greeting his
scholars with a bow. There was trouble coming, he was convinced, but he
did not choose to betray any apprehension.




CHAPTER XII.

WHO SHALL BE MASTER?


With as much dignity as was possible under the circumstances, James
stepped to the teacher's desk and rang the bell.

This was hardly necessary, for out of curiosity all the scholars had
promptly followed the young teacher into the school-room and taken their
seats.

After the introductory exercises, James made a brief address to the
scholars:

"I don't need any introduction to you," he said, "for you all know me. I
see before me many who have been my playfellows and associates, but
to-day a new relation is established between us. I am here as your
teacher, regularly appointed by the committee, and it is my duty to
assist you as far as I can to increase your knowledge. I should hardly
feel competent to do so if I had not lately attended Geauga Seminary,
and thus improved my own education. I hope you will consider me a
friend, not only as I have been, but as one who is interested in
promoting your best interests. One thing more," he added, "it is not
only my duty to teach you, but to maintain good order, and this I mean
to do. In school I wish you to look upon me as your teacher, but outside
I shall join you in your sports, and be as much a boy as any of you. We
will now proceed to our daily lessons."

This speech was delivered with self-possession, and favorably impressed
all who heard it, even the boys who meant to make trouble, but they
could not give up their contemplated fun. Nevertheless, by tacit
agreement, they preserved perfect propriety for the present. They were
not ready for the explosion.

The boy teacher was encouraged by the unexpected quiet.

"After all," he thought, "everything is likely to go smoothly. I need
not have troubled myself so much."

He knew the usual routine at the opening of a school term. The names of
the children were to be taken, they were to be divided into classes, and
lessons were to be assigned. Feeling more confidence in himself, James
went about this work in business fashion, and when recess came, the
comments made by the pupils in the playground were generally favorable.

"He's going to make a good teacher," said one of the girls, "as good as
any we've had, and he's so young too."

"He goes to work as if he knew how," said another. "I didn't think Jimmy
Garfield had so much in him."

"Oh, he's smart!" said another. "Just think of brother Ben trying to
keep school, and he's just as old as James."

Meanwhile Tom Bassett and Bill Stackpole had a private conference
together.

"What do you think of Jim's speech, Bill?" asked Tom.

"Oh, it sounded well enough, but I'll bet he was trembling in his boots
all the while he was talkin'."

"Maybe so, but he seemed cool enough."

"Oh, that was all put on. Did you hear what he said about keepin'
order?"

"Yes, he kinder looked at you an' me when he was talkin'."

"I guess he heard about our turnin' out the last teacher."

"Of course. I tell you, it took some cheek to come here and order 'round
us boys that has known him all his life."

"That's so. Do you think he's goin' to maintain order, as he calls it?"

"You just wait till afternoon. He'll know better then."

James did not go out to recess the first day. He had some things to do
affecting the organization of the school, and so he remained at his
desk. Several of the pupils came up to consult him on one point or
another, and he received them all with that pleasant manner which
throughout his life was characteristic of him. To one and another he
gave a hint or a suggestion, based upon his knowledge of their character
and abilities. One of the boys said: "Do you think I'd better study
grammar, Jimmy--I mean Mr. Garfield?"

James smiled. He knew the slip was unintentional. Of course it would not
do for him to allow himself to be addressed in school by a pupil as
Jimmy.

"Yes," he answered, "unless you think you know all about it already."

"I don't know the first thing about it."

"Then, of course, you ought to study it. Why shouldn't you?"

"But I can't make nothin' out of it. I can't understand it nohow."

"Then you need somebody to explain it to you."

"It's awful stupid."

"I don't think you will find it so when you come to know more about it.
I shall be ready to explain it. I think I can make you understand it."

Another had a sum he could not do. So James found the recess pass
quickly away, and again the horde of scholars poured into the
school-room.

It was not till afternoon that the conflict came.

Tom Bassett belonged to the first class in geography.

James called out the class.

All came out except Tom, who lounged carelessly in his seat.

"Thomas, don't you belong to this class?" asked the young teacher.

"I reckon I do."

"Then why don't you come out to recite?"

"Oh, I feel lazy," answered Tom, with a significant smile, as if to
inquire, "What are you goin' to do about it?"

James thought to himself with a thrill of unpleasant excitement, "It's
coming. In ten minutes I shall know whether Tom Bassett or I is to rule
this school."

His manner was calm, however, as he said, "That is no excuse. I can't
accept it. As your teacher I order you to join your class."

"Can't you wait till to-morrow?" asked Tom, with a grin, which was
reflected on the faces of several other pupils.

"I think I understand you," said James, with outward calmness. "You defy
my authority."

"You're only a boy like me," said Tom; "I don't see why I should obey
you."

"If you were teacher, and I pupil, I should obey you," said James, "and
I expect the same of you."

"Oh, go on with the recitation!" said Tom, lazily. "Never mind me!"

James felt that he could afford to wait no longer Turning to the class,
he said, "I shall have to delay you for a minute."

He walked deliberately up to the seat where Tom Bassett was sitting.

Tom squared off in the expectation of an assault; but, with the speed of
lightning, the young teacher grasped him by the collar, and, with a
strength that surprised himself, dragged him from his seat, in spite of
his struggles, till he reached the place where the class was standing.

By this time Bill Stackpole felt called upon to help his partner in
rebellion.

"You let him alone!" he said, menacingly, stepping forward.

"One at a time!" said James, coolly. "I will be ready for you in a
minute."

He saw that there was only one thing to do.

He dragged Tom to the door, and forcibly ejected him, saying, "When you
get ready to obey me you can come back."

He had scarcely turned when Bill Stackpole was upon him.

With a quick motion of the foot James tripped him up, and, still
retaining his grasp on his collar, said, "Will you go or stay?"

Bill was less resolute than Tom.

"I guess I'll stay," he said; then picked himself up and resumed his
place in the class.

Apparently calm, James returned to his desk, and commenced hearing the
class recite.

The next morning, on his way to school, James overtook Tom Bassett, who
eyed him with evident embarrassment. Tom's father had sent him back to
school, and Tom did not dare disobey.

"Good morning, Tom," said James, pleasantly.

"Mornin'!" muttered Tom.

"I hope you are going to school?"

"Father says I must."

"I am glad of that, too. By the way, Tom, I think I shall have to get
some of the scholars to help me with some of the smaller pupils. I
should like to get you to hear the lowest class in arithmetic to-day."

"You want me to help you teach?" exclaimed Tom, in amazement.

"Yes; it will give me more time for the higher classes."

"And you don't bear no malice on account of yesterday?"

"Oh, no; we are too good friends to mind such a trifle."

"Then," said Tom, impulsively, "you won't have no more trouble with me.
I'll help you all I can."

There was general surprise felt when the young teacher and his
rebellious scholar were seen approaching the school-house, evidently on
the most friendly terms. There was still greater surprise when, during
the forenoon, James requested Tom to hear the class already mentioned.
At recess Tom proclaimed his intention to lick any boy that was impudent
to the teacher, and the new Garfield administration seemed to be
established on a firm basis.

This incident, which is based upon an actual resort to war measures on
