is the finest one belonging to Captain Alvarez. Oh, won't he be angry!"

Sol slipped off his hunting shirt, and slipped on the doublet.

"It's a little tight in the shoulders," he said, "but I could wear it in a
pinch, that is, I guess I'd hev to wear it in a pinch. Say, Henry, ain't I
a beauty?"

He stood up in the boat and turned slowly around and around, his arms
extended and the doublet glittering. Henry leaned against the side of the
boat and laughed.

"It doesn't suit you, Sol," he replied, "you're a fine looking man, but
it's in your own way, not the Spanish way."

Sol took off the garment, folded it up carefully, and put it back in the
locker.

"Anyway, I'm goin' to claim it," he said. "I want it to make Jim Hart
jealous. An', Henry, thar's a lot more things here, a little tent all
rolled up, some bottles o' medicine, some more clothes, two big bottles
o' brandy, and a whole lot o' house-keepin' truck, like pins an' needles
an' thread, an' them things that kin be pow'ful useful to us on a long
journey. An' jumpin' Jehoshaphat, Henry, here's a little bag o' silver an'
gold!"

"Put that back!" said Henry hastily. "Put it back, Sol! Their goods we'll
borrow as fair spoil, but we won't touch their money. Put it back and none
of us will ever take that bag out again."

"You're right, Henry," said Sol soberly. "I wouldn't handle a single coin
in that bag thar. Here she goes right under the bottom o' everything in
this locker, an' thar she'll stay. But, Henry, our gall-yun is the biggest
find we ever made in our lives. I never dreamed o' travelin' in sech style
an' comfort down the Mississippi."

"Do you think it's going to grow lighter?" asked Henry.

"No," replied Sol decidedly. "It's been a shy kind o' moon to-night, an'
it's a gittin' so much shyer that it's plumb afraid to show its face. In
three minutes it will hide behind a big cloud that's edgin' up over thar,
an' we won't see it no more to-night."

"Then we'll pull down to the edge of the woods and see if the Spaniards
have given up the chase."

"An' be keerful not to run into any snags or sech like. We don't want to
wreck a magnificent gall-yun like this when we've got her."

They had been lying in the flooded forest about two hours, and now they
pulled very cautiously toward the main stream. It was a large boat for
two men, however strong, to handle, but they got through without colliding
with snag or tree trunk, or making any noise that could be heard a dozen
yards away.




CHAPTER V

ON THE GREAT RIVER


They remained just within the edge of the forest, but, despite the lack of
moonlight, they could see far over the surface of the river. It seemed to
be an absolutely clean sweep of waters, as free from boats as if man had
never come, but, after long looking, Henry thought that he could detect a
half dozen specks moving southward. It was only for a moment, and then the
specks were gone.

"I'm sure it was the Spanish boats," said Henry, "and I think they've
given up the hunt."

"More'n likely," said Sol, "an' I guess it's about time fur us to pull
across an' pick up Paul an' Tom an' Jim. They'll wonder what hez become o'
us. An' say, Henry, won't they be s'prised to see us come proudly sailin'
into port in our gran' big gall-yun, all loaded down with arms an'
supplies an' treasures that we hev captured?"

Sol spoke in a tone of deep content, and Henry replied in the same tone:

"If they don't they've changed mightily since we left 'em."

Both, in truth, were pervaded with satisfaction. They felt that they had
never done a better night's work. They had a splendid boat filled with the
most useful supplies. As Sol truthfully said, it was one thing to walk a
thousand miles through the woods to New Orleans and another to float down
on the current in a comfortable boat. They had cause for their deep
satisfaction.

They pulled with strong, steady strokes across the Mississippi, taking a
diagonal course, and they stopped now and then to look for a possible
enemy. But they saw nothing, and at last their boat touched the western
shore. Here Sol uttered their favorite signal, the cry of the wolf, and it
was quickly answered from the brush.

"They're all right," said Henry, and presently they heard the light
footsteps of the three coming fast.

"Here, Paul, here we are!" called out Sol a few moments later, "an' min',
Paul, that your moccasins are clean. We don't allow no dirty footsteps on
this magnificent, silver-plated gall-yun o' ours, an' ez fur Jim Hart, ef
the Mississippi wuzn't so muddy I'd make him take a bath afore he come
aboard."

Henry and the shiftless one certainly enjoyed the surprise of their
comrades who stood staring.

"I suppose you cut her out, took her from the Spaniards?" said Paul.

"We shorely did," replied Sol, "an', Paul, she's a shore enough gall-yun,
one o' the kind you told us them Spaniards had, 'cause she's full o' good
things. Jest come on board an' look."

The three were quickly on the boat and they followed Sol with surprise and
delight, as he showed them their new treasures one by one.

"You've named her right, Sol," said Paul. "She is a galleon to us, sure
enough, and that's what we'll call her, 'The Galleon.' When we have time,
Sol, you and I will cut that name on her with our knives."

They tied their boat to a sapling and kept the oars and themselves aboard.
Tom Ross volunteered to keep the watch for the few hours that were left of
the night. The others disposed themselves comfortably in the boat, wrapped
their bodies in the beautiful new Spanish blankets, and were soon sound
asleep.

Tom sat in the prow of the boat, his rifle across his knees, and his keen
hunting knife by his side. At the first sign of danger from shore he could
cut the rope with a single slash of his knife and push the boat far out
into the current.

But there was no indication of danger nor did the indefinable sixth sense,
that came of long habit and training, warn him of any. Instead, it
remained a peaceful night, though dark, and Tom looked contemplatively at
his comrades. He was the oldest of the little party and a man of few
words, but he was deeply attached to his four faithful comrades. Silently
he gave thanks that his lot was cast with those whom he liked so well.

The night passed away and up came a beautiful dawn of rose and gold. Tom
Ross awakened his comrades.

"The day is here," he said, "an' we must be up an' doin' ef we're goin' to
keep on the trail o' them Spanish fellers."

"All right," said Shif'less Sol, opening his eyes. "Jim Hart, is my
breakfus ready? Ef so, you kin jest bring it to me while I'm layin' here
an' I'll eat it in bed."

"Your breakfus ready!" replied Jim Hart indignantly. "What sort uv
nonsense are you talkin' now, Sol Hyde?"

"Why, ain't you the ship's cook?" said Sol in a hurt tone, "an' oughtn't
you to be proud o' bein' head cook on a splendiferous new gall-yun like
this? I'd a-thought, Jim, you'd be so full o' enthusiasm over bein'
promoted that you'd have had ready fur us the grandest breakfus that wuz
ever cooked by a mortal man fur mortal men. It wuz sech a fine chance fur
you."

"I think we can risk a fire," said Henry. "The Spaniards are far out of
sight, and warm food will be good for us."

After they had eaten, Henry poured a few drops of the Spanish liquor for
each in a small silver cup that he found in one of the lockers.

"That will hearten us up," he said, but directly after they drank it Paul,
who had been making an exploration of his own on the boat, uttered a cry
of joy.

"Coffee!" he said, as he dragged a bag from under a seat, "and here is a
pot to boil it in."

"More treasures," said Sol gleefully. "That wuz shorely a good night's
work you an' me done, Henry!"

There was nothing to do but boil a pot of the coffee then and there, and
each had a long, delicious drink. Coffee and tea were so rare in the
wilderness that they were valued like precious treasures. Then they packed
their things and started, pulling out into the middle of the stream and
giving the current only a little assistance with the oars.

"One thing is shore," said Shif'less Sol, lolling luxuriously on a locker,
"that Spanish gang can't git away from us. All we've got to do is to float
along ez easy ez you please, an' we'll find 'em right in the middle o' the
road."

"It does beat walkin'," said Jim Hart, with equal content, "but this is
shorely a pow'ful big river. I never seed so much muddy water afore in my
life."

"It's a good river, a kind river," said Paul, "because it's taking us
right to its bosom, and carrying us on where we want to go with but little
trouble to us."

It was to Paul, the most imaginative of them all, to whom the mighty river
made the greatest appeal. It seemed beneficent and kindly to him, a friend
in need. Nature, Paul thought, had often come to their assistance,
watching over them, as it were, and helping them when they were weakest.
And, in truth, what they saw that morning was enough to inspire a bold
young wilderness rover.

The river turned from yellow to a lighter tint in the brilliant sunlight.
Little waves raised by the wind ran across the slowly-flowing current. As
far as they could see the stream extended to eastward, carried by the
flood deep into the forest. The air was crisp, with the sparkle of spring,
and all the adventurers rejoiced.

Now and then great flocks of wild fowl, ducks and geese, flew over the
river, and they were so little used to man that more than once they passed
close to the boat.

"The Spaniards are too far away to hear," said Henry, "and the next time
any wild ducks come near I'm going to try one of these fowling pieces. We
need fresh ducks, anyway."

He took out a fowling piece, loaded it carefully with the powder and shot
that the locker furnished in abundance and waited his time. By and by a
flock of wild ducks flew near and Henry fired into the midst of them.
Three lay floating on the water after the shot, and when they took them in
Long Jim Hart, a master on all such subjects, pronounced them to be of a
highly edible variety.

Paul, meanwhile, took out one of the small swords and examined it
critically.

"It is certainly a fine one," he said, "I suppose it's what they call a
Toledo blade in Spain, the finest that they make."

"Could you do much with it, Paul?" asked Shif'less Sol.

"I could," replied Paul confidently. "Mr. Pennypacker served in the great
French war. He was at the taking of Quebec, and he learned the use of the
sword from good masters. He's taught me all the tricks."

"Maybe, then," said Sol laughing, "you'll have to fight Alvarez with one
o' them stickers. Ef sech a combat is on it'll fall to you, Paul. The rest
of us are handier with rifle an' knife."

"It's never likely to happen," said Paul.

The morning passed peacefully on, and the glory of the heavens was
undimmed. The river was a vast, murmuring stream, and the five voyagers
felt that, for the present, their task was an easy one. A single man at
the oars was sufficient to keep the boat moving as fast as they wished,
and the rest occupied themselves with details that might provide for a
future need.

Paul brought out one of the beautiful small swords again, and fenced
vigorously with an imaginary antagonist. Jim Hart took a captured needle
and thread and began to mend a rent in his attire. Henry lifted the folded
tent from the locker and looked carefully at the cloth.

"I think that with this and a pole or two we might fix up a sail if we
needed it," he said. "We don't know anything about sails, but we can learn
by trying."

Tom Ross was at the oars, but Shif'less Sol lay back on a locker, closed
his eyes, and said:

"Jest wake me up, when we git to New Or-lee-yuns. I could lay here an'
sleep forever, the boat rockin' me to sleep like a cradle."

They saw nothing of the Spanish force, but they knew that such a flotilla
could not evade them. Having no reason to hide, the Spaniards would not
seek to conceal so many boats in the flooded forest. Hence the five felt
perfectly easy on that point. About noon they ran their own boat among the
trees until they reached dry land. Here they lighted a fire and cooked
their ducks, which they found delicious, and then resumed their leisurely
journey.

The afternoon was as peaceful as the morning, but it seemed to the
sensitive imagination of Paul that the wilderness aspect of everything was
deepening. The great flooded river broadened until the line of water and
horizon met, and Paul could easily fancy that they were floating on a
boundless sea. An uncommonly red sun was setting and here and there the
bubbles were touched with fire. Far in the west dark shadows were stealing
up.

"Look," Henry suddenly exclaimed, "I think that the Spanish have gone into
camp for the night!"

He pointed down the stream and toward the western shore, where a thin
spire of smoke was rising.

"It's that, certain," said Tom Ross, "an' I guess we'd better make fur
camp, too."

They pulled toward the eastern shore, in order that the river might be
between them and the Spaniards during the night and soon reached a grove
which stood many feet deep in the water. As they passed under the shelter
of the boughs they took another long look toward the spire of smoke.
Henry, who had the keenest eyes of all, was able to make out the dim
outline of boats tied to the bank, and any lingering doubt that the
Spaniards might not be there was dispelled.

"When they start in the morning we'll start, too," said Henry.

Then they pushed their boat further back into the grove. Night was coming
fast. The sun sank in the bosom of the river, the water turned from yellow
to red and then to black, and the earth lay in darkness.

"I think we'd better tie up here and eat cold food," said Henry.

"An' then sleep," said Shif'less Sol. "That wuz a mighty comf'table
Spanish blanket I had last night an', Jim Hart, I want to tell you that if
you move 'roun' to-night, while you're watchin', please step awful easy,
an' be keerful not to wake me 'cause I'm a light sleeper. I don't like to
be waked up either early or late in the night. Tain't good fur the health.
Makes a feller grow old afore his time."

"Sol," said Henry, who was captain by fitness and universal consent,
"you'll take the watch until about one o'clock in the morning and then
Paul will relieve you."

Jim Hart doubled up his long form with silent laughter, and smote his knee
violently with the palm of his right hand.

"Oh, yes, Sol Hyde," he said, "I'll step lightly, that is, ef I happen to
be walkin' 'roun' in my sleep, an' I'll take care not to wake you too
suddenly, Sol Hyde. I wouldn't do it for anything. I don't want to stunt
your growth, an' you already sech a feeble, delicate sort o' creetur, not
able to take nourishment 'ceptin' from a spoon."

"Thar ain't no reward in this world fur a good man," said the shiftless
one in a resigned tone.

They ate quickly, and, as usual, those who did not have to watch wrapped
themselves in their blankets and with equal quickness fell asleep.
Shif'less Sol took his place in the prow of the boat, and his attitude was
much like that of Tom Ross the night before, only lazier and more
graceful. Sol was a fine figure of a young man, drooped in a luxurious and
reclining attitude, his shoulder against the side of the boat, and a roll
of two blankets against his back. His eyes were half closed, and a stray
observer, had there been any, might have thought that he was either asleep
or dreaming.

But the shiftless one, fit son of the wilderness, was never more awake in
his life. The eyes, looking from under the lowered lids, pierced the
forest like those of a cat. He saw and noted every tree trunk within the
range of human vision, and no piece of floating debris on the surface of
the flooded river escaped his attention. His sharp ears heard, too, every
sound in the grove, the rustle of a stray breeze through the new leaves,
or the splash of a fish, as it leaped from the water and sank back again.

The hours dragged after one another, one by one, but Shif'less Sol was not
unhappy. He was really quite willing to keep the watch, and, as Tom Ross
had done, he regarded his sleeping comrades with pride, and all the warmth
of good fellowship.

The night was dark, like its predecessor. The moon's rays fell only in
uneven streaks, and revealed a singular scene, a forest standing knee
deep, as it were, in water.

