over the snow,--the sweetest music I ever heard."

Long years after, when Pedro grew to be a man, he was a great musician.
Many, many people came to hear him play.

Some one said to him one day, "How can you play so sweetly? I never
heard such music before."

"Ah," said Pedro, "but you never heard the Christmas bells as I heard
them that Christmas night years and years ago."

--OLD TALE RETOLD.




[Illustration: Family at prayer at the table]

GOD BLESS THE MASTER OF THIS HOUSE


  God bless the master of this house,
    The mistress, also,
  And all the little children
    That round the table go:
  And all your kin and kinsfolk,
    That dwell both far and near;
  I wish you a merry Christmas
    And a happy new year.

--OLD ENGLISH RIME.




SQUEAKY AND THE SCARE BOX

I


Once upon a time a family of mice lived in the pantry wall. There was a
father mouse, there was a mother mouse, and there were three little baby
mice.

One little mouse had sharp bright eyes and could see everything, even in
the darkest holes. He was called Sharpeyes. His brother could sniff and
smell anything, wherever it might be hidden, and he was called Sniffy.
The baby mouse had such a squeaky little voice that he was called
Squeaky. He was always singing, "Ee-ee-ee!"

Mother mouse was very wise, and she had taught her babies to run and
hide when they saw the old cat coming. She had also taught them not to
go near a trap. The little mice obeyed their mother, and they were happy
in their home in the pantry wall.

They had many good times together. I could not tell you about all of
these, but I am going to tell you about their Christmas party and what
happened to Squeaky.

It was the night before Christmas. The stockings hung by the chimney,
and the tall tree was standing in the parlor. The children were asleep,
and the father and mother had gone upstairs to bed.

In the pantry wall, the little mice were all wide-awake.

"Ee-ee-ee!" squeaked Squeaky; "why can't we creep into the big room and
see the tall Christmas tree? The children have talked about it for days,
and we have never seen one. Mother, please let us go and see it."

"Yes," said Sniffy, "do let us go. Everything smells so good. The
children and the cook made long strings of pop corn to-day. I found a
little on the pantry floor, and I want some more."

"I peeped out of our hole," said Sharpeyes, "and I saw cake and candy
all ready for the children. Oh, I do want a bite of those good things!
Please let us have a Christmas party."

"Well," said mother mouse, "I will ask your father. If he says it is
safe, we will go."

When mother mouse asked father mouse, he said, "I will go out first and
look all about. If it is safe, I will come back for you."

So father mouse crept softly through the pantry, down the long hall, and
into the parlor. The cat was nowhere to be seen. Father mouse ran back
to the pantry and cried, "The cat is not near; come and see the tree."


II


Then all the mice came scampering from the hole in the wall. They crept
through the pantry, down the long hall, and into the parlor. When they
saw the tall Christmas tree, they squeaked again and again in their joy.
Then they ran around and around the tree to see what was on it.

[Illustration: The mice look at the Christmas tree]

On the floor they saw a wonderful doll's house. "How fine it would be to
live there!" they squeaked.

They ran up and down the stairs, sat on the chairs, and lay down in the
beds. Oh, they had a merry time!

Then Sniffy said, "I smell that good pop corn again. Let's climb up into
the Christmas tree and get some."

They climbed up into the tree. They nibbled the pop corn; they nibbled
the candy; they nibbled the nuts; and they nibbled the cakes.

Soon Sharpeyes cried out, "Come here, I see a mouse! I see a mouse! But
he doesn't look like our family at all."

"I should say not," sniffed Sniffy; "and how good he smells!"

"Why, he is good to eat!" squeaked Squeaky; and they all began to eat
the chocolate mouse.

Then they found another candy mouse--a pretty pink one. They were so
busy eating it that they forgot to watch and listen; then--bang! The
door was opened, and the lights were turned on.

With a squeak, the mice scampered down from the tree; then they ran
along the hall, through the pantry, and back to their home. There was
the father mouse, and the mother mouse, and Sharpeyes, and Sniffy. But
where was Squeaky?


III


Now, as Squeaky tried to run down the tree, he fell heels over head.
Down, down, down, he fell until he was caught in a funny box. An ugly
man with black hair and black whiskers seemed to be hopping out of the
box.

When Squeaky saw the lights turned on, he hid under the dress of this
queer man. He lay very, very still, for he had been taught to be still
when danger was near. He heard voices. The father and mother had come
back.

"Yes," the father was saying; "it would have been a shame to forget this
train. I would like it to come right out from under the tree. Help me
put the track down, mother."

When the train was just where it should be, the mother turned to the
beautiful tree.

"Why, look at that Jack-in-the-box," she said. "The man is hanging out.
That will never do. I will shut the box. Teddy must see the man jump
out."

The mother pushed the man with the black hair down, down, into the box
and shut the lid. Poor Squeaky felt the springs close down on him and
squeaked, "Ee-ee-"

"That was a fine squeak," said the father. "The toys are wonderful these
days."

"Yes," said the mother, as she turned off the light. "When I was a
child, we did not have such toys."

"I am in a trap," said poor Squeaky, "but there isn't even a bit of
cheese in it. I wonder what kind of trap it is; nothing seems to hurt
me. Well, I am safe for a while, and I hope I shall soon get out."

Squeaky lay in the box all night, and wondered what Sniffy and Sharpeyes
were doing. The next morning, he heard children calling, "Merry
Christmas! Merry Christmas!" And soon the toys were taken down, one by
one. Then such a noise was heard--drums beating, horns tooting, children
shouting. You should have heard it.

[Illustration: The mother is surprised as Squeaky escapes]

"See our new doll's house!" cried one child.

"See my new train! How fast it goes!" cried another.

"And see my beautiful dolly!" cried another. "She can open and shut her
eyes."

By and by the mother took the box from the tree. "Come here, Teddy," she
said. "Here is a scare box. We will have some fun. Watch me open the
lid."

Teddy stood by his mother and watched closely.

"Are you ready?" asked his mother. "Well, let us count. One, two,
three!"

The lid flew open, and out jumped the man with the black hair and black
whiskers. And with a squeak of joy, out jumped the mouse.

"Ee-ee-ee!" he cried, as he ran away.

"Ee!" said the Jack-in-the-box.

"Whee-ee-ee!" cried the boy with delight.

"Oh,--a mouse! a mouse!" cried the mother. Then she threw the box on the
floor and jumped up on her chair.

"Where? where?" cried all the children.

But they saw only the tip of Squeaky's tail as he ran across the hall to
the pantry. Another moment and he was safe in the hole in the pantry
wall.

The children's father laughed as he helped their mother climb down from
the chair.

"Well," he said, "how did _you_ enjoy Teddy's scare box?"

--GEORGENE FAULKNER.




THE GLAD NEW YEAR


  It's coming, boys,
    It's almost here.
  It's coming, girls,
    The grand New Year.

  A year to be glad in,
    Not to be sad in;
  A year to live in,
    To gain and give in.

  A year for trying,
    And not for sighing;
  A year for striving
    And healthy thriving.

  It's coming, boys,
    It's almost here.
  It's coming, girls,
    The grand New Year.

--MARY MAPES DODGE.




[Illustration: The goose and the hen]

MAKING THE BEST OF IT


"What a dreary day it is!" grumbled the old gray goose to the brown hen.
They were standing at the henhouse window watching the falling snow
which covered every nook and corner of the farmyard.

"Yes, indeed," said the brown hen. "I should almost be willing to be
made into a chicken pie on such a day."

She had scarcely stopped talking when Pekin duck said fretfully, "I am
so hungry that I am almost starved."

A little flock of chickens all huddled together wailed in sad tones,
"And we are so thirsty!"

In fact, all the feathered folk in the henhouse seemed cross and
fretful. It is no wonder they felt that way, for they had had nothing to
eat or drink since early in the morning. The cold wind howled around
their house. Hour after hour went by, but no one came near the henhouse.

The handsome white rooster, however, seemed as happy as usual. That is
saying a great deal, for a jollier old fellow than he never lived in a
farmyard. Sunshine, rain, or snow were all the same to him, and he
crowed quite as merrily in stormy weather as in fair.

"Well," he said, laughing, as he looked about the henhouse, "you all
seem to be having a fit of dumps."

Nobody answered the white rooster, but a faint cluck or two came from
some of the hens. They immediately put their heads back under their
wings, however, as if ashamed of having spoken at all.

This was too much for the white rooster. He stood first on one yellow
foot and then on the other. Turning his head from side to side, he said,
"What's the use of looking so sad? Any one would think that you expected
to be eaten by a band of hungry foxes."

Just then a brave little white bantam rooster hopped down from his
perch. He strutted over to the big rooster and caused quite a flutter in
the henhouse by saying:

"We're lively enough when our crops are full, but when we are starving,
it is a wonder that we can hold our heads up at all. If I ever see that
farmer's boy again, I'll--I'll--I'll peck his foot!"

"You won't see him until he feeds us," said the white rooster, "and then
I guess you will peck his corn."

"Oh, oh!" moaned the brown hen. "Don't speak of a peck of corn."

"Madam," said the white rooster, bowing very low, "your trouble is my
own,--that is, I'm hungry, too. But we might be worse off. We might be
in a box on our way to market. It is true that we haven't had anything
to eat to-day, but we at least have room enough to stretch our wings."

"Why, that is a fact," clucked the brown hen. And all the feathered
family--even the smallest chickens--stretched their wings, and looked a
little more cheerful.

"Now, then," went on the rooster, "suppose we have a little music to
cheer us and help pass the hours until roosting time. Let us all crow.
There, I beg your pardon, ladies; I am sorry you can't crow. Let us sing
a happy song. Will you be kind enough to start a merry tune, Mrs. Brown
Hen?"

The brown hen shook herself proudly, tossed her head back and
began,--"Ca-ca-ca-ca-ca-ca!" In less than two minutes every one in the
henhouse had joined her. The white rooster was the loudest of all, and
the little bantam rooster stretched his neck and did the best he could.

Now, the horses, cows, and sheep were not far away. They heard the happy
voices, and they, too, joined in the grand chorus. The pigs did their
best to sing louder than all the rest.

Higher and higher, stronger and stronger, rose the chorus. Louder and
louder quacked the ducks. Shriller and shriller squealed the pigs.

They were all so happy that they quite forgot their hunger until the
door of the henhouse burst open, and in came three chubby children. Each
was carrying a dish of hot chicken food.

"Don't stop your music, Mr. Rooster," said the little girl, who was
bundled up until you could scarcely see her dear little face.
