and so on, up to the last.

Before the twelfth wise woman could speak, in walked the thirteenth.

This woman was in a great rage because she had not been invited.

She cried in a loud voice, "When the princess is fifteen years old she
shall prick her finger with a spindle and shall fall down dead."

At these words every one turned pale with fright.

The twelfth wise woman, who had not yet spoken, now came up and said:

"I could not stop this woman's evil words, I can only make them less
harsh.

The king's child shall not die, but a deep sleep shall fall upon her, in
which she shall stay one hundred years."


BRIAR ROSE--II

The little princess was so beautiful, so kind; and so good that no one
who knew her could help loving her.

As she grew older the king and queen began to feel very unhappy, for
they could not help thinking of what was to happen to their dear little
daughter.

They ordered all the spindles in the kingdom to be burned.

Now, as it happened, on the very day that the princess was fifteen years
old the king and queen were away from home.

The princess was quite alone in the castle, and she rain about over the
palace, looking in at rooms and halls, just as her fancy led her.

At last she came to an old tower at the top of a winding stair.

She saw a little door.

In the lock was a rusty key.

When she turned it, the door flew open.

There, in a small room, sat an old woman with her spindle, spinning
flax.

"Good Morning," said the princess. "Do tell me what that funny thing is
that jumps about so."

And then she held out her hand to take the spindle.

It came about just as the fairy had foretold.

The princess pricked her finger with the spindle.

At once she fell upon a bed which was near, and lay in a deep sleep as
if dead.

This sleep came not only upon the princess, but spread over the whole
castle.

The king and queen, who had just come home, fell asleep, and all their
lords and ladies with them.

The horses went to sleep in the stable; the dogs in the yard; the doves
on the roof; the flies on the wall; yes, even the fire that burned in
the fireplace grew still and slept.

The meat stopped roasting before the fire.

The cook in the kitchen was just going to box the ears of the kitchen
boy, but her hand dropped and she sank to sleep.

Outside the castle the wind was still, and upon the trees not a leaf
stirred.

In a short time there sprung up around the castle a hedge of thorn
bushes.

Year by year the hedge grew higher and higher, until at last nothing of
the castle could be seen above it, not even the roof, nor the chimneys,
nor the flag on the tower.


BRIAR ROSE--III

As years went by the story of the sleeping beauty was told all over the
kingdom.

Many kings' sons came and tried to get through the hedge of thorns, but
this they could not do.

The sharp thorns seemed to have hands which held the young men fast.

After many, many years a prince came from a far-off kingdom.

He heard the story of the castle and its sleeping beauty.

He knew what danger lay in the great hedge of thorn bushes.

But the young prince was brave, and he was not to be turned back.

"I am not afraid. I will go out and see this beautiful Briar Rose," he
said.

It happened that the hundred years of the magic spell had just ended.

The day had come when the sleeping princess was to wake up again.

As the prince came to the hedge of thorn bushes, it was in full bloom
and covered with beautiful red flowers. There, through the thorn bushes,
lay a wide road.

Soon the prince came to the gates of the castle.

He found the horses and dogs lying asleep on the ground.

The doves sat on the roof with their heads under their wings.

He went into the castle.

Even the flies on the wall still slept.

Near the throne lay the king and queen, while all around were the
sleeping lords and ladies.

[Illustration]

The whole castle was so still that he could hear his heart beat.

The prince went on from room to room until he came to the old tower.

Going up the winding stair he saw the little door.

A rusty key was in the lock, and the door was half open.

There before him lay the sleeping princess.

The prince bent down and gave her a kiss.

As he did so the sleeping beauty opened her eyes. With her the whole
castle awoke.

The king waked up, and the queen, and all the lords and ladies.

The horses in the stable stood up and shook themselves.

The dogs jumped about and wagged their tails.

The doves on the roof lifted their heads and flew into the fields.

The flies on the wall began to buzz.

The fire in the kitchen began to burn.

The meat began to roast.

The cook boxed the ears of the kitchen boy, so that he ran off crying.

The hedge of thorn bushes around the castle dried up and blew away.

Then the prince married the beautiful princess, and they lived happily
ever after.

WILLIAM AND JACOB GRIMM




    ALL THINGS BEAUTIFUL

    All things bright and beautiful,
      All creatures great and small,
    All things wise and wonderful,
      The Lord God made them all.

    Each little flower that opens,
      Each little bird that sings,
    He made their glowing colors,
      He made their tiny wings.

    The cold wind in the winter,
      The pleasant summer sun,
    The ripe fruits in the garden,
      He made them every one.

    He gave us eyes to see them,
      And lips that we might tell
    How great is God Almighty,
      Who hath made all things well.

    MRS. C.F. ALEXANDER




[Illustration]

THE BAKER BOYS AND THE BEES--I

trouble  Andernach  guarded


Long years ago many cities had great stone walls around them.

The walls were built to keep out enemies, for in those old days cities
often went to war with one another.

The city of Andernach had around it one of these great walls.

There was only one gateway into the city, and this gateway was guarded
by strong iron doors.

Just behind the doors lived a gatekeeper, who did nothing but open and
shut the gates.

He watched them well.

No one could come in who was not friendly to the city.

The gates were not opened very often. Some days they were not opened at
all. So the gatekeeper had much spare time.

"I am very fond of honey," thought he. "I think I will buy a few hives
of bees. I can place the hives on the top of the wall. There nobody will
trouble them."

Soon there were rows of beehives on the top of the wall over the gate.

It happened that, not far away, there was another walled city, named
Lintz.

The people of Lintz were the enemies of the people of Andernach.

They were always watching each other, and fought when they could get a
chance.

Now the people of Lintz planned to attack and capture the city of
Andernach.

They called their wisest men together to see how the attack should be
made.

Many plans were talked over.

At length an old man said, "Men of Lintz, you know that the men of
Andernach are lazy. They like to lie late in their beds. If we attack
the city at sunrise, we shall capture it before they can get their eyes
open."

This plan seemed wise to the people of Lintz, and in army was soon ready
to march against the city of Andernach.

One dark night the army crept softly toward the walls of the sleeping
city.


THE BAKER BOYS AND THE BEES--II

The only people who rose early in Andernach were the bakers. They had to
have fresh bread ready for breakfast.

After their work was done the bakers used to have a morning nap, but the
baker boys had to stay awake and watch the loaves of bread.

Two of these boys, named Hans and Fritz, were fast friends and were
always together.

One morning, just at sunrise, Hans said to Fritz, "Let us creep upon the
wall over the gatekeeper's house. I think we can find some honey. The
old gatekeeper is asleep; he will not hear us."

The two boys crept softly up the stairs.

They soon reached the top of the wall.

"Did you hear that noise?" whispered Fritz.

"Yes, it must be the old gatekeeper," said Hans, in a low voice.

"No, it seems to come from over the wall," said Fritz.

The two boys crawled to the edge of the wall and carefully looked over.

There stood the army of Lintz.

A ladder was placed against the wall.

The soldiers would soon mount over the gate into the city.

What was to be done?

There was no time to wake the people.

What could two boys do against an army?

In an instant Fritz thought of the beehives.

Ah, the bees were awake if the people were not!

Each boy seized a hive and bore it carefully to the edge of the wall.

Then with a strong push down tumbled hives, honey, and bees upon the
heads of the enemy.

Such buzzing, such stinging, such shouting as arose!

The boys ran down the stairs to the city hall.

[Illustration]

The old bell ringer was aroused by the cries.

Soon the wild clang of the bell awoke the people of Andernach.

Armed men ran to the city gate, but the bees had done their work well.
There was no need for soldiers.

The army of Lintz was running away.

Over the great gate the people of Andernach placed a statue of the two
baker boys whose quick wit had saved the city.

_German Folk Tale_




    FALLING SNOW

    See the pretty snowflakes
      Falling from the sky;
    On the wall and housetops
      Soft and thick they lie.

    On the window ledges,
      On the branches bare;
    Now how fast they gather,
      Filling all the air.

    Look into the garden,
      Where the grass was green;
    Covered by the snowflakes,
      Not a blade is seen.

    Now the bare black bushes
      All look soft and white,
    Every twig is laden,--
      What a pretty sight!

    ANONYMOUS




LITTLE GOODY TWO SHOES


All the world must know that Two Shoes was not her real name. No; her
father's name was Meanwell, and he was for many years a well-to-do
farmer.

While Margery (for that was her real name) was yet a little girl her
father became very poor. He was so poor that at last he and Margery's
mother and Margery and her little brother were all turned out of doors.
They did not have a roof to cover their heads.

Margery's father felt so unhappy that at last he died, and only a few
days later Margery's mother died, too. Poor little Margery and her
brother were left alone in the wide world.

Their sorrow would have made you pity them, but it would have done your
heart good to see how fond they were of each other. They always went
about hand in hand, and when you saw one you were sure to see the other.

[Illustration]

Look at them in the picture.

They were both very ragged, and though Tommy had two shoes, Margery had
but one. They had nothing, poor little things, to live upon but what
kind people gave to them. Each night they lay on the hay in just such a
barn as you see here.

[Illustration]


LITTLE GOODY TWO SHOES--II

Mr. Smith was a very good man who lived in the town where little Margery
and Tommy were born. Although he was a poor man, he took the children
home to live with him.

"They shall not want for food nor for a bed to sleep in while I live,"
he said.

Mr. Smith had a friend who was a very wealthy man. When he heard the
story about Margery and Tommy, this man gave Mr. Smith some money to buy
little Margery a new pair of shoes and Tommy a new suit of clothes. Can
you see Tommy in the picture wearing his new clothes?

[Illustration]

The gentleman who had given the money for Margery's new shoes and
Tommy's new clothes wished to take Tommy with him to London to make a
sailor of him.

When the time came for Tommy to go, both children began to cry. They
kissed each other a hundred times. At last Tommy wiped away Margery's
tears and said:

"Don't cry, little sister, for I will come home to you again and bring
you beautiful clothes and much money."

That night Margery went to bed weeping for her dear little brother. It
was the first time they had ever been parted.

The next morning the shoemaker came in with Margery's new shoes. She put
them on in great glee and ran out to Mrs. Smith crying, "Two shoes, two
shoes. See goody two shoes!" This she did to all the people she met, so
that soon she was known far and wide as Goody Two Shoes.


LITTLE GOODY TWO SHOES--III

Dear little Margery saw how good and wise Mr. Smith was. She thought it
was because he read so many books.

Soon Margery wished, above all things, to learn to read. She would
borrow books from the school children and sit down and read and read.
Very soon she could read better than any of her playmates.

Margery took such delight in her books that she wished everybody else
could read, too, so she formed this plan of teaching very little
children how to read.

First, she made letters out of bits of wood with her knife. She worked
and worked until there were ten sets of the small letters:

    a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z

and six sets of the large letters:

    A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

She then made the little tots spell words with her wooden letters. Take
the word "plum-pudding" (and who can think of a better one!); the first
