It was this shot that first alarmed the natives in church, and it was
the yell uttered by the wounded man, as he fell stunned on the floor,
that called forth the answering yell from the savage host, and
precipitated the attack.

It was sufficiently premature to give the people of the settlement time
to seize their arms; which, as has been said, they had placed so as to
be available at a moment's notice.

The fight that ensued was a desperate, and almost indiscriminate, melee.
The attacking party had been so sure of taking the people by surprise
that they formed no plan of attack; but simply arranged that, at a given
signal from their chief, a united rush should be made upon the church,
and a general massacre ensue. As we have seen, Corrie's pistol drew
forth the signal sooner than had been intended. In the rush that
immediately ensued, a party dashed through the house, the boy was
overturned, and a savage gave him a passing blow with a club that would
have scattered his brains on the floor had it taken full effect; but it
was hastily delivered; it glanced off his head, and spent its force on
the shoulder of the chief, who was thus unfortunate enough to be wounded
by friends as well as foes.

On the first alarm, Gascoyne sprang up, and darted through the door. He
was closely followed by Henry Stuart, and the captain of the Talisman,
with his handful of officers and men, who were all armed, as a matter of
course.

"Sit where you are," cried Henry to his trembling mother, as he sprang
after Gascoyne; "the church is the safest place you'll find."

The widow fell on her knees, and prayed to God while the fight raged
without.

Among the first to leave the church was the pastor. The thought of his
child having been left in the house unprotected filled him with an agony
of fear. He sought no weapon of war, but darted unarmed straight into
the midst of the savage host that stood between him and the object of
his affection. His rush was so impetuous, that he fairly overturned
several of his opponents by dashing against them. The numbers that
surrounded him, however, soon arrested his progress; but he had pressed
so close in amongst them, that they were actually too closely packed,
for a few seconds, to be able to use their heavy clubs and long spears
with effect.

It was well for the poor missionary, at that moment, that he had learned
the art of boxing when a boy. The knowledge so acquired had never
induced him to engage in dishonorable and vulgar strife; but it had
taught him how and where to deliver a straightforward blow with effect;
and he now struck out with tremendous energy, knocking down an adversary
at every blow; for the thought of Alice lent additional strength to his
powerful arm. Success in such warfare, however, was not to be expected.
Still, Mr. Mason's activity and vigor averted his own destruction for a
few minutes; and these minutes were precious, for they afforded time
for Captain Montague and his officers to cut their way to the spot where
he fought, just as a murderous club was about to descend on his head
from behind. Montague's sword unstrung the arm that upheld it, and the
next instant the pastor was surrounded by friends.

Among their number was John Bumpus, who was one of the crew of
Montague's boat, and who now rushed upon the savages with a howl
peculiarly his own, felling one with a blow of his fist, and another
with a slash of his cutlass.

"You must retire," said Montague, hastily, to Frederick Mason, who stood
panting and inactive for a few moments in order to recover breath. "You
are unarmed, sir; besides, your profession forbids you taking part in
such work as this. There are men of war enough here to keep these
fellows in play."

Montague spoke somewhat sharply; for he erroneously fancied that the
missionary's love of fighting had led him into the fray.

"My profession does not forbid me to save my child," exclaimed the
pastor, wildly.

He turned in the direction of his cottage, which was full in view; and
at that moment smoke burst from the roof and windows. With a cry of
despair, Mr. Mason once more launched himself on the host of savages;
but these were now so numerous that, instead of making head against
them, the little knot of sailors who opposed them at that particular
place found it was as much as they could do to keep them at bay.

The issue of the conflict was still doubtful, when a large accession to
their numbers gave the savages additional power and courage. They made a
sudden onset, and bore back the small band of white men. In the rush
the pastor was overthrown, and rendered for a time insensible.

While this was going on in one part of the field, in another, stout Ole
Thorwald, with several of the white settlers and the greater part of the
native force, was guarding the principal approach to the church against
immensely superior numbers. And nobly did the descendant of the Norse
sea-kings maintain the credit of his warlike ancestors that day. With a
sword that might have matched that of Goliath of Gath, he swept the way
before him wherever he went, and more than once by a furious onset
turned the tide of war in favor of his party when it seemed about to
overwhelm them.

In a more distant part of the field, on the banks of a small stream,
which was spanned by a bridge about fifty paces further down, Gascoyne
and Henry Stuart contended, almost alone, with about thirty savages.
These two had rushed forward with such impetuosity at the first onset as
to have been separated from their friends, and with four Christian
natives, had been surrounded. Henry was armed with a heavy claymore, the
edge of which betokened that it had once seen much service in the wars
of the youth's Scottish ancestors. Gascoyne, not anticipating this
attack, had returned to the settlement armed only with his knife. He had
seized the first weapon that came to hand, which chanced to be an
enormous iron shovel, and with this terrific implement the giant carried
all before him.

It was quite unintentionally that he and Henry had come together. But
the nature and power of the two men being somewhat similar, they had
singled out the same point of danger, and had made their attack with the
same overwhelming vehemence. The muscles of both seemed to be made of
iron; for, as increasing numbers pressed upon them, they appeared to
deliver their terrible blows with increasing rapidity and vigor, and the
savages, despite their numbers, began to quail before them.

Just then Keona--who, although wounded, hovered about doing as much
mischief as he could with his left hand (which, by the way, seemed to be
almost as efficient as his right)--caught sight of this group of
combatants on the banks of the stream. He, with a party, had succeeded
in forcing the bridge, and now uttering a shout of wild delight at the
sight of his two greatest enemies within his power, as he thought, he
rushed towards them, and darted his spear with unerring aim and terrible
violence. The man's anger defeated his purpose; for the shout attracted
the attention of Gascoyne, who saw the spear coming straight towards
Henry's breast. He interposed the shovel instantly, and the spear fell
harmless to the ground. At the same time, with a back-handed sweep, he
brained a gigantic savage who at the moment was engaging Henry's
undivided attention. Bounding forward with a burst of anger, Gascoyne
sought to close with Keona. He succeeded but too well, however; for he
could not check himself sufficiently to deliver an effective blow, but
went crashing against his enemy, and the two fell to the ground.

In an instant a rush was made on the fallen man, but Henry leaped
forward, and sweeping down two opponents with one cut of his claymore,
afforded his companion time to leap up.

"Come, we are quits," said Henry, with a grim smile, as the two darted
again on the foe.

At that moment Ole Thorwald, having scattered the party he first
engaged, came tearing down towards the bridge, whirling the great sword
round his head, and shouting "victory" in the voice of a Stentor.

"Ha! here is more work," he cried, as his eye fell on Gascoyne's figure.
"Thorwald to the rescue,--hurrah!"

In another moment the savages were flying pell-mell across the bridge
with Gascoyne and Henry close on their heels, and the stout merchant
panting after them, with his victorious band, as fast as his less agile
limbs could carry him.

It was at this moment that Gascoyne and Henry noticed the attack made on
the small party of sailors, and observed the fall of Mr. Mason.

"Thorwald to the rescue!" shouted Gascoyne, in a voice that rolled deep
and loud over the whole field like the roar of a lion.

"Aye, aye, my noisy stranger; it's easy for your tough limbs to carry
you up the hill," gasped Ole; "but the weight of ten or fifteen years
will change your step. Hurrah!"

The cry of the bold Norseman, coupled with that of Gascoyne, had the
double effect of checking the onset of the enemy, and of collecting
their own scattered forces around them. The battle was now drawing to a
point. Men who were skirmishing in various places left off and hastened
to the spot on which the closing scene was now evidently to be enacted;
and for a few minutes the contending parties paused, as if by mutual
consent, to breathe and scan each other before making the final attack.

It must not be supposed that, during the fight which we have described,
the crew of the Talisman were idle. At the first sign of disturbance on
shore, the boats were lowered, and a well-armed force rowed for the
landing-place as swiftly as the strong and willing arms of the men could
pull. But the distance between the vessel and the shore was
considerable, and the events we have recounted were quickly enacted; so
that before the boats had proceeded half the distance the fight was
nearly over, and the settlement seemed about to be overwhelmed.

These facts were not lost upon the first lieutenant of the _Talisman_,
Mr. Mulroy, who, with telescope in hand, watched the progress of the
fight with great anxiety. He saw that it was impossible for the boats to
reach the shore in time to render efficient aid. He also observed that a
fresh band of savages were hastening to reinforce their comrades, and
that the united band would be so overpoweringly strong as to render the
chances of a successful resistance on the part of the settlers very
doubtful indeed--almost hopeless.

In these circumstances he adopted a course which was as bold as it was
dangerous. Observing that the savages mustered for the final onset in a
dense mass on an eminence which just raised their heads a little above
those of the party they were about to attack, he at once loaded three of
the largest guns with round shot and pointed, them at the mass of human
beings with the utmost possible care. There was the greatest danger of
hitting friends instead of foes; but Mr. Mulroy thought it his duty to
incur the responsibility of running the risk.

Montague, to whom the command of the band of united settlers had been
given by general consent, had thrown them rapidly into some sort of
order, and was about to give the word to charge, when the savage host
suddenly began to pour down the hill with frantic yells.

Mulroy did not hear the shouts, but he perceived the movement. Suddenly,
as if a thunder storm had burst over the island, the echoes of the hills
were startled by the roar of heavy artillery, and, one after another,
the three guns hurled their deadly contents into the center of the
rushing mass, through which three broad lanes were cut in quick
succession.

The horrible noise and the dreadful slaughter in their ranks seemed to
render the affrighted creatures incapable of action, for they came to a
dead halt.

"Well done, Mulroy!" shouted Montague; "forward, boys,--charge!"

A true British cheer burst from the tars and white settlers, which
served further to strike terror into the hearts of the enemy. In another
moment they rushed up the hill, led on by Montague, Gascoyne, Henry, and
Thorwald. But the savages did not await the shock. Seized with a
complete panic, they turned and fled in utter confusion.

Just as this occurred, Mr. Mason began to recover consciousness.
Recollecting suddenly what had occurred, he started up and followed his
friends, who were now in hot pursuit of the foe in the direction of his
own cottage. Quickly though they ran, the anxious father overtook and
passed them; but he soon perceived that his dwelling was wrapped in
flames from end to end.

Darting through the smoke and fire to his daughter's room, he shouted
her name; but no voice replied. He sprang to the bed,--it was empty.
With a cry of despair, and blinded by smoke, he dashed about the room,
grasping wildly at objects in the hope that he might find his child. As
he did so he stumbled over a prostrate form, which he instantly seized,
raised in his arms, and bore out of the blazing house, round which a
number of the people were now assembled.

The form he had thus plucked from destruction was that of the poor boy,
who would willingly have given his life to rescue Alice, and who still
lay in the state of insensibility into which he had been thrown by the
blow from a gun or heavy club.

The missionary dropped his burden, turned wildly round, and was about to
plunge once again into the heart of the blazing ruin, when he was seized
in the strong arms of Henry Stuart, who, with the assistance of Ole
Thorwald, forcibly prevented him from doing that which would have
resulted in almost certain death.

The pastor's head sunk on his breast. The excitement of action and hope
no longer sustained him. With a deep groan, he fell to the earth
insensible.




CHAPTER IX.

BAFFLED AND PERPLEXED--PLANS FOR A RESCUE.


While the men assembled round the prostrate form of Mr. Mason were
attempting to rescue him from his state of stupor, poor Corrie began to
show symptoms of returning vitality. A can of water, poured over him by
Henry, did much to restore him. But no sooner was he enabled to
understand what was going on, and to recall what had happened, than he
sprang up with a wild cry of despair, and rushed towards the blazing
house. Again Henry's quick arm arrested a friend in his mad career.

"Oh! she's there!--Alice is _there_!" shrieked the boy, as he struggled
passionately to free himself.

"You can do nothing, Corrie," said Henry, trying to soothe him.

"Coward!" gasped the boy, in a paroxysm of rage, as he clenched his fist
and struck his captor on the chest with all his force.

"Hold him," said Henry, turning to John Bumpus, who at that moment came
up.

Bumpus nodded intelligently, and seized the boy, who uttered a groan of
anguish as he ceased a struggle which he felt was hopeless in such an
iron gripe.

"Now, friends--all of you," shouted Henry, the moment he was relieved of
his charge: "little Alice is in that house. We must pull it down. Who
will lend a hand?"

He did not pause for an answer, but, seizing an ax, rushed through the
smoke and began to cut down the door-posts. The whole party there
assembled, numbering about fifty, rushed forward, as one man, to aid in
the effort. The attempt was a wild one. Had Henry considered for a
moment, he would have seen that, in the event of their succeeding in
pulling down the blazing pile, they would in all probability smother the
child in the ruins.

"The shell is in the outhouse," said Corrie, eagerly, to the giant who
held him.

"Wot shell?" inquired Bumpus.

"The shell that they blow like a horn to call the people to work with."

"Ah! you're sane again," said the sailor releasing him; "go, find it,
lad, and blow till yer cheeks crack."

Corrie was gone long before Jo had concluded even that short remark. In
another second the harsh but loud sound of the shell rang over the
hillside. The settlers, black and white, immediately ceased their
pursuit of the savages, and from every side they came trooping in by
dozens. Without waiting to inquire the cause of what was being done,
each man, as he arrived, fell to work on the blazing edifice, and, urged
on by Henry's voice and example, toiled and moiled in the midst of fire
and smoke until the pastor's house was literally pulled to pieces.

Fortunately for little Alice, she had been carried out of the house long
before by Keona, who, being subtle as well as revengeful, knew well how
to strike at the tenderest part of the white man's heart.

While her friends were thus frantically endeavoring to deliver her from
the burning house in which they supposed her to be, Alice was being
hurried through the woods by a steep mountain path in the direction of
the native village. Happily for the feelings of her father, the fact was
made known, soon after the house had been pulled down, by the arrival of
a small party of native settlers bearing one of the child's shoes. They
had found it, they said, sticking in the mud, about a mile off, and had
tracked the little footsteps a long way into the mountains by the side
of the prints made by the naked feet of a savage. At length they had
lost the tracks amid the hard lava rocks, and had given up the chase.

"We must follow them up instantly," said Mr. Mason, who had by this time
recovered: "no time is to be lost."

"Aye, time is precious; who will go?" cried Henry, who, begrimed with
fire and smoke, and panting vehemently from recent exertion, had just at
that moment come towards the group.

"Take me! oh take me, Henry!" cried Corrie, in a beseeching tone, as he
sprang promptly to his friend's side.

At any other time, Henry would have smiled at the enthusiastic offer of
such a small arm to fight the savages; but fierce anger was in his
breast at that moment. He turned from the poor boy and looked round with
a frown, as he observed that, although the natives crowded round him at
once, neither Gascoyne, nor Thorwald, nor Captain Montague showed any
symptom of an intention to accompany him.

"Nay, be not angry, lad," said Gascoyne, observing the frown; "your
blood is young and hot, as it should be; but it behooves us to have a
council of war before we set out on this expedition, which, believe me,
will be no trifling one, if I know anything of savage ways and doings."

"Mr. Gascoyne is right," said Montague, turning to the missionary, who
stood regarding the party with anxious looks, quite unable to offer
advice on such an occasion, and clasping the little shoe firmly in both
hands; "it seems to me that those who know the customs of savage warfare
should give their advice first. You may depend on all the aid that it is
in my power to give."

"Ole Thorwald is our leader when we are compelled to fight in
self-defense," said Mr. Mason; "would God that it were less frequently
we were obliged to demand his services. He knows what is best to be
done."

"I know what is best to do," said Thorwald, "when I have to lead men
into action, or to show them how to fight. But, to say truth, I don't
plume myself on possessing more than an average share of the qualities
of the terrier dog. When niggers are to be hunted out of holes in the
mountains like rabbits, I will do what in me lies to aid in the work;
but I had rather be led than lead if you can find a better man."

Thorwald said this with a rueful countenance, for he had hoped to have
settled this war in a pitched battle; and there were few things the
worthy man seemed to enjoy more than a stand-up fight on level ground. A
fair field and no favor was his delight; but climbing the hills was his
mortal aversion. He was somewhat too corpulent and short of wind for
that.

"Come, Gascoyne," said Henry; "you know more about the savages than
anybody here; and if I remember rightly, you have told me that you are
acquainted with most of the mountain passes."

"With all of them, lad," interposed Gascoyne; "I know every pass and
cavern on the island."

"What, then, would you advise?" asked Montague.

"If a British officer can put himself under a simple trading skipper,"
said Gascoyne, "I may perhaps show what ought to be done in this
emergency."

"I can co-operate with any one who proves himself worthy of confidence,"
retorted Montague, sharply.

"Well, then," continued the other, "it is vain to think of doing any
good by a disorderly chase into mountains like these. I would advise
that our forces be divided into three. One band under Mr. Thorwald
should go round by the Goat's Pass, to which I will guide him, and cut
off the retreat of the savages there; another party under my friend
Henry Stuart should give chase in the direction in which little Alice
seems to have been taken; and a third party, consisting of his Majesty's
vessel the Talisman and crew; should proceed round to the north side of
the island and bombard the native village."

"The Goat's Pass," growled Thorwald, "sounds unpleasantly rugged and
steep in the ears of a man of my weight and years, Mister Gascoyne. But
if there's no easier style of work to be done, I fancy I must be content
with what falls to my lot."

"And truly," added Montague, "methinks you might have assigned me a more
useful, as well as more congenial occupation, than the bombardment of a
mud village full of women and children; for I doubt not that every
able-bodied man has left it, to go on this expedition."

