under a tree in the orchard, so I dashed out to get them, all quite
soaked.  The red cover of the poems had run into the inside; Dover
Beach in the future will be washed by pink waves.

A storm is awfully disturbing in the country.  You are always having to
think of so many things that are out of doors and getting spoiled.

                                                   Thursday

Daddy!  Daddy!  What do you think?  The postman has just come with two
letters.

1st.  My story is accepted.  $50.

ALORS!  I'm an AUTHOR.

2nd.  A letter from the college secretary.  I'm to have a scholarship
for two years that will cover board and tuition.  It was founded for
'marked proficiency in English with general excellency in other lines.'
And I've won it!  I applied for it before I left, but I didn't have an
idea I'd get it, on account of my Freshman bad work in maths and Latin.
But it seems I've made it up.  I am awfully glad, Daddy, because now I
won't be such a burden to you.  The monthly allowance will be all I'll
need, and maybe I can earn that with writing or tutoring or something.

I'm LONGING to go back and begin work.

                   Yours ever,
                                           Jerusha Abbott,

                               Author of When the Sophomores Won
                               the Game.  For sale at all news
                               stands, price ten cents.




                                               26th September

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Back at college again and an upper classman.  Our study is better than
ever this year--faces the South with two huge windows and oh!  so
furnished.  Julia, with an unlimited allowance, arrived two days early
and was attacked with a fever for settling.

We have new wall paper and oriental rugs and mahogany chairs--not
painted mahogany which made us sufficiently happy last year, but real.
It's very gorgeous, but I don't feel as though I belonged in it; I'm
nervous all the time for fear I'll get an ink spot in the wrong place.

And, Daddy, I found your letter waiting for me--pardon--I mean your
secretary's.

Will you kindly convey to me a comprehensible reason why I should not
accept that scholarship?  I don't understand your objection in the
least.  But anyway, it won't do the slightest good for you to object,
for I've already accepted it and I am not going to change!  That sounds
a little impertinent, but I don't mean it so.

I suppose you feel that when you set out to educate me, you'd like to
finish the work, and put a neat period, in the shape of a diploma, at
the end.

But look at it just a second from my point of view.  I shall owe my
education to you just as much as though I let you pay for the whole of
it, but I won't be quite so much indebted.  I know that you don't want
me to return the money, but nevertheless, I am going to want to do it,
if I possibly can; and winning this scholarship makes it so much
easier.  I was expecting to spend the rest of my life in paying my
debts, but now I shall only have to spend one-half of the rest of it.

I hope you understand my position and won't be cross.  The allowance I
shall still most gratefully accept.  It requires an allowance to live
up to Julia and her furniture!  I wish that she had been reared to
simpler tastes, or else that she were not my room-mate.

This isn't much of a letter; I meant to have written a lot--but I've
been hemming four window curtains and three portieres (I'm glad you
can't see the length of the stitches), and polishing a brass desk set
with tooth powder (very uphill work), and sawing off picture wire with
manicure scissors, and unpacking four boxes of books, and putting away
two trunkfuls of clothes (it doesn't seem believable that Jerusha
Abbott owns two trunks full of clothes, but she does!) and welcoming
back fifty dear friends in between.

Opening day is a joyous occasion!

Good night, Daddy dear, and don't be annoyed because your chick is
wanting to scratch for herself.  She's growing up into an awfully
energetic little hen--with a very determined cluck and lots of
beautiful feathers (all due to you).

                           Affectionately,
                                               Judy




                                               30th September

Dear Daddy,

Are you still harping on that scholarship?  I never knew a man so
obstinate, and stubborn and unreasonable, and tenacious, and
bull-doggish, and unable-to-see-other-people's-point-of-view, as you.

You prefer that I should not be accepting favours from strangers.

Strangers!--And what are you, pray?

Is there anyone in the world that I know less?  I shouldn't recognize
you if I met you in the street.  Now, you see, if you had been a sane,
sensible person and had written nice, cheering fatherly letters to your
little Judy, and had come occasionally and patted her on the head, and
had said you were glad she was such a good girl--Then, perhaps, she
wouldn't have flouted you in your old age, but would have obeyed your
slightest wish like the dutiful daughter she was meant to be.

Strangers indeed!  You live in a glass house, Mr. Smith.

And besides, this isn't a favour; it's like a prize--I earned it by
hard work.  If nobody had been good enough in English, the committee
wouldn't have awarded the scholarship; some years they don't. Also--
But what's the use of arguing with a man?  You belong, Mr. Smith, to a
sex devoid of a sense of logic.  To bring a man into line, there are
just two methods:  one must either coax or be disagreeable.  I scorn to
coax men for what I wish.  Therefore, I must be disagreeable.

I refuse, sir, to give up the scholarship; and if you make any more
fuss, I won't accept the monthly allowance either, but will wear myself
into a nervous wreck tutoring stupid Freshmen.

That is my ultimatum!

And listen--I have a further thought.  Since you are so afraid that by
taking this scholarship I am depriving someone else of an education, I
know a way out.  You can apply the money that you would have spent for
me towards educating some other little girl from the John Grier Home.
Don't you think that's a nice idea?  Only, Daddy, EDUCATE the new girl
as much as you choose, but please don't LIKE her any better than me.

I trust that your secretary won't be hurt because I pay so little
attention to the suggestions offered in his letter, but I can't help it
if he is.  He's a spoiled child, Daddy.  I've meekly given in to his
whims heretofore, but this time I intend to be FIRM.

Yours,
       With a mind,
           Completely and Irrevocably and
               World-without-End Made-up,

                                        Jerusha Abbott




                                                   9th November

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I started down town today to buy a bottle of shoe blacking and some
collars and the material for a new blouse and a jar of violet cream and
a cake of Castile soap--all very necessary; I couldn't be happy another
day without them--and when I tried to pay the car fare, I found that I
had left my purse in the pocket of my other coat.  So I had to get out
and take the next car, and was late for gymnasium.

It's a dreadful thing to have no memory and two coats!

Julia Pendleton has invited me to visit her for the Christmas holidays.
How does that strike you, Mr. Smith?  Fancy Jerusha Abbott, of the John
Grier Home, sitting at the tables of the rich.  I don't know why Julia
wants me--she seems to be getting quite attached to me of late.  I
should, to tell the truth, very much prefer going to Sallie's, but
Julia asked me first, so if I go anywhere it must be to New York
instead of to Worcester.  I'm rather awed at the prospect of meeting
Pendletons EN MASSE, and also I'd have to get a lot of new clothes--so,
Daddy dear, if you write that you would prefer having me remain quietly
at college, I will bow to your wishes with my usual sweet docility.

I'm engaged at odd moments with the Life and Letters of Thomas
Huxley--it makes nice, light reading to pick up between times.  Do you
know what an archaeopteryx is?  It's a bird.  And a stereognathus?  I'm
not sure myself, but I think it's a missing link, like a bird with
teeth or a lizard with wings.  No, it isn't either; I've just looked in
the book.  It's a mesozoic mammal.

I've elected economics this year--very illuminating subject.  When I
finish that I'm going to take Charity and Reform; then, Mr. Trustee,
I'll know just how an orphan asylum ought to be run.  Don't you think
I'd make an admirable voter if I had my rights?  I was twenty-one last
week.  This is an awfully wasteful country to throw away such an
honest, educated, conscientious, intelligent citizen as I would be.

                           Yours always,
                                               Judy




                                               7th December

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

Thank you for permission to visit Julia--I take it that silence means
consent.

Such a social whirl as we've been having!  The Founder's dance came
last week--this was the first year that any of us could attend; only
upper classmen being allowed.

I invited Jimmie McBride, and Sallie invited his room-mate at
Princeton, who visited them last summer at their camp--an awfully nice
man with red hair--and Julia invited a man from New York, not very
exciting, but socially irreproachable.  He is connected with the De la
Mater Chichesters.  Perhaps that means something to you?  It doesn't
illuminate me to any extent.

However--our guests came Friday afternoon in time for tea in the senior
corridor, and then dashed down to the hotel for dinner.  The hotel was
so full that they slept in rows on the billiard tables, they say.
Jimmie McBride says that the next time he is bidden to a social event
in this college, he is going to bring one of their Adirondack tents and
pitch it on the campus.

At seven-thirty they came back for the President's reception and dance.
Our functions commence early!  We had the men's cards all made out
ahead of time, and after every dance, we'd leave them in groups, under
the letter that stood for their names, so that they could be readily
found by their next partners.  Jimmie McBride, for example, would stand
patiently under 'M' until he was claimed.  (At least, he ought to have
stood patiently, but he kept wandering off and getting mixed with 'R's'
and 'S's' and all sorts of letters.) I found him a very difficult
guest; he was sulky because he had only three dances with me.  He said
he was bashful about dancing with girls he didn't know!

The next morning we had a glee club concert--and who do you think wrote
the funny new song composed for the occasion?  It's the truth.  She
did.  Oh, I tell you, Daddy, your little foundling is getting to be
quite a prominent person!

Anyway, our gay two days were great fun, and I think the men enjoyed
it.  Some of them were awfully perturbed at first at the prospect of
facing one thousand girls; but they got acclimated very quickly.  Our
two Princeton men had a beautiful time--at least they politely said
they had, and they've invited us to their dance next spring.  We've
accepted, so please don't object, Daddy dear.

Julia and Sallie and I all had new dresses.  Do you want to hear about
them?  Julia's was cream satin and gold embroidery and she wore purple
orchids.  It was a DREAM and came from Paris, and cost a million
dollars.

Sallie's was pale blue trimmed with Persian embroidery, and went
beautifully with red hair.  It didn't cost quite a million, but was
just as effective as Julia's.

Mine was pale pink crepe de chine trimmed with ecru lace and rose
satin.  And I carried crimson roses which J. McB.  sent (Sallie having
told him what colour to get). And we all had satin slippers and silk
stockings and chiffon scarfs to match.

You must be deeply impressed by these millinery details.

One can't help thinking, Daddy, what a colourless life a man is forced
to lead, when one reflects that chiffon and Venetian point and hand
embroidery and Irish crochet are to him mere empty words.  Whereas a
woman--whether she is interested in babies or microbes or husbands or
poetry or servants or parallelograms or gardens or Plato or bridge--is
fundamentally and always interested in clothes.

It's the one touch of nature that makes the whole world kin.  (That
isn't original.  I got it out of one of Shakespeare's plays).

However, to resume.  Do you want me to tell you a secret that I've
lately discovered?  And will you promise not to think me vain?  Then
listen:

I'm pretty.

I am, really.  I'd be an awful idiot not to know it with three
looking-glasses in the room.

                                           A Friend


PS.  This is one of those wicked anonymous letters you read about in
novels.



                                               20th December

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

I've just a moment, because I must attend two classes, pack a trunk and
a suit-case, and catch the four-o'clock train--but I couldn't go
without sending a word to let you know how much I appreciate my
Christmas box.

I love the furs and the necklace and the Liberty scarf and the gloves
and handkerchiefs and books and purse--and most of all I love you!  But
Daddy, you have no business to spoil me this way.  I'm only human--and
a girl at that.  How can I keep my mind sternly fixed on a studious
career, when you deflect me with such worldly frivolities?

I have strong suspicions now as to which one of the John Grier Trustees
used to give the Christmas tree and the Sunday ice-cream.  He was
nameless, but by his works I know him!  You deserve to be happy for all
the good things you do.

Goodbye, and a very merry Christmas.

                               Yours always,
                                               Judy


PS.  I am sending a slight token, too.  Do you think you would like her
if you knew her?




                                               11th January

I meant to write to you from the city, Daddy, but New York is an
engrossing place.

I had an interesting--and illuminating--time, but I'm glad I don't
belong to such a family!  I should truly rather have the John Grier
Home for a background.  Whatever the drawbacks of my bringing up, there
was at least no pretence about it.  I know now what people mean when
they say they are weighed down by Things.  The material atmosphere of
that house was crushing; I didn't draw a deep breath until I was on an
express train coming back.  All the furniture was carved and
upholstered and gorgeous; the people I met were beautifully dressed and
low-voiced and well-bred, but it's the truth, Daddy, I never heard one
word of real talk from the time we arrived until we left.  I don't
think an idea ever entered the front door.

Mrs. Pendleton never thinks of anything but jewels and dressmakers and
social engagements.  She did seem a different kind of mother from Mrs.
McBride!  If I ever marry and have a family, I'm going to make them as
exactly like the McBrides as I can.  Not for all the money in the world
would I ever let any children of mine develop into Pendletons.  Maybe
it isn't polite to criticize people you've been visiting?  If it isn't,
please excuse.  This is very confidential, between you and me.

I only saw Master Jervie once when he called at tea time, and then I
didn't have a chance to speak to him alone.  It was really
disappointing after our nice time last summer.  I don't think he cares
much for his relatives--and I am sure they don't care much for him!
Julia's mother says he's unbalanced.  He's a Socialist--except, thank
Heaven, he doesn't let his hair grow and wear red ties.  She can't
imagine where he picked up his queer ideas; the family have been Church
of England for generations.  He throws away his money on every sort of
crazy reform, instead of spending it on such sensible things as yachts
and automobiles and polo ponies.  He does buy candy with it though!  He
sent Julia and me each a box for Christmas.

You know, I think I'll be a Socialist, too.  You wouldn't mind, would
you, Daddy?  They're quite different from Anarchists; they don't
believe in blowing people up.  Probably I am one by rights; I belong to
the proletariat.  I haven't determined yet just which kind I am going
to be.  I will look into the subject over Sunday, and declare my
principles in my next.

I've seen loads of theatres and hotels and beautiful houses.  My mind
is a confused jumble of onyx and gilding and mosaic floors and palms.
I'm still pretty breathless but I am glad to get back to college and my
books--I believe that I really am a student; this atmosphere of
academic calm I find more bracing than New York.  College is a very
satisfying sort of life; the books and study and regular classes keep
you alive mentally, and then when your mind gets tired, you have the
gymnasium and outdoor athletics, and always plenty of congenial friends
who are thinking about the same things you are.  We spend a whole
evening in nothing but talk--talk--talk--and go to bed with a very
uplifted feeling, as though we had settled permanently some pressing
world problems.  And filling in every crevice, there is always such a
lot of nonsense--just silly jokes about the little things that come up
but very satisfying.  We do appreciate our own witticisms!

It isn't the great big pleasures that count the most; it's making a
great deal out of the little ones--I've discovered the true secret of
happiness, Daddy, and that is to live in the now.  Not to be for ever
regretting the past, or anticipating the future; but to get the most
that you can out of this very instant.  It's like farming.  You can
have extensive farming and intensive farming; well, I am going to have
intensive living after this.  I'm going to enjoy every second, and I'm
going to KNOW I'm enjoying it while I'm enjoying it.  Most people don't
live; they just race.  They are trying to reach some goal far away on
the horizon, and in the heat of the going they get so breathless and
panting that they lose all sight of the beautiful, tranquil country
they are passing through; and then the first thing they know, they are
old and worn out, and it doesn't make any difference whether they've
reached the goal or not.  I've decided to sit down by the way and pile
up a lot of little happinesses, even if I never become a Great Author.
Did you ever know such a philosopheress as I am developing into?

                                   Yours ever,
                                                   Judy

PS.  It's raining cats and dogs tonight.  Two puppies and a kitten have
just landed on the window-sill.




Dear Comrade,

Hooray!  I'm a Fabian.

That's a Socialist who's willing to wait.  We don't want the social
revolution to come tomorrow morning; it would be too upsetting.  We
want it to come very gradually in the distant future, when we shall all
be prepared and able to sustain the shock.

In the meantime, we must be getting ready, by instituting industrial,
educational and orphan asylum reforms.

               Yours, with fraternal love,
                                               Judy

Monday, 3rd hour




                                                   11th February
Dear D.-L.-L.,

Don't be insulted because this is so short.  It isn't a letter; it's
just a LINE to say that I'm going to write a letter pretty soon when
examinations are over.  It is not only necessary that I pass, but pass
WELL.  I have a scholarship to live up to.

                       Yours, studying hard,
                                               J. A.




                                                   5th March

Dear Daddy-Long-Legs,

President Cuyler made a speech this evening about the modern generation
being flippant and superficial.  He says that we are losing the old
ideals of earnest endeavour and true scholarship; and particularly is
this falling-off noticeable in our disrespectful attitude towards
organized authority.  We no longer pay a seemly deference to our
superiors.

I came away from chapel very sober.

Am I too familiar, Daddy?  Ought I to treat you with more dignity and
aloofness?--Yes, I'm sure I ought.  I'll begin again.

My Dear Mr. Smith,

You will be pleased to hear that I passed successfully my mid-year
examinations, and am now commencing work in the new semester.  I am
leaving chemistry--having completed the course in qualitative
analysis--and am entering upon the study of biology.  I approach this
subject with some hesitation, as I understand that we dissect
angleworms and frogs.

An extremely interesting and valuable lecture was given in the chapel
last week upon Roman Remains in Southern France.  I have never listened
to a more illuminating exposition of the subject.

We are reading Wordsworth's Tintern Abbey in connection with our course
in English Literature.  What an exquisite work it is, and how
adequately it embodies his conceptions of Pantheism!  The Romantic
movement of the early part of the last century, exemplified in the
works of such poets as Shelley, Byron, Keats, and Wordsworth, appeals
to me very much more than the Classical period that preceded it.
Speaking of poetry, have you ever read that charming little thing of
Tennyson's called Locksley Hall?

I am attending gymnasium very regularly of late.  A proctor system has
been devised, and failure to comply with the rules causes a great deal
of inconvenience.  The gymnasium is equipped with a very beautiful
swimming tank of cement and marble, the gift of a former graduate.  My
room-mate, Miss McBride, has given me her bathing-suit (it shrank so
that she can no longer wear it) and I am about to begin swimming
lessons.

We had delicious pink ice-cream for dessert last night.  Only vegetable
dyes are used in colouring the food.  The college is very much opposed,
both from aesthetic and hygienic motives, to the use of aniline dyes.

The weather of late has been ideal--bright sunshine and clouds
interspersed with a few welcome snow-storms. I and my companions have
enjoyed our walks to and from classes--particularly from.

Trusting, my dear Mr. Smith, that this will find you in your usual good
health,

           I remain,
               Most cordially yours,
                                      Jerusha Abbott




                                               24th April

Dear Daddy,

Spring has come again!  You should see how lovely the campus is.  I
think you might come and look at it for yourself.  Master Jervie
dropped in again last Friday--but he chose a most unpropitious time,
for Sallie and Julia and I were just running to catch a train.  And
where do you think we were going?  To Princeton, to attend a dance and
a ball game, if you please!  I didn't ask you if I might go, because I
had a feeling that your secretary would say no.  But it was entirely
regular; we had leave-of-absence from college, and Mrs. McBride
chaperoned us.  We had a charming time--but I shall have to omit
details; they are too many and complicated.


                                                       Saturday

Up before dawn!  The night watchman called us--six of us--and we made
coffee in a chafing dish (you never saw so many grounds!) and walked
two miles to the top of One Tree Hill to see the sun rise.  We had to
scramble up the last slope!  The sun almost beat us!  And perhaps you
think we didn't bring back appetites to breakfast!

