in that region.

"I take it," he said, "that the Mexicans are a good distance east, and
that the Lipans and Comanches are another good distance west. Just the
same, boys, we've got to keep a close watch, an' I think we've got more
to fear from raidin' parties of the Indians than from the Mexicans. All
the Mexicans are likely to be ridin' to some point on the Rio Grande to
meet the forces of Santa Anna."

"I wish we had more horses," said Obed. "We'd go that way ourselves and
see what's up."

"Well, maybe we'll get 'em," said the Panther. "Thar's a lot of horses
on these plains, some of which ought to belong to us an' we may find a
way of claimin' our rights."

They passed a number of pleasant days at the cabin and in hunting and
foraging in the vicinity. They killed more big game and the dressed
skins of buffalo, bear and deer were spread on the floor or were hung on
the walls. Wild turkeys were numerous, and they had them for food every
day. But they discovered no signs of man, white or red, and they would
have been content to wait there had they not been so anxious to
investigate the reported advance of Santa Anna on the Rio Grande.

Roylston was the most patient of them all, or at least he said the
least.

"I think," he said about the fourth or fifth day, "that it does not hurt
to linger here. The Mexican power has not yet gathered in full. As for
me, personally, it suits me admirably. I can walk a full two hundred
yards now, and next week I shall be able to walk a mile."

"When we are all ready to depart, which way do you intend to go Mr.
Roylston?" asked Ned.

"I wish to go around the settlements and then to New Orleans," replied
Roylston. "That city is my headquarters, but I also have establishments
elsewhere, even as far north as New York. Are you sure, Ned, that you
cannot go with me and bring your friend Allen, too? I could make men of
you both in a vast commercial world. There have been great
opportunities, and greater are coming. The development of this mighty
southwest will call for large and bold schemes of organization. It is
not money alone that I offer, but the risk, the hopes and rewards of a
great game, in fact, the opening of a new world to civilization, for
such this southwest is. It appeals to some deeper feeling than that
which can be aroused by the mere making of money."

Ned, deeply interested, watched him intently as he spoke. He saw
Roylston show emotion for the first time, and the mind of the boy
responded to that of the man. He could understand this dream. The image
of a great Texan republic was already in the minds of men. It possessed
that of Ned. He did not believe that the Texans and Mexicans could ever
get along together, and he was quite sure that Texas could never return
to its original position as part of a Mexican state.

"You can do much for Texas there with me in New Orleans," said Roylston,
as if he were making a final appeal to one whom he looked upon almost as
a son. "Perhaps you could do more than you can here in Texas."

Ned shook his head a little sadly. He did not like to disappoint this
man, but he could not leave the field. Young Allen also said that he
would remain.

"Be it so," said Roylston. "It is young blood. Never was there a truer
saying than 'Young men for war, old men for counsel.' But the time may
come when you will need me. When it does come send the word."

Ned judged from Roylston's manner that dark days were ahead, but the
merchant did not mention the subject again. At the end of a week, when
they were amply supplied with everything except horses, the Panther
decided to take Ned and Obed and go on a scout toward the Rio Grande.
They started early in the morning and the horses, which had obtained
plenty of grass, were full of life and vigor.

They soon left the narrow belt of forest far behind them, maintaining an
almost direct course toward the southeast. The point on the river that
they intended to reach was seventy or eighty miles away, and they did
not expect to cover the distance in less than two days.

They rode all that day and did not see a trace of a human being, but
they did see both buffalo and antelope in the distance.

"It shows what the war has done," said the Panther. "I rode over these
same prairies about a year ago an' game was scarce, but there were some
men. Now the men are all gone an' the game has come back. Cur'us how
quick buffalo an' deer an' antelope learn about these things."

They slept the night through on the open prairie, keeping watch by
turns. The weather was cold, but they had their good blankets with them
and they took no discomfort. They rode forward again early in the
morning, and about noon struck an old but broad trail. It was evident
that many men and many wagons had passed here. There were deep ruts in
the earth, cut by wheels, and the traces of footsteps showed over a
belt a quarter of a mile wide.

"Well, Ned, I s'pose you can make a purty good guess what this means?"
said the Panther.

"This was made weeks and weeks ago," replied Ned confidently, "and the
men who made it were Mexicans. They were soldiers, the army of Cos, that
we took at San Antonio, and which we allowed to retire on parole into
Mexico."

"There's no doubt you're right," said the Panther. "There's no other
force in this part of the world big enough to make such a wide an'
lastin' trail. An' I think it's our business to follow these tracks.
What do you say, Obed?"

"It's just the one thing in the world that we're here to do," said the
Maine man. "Broad is the path and straight is the way that leads before
us, and we follow on."

"Do we follow them down into Mexico?" said Ned.

"I don't think it likely that we'll have to do it," replied the Panther,
glancing at Obed.

Ned caught the look and he understood.

"Do you mean," he asked, "that Cos, after taking his parole and pledging
his word that he and his troops would not fight against us, would stop
at the Rio Grande?"

"I mean that an' nothin' else," replied the Panther. "I ain't talkin'
ag'in Mexicans in general. I've knowed some good men among them, but I
wouldn't take the word of any of that crowd of generals, Santa Anna,
Cos, Sesma, Urrea, Gaona, Castrillon, the Italian Filisola, or any of
them."

"There's one I'd trust," said Ned, with grateful memory, "and that's
Almonte."

"I've heard that he's of different stuff," said the Panther, "but it's
best to keep out of their hands."

They were now riding swiftly almost due southward, having changed their
course to follow the trail, and they kept a sharp watch ahead for
Mexican scouts or skirmishers. But the bare country in its winter brown
was lone and desolate. The trail led straight ahead, and it would have
been obvious now to the most inexperienced eye that an army had passed
that way. They saw remains of camp fires, now and then the skeleton of a
horse or mule picked clean by buzzards, fragments of worn-out clothing
that had been thrown aside, and once a broken-down wagon. Two or three
times they saw little mounds of earth with rude wooden crosses stuck
upon them, to mark where some of the wounded had died and had been
buried.

They came at last to a bit of woodland growing about a spring that
seemed to gush straight up from the earth. It was really an open grove
with no underbrush, a splendid place for a camp. It was evident that
Cos's force had put it to full use, as the earth nearly everywhere had
been trodden by hundreds of feet, and the charred pieces of wood were
innumerable. The Panther made a long and critical examination of
everything.

"I'm thinkin'," he said, "that Cos stayed here three or four days. All
the signs p'int that way. He was bound by the terms we gave him at San
Antonio to go an' not fight ag'in, but he's shorely takin' his time
about it. Look at these bones, will you? Now, Ned, you promisin' scout
an' skirmisher, tell me what they are."

"Buffalo bones," replied Ned promptly.

"Right you are," replied the Panther, "an' when Cos left San Antonio he
wasn't taking any buffaloes along with him to kill fur meat. They staid
here so long that the hunters had time to go out an' shoot game."

"A long lane's the thief of time," said Obed, "and having a big march
before him, Cos has concluded to walk instead of run."

"'Cause he was expectin' somethin' that would stop him," said the
Panther angrily. "I hate liars an' traitors. Well, we'll soon see."

Their curiosity became so great that they rode at a swift trot on the
great south trail, and not ten miles further they came upon the
unmistakable evidences of another big camp that had lasted long.

"Slower an' slower," muttered the Panther. "They must have met a
messenger. Wa'al, it's fur us to go slow now, too."

But he said aloud:

"Boys, it ain't more'n twenty miles now to the Rio Grande, an' we can
hit it by dark. But I'm thinkin' that we'd better be mighty keerful now
as we go on."

"I suppose it's because Mexican scouts and skirmishers may be watching,"
said Ned.

"Yes, an' 'specially that fellow Urrea. His uncle bein' one of Santa
Anna's leadin' gen'rals, he's likely to have freer rein, an', as we
know, he's clever an' active. I'd hate to fall into his hands again."

They rode more slowly, and three pairs of eyes continually searched the
plain for an enemy. Ned's sight was uncommonly acute, and Obed and the
Panther frequently appealed to him as a last resort. It flattered his
pride and he strove to justify it.

Their pace became slower and slower, and presently the early twilight of
winter was coming. A cold wind moaned, but the desolate plain was broken
here and there by clumps of trees. At the suggestion of the Panther
they rode to one of these and halted under cover of the timber.

"The river can't be much more than a mile ahead," said the Panther, "an'
we might run into the Mexicans any minute. We're sheltered here, an'
we'd better wait a while. Then I think we can do more stalkin'."

Obed and Ned were not at all averse, and dismounting they stretched
themselves, easing their muscles. Old Jack hunted grass and, finding
none, rubbed Ned's elbow with his nose suggestively.

"Never mind, old boy," said Ned, patting the glossy muzzle of his
faithful comrade. "This is no time for feasting and banqueting. We are
hunting Mexicans, you and I, and after that business is over we may
consider our pleasures."

They remained several hours among the trees. They saw the last red glow
that the sun leaves in the west die away. They saw the full darkness
descend over the earth, and then the stars come trooping out. After that
they saw a scarlet flush under the horizon which was not a part of the
night and its progress. The Panther noted it, and his great face
darkened. He turned to Ned.

"You see it, don't you? Now tell me what it is."

"That light, I should say, comes from the fires of an army. And it can
be no other army than that of Cos."

"Right again, ain't he, Obed?"

"He surely is. Cos and his men are there. He who breaks his faith when
he steals away will have to fight another day. How far off would you say
that light is, Panther?"

"'Bout two miles, an' in an hour or so we'll ride fur it. The night will
darken up more then, an' it will give us a better chance for lookin' an
listenin'. I'll be mightily fooled if we don't find out a lot that's
worth knowin'."

True to Obed's prediction, the night deepened somewhat within the hour.
Many of the stars were hidden by floating wisps of cloud, and objects
could not be seen far on the dusky surface of the plain. But the
increased darkness only made the scarlet glow in the south deepen. It
seemed, too, to spread far to right and left.

"That's a big force," said the Panther. "It'll take a lot of fires to
make a blaze like that."

"I'm agreeing with you," said Obed. "I'm thinking that those are the
camp fires of more men than Cos took from San Antonio with him."

"Which would mean," said Ned, "that another Mexican army had come north
to join him."

"Anyhow, we'll soon see," said the Panther.

They mounted their horses and rode cautiously toward the light.




CHAPTER V

SANTA ANNA'S ADVANCE


The three rode abreast, Ned in the center. The boy was on terms of
perfect equality with Obed and the Panther. They treated him as a man
among men, and respected his character, rather grave for one so young,
and always keen to learn.

The land rolled away in swells as usual throughout a great part of
Texas, but they were not of much elevation and the red glow in the south
was always in sight, deepening fast as they advanced. They stopped at
last on a little elevation within the shadow of some myrtle oaks, and
saw the fires spread before them only four or five hundred yards away,
and along a line of at least two miles. They heard the confused murmur
of many men. The dark outlines of cannon were seen against the
firelight, and now and then the musical note of a mandolin or guitar
came to them.

"We was right in our guess," said the Panther. "It's a lot bigger force
than the one that Cos led away from San Antonio, an' it will take a heap
of rippin' an' t'arin' an' roarin' to turn it back. Our people don't
know how much is comin' ag'in 'em."

The Panther spoke in a solemn tone. Ned saw that he was deeply impressed
and that he feared for the future. Good cause had he. Squabbles among
the Texan leaders had reduced their army to five or six hundred men.

"Don't you think," said Ned, "that we ought to find out just exactly
what is here, and what this army intends?"

"Not a doubt of it," said Obed. "Those who have eyes to see should not
go away without seeing."

The Panther nodded violently in assent.

"We must scout about the camp," he said. "Mebbe we'd better divide an'
then we can all gather before day-break at the clump of trees back
there."

He pointed to a little cluster of trees several hundred yards back of
them, and Ned and Obed agreed. The Panther turned away to the right,
Obed to the left and Ned took the center. Their plan of dividing their
force had a great advantage. One man was much less likely than three to
attract undue attention.

Ned went straight ahead a hundred yards or more, when he was stopped by
an arroyo five or six feet wide and with very deep banks. He looked
about, uncertain at first what to do. Obed and the Panther had already
disappeared in the dusk. Before him glowed the red light, and he heard
the distant sound of many voices.

Ned quickly decided. He remembered how they had escaped up the bed of
the creek when they were besieged by Urrea, and if one could leave by an
arroyo, one could also approach by it. He rode to the group of trees
that had been designated as the place of meeting, and left his horse
there. He noticed considerable grass within the ring of trunks, and he
was quite confident that Old Jack would remain there until his return.
But he addressed to him words of admonition:

"Be sure that you stay among these trees, old friend," he said, "because
it's likely that when I want you I'll want you bad. Remain and attend to
this grass."

Old Jack whinnied softly and, after his fashion, rubbed his nose gently
against his master's arm. It was sufficient for Ned. He was sure that
the horse understood, and leaving him he went back to the arroyo, which
he entered without hesitation.

Ned was well armed, as every one then had full need to be. He wore a
sombrero in the Mexican fashion, and flung over his shoulders was a
great serape which he had found most useful in the winter. With his
perfect knowledge of Spanish and its Mexican variants he believed that
if surprised he could pass as a Mexican, particularly in the night and
among so many.

The arroyo led straight down toward the plain upon which the Mexicans
were encamped, and when he emerged from it he saw that the fires which
at a distance looked like one continuous blaze were scores in number.
Many of them were built of buffalo chips and others of light wood that
burned fast. Sentinels were posted here and there, but they kept little
watch. Why should they? Here was a great Mexican army, and there was
certainly no foe amounting to more than a few men within a hundred
miles.

Ned's heart sank as he beheld the evident extent of the Mexican array.
The little Texan force left in the field could be no match for such an
army as this.

Nevertheless, his resolution to go through the Mexican camp hardened. If
he came back with a true and detailed tale of their numbers the Texans
must believe and prepare. He drew the brim of his sombrero down a little
further, and pulled his serape up to meet it. The habit the Mexicans had
of wrapping their serapes so high that they were covered to the nose was
fortunate at this time. He was now completely disguised, without the
appearance of having taken any unusual precaution.

He walked forward boldly and sat down with a group beside a fire. He
judged by the fact that they were awake so late that they had but little
to do, and he saw at once also that they were Mexicans from the far
south. They were small, dark men, rather amiable in appearance. Two
began to play guitars and they sang a plaintive song to the music. The
others, smoking cigarritos, listened attentively and luxuriously. Ned
imitated them perfectly. He, too, lying upon his elbow before the
pleasant fire, felt the influence of the music, so sweet, so murmurous,
speaking so little of war. One of the men handed him a cigarrito, and,
lighting it, he made pretense of smoking--he would not have seemed a
Mexican had he not smoked the cigarrito.

Lying there, Ned saw many tents, evidence of a camp that was not for the
day only, and he beheld officers in bright uniforms passing among them.
His heart gave a great jump when he noticed among them a heavy-set, dark
man. It was Cos, Cos the breaker of oaths. With him was another officer
whose uniform indicated the general. Ned learned later that this was
Sesma, who had been dispatched with a brigade by Santa Anna to meet Cos
on the Rio Grande, where they were to remain until the dictator himself
came with more troops.

The music ceased presently and one of the men said to Ned:

"What company?"

Ned had prepared himself for such questions, and he moved his hand
vaguely toward the left.

"Over there," he said.

They were fully satisfied, and continued to puff their cigarritos,
resting their heads with great content upon pillows made of their
saddles and blankets. For a while they said nothing more, happily
watching the rings of smoke from their cigarritos rise and melt into the
air. Although small and short, they looked hardy and strong. Ned
noticed the signs of bustle and expectancy about the camp. Usually
Mexicans were asleep at this hour, and he wondered why they lingered.
But he did not approach the subject directly.

"A hard march," he said, knowing that these men about him had come a
vast distance.

"Aye, it was," said the man next on his right. "Santiago, but was it
