evening. Will meet you at a quarter to nine outside Mrs. Tennant's
house."

When Kathleen received the communication her eyes flashed with delighted
fire. She thrust the letter into her pocket and proceeded with her work.
The Irish girl looked quite happy that day; she had something to
interest her at last. Her lessons, too, were by no means distasteful.
She had a great deal of quick wit and ready perception. Hitherto she had
been taught anyhow, but now she was all keen to receive real
instruction. Her intuitions were rapid indeed; she could come to
startlingly quick conclusions, and as a rule her guesses were correct
rather than otherwise. Kathleen had a passion for music; she had never
been properly taught, but the soul of music was in her as much as it was
in David Tennant. She had a beautiful melodious voice, which had, of
course, not yet come to maturity. Just before the end of the morning she
took her first lesson in music. Her mistress was a very amiable and
clever woman of the name of Agnes Spicer. Miss Spicer put a sheet of
music before her.

"Play that," she said.

Kathleen frowned. Her delicate white fingers trembled for an instant on
the keys. She played one or two bars perforce and very badly; then she
dashed the sheet of music in an impetuous way to the floor.

"I can't," she said; "it isn't my style. May I play you something
different?"

Miss Spicer was about to refuse, but looking at the girl, whose cheeks
were flushed and eyes full of fire, she changed her mind.

"Just this once," she said; "but you must begin to practice properly.
What I call amateur music can't be allowed here."

"Will this be allowed?" said Kathleen.

She dashed into heavy chords, played lightly a delicate movement, and
then broke into an Irish air, "The Harp that once through Tara's Halls."
From one Irish melody to another her light fingers wandered. She played
with perfect correctness--with fire, with spirit. Soon she forgot
herself. When she stopped, tears were running down her cheeks.

"What is music, after all," she said, looking full into the face of her
teacher, "when you are far from the land you love? How can you stand
music then? No, I don't mean to learn _music_ at the Great Shirley
School; I can't. When I am back again at home I shall play 'The Harp
that once through Tara's Halls,' but I can't do it justice here. You
will excuse me; I can't. I am sorry if I am rude, but it isn't in me.
Some time, if you have a headache and feel very bad, as my dear father
does sometimes, I shall play to you; but I can't learn as the other
girls learn--it isn't in me."

Again she put her fingers on the keys of the piano and brought forth a
few sobbing, broken-hearted notes. Then she started up.

"I expect you will punish me for this, Miss Spicer, but I am sorry--I
can't help myself."

Strange to say, Miss Spicer did not punish her. On the contrary, she
took her hand and pressed it.

"I won't ask you to do any more to-day," she said. "I see you are not
like others. I will talk the matter over with you to-morrow."

"And you will find me unchanged," said Kathleen. "Thank you, all the
same, for your forbearance."




CHAPTER VI.

THE POOR TIRED ONE.


Mrs. Tennant spent the afternoon out shopping. She told the girls at
dinner that she would be home for tea, that she expected to be rather
tired, and hoped that they would be as good as possible. The boys were
always out during the afternoon, and as a rule never returned until
after tea; but Alice and Kathleen were expected to be in for this meal.
When Mrs. Tennant walked down the street, Kathleen went to the window
and looked after her.

"What are you going to do this afternoon?" said Alice, who was lying
back in an easy-chair with an open novel in her hand.

"I don't know," replied Kathleen. "What a dull hole this is! How can you
have grown up and kept well in a place like this?"

"Opinions differ with regard to its dullness," said Alice. "I think our
home a very pleasant, entertaining place. I wouldn't live in your wild
castle for all you could give me."

"Nobody asked you, my dear," said Kathleen, with a saucy nod of her
head.

She left the room and went up to what she called her half of the bedroom
on the next floor. She knelt down by the window and looked across over
the ugly landscape. There were houses everywhere--not a scrap of real
country, as she expressed it, to be found. She took out of her pocket
the letter which the foundation girls had sent her, and opened and read
it.

"The old quarry! I wonder where the old quarry is," she thought. "It
must be a good way from here. We have such a place at home, too. I did
not suppose one was to be found in this horrid part of the world. I am
rather glad there is an old quarry; it was quite nice of little Susy to
suggest it, and she will meet me, the little colleen. That is good. What
fun! I shall probably have to return through the bedroom window, so I
may as well explore and make all in readiness. Dear, dear! I should like
David to help me. It isn't the naughtiness that I care about, but it is
the fun of being naughty; it is the fun of having a sort of dangerous
thing to do. That is the real joy of it. It is the ecstacy of shocking
the prim Alice! Oh! there is her step. She's coming up, the creature!
Now then, I had best be as mum as I can unless I want to distract the
poor thing entirely."

Alice entered the room.

"Do you greatly object to shutting the window?" she said to Kathleen. "I
have a slight cold, and the draught will make it worse."

"Why, then, of course, darling," said Kathleen in a hearty voice, as she
brought down the window with a bang. "Would you like me to shut the
ventilator in the grate?" she then asked.

"No. How silly you are!"

"Is it silly? I thought you had a cold. You are afraid of the draughts.
Why are you going out?"

"I want to see a school friend."

"You will be back in time for tea, won't you?"

"Can't say."

"But your mother, the poor tired one, asked you to be back."

"I do wish, Kathleen, that you wouldn't call mother by that ridiculous
name. She is no more tired than--than other women are."

"If that is the case," said Kathleen, "I heartily hope that I shall not
live to be a woman. I wouldn't like us all to be as fagged as she
is--poor, dear, gentle soul! She's overworked, and that's the truth."

Kathleen saw that she was annoying Alice, and proceeded with great gusto
to expand her theory with regard to Mrs. Tennant.

"She's in the condition when she might drop any time," she said. "We
have had old Irishwomen overworked like that, and all of a sudden they
went out like snuffs: that is what happens. What are you putting on your
best hat for?"

"That is no affair of yours."

"Oh, hoity-toity, how grand we are! Do you know, Alice, you haven't got
at all nice manners. You think you have, but you haven't. We are never
rude like that in Ireland. We tell a few lies now and then, but they are
only _polite_ lies--the kind that make other people happy. Alice, I
should like to know which is best--to be horribly cross, or to tell nice
polite lies. Which is the most wicked? I should like to know."

"Then I will tell you," said Alice. "What you call a nice lie is just a
very great and awful sin; and if you don't believe me, go to church and
listen when the commandments are read."

"In future," said Kathleen very calmly, "now that I really know your
views, I will always tell you _home truths_. You can't blame me, can
you?"

Alice deigned no answer. She went downstairs and let herself out of the
house.

"And that is the sort of girl I have exchanged for daddy and the mother
and the boys," thought the Irish girl. "Oh, dear! oh, dear!"

Kathleen flew downstairs. It was nearly three o'clock; tea was to be on
the table at half-past four. Quick as thought she dashed into the
kitchen.

"Maria," she said, "and cook, is there anything nice and tasty for tea
this evening?"

"Nice and tasty, miss!" said cook. "And what should there be nice and
tasty? There's bread, and there's butter--Dorset, second-class
Dorset--and there's jam (if there's any left); and that's about all."

"That sort of tea isn't very nourishing, cook, is it? I ask because I
want to know," said Kathleen.

"It's the kind we always have at Myrtle Lodge," replied cook. "I don't
hold with it, but then it's the way of the missis."

"I have got some money in my pocket," said Kathleen. "I want to have a
beautiful, nice tea. Can't you think of something to buy? Here's five
shillings. Would that get her a nice tea?"

"A nice tea!" cried Maria. "It would get a beautiful meal; and the poor
missis, she would like it."

"Then go out, Maria; do, like a darling. I will open the door for you if
anybody calls. Do run round the corner and bring in--Oh! I know what.
We'll have sausages--they are delicious--and a little tin of
sardines--won't they be good?--and some water-cress, and some
shrimps--oh, yes, shrimps! Be quick! And we will put out the best
tea-things, and a clean cloth; and it will rest the poor tired one so
tremendously when she comes in and sees a good meal on the table."

Both cook and Maria were quite excited. Perhaps they had an eye to the
reversion of the tea, the sausages, the sardines, the shrimps, and the
water-cress.

Maria went out, and Kathleen stood in the hall. Two or three people
arrived during Maria's absence, and Kathleen went promptly to the door
and said, "Not at home, ma'am," in a determined voice, and with rather a
scowling face, to these arrivals. Some of the visitors left rather
important messages, but Kathleen did not remember them for more than a
moment after they were delivered. Maria presently came back and the
tea-table was laid. Kathleen gave Maria sixpence for the washing of an
extra cloth, and the well-spread table looked quite fresh and
wonderfully like a school-feast.

When Mrs. Tennant returned (she came in looking very hot and tired), it
was to see the room tidy, Kathleen seated in her own special chair
cobbling the boys' socks as hard as she could, and an appetizing tea on
the table.

"What does this mean?" said Mrs. Tennant.

"It means," said Kathleen, jumping up, "that you are to plant yourself
just here, and you are not to stir. Oh, I know you are _dead_ tired. I
will take off your shoes, poor dear; I have brought your slippers down
on purpose, and you are to have your tea at this little table. Now what
will you have? Hot sausages?--They are done to a turn, aren't they,
Maria?"

"That they are, miss."

"A nice hot sausage on toast, and a lovely cup of tea with cream in it."

"But--but," said Mrs. Tennant, "what will Alice say?"

"Maria and I don't care twopence what Alice says. This is my tea, and
Maria fetched it. Now then, dear tired one, eat and rest."

Mrs. Tennant looked at Kathleen with loving eyes.

"Did you buy these things?" she said.

"That she did, ma'am," cried Maria. "I never did see a more thoughtful
young lady."

"My dear child," said Mrs. Tennant, "you are too good."

Kathleen laughed.

"If there is one thing I am, it is not that," she said. "I am not a bit
good. I am as wild and naughty and----Oh, but don't let us talk about
me. I am so hungry. You know I didn't much like your dinner to-day. I am
not fond of those watery stews. Of course, I can eat anything, but I
don't specially like them; so if you don't mind I will have a sausage,
too, and a plateful of shrimps afterwards, and some sardines. And isn't
this water-cress nice? The leaves are not quite so brown as I should
like. Oh, we did have such lovely water-cress in the stream at home!
Mrs. Tennant, you must come back with me to Carrigrohane some day, and
then you will have a real rest."

Mrs. Tennant, feeling very much like a naughty child herself, enjoyed
her tea. She and Kathleen laughed over the shrimps, exclaimed at the fun
of eating the water-cress, enjoyed the sausages, and each drank four
cups of tea. It was when the meal had come to an end that Kathleen said
calmly:

"Three or four, or perhaps five, ladies called while Maria was out."

"Who were they, dear?"

"I don't know. They left messages, and I have forgotten them. One lady
was dressed in what I should call a very loud style. She was quite old.
Her face was all over wrinkles. She was stout, and she wore a short
jacket and a big--very big--picture-hat."

"You don't mean," said Mrs. Tennant, "that Mrs. Dalzell has called? She
is one of my most important friends. She promised to help me with regard
to David's future. What did she say--can't you remember?"

"I am ever so sorry, but I can't. I kept staring at her hat all the
time. I don't remember anything about her except that she was old and
had wrinkles and a big picture-hat--the sort of hat that Ruth Craven
would look pretty in."

Mrs. Tennant began to find the remembrance of her delightful tea a
little depressing, for, question Kathleen as she might, she did not
remember anything about the ladies except a few fugitive descriptions.
As far as Mrs. Tennant could make out, people who were of the greatest
importance to her had left messages, and yet none of the messages could
be attended to.

"I can't even imagine who the other ladies can be," she said. "But as to
Mrs. Dalzell, she must not be neglected; I must go out and see her at
once."

"Then you will be more tired than ever, and I have not done a scrap of
good."

"You meant very kindly, my dear child, and have given me a delicious and
strengthening tea. Only don't do it again, darling, for it is my place
to give you tea, not yours to give it to me."




CHAPTER VII.

THE QUEEN AND HER SECRET SOCIETY.


Mrs. Tennant had not been out more than a minute or two before David and
Ben came in. Kathleen saw them from the window; she tapped on the window
with her knuckles, nodded to them, kissed her hand, and looked radiant
with delight. Some boys at the opposite side of the street saw her and
burst out laughing. David's face grew red.

"I wish the little Irish girl wouldn't make us figures of fun," said
Ben, speaking in an annoyed tone.

The next instant David had opened the door with his latchkey, and
Kathleen was waiting for them in the hall.

"Sausages," she said, bringing out the word with great gusto, "and
shrimps, and water-cress, and sardines, besides bread-and-butter galore,
and nice hot tea. Maria is making fresh tea now in the kitchen. Come
along in--do; you must be ravenous."

The boys stared at her. Ben forgot his anger; he was schoolboy enough to
thoroughly enjoy the delicious meal which Kathleen had prepared.

When it came to an end David jumped up impatiently.

"Where are you going, Dave?" asked Kathleen in an interested voice. She
wanted him to help her. She had hoped that he and she would go away to
the old loft together, and talk as they had done the night before. But
David was firm.

"I am going to the church," he said, "to practice on the organ. I only
get the chance three times a week, and I must not neglect it."

"David hopes to be no end of a swell some day," remarked Ben. "He thinks
he can make the instrument speak."

"And so can I," said Kathleen. "May I come with you, Dave?"

"Some day," he replied, looking at her kindly, "but not to-day. I'll be
back as soon as I can."

David did not notice her disappointed face; he went out immediately,
without even going upstairs first. Ben and Kathleen were now alone.
Kathleen looked at him attentively.

"I wonder--" she said slowly.

"What are you staring at me for?" said Ben.

"I have been wondering what sort you are. I have got cousins at home,
and they do anything in the world I like. I wonder if you would."

Ben had been very cross with Kathleen when she had knocked to him and
David from the dining-room window, but he was not cross now. He was only
thirteen, and up to the present no pretty girl had ever taken the
slightest notice of him. He was a plain, sandy-haired boy, with a
freckled face, a wide mouth, and good-humored blue eyes.

"You make me laugh whenever I look at you," was Kathleen's next candid
remark.

"I didn't know that I was so comical," was his answer.

"Perhaps you don't like it."

"I can't say I do."

"Well, this is the Palace of Home Truths," said Kathleen, laughing. "I
asked your darling, saintly sister just now which was the most
wicked--to tell a polite lie, or a frightfully rude home truth. She said
that a polite lie was an awful sin, so in this house I must cleave to
the home truths. I could tell you, you know, that you have quite a
fascinating smile, and a very taking voice, and a delightful and
polished manner; but I prefer to tell you that you are comical, which
means that I feel inclined to burst out laughing whenever I look at
you."

"Thank you," said Ben, who could be very sulky when he liked. "Then I
will take my objectionable presence out of your sight. I have got my
lessons to do."

Kathleen raised her brows and gave a slow smile. Ben got as far as the
door.

"Benny," she said then in a most seductive whisper.

He turned.

"I am so glad you are in."

