Ned sat beside the fire on his serape with another thrown over his
shoulders, as the night was growing very chill with a sharp wind
whistling down from the mountains. The kindness of his captors did not
decrease, and he found a genuine pleasure in the human companionship and
physical comfort. Almonte found a comfortable place, took a guitar out
of a silken case, and hummed and played a love song. No American officer
would have done it at such a time and place, but it seemed natural in
him.

Ned could not keep from being attracted by the picture that he
presented, the handsome young officer bending over his guitar, his heart
in the song that he played, but ready at any instant to be the brave and
wary soldier. Circumstance and place seemed to the boy so full of wild
romance that he forgot, for the time, his own fate and the message that
he wished to bear to those far Texans.

It was very cold that night on the heights, and, now and then, a little
snow was blown about by the wind, but Ned kept warm by the fire and
between the two serapes. He fell asleep to the tinkling of Almonte's
guitar. They started again at earliest dawn, descended the slopes into a
highway to Vera Cruz, and pushed on in the trail of Cos. Ned still rode
his burro, which trotted along faithfully with the best, and he kept an
eager eye for the road and all that lay along it. The silent youth had
learned the value of keen observation, and he never neglected it.

Before noon Ned saw a dim, white cone rising on the eastern horizon. It
was far away and misty, a thing of beauty which seemed to hang in the
air above the clouds.

"Orizaba, the great mountain!" said Almonte.

Ned had seen Popocatepetl and Ixtaccihuatl, but this was a shade loftier
and more beautiful than either, shooting up nearly four miles, and
visible to sailors far out at sea. It grew in splendor as they
approached. Great masses of oak and pine hung on its lofty sides, up the
height of three miles, and above the forest rose the sharp cone,
gleaming white with snow. The face of Juan Nepomuceno Almonte flushed as
he gazed at it.

"It is ours, the great mountain!" he exclaimed. "And the many other
magnificent mountains and the valleys and rivers of Mexico. Can you
wonder, then, Edward Fulton, that we Mexicans do not wish to lose any
part of our country? Texas is ours, it has always been ours, and we will
not let the Texans sever it from us!"

"The Texans have not wished to do so," said Ned. "You have been kind to
me, Colonel Almonte, and I do not wish to tell you anything but the
truth. The Texans will fight oppression and bad faith. You do not know,
the Mexicans do not know, how hard they will fight. Our charter has been
violated and President Santa Anna would strip our people of arms and
leave them at the mercy of savage Indians."

Almonte was about to make a passionate reply, but he checked himself
suddenly and said in mild tones:

"It is not fair for me to attack you, a prisoner, even in words. Look
how Orizaba grows! It is like a pillar holding up the heavens!"

Ned gazed in admiration. He did not wonder that Almonte loved this
country of his, so full of the strange and picturesque. The great
mountain grew and grew, until its mighty cone, dark below, and white
above, seemed to fill the horizon. But much of the gayety of Almonte
departed.

"Before night," he said, "we will be with General Cos, who is my
commander. As you know, he is the brother-in-law of General Santa Anna,
and--he is much inflamed against the Texans. I fear that he will be hard
with you, but I shall do what I can to assuage his severity."

"I thank you, Colonel Almonte," said Ned with a gravity beyond his
years. "You are a generous enemy, and chance may help me some day to
return your kindness, but whatever treatment General Cos may accord me,
I hope I shall be able to stand it."

In another hour they saw a column of dust ahead of them. The column grew
and soon Ned saw lances and bayonets shining through it. He knew that
this was the army of Cos, and, just as the eastern light began to fade,
they joined it. Cos was going into camp by the side of a small stream,
and, after a little delay, Almonte took the prisoner to him.

A large tent had been erected for General Cos, but he was sitting before
it, eating his supper. A cook was serving him with delicate dishes and
another servant filled his glass with red wine. His dark face darkened
still further, as he looked at Ned, but he saluted Almonte courteously.
It was evident to Ned that through family or merit, probably both,
Almonte stood very high in the Mexican service.

"I have the honor to report to you, General Cos," said Almonte, "that we
have retaken the young Texan who escaped through the bars of his prison
at the capital. We found him in the mountains overcome by exhaustion."

General Cos' lips opened in a slow, cold smile,--an evil smile that
struck a chill to Ned's heart. Here was a man far different from the
gallant and gay young Almonte. That cruel strain which he believed was
in the depths of the Spanish character, dormant though it might usually
be, was patent now in General Cos. Moreover, this man was very powerful,
and, as brother-in-law of Santa Anna, he was second only to the great
dictator. He did not ask Ned to sit down and he was brusque in speech.
The air about them grew distinctly colder. Almonte had talked with Ned
in English, but Cos spoke Spanish:

"Why did you run away from the capital?" he asked, shortly. "You were
treated well there."

"No man can be held in prison and be treated well."

General Martin Perfecto de Cos frowned. The bearing of the young Gringo
did not please him. Nor did his answer.

"I repeat my question," he said, his voice rising. "Why did you run like
a criminal from the capital? You were with the man Austin. You, like he,
were the guest of our great and illustrious Santa Anna who does no
wrong. Answer me, why did you slip away like a thief?"

"I slipped away, but it was not like a thief nor any other kind of
criminal. And if you must know, General Cos, I went because I did not
believe the words of the great and illustrious Santa Anna. He promises
the Texans redress for their wrongs, and, at the same time, he orders
them to give up their weapons. Do you think, and does General Santa Anna
think, that the Texans are fools?"

Despite all his study and thought, Ned Fulton was only a boy and he did
not have the wisdom of the old. The manner and words of General Cos had
angered him, and, on impulse, he gave a direct reply. But he knew at
once that it was impolitic. Cos' eyes lowered, and his lips drew back
like those of an angry jaguar, showing his strong white teeth. There was
no possible doubt now about that Spanish strain of cruelty.

"I presume," he said, and he seemed to Ned to bite each word, "that you
meant to go to the Texans with the lying message that the word of the
most illustrious General Santa Anna was not to be believed?"

"I meant to go with such a message," said Ned proudly, "but it would not
be a lying one."

Knowing that he was already condemned he resolved to seek no subterfuge.

"The President cannot be insulted in my presence," said Cos ominously.

"He is only a boy, General," said Almonte appealingly.

"Boys can do mischief," said Cos, "and this seems to be an unusually
cunning and wicked one. You are zealous, Colonel Almonte, I will give
you that much credit, but you do not hate the Gringos enough."

Almonte flushed, but he bowed and said nothing. Cos turned again to Ned.

"You will bear no message to the Texans," he said. "I think that instead
you will stay a long time in this hospitable Mexico of ours."

Ned paled a little. The words were full of menace, and he knew that they
came straight from the cruel heart of Cos. But his pride would not
permit him to reply.

"You will be kept under close guard," said the General. "I will give
that duty to the men of Tlascala. They are infantry and to-morrow you
march on foot with them. Colonel Almonte, you did well to take the
prisoner, but you need trouble yourself no longer about him."

Two men of the Tlascalan company were summoned and they took Ned with
them. The name "Tlascala" had appealed to Ned at first. It was the brave
Tlascalan mountaineers who had helped Cortez and who had made possible
his conquest of the great Mexican empire. But these were not the
Tlascalans of that day. They were a mongrel breed, short, dirty and
barefooted. He ate of the food they gave him, said nothing, and lay down
on his serape to seek sleep. Almonte came to him there.

"I feared this," he said. "I would have saved you from General Cos had I
been able."

"I know it," said Ned warmly, "and I want to thank you, Colonel
Almonte."

Almonte held out his hand and Ned grasped it. Then the Mexican strode
away. Ned lay back again and watched the darkness thin as the moon and
stars came out. Far off the silver cone of Orizaba appeared like a spear
point against the sky. It towered there in awful solemnity above the
strife and passion of the world. Ned looked at it long, and gradually it
became a beacon of light to him, his "pillar of flame" by night. It was
the last thing he saw as he fell asleep, and there was no thought then
in his mind of the swart and menacing Cos.

They resumed the march early in the morning. Ned no longer had his
patient burro, but walked on foot among the Tlascalans. Often he saw
General Cos riding ahead on a magnificent white horse. Sometimes the
peons stood on the slopes and looked at them but generally they kept far
from the marching army. Ned surmised that they had no love of military
service.

The way was not easy for one on foot. Clouds of dust arose, and stung
nose and throat. The sharp lava or basalt cut through the soles of
shoes, and at midday the sun's rays burned fiercely. Weakened already by
the hardships of his flight Ned was barely able to keep up. Once when he
staggered a horseman prodded him with the butt of his lance. Ned was not
revengeful, but he noted the man's face. Had he been armed then he
would have struck back at any cost. But he took care not to stagger
again, although it required a supreme effort.

They halted about an hour at noon, and Ned ate some rough food and drank
water with the Tlascalans. He was deeply grateful for the short rest,
and, as he sat trying to keep himself from collapse, Almonte came up and
held out a flask.

"It is wine," he said. "It will strengthen you. Drink."

Ned drank. He was not used to wine, but he had been so near exhaustion
that he took it as a medicine. When he handed the flask back the color
returned to his face and the blood flowed more vigorously in his veins.

"General Cos does not wish me to see you at all," said Almonte. "He
thinks you should be treated with the greatest harshness, but I am not
without influence and I may be able to ease your march a little."

"I know that you will do it if you can," said Ned gratefully.

Yet Almonte was able to do little more for him. The march was resumed
under equally trying conditions, after the short rest. When night came
and the detachment stopped, Ned ached in every bone, and his feet were
sore and bleeding. Almonte was sent away in the morning on another
service, and there was no one to interfere for him.

He struggled on all of the next day. Most of his strength was gone, but
pride still kept him going. Orizaba was growing larger and larger,
dominating the landscape, and Ned again drew courage from the lofty
white cone that looked down upon them.

Late in the afternoon he heard a trumpet blow, and there was a great
stir in the force of Cos. Men held themselves straighter, lines were
re-formed, and the whole detachment became more trim and smart. General
Cos on his white horse rode to its head, and he was in his finest
uniform. Somebody of importance was coming! Ned was keen with curiosity
but he was too proud to ask. The Tlascalans had proved a churlish lot,
and he would waste no words on them.

The road now led down into a beautiful savanna, thick in grass, and with
oaks and pines on all sides. Cos' companies turned into the grass, and
Ned saw that another force entering at the far side was doing the same.
All the men in the second force were mounted, the officer who was at
their head riding a horse even finer than that of Cos. His uniform, too,
was more splendid, and his head was surmounted by a great three-cornered
hat, heavy with gold lace. He was compact of figure, sat his saddle
well, and rode as if the earth belonged to him. Ned recognized him at
once. It was the general, the president, the dictator, the father of his
country, the illustrious Santa Anna himself.

The mellow trumpet pealed forth again, and Santa Anna advanced to meet
his brother, Cos, who likewise advanced to meet him. They met in full
view of both forces, and embraced and kissed each other. Then a shout
came forth from hundreds of throats at the noble spectacle of fraternal
amity. The two forces coalesced with much Latin joy and chatter, and
camp was pitched in the savanna.

Ned stayed with the Tlascalans, because he had no choice but to do so.
They flung him a tortilla or two, and he had plenty of water, but what
he wanted most was rest. He threw himself on the grass, and, as the
Tlascalans did not disturb him, he lay there until long after
nightfall. He would have remained there until morning had not two
soldiers come with a message that he was wanted by Santa Anna himself.

Ned rose, smoothed out his hair, draped his serape as gracefully as he
could about his shoulders, and, assuming all the dignity that was
possible, went with the men. He had made up his mind that boldness of
manner and speech was his best course and it suited his spirit. He was
led into a large tent or rather a great marquee, and he stood there for
a few moments dazzled.

The floor of the marquee was spread with a thick velvet carpet. A table
loaded with silver dishes was between the generals, and a dozen lamps on
the walls shed a bright light over velvet carpet, silver dishes and the
faces of the two men who held the fortunes of Mexico in the hollows of
their hands. General Cos smiled the same cold and evil smile that Ned
had noticed at their first meeting, but Santa Anna spoke in a tone half
of surprise and half of pity.

"Ah, it is the young Fulton! And he is in evil plight! You would not
accept my continued hospitality at the capital, and behold what you have
suffered!"

Ned looked steadily at him. He could not fathom the thought that lay
behind the words of Santa Anna. The man was always appearing to him in
changing colors. So he merely waited.

"It was a pleasure to me," said Santa Anna, "to learn from General Cos
that you had been retaken. Great harm might have come to you wandering
through the mountains and deserts of the north. You could never have
reached the Texans alive, and since you could not do so it was better to
have come back to us, was it not?"

"I have not come willingly."

General Cos frowned, but Santa Anna laughed.

"That was frank," he said, "and we will be equally frank with you. You
would go north to the Texans, telling them that I mean to come with an
army and crush them. Is it not so?"

"It is," replied Ned boldly.

Santa Anna smiled. He did not seem to be offended at all. His manner,
swift, subtle and changing, was wholly attractive, and Ned felt its
fascination.

"Be your surmise true or not," said the dictator, "it is best for you
not to reach Texas. I have discussed the matter with my brother, General
Cos, in whom I have great confidence, and we have agreed that since you
undertook to reach Vera Cruz you can go there. General Cos will be your
escort on the way, and, as I go to the capital in the morning, I wish
you a pleasant journey and a happy stay in our chief seaport."

It seemed to Ned that there was the faintest touch of irony in his last
word or two, but he was not sure. He was never sure of Santa Anna, that
complex man of great abilities and vast ambition. And so after his
fashion when he had nothing to say he said nothing.

"You are silent," said Santa Anna, "but you are thinking. You of the
north are silent to hide your thoughts, and we of the south talk to hide
ours!"

Ned still said nothing, and Santa Anna examined him searchingly. He sent
his piercing gaze full into the eyes of the boy. Ned, proud of his race
and blood, endured it, and returned it with a firm and steady look. Then
the face of Santa Anna changed. He became all at once smiling and
friendly, like a man who receives a welcome guest. He put a hand on
Ned's shoulder, and apparently he did not notice that the shoulder
became rigid under his touch.

"I like you," he said, "I like your courage, your truth, and your
bluntness. You Texans, or rather you Americans,--because the Texans are
Americans,--have some of the ruder virtues which we who are of the
Spanish and Latin blood now and then lack. You are only a boy, but you
have in you the qualities that can make a career. The Texans belong to
Mexico. Your loyalty is due to Mexico and to me. I have said that you
would go to Vera Cruz and take the hospitality that my brother, Cos,
will offer you, but there is an alternative."

He stopped as if awaiting a natural question, but still Ned did not
speak. A spark appeared in the eye of Santa Anna, but it passed so
quickly that it was like a momentary gleam.

"I would make of you," continued the dictator in his mellow, coaxing
tone, "a promising young member of my staff, and I would assign to you
an immediate and important duty. I would send you to the Texans with a
message entirely different from the one you wish to bear. I would have
you to tell them that Santa Anna means only their greatest good; that he
loves them as his children; that he is glad to have these strong, tall,
fair men in the north to fight for him and Mexico; that he is a man who
never breaks a promise; that he is the father of his people, and that he
loves them all with a heart full of tenderness. To show you how much I
trust and value you I would take your word that you would bear such a
message, and I would send you with an escort that would make your way
safe and easy."

Again he sent his piercing gaze into the eyes of the boy, but Ned was
still silent.

"You would tell them," said Santa Anna in the softest and most
persuasive tones, "that you have been much with me, that you know me,
and that no man has a softer heart or a more just mind."

"I cannot do it," said Ned.

"Why?"

"Because it is not so."

The change on the face of Santa Anna was sudden and startling. His eyes
became black with wrath, and his whole aspect was menacing. The hand of
Cos flew to the hilt of his sword, and he half rose from his chair. But
Santa Anna pushed him back, and then the face of the dictator quickly
underwent another transformation. It became that of the ruler, grave but
not threatening.

"Softly, Cos, my brother," he said. "Bear in mind that he is only a boy.
I offered too much, and he does not understand. He has put away a
brilliant career, but, my good brother Cos, he has left to him your
hospitality, and you will not be neglectful."

Cos sank back in his chair and laughed. Santa Anna laughed. The two
laughs were unlike, one heavy and angry, and the other light and gay,
but their effect upon Ned was precisely the same. He felt a cold shiver
at the roots of his hair, but he was yet silent, and stood before them
waiting.

"You can go," said Santa Anna. "You have missed your opportunity and it
will not come again."

Ned turned away without a word. The Tlascalans were waiting at the door
of the marquee, and he went with them. Once more he slept under the
stars.




CHAPTER VII

THE DUNGEON UNDER THE SEA


Ned, early the next morning, saw Santa Anna with his brilliant escort
ride away toward the capital, while General Cos resumed his march to
Vera Cruz. Almonte did not reappear at all, and the boy surmised that he
was under orders to join the dictator.

Ned continued on foot among the Tlascalans. Cos offered him no kindness
whatever, and his pride would not let him ask for it. But when he looked
at his sore and bleeding feet he always thought of the patient burro
that he had lost. They marched several more days, and the road dropped
down into the lowlands, into the tierra caliente. The air grew thick and
hot and Ned, already worn, felt an almost overpowering languor. The
vegetation became that of the tropics. Then, passing through marshes and
sand dunes, they reached Vera Cruz, the chief port of Mexico, a small,
