Mother Magpie was sitting on a bush waiting for him, for she had guessed
what would happen to the greedy bird. And when she saw him she gave a
squawk of laughter.

"O Whitebird," she chuckled, "what a sight! what a sight! Your lovely
coat, your spotless feathers! Oh, you greedy, greedy _Blackbird_!"

Then he who had been Whitebird looked down at himself and saw what a
dreadful thing had happened. And he closed his eyes and gave a hoarse,
sad croak. For the smoke and flame of the dragon's breath had smirched
and scorched him from top to toe, so that he was no longer white, but
thenceforth and forever Blackbird.

I think Mother Magpie must have told the story to her children,
chuckling over the greedy fellow's failure. And they told it to the
children of sunny France, from whom I got the tale for you. So now you
know why the Blackbird looks so solemn and so sulky in his suit of rusty
black; and why his nerves are so weak that if one suddenly surprises
him, picking up seeds in the field, he gives a terrible scream of
fright. For he thinks one is that dreadful dragon-creature who chased
him and so nearly gobbled him on that unlucky day, long ago.

Poor Brother Blackbird! Don't let him know I told you all this; it would
make him so very much ashamed.




THE BLACKBIRD AND THE FOX


One day Madame Fox, who was strolling along under the hedge, heard a
Blackbird trilling on a branch. Quick as thought she jumped and seized
the little fellow, and was about to gobble him down then and there. But
the Blackbird began to chirp piteously:--

"Oh, oh, Madame Fox! What are you thinking of? Just see, I am such a
tiny mouthful! And when I am gone--I am gone. Only let me free and I
will tell you something. Look! Here come some peasant women with eggs
and cheese which they are carrying to the market at Verrieres. That
would be a meal worth having! Only let me go, and I will help you,
Master Fox."

The Fox saw that this might be a good plan which the bird proposed, so
she let him go.

And what do you think the Blackbird did? He began to hop, hop, hop
toward the women, dragging his wing behind him as if it were broken,
which is a trick some birds know very well.

"Look!" cried one of the women, when she caught sight of him. "Oh, look
at the little Blackbird there! His wing is broken and he cannot fly. I
shall try to catch him." And she ran as fast as she could, making her
hands into a little cage to put over him. The other women, too, set down
their baskets, for convenience--set them down right in the middle of the
road--and joined the chase after the poor little Blackbird, so lame, so
lame! But always, as they came close to him, he managed to flutter out
of reach.

Meanwhile, Madame Fox went round about by the hedge and came all quietly
and unseen to the place where the baskets waited in the road. And oh!
what a good dinner she found there; chickens and eggs and fresh cheese
nicely done up for the market. And the greedy old lady ate them all--all
the chickens and the eggs and the cheeses. My! How fat she was when all
was done.

Now the Blackbird hopped on and on for a long, long way, until, by
cocking his eye, he saw that Madame Fox had finished her dinner. And
then, houff! Up he flew, with a jolly chirp of laughter, right over the
heads of the astonished women. What of his broken wing now? He began to
whistle, to sing, to chirrup like a crazy bird up there in the air. The
women looked at one another sheepishly.

"Ah, the wicked Blackbird!" they said. "One would have thought that he
could not fly at all. But look at him, the sly creature! Oho, it is a
pretty trick he has played us!"

They turned back to where they had left their baskets, intending to
start on for the market. But when they came there--well, well! What a
shame!--they found the eggs, the chickens, the cheeses all gone--eaten
up by the greedy Fox. And then they began to scold and cry.

"Oh, what misfortune!" they wailed. "We have lost our eggs, our
chickens, and our cheeses, and there is nothing left to carry to market.
We have not even a Blackbird to show for our morning's work. Oh dear! oh
dear! It is all the fault of that wicked, deceitful little bird."

And, instead of going on to Verrieres, they turned about with their
empty baskets and went back home, a sorry party, scolding and crying all
the way. But long before they reached their homes and their angry
husbands Madame Fox was comfortably snoozing her after-dinner nap under
the hedge; while the happy Blackbird picked up juicy bugs in the
neighboring meadow, with one eye cocked to guard against being surprised
a second time by any bushy-tailed rogue.

[Illustration: _He managed to flutter out of reach_]




THE DOVE WHO SPOKE TRUTH


The Dove and the wrinkled little Bat once went on a journey together.
When it came towards night a storm arose, and the two companions sought
everywhere for a shelter. But all the birds were sound asleep in their
nests and the animals in their holes and dens. They could find no
welcome anywhere until they came to the hollow tree where old Master Owl
lived, wide awake in the dark.

"Let us knock here," said the shrewd Bat, "I know the old fellow is not
asleep. This is his prowling hour, and but that it is a stormy night he
would be abroad hunting.--What ho, Master Owl!" he squeaked, "will you
let in two storm-tossed travelers for a night's lodging?"

Gruffly the selfish old Owl bade them enter, and grudgingly invited them
to share his supper. The poor Dove was so tired that she could scarcely
eat, but the greedy Bat's spirits rose as soon as he saw the viands
spread before him. He was a sly fellow, and immediately began to flatter
his host into good humor. He praised the Owl's wisdom and his courage,
his gallantry and his generosity; though every one knew that however
wise old Master Owl might be, he was neither brave nor gallant. As for
his generosity,--both the Dove and the Bat well remembered his
selfishness towards the poor Wren, when the Owl alone of all the birds
refused to give the little fire-bringer a feather to help cover his
scorched and shivering body.

All this flattery pleased the Owl. He puffed and ruffled himself, trying
to look as wise, gallant, and brave as possible. He pressed the Bat to
help himself more generously to the viands, which invitation the sly
fellow was not slow to accept.

During this time the Dove had not uttered a word. She sat quite still
staring at the Bat and wondering to hear such insincere speeches of
flattery. Suddenly the Owl turned to her.

"As for you, Miss Pink-eyes," he said gruffly, "you keep careful
silence. You are a dull table-companion. Pray, have you nothing to say
for yourself?"

"Yes," exclaimed the mischievous Bat, "have you no words of praise for
our kind host? Methinks he deserves some return for this wonderfully
generous, agreeable, tasteful, well-appointed, luxurious, elegant, and
altogether acceptable banquet. What have you to say, O little Dove?"

But the Dove hung her head, ashamed of her companion, and said very
simply:--

"O Master Owl, I can only thank you with all my heart for the
hospitality and shelter which you have given me this night. I was beaten
by the storm, and you took me in. I was hungry, and you gave me your
best to eat. I cannot flatter nor make pretty speeches like the Bat. I
never learned such manners. But I thank you."

"What!" cried the Bat, pretending to be shocked. "Is that all you have
to say to our obliging host? Is he not the wisest, bravest, most gallant
and generous of gentlemen? Have you no praise for his noble character as
well as for his goodness to us? I am ashamed of you! You do not deserve
such hospitality. You do not deserve this shelter."

The Dove remained silent. Like Cordelia in the play, she could not speak
untruths even for her own happiness.

"Truly, you are an unamiable guest," snarled the Owl, his yellow eyes
growing keen and fierce with anger and mortified pride. "You are an
ungrateful bird, Miss, and the Bat is right. You do not deserve this
generous hospitality which I have offered, this goodly shelter which you
asked. Away with you! Leave my dwelling! Pack off into the storm and see
whether or not your silence will soothe the rain and the wind. Be off, I
say!"

"Yes, away with her!" echoed the Bat, flapping his leathery wings. And
the two heartless creatures fell upon the poor little Dove and drove her
out into the dark and stormy night.

Poor little Dove! All night she was tossed and beaten about shelterless
in the storm, because she had been too truthful to flatter the vain old
Owl. But when the bright morning dawned, draggled and weary as she was,
she flew to the court of King Eagle and told him all her trouble. Great
was the indignation of that noble bird.

"For his flattery and his cruelty let the Bat never presume to fly
abroad until the sun goes down," he cried. "As for the Owl, I have
already doomed him to this punishment for his treatment of the Wren. But
henceforth let no bird have anything to do with either of them, the Bat
or the Owl. Let them be outcasts and night-prowlers, enemies to be
attacked and punished if they appear among us, to be avoided by all in
their loneliness. Flattery and inhospitality, deceit and cruelty,--what
are more hideous than these? Let them cover themselves in darkness and
shun the happy light of day. As for you, little Dove, let this be a
lesson to you to shun the company of flatterers, who are sure to get you
into trouble. But you shall always be loved for your simplicity and
truth. And as a token of our affection your name shall be used by poets
as long as the world shall last to rhyme with _love_."

The words of the wise King Eagle are true to this day. So now you know
why a great many poems came to be written in which the rhymes _dove_ and
_love_ have not seemed to make any particular sense.




THE FOWLS ON PILGRIMAGE


Once upon a time old Lady Fox was very hungry, but she had nothing to
eat, and there was no sign of a dinner to be had anywhere.

"What shall I do, what shall I do?" whined the Fox. "I am so faint and
hungry, but all the birds and all the fowls are afraid of me and will
not venture near enough for me to consult them about a dinner. I have so
bad a name that no one will trust me. What can I do to win back the
respect of the community and earn a square meal? Ah, I have it! I will
turn pious and go upon a pilgrimage. That ought to make me popular once
more."

So the Fox started upon the pilgrimage. She had not gone very far when
she met a Cock, but he knew the character of Madame Fox too well to
trust himself near. He flew up into a tree, and from that safe perch
crowed jauntily, "Good morning, Madame Fox. Whither away so fast?"

The Fox drew down the corners of her mouth, trying to look pious, and
rolled up her eyes as she answered in a hollow voice, "Oh, Master Cock,
I am going on a pious pilgrimage. I am sorry for my wicked life, and now
I am going to be good."

"Ah," said the Cock, "I am indeed glad to hear that! Going on a
pilgrimage, are you? Well, in that case I will go with you."

"Do, Master Cock, do," answered the Fox fervently. "It will do you good.
Come sit upon my broad back and I will carry you."

The Cock thanked her and climbed upon her back, and so they proceeded on
their pilgrimage together. After a while they came upon a Dove, which
fluttered away hastily when she saw old Lady Fox, knowing too well her
wicked tricks. But the Fox called to her in a gentle voice:--

"Do not be afraid, O Dove. I know why you start at my approach. But I
have repented of my former sins and have turned pilgrim. My friend, the
Cock, and I have just started upon our pious journey. Will you join us?"

When the innocent Dove saw the Cock upon the Fox's back she thought that
certainly everything must be safe, so she answered:--

"Yes, Madame Fox, I will go with you."

"Jump right up on my back; there is plenty of room beside the Cock,"
said the Fox cordially.

A little further on they met a wild Duck, who waddled away quacking
wildly when he saw the Fox trotting towards him. But the sly old lady
called out to him, smiling:--

"Be calm, little brother. I have given up my former unkind tricks, for
which I sadly repent, and now I am going on a pious pilgrimage. See,
your friends the Cock and the Dove are my companions."

"In that case I will go along, too," said the Duck, "for you have a
goodly party."

"That is right," replied the Fox approvingly. "I thought you would go.
Kindly take a back seat with the others."

Now when these queer pilgrims had traveled for some time they came to a
cave in the rocks, a deep dark cave which looked like a den. And here
the Fox stopped, saying:--

"Dear brothers, it is time that we paused and thought more carefully
about our sins. We must cross seas and rivers, and Heaven knows when we
shall reach the end of our journey. Let us listen to one another's
confessions, for I am sure we have all been miserable sinners. Come, Mr.
Cock, come into the cave with me and I will hear you first."

The Cock followed her into the cave, saying with some surprise, "Why,
Madame Fox, what have I done that is wicked?"

"Do you not know?" answered the Fox sternly. "Why, do you not begin to
crow at midnight and wake poor tired people out of their first sleep? Go
to! You ought to be ashamed! Then again you crow at the most
inconveniently early hour in the morning and make the caravans mistake
the true time, so that they start upon their journeys long before the
proper hour and fall into the hands of robbers who prowl about before
light. These are dreadful sins, Mr. Cock, and you deserve to be
punished." So the wicked old Fox seized the Cock and ate him all up.

After the Fox had finished him she came to the entrance of the cave and
called, "Now you come, little Dove, and tell me what you have done that
is naughty."

"But I have done nothing," said the innocent Dove, wondering very much;
"of what evil do you accuse me, Madame Fox?"

"When the farmers sow their grain you dig up the yellow kernels and eat
them for your dinner. That is stealing, which is a wicked, wicked sin,
and must be severely punished," cried the hungry Fox. And thereupon she
seized the poor little Dove and ate her up.

Once more the Fox stood at the door of the cave, stealthily licking her
chops, and she called out to the Duck, "Come in, Mr. Duck, and I will
hear what you have to say."

"Well, I have not done anything wrong," said the Duck positively, "and
you cannot say that I have; can you now, Madame Fox?"

"Oh, indeed and indeed!" exclaimed the Fox. "Have you not stolen the
king's gold crown, and do you not wear it on your head, you wicked
creature?"

"Indeed and indeed I have done no such thing. It is not true, Madame
Fox, as I can prove. Wait a bit and I will bring witnesses."

So the Duck went out and flew up and down in front of the cave, waiting.
Presently along came a Hunter with a gun, who espied the Duck and aimed
the weapon at him.

"Don't shoot me," cried the Duck. "What have you against me, O Hunter? I
can tell you where to find worthier game. Come with me and I will show
you a wicked old Fox who eats innocent birds."

"Very well," said the Hunter, putting up his gun, "show me the place and
I will spare you."

The Duck led him softly to the entrance of the cave, and pausing there
cried out to the Fox inside, "Come out, Madame Fox, I have brought the
witness."

"Let him come in, let him come in!" cried the Fox, for she had grown
very hungry indeed and hoped for a double meal.

"No indeed," answered the Duck; "he insists that you must come out." So
the Fox crept stealthily to the door, but as soon as she popped out her
wicked old head the Hunter was ready for her, and Bang! That was the end
of the Fox's pilgrimage.

The Duck also had had enough of being a pilgrim. He went home with the
Hunter and became a tame Duck, and lived happily ever after on the pond
near the Hunter's house.




THE GROUND-PIGEON


Once upon a time there was a little Malay maiden who lived in the forest
with her father and mother and baby sister. They dwelt very happily
together, until one day Coora's father decided to clear the ground on
the edge of the forest and have a rice plantation, as many of his
neighbors were doing.

So one morning early after breakfast he started out with his axe on his
shoulder to cut down the trees and make a clearing.

"O Father, let me go with you!" begged Coora. "I do so want to see the
plantation grow from the very beginning."

But her father said No, she must stay at home until the trees were
felled.

"And after that may I go with you?" asked Coora. And her father promised
that it should be so.

The days went by and at last the trees were all felled in the clearing.
When Coora heard this she jumped up and down on her little bare brown
feet until her anklets tinkled, and cried, "O Father! Now I may go with
you to the clearing, may I not? For so you promised."

But again her father shook his head and said, "No, Coora, not yet. You
must wait until the fallen timber has been burned off. Then you shall go
with your mother and me to the planting of the rice."

Coora was very much disappointed, and the big tears stood in her eyes.
But she only said, "Do you promise that I may help plant the rice,
really and truly?"

And he called back over his shoulder, "I promise!"

At last the fallen timber was burned away, and the ground was ready for
planting. One morning Coora saw her father and mother making ready to go
out together. "Oh, where are you going, Father and Mother?" she asked.

"We go to the planting of the rice," answered her father, slinging a big
bag over his shoulder.

"But you promised that I should go with you when that time came?" cried
Coora wistfully. "Please, please may I not be your little helper?"

"No, no, Coora," answered her mother impatiently. "Do not tease us so.
You must stay at home to take care of your little sister. Be a good
girl this time, and when the rice is well grown we will all go together
and harvest it. That will be great fun!"

"Shall I really go? Do you promise, Mother?" asked poor Coora hopefully,
for she felt sure that her mother would not deceive her.

"I promise," said the mother, not looking her in the eyes; and the
parents went away through the forest to plant the rice.

Time went by until the rice had grown tall and was ready for the
harvest. Now Coora heard her parents talking of the matter, and she was
very gay, for now she expected a happy, happy day. She dressed herself
and made ready to go to the harvesting, as her parents had promised. But
when she joined them, smiling joyfully, they turned upon her frowning
and bade her return to the house and take care of everything until their
home-coming. Then poor little Coora burst into tears and said, "O my
Father and O my Mother, I have obeyed you without a word every time you
broke your promise to me. And still you continue to put me off from day
to day, when this is the thing I long to do so much that it seems as if
my heart would break. Think of it! The clearing has been made, the
timber burned, the rice planted and grown, and now it is ready for the
harvest. But I have not even seen the place where all this has
happened. O Father and Mother, why are you so unkind to me?"

"There, there!" cried her father and mother together, "do not make a
fuss over so small a matter. You cannot go to-day; but wait until the
rice is gathered and it is time to tread it out. Then we will let you
help us, you may be sure. We promise, Coora, that you shall really and
truly go."

"You promise!" echoed Coora bitterly. "You have promised me before and
nothing came of it." But even while she spoke the unkind parents were
gone.

Then Coora fell to weeping most sorely, for she knew that she could not
trust the word of her father and mother; and that is a most terrible
thing. At last she rose and wiped away the tears and looked about the
little cottage where she had been patient through so many
disappointments. And she said to herself, "I can bear it no longer. It
is not right that I should be made to suffer like this when a little
thing would make me so happy. I must see the rice field; I will go
to-day."

Coora tidied the cottage, putting everything in its place and making it
look as beautiful as she could. Then she took up the little sister who
had fallen asleep on the floor, and kissing her tenderly placed her in
the hammock which swung from wall to wall of the hut. Lastly Coora took
off the golden bracelets and earrings and the tinkling anklets which she
wore like other little Malay girls, and left them in a shining heap
behind the door. But she kept her necklace about her pretty little neck.

Now Coora had learned a little magic from a witch, just enough magic to
serve her turn. She went out and picked two palm leaves which she
fastened on her shoulders and changed herself into a bird, a bright,
beautiful Ground-Pigeon, with many-colored metallic feathers. But the
necklace still made a band about her pretty little neck, as you may see
on every Ground-Pigeon to this day.

Coora the Ground-Pigeon fluttered away through the forest until she came
to the rice plantation where her parents were at work. She alighted on a
dead tree close by them and called out, "Mother, O Mother! I have left
my earrings and bracelets behind the door and have put my little sister
in the hammock."

Astonished at these words her mother looked up, but saw no one, only a
Ground-Pigeon perched on the tree over her head. "Father," she cried to
her husband who was at work beside her, "did you not hear Coora's voice
just now?"

"Yes, I thought so," answered the father angrily. "The wicked girl must
have disobeyed me and have followed us here after all. I will punish her
if this is so." They called to her, "Coora, Coora!" until the forest
reechoed. But no one appeared or answered.

"I will go home and see if she is there," said the mother. "Either I
heard Coora speak or there is some magic in the forest." And she
hastened back to the cottage. There she found the baby in the hammock
and the bracelets and earrings in a shining heap behind the door, as the
voice had said, but there was no Coora anywhere. Surprised and anxious,
once more the mother ran back to the plantation.

