willing to deny themselves, that they may make their associates happy.

18. This is not peculiar to childhood. It is the same in all periods of
life. There is but one way to make friends; and that is, by being
friendly to others.

19. Perhaps some child, who reads this, feels conscious of being
disliked, and yet desires to have the affection of his companions. You
ask me what you shall do. I will tell you.

20. I will give you an infallible rule. Do all in your power to make
others happy. Be willing to make sacrifices of your own convenience,
that you may promote the happiness of others.

21. This is the way to make friends, and the only way. When you are
playing with your brothers and sisters at home, be always ready to give
them more than their share of privileges.

22. Manifest an obliging disposition, and they cannot but regard you
with affection. In all your intercourse with others, at home or abroad,
let these feelings influence you, and you will receive a rich reward.




LESSON XXXVIII.

_Obedience and Disobedience._--CHILD'S COMPANION.


1. You have never disobeyed your parents, or your teachers, or any who
have been placed in authority over you, without being uncomfortable and
unhappy! Obedience, in a child, is one of the most necessary qualities;
for it protects him from all the evils of his want of experience, and
gives him the benefit of the experience of others.

2. One fine summer's day, I went to spend an afternoon at a house in
the country, where some young people were enjoying a holiday.

3. They were running cheerfully up and down a meadow, covered over with
yellow crocuses, and other flowers; and I looked on them with delight,
while they gamboled and made posies, as they felt disposed.

    "Here sister with sister roamed over the mead,
       And brother plucked flow'rets with brother;
     And playmates with playmates ran on with such speed
       That the one tumbled over the other."

4. Now, they all had been told to keep away from the ditch at the bottom
of the field; but, notwithstanding this injunction, one little urchin,
of the name of Jarvis, seeing a flower in the hedge on the opposite
bank, which he wished to gather, crept nearer and nearer to the ditch.

5. The closer he got to the flower, the more beautiful it appeared to
be, and the stronger the temptation became to pluck it.

6. Now, what right had he to put himself in the way of temptation? The
field, as I said before, was covered over with flowers; and that in the
hedge was no better than the rest, only it was a forbidden flower, and
when anything is forbidden it becomes, on that very account, a greater
temptation to a disobedient heart.

7. Jarvis had gathered a whole handful of flowers before he saw the one
growing in the hedge; but he threw all these away, so much was his mind
set on getting the one which he wanted.

8. Unluckily for him, in getting down the bank, his foot slipped, and
down he rolled into a bed of stinging nettles, at the bottom of the
ditch, which fortunately happened to have in it but little water.

9. Jarvis screamed out with might and main, as he lay on his back; for,
whichever way he turned, his cheeks and his fingers brushed against the
nettles.

[Illustration]

10. His cries soon brought his companions around him; but, as they were
all young, they knew not how to render him assistance, on account of
the stinging nettles, and the depth of the ditch.

11. I ran to the spot, and pulled up Master Jarvis in a pretty pickle,
his jacket and trowsers plastered with mud, and his hands and face
covered with blotches.

12. Here was the fruit of disobedience! And as it was with Jarvis, so
will it be with every one who acts disobediently.

13. Whenever you feel a temptation to disobey God; to disobey his holy
word; to disobey the admonitions of your own conscience; to disobey your
parents, your teachers, or any in authority over you,--be sure that a
punishment awaits you, if you do not resist it.

14. As you are not able to resist it in your own strength, ask God's
assistance for Christ's sake, and it will not be withheld. Now, remember
Jarvis, and the bed of stinging nettles!

15. The Bible tells us very plainly how much God sets his face against
disobedience. "The children of Israel walked forty years in the
wilderness, till all the people that were men of war, which came out of
Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord."

16. "Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, because of these
things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." Nor
is it disobedience to God that is alone hateful in his sight; for
disobedience to parents is spoken of as an evil thing, too.

17. "The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pluck it out, and the young
eagles shall eat it."

18. But I cannot bear to think that you are disobedient! I would rather
consider you obedient in all things, and encourage you in holding on
your way, obeying the will of God, and the word of all in authority over
you.

    "The Lord rules over sea and land,
       And blest indeed are they
     Who all his counsels understand,
       And his commands obey."

19. I have often been struck with the simplicity with which some
children obey their parents. This tractable disposition is very amiable
in a child.

20. It was no longer ago than last week, that, in crossing a field, I
overtook three children: one, a little girl of about five years old, was
on the foot-path, and, just as I came up, her brother called her to him,
where he was in the field.

21. "No, William," said the little maid; "my mother told me not to go
off the foot-path, and it would be very wicked to disobey my mother."

22. I caught the little creature up in my arms; and having a small neat
book in my pocket, suitable for a child, I gave it to her, and told her
to remember that the reason why I gave it was, that she had been
obedient to her mother.

    "Though cares on cares in parent hearts be piled,
     Great is that blessing--an obedient child!"

23. Without obedience there can be no order. The man must obey his
master, the maid her mistress, and the scholar his teacher. If you
attend a Sunday-school, whatever class you are in, be obedient to your
instructors, or you will make but little progress. By obedience you will
learn faster, secure the respect of those about you, and set a proper
example to those younger than yourself.

24. If you are in a place of work, be obedient to your employer. Those
make the best masters and mistresses who have been the most obedient
servants; for the discharge of one duty disposes us to perform another.

25. The best way to qualify yourselves to act well when grown up, is to
act well while you are children.




LESSON XXXIX.

_Obstinacy._--LESSONS WITHOUT BOOKS.


1. There is a certain fault which almost all children have in a greater
or less degree. It is called by different names; sometimes it is termed
wilfulness, sometimes pertinacity, and sometimes it receives the still
harsher name of obstinacy.

2. Almost all our faults are owing to the perversion or abuse of
propensities originally good; and perseverance, when carried too far, or
expended upon unworthy objects, becomes a troublesome infirmity.

3. Louisa and Emily had both something of this infirmity, but differing
both in degree and in its mode of operation.

4. What are called _little things_ did not trouble Emily at all; and, on
the contrary, they troubled Louisa very much.

5. But, when anything did seem peculiarly desirable to Emily,--when she
set her heart upon having her own way,--she carried her perseverance to
a degree which deserved to be called obstinacy.

6. She could _give up_, as children term it, with less effort, and more
grace, than most others; but if anything determined her not to give up,
she was immovable.

7. "You are almost always in the right," my daughter, her father once
said to her, "and Heaven preserve you from error; for when you once fall
into it, you will be too apt to persevere."

8. It happened, at one time, that she and Louisa were having some nice
sun-bonnets made. Emily went for them at the time when they were to be
finished, and finding only one completed, immediately appropriated it to
herself, because she was really in greater need of it than Louisa, who
had one that answered her purpose very well.

9. Louisa resented this, because that, being the eldest, she considered
herself as having the first right; but Emily could not be persuaded to
give up, although Louisa's equanimity was very much disturbed on that
account.

10. If it had been proposed to her beforehand to let Louisa have the
bonnet voluntarily, she would not have hesitated, for she was not
selfish; but when Louisa claimed it as a right, she resisted.

11. Her mother afterwards told her that she should always avoid
irritating the peculiar humors of her companions. "You," said she,
"would not have minded waiting for the other bonnet a day or two, but to
Louisa it was quite a serious evil."

12. And here let me remark upon the proneness which all children have to
magnify the importance of little things. A strife often arises among
them, about just nothing at all, from a mere spirit of competition.

[Illustration]

13. One says, "This is my seat." Another, who would not else have
thought of desiring that particular seat, immediately regards it in the
light of a prize, and exclaims, "No, I meant to have that seat; and I
had it just before you took it."

14. Half a dozen claimants will appear directly, and perhaps get into a
serious quarrel; whereas, had the reply been, in the first instance,
"Very well, let it be your seat," there would have been an end to the
matter.

15. But to return to Louisa. She magnified a thousand little things, of
every day occurrence, in such a manner as proved a very serious
inconvenience to herself.

16. She wished to have her potato sliced, but never mashed. She could
not bear to see a door open a single moment; and, even if she were at
her meals, and the closet door happened to stand ajar, she would jump up
and fly to shut it, with the speed of lightning.

17. She could not _endure_ the feeling of gloves; nor could she any
better endure to have her hat tied. Her aunt bore with all these follies
a while, and then deliberately resolved to counteract them.

18. Louisa at first thought this was very hard and unreasonable. "Why
can't I have my potato sliced, Aunt Cleaveland?" said she; "what hurt
can it do? And why can't I shut the door when it is open? is there any
harm in that?"

19. "Not at all, my dear, in the thing itself," Mrs. Cleaveland replied;
"but there is a great deal of evil in having your tranquillity disturbed
by things of such small moment.

20. "If you allow yourself to be distressed by trifles now, how will you
bear the real trials of life, which you must inevitably sustain, sooner
or later?

21. "By and by, you will find out that your suffering from these sources
is all imaginary, and then you will thank me for having restrained you.

22. "Now, here is this nice dish of mashed potatoes, which we have every
day. If such a little hungry girl as you are, since you have breathed
our healthy mountain air, cannot eat it, and with relish too, I am
greatly mistaken; and, in process of time, I have no doubt you will
cease to observe whether the door is open or shut."

23. On the first day of trial, Louisa just tasted the potato, and left
the whole of it upon her plate. Her aunt took no notice of this. The
next day, Louisa came in to dinner after a long walk, and was very
hungry.

24. There was but one dish of meat upon the table, and it was of a kind
which she did not much like; so, forgetting all her repugnance to mashed
potato, she ate it very heartily.

25. Mrs. Cleaveland, however, forbore to take any notice of this change;
and it was not until after several weeks had elapsed, and Louisa had
ceased to think of the distinction between sliced potato and mashed
potato, that her aunt reminded her of the importance which she had
formerly attached to the former.

26. "Now, my dear Louisa," said Mrs. Cleaveland, "since you find the
task is not so very difficult as you apprehended, promise me that you
will try to cure yourself of all these little infirmities; for such I
must term them.

27. "There is so much real suffering in life, that it is a pity to have
any which is merely imaginary; and though, while you are a little girl,
living with indulgent friends, your whims might all be gratified, a
constant and uniform regard to them will be impossible by and by, when
you are old enough to mingle with the world."




LESSON XL.

_King Edward and his Bible._--MRS. L.H. SIGOURNEY.


1. I will tell you a little story about a young and good king. He was
king of England more than two hundred and eighty years ago. His name was
Edward, and, because there had been five kings before him of the name of
Edward, he was called Edward the Sixth.

2. He was only nine years old when he began to reign. He was early
taught to be good, by pious teachers, and he loved to do what they told
him would please God. He had a great reverence for the Bible, which he
knew contained the words of his Father in heaven.

[Illustration]

3. Once, when he was quite a young child, he was playing with some
children about his own age. He wished much to reach something which was
above his head. To assist him, they laid a large, thick book in a chair,
for him to step on. Just as he was putting his foot upon it, he
discovered it to be the Bible.

4. Drawing back, he took it in his arms, kissed it, and returned it to
its place. Turning to his little playmates, he said, with a serious
face,--"Shall I dare to tread under my feet that which God has
commanded me to keep in my heart?"

5. This pious king never forgot his prayers. Though the people with whom
he lived were continually anxious to amuse him, and show him some new
thing, they never could induce him to omit his daily devotions.

6. One day he heard that one of his teachers was sick. Immediately, he
retired to pray for him. Coming from his prayers, he said, with a
cheerful countenance, "I think there is hope that he will recover. I
have this morning earnestly begged of God to spare him to us."

7. After his teacher became well, he was told of this; and he very much
loved the young king for remembering him in his prayers.

8. Edward the Sixth died when he was sixteen years old. He was beloved
by all, for his goodness and piety. His mind was calm and serene in his
sickness.

9. If you are not tired of my story, I will tell you part of a prayer
which he used often to say, when on his dying bed.

10. "My Lord God, if thou wilt deliver me from this miserable life, take
me among thy chosen. Yet not my will, but thy will, be done. Lord, I
commit my spirit unto thee. Thou knowest how happy it were for me to be
with thee. Yet, if thou shouldst send me life and health, grant that I
may truly serve thee."

11. Children, you should do like King Edward, reverence your Bible, and
love to pray to God.




LESSON XLI.

_What does it Mean to be Tempted._--M.H., IN THE ROSE-BUD.


1. "Mother," said little Frank, "I wish you would tell me what it means
to be tempted. I heard you say, the other day, that people are tempted
to do many wicked things;--pray tell me, mother, if such a little boy as
I am is ever tempted?"

2. "Yes, my child, every day you live; and when I have told you what
temptation is, I think you will confess that you have not only been
tempted, but often yielded to temptation.

3. "To be tempted, means to be drawn by the offer of present pleasure to
do what is wrong. There are many kinds of temptation, and I think you
will understand me better if I give you an instance.

4. "You know, my dear Frank, that both your father and I have forbidden
your going to the pond where your cousin Henry was drowned, because we
think it very dangerous for you to venture there. But you also know that
the other day you went, and suffered severely afterward for your
disobedience."

5. "Yes, mother," said Frank; "but then I should not have gone, if
William Brown had not showed me his pretty ship, just as I was coming
out of school, and asked me to go see him launch it; and oh, mother, if
you had only seen it!

6. "It had masts and sails, just like a _real_ ship; and on the deck a
little man, which William called the captain. And then, when it was on
the water, it sailed along so sweetly!--the pond was as smooth as a
looking-glass, so that we could see two little ships all the time.

7. "I didn't think of disobeying you, mother; I only thought of the
pretty ship, and that there could be no harm in seeing William sail
it."--"The harm, my dear son (as you call it)," said his mother, "was
not in sailing the boat,--this is an innocent pleasure in itself; but it
was doing it after it had been forbidden by your parents, that made it
wrong.

8. "The temptation to disobedience came in the form of a little ship.
You were drawn by it to the pond, the forbidden spot. You saw it sail
gayly off, and stood on the bank delighted."

9. "But, mother," interrupted Frank, "I shouldn't have got into the
water and muddied my clothes, if the little ship hadn't got tangled in
the weeds; and the boys all shouted, Clear her! Clear her! and I
couldn't help stepping in, I was so near; and my foot slipped, and I
fell in."

10. "Yes," said his mother, "and but for assistance of your
play-fellows, you might have been drowned. But God, whose eye was upon
you all the while, saw fit to spare you; and how thankful you ought to
be that he did not take you away in your disobedience!

11. "You now see how you were tempted, first to go with William Brown to
the pond, and then to step into the water; which shows how one
temptation leads to another. But did not something within you, my son,
tell you, while there, that you were doing wrong to disobey your
parents?"

12. "No, mother; I do not recollect that it did. I'm sure I did not
think a word about it till I was alone in bed, and was asking my
heavenly Father to take care of me. Then something seemed to say,
'Frank, you have done wrong to-day.'

13. "And I felt how wicked I had been, and could not ask God to forgive
me till I had confessed all to you. I knew you were away when I came
home, and I thought you hadn't returned.

14. "I was so unhappy that I called Betsy, and told her how I felt. She
told me it was an accident, and no matter at all; that she had taken
care of my clothes, and she believed you would never know anything about
it.

15. "But all this was no comfort to me; the something within would not
be quiet. If it had spoken to me in the same way when I first saw the
little ship, I think I should not have gone to the pond."

16. "Frank," said his mother, "this something within, which is
conscience, did then speak, but you did not listen to its voice. The
voice of temptation was louder, and you obeyed it, just as you followed
some noisy boys, the other day, though I was calling to you, 'Frank,
come back.'

17. "I spoke louder than usual, and at any other time you would have
heard my voice; but you were too much attracted by the boys to listen to
me.

18. "Temptation makes us deaf to the voice within; and yielding to
temptation, as you see, my son, leads us into sin; and this is why we
pray, in the Lord's prayer, 'Lead us not into temptation, but deliver
us from evil,' which is sin, for there is no greater evil than sin.

19. "It is to keep us from this great evil that God has given us this
voice within, to warn us not to follow temptation, though the sin appear
but a trifling one, and though it hold out the promise of pleasure, as
the little ship did."




LESSON XLII.

_The same subject, continued._


1. "I will name some of the temptations to which little boys are a good
deal exposed, and yield to without thinking, and sometimes without
knowing to what they may lead.

2. "Sometimes the temptation to steal comes in the form of some
beautiful fruit; perhaps in his father's garden, which he has been
forbidden to touch; or perhaps in an orchard far from the eye of the
owner, where he might take it without fear of being seen; and he says to
himself, 'No one will ever know it; I will take only a few.'

3. "But does he forget that the eye of God is upon him, and does he not
hear the voice of conscience saying, 'Thou shalt not steal!' He would
shudder to be called a thief; but taking what does not belong to us, be
it ever so small a thing, is stealing.

4. "And when detected, he is tempted to lie, to conceal his fault and
avoid punishment; and here again we see how one sin leads to another.
The temptations to cruelty are many. Sometimes they appear in the form
of a bird's nest, placed by a fond and loving mother on the high bough
of a tree, to secure her young brood from danger.

5. "The boy, in his rambles in the woods, sees the nest, climbs the
tree, and, though the little birds are too feeble to fly, and the
anxious mother flutters round, as if to entreat the cruel boy to spare
her little ones, he is unmindful of her tenderness, and, thinking only
of his prize, bears it off to his companions, who enjoy it with him.

6. "Here is a sinful feeling indulged, which, if not subdued, may lead
to murder. I wish you to remember, my dear boy, that it is by allowing
ourselves to commit little sins that we become great sinners.

7. "You would be frightened if you could have placed before you a
picture of the course of sin. You would exclaim, What a monster!--he
must never come near me,--it is dangerous even to look on him! Let me
entreat you, then, my son, to guard against temptation.

[Illustration]

8. "If you say to temptation, as you would to a wicked companion, who
had often led you into mischief, 'Go away; I do not like your company,'
temptation, though for a while it may plead to be indulged, will soon do
as the wicked companion would, if often sent away with such a reproof,
discontinue to come; or, if found in your company, will not harm you;
for conscience, like a good friend, will be ever near; and your blessed
Saviour, who has promised to help those who are tempted, will assist you
to overcome temptation.

9. "I hope now you understand what it means to be tempted."--"I think I
do, mother," said Frank, "and I thank you for telling me so much about
temptation. I shall never again repeat the Lord's prayer without
thinking what it means, and I hope God will keep me from the great evil
of sin." He then kissed his mother, and she promised to tell him, some
other time, how we are tempted by sinful thoughts.




LESSON XLIII.

_The same, subject, continued._


[Illustration]

1. It was not long after Frank had the conversation with his mother upon
the temptation to sinful actions, that he claimed her promise to tell
him how we may be tempted to sinful thoughts.

2. It was Sunday evening. Frank and his mother were sitting alone
together at a window which opened upon a flower-garden, rich in the hues
with which God has seen fit to adorn this beautiful part of creation.

3. "You have been at church to-day, my son," said his mother; "and to my
eye you did nothing offensive, for you sat still during the sermon, and
appeared engaged with your book during the prayers.

4. "I saw only the _outward_ part; but remember there was an eye of
infinite purity looking upon your heart, and seeing the thoughts that
were passing there. You only can tell if they were fit to meet that
eye."

5. Frank looked down; for, like most children, he was not apt to examine
either his thoughts or motives, but was well satisfied if he gained the
approbation of his parents.

6. His mother, seeing he was struggling to disclose something, said,
"You are an honest boy, Frank, and do not, I trust, wish to conceal the
truth from your mother. If you have received my approbation for correct
conduct, you certainly cannot enjoy it, if you feel that it is not
deserved."

7. "That is what troubles me, mother," said Frank; "for, while I was
sitting so still, and you thought I was attending to the sermon, I was
all the while watching a pretty little dog, that was running from pew to
pew, trying to find his master; and when he got on the pulpit step, and
rolled off, I came so near laughing that I was obliged to put my
handkerchief to my mouth, and make believe to cough.

8. "I kept my eye upon him till church was done, and thought, if I could
see him at the door, I would try to make him follow me home, and keep
him.
