    Now I hear his footsteps, rustling through the grass:
    Hidden in my leafy nook, shall I let him pass?
    Just a low, soft whistle,--quick the hunter turns,
    Leaps upon me laughing, rolls me in the ferns.

                "Hold him fast,
                "Caught at last!
                "Now you're it, you see.
                "Hide your eye,
                "Till I cry,
              "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

    Long ago he left me, long and long ago:
    Now I wander through the world and seek him high and low;
    Hidden safe and happy, in some pleasant place,--
    Ah, if I could hear his voice, I soon should find his face.

                Far away,
                Many a day,
                Where can Barney be?
                Answer, dear,
                Don't you hear?
              "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

    Birds that in the spring-time thrilled his heart with joy,
    Flowers he loved to pick for me, 'mind me of my boy.
    Surely he is waiting till my steps come nigh;
    Love may hide itself awhile, but love can never die.

                Heart be glad,
                The little lad
                Will call some day to thee:
                "Father dear,
                "Heaven is here,
              "Coo-ee, coo-ee, coo-ee!"

HENRY VAN DYKE




THE BURNING OF THE "GOLIATH"

     (Owing to the excellent discipline which Captain Bourchier had
     established, and to the courage of the boys, only twelve lives
     were lost out of the crew of five hundred).


Let me give you an example of self-denial which comes from near home. I
will speak to you of what has been done by little boys of seven, of
eight, of twelve, of thirteen;--little English boys, and English boys
with very few advantages of birth; not brought up, as most of you are,
in quiet, orderly homes, but taken from the London workhouses. I will
speak to you of what such little boys have done, not fifteen hundred, or
even two hundred years ago, but last week--last Wednesday, on the river
Thames.

Do you know of whom I am thinking? I am thinking of the little boys,
nearly five hundred, who were taken from different workhouses in London,
and put to school to be trained as sailors on board the ship which was
called after the name of the giant whom David slew--the training-ship
Goliath.

About eight o'clock on Wednesday morning that great ship suddenly caught
fire, from the upsetting of a can of oil in the lamp-room. It was hardly
daylight. In a very few minutes the ship was on fire from one end to the
other, and the fire-bell rang to call the boys to their posts. What did
they do? Think of the sudden surprise, the sudden danger--the flames
rushing all around them, and the dark, cold water below them! Did they
cry, or scream, or fly about in confusion? No; they ran each to his
proper place.

They had been trained to do that--they knew that it was their duty; and
no one forgot himself; no one lost his presence of mind. They all, as
the captain said: "behaved like men." Then, when it was found impossible
to save the ship, those who could swim jumped into the water by order of
the captain, and swam for their lives. Some, also at his command, got
into a boat; and then, when the sheets of flame and the clouds of smoke
came pouring out of the ship, the smaller boys for a moment were
frightened, and wanted to push away.

But there was one among them--the little mate: his name was William
Bolton: we are proud that he came from Westminster: a quiet boy, much
loved by his comrades--who had the sense and courage to say: "No; we
must stay and help those that are still in the ship." He kept the barge
alongside the ship as long as possible, and was thus the means of saving
more than one hundred lives!

There were others who were still in the ship while the flames went on
spreading. They were standing by the good captain, who had been so kind
to them all, and whom they all loved so much. In that dreadful crisis
they thought more of him than of themselves. One threw his arms round
his neck and said: "You'll be burnt, Captain;" and another said: "Save
yourself before the rest." But the captain gave them the best of all
lessons for that moment. He said: "That's not the way at sea, my boys."

He meant to say--and they quite understood what he meant--that the way
at sea is to prepare for danger beforehand, to meet it manfully when it
comes, and to look at the safety, not of oneself, but of others. The
captain had not only learned that good old way himself, but he also knew
how to teach it to the boys under his charge.

DEAN STANLEY




HEARTS OF OAK


    Come, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,
    To add something more to this wonderful year,
    To honour we call you, not press you like slaves,
    For who are so free as the sons of the waves?
    Hearts of oak are our ships, hearts of oak are our men,
            We always are ready,
            Steady, boys, steady,
    We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.

    Still Britain shall triumph, her ships plough the sea,
    Her standard be justice, her watchword "Be free;"
    Then, cheer up, my lads, with one heart let us sing
    Our soldiers, our sailors, our statesmen, our king.
    Hearts of oak are our ships, hearts of oak are our men,
            We always are ready,
            Steady, boys, steady,
    We'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.

DAVID GARRICK




A WET SHEET AND A FLOWING SEA


    A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
      A wind that follows fast,
    And fills the white and rustling sail,
      And bends the gallant mast;
    And bends the gallant mast, my boys,
      While, like the eagle free,
    Away the good ship flies, and leaves
      Old England on the lee!

    "O for a soft and gentle wind!"
      I heard a fair one cry;
    But give to me the snoring breeze
      And white waves heaving high;
    And white waves heaving high, my boys,
      The good ship tight and free,--
    The world of waters is our home,
      And merry men are we.

    There's tempest in yon horned moon,
      And lightning in yon cloud;
    And hark the music, mariners,
      The wind is piping loud!
    The wind is piping loud, my boys,
      The lightning flashes free,--
    While the hollow oak our palace is,
      Our heritage the sea.

ALLAN CUNNINGHAM




THE TALENTS


The kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far country, who
called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods. And unto one
he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man
according to his several ability; and straightway took his journey.

Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the
same, and made them other five talents. And likewise he that had
received two, he also gained other two. But he that had received one
went and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's money. After a long
time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them.

And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five
talents saying, "Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I
have gained beside them five talents more." His lord said unto him,
"Well done, thou good and faithful servant; thou hast been faithful over
a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into
the joy of thy lord."

He also that had received two talents came and said, "Lord, thou
deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents
beside them." His lord said unto him, "Well done, good and faithful
servant; thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord."

Then he which had received the one talent came and said, "Lord, I knew
thee that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and
gathering where thou hast not strawed; and I was afraid, and went and
hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine." His
lord answered and said unto him, "Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou
knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not
strawed: thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the
exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with
usury. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which
hath ten talents. For unto every one that hath shall be given, and he
shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken away
even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."

ST. MATTHEW, XXV. 14-30




A FAREWELL


    My fairest child, I have no song to give you;
      No lark could pipe to skies so dull and gray;
    Yet, ere we part, one lesson I can leave you
            For every day.

    I'll tell you how to sing a clearer carol
      Than lark who hails the dawn or breezy down,
    To earn yourself a purer poet's laurel
            Than Shakespeare's crown.

    Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be clever;
      Do noble things, not dream them, all day long:
    And so make life, death, and that vast forever,
            One grand, sweet song.

KINGSLEY




AN APPLE ORCHARD IN THE SPRING


    Have you seen an apple orchard in the spring?
            In the spring?
    An English apple orchard in the spring?
      When the spreading trees are hoary
      With their wealth of promised glory,
      And the mavis sings its story,
            In the spring.

    Have you plucked the apple blossoms in the spring?
            In the spring?
    And caught their subtle odours in the spring?
      Pink buds pouting at the light,
      Crumpled petals baby white
      Just to touch them a delight--
            In the spring.

    Have you walked beneath the blossoms in the spring?
            In the spring?
    Beneath the apple blossoms in the spring?
      When the pink cascades are falling,
      And the silver brooklets brawling,
      And the cuckoo bird soft calling,
            In the spring.

    If you have not, then you know not, in the spring,
            In the spring,
    Half the colour, beauty, wonder of the spring,
      No sweet sight can I remember
      Half so precious, half so tender,
      As the apple blossoms render,
            In the spring.

WILLIAM MARTIN




THE BLUEJAY


Said Jim Baker: "There's more to a bluejay than to any other creature.
He has more kinds of feeling than any other creature; and mind you,
whatever a bluejay feels, he can put into words. No common words either,
but out-and-out book-talk. You never see a jay at a loss for a word.

"You may call a jay a bird. Well, so he is, because he has feathers on
him. Otherwise, he is just as human as you are.

"Yes, sir; a jay is everything that a man is. A jay can laugh, a jay can
gossip, a jay can feel ashamed, just as well as you do, maybe better.
And there's another thing: in good, clean, out-and-out scolding, a
bluejay can beat anything alive.

"Seven years ago the last man about here but me moved away. There stands
his house--a log house with just one big room and no more: no ceiling,
nothing between the rafters and the floor.

"Well, one Sunday morning I was sitting out here in front of my cabin,
with my cat, taking the sun, when a bluejay flew down on that house with
an acorn in his mouth.

"'Hello,' says he, 'I reckon here's something.' When he spoke, the acorn
fell out of his mouth and rolled down on the roof. He didn't care; his
mind was on the thing he had found.

"It was a knot-hole in the roof. He cocked his head to one side, shut
one eye, and put the other to the hole, like a 'possum looking down a
jug.'

"Then he looked up, gave a wink or two with his wings, and says: 'It
looks like a hole, it's placed like a hole--and--if I don't think it is
a hole!'

"Then he cocked his head down and took another look. He looked up with
joy, this time winked his wings and his tail both, and says: 'If I ain't
in luck! Why it's an elegant hole!'

"So he flew down and got that acorn and dropped it in, and was tilting
his head back with a smile when a queer look of surprise came over his
face. Then he says: 'Why, I didn't hear it fall.'

"He cocked his eye at the hole again and took a long look; rose up and
shook his head; went to the other side of the hole and took another look
from that side; shook his head again. No use.

"So after thinking awhile, he says: 'I reckon it's all right. I'll try
