
"And it would perhaps be well for young Mr. Lennox also to keep himself
in a safe place," said Mr. Hervey, who had spent the night too in Mr.
Huysman's house. "It seems that a most determined effort is being made
against him."

"Thank you, sir, for your interest in me," said Robert, "and I'll do my
best to be cautious."

He ate a hearty breakfast and then, on the insistence of Master Jacobus,
lay down. Declaring that he would not sleep, he fell asleep nevertheless
in ten minutes, and did not awake until the afternoon. He learned then
that Albany was feeling better. Many of the rumors that Montcalm was
advancing had been quieted. Scouts brought word that he was yet at Lake
Champlain, and that he had not given any sign of marching upon Albany.

Robert learned also that the council in Mr. Huysman's house had been to
take measures of offense as well as defense. Alan Hervey spoke for the
leading men of New York and he was to tell Albany for them that they
would make a mighty effort. A campaign had been lost, but another would
be undertaken at once, and it would be won. They had no doubt that
Boston, Baltimore and Charleston were doing the same. The strong men of
the Colonies intended to assure England of their staunch support, and
the English-speaking race not dreaming perhaps even then that it was to
become such a mighty factor in the world, would fight to the bitter end
for victory.

"I go back by sloop to New York to-morrow," said Mr. Hardy to him, "and
of course Jonathan Pillsbury goes with me. There are important affairs
of which I must speak to you some day, Robert, and believe me, my lad, I
do not speak of them to you now because the reasons are excellent. I
know you've borne yourself bravely in many dangers, and I know you will
be as strong of heart in others to come. I'm sorry I have to go away
without seeing Willet, but you could not be in safer hands than his."

"And I know, too," said Robert earnestly, "that I could have no better
friend than you, Mr. Hardy, nor you, Mr. Pillsbury."

He spoke with the frank sincerity that always made such an appeal to
everybody, and Mr. Hardy patted him approvingly on the shoulder.

"And don't forget me, Mr. Lennox," said Mr. Hervey. "I want you to be my
guest in New York some day. We live in tremendous times, and so guard
yourself well."

They left with a favoring breeze and the swift sloop that bore them was
soon out of sight. Robert, Tayoga, Mr. Huysman and Master McLean, who
had seen them off, walked slowly back up the hill to Mr. Huysman's
house.

"I feel that they brought us new courage," said Master Jacobus. "New
York iss a great town, a full equal to Boston, though they are very
unlike, and do not forget, Robert, that the merchants and financiers
have much to say in a vast war like this which is vexing the world
to-day."

"I do not forget it, sir," said Robert. "I have seen New York and its
wealth and power. They say that it has nearly twenty thousand
inhabitants--and some day I hope to see London too. Lieutenant Grosvenor
is coming. Can we stop and speak to him?"

"Of course, my lad, but Master Alexander and I have pressing business
and you will pardon us if we go on. If Lieutenant Grosvenor will come to
my house as my guest bring him, and tell him to stay as long as he
will."

"That I will, sir, and gladly," said Robert, as he and Tayoga turned
aside to meet the young Englishman.

The meeting had all the warmth of youth and of real liking. Grosvenor
was fully restored now and his intense interest in everything that was
happening was undiminished. They strolled on together. Robert and Tayoga
did not say anything for the present about their adventure of the
preceding night with the slaver and the spy, but Robert delivered the
invitation of Master Jacobus.

"If you can get leave come and stay a while with us in the house of Mr.
Huysman," he said. "He bids me give you a most hospitable welcome, and
when he says a thing he means not only what he says but a good deal
more, too. You'll have a fine bed and you may have to eat more than you
can well stand."

"It appeals to me," said Grosvenor, "and I'd come, but I'm leaving
Albany in a day or two."

"Leaving Albany! I suppose I shouldn't ask where you're going."

"I'll tell you without the asking. I'm going with some other officers to
Boston, where we're to await orders. Between you and me, Lennox, I think
we shall take a sea voyage from Boston, maybe to Nova Scotia."

"And that, I think, indicates a new expedition from England and a new
attack upon Canada and the French, but from another point. It's like the
shadow of great events."

"It seems so to me, too. Come with us, Lennox. All your friends have got
into the Royal Americans, and I think they too are going east. We could
raise enough influence to secure you a lieutenant's commission."

Robert's heart swelled, but he shook his head.

"You tempt me, Grosvenor," he said. "I'd like to go. I think you and the
others will be in the thick of great events, but I could never desert
Tayoga and Willet. I feel that my business, whatever it is, is here. But
we may meet on the front again, though we'll come by different routes."

"If you can't you can't, and that's an end of it, but I'm glad, Lennox,
that I've known you and Tayoga and Willet, and that we've shared perils.
I'm to meet the Philadelphians and the Virginians at the George Inn
again. Will you two come on?"

"Gladly," said Robert.

They found that the others had already arrived, and they were full of
jubilation. Colden, Wilton and Carson were leaving their troop with
regret, but the Royal Americans raised in the Colonies were a picked
regiment ranking with the best of the British regulars. Stuart and
Cabell, coming from the south, which was now more remote from the scene
of war, were delighted at the thought that they would be in the heart of
the conflict. They, too, were insistent that Robert come with them, but
again he refused. When he and Tayoga left them and walked back to the
house of Mr. Huysman the Onondaga said:

"Dagaeoga was right to stay. His world is centered here."

"That's so. I feel it in every bone of me. Besides, I'm thinking that
we'll yet have to deal with Garay and that slaver. I'll be glad though
when Willet comes. Then we can decide upon our next step."

Robert was too active to stay quietly at the house of Mr. Huysman. Only
their host, Tayoga and he were present at their supper that evening,
and, as the man was rather silent, the lads respected his preoccupation,
believing that he was concerned with the great affairs in which he was
having a part. After supper Tayoga left for the camp on the flats to see
an Onondaga runner who had arrived that day, and Mr. Huysman, still
immersed in his thoughts, withdrew into the room containing the great
chest of drawers.

Robert spent a little while in the chamber that he and Tayoga had used,
looking at the old, familiar things, and then he wandered restlessly
outside, where he stood, glancing down at the lights of the town. He
felt lonely for the moment. Everybody else was doing something, and he
liked to be with people. Perhaps some of his friends had come to the
George Inn. A light was burning there and he would go and see.

There was a numerous company at the inn, but it included nobody that
Robert knew, and contenting himself with a look from the doorway, he
turned back. Then the masts and spars in the river, standing up a black
tracery against the clear, moonlit sky, interested him, and he walked
casually to the bank. Some activity was still visible on the vessels,
but tiring of them soon he turned away.

It was dark on the shore, but Robert started violently. If fancy were
not playing tricks with him he saw the shadow of Garay once more. The
figure had appeared about twenty yards ahead of him and then it was
gone. Robert was filled with fierce anger that the man should show such
brazen effrontery, and impulsively he pursued. Profiting by his
experience with the spy, he now had a pistol in his pocket, and
clutching the butt of it he hurried after the elusive shadow.

He caught a second glimpse. It was surely Garay, and he was running
along the shore, up the stream.

Robert's anger rose by leaps. The spy's presumption was beyond all
endurance, but he would make him pay for it this time. He drew his
pistol that he might be ready should Garay turn and attack, though he
did not believe that he would do so, and sped after him. But always the
shadow flitted on before, and the distance between them did not seem to
diminish.

They soon left all houses behind, although Robert, in his excitement,
did not notice it, and then he saw that at last he was gaining.

"Stop, Garay! Stop, or I shoot!" he cried.

The spy halted, and Robert, covering him with his pistol, was about to
approach when he heard a step behind him. He whirled, but it was too
late. A stunning weight crashed down upon his head, and he fell into
oblivion.




CHAPTER IV

OUT TO SEA


When Robert came back from the far country in which he had been
dwelling, for a little space, he looked into a long face, with eyes set
close and a curved nose. He was dimly conscious that it was a familiar
countenance, but he could not yet remember where he had seen it before,
because he could not concentrate his thoughts. His head was heavy and
aching. He knew that he lived, but he did not know much more.

The staring face was distinctly unpleasant and menacing. He gazed into
it, trying to recall the owner, but the effort was still too great. Then
he became conscious that he was lying upon his back and that he was
moving. Trees on his right and trees on his left, some distance away,
were filing past. Two men on each side were pulling hard on oars, and
then it slowly entered his mind that he was in a boat.

He made another and stronger effort to gather up his wandering faculties
and then he realized with a jerk that the face looking into his was that
of the slaver. Making a supreme effort he sat up. The slaver laughed.

"So, Peter Smith," he said, "you've decided to come back a second time.
I knew that you couldn't stay away always from such a good, kind captain
as I am. I saw the light of welcome in your eyes when we met so
unexpectedly at the George Inn, and I decided that it was only a
question of time until you came into my service again."

Robert stared at him. His mind, which would not work hitherto, recovered
its power with great suddenness. All his faculties were keen and alert,
and they cooerdinated smoothly and perfectly. He had been trapped. He had
been struck from behind, while he pursued Garay with such eagerness. He
had been careless, and once more he was in the power of the slaver. And
there was the spy, too, in the prow of the boat, with his back to him,
but that very back seemed to express insolent triumph. He felt a great
sinking of the heart, but in a few moments recalled his courage. His was
a spirit that could not be crushed. His head still ached and he was a
prisoner, but his courage was invincible, and he put on a light manner.

"Yes, I've come back," he said. "You see, Captain, there are some things
concerning you of which I'm not sure, and I couldn't part from you
permanently until I learned them."

"I'm glad of it, Peter. You've an inquiring mind, I know, and you'll
have plenty of opportunity to learn everything about me. We're likely to
be together for quite a while."

Robert looked around. He was in a long boat, and there were four
oarsmen, stout fellows, rough of looks and with hangers and pistols in
their belts. Garay and the captain completed the party, and both the
slaver and the spy were armed heavily. He saw that he had no earthly
chance of escape at present, and he resigned himself for the moment. The
slaver read his look.

"I'm glad, Peter," he said, "that you've given up the thought of leaving
us that was flitting around in your head a minute or two ago. You're in
a better state of mind now, and it was not possible anyway. Nor will
there be any storm to send you away from me again. A chance like that
wouldn't happen once in a hundred times. I suppose you understand where
you are."

"I'm in a boat a few miles above Albany, and I think that before long
you'll turn and go back down the stream."

"Why, Peter?"

"Because there's nothing for you to go to up the stream. If you kept on
you'd arrive in the Indian country, and I doubt whether that's any part
of your plan."

"Clever, Peter, clever! and well reasoned. I see that your intellect's
as good as ever. You must rise above the place of a common seaman. When
you're a little older there's a mate's berth for you."

Garay turned for the first time, and his malignant look of triumph was
not veiled at all.

"You and Willet and the Indian thought you were very clever there in the
forest when you compelled me to tell where the paper was hid," he said,
"but you forgot that I might make repayment. We've taken you out of
Albany from the very center of your friends, and you'll never see them
again."

"Theatricals! theatricals!" said Robert, preserving his gay manner,
though his heart was low within him. "A cat has nine lives, but I have
ten. I've been twice a prisoner of the French, and my presence here is
proof that I escaped both times. When I tire of your society and that of
the captain I'll leave you."

"No quarreling! no quarreling!" said the slaver. "I never allow it among
my men. And now, Peter, I must insure your silence for a little while."

Two of the men who were rowing dropped their oars, seized him, bound and
gagged him. He struggled at first against the indignity, but, soon
realizing its futility, lay inert on the bottom of the boat.

"Good judgment, Peter," said the slaver, looking down at him. "It's
never wise to struggle against a certainty. You've the makings of a fine
officer in you."

The two resumed their oars, and the boat, turning abruptly, as Robert
had surmised it would, went down the stream. The men ceased to talk and
the lad on his back looked up at the sky in which but few stars
twinkled. Heavy clouds floated past the moon, and the night was
darkening rapidly. Once more his heart sank to the uttermost depths, and
it had full cause to do so. For some reason he had been pursued with
singular malice and cunning, and now it seemed that his enemies were
triumphant. Tayoga could trail him anywhere on land, but water left no
trail. He was sure that his captors would keep to the river.

The speed of the boat increased with the efforts of the rowers and the
favor of the current. Soon it was opposite Albany and then the men rowed
directly to a small schooner that lay at anchor, having come up the
stream the day before. Robert was lifted on board and carried into the
depths of the vessel, where they took out the gag and put him on the
floor. The captain held a lantern over him and said:

"Garay is telling you good-bye, Peter. He's sorry he can't go with us,
but he'll be having business on the Canadian frontier. He feels that the
score is about even with you for that business of the letter in the
forest, and that later on he'll attend also to the hunter and the
Onondaga."

"And I wish you a pleasant life on the West Indian plantations," said
Garay. "They still buy white labor there in both the French and British
islands. It does not matter to me to which the captain sells you, for in
either case it means a life of hard labor in the sugar cane. Few ever
escape, and you never will."

Robert turned quite sick. So this was the plan. To sell him into slavery
in the West Indies. Kidnapping was not at all uncommon then in both the
Old World and the New, and they seemed to have laid their plans well. As
the slaver had said, there was not one chance in a hundred of another
storm. Again the captain read his mind.

"You don't like the prospect," he said, "and I'll admit myself that it's
not a cheerful one. I've changed my opinion of you, Peter. I thought
you'd make a fine sailor and that you might become a mate some day, but
I've seen a light. You're not a good sailor at all. The stuff's not in
you. But you're strong and hearty and you'll do well in the sugar cane.
If the sun's too hot and your back bends too much just reflect that for
a white man it's not a long life and your troubles will be over, some
day."

Robert's old indomitable spirit flamed up.

"I never expect to see a West Indian plantation, not on this journey, at
least," he said. "You and that miserable spy boast that you took me out
of the very center of my friends, and I tell you in reply that if I have
enemies who follow me I also have friends who are truer in their
friendship than you are in your hate, and they'll come for me."

"That's the spirit. I never heard another lad sling words in the noble
fashion you do. You'll live a deal longer on the plantations than most
of 'em. Now, Garay, I think you can go. It will be the last farewell for
you two."

The exulting spy left the close little place, and Robert felt that a
breath of hate went with him. His feet disappeared up a narrow little
stair, and the slaver cut the cords that bound Robert.

"You'll be locked in here," he said, "and it's not worth while to damage
good property by keeping it tied up too long."

"That's so," said Robert, trying to preserve a light manner. "You want
to keep me strong and active for the work on the plantations. A white
slave like a black one ought to be in good health."

The captain laughed. He was in high humor. Robert knew that he felt
intense satisfaction because he was taking revenge for his mortification
when he was defeated in the duel with swords before his own men by a
mere boy. Evidently that would rankle long with one of the slaver's
type.

"I'm glad to see you recognize facts so well, Peter," he said. "I see
that you've an ambition to excel on the plantations, perhaps to be the
best worker. Now, Garay, telling me of that little adventure of his in
the forest with the hunter, the Indian and you, wanted me to be very
careful about your rations, to put you on a sparing diet, so to speak.
He thought it would be best not to let you have anything to eat for two
or three days. His idea rather appealed to me, too, but, on the other
hand, I couldn't impair your value, and so I decided against him."

"I'm not hungry," said Robert.

"No, but you will be. You're young and strong, and that wound on your
head where I had to hit you with the butt of my pistol doesn't amount to
much."

Robert put up his hands, felt of the back of his head, where the ache
was, and found that the hair was matted together by congealed blood. But
he could tell that the hurt was not deep.

"I'll leave you now," said the slaver in the same satisfied tone, "and I
