
"Ze Frenchman like, wat was this you call him, ze fair play; and ve
could not prevent to put some fingers in tose pies. Ver glad you was not
have the head broke," replied M. Rubempre, with another native flourish.
"_Mais_, wat for de _canaille_ make ze war on you, saire? You was
certainment un gentleman ver respectable."

Mr. Alwayn explained why he had incurred the hostility of the
blockade-runners and their adherents, for he was sometimes compelled to
protest against what he regarded as breaches of neutrality, and was
obliged in the discharge of his duty to look after these people very
closely, so that he was regarded as a spy.

"Oh! it was ze blockheads, was it?" exclaimed the Frenchman.

"Hardly the blockheads," replied the consul, laughing at the blunder of
the foreigner. "It is the blockade-runners that make the trouble."

"Blockade-runners! _Merci._ Was there much blockadeers here in ze
islands?" asked M. Rubempre, as though he was in total ignorance of the
entire business of breaking the blockade.

"Thousands of them come here, for this is about the nearest neutral port
to Wilmington, where many of this sort of craft run in."

"Wilmington was in Delaware, where I have seen him on ze map."

"No, sir; this Wilmington is in North Carolina. If you look out on the
waters of the harbor, half the vessels you see there are
blockade-runners," added the consul. "And there are more of them at St.
George's. It was only yesterday that a steamer I believe to be intended
for a man-of-war for the Confederacy came into the port of St. George's,
and I have been much occupied with her affairs, which is probably the
reason for this attempt to assault me."

"Ze _man_-of-war," repeated the Frenchman. "Ze war, _c'est la guerre_;
_mais_ wat was ze man?"

"She is a vessel used for war purposes."

"_She!_ She is a woman; and I think that steamer was a woman-of-war."

The consul laughed heartily, but insisted upon the feminine designation
of the steamer.

"What you call ze name of ze man-of-war?" asked M. Rubempre, putting on
a very puzzled expression of countenance.

"The Dornoch," replied Mr. Alwayn.

"The D'Ornoch," added the detective. "How you write him--like zis?" and
he wrote it on a piece of paper by his own method.

"Not exactly," replied the consul, writing it as given in English.

"How long ze Dornoch will she stop in zat port?" asked the Frenchman,
in a very indifferent tone, as though the answer was not of the least
consequence to him.

"Not long; I heard it stated in St. George's that she would get her
supplies and cargo on board to-day and to-morrow, and will sail before
dark to-morrow night," replied Mr. Alwayn. "The government here ought
not to allow her to remain even as long as that, for she is plainly
intended for a Confederate cruiser, and my men inform me that she has
six great guns, and fifty men."

M. Rubempre obtained all the information the consul was able to give
him, and much of it was of great importance. The official was under
obligations to the two strangers, and he seemed not to suspect that
either of them was an American, much less a naval officer. They took
their leave of him in the politest manner possible, and were shown to
the door by the consul.

"I am not quite sure that all his information is correct, and we must
investigate for ourselves," said the detective when they were in the
street. "But this affray is bad for us, and I was very sorry when you
interfered, Christophe."

"You did not expect to see me fold my arms when a representative of the
United States, and under our flag, was attacked by a lot of ruffians?"
demanded Christy, rather warmly, though he spoke in French.

"I know you could not help it, and I did my best to aid you," added M.
Rubempre. "I only mean that it was unfortunate for us, for when we go
about on the islands, we may be recognized by some of that mob. We must
go back to the hotel."

In a few minutes more they were at the Atlantic, where the Frenchman,
with his usual flourish, ordered a carriage to be ready in half an hour,
adding that he was about to dress for some visits he was to make in St.
George's. They went to their rooms, and each of them changed his dress,
coming out in black suits. The master wore a frock coat, but the servant
was dressed in a "claw-hammer," and looked like a first-class waiter.

It is about a two hours' ride over to St. George's, and Christy enjoyed
the excursion as much as though there had not been a blockade-runner in
the world. The town, with even its principal street not more than ten
feet wide, reminded him of some of the quaint old cities of Europe he
had visited with his father a few years before. But M. Rubempre was bent
on business, and the delightful scenery was an old story to him. They
took a boat at a pier, and for an hour a negro pulled them about the
harbor. There were quite a number of steamers in the port, long, low,
and rakish craft, built expressly for speed, and some of them must have
been knocked to pieces by the blockaders before the lapse of many weeks,
though a considerable proportion of them succeeded in delivering their
cargoes at Wilmington or other places.

The visitors looked them over with the greatest interest. They even went
on board of a couple of them, the detective pretending that he was
looking for a passage to some port in the South from which he could
reach Mobile, where his brother was in the Confederate army. No one
could doubt that he was a Frenchman, and on one of them the captain
spoke French, though very badly. M. Rubempre's good clothes secured the
respect and confidence of those he encountered, and most of the officers
freely told him where they were bound, and talked with great gusto of
the business in which they were engaged. But none of them could
guarantee him a safe passage to any port on the blockaded coast.

The excursion in the boat was continued, for the visitors had not yet
seen the steamer they were the most anxious to examine. The detective
would not inquire about this steamer, fearful that it might be reported
by the negro at the oars, and excite suspicion. But at last, near the
entrance to the harbor, the boatman pointed out the Dornoch, and told
them all he knew about her. There were several lighters alongside,
discharging coal and other cargo into her.

M. Rubempre, in his broken English, asked permission to go on deck, and
it was promptly accorded to him. He was very polite to the officers, and
they treated him with proper consideration. There were no guns in sight,
and the steamer looked like a merchantman; but if she had been searched,
her armament would have been found in the hold. The visitor again
repeated his desire to obtain a passage to the South; and this request
seemed to satisfy the first officer with whom he talked. He was informed
that the steamer would sail about five on the afternoon of the next day,
and he must be on board at that time, if he wished to go in the vessel.
He learned many particulars in regard to her.




CHAPTER XI

AN UNEXPECTED RENCONTRE


It was lunch-time when the visitors landed, and they proceeded to the
St. George's Hotel in Market Square, to attend to this mid-day duty. In
the coffee-room they found quite a number of guests, and the only spare
seat the detective found was at a large table at which a gentleman in
uniform was seated.

"Wit your permis-si-on, I take one of the places here," said M. Rubempre
with his politest flourish.

"Certainly," replied the gentleman, as politely as the Frenchman; and he
seated himself at the table, Christy remaining standing.

"_Demandez un garcon_" (ask for a waiter), "Christophe." Then in French
he asked the stranger opposite him if he spoke that language.

"A little, sir; but I am not fluent in it," replied the gentleman in the
same language.

"Ah, my dear sir, you speak very well; and you have the Parisian
accent," added the Frenchman, who, like his countrymen, counted upon the
effect of a little well-administered flattery.

"You are very kind to say so, sir. I have been in Paris a few months,
and was always able to make my way with the language," said the
stranger, evidently pleased with the commendation bestowed upon his
French accent; for many people take more pride in their foreign accent
than in the proper use of their own language.

"Christophe, find a place for yourself, and order what you desire,"
continued the Frenchman, as a waiter, summoned by the acting servant,
presented himself to take the order.

At this moment a gentleman behind the detective vacated his place at the
table, and Christy took a seat close to his companion. The lunch of both
was ordered, and the stranger opposite had but just commenced his meal.
M. Rubempre "laid himself out" to make himself as agreeable as possible,
and he seemed to be succeeding admirably, for the stranger appeared to
be absolutely charmed with him. Speaking slowly and clearly, so that the
person in uniform, who did not speak French fluently, could understand
him, he told him all about his brother in the Confederate army, and
strongly expressed his desire to join him, and perhaps the army, for he
had very strong sympathy for the right in the great conflict; in fact,
he was disposed to engage in fighting for the right.

Then he inquired of his new friend what wine was the best in the island.
The stranger preferred sherry, but perhaps a Frenchman might take a
different view of the subject. M. Rubempre ordered both sherry and
claret, and then filled the glasses of his _vis-a-vis_ and his own. He
did not offer any to his servant, for he knew that he never touched it.
They drank claret first to each other's health.

"You are in the military, my friend?" continued the detective.

"No, sir; I am a sailor. Allow me to introduce myself as Captain
Rombold, of the steamer Dornoch."

"I am extremely happy to make your acquaintance, Captain Rombold. To
reciprocate, I am M. Rubempre, of Paris," added the Frenchman, as he
filled his companion's glass, and they tippled again with an abundance
of compliments. "I presume that you are in the British navy, Captain
Rombold?"

"At present I am not, though I was formerly in that service, and
resigned to engage in a more lucrative occupation."

"Indeed, what could be better than the position of an officer in the
Royal navy?"

"I am now a commander in the navy of the Confederate States," added the
captain, looking with interest into the face of his companion. "I am
taking in coal and cargo, and shall sail at five to-morrow afternoon for
Wilmington."

"Is it possible?" said M. Rubempre, who appeared to be greatly impressed
by what was said to him. "I wish I was a sailor, but I am not. You will
break through the blockade?"

"I apprehend no difficulty in doing that, for the Dornoch is good for
fourteen knots an hour, and most of the Federal fleet cannot make more
than twelve."

Christy was very glad to hear this acknowledgment of the speed of the
intended cruiser, for it assured him that the Chateaugay could outsail
her. The two gentlemen at the other table passed the wine very freely,
and both of them seemed to be considerably exhilarated; but he was glad
to perceive that his friend allowed the captain to do the most of the
talking. The lunch was finished at last, and both of them rose from the
table.

"I am exceedingly obliged to you, M. Rubempre, for the pleasure I have
derived from this interview," said Captain Rombold, as he grasped the
hand of his companion. "I have had more practice with my French than for
several years, and I take great delight in speaking the language. I hope
we shall meet again."

"Thanks! Thanks! I am very sure that we shall meet again; and almost as
sure that we shall meet fighting for the right," added the Frenchman.

"But I hope you will be a passenger on board of the Dornoch, as you
suggested to me a little while ago. I will give you a good stateroom,
though I cannot absolutely promise to take you to the port of our
destination, for accidents may happen in the midst of the blockaders."

"If I can go with you, my dear Captain Rombold, I shall be on board of
your ship by four to-morrow afternoon," replied the detective, as he
took the hand of his new friend for the last time.

Christy had finished his lunch, and they left the hotel together. The
carriage in which they had come called for them at the appointed time,
and they returned to Hamilton. The conversation was continued in French,
so that the driver was none the wiser for what he heard. At the Atlantic
they went to their rooms, where the information they had obtained was
collaborated, and written down in French, the detective concealing it in
a belt pocket he wore on his body.

"The wonder to me has been that these officers talked so freely," said
Christy, as they seated themselves at a window. "They talked to you as
plainly as though you had been their friend for life."

"Why shouldn't they? They can't help knowing that I am a Frenchman; and
I am sorry to say that my countrymen, like so many of the English,
sympathize with the South in the great Civil War. They take me for a
friend at once. Besides, as they understand the matter here, why should
these blockade-runners, or even the Confederate commander, object to
telling what they are going to do. There will be no mail steamer to New
York till after they have all gone off; and there is no telegraph yet."

"Perhaps you are right, M. Rubempre; but I think a good deal more
discretion would become them better, as they are likely to ascertain
very soon," added Christy.

"I suppose none of these people here would consider it possible or
practicable to land at these islands and pick up the news, as we have
done. This was my plan for Nassau, but I did not think of applying it to
the Bermudas, till Captain Chantor told me his difficulty as to waiting
for the Dornoch."

"It seems to me we have done all we can do here, and there is nothing
more to do."

"That is very true; but I supposed it would take at least two days to do
our business. We have been much more successful than I anticipated, and
performed the duty in half the time I supposed it would require. But it
was better to have too much time than too little."

"It is nearly night now, and we have another day to spend here."

"We can rest from our labors in the hope that our works will follow us.
I am ready to do a good deal of sleeping in the time that remains to us,
for we may not be able to sleep any to-morrow night," added the
detective as he threw himself on his bed, and was soon fast asleep.

Christy had slept enough the night before and during the morning; and he
went out to take a walk in the town. He had taken off his suit of black,
and put on the costume he had worn from the ship. He was inclined to see
what there was in the town; and he walked about till it was dark, at
which time he found himself in the vicinity of the Hamilton Hotel, the
largest and best appointed in the town. He was dressed very plainly, but
there was nothing shabby in his appearance; and he thought he would
inspect the interior of the hotel.

He began to mount the piazza, when he suddenly halted, and started back
with astonishment, and his hair almost stood on end. Directly in front
of him, and not ten feet distant, sat his uncle, Homer Passford, of
Glenfield, talking with a gentleman in uniform. The lantern that hung
near him enabled him to see the features of the planter, but he could
not see the face of the officer, with whom he was engaged in a very
earnest conversation.

Christy's first impulse was to put a long distance between himself and
his uncle, for his father's brother might identify him in spite of the
color on his face. Such a discovery was likely to prove very annoying to
him, and might render useless the information the detective and himself
had obtained with so much trouble and risk. But the first question that
came into his head was the inquiry as to what his uncle was doing in
Bermuda. He was a Confederate of the most positive type, had done
everything in his power for his government, as he understood it, and was
willing to sacrifice his life and all that he had in the world in its
service.

Colonel Passford must be there on some mission. He was a prominent and
useful man in his State; and he would not have left it without some very
strong motive. The nephew would have given a great deal, and exposed
himself to no little peril, to be able to fathom this motive. He moved
away from the piazza, and went upon it at another place. If he could
hear some of the conversation he might be able to form some idea of the
occasion of his uncle's visit.

Walking along the platform, he obtained a position behind Colonel
Passford, and at the same time saw the face of the person with whom he
was in conversation. He was not a little surprised to discover that the
gentleman was Captain Rombold, commander of the Dornoch. He had hardly
seen this officer, and he had no fear that he would recognize him; and,
if he did, it was of little consequence, for he was there in the
capacity of a servant. He took a vacant chair, turned his back to both
of the speakers, and opened wide his ears. Probably nine-tenths of the
people in the hotel were directly or indirectly concerned in the
business of blockade-running; and secrecy was hardly necessary in that
locality.

"As I say, Captain Rombold, we need more fast steamers, not to run the
blockade, but to prey upon the enemy's commerce. In that way we can
bring the people of the North to their senses, and put this unhallowed
strife on the part of the Federals to an end," said Colonel Passford.

"Well, Colonel, there are ships enough to be had on the other side of
the Atlantic, and your money or your cotton will buy them," added the
naval officer.

"We have been rather unfortunate in running cotton out this last year.
Several steamers and sailing vessels that I fitted out with cotton
myself were captured by my own nephew, who was in command of a small
steamer called the Bronx."

"Of course those things could not be helped," replied Captain Rombold;
"but with the Gateshead and the Kilmarnock, larger and more powerful
steamers than any that have been sent over, you can scour the ocean.
They are ready for you when your money is ready."

"It is ready now, for I have sacrificed my entire fortune for the
purchase of these steamers; and I wait only for a vessel that will take
me to Scotland," replied Colonel Passford.

Christy promptly decided that the steamers mentioned should not be
purchased to prey on the commerce of the United States, if he could
possibly prevent it.




CHAPTER XII

AN IMPRACTICABLE SCHEME


Before the War of the Rebellion the commerce of the United States
exceeded that of any other nation on the globe. The Confederate
steamers, the Sumter, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, and other cruisers,
swept our ships from the ocean, and the country has never regained its
commercial prestige. Christy Passford listened with intense interest to
the conversation between his uncle and the commander of the Dornoch, and
he came to the conclusion that the latter was a naval officer of no
ordinary ability. He evidently believed that the six-gun steamer in his
charge was a command not worthy of his talent.

The Sumter, and some other vessels fitted out as privateers or war
vessels, had already done a great deal of mischief to the shipping of
the Northern States, and the young man fully realized the meaning of his
uncle's intentions. Colonel Passford had been supplied with money by his
government, with what he had raised himself, to purchase larger and more
powerful steamers than had yet been obtained, and Captain Rombold
appeared to be his confidant, with whom he must have been in
communication for a considerable length of time.

Colonel Passford was going to England and Scotland to purchase the
steamers mentioned and recommended as the kind required by his present
companion. Christy could think of no manner in which he could serve his
country so effectually as by preventing, or even delaying, the adding of
these vessels to the navy of the South. But it was a tremendous
undertaking for a young man. His uncle had certainly been very
indiscreet in talking out loud about his plans; but it could hardly have
been supposed that any loyal ears were near enough to hear them, for
even the American consul was not safe in the islands.

Christy had doubled himself up in his chair, and pretended to be asleep,
so that no notice was taken of him by the two gentlemen in conversation.
He continued to listen till he heard a clock strike nine; but he
obtained no further information, except in relation to the details of
the colonel's plans. He was in great haste to get to England to purchase
the vessels, and he had the drafts about him for the purpose. It was a
vast sum, for the prices of desirable steamers had largely advanced
under the demand for them for running the blockade.

"The easiest and quickest way for you to get to Liverpool or Glasgow is
to go to New York, and there take a steamer to either of these ports,"
suggested Captain Rombold.

"I dare not go to New York, for I should certainly be recognized there.
My only brother is one of the most prominent agents of the Yankee
government, and every passenger from Bermuda and Nassau is watched and
dogged by detectives. It would not be prudent for me to go New York, for
some pretext to rob me of the drafts I carry would be found," replied
Homer Passford.

"There may be a steamer from Bermuda in a week or a month, for there is
no regular line," added the naval officer.

