sitting under a tree, when Dimple sprang up, crying, "I see something!"
And she scrambled up the bank to a ledge beyond. "Girls! girls! here are
lots of huckleberries," she called.

"Are you sure?"

"Certain sure. I wish you'd see. Come up." And they clambered up to the
spot to find that she spoke truly: there was a patch of huckleberry
bushes full of fruit. They set to work with a will and bore their feast
down to the spring, near which they seated themselves on a fallen log.

"Did you ever taste anything so good?" said Emma. "I never care much for
huckleberries at home, but I shall never despise them again."

Being refreshed they took up their journey again. Weary and warm they at
length reached home, glad indeed to see the familiar streets, shady and
quiet.

"I am going to see you safely in your mother's hands," Callie assured
Dimple; "for it was my fault that you got into trouble. I had no
business to tempt you."

"But you only meant it out of kindness," replied Dimple, appreciatively.
"I think you were very good to want us; and it would have been all right
if the boat had not floated off that way."

"But we did float off, and I want to explain matters to your mother."

"I'll give you the dollar I have in my bank," said Dimple.

"No, wait till we find out about the other man; the one who owns the
boat. When he understands that we didn't mean any harm, and that it was
an accident, perhaps he won't charge for the boat, and then we'll only
have to pay eighty cents apiece. I don't want to take any money of yours
if I can help it."

"Oh, but you must. I'm sure mamma will say so."

"Well, we'll see. Just look how nicely your frock has dried. It doesn't
look bad at all. A little limp maybe, but it's better that than muddy.
I hope your mamma isn't very much worried. I don't believe it is so late
after all." And although it seemed to Dimple that she had been days away
from home, she was surprised to find that it was only about four
o'clock, when hot and hungry they arrived at home.

Callie made her excuses and apologies as contritely as possible, and
Mrs. Dallas was so relieved to find that nothing worse had happened,
that she said very little in the way of reproof to the two runaways.

"You must never go down to the river again, my children," she said;
"that is, unless papa or I, or some trustworthy person is with you. I
should have forbidden you to go this time, but you have never ventured
there before."

"I know, mamma," replied Dimple, "but it was so easy getting there from
Mr. Atkinson's place, that we were there before we knew it. Was it
'Didn't think,' mamma?"

"Not exactly. I suppose you hardly realized that you were doing wrong
since there were older girls with you, and it was more of an accident
than actual wrongdoing. I think we shall have to keep you at home
hereafter, for it seems very easy for little folks to get into trouble
when they are away from their mothers. You have your own garden and your
own little house to play in, so I think we must set the bounds there,
and only allow you to go outside our premises by special invitation."

"Not even to Mr. Atkinson's?"

"No, I think not, dear. It is safer for you at home. Mamma has been
greatly worried and distressed, and I am sure you do not want her to
pass through such an anxious time again. It is for mamma's sake, dear,
as well as your own, that she keeps you close to her. Suppose you had
fallen overboard." She drew the child nearer to her, while her eyes grew
moist at the thought.

"Dear, dear mamma, I'll never go away again without your leave. I don't
want to make you unhappy, mamma. I do love you."

"I know you do, darling; but little girls sometimes forget that it is
more by the doing than by the saying that their mothers are made aware
of their love. You know papa always tells you that if you really love
your parents, you will do the things that please them, otherwise, no
matter how much you say 'I love you,' it doesn't mean anything."

Dimple looked very sober, and Florence, too, listened to all this with a
very grave face. It had really been a very trying day for the two little
cousins, and now that they were safe, they realized how uncomfortable it
had been. Therefore, from that time there never was a question of their
going outside the gate without permission, and Mr. Atkinson's place was
no longer visited unless by his express invitation on Saturday
afternoons.

"I feel as if I had been sort of ungrateful," said Dimple, the next day
after their rescue. "I just love my home, Florence, and somehow I don't
feel a bit bad about not going to Mr. Atkinson's. I believe I know
exactly how the little birdies feel when they get back to the nest,
after they have been trying to fly. I hope I shall never go so far away
again, until I am much older." And the two returned contentedly to their
old playground, only too glad to feel the security of familiar sights
and sounds.




CHAPTER IX

Down Town


"Don't you want to go down town for me, girls?" said Mrs. Dallas, one
pleasant morning. "I can't send Bubbles very well."

"Oh, yes," said Dimple. "What are we to get?"

"Several things," replied her mother. "Go and get ready and I will tell
you."

"May we take Celestine and Rubina?" asked Florence.

"I don't think I would, for you will have packages, and they will be in
the way."

"Don't let's take them anyhow, Florence," said Dimple. "I was thinking
this morning that their frocks are too thick for summer." So they ran
off to get ready.

"Now," said Mrs. Dallas, as they came back, "I want you to go to Fink's
and get me four yards of trimming like this sample; if they haven't
exactly like it, the nearest will do. Then I want you to get me four
lemons. You may go to old Mrs. Wills for those, and if she has any fresh
eggs you may get a dozen, and--oh, yes, a bottle of vanilla extract. Now
don't be too long, for I shall want to use some of the things this
morning."

They promised, and went off without delay. It was a pleasant July
morning, and they started gaily down the street, which was shaded by
trees and bordered on each side by pretty cottages, with gardens in
front.

"There is Mrs. Brown," said Dimple; "let's cross over, Florence, she
will be sure to stop us if we don't."

"Who is Mrs. Brown?" asked Florence.

"Oh, she's a woman," returned Dimple. "I suppose she is very nice, but
she is so solemn, and is always telling me that she hopes I will grow up
to be a comfort to my mother and not a care and burden; and she always
says it as if there wasn't the least doubt but that I would be a care
and a burden, and I don't like her. Do you know mamma and Mrs. Hardy
have been friends for over twenty years, and mamma is Rock's
godmother?"

"How do you know?"

"Mamma told me. I asked her how she came to know Rock's mother, and she
said she used to know her when she was a little girl like me--and when
they were young ladies they were great friends. Then mamma was married
and came here, and Rock's mother was married and went to California.
When her husband died she came back to Baltimore to live. Here is
Fink's; we have to go in here."

This was the largest dry goods shop in the town, and the clerks all knew
Dimple.

"What can we do for you this morning, Miss Dallas?" said one of them,
leaning over the counter.

"Mamma wants four yards of this trimming," said Dimple, holding out her
sample.

The man took it, turned it over to examine both sides, and took down a
box.

"Four yards, did you say?"

"Yes," said Dimple.

He measured it off, saying, "Don't you want some cards? We have some
just in with a lot of goods."

"I would rather have a box," said Dimple; "for I have a new doll, and I
want it to put her sashes in."

"You don't object to having both, do you?" said he. "Suppose I put the
cards in the box. How would that do?"

"Oh, that would be very nice," said Dimple; "you are very kind."

As he went off, she turned to Florence and said in a low tone, "I didn't
like to ask him for two boxes, but I will give you the cards."

"No matter," said Florence. "I don't care very much for a box."

However, when the man returned he had two boxes with four pretty cards
in each.

"Thank you so much," said the girls, highly pleased.

"He is a real nice man," said Florence, when they were in the street. "I
didn't believe he would think of me."

"Yes, I think he is nice," said Dimple; "besides he has known me ever
since I was a baby; he mightn't be so nice to a stranger."

They next came to a little low brown building with one window. As they
went in at the door, a small bell over it tinkled and a voice said, "In
a minute."

While they waited they looked about the shop, which was quite a
curiosity to Florence. In the window were jars of candy, red and white,
gingerbread horses, shoestrings, oranges, lemons, and dolls strung along
in a line, the largest in the middle and the smallest at each end;
besides these there were tops, whistles, writing paper, pencils, scrap
pictures, and a variety of other things, all jumbled up together.
Inside, the glass case and the shelves were full, and from the ceiling
hung rolls of cotton in tissue paper, toy wagons, jumping-jacks and
hoops.

"What a funny place," whispered Florence; but just then a funnier old
woman came in. Her face looked like a withered apple, it was so wrinkled
and rosy; her eyes were bright and her grey hair was combed back under a
high white cap. As she came behind the counter, Florence saw that one of
her hands was very much scarred, and the fingers bent. She wondered what
had happened to it.

"Well, little Dallas girl, it's you, is it? And how is my pretty with
her dimples and curls? Hm! Hm! Hm! The little Dallas girl," said the
old woman.

"Mamma wants four lemons, Mrs. Wills," said Dimple.

"Four lemons; four--four--" said the old woman, going to a box and
taking them out.

"And she wants to know if you have any fresh eggs?"

"Fresh eggs. Hm! Hm! Fresh eggs. How many? I'll see."

"A dozen if you have them."

"Well, we'll have to go and find them, little girls. Who is the other
little girl?"

"My cousin," said Dimple.

"A Dallas?"

"No; her name is Florence Graham."

"Graham, Graham. A Dallas and a Graham. Come you two, then, and we'll
see if we can find any eggs."

They followed Mrs. Wills through the back room into the yard. The room
they passed through was very clean, and held a stove with a little tin
kettle on it, a bed with a patchwork quilt, a shining little table and
several chairs with flowers painted on them.

The yard was quite a curiosity, and seemed to be given up entirely to
pigeons and chickens, who made a great fuss, flying up on the old
woman's shoulder and pecking at her; while an old duck waddled solemnly
after, giving a quack once in a while to let them know she was there.

Mrs. Wills took them to the hen-house, and told them where to look for
eggs.

As Dimple had been there before, she knew where to look, and they soon
made up the dozen.

The old duck followed them into the house, and was waddling after them
into the shop, when Mrs. Wills with a "Shoo! Shoo!" drove her out.

"Now, Dallas girl, and Graham girl," said Mrs. Wills, "does the mother
need anything else to-day?"

"There was something else," said Dimple, "but I can't think what. Can
you, Florence?"

"There were four things, I know," said Florence. "But I don't remember
the fourth."

"A--apples, B--brooms, C--crackers, D--dust-pans," went on Mrs. Wills,
rapidly, and then paused.

"No; not any of those," said Dimple.

"E--extract," said Mrs. Wills.

"Yes, that's it. You have guessed, Mrs. Wills, vanilla, please."

"E--extract, E--extract," said the old woman, as she hunted in a dark
corner.

"And C--cocoanut cakes. Red or white?" she asked, opening the case.

"White," said Dimple. "But Mrs. Wills----"

"Tut! Tut! Don't you say it; don't you say it, or I'll take back my
eggs," she said, as she handed each of the children a cake.

"Thank you, Mrs. Wills. When I'm grown-up I'll make you a great big cake
and send it to you," said Dimple.

That pleased the old woman mightily, and she nodded good-bye to them,
saying, "Lemons, eggs and extract," over and over to herself.

"What a ridiculous old woman!" said Florence. "Is she crazy?"

"No," said Dimple. "But she is queer. She is good, though, and mamma
always buys everything from her that she can, and she feels so bad if I
don't take the things she offers me that I have to accept them."

"What is the matter with her hand?"

"She burned it trying to save her child from burning."

"Did she save it?"

"No; and that is what makes her so queer. She has never been the same
since."

"My! how warm it is getting," said Florence. "I am glad we have broad
brimmed hats. Let's hurry home. There is your Mrs. Brown again."

"Oh, dear!" said Dimple. "Let us turn up this street; it is just as near
to go home this way." So they turned the corner and reached home before
Mrs. Brown knew which way they had gone.

"Suppose we watch Sylvy make cake," said Dimple, when they had delivered
their packages. "She always lets me watch her. And then we can scrape
the bowl. Don't you like to?"

"I never do at home," said Florence. "Our cook is so cross and mamma
does not like me to go into the kitchen."

"My mamma doesn't care; she lets me go whenever I please, and sometimes
I help Bubbles clean knives and do such things, so she can get through,
and play with me sooner."

"Sylvy, we are coming to watch you make cake; may we?"

"I'm not a carin'!" said Sylvy. "Git 'round on the other side of the
table."

"See her break the eggs," said Florence. "Could you do it, Dimple? I'd
be sure to get the yolks all mixed with the whites, and she just turns
one half into the other as easily."

"I'd be afraid to try," said Dimple; "but when I am a little bigger, I
mean to make a cake myself. I believe I could now if I had some one to
tell me."

"I wouldn't try just yet," said Sylvy, briskly beating the whites of the
eggs to a froth.

"Could you, Sylvy, when you were a little girl?" asked Florence.

"Laws, no. I was nigh as big as I am now, and then I made a poor fist at
it," said Sylvy, laughing at the recollection.

"What was the matter?" asked Dimple.

"Too much butter and sugar, and not enough flour; it rose up beautiful
at first and then down it went; when I took it out of the oven it was
like taffy. I felt plum bad, I tell you; but I did better next time;" so
saying, she turned her cake into the pans and giving each of the
children a spoon, bade them take the bowl between them out on the steps,
and "lick" to their hearts' content.

"You aren't going to make another cake right away, are you, Sylvy?"
asked Dimple, looking up from her bowl. "And--oh, Florence, see all
those turnovers. Are you really going to make another cake, Sylvy?"

"Yass, miss, some suveral of 'em."

"What for?"

"Yo' ma done tole me to," replied Sylvy, with a smile.

"I'm going to ask her about it. I know she doesn't intend we shall eat
them all. Perhaps there is going to be a church supper, or a strawberry
festival, or something. Come on, Florence, let's go and see about it."
And throwing down their spoons, they went to hunt up Mrs. Dallas.

They found her in the dining-room, making salad dressing, and upon the
table was a newly-boiled ham, and a quantity of chopped chicken.

"There, now, mamma is doing something about eating, too," exclaimed
Dimple. "I'd just like to know what it is all for. Won't you tell us,
mamma? Are you going to have a tea or anything like that?"

"Not exactly like that; but we are going on a picnic."

"Oh! oh! a picnic! Tell us, mamma. Who is going? Are we children to go?"

"Yes. You children, Mrs. Hardy and Rock, the Spears, the Neals, and the
Jacksons. Mr. Atkinson, too, I think."

"Which Jacksons?"

"Mr. David Jackson's family. Mr. Atkinson is not sure of being here, but
he hopes to be able to get off."

"Oh, good! Tell us some more, mamma."

"We are going to start early to-morrow afternoon, if it is pleasant. We
will take supper with us. We are going up the river to the island, and
have our meal there."

"Fine! fine! Oh, Florence, you have never been to the island, and it is
just lovely there. I think you are very good to let us go, mamma, after
our running away in a boat."

"Who ever heard of any one's running away in a boat?" laughed Mrs.
Dallas. "Now be good children, and keep out of the way, for Sylvy and I
have a lot to do."

"We'll be good as possible, mamma, but just one more question: are you
going to take Bubbles?"

"I hadn't thought of it."

"Oh, do, please; she'd be a lot of help, and she'd simply jump out of
her skin if she thought she would be allowed to go."

"Then we'd better let her stay in her skin. She would be very
uncomfortable without it, even in this warm weather."

"Please, mamma."

Mrs. Dallas considered for a moment, and then said: "Well, yes, upon the
whole, I think it would be rather a good plan, but she must not neglect
her work to-day. If she gets through all that she has to do by the time
we start she may go, but not otherwise. She will have extra work to-day,
because Sylvy is more than usually busy."

"May we help her a little bit? We could clean the knives, and shell the
peas."

"I think that would be very kind if you did."

"And may we tell her?"

"If you like."

The two little girls ran off to where Bubbles was washing out dish
towels by the kitchen door. "Bubbles! Bubbles! You are going on a
picnic," cried Dimple.

Bubbles dropped the dish towel she was dousing up and down in the water.
"Me, Miss Dimple? Me? Who say so?"

"Mamma. There is to be a picnic to-morrow, and you are to go along with
us. Aren't you glad?"

"Hm! Hm! I reckon I is. All dem cakes an' pies an' good eatin's, an' I
gwine have some fo' dey gits mashed up an' soft, an' I gwine wait on de
ladies and gent'mans. Ain't dat fine?" She gave a twist to her towel and
shook it out with a snap. Then she was overtaken by a sudden fear. "Yuh
ain't a-foolin' me, is yuh?"

"No, of course not. I wouldn't be so mean as to fool you about such a
thing. But mamma says you mustn't dawdle to-day. So hurry up and get
those towels done. Sylvy is going to be awfully busy, so you'll have to
help her, but we're going to clean the knives for you, and shell the
peas. Bring them down to the little house; we're going down there. We
might set the table, too, Florence."

"Thanky, ma'am, Miss Dimple. Thanky, Miss Flo'ence." Bubbles' face was
beaming, and her slim, black legs went scudding into the house with more
than their usual agility.

"I shouldn't wonder if Rock were to come over, Florence," said Dimple;
"then he can help us to shell the peas, so we can have some time to
play. Rock will want to talk over the picnic, and he will want to see
how the garden is coming on. I think the pumpkin vine is coming up. I
can't tell whether it is that or a weed, but Rock will know."

"Rock always thinks of such nice plays; I hope he will come," returned
Florence; and, indeed, they had hardly established themselves on the
porch of the little house before the boy's cheery whistle was heard, and
the three children, after faithfully fulfilling the promise to Bubbles
to relieve her of some of her tasks, determined to invent a new play.

"I'll tell you what we'll do," said Rock. "We'll dig a cave over here,
and we'll pretend a company of bandits live in it, and they will
capture one of your dolls. Then we will go to the rescue."

"Who'll be the bandits?"

"Why, let me see. We'll take sticks of wood; little branches with two
prongs, like this; they make the legs, you see; and then we'll stick on
something round for the heads, turnips or onions or something like
that."

"There aren't any turnips this time of year," returned Dimple, "and
onions smell so strong. We can get potatoes, though, and they have eyes,
so I should think they would make very good heads."

Rock laughed. "So they will."

"I'll go and see if mamma will let me have--how many?"

"Oh, half a dozen or so."

Dimple started for the house; then suddenly remembered that she had
promised not to bother her mother, and she stood still for a moment. But
the idea of the bandits was too alluring, and so she proceeded to the
house, putting her head timidly in at the dining-room door, where her
mother was still busy.

"Mamma," she said, "are potatoes very expensive?"

"No, not very. What a funny question. Did you come all the way in here
to ask that?"

"No, mamma, not exactly; but do they cost too much for you to give us
half a dozen for our bandits?"

"For your bandits! What do you mean?"

"Why, we are going to have a lovely play--Rock made it up--and we can't
have any bandits unless we have heads for them, and I said potatoes
would do, because they have eyes. May we have half a dozen?"

Mrs. Dallas smiled. "Yes, but you must not ask Sylvy or Bubbles to get
them for you."

"I'll get them if you will tell me where they are."

"They are down in the cellar. Please, Dimple, don't bother me again. Try
to play without coming up after things all the time."

"Yes, mamma," Dimple replied, very meekly. "I wouldn't have come this
time if it had been for anything but the bandits."

Mrs. Dallas let her go, and then called her back, for she had seen a
little wistful look in the child's face when her mother spoke shortly.
"Come, kiss me, dear," she said. "I want you to know that you are quite
welcome to the potatoes. They will make very inexpensive and harmless
playthings, and I hope your bandits will turn out just as you want them
to."

Dimple gave her a grateful hug.

"You may stop in the kitchen and get a turnover apiece for you three
children. Tell Sylvy I said you might."

"Oh, mamma, how dear you are," and the happy little face disappeared.

The six potato-headed bandits proved most venturesome creatures, and
kept their captive safe from her would-be rescuers, till she was
redeemed by the payment of a hundred pieces of gold, represented by
buttercup petals, and the morning passed so quickly that the children
could scarcely believe it, when Bubbles came--as they had told her to
do--to tell them it was time to set the dinner-table.

"Shall I fill up the cave?" Rock asked.

"Oh no, we might want to use it again," Dimple decided. "That was such a
lovely, exciting play, Rock."

"Then we'd better cover up the cave. Some one might step in it, and get
hurt."

After hunting around, an old battered tin pan was found, which was laid
over the entrance, but, alas! it was not proof against Bubbles'
unfairy-like tread, for she stepped on it that very evening, and down
she went, but, as luck had it, she did nothing worse than scratch her
toes upon the very rough body of the bandit chief; although, be it
confessed, he fared worse by the encounter than she did, for he had both
legs broken beyond hope of saving. The next morning he was carefully
carried away to a hospital and devotedly nursed by one of Dimple's
dolls; but he never recovered, though he lingered for several days. His
funeral was quite a magnificent affair, and he was buried with proper
ceremonies under the very tree upon which he originally grew.




CHAPTER X

The Picnic


The children awoke on the morning of the day set for the picnic, to
view, with anxious eyes, a grey sky.

"Oh, if it should rain, wouldn't it be just too bad for anything," said
Florence. "I should be so dreadfully disappointed, shouldn't you,
Dimple?"

