
Two or three characters were sent on the line.

Then no more could be sent.

Some sailors, in pulling up their anchor, had caught the wire.

They pulled in about two hundred feet.

Then they cut the wire.

So ended the first cable.

The Vails had been good friends to Mr. Morse.

But they became afraid to spend any more money.

Then, indeed, Mr. Morse was in despair.

A bill had been brought before Congress, asking for thirty thousand
dollars.

This was to build the trial telegraph line.

Oh, how anxiously Mr. Morse waited!

Delay after delay came.

Many Congressmen in their speeches, made all manner of fun of the
bill.

Twilight came upon the evening of March 3rd, 1842.

It was the last day of the session of Congress.

There were still one hundred and nineteen bills to dispose of.

It seemed impossible that the telegraph bill could be reached.

Mr. Morse had patiently waited all day.

At last he gave up all hope.

He left the building and went to his hotel.

He planned to leave for New York on an early train.

As he came down to breakfast next morning, a young lady met him.

"I have come to congratulate you," she exclaimed.

"Upon what?" inquired the professor.

"Upon the passage of your bill," she replied.

"Impossible! Its fate was sealed last evening.

You must be mistaken."

"Not at all," said the young lady; "father sent me to tell you that
your bill was passed. It was passed just five minutes before the
close of the session."

Mr. Morse was almost overcome with the news.

He promised the young lady that she should send the first message
over the new line.

Mr. Morse received a sad message in the midst of his joy.

This was the news of the death of his dearest friend, Mr. Allston.

He hastened to the home of his friend in Cambridge.

The brush with which Mr. Allston had been painting was still moist.

Mr. Morse begged this as a memorial of his friend.

He afterwards gave it to the National Academy.

Now that the bill was passed, how hard he and his friend worked to
build the line!

They tried putting the wires underground.

But this proved very expensive.

Then they tried the poles as we have them now.

This succeeded nicely.

1844 was the year for the appointing of a new President.

The Whig party were to hold their convention at Baltimore, in May.

The managers of the telegraph worked hard to get the line done
before the meeting.

And, although the line was not finished, signals were arranged by
which the message could be given.

At last the day came.

Henry Clay was nominated for President.

The news was sent by the wires to Washington.

Passengers arrived from Baltimore an hour later.

They were astonished to find the news already known.

On the 24th of May the line was ready for its test.

Every one was anxious.

Mr. Vail was at the Baltimore end of the line.

Miss Ellsworth, the young lady who had the promise of sending the
first message, was with Mr. Morse.

Remember the twelve long, weary, anxious years, during which Mr.
Morse had worked and waited.

It was an anxious moment.

Miss Ellsworth chose her message from the Bible.

It is found in Numbers, 23rd chapter, 23rd verse.

The words are: "What hath God wrought!"

This was received at once by Mr. Vail.

Professor Morse said this of the words of the message:--

"It baptized the American Telegraph with the name of the author."

He meant by this, that God was the author of the telegraph.

What a glad, happy time followed!

Everybody congratulated Mr. Morse.

The democratic convention took place two days later.

There was much excitement.

James K. Polk was nominated for President.

All sorts of messages were sent over the new telegraph line.

Mr. Morse loved his country.

And through his whole life worked for its interests.

He rejoiced in having his invention called an American invention.

He was at one time in Europe.

His friend, Mr. F.O.J. Smith, was embarking on his voyage for home.

Mr. Morse said to him:--

"When you arrive in sight of dear America, bless it for me.

"And when you land, kiss the very ground for me.

"Land of lands! Oh, that all our country-men would but know their
blessings!

"God hath not dealt so with any nation.

"We ought to be the best, as well as the happiest and most
prosperous of all nations.

"Nor should we forget to whom we are in debt for all these
blessings.

"'Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a reproach to any
nation.'"

       *       *       *       *       *

There were still many hard things for Mr. Morse to endure.

Wicked men tried to steal his invention from him.

They pretended to have invented telegraphs.

The nations of Europe did not treat him justly.

But, little by little, the telegraph lines were built over the
country.

Little, by little, the world came to know and love the name of
Samuel F.B. Morse.

Honors of all sorts were given him.

But, through all, he was the same kind, patient man.

The Sultan of Turkey was the first foreign prince to honor Mr.
Morse.

But he was followed by many others.

You have noticed that Mr. Morse never had a chance to enjoy a home.

In 1847, he bought a beautiful home upon the Hudson.

In the following year he married Miss Griswold, a lady born at Sault
Ste. Marie.

They called their new home Locust Grove.

There they enjoyed life greatly.

Professor Morse had a telegraph instrument in his study.

He afterwards bought a beautiful home in New York City.

There they spent their winters.

These words were written by a friend to Mrs. Morse, alluding to her
husband:--

"Though he did not 'snatch the thunder from the heaven,' he gave the
electric current thought, and bound the earth in light."

To Mr. Morse belongs also the honor of the submarine telegraph.

A successful telegraph of this kind was laid near New York City.

Other gentlemen became interested in this.

Chief among these were Mr. Cyrus W. Field and his brother David
Dudley Field.

The story of the cable laid across the Atlantic is a long one.

But Mr. Morse lived to see this, too, a success.

When Mr. Morse was eighty years of age, his statue was erected in
Central Park, New York.

This was done by the telegraph operators of the country.

It represented Mr. Morse as sending the first message of the
telegraph, "What hath God wrought."

Mr. Morse was present when the statue was unveiled.

In 1872 he became very ill.

His busy life was at an end.

The whole country mourned, as news flashed over the wires that
Professor Morse was dying.

The light was going out of those bright, kind eyes.

The fingers that harnessed the steed, Lightning were powerless.

The great brain, that had worked so hard for the world, was ready
for rest.

The great heart, that never kept an unkind thought, ceased to beat.

All America mourned for him.

Messages were received from Europe, Asia and Africa, paying tribute
to the dead.

Few men have lived such lives as did Samuel Finley Breese Morse.

  [Illustration]




  [Illustration: PETER COOPER.]




PETER COOPER.


On the seventh of April, in 1883, the great city of New York was in
mourning. Flags were at half-mast. The bells tolled.

Shops were closed, but in the windows were pictures of a kind-faced,
white-haired man.

These pictures were draped in black.

All day long tens of thousands of people passed by an open coffin in
one of the churches.

Some of these people were governors, some millionaires.

There were poor women, too, with little children in their arms.

There were workmen in their common clothes.

There were ragged newsboys.

And all these people had aching hearts.

The great daily papers printed many columns about the sad event.

People in England sent messages by the Atlantic cable that they,
too, had sad hearts.

Who was this man for whom the world mourned on that April day?

Was he a president? Oh, no.

A great general? Far from it.

Did he live magnificently and have splendid carriages and fine
diamonds?

No, he was simply Peter Cooper, a man ninety-two years old, and the
best loved man in America.

Had he given money?

Yes, but other men in our country do that

Had he traveled abroad, and so become widely known?

No, he would never go to Europe because he wished to use his money
in a different way.

Why, then, was he loved by so many?

One of the New York papers gave this truthful answer:

"Peter Cooper went through his long life as gentle as a sweet woman,
as kind as a good mother, as honest as a man could live, and remain
human."

Some boys would be ashamed to be thought as gentle as a girl, but
not so Peter Cooper.

He was born poor, and was always willing that everyone should know
it.

He despised pride.

When his old horse and chaise came down Broadway, every cartman and
omnibus driver turned aside for him.

Though a millionaire, he was their friend and brother, and they were
proud and fond of him.

He gave away more than he kept.

He found places for the poor to work if possible.

He gave money to those he found were worthy.

And though he was one of the busiest men in America, he always took
time to be kind.

His pastor, Mr. Collyer, said this of him:--

"His presence, wherever he went, lay like a bar of sunshine across a
dark and troubled day. I have seen it light up the careworn faces of
thousands of people. It seemed as if those who looked at him were
saying to themselves; 'It cannot be so bad a world as we thought,
since Peter Cooper lives in it and blesses us.'"

But how did this poor boy become a millionaire? And how did he get
people to love him so?

He did it, boys and girls, by making up his mind to do it at first,
and then sticking to it.

Nobody could have had more hard things to overcome than Peter
Cooper.

His parents were poor and had nine children.

His father moved from town to town, always hoping to do better.

He forgot the old saying, "A rolling stone gathers no moss."

When the fifth baby was born, he was named after the Apostle Peter,
because his father said, "This boy will come to something."

But he was not a strong boy.

He was able to go to school but one year of his life, and then only
every other day.

His father was a hatter, and when Peter was eight years old he
pulled hair from rabbit skins for hat pulp.

Year after year he worked harder than he was able, but he was
determined to win.

When his eight little brothers and sisters needed shoes, he ripped
up an old one to see how it was made. Always after that he made the
shoes for the family.

Do you think a lazy boy would have done that?

When he was seventeen, he bade his anxious mother good-bye, and
started for New York to make his fortune.
