peace" till they let him "go for a soldier" with Master Tony and
Master Jackanapes. They consented at last, with more tears than they
shed when an elder son was sent to jail for poaching, and the boy was
perfectly happy in his life, and full of _esprit de corps_. It was
this which had been wounded by having to sound retreat for "the young
gentlemen's regiment," the first time he served with it before the
enemy, and he was also harassed by having completely lost sight of
Master Tony. There had been some hard fighting before the backward
movement began, and he had caught sight of him once, but not since. On
the other hand, all the pulses of his village pride had been stirred
by one or two visions of Master Jackanapes whirling about on his
wonderful horse. He had been easy to distinguish, since an eccentric
blow had bared his head without hurting it, for his close golden mop
of hair gleamed in the hot sunshine as brightly as the steel of the
sword flashing round it.

Of the missiles that fell pretty thickly, the Boy Trumpeter did not
take much notice. First, one can't attend to everything, and his hands
were full. Secondly, one gets used to anything. Thirdly, experience
soon teaches one, in spite of proverbs, how very few bullets find
their billet. Far more unnerving is the mere suspicion of fear or even
of anxiety in the human mass around you. The Boy was beginning to
wonder if there were any dark reason for the increasing pressure, and
whether they would be allowed to move back more quickly, when the
smoke in front lifted for a moment, and he could see the plain, and
the enemy's line some two hundred yards away.

[Illustration]

And across the plain between them, he saw Master Jackanapes galloping
alone at the top of Lollo's speed, their faces to the enemy, his
golden head at Lollo's ear.

But at this moment noise and smoke seemed to burst out on every side,
the officer shouted to him to sound retire, and between trumpeting and
bumping about on his horse, he saw and heard no more of the incidents
of his first battle.

Tony Johnson was always unlucky with horses, from the days of the
giddy-go-round onwards. On this day--of all days in the year--his own
horse was on the sick list, and he had to ride an inferior,
ill-conditioned beast, and fell off that, at the very moment when it
was a matter of life or death to be able to ride away. The horse fell
on him, but struggled up again, and Tony managed to keep hold of it.
It was in trying to remount that he discovered, by helplessness and
anguish, that one of his legs was crushed and broken, and that no feat
of which he was master would get him into the saddle. Not able even to
stand alone, awkwardly, agonizingly unable to mount his restive horse,
his life was yet so strong within him! And on one side of him rolled
the dust and smoke-cloud of his advancing foe, and on the other, that
which covered his retreating friends.

He turned one piteous gaze after them, with a bitter twinge, not of
reproach, but of loneliness; and then, dragging himself up by the side
of his horse, he turned the other way and drew out his pistol, and
waited for the end. Whether he waited seconds or minutes he never
knew, before some one gripped him by the arm.

"_Jackanapes_! _GOD bless you_! It's my left leg. If you could get me
on--"

It was like Tony's luck that his pistol went off at his horse's tail,
and made it plunge; but Jackanapes threw him across the saddle.

"Hold on anyhow, and stick your spur in. I'll lead him. Keep your head
down, they're firing high."

And Jackanapes laid his head down--to Lollo's ear.

It was when they were fairly off, that a sudden upspringing of the
enemy in all directions had made it necessary to change the gradual
retirement of our force into as rapid a retreat as possible. And when
Jackanapes became aware of this, and felt the lagging and swerving of
Tony's horse, he began to wish he had thrown his friend across his own
saddle, and left their lives to Lollo.

When Tony became aware of it, several things came into his head.
1. That the dangers of their ride for life were now more than doubled.
2. That if Jackanapes and Lollo were not burdened with him they would
undoubtedly escape. 3. That Jackanapes' life was infinitely valuable,
and his--Tony's--was not. 4. That this--if he could seize it--was the
supremest of all the moments in which he had tried to assume the
virtues which Jackanapes had by nature; and that if he could be
courageous and unselfish now--

He caught at his own reins and spoke very loud--

"Jackanapes! It won't do. You and Lollo must go on. Tell the fellows I
gave you back to them, with all my heart. Jackanapes, if you love me,
leave me!"

There was a daffodil light over the evening sky in front of them, and
it shone strangely on Jackanapes' hair and face. He turned with an odd
look in his eyes that a vainer man than Tony Johnson might have taken
for brotherly pride. Then he shook his mop and laughed at him.

"_Leave you?_ To save my skin? No, Tony, not to save my soul!"




CHAPTER V.

     Mr. VALIANT _summoned. His will. His last words._

     Then, said he, "I am going to my Father's.... My Sword I
     give to him that shall succeed me in my Pilgrimage, and my
     Courage and Skill to him that can get it." ... And as he
     went down deeper, he said, "Grave, where is thy Victory?"

     So he passed over, and all the Trumpets sounded for him on
     the other side.

BUNYAN'S _Pilgrim's, Progress_.


Coming out of a hospital-tent, at headquarters, the surgeon cannonaded
against, and rebounded from, another officer; a sallow man, not young,
with a face worn more by ungentle experiences than by age; with weary
eyes that kept their own counsel, iron gray hair, and a moustache that
was as if a raven had laid its wing across his lips and sealed them.

"Well?"

"Beg pardon, Major. Didn't see you. Oh, compound fracture and bruises,
but it's all right. He'll pull through."

"Thank GOD."

It was probably an involuntary expression, for prayer and praise were
not much in the Major's line, as a jerk of the surgeon's head would
have betrayed to an observer. He was a bright little man, with his
feelings showing all over him, but with gallantry and contempt of
death enough for both sides of his profession; who took a cool head, a
white handkerchief and a case of instruments, where other men went
hot-blooded with weapons, and who was the biggest gossip, male or
female, of the regiment. Not even the Major's taciturnity daunted him.

"Didn't think he'd as much pluck about him as he has. He'll do all
right if he doesn't fret himself into a fever about poor Jackanapes."

"Whom are you talking about?" asked the Major hoarsely.

"Young Johnson. He--"

"What about Jackanapes?"

"Don't you know? Sad business. Rode back for Johnson, and brought him
in; but, monstrous ill-luck, hit as they rode. Left lung--"

"Will he recover?"

"No. Sad business." "What a frame--what limbs--what health--and what
good looks? Finest young fellow--"

"Where is he?"

"In his own tent," said the surgeon sadly.

The Major wheeled and left him.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can I do anything else for you?"

"Nothing, thank you. Except--Major! I wish I could get you to
appreciate Johnson."

"This is not an easy moment, Jackanapes."

"Let me tell you, sir--_he_ never will--that if he could have driven
me from him, he would be lying yonder at this moment, and I should be
safe and sound."

The Major laid his hand over his mouth, as if to keep back a wish he
would have been ashamed to utter.

"I've known old Tony from a child. He's a fool on impulse, a good man
and a gentleman in principle. And he acts on principle, which it's not
every--some water, please! Thank you, sir. It's very hot, and yet
one's feet get uncommonly cold. Oh, thank you, thank you. He's no
