He found his aunt sitting in the garden reading. She looked up in
surprise at his approach.

"Aunt Alice, can you spare me a few minutes?" he said, after the usual
greeting.

"Surely, St. John. What is it that you wish?"

"I wish to speak to you about Marion."

"About Marion?" Mrs. Ruthven looked somewhat surprised.

"Yes. I saw her out again in a boat with that boy."

"That boy? Do you mean Jack?"

"Yes. I wonder you trust her to his care--after what happened at the
wreck."

"Why should I not? Jack understands how to manage a boat. Marion is safe
with her brother."

"But he is not her brother," cried St. John.

"Not in blood, perhaps, but in affection. They have been brought up
together as children of one family."

"My dear Aunt Alice, do you think you have done wisely in encouraging
this intimacy?" he said earnestly.

"What can you mean?" she demanded. "Jack is fourteen years old and
Marion is eighteen."

"Of course. But you know nothing of the boy's parentage. He is an
unknown waif, cast upon the shore in his infancy, very possibly of a low
family."

"No, you are wrong there. Remember, I saw his mother. Everything
indicated her to be a lady. The child's clothing was of fine texture.
But even if it were otherwise, he has endeared himself to me by his
noble qualities. I regard him as a son."

St. John shrugged his shoulders. "You look upon him with the eyes of
affection. To me he seems----"

"Well?"

"A commonplace boy,--a mechanic's child, very possibly,--who is quite
out of place among the Ruthvens."

At this Mrs. Ruthven grew indignant.

"You are prejudiced!" she cried. "I will not discuss the matter farther
with you. I wish no one to speak to me against Jack. He is as dear to me
as Marion herself."

The young man drew a deep breath. "I am silenced, Aunt Alice. But I wish
to speak to you about Marion. She is no longer a child, but a young
lady."

"Yes, she is now eighteen," answered Mrs. Ruthven slowly. "But to me she
seems a child still."

"Well--er--at what age did you marry, aunt?"

"At eighteen."

"Then, Aunt Alice, you cannot be surprised if I have thought of Marion
as my future wife. I love her warmly and sincerely."

At this abrupt declaration Mrs. Ruthven was considerably surprised.

"Why, St. John, do you wish to marry that child?" she exclaimed.

"Why not? She is eighteen."

"Yes, but I had never thought of her as old enough to be married. Have
you spoken to her?"

"Yes," he returned slowly, and with a cloud on his face.

"And what did she say?"

"Nothing--that is, she was taken by surprise and did not wish to discuss
the matter at present."

Mrs. Ruthven drew a breath of relief. "She was sensible. Have you any
reason to think that she loves you?"

"I think she will soon. I am not conceited, Aunt Alice, but I think I
have a good appearance and--I am a Ruthven."

"You are much older than she, St. John."

"I am, but a man of my age is still a young man."

"I should not object if she loved you, but I have never seen any
indications of it."

"Will you let her know that you favor my suit?"

At this Mrs. Ruthven shrugged her shoulders.

"But I am not sure that I do," she returned slowly.

"Have you heard anything to my discredit?" he demanded stiffly.

"No, no, St. John; but don't be precipitate. Let the matter rest for the
present."

"Well, if you insist upon it, Aunt Alice," he said, his face falling.

"It seems to me best."

"But still, Aunt Alice, if Marion allows her affections to drift in
another direction----"

"I do not think she will, for the present. She is more interested in the
war than in anything else. Why, if I would allow it, she would go off
and offer her services as a nurse."

"Don't let her go, aunt--I beg of you."

Mrs. Ruthven looked at her nephew curiously.

"What makes you so afraid of this war, St. John?"

"Afraid? I am not afraid exactly," he stammered. "I was thinking of dear
Marion. It would be horrible for her to put up with the hardships, and
such sights!"

"But somebody must bear such sights and sounds. War is war, and our
beloved country must be sustained, even in her darkest hour."

He trembled and turned pale, but quickly recovered.

"What you say is true, Aunt Alice. I have wanted to go to the front, but
my mother positively refuses her permission. She is in mortal terror
that the Yankees will come to our plantation and loot the place in my
absence."

"Do you think you can keep them from coming?"

"No, but I can--er--I can perhaps protect my mother."

"If you went off, she could come over here and remain with me."

"She wishes to remain at home. The old place is very dear to her. It
would break her heart to have the enemy destroy it."

"I should not wish our place destroyed. Yet the only way to keep the
enemy back is to go to the front and fight them."

"Well--I presume you are right, and I shall go some time--when I can win
my mother over," said St. John lamely.

He wanted to speak of Marion again, but, on looking across the garden,
saw his cousin and Jack approaching. Soon the pair came up and Marion
greeted St. John with a slight bow.

"We have been out rowing, mother," said Jack, as he came up and kissed
Mrs. Ruthven. "It was lovely on the bay."

"Did you go far?"

"We went over to Hoskin's beach. Marion rowed part of the way."

"I hope you had a nice time," said St. John stiffly, turning to Marion.

"We had a lovely time," answered the girl. "Jack is the best rower
around here."

"Humph! Why, he's only a boy!" sneered the spendthrift.

"Yes, I am only a boy, St. John, but I reckon I can row as good as you,"
replied our hero warmly. He had not forgotten the encounter on the road.

"Do you, indeed?"

"Yes, I do. Some day we can try a race. I'll give you choice of boats
and beat you."

At this Marion set up a merry laugh.

"I believe Jack can beat you at rowing, St. John," she said.

"I never race with boys," answered the spendthrift, more stiffly than
ever.

"I'll race you to-day," went on Jack. "And I've rowed three or four
miles already."

"Oh, Jack! you are too tired and the sun is too strong," remonstrated
Mrs. Ruthven, although inwardly pleased to see the lad stand up for
himself.

"I said I never raced with boys," said St. John.

"I would like to see a race," came from Marion. "I dare you to row Jack,
St. John."

"Let us make it to the rocks and back," said Jack. "And you can have any
of the boats you please. I dare you to do it," and he looked at St. John
defiantly.

"St. John may be tired. Perhaps he has been working," suggested Mrs.
Ruthven, although she knew better.

"No, he has been walking and resting along shore," said Marion. "We saw
him from our boat."

"I'll give you another advantage, besides choice of boats," said Jack,
bound that St. John should not back out. "I'll carry Marion as extra
weight."

"Oh, that wouldn't be fair!" cried the girl. "Let St. John carry mamma."

"No, I must decline to go," said Mrs. Ruthven.

"I'll take Marion, and St. John need carry only himself," said our hero.
"I am certain I can beat him. I dare him to take me up."

There seemed no help for it, so St. John gave in, and soon the three
were on the way to Old Ben's boathouse.




CHAPTER XII.

THE BOAT RACE ON THE BAY.


"I think this is a very foolish proceeding," observed St. John as they
walked along.

"I think it's going to be lots of fun," replied Marion. "The one who
wins shall receive a lovely bunch of roses from me."

"Then I'll win," said the spendthrift, and bestowed a meaning smile upon
her, which instantly made her turn her head.

They used a short cut to the beach, consequently they did not meet Old
Ben and Dr. Mackey.

When the boathouse was gained they went to inspect the four boats lying
there.

St. John knew the boats well, for he was by no means an unskilled rower.

He picked out the lightest of the craft, one which was long and narrow,
and also took the best pair of oars.

Marion was going to remonstrate, but Jack silenced her.

"But, Jack, if you have a poor boat, and carry me, too----" she began,
in a whisper.

"I'll beat him, anyway," replied our hero. "I know I can do it."

Soon they had the boats out.

Marion half expected St. John to invite her to enter his craft, but in
this she was mistaken. The spendthrift was afraid that the extra weight
would prove fatal to his success. Yet it angered him to have his cousin
go off with Jack.

"Marion, you ought to remain on shore," he said. "The race ought to be
rowed with both boats empty."

"Well, if you think best----" she began.

"No, Marion, you are to go with me," put in Jack hastily. "I said I
would row with you in my boat, and I will."

"But I am quite a weight----"

"Never mind; jump in."

As there seemed no help for it, Marion entered Jack's boat and our hero
pulled a rod away from the shore.

"Now where is the race to be?" asked St. John, as he followed Jack's
example and pulled off his coat.

"Let Marion decide that," said the youth promptly.

"Then make it to the Sister Rocks," said Marion. "Each boat must go
directly around the rocks."

"That suits me," said Jack.

"It's a good mile and a half," grumbled St. John. He had no desire to
exert himself in that warm sun.

"It's no farther for you than for Jack," answered the girl. "Come, are
you ready?"

There was a pause, and then St. John said that he was.

"And you, Jack?"

"All ready, Marion."

"Then go!" cried the girl.

The four oars dropped into the water and off went the two boats, side by
side.

St. John, eager to win for the sake of finding favor in Marion's eyes,
exerted himself to the utmost, and soon forged ahead.

"Oh, Jack! he is going to beat," cried the girl, in disappointment. "I
am too much of a load for you."

"The race has but started," he replied. "Wait until we turn the rocks
and then see who is ahead."

On and on went the two boats, St. John pulling strongly, but somewhat
wildly--a pace he could not keep up. Jack rowed strongly, too, but kept
himself somewhat in reserve.

When half the distance to the Sister Rocks was covered St. John was four
boat-lengths ahead.

"Ha! what did I tell you!" he cried. "I will beat you, and beat you
badly, too!"

"'He laughs best who laughs last,'" quoted Jack. "Marion, sit a little
more to the left, please. There, that's it--now we'll go along
straighter."

"I wish I could help row," she said. "But that wouldn't be fair. But,
oh, Jack! you must beat him!"

Slowly, but surely, they approached the Sister Rocks. Being ahead, St.
John turned in, to take the shortest cut around the turning-stake, if
such the rocks may be called.

"Too bad, Jack, you will have to go outside," cried Marion.

"Never mind, I'll beat him, anyway," answered our hero, and now let
himself out.

The added strength to his stroke soon told, and before long he began to
crawl close to St. John's craft. Then he overlapped his opponent and
forged ahead.

"Hurrah! you are ahead!" cried Marion excitedly, but in a voice her
cousin might not hear. "Keep up, Jack; you are doing wonderfully well."

Our hero did keep up, and when he reached the first of the Sister Rocks
he was more than two boat-lengths ahead.

He knew the rocks well, and glided around them skillfully, with just
enough water between the rocks and the boat to make the turning a safe
one.

"Now for the home stretch!" he murmured, and began to pull as never
before. He felt certain he could defeat St. John, but he wished to make
the defeat as large as possible. "He'll find even a nobody can row," he
told himself, with grim satisfaction.

To have Jack go ahead of him drove St. John frantic, and as he drew
closer to the rocks he became wildly excited.

"He must not win this race--he a mere nobody," he muttered. "What will
Marion think if he wins?"

The thought was maddening, and he pulled desperately, first on one oar
and then on the other. Around the rocks the waters ran swiftly, and
before he knew it there came a crash and his craft was stove in and
upset. He clutched at the gunwale of the boat, but missed it, and
plunged headlong into the bay.

When the mishap occurred Jack was paying sole attention to the work cut
out for him, consequently he did not notice what was taking place. Nor
did Marion see the disaster until several seconds later.

"St. John will----" began the girl, and then turned deadly pale. "Oh,
Jack!" she screamed.

"What's the matter?" he cried, and stopped rowing instantly.

"Look! look! St. John's boat has gone on the rocks and he is overboard!"
she gasped.

"How foolish for him to row so close," was Jack's comment. And then he
added, in something like disgust, "I reckon the race is off now."

"We must go back for him," went on Marion. "See, he has disappeared."

The girl was right, the weight of St. John's clothing had carried him
beneath the surface. The swiftly running water had likewise caught him,
and when he came up it was at a point fifty feet away from the nearest
rock.

"He will be drowned, Jack!"

"Help! help!" came in a faint cry from the spendthrift. "Help me, Jack!
Don't leave me to perish!"

"Keep up, I'm coming!" answered Jack readily, and as quickly as he could
he turned his boat and pulled in the direction where St. John had again
sunk from sight.

The spendthrift was but an indifferent swimmer, and the weight of his
clothing was much against him. Moreover, he was scared to death, and
threw his arms around wildly instead of doing his best to save himself.

He had gone down once, and now, as Jack's boat came closer, he went down
a second time.

"Oh, Jack! he will surely be drowned!" gasped Marion, and she placed her
