little door behind him, as if the unwonted spectacle were too much for
his feelings.

If the little Hay-maker had been armed with the sharpest of scythes, and
had cut at every stroke into the Carrier's heart, he never could have
gashed and wounded it as Dot had done.

It was a heart so full of love for her; so bound up and held together by
innumerable threads of winning remembrance, spun from the daily working
of her many qualities of endearment; it was a heart in which she had
enshrined herself so gently and so closely; a heart so single and so
earnest in its Truth, so strong in right, so weak in wrong,--that it
could cherish neither passion nor revenge at first, and had only room to
hold the broken image of its Idol.

But, slowly, slowly, as the Carrier sat brooding on his hearth, now cold
and dark, other and fiercer thoughts began to rise within him, as an
angry wind comes rising in the night. The Stranger was beneath his
outraged roof. Three steps would take him to his chamber door. One blow
would beat it in. "You might do murder before you know it," Tackleton
had said. How could it be murder, if he gave the villain time to grapple
with him hand to hand? He was the younger man.

It was an ill-timed thought, bad for the dark mood of his mind. It was
an angry thought, goading him to some avenging act, that should change
the cheerful house into a haunted place which lonely travellers would
dread to pass by night; and where the timid would see shadows struggling
in the ruined windows when the moon was dim, and hear wild noises in the
stormy weather.

He was the younger man! Yes, yes; some lover who had won the heart that
_he_ had never touched. Some lover of her early choice, of whom she had
thought and dreamed, for whom she had pined and pined, when he had
fancied her so happy by his side. Oh, agony to think of it!

She had been above-stairs with the Baby; getting it to bed. As he sat
brooding on the hearth, she came close beside him, without his
knowledge--in the turning of the rack of his great misery, he lost all
other sounds--and put her little stool at his feet. He only knew it when
he felt her hand upon his own, and saw her looking up into his face.

With wonder? No. It was his first impression, and he was fain to look at
her again, to set it right. No, not with wonder. With an eager and
inquiring look; but not with wonder. At first it was alarmed and
serious; then, it changed into a strange, wild, dreadful smile of
recognition of his thoughts; then, there was nothing but her clasped
hands on her brow, and her bent head, and falling hair.

Though the power of Omnipotence had been his to wield at that moment, he
had too much of its diviner property of Mercy in his breast, to have
turned one feather's weight of it against her. But he could not bear to
see her crouching down upon the little seat where he had often looked on
her, with love and pride, so innocent and gay; and, when she rose and
left him, sobbing as she went, he felt it a relief to have the vacant
place beside him rather than her so long-cherished presence. This in
itself was anguish keener than all, reminding him how desolate he was
become, and how the great bond of his life was rent asunder.

[Illustration: _When suddenly, the struggling fire illuminated the whole
chimney with a glow of light; and the Cricket on the Hearth began to
Chirp!_]

The more he felt this, and the more he knew he could have better borne
to see her lying prematurely dead before him with her little child upon
her breast, the higher and the stronger rose his wrath against his
enemy. He looked about him for a weapon.

There was a gun hanging on the wall. He took it down, and moved a pace
or two towards the door of the perfidious Stranger's room. He knew the
gun was loaded. Some shadowy idea that it was just to shoot this man
like a wild beast seized him, and dilated in his mind until it grew into
a monstrous demon in complete possession of him, casting out all milder
thoughts, and setting up its undivided empire.

That phrase is wrong. Not casting out his milder thoughts, but artfully
transforming them. Changing them into scourges to drive him on. Turning
water into blood, love into hate, gentleness into blind ferocity. Her
image, sorrowing, humbled, but still pleading to his tenderness and
mercy with resistless power, never left his mind; but, staying there, it
urged him to the door; raised the weapon to his shoulder; fitted and
nerved his fingers to the trigger; and cried "Kill him! In his bed!"

He reversed the gun to beat the stock upon the door; he already held it
lifted in the air; some indistinct design was in his thoughts of calling
out to him to fly, for God's sake, by the window----

When suddenly, the struggling fire illuminated the whole chimney with a
glow of light; and the Cricket on the Hearth began to Chirp!

No sound he could have heard, no human voice, not even hers, could so
have moved and softened him. The artless words in which she had told him
of her love for this same Cricket were once more freshly spoken; her
trembling, earnest manner at the moment was again before him; her
pleasant voice--oh, what a voice it was for making household music at
the fireside of an honest man!--thrilled through and through his better
nature, and awoke it into life and action.

He recoiled from the door, like a man walking in his sleep, awakened
from a frightful dream; and put the gun aside. Clasping his hands before
his face, he then sat down again beside the fire, and found relief in
tears.

The Cricket on the Hearth came out into the room, and stood in Fairy
shape before him.

"'I love it,'" said the Fairy Voice, repeating what he well remembered,
"'for the many times I have heard it, and the many thoughts its harmless
music has given me.'"

"She said so!" cried the Carrier. "True!"

"'This has been a happy home, John! and I love the Cricket for its
sake!'"

"It has been, Heaven knows," returned the Carrier. "She made it happy,
always,--until now."

"So gracefully sweet-tempered; so domestic, joyful, busy, and
light-hearted!" said the Voice.

"Otherwise I never could have loved her as I did," returned the Carrier.

The Voice, correcting him, said "do."

The Carrier repeated "as I did." But not firmly. His faltering tongue
resisted his control, and would speak in its own way for itself and him.

The Figure, in an attitude of invocation, raised its hand and said:

"Upon your own hearth----"

"The hearth she has blighted," interposed the Carrier.

"The hearth she has--how often!--blessed and brightened," said the
Cricket; "the hearth which, but for her, were only a few stones and
bricks and rusty bars, but which has been, through her, the Altar of
your Home; on which you have nightly sacrificed some petty passion,
selfishness, or care, and offered up the homage of a tranquil mind, a
trusting nature, and an overflowing heart; so that the smoke from this
poor chimney has gone upward with a better fragrance than the richest
incense that is burnt before the richest shrines in all the gaudy
temples of this world!--Upon your own hearth; in its quiet sanctuary;
surrounded by its gentle influences and associations; hear her! Hear me!
Hear everything that speaks the language of your hearth and home!"

"And pleads for her?" inquired the Carrier.

"All things that speak the language of your hearth and home _must_ plead
for her!" returned the Cricket. "For they speak the truth."

And while the Carrier, with his head upon his hands, continued to sit
meditating in his chair, the Presence stood beside him, suggesting his
reflections by its power, and presenting them before him, as in a glass
or picture. It was not a solitary Presence. From the hearth-stone, from
the chimney, from the clock, the pipe, the kettle, and the cradle; from
the floor, the walls, the ceiling, and the stairs; from the cart
without, and the cupboard within, and the household implements; from
everything and every place with which she had ever been familiar, and
with which she had ever entwined one recollection of herself in her
unhappy husband's mind,--Fairies came trooping forth. Not to stand
beside him as the Cricket did, but to busy and bestir themselves. To do
all honour to her image. To pull him by the skirts, and point to it when
it appeared. To cluster round it, and embrace it, and strew flowers for
it to tread on. To try to crown its fair head with their tiny hands. To
show that they were fond of it, and loved it; and that there was not one
ugly, wicked, or accusatory creature to claim knowledge of it--none but
their playful and approving selves.

His thoughts were constant to her image. It was always there.

She sat plying her needle, before the fire, and singing to herself. Such
a blithe, thriving, steady little Dot! The Fairy figures turned upon him
all at once, by one consent, with one prodigious concentrated stare, and
seemed to say, "Is this the light wife you are mourning for?"

There were sounds of gaiety outside, musical instruments, and noisy
tongues, and laughter. A crowd of young merry-makers came pouring in,
among whom were May Fielding and a score of pretty girls. Dot was the
fairest of them all; as young as any of them too. They came to summon
her to join their party. It was a dance. If ever little foot were made
for dancing, hers was, surely. But she laughed, and shook her head, and
pointed to her cookery on the fire, and her table ready spread; with an
exulting defiance that rendered her more charming than she was before.
And so she merrily dismissed them, nodding to her would-be partners, one
by one, as they passed out, with a comical indifference, enough to make
them go and drown themselves immediately if they were her admirers--and
they must have been so, more or less; they couldn't help it. And yet
indifference was not her character. Oh no! For presently there came a
certain Carrier to the door; and, bless her, what a welcome she bestowed
upon him!

Again the staring figures turned upon him all at once, and seemed to
say, "Is this the wife who has forsaken you?"

A shadow fell upon the mirror or the picture: call it what you will. A
great shadow of the Stranger, as he first stood underneath their roof;
covering its surface, and blotting out all other objects. But, the
nimble Fairies worked like bees to clear it off again. And Dot again was
there. Still bright and beautiful.

Rocking her little Baby in its cradle, singing to it softly, and resting
her head upon a shoulder which had its counterpart in the musing figure
by which the Fairy Cricket stood.

The night--I mean the real night: not going by Fairy clocks--was wearing
now; and, in this stage of the Carrier's thoughts, the moon burst out,
and shone brightly in the sky. Perhaps some calm and quiet light had
risen also in his mind; and he could think more soberly of what had
happened.

Although the shadow of the Stranger fell at intervals upon the
glass--always distinct, and big, and thoroughly defined--it never fell
so darkly as at first. Whenever it appeared, the Fairies uttered a
general cry of consternation, and plied their little arms and legs with
inconceivable activity to rub it out. And whenever they got at Dot
again, and showed her to him once more, bright and beautiful, they
cheered in the most inspiring manner.

They never showed her otherwise than beautiful and bright, for they were
Household Spirits to whom falsehood is an annihilation; and being so,
what Dot was there for them, but the one active, beaming, pleasant
little creature who had been the light and sun of the Carrier's Home?

The Fairies were prodigiously excited when they showed her, with the
Baby, gossipping among a knot of sage old matrons, and affecting to be
wondrous old and matronly herself, and leaning in a staid demure old way
upon her husband's arm, attempting--she! such a bud of a little
woman--to convey the idea of having abjured the vanities of the world in
general, and of being the sort of person to whom it was no novelty at
all to be a mother; yet, in the same breath, they showed her laughing at
the Carrier for being awkward, and pulling up his shirt collar to make
him smart, and mincing merrily about that very room to teach him how to
dance!

They turned, and stared immensely at him when they showed her with the
Blind Girl; for, though she carried cheerfulness and animation with her
wheresoever she went, she bore those influences into Caleb Plummer's
home, heaped up and running over. The Blind Girl's love for her, and
trust in her, and gratitude to her; her own good busy way of setting
Bertha's thanks aside; her dexterous little arts for filling up each
moment of the visit in doing something useful to the house, and really
working hard while feigning to make holiday; her bountiful provision of
those standing delicacies, the Veal and Ham Pie and the bottles of Beer;
her radiant little face arriving at the door, and taking leave; the
wonderful expression in her whole self, from her neat foot to the crown
of her head, of being a part of the establishment--a something necessary
to it, which it couldn't be without,--all this the Fairies revelled in,
and loved her for. And once again they looked upon him all at once,
appealingly, and seemed to say, while some among them nestled in her
dress and fondled her, "Is this the wife who has betrayed your
confidence?"

More than once, or twice, or thrice, in the long thoughtful night, they
showed her to him sitting on her favourite seat, with her bent head, her
hands clasped on her brow, her falling hair. As he had seen her last.
And when they found her thus, they neither turned nor looked upon him,
but gathered close round her, and comforted and kissed her, and pressed
on one another, to show sympathy and kindness to her, and forgot him
altogether.

Thus the night passed. The moon went down; the stars grew pale; the cold
day broke; the sun rose. The Carrier still sat, musing, in the
chimney-corner. He had sat there, with his head upon his hands, all
night. All night the faithful Cricket had been Chirp, Chirp, Chirping on
the Hearth. All night he had listened to its voice. All night the
Household Fairies had been busy with him. All night she had been amiable
and blameless in the glass, except when that one shadow fell upon it.

He rose up when it was broad day, and washed and dressed himself. He
couldn't go about his customary cheerful avocations--he wanted spirit
for them--but it mattered the less that it was Tackleton's wedding-day,
and he had arranged to make his rounds by proxy. He had thought to have
gone merrily to church with Dot. But such plans were at an end. It was
their own wedding-day too. Ah! how little he had looked for such a close
to such a year!

The Carrier expected that Tackleton would pay him an early visit; and he
was right. He had not walked to and fro before his own door many
minutes, when he saw the toy merchant coming in his chaise along the
road. As the chaise drew nearer, he perceived that Tackleton was dressed
out sprucely for his marriage, and that he had decorated his horse's
head with flowers and favours.

The horse looked much more like a bridegroom than Tackleton, whose
half-closed eye was more disagreeably expressive than ever. But the
Carrier took little heed of this. His thoughts had other occupation.

"John Peerybingle!" said Tackleton with an air of condolence. "My good
fellow, how do you find yourself this morning?"

"I have had but a poor night, Master Tackleton," returned the Carrier,
shaking his head: "for I have been a good deal disturbed in my mind. But
it's over now! Can you spare me half an hour or so, for some private
talk?"

"I came on purpose," returned Tackleton, alighting. "Never mind the
horse. He'll stand quiet enough, with the reins over this post, if
you'll give him a mouthful of hay."

The Carrier having brought it from his stable and set it before him,
they turned into the house.

"You are not married before noon," he said, "I think?"

"No," answered Tackleton. "Plenty of time. Plenty of time."

When they entered the kitchen, Tilly Slowboy was rapping at the
Stranger's door; which was only removed from it by a few steps. One of
her very red eyes (for Tilly had been crying all night long, because her
mistress cried) was at the keyhole; and she was knocking very loud, and
seemed frightened.

"If you please I can't make nobody hear," said Tilly, looking round. "I
hope nobody an't gone and been and died if you please!"

This philanthropic wish Miss Slowboy emphasized with various new raps
and kicks at the door, which led to no result whatever.

"Shall I go?" said Tackleton. "It's curious."

The Carrier, who had turned his face from the door, signed him to go if
he would.

So Tackleton went to Tilly Slowboy's relief; and he too kicked and
knocked; and he too failed to get the least reply. But he thought of
trying the handle of the door; and, as it opened easily, he peeped in,
looked in, went in, and soon came running out again.

"John Peerybingle," said Tackleton in his ear, "I hope there has been
nothing--nothing rash in the night?"

The Carrier turned upon him quickly.

"Because he's gone!" said Tackleton; "and the window's open. I don't see
any marks--to be sure, it's almost on a level with the garden: but I was
afraid there might have been some--some scuffle. Eh?"

He nearly shut up the expressive eye altogether; he looked at him so
hard. And he gave his eye, and his face, and his whole person, a sharp
twist. As if he would have screwed the truth out of him.

"Make yourself easy," said the Carrier. "He went into that room last
night, without harm in word or deed from me, and no one has entered it
since. He is away of his own free-will. I'd go out gladly at that door,
and beg my bread from house to house, for life, if I could so change the
past that he had never come. But he has come and gone. And I have done
with him!"

"Oh!--Well, I think he has got off pretty easy," said Tackleton, taking
a chair.

The sneer was lost upon the Carrier, who sat down too, and shaded his
face with his hand, for some little time, before proceeding.

"You showed me last night," he said at length, "my wife--my wife that I
love--secretly----"

"And tenderly," insinuated Tackleton.

"--Conniving at that man's disguise, and giving him opportunities of
meeting her alone. I think there's no sight I wouldn't have rather seen
than that. I think there's no man in the world I wouldn't have rather
had to show it me."

"I confess to having had my suspicions always," said Tackleton. "And
that has made me objectionable here, I know."

"But, as you did show it me," pursued the Carrier, not minding him; "and
as you saw her, my wife, my wife that I love"--his voice, and eye, and
hand grew steadier and firmer as he repeated these words: evidently in
pursuance of a steadfast purpose--"as you saw her at this disadvantage,
it is right and just that you should also see with my eyes, and look
into my breast, and know what my mind is upon the subject. For it's
settled," said the Carrier, regarding him attentively. "And nothing can
shake it now."

Tackleton muttered a few general words of assent about its being
necessary to vindicate something or other; but he was overawed by the
manner of his companion. Plain and unpolished as it was, it had a
something dignified and noble in it, which nothing but the soul of
generous honour dwelling in the man could have imparted.

"I am a plain, rough man," pursued the Carrier "with very little to
recommend me. I am not a clever man, as you very well know. I am not a
young man. I loved my little Dot, because I had seen her grow up, from a
child, in her father's house; because I knew how precious she was;
because she had been my life for years and years. There's many men I
can't compare with, who never could have loved my little Dot like me, I
think!"

He paused, and softly beat the ground a short time with his foot, before
resuming:

"I often thought that though I wasn't good enough for her, I should make
her a kind husband, and perhaps know her value better than another; and
in this way I reconciled it to myself, and came to think it might be
possible that we should be married. And, in the end, it came about, and
we _were_ married!"

"Hah!" said Tackleton with a significant shake of his head.

"I had studied myself; I had had experience of myself; I knew how much I
loved her, and how happy I should be," pursued the Carrier. "But I had
not--I feel it now--sufficiently considered her."
