couldn't do the buttons.

I can't make out how I got him out of his togs.  Then he kicked up no
end of a shine because I was going to stick him in bed without his bath.

"I've got no bath," said I; "wait till the morning."

"Tommy wants his bath.  Bring it! bring it!!" he shrieked.

Finally I had to mess him about in a basin in cold water, which set him
yelling worse than ever.  Then I had to put him in my night-gown, for
he'd got none of his own.

"I want to get in beside you," he said, as I stuck him in bed.

"I'm not going to bed yet," said I; "not likely, at eight o'clock!"

More yells; and a chambermaid came and knocked at the door to know what
was the matter.

I tried all I knew to quiet him down.  He wouldn't listen to me, not
even when I tried to tell him his "Three Bears."  He bellowed out one
incessant "Want to get in beside you!  Want to get in beside you!!" till
finally I chucked up the sponge and actually went to bed to oblige him.

He simmered down after that; and I began to hope he'd drop off and get
to sleep.  But bless you, Jossy, was it likely, after those buns and the
dinner he'd had?

We had a fearful night, I can tell you.  He kicked till I was black and
blue, and rolled over and over till I hadn't a stitch on me.  Then he
wanted some water to drink.  Then he wanted the gas alight.  Then he
began to blubber for his mother.  Then he wanted the clothes on.  Then
he wanted them off.  Then he got his feet entangled in the night-gown.
Then he wanted some chocolates.  Then he wanted to know who was talking
in the next room.  Then he wanted the pillow turned over.  Then he
wanted a story told him, and shut me up before I'd begun one sentence of
it.  Then he wanted me to put my arm round him.  Then he wanted me to
lie over on the edge of the bed.  Then he had a pain in his "tummy," and
called on me to make it well, and howled because I couldn't.

Poor little beggar!  He was in a jolly bad way, and I couldn't well cut
up rough; but I can tell you it was the worst night I ever spent.  He
didn't quiet down till about three in the morning; and then he went off
with his head on my chest and his hand on my nose, and I daren't for the
life of me shift an inch, for fear of bringing it all on again.

I suppose I must have dropped off myself at last; for the next thing I
remember, it was broad daylight, and the young cad was sitting on the
top of me as merry as a cricket, trying to prize my eyes open with his
fingers.

"Can't you let a chap be?" grunted I; "haven't you made a beast enough
of yourself all night without starting again now?"

"I want to see your eyes," said he.

Then he began to jump up and down on the top of me, and explained that
he was "riding in the puff-puff."

I wished to goodness he was!  Of course I had to wake up, and then we
had those brutal "Three Bears" on again for an hour, till it was time to
get up.

He insisted on being tubbed all over, with soap, and criticised me all
the while.

"Boys who spill on the carpet must be whipped," said he.  "Mother will
whip you, and you'll cry--ha, ha!"

"I don't care," said I, "as long as she clears you off."

He never seemed to understand what I said, and wasn't a bit set down by
this.

Then came the same old game of getting him into his togs, and parting
his horrid hair, and blowing his nose, and all that.

I can tell you I was about sick of it when it was done.

When we got down in the hall, the first chap we met was the hotel man.

"There's the ugly man with the red nose," sings out the kid.  "I can see
him--there is he!" pointing with all his might.

"Look here, young gentleman," said the man, coming to me, "we aren't
used to be kept awake all night by your noise or your baby's.  You may
tell your papa he needn't send you here again.  There's half a dozen of
my visitors leaving to-day, because they couldn't get a wink of sleep
all night."

"No more could I," said I.

He was going to say something more, but just then a man came in from the
street.  Directly he spotted the kid, he rushed up to him.

"Why, it _is_ Tommy," said he.

Tommy put on a grin, and dug his hands into his pockets.  "I've got a
knife," said he, "of my very own."

"Are you the young gentleman who left the message at Waterloo?" said the
man.  "Why, the letter I got said the train got in at 8 a.m., not 8 p.m.
You don't know what a turn it gave me to go down there this morning and
not see him.  Have you had him here all night?"

"Rather," said I.

"Daddy, there's an ugly man came to this house.  I can see him now, with
a red nose.  Look there!"

"I hope he's been a good boy," said the proud father.  "I'm sure I'm
much obliged.  I'm afraid he's been a trouble to you.  I've got a cab
here.  My word, I'm glad I've got you safe, Tommy, my boy.  Come, say
good-bye to the kind gentleman."

"He was naughty, and spilt the water on the floor.  He must be whipped--
ha, ha!" observed Tommy, by way of farewell.

He didn't seem to care twopence about leaving me, and chucked me up for
his governor as if I'd been a railway porter.  However, I can tell you I
was glad to see the back of him, and didn't envy his governor a little
bit.

Of course, I'd lost my first train home, and had to wait till mid-day,
to endure the scowls of the hotel man, and the frowns of all the people
who had been kept awake by the kid's row.  Among others there was the
professor.

"Well," said he, "what sort of night did baby have?"

"Middling," said I.

"I expected it would be middling," said he.

Now, Jossy, you know what I mean by "'Ware kids."  Keep all this mum,
whatever you do.  I wouldn't have any of the fellows hear about it for
the world.  I can tell you, I feel as if I deserve a week's holiday
longer than the rest of you.  Never you utter the words "Three Bears" in
my hearing, or there'll be a row.

Yours truly, Gus.  Cutaway.



CHAPTER FIVE.

SIGURD THE HERO.

Sub-Chapter I.

THE TOWER OF THE NORTH-WEST WIND.

On the rugged shore of the Northern Sea, where the summer sun never
sets, there stood long ago a grim bleak fortress, called the Tower of
the North-West Wind.  Before it stretched the sea, which thundered
ceaselessly at its base, like a wolf that gnaws at the root of some
noble oak.  On either side of it glittered the blue fiord, dotted with
numberless islets, throwing its long arms far inland.  Behind it frowned
a dense forest of pines as far as eye could reach, in which the wind
roared day and night, mingled often with the angry howls of the wolves.

The Tower of the North-West Wind stood there, the solitary work of man
in all that wild landscape.  Not a sign of life was to be seen besides.
Not even a fisherman's hut on the shores of the fiord, or a woodman's
shed among the trees.  The stranger might easily have taken the rugged
pile itself for a part of the black cliff on which it stood.  No road
seemed to lead up to it, no banner floated from its walls, no trumpet
startled the sea-birds that lodged amongst its turrets.

Yet the old castle was not the deserted place it looked, for here dwelt
Sigurd, the mightiest hero of all that land, brother to Ulf, the king.

Men hated Ulf as much as they loved his brother; for Sigurd, with all
his prowess, was just and generous, and lied to no man.

"If Sigurd were but king," said they one to the other, "our land would
be the happiest the sun shines upon.  As it is, Ulf makes us wretched.
We had rather be his enemies than his friends."

But though they said this one to another, Sigurd listened to none of it,
and when they urged him to rebel, he sternly bade them hold their peace.
And he went forth and fought the battles of the king, his brother, and
they followed him, wishing only the battle-cry were "Sigurd!" and not
"Ulf!"

For all this loyalty the king gave his brother little thanks.  Indeed,
as victory followed victory, and Sigurd's fame rose higher and higher,
Ulf's heart swelled with jealousy, and jealousy presently grew to hate.
For it was not in Ulf's nature to endure that another should be held
greater than himself.  So, instead of rewarding his brother for his
service, he accused him and degraded him, and made another general in
his place.

"Now," said the soldiers, "our chief will surely rebel, and we will
follow his lead, and pluck down Ulf from the throne and set up our
Sigurd."

But Sigurd sternly silenced them, and bade them serve their king as they
feared him.  He meanwhile departed sadly from his brother's court, and
came and dwelt alone in his Tower of the North-West Wind.

For many weeks the time passed slowly, as Sigurd brooded over his wrongs
and pined in idleness.

Yet this grieved him less than the secret visits of not a few of his old
comrades, who had deserted Ulf, and now came begging him to lead them
forth and rid the land of a tyrant.  He sent them each sternly away,
bidding them, on pain of his anger, return to their duty and serve the
king; and they durst not disobey.

So passed many a weary month in the Tower of the North-West Wind, when
one bright summer day a little fleet of English ships sailed gaily up
the fiord under the castle walls.

Sigurd joyfully bade the voyagers welcome to his castle, for the chief
of the little band was Raedwald, an English king, whom Sigurd himself
only two years before had visited in his own land.  There, too, he had
met not Raedwald only, but Raedwald's beautiful daughter, who now, with
her gay train of attendants, accompanied her father on this visit to his
friend and comrade.

And now the days passed gaily and only too swiftly for the happy Sigurd.
In the company of Raedwald and amid the smiles of the ladies, Ulf was
forgotten, and all the wrongs of the past vanished.  The Tower of the
North-west Wind was no longer a gloomy fortress, but a gay palace, and,
like the summer day in the northern heavens, the sun of Sigurd's content
knew no setting.

Before the day of Raedwald's departure arrived a wedding had taken place
in the chapel of the good old Tower, and the English king, as he hauled
his anchors and set his sails westward, knew not whether to mourn over
the daughter he had given up or to rejoice over the son he had gained.

As for Sigurd, he could do nothing but rejoice, and some who saw him and
heard him laugh said, smiling--

"The queen his wife is a fairer sweetheart than was the king his
brother.  Ulf and our country and all of us are forgotten in the smiles
of this little English maiden."

But three days after Raedwald had sailed a storm broke over the Tower of
the North-West Wind.  The summer sea lashed furiously against the rocks,
and far up the fiord the angry breakers rushed in, so that no boat could
live upon their surface for an hour.

That night as Sigurd sat heedless of the hurricane without and feasted
with his lords and ladies, they came and told him that a raft had been
driven ashore at the foot of the castle, with a man upon it half dead.
Sigurd bade them instantly bring him to the castle, and give him fire
and clothing and food, to revive him in his unhappy plight.

This they did, and presently came to the hero with the hews that the man
lived and desired to speak with his deliverer.  So Sigurd ordered him to
be brought up.  And as the tempest raged without, his heart rejoiced to
know that one man at least had been saved from its ravages.

The man was of the common order, and though clothed in a rough woodman's
suit it was plain to see he was a soldier.

He fell at the feet of the prince and poured forth his thanks for the
shelter given him that night.

"And who art thou?" asked Sigurd, to whom such thanks were never
welcome.

"I am a servant of King Ulf thy brother."

At the mention of the king's name the faces of those present fell, and
Sigurd asked, sternly--

"And what is thy errand here?"

"I was sent," said the man, "with two others, to spy into your state
here.  The king has heard of your merrymakings and of your alliance with
the English king.  He bade us see how you were armed and how prepared
for a sudden assault, and then return secretly and report it to him."

"And is it thus you perform your errand?" cried Sigurd.  "Where are thy
companions?"

"Drowned, my liege, in the fiord, as I had been but for your gracious
help."

"And when is the king coming to assault this tower?" demanded an English
noble who sat near.

"Never," said the man, shortly.

"And why?" asked Sigurd.

"Oh, my liege," said the man, dropping once more on his knees, "please
Heaven, in a week's time there will be no king in all this land but
Sigurd."

The hero started from his seat and seized the man roughly.

"What is it you say?" he cried.  "Speak out, and that plainly, or it
will be worse for you!"

"On this day week," said the trembling serf, "Ulf is to visit his castle
of Niflheim.  He goes there alone, as you, my liege, came hither, to
receive his bride.  But he will never return the way he came, for Bur
and Harald, your friends, my prince, have vowed to slay him there, and
at one blow rid the land of a tyrant and give it a just and good king."

When Sigurd heard this he turned white and red with wrath and fear.
Fiercely he summoned his guards, and bade them seize the spy and cast
him into the dungeon.

Then, as soon as words came, he turned to the company and said--

"You hear what this knave says?"

"Yes, we hear," cried some, "and we rejoice that Sigurd's day has come
at last.  Long live King Sigurd!"

Then Sigurd struck the table with his fist as he started to his feet and
glared at the rash companions.

"Villains!" he shouted, with a voice that made the room itself tremble.
"Yes, Sigurd's day has come--the day for teaching cowards like you the
duty of a knight and a brother.  Ulf, at his bridal, unarmed, slain by
traitors' hands.  Is that the chivalry ye praise?  If so, begone from my
sight and reach of this arm!  But 'tis no time for talk.  Without there,
