oar, just beside Tom Lokins, who was ready with his harpoons in the
bow.  Young Borders pulled the oar directly in front of me.  The
captain himself steered, and, as our crew was a picked one, we soon
left the other two boats behind us.

Presently a small whale rose close beside us, and, sending a shower of
spray over the boat, went down in a pool of foam.  Before we had time
to speak, another whale rose on the opposite side of the boat, and then
another on our starboard bow.  We had got into the middle of a shoal of
whales, which commenced leaping and spouting all round us, little aware
of the dangerous enemy that was so near.

In a few minutes more up comes the big one again that we had first
seen.  He seemed very active and wild.  After blowing on the surface
once or twice, about a quarter of a mile off, he peaked his flukes, and
pitched down head foremost.

"Now then, lads, he's down for a long dive," said the captain; "spring
your oars like men, we'll get that fish for certain, if you'll only
pull."

The captain was mistaken; the whale had only gone down deep in order to
come up and breach, or spring out of the water, for the next minute he
came up not a hundred yards from us, and leaped his whole length into
the air.

A shout of surprise broke from the men, and no wonder, for this was the
largest fish I ever saw or heard of, and he came up so clear of the
water that we could see him from head to tail as he turned over in the
air, exposing his white belly to view, and came down on his great side
with a crash like thunder, that might have been heard six miles off.  A
splendid mass of pure white spray burst from the spot where he fell,
and in another moment he was gone.

"I do believe it's _New Zealand Tom_," cried Bill Blunt, referring to
an old bull whale that had become famous among the men who frequented
these seas for its immense size and fierceness, and for the great
trouble it had given them, smashing some of their boats, and carrying
away many of their harpoons.

"I don't know whether it's New Zealand Tom or not," said the captain,
"but it's pretty clear that he's an old sperm bull.  Give way, lads, we
must get that whale whatever it should cost us."

We did not need a second bidding; the size of the fish was so great
that we felt more excited than we had yet been during the voyage, so we
bent our oars till we almost pulled the boat out of the water.  The
other boats had got separated, chasing the little whales, so we had
this one all to ourselves.

"There she blows!" said Tom Lokins, in a low voice, as the fish came up
a short distance astern of us.

We had overshot our mark, so, turning about, we made for the whale,
which kept for a considerable time near the top of the water, spouting
now and then, and going slowly to windward.  We at last got within a
few feet of the monster, and the captain suddenly gave the word, "Stand
up."

This was to our harpooner, Tom Lokins, who jumped up on the instant,
and buried two harpoons deep in the blubber.

"Stern all!" was the next word, and we backed off with all our might.
It was just in time, for, in his agony, the whale tossed his tail right
over our heads, the flukes were so big that they could have completely
covered the boat, and he brought them down flat on the sea with a clap
that made our ears tingle, while a shower of spray drenched us to the
skin.  For one moment I thought it was all over with us, but we were
soon out of immediate danger, and lay on our oars watching the
writhings of the wounded monster as he lashed the ocean into foam.  The
water all round us soon became white like milk, and the foam near the
whale was red with blood.

Suddenly this ceased, and, before we could pull up to lance him, he
went down, taking the line out at such a rate that the boat spun round,
and sparks of fire flew from the loggerhead from the chafing of the
rope.

"Hold on!" cried the captain, and next moment we were tearing over the
sea at a fearful rate, with a bank of white foam rolling before us,
high above our bows, and away on each side of us like the track of a
steamer, so that we expected it every moment to rush inboard and swamp
us.  I had never seen anything like this before.  From the first I had
a kind of feeling that some evil would befall us.

While we were tearing over the water in this way, we saw the other
whales coming up every now and then and blowing quite near to us, and
presently we passed close enough to the first mate's boat to see that
he was fast to a fish, and unable, therefore, to render us help if we
should need it.

In a short time the line began to slack, so we hauled it in hand over
hand, and Tom Lokins coiled it away in the tub in the stern of the
boat, while the captain took his place in the bow to be ready with the
lance.  The whale soon came up, and we pulled with all our might
towards him.  Instead of making off again, however, he turned round and
made straight at the boat.  I now thought that destruction was certain,
for, when I saw his great blunt forehead coming down on us like a
steamboat, I felt that we could not escape.  I was mistaken.  The
captain received him on the point of his lance, and the whale has such
a dislike to pain, that even a small prick will sometimes turn him.

For some time we kept dodging round this fellow; but he was so old and
wise, that he always turned his head to us, and prevented us from
getting a chance to lance him.  At last he turned a little to one side,
and the captain plunged the lance deep into his vitals.

"Ha! that's touched his life," cried Tom, as a stream of blood flew up
from his blowholes, a sure sign that he was mortally wounded.  But he
was not yet conquered.  After receiving the cruel stab with the lance,
he pitched right down, head foremost, and once more the line began to
fly out over the bow.  We tried to hold on, but he was going so
straight down that the boat was almost swamped, and we had to slack off
to prevent our being pulled under water.

Before many yards of the line had run out, one of the coils in the tub
became entangled.

"Look out, lads!" cried Tom, and at once throwing the turn off the
logger-head, he made an attempt to clear it.  The captain, in trying to
do the same thing, slipped and fell.  Seeing this, I sprang up, and,
grasping the coil as it flew past, tried to clear it.  Before I could
think, a turn whipped round my left wrist.  I felt a wrench as if my
arm had been torn out of the socket, and in a moment I was overboard,
going down with almost lightning speed into the depths of the sea.
Strange to say, I did not lose my presence of mind.  I knew exactly
what had happened.  I felt myself rushing down, down, down with
terrific speed; a stream of fire seemed to be whizzing past my eyes;
there was a dreadful pressure on my brain, and a roaring as if of
thunder in my ears.  Yet, even in that dread moment, thoughts of
eternity, of my sins, and of meeting with my God, flashed into my mind,
for thought is quicker than the lightning flash.

[Illustration: "IN A MOMENT I WAS OVERBOARD"]

Of a sudden the roaring ceased, and I felt myself buffeting the water
fiercely in my efforts to reach the surface.  I know not how I got
free, but I suppose the turn of the line must have slackened off
somehow.  All this happened within the space of a few brief moments;
but oh! they seemed fearfully long to me.  I do not think I could have
held my breath a second longer.

When I came to the surface, and tried to look about me, I saw the boat
not more than fifty yards off, and, being a good swimmer, I struck out
for it, although I felt terribly exhausted.  In a few minutes my
comrades saw me, and, with a cheer, put out the oars and began to row
towards me.  I saw that the line was slack, and that they were hauling
it in--a sign that the whale had ceased running and would soon come to
the surface again.  Before they had pulled half-a-dozen strokes I saw
the water open close beside the boat, and the monstrous head of the
whale shot up like a great rock rising out of the deep.

He was not more than three feet from the boat, and he came up with such
force, that more than half his gigantic length came out of the water
right over the boat.  I heard the captain's loud cry--"_Stern all!_"
But it was too late, the whole weight of the monster's body fell upon
the boat; there was a crash and a terrible cry, as the whale and boat
went down together.

For a few moments he continued to lash the sea in his fury, and the
fragments of the boat floated all round him.  I thought that every man,
of course, had been killed; but one after another their heads appeared
in the midst of blood and foam, and they struck out for oars and pieces
of the wreck.

Providentially, the whale, in his tossings, had shot a little away from
the spot, else every man must certainly have been killed.

A feeling of horror filled my heart, as I beheld all this, and thought
upon my position.  Fortunately, I had succeeded in reaching a broken
plank; for my strength was now so much exhausted, that I could not have
kept my head above water any longer without its assistance.  Just then
I heard a cheer, and the next time I rose on the swell, I looked
quickly round and saw the mate's boat making for the scene of action as
fast as a stout and willing crew could pull.  In a few minutes more I
was clutched by the arm and hauled into it.  My comrades were next
rescued, and we thanked God when we found that none were killed,
although one of them had got a leg broken, and another an arm twisted
out of joint.  They all, however, seemed to think that my escape was
much more wonderful than theirs; but I cannot say that I agreed with
them in this.

We now turned our attention to the whale, which had dived again.  As it
was now loose, we did not know, of course, where it would come up: so
we lay still awhile.  Very soon up he came, not far from us, and as
fierce as ever.

"Now, lads, we _must_ get that whale," cried the mate; "give way with a
will."

The order was obeyed.  The boat almost leaped over the swell, and,
before long, another harpoon was in the whale's back.

"Fast again, hurrah!" shouted the mate, "now for the lance."

He gave the monster two deep stabs while he spoke, and it vomited up
great clots of blood, besides spouting the red stream of life as it
rolled on the sea in its agony, obliging us to keep well out of its way.

I could not look upon the dying struggles of this enormous fish without
feelings of regret and self-reproach for helping to destroy it.  I felt
almost as if I were a murderer, and that the Creator would call me to
account for taking part in the destruction of one of His grandest
living creatures.  But the thought passed quickly from my mind as the
whale became more violent and went into its flurry.  It began to lash
the sea with such astonishing violence, that all the previous struggles
seemed as nothing.  The water all round became white like milk, with
great streaks of red blood running through it, and the sound of the
quick blows of its tail and fins resembled that of dull hollow thunder.
We gazed at this scene in deep silence and with beating hearts.

All at once the struggles ceased.  The great carcass rolled over belly
up, and lay extended on the sea in death.  To me it seemed as if a dead
calm had suddenly fallen around us, after a long and furious storm, so
great was the change when that whale at length parted with its huge
life.  The silence was suddenly broken by three hearty cheers, and
then, fastening a rope to our prize, we commenced towing it to the
ship, which operation occupied us the greater part of the night, for we
had no fewer than eight miles to pull.




CHAPTER VIII

DEATH ON THE SEA

The whale which we had taken, as I have related in the last chapter,
was our largest fish of that season.  It produced ninety barrels of
oil, and was worth about 500 pounds, so that we did not grieve much
over the loss of our boat.

But our next loss was of a kind that could not be made up for by oil or
money, for it was the loss of a human life.  In the whale-fishery men
must, like soldiers, expect to risk their lives frequently, and they
have too often, alas! to mourn over the loss of a shipmate or friend.
Up to this time our voyage had gone prosperously.  We had caught so
many fish that nearly half our cargo was already completed, and if we
should be as lucky the remainder of the voyage, we should be able to
return home to Old England much sooner than we had expected.

Of course, during all this time we had met with some disappointments,
for I am not describing everything that happened on that voyage.  It
would require a much thicker volume than this to tell the half of our
adventures.  We lost five or six fish by their sinking before we could
get them made fast to the ship, and one or two bolted so fast that they
broke loose and carried away a number of harpoons and many a fathom of
line.  But such misfortunes were what we had to look for.  Every whaler
meets with similar changes of luck, and we did not expect to fare
differently from our neighbours.  These things did not cause us much
regret beyond the time of their occurrence.  But it was far otherwise
with the loss that now befell us.

It happened on a Sunday forenoon.  I was standing close to the
starboard gangway early that morning, looking over the side into the
calm water, for there was not a breath of wind, and talking to the
first mate, who was a gruff, surly man, but a good officer, and kind
enough in his way when everything went smooth with him.  But things
don't go very smooth generally in whaling life, so the mate was oftener
gruff than sweet.

"Bob Ledbury," said he, "have you got your cutting-in gear in order?
I've got a notion that we'll 'raise the oil' this day."

"All right, sir," said I; "you might shave yourself with the
blubber-spades.  That was a good fish we got last, sir, wasn't it?"

"Pretty good, though I've seen bigger."

"He gave us a deal of trouble too," said I.

"Not so much as I've seen others give," said he.  "When I was fishing
in the Greenland Seas we made fast to a whale that cost us I don't know
how many hundred dollars."  (You must know the first mate was a Yankee,
and he reckoned everything in dollars.)

"How was that, sir?" asked I.

"Well, it was something in this fashion.  We were floating about in the
North Atlantic one calm, hot day, just something like this, only it was
the afternoon, not the morning.  We were doing nothing, and whistling
for a breeze, when, all of a sudden, up comes five or six whales all
round the ship, as if they had spied her from the bottom of the sea,
and had come up to have a squint at her.  Of course the boats were
manned at once, and in less than no time we were tearing after them
like all alive.  But them whales were pretty wildish, I guess.  They
kept us pullin' the best part of five hours before we got a chance at
them.  My boat was out of sight of the ship before we made fast to a
regular snorer, a hundred-barreller at the least.  The moment he felt
the iron, away he went like the shot out of a gun; but he didn't keep
it up long, for soon after another of our boats came up and made fast.
Well, for some two or three hours we held fast, but could not haul on
