
DRAWING THEIR DRINK.

The idea about the cave was a good one, and gave them some little
comfort in the midst of their tribulation.

Still, it was not much; for although they would be safe enough while in
the cavern, they could not accomplish anything there.  The want of light
would hinder them from working at the ladders; and while cutting the
timber out of which to make them, and every hour that they might be
engaged upon them, they would be exposed to the attacks of their
implacable enemy.

The prospect was sufficiently discouraging--even with the knowledge that
the cave would offer them a safe asylum to which they could retreat
whenever pursued.

As the elephant remained comparatively tranquil for a length of time,
these thoughts of future operations had engaged their attention.
Confident in their present security, they were not troubled by the fear
of any immediate danger.

Very soon, however, this confidence began to forsake them.  How long
were they going to be kept in the tree?  That was a question that now
presented itself; and as the time passed, became a source of uneasiness.

Though none of them could answer this question, yet all could understand
that the siege promised to be a long one--perhaps much longer than that
which had so lately been raised: for the rogue, inspired by a rage
profound and implacable, exhibited in his sullen look a determination to
stand his ground for an indefinite period of time.  Seeing this, our
adventurers once more became uneasy.  Not only was their situation
irksome--from the fact of their having to sit astride slender branches--
but should the siege be continued, they would be subjected to that
danger peculiar to all people besieged--the danger of starvation.  Even
at the outset all three were as hungry as wolves.  They had eaten but a
very light breakfast, and nothing since: for they had not found time to
cook dinner.  It was now late in the afternoon; and should the enemy
continue there all night, they would have to go to bed supperless.  Ah!
to bed indeed.  Perhaps there would be neither bed nor sleep that night:
for how could they slumber upon those hard branches?  Should they lose
consciousness for a moment, they would drop off, and tumble down upon
their sleepless besieger!  Even should they tie themselves in the tree,
to go to sleep upon such narrow couches would be out of the question.

Thus, then, they saw no prospect of either supper or sleep for that
night.  But there was another appetite now annoying them far worse than
either hunger or longing for sleep.  It was the desire to drink.  The
rough and varied exercise which they had been compelled to take since
starting in the morning--climbing trees, and skulking through pathless
jungles--combined with the varied emotions which their repeated perils
had called up--all had a tendency to produce thirst; and thirst they now
felt in an extreme degree.  It was not lessened by the sight of the
water shining beneath them.  On the contrary, this only increased the
craving to an extent that was almost unendurable.

For a considerable time they bore the pain, without any hope of being
able to get relieved of it; and with the lake glistening before their
eyes under the clear sunlight, and the current gently gliding through
the straits underneath, they could realise, in something more than
fancy, what must have been the terrible sufferings of poor Tantalus.

After submitting to this infliction for a considerable length of time,
an exclamation escaping from Caspar drew upon him the attention of the
others.

"Dunder und blitzen!" cried he; "what have we been thinking about all
this time?  The three of us sitting here choking with thirst, and a
river of water within our reach!"

"Within our reach?  I wish it were, Caspar," rejoined Karl, in rather a
desponding tone.

"Certainly it is within our reach.  Look here!"

As Caspar spoke, he held out his copper powder-flask, now nearly empty.
Karl did not yet quite comprehend him.

"What is to hinder us from letting this down," he inquired, "and drawing
it up again full of water?  Nothing.  Have you a piece of string about
you, Ossy?"

"Yes, sahib, I have," briskly replied the shikaree, at the same time
drawing a roll of hempen twist out of the breast of his cotton shirt,
and holding it out towards the young hunter.

"Long enough, it is," said Caspar, taking the cord; which the next
moment he attached around the neck of the flask.  After pouring the
powder into his bullet-pouch, he permitted the flask to drop down till
it became immersed under the current.  Allowing it to remain there, till
it had become filled with water, he drew it up again; and with a
congratulatory exclamation presented it to Karl, telling him to drink to
his heart's content.  This injunction Karl obeyed without the slightest
reluctance.

The flask was soon emptied; and once more let down and re-filled, and
again emptied; and this series of operations was continued, until all
were satisfied, and there was no longer a thirsty individual in the top
of that tree.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

A GIGANTIC SYRINGE.

Having by Caspar's ingenious artifice obtained as much water as they
wanted, the besieged felt better able to endure their irksome situation.
They were resigning themselves with as much philosophy as they could
command to bear it a little longer, when to their great astonishment
they were treated to more water than they wanted, and from a source as
curious as was unexpected.

Whether the elephant had taken a hint from seeing the flask plunged down
into the water, or whether the idea had occurred to it without being
suggested by anything in particular, it would be difficult to say.
Certain it is, that just after the last flask-full had been pulled up,
and before the eddying ripples had subsided from the surface, the rogue
was seen to make a rush into the water, at the same time deeply
submerging his proboscis, as if about to take a drink.

For some moments he remained in a stationary attitude, apparently
filling his capacious stomach with the fluid.

There was no reason why he should not be as thirsty as themselves; and
the spectators in the tree had no other thought, than that the great
quadruped had waded into the pool simply for the purpose of quenching
his thirst.

There was something about his movements, however, and the style in which
he had set about sucking up the water, which betrayed a different
determination; and it was not long before this was evinced by a
performance which, under other circumstances, might have evoked laughter
from those who witnessed it.  In this instance, however, the spectators
were themselves the victims of the joke--if joke it might be termed--and
during its continuance, not one of the three felt the slightest
inclination to indulge in mirth.  It was thus that the elephant acted:--

Having filled its trunk with the water of the stream, it raised it
aloft.  Then pointing it towards the tree, and even directing it with as
much coolness and precision as an astronomer would have used in
adjusting his telescope, it sent the fluid in a drenching stream into
the faces of the three individuals whom it was holding in siege.  All
three, who chanced to be sitting close together, were at the same
instant, and alike, the victims of this unexpected deluge; and before
any of them could have counted half a score, they were wet from head to
foot, every rag upon their backs, and fronts too, becoming as thoroughly
saturated as if they had been exposed for hours to a drenching rain
storm!

But the elephant was not satisfied with giving them a single
shower-bath.  As soon as its first supply was exhausted, it once more
immersed its pliant sucker, re-filled the reservoir, took a good aim,
and ejected the fluid into their faces.

In this way the creature continued drawing up the water from the stream,
and squirting it from its vast muscular syringe, until it had douched
them nearly a dozen times.

Their situation was anything but enviable; for the watery stream,
propelled against them with as much force as from the hose-pipe of a
fire-engine, almost washed them from their unstable seats; to say
nothing of the great discomfort which the douche occasioned them.

It would be difficult to guess what could be the object of the elephant
in this curious performance.  Perhaps it may have conceived a hope
either of driving them out of the tree, or forcibly washing them from
the branches; or perhaps it merely designed to make their situation as
uncomfortable as possible, and thus to some extent satisfy its spite.

It would be equally difficult to tell how long the performance might
have lasted.  Perhaps for hours longer--since the supply of water was
inexhaustible; but it was brought to a conclusion which neither the
great pachyderm himself foresaw, nor they who were the subjects of his
aqueous dispensation.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

SWALLOWED WHOLESALE.

Just while it was in the midst of its performance, keeping its
_water-battery_ in full play, and apparently with malicious enjoyment,
it was seen all at once to desist; and then its huge body commenced
rocking from side to side, one shoulder now upheaving, then the other,
while the long trunk was swept in circles through the air, at the same
time emitting, instead of water, shrill sounds that proclaimed either
pain or terror.

What could it mean?  The quadruped was evidently smitten with some
sudden fear; but who and what was the enemy it dreaded?  So mentally
inquired Karl and Caspar; but before either had time to shape his
thought into an interrogative speech, the shikaree had answered it.

"He-ho!" he exclaimed.  "Goot! vair goot!--praise to the God of the
Great Gangee!  See, sahibs, the rogue he go down, down--he sinkee in de
quicksand that near swalley Ossaroo; he-ho; sinkee! he sinkee!"

Karl and Caspar easily comprehended the meaning of Ossaroo's broken but
exultant speeches.  Bending their eyes on the brute below, and watching
its movements, they at once perceived that the shikaree had spoken the
truth.  The elephant was evidently sinking in the quicksand!

They had noticed that when it first entered the bed of the stream, the
water had not reached far above its knees.  Now it was up to its sides,
and slowly but gradually rising higher.  Its violent struggles,
moreover--the partial and alternate raising of its shoulders, its
excited shrieks--and the proboscis, rapidly extended now to this side,
now to that, as if searching to grasp some support--all proved the truth
of Ossaroo's assertion--the rogue was sinking in the quicksand.  And
rapidly was the creature going down.  Before the spectators had been
watching it five minutes, the water lapped up nearly to the level of its
back, and then inch by inch, and foot by foot, it rose higher, until the
round shoulders were submerged, and only the head and its long
trumpet-like extension appeared above the surface.

Soon the shoulders ceased to play; and the vast body exhibited no other
motion, save that gentle descent by which it was being drawn down into
the bowels of the earth!

The trunk still kept up its vibratory movement, now violently beating
the water into foam, and now feebly oscillating, all the while breathing
forth its accents of agony.

At length the upturned head and smooth protuberant jaws sank beneath the
surface; and only the proboscis appeared, standing erect out of the
water like a gigantic Bologna sausage.  It had ceased to give out the
shrill trumpet scream; but a loud breathing could still be heard,
interrupted at intervals by a gurgling sound.

Karl and Caspar kept their seats upon the tree, looking down upon the
strange scene with feelings of awe depicted in their faces.  Not so the
shikaree, who was no longer aloft.  As soon as he had seen the elephant
fairly locked in the deadly embrace of that quicksand that had so nearly
engulfed his own precious person, he lowered himself nimbly down from
the branches.

For some moments he stood upon the bank, watching the futile efforts
which the animal was making to free itself, all the while talking to it,
and taunting it with spiteful speeches--for Ossaroo had been
particularly indignant at the loss of his skirt.  When at length the
last twelve inches of the elephant's trunk was all that remained above
the surface, the shikaree could hold back no longer.  Drawing his long
knife, he rushed out into the water; and, with one clean cut, severed
the muscular mass from its supporting stem, as a sickle would have
levelled some soft succulent weed.

The parted tube sank instantly to the bottom; a few red bubbles rose to
the surface; and these were the last tokens that proclaimed the exit of
that great elephant from the surface of the earth.  It had gone down
into the deep sands, there to become fossilised--perhaps after the lapse
of many ages to be turned up again by the spade and pick-axe of some
wondering quarry-man.

Thus by a singular accident were our adventurers disembarrassed of a
disagreeable neighbour--or rather, a dangerous enemy--so dangerous,
indeed, that had not some chance of the kind turned up in their favour,
it is difficult to conjecture how they would have got rid of it.  It was
no longer a question of pouring bullets into its body, and killing it in
that way.  The spilling of their powder had spoiled that project; and
the three charges that still remained to them might not have been
sufficient with guns of so small a calibre as theirs.

No doubt in time such gallant hunters as Caspar and Ossaroo, and so
ingenious a contriver as Karl, would have devised some way to circumvent
the rogue, and make an end of him; but for all that they were very well
pleased at the strange circumstance that had relieved them of the
necessity, and they congratulated themselves on such a fortunate result.

On hearing them talking together, and perceiving that they were no
longer in the tree, Fritz, who had all this while been skulking only a
few paces from the spot, now emerged from his hiding-place, and came
running up.  Little did Fritz suspect, while swimming across the straits
to rejoin his masters, that the huge quadruped which had so frequently
given him chase was at that moment so very near him; and that his own
claws, while cutting the water, came within an inch of scratching that
terrible trunk, now _truncated_ to a _frustrum_ of its former self!

But although Fritz had no knowledge of strange incident that had
occurred during his absence--and may have been wondering in what
direction the enemy had gone off--while swimming across the straits, the
red colour of the water at a particular place, or more likely the scent
of blood upon it, admonished him that some sanguinary scene had
transpired; and drew from him a series of excited yelps as he buoyantly
breasted the wave.

Fritz came in for a share of the congratulations.  Although the faithful
creature had retreated on each occasion of his being attacked, no one
thought of casting a slur upon his canine courage.  He had only
exhibited a wise discretion: for what chance would he have stood against
such a formidable adversary?  He had done better, therefore, by taking
to his heels; for had he foolishly stood his ground, and got killed in
the first encounter by the obelisk, the elephant might still have been
alive, and besieging them in the tree.  Besides, it was Fritz who had
sounded the first note of warning, and thus given time to prepare for
the reception of the assailant.

All of the party regarded Fritz as worthy of reward; and Ossaroo had
made up his mind that he should have it, in the shape of a dinner upon
elephant's trunk.  But in wading back into the stream, the shikaree
perceived to his chagrin that the brave dog must be disappointed: since
the piece which he had so skilfully lopped off, had followed the
fortunes of the part from which it had been severed, and was now far
below the surface of the sand!

Ossaroo made no attempt to dig it up again.  He had a wholesome dread of
that treacherous footing; and treading it gingerly, he lost no time in
returning to the bank, and following the sahibs--who had already taken
their departure from the water's edge, and were proceeding in the
direction of the ruined hut.



CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE DEODAR.

The idea that had occurred to them--of making the cave their home--was
no longer deemed worthy of being entertained.  The dangerous proximity
of the elephant had alone suggested it; and this no longer existed.  It
was not likely that there was another _rogue_ in the valley.  Indeed,
Ossaroo was able to set their minds at rest on this point--assuring them
that two animals of the kind are never found occupying the same
district: since two creatures of such malignant dispositions would
certainly enact the tragedy of the Kilkenny cats--though Ossaroo did not
illustrate his meaning by quoting this celebrated expression.

Possibly there might be other animals in the neighbourhood as much to be
dreaded as the elephant had been.  There might be panthers, or leopards,
or tigers, or even another bear; but against any of these the cave would
be no safe asylum--not safer than their old hut.  They could reconstruct
it more strongly than ever; and put a stout door upon it to keep out any
midnight intruder; and to this work did they apply themselves as soon as
they had eaten dinner, and dried their garments--so thoroughly saturated
by the colossal syringe of the defunct elephant.

Several days were spent in restoring the hovel--this time with
considerable improvements.  The winter weather had now fairly set in;
and household warmth had become an important object: so that not only
did they fill up the chinks with a thick coating of clay, but a
fireplace and chimney were constructed, and a strong door was added.

They knew that it would take them a long time to make the ladders--more
than a dozen long ladders--each of which must be light as a reed and
straight as an arrow.

During the milder days of winter they might work in the open air;
indeed, the greater part of their work they must needs do outside the
hut.  Still it would be necessary to have shelter not only during the
nights, but in times of storm and severe weather.

Prudence therefore counselled them to providence; and before proceeding
farther with their design of scaling the cliff, they made all snug
within doors.

They had no fear of suffering from the winter's cold--either for want of
clothing by day, or covering by night.  Some of the yak-skins were still
in good preservation--with the pelts of several other animals that had
fallen before the double-barrel of Caspar--and these would suffice for
warm clothing by day and bed-covering by night.

About their winter's food they were a little more anxious.  The elephant
had succeeded not only in destroying their means of obtaining
provisions, but had also damaged the stock which was on hand, by
trampling it in the mud.  Those portions of the dried venison and
yak-beef that the brute had not succeeded in completely spoiling, were
once more collected, and stored in a safe place; while it was resolved,
in the event of their not being able to procure more, that they should
go on rations proportioned to the time which they might have to continue
in their rock-bound prison.  Of course, though their ammunition was
exhausted, they were not without hopes of being able to add to their
store of provisions.  The arrows of Ossaroo still existed, independent
of either powder or lead.  Snares and traps would enable them to capture
many of the wild creatures that, like themselves, appeared to have found
a prison in that secluded and singular valley.

When all the arrangements regarding their winter residence were
completed, they returned once more to the survey of the cliffs, which
had been interrupted by the elephant.

After a prolonged examination of the ledges, that had been discovered on
that eventful day, they continued on until they had made the circuit of
the valley.  Not a foot of the precipice was passed without the most
elaborate inspection being bestowed upon it; and of course the twin
cliffs which hemmed in the gorge of the glacier were examined with the
rest.

There proved to be no place offering such advantages for an ascent by
ladders as that already discovered; and although there was no positive
certainty that they might be able to accomplish their formidable task,
they determined to make a trial, and without further delay set about
preparing the ladders.

The preliminary step was to select and cut down a sufficient quantity of
timber of the right length.  They were about to have recourse to the
beautiful Thibet pine--the sort which had served them for bridging the
crevasse--when a new tree was discovered by them, equally beautiful, and
more suitable for their purpose.  It was the cedar (_Pinus deodara_).
Ossaroo once more lamented the absence of his beloved bamboos--alleging
that with a sufficient number of these he could have made ladders enough
for scaling the cliff, in less than a quarter of the time it would take
to construct them out of the pines.  This was no exaggeration: for the
culm of the great bamboo, just as it is cut out of the brake, serves for
the side of a ladder, without any pains taken with it, further than to
notch out the holes in which to insert the rounds.  Moreover, the bamboo
being light, would have served better than any other timber for such
ladders as they required--enabling them with less trouble to get them
hoisted up to the ledges--an operation in which they apprehended no
little difficulty.  But although there was a species of cane growing in
the valley--that known to the hill people as the "ringall"--its culms
were neither of sufficient length nor thickness for their purpose.  It
was the great bamboo of the tropical jungles that Ossaroo sighed for;
and which on their way up through the lower ranges of the Himalayas they
had seen growing in vast brakes, its tall stems often rising to the
height of a hundred feet.

The deodar, under favourable circumstances, attains to vast dimensions,
trunks being often met with in the mountains upwards of ten feet in
diameter, and rising to the height of one hundred feet.  A few sticks of
this description would have made their labour both short and easy.

Failing the bamboo, therefore, they selected the second best material
which the forest afforded them--the tall "deodar."  This tree, which is
known to the Anglo-Indian residents of the Himalayan countries as the
"cedar," has long since been introduced into English parks and
arboretums, under the name of _deodara_--its specific botanical
appellation.  It is a true pine and is found in most of the hills and
valleys of the Himalayan chain, growing at almost any elevation and on
