vessels, though I have heard of them."

The priest said no more, but evidently fell into a profound
meditation; and Stanley, getting quietly up, returned to his work.
The priest came in, just as he had completed his bed.

"That is well," he said, looking at it approvingly. "I myself,
although I know that, until my time has come, no creature can harm
me, cannot resist a shudder when I hear one rustling amid the
leaves of my bed; for they come in, although some of my friends
have had a door placed to exclude their entry at night. I wander
but little from my cell, and always close the door after me; but
they enter, sometimes, when I am meditating, and forgetful of
earthly matters, and the first I know of their presence is the
rustling of the leaves in the bed, at night. Were I as strong in
faith as I should be, I would heed it not. I tell myself so; but my
fear is stronger than my will, and I am forced to rise, turn up the
leaves with a stick until I find them, and then I open the door and
eject them, with as much gentleness as may be."

"I should get no sleep at all," Stanley said. "I don't think that
even a door would make me feel any safer, for I might forget to
shut it, sometimes. Tomorrow, father, I will wage war with them,
and see if I cannot decrease their numbers considerably."

Stanley's first task was to clear the bushes away from the court of
the temple; and this, after several days' hard work, he carried
out; although he soon saw that by so doing he would not diminish
the number of the snakes, for the greater portion of the area was
covered with blocks of fallen stone, among which the reptiles found
an impenetrable shelter. The clearance effected, however, was so
far useful that, while the creatures were before altogether hidden
from sight by the bushes, they could now be killed when they came
out to bask in the sun on the uncovered stones; and he could, every
day, destroy a dozen or more without the slightest difficulty.

Ten days after he had finished the work, he heard the sound of
men's voices and, peeping out, saw a Burmese officer with a party
of eight armed men going to the Phongee's cell. It was possible
that they might have come on other business, but it was more
probable they had come in search of him. Some of the women who had
come up to the hermit had seen him at work; and might have
mentioned, on their return, that the priest had a man at work
clearing away the bushes. The matter might have come to the ears of
some officer anxious to distinguish himself, and the idea that this
was the prisoner for whom a search was being made occurred to him.

Stanley shrank back into his cell, took up the bundle of clothes
that served as his pillow, got on to the bed and, standing on it,
was able to get his fingers on to the top of the wall. He hoisted
himself up, made his way through the boughs of the roof, and
dropped on to the ground outside. Then he went round by the back of
the temple, until he stood outside the priest's cell, and could
hear the voices within without difficulty.

"Then you know nothing whatever of this man?"

"Nothing whatever," he replied. "As I have told you, he came to me
and asked for shelter. I gave him such poor assistance as I could,
as I should give it to anyone who asked me. He has been no burden
upon me, for he has killed enough snakes for my food and his own."

"You know not of what part he is a native?"

"Not at all; I asked him no questions. It was no business of mine."

"Could you form any idea from his speech?"

"His speech was ours. It seemed to me that it was that of a native
of the lower provinces."

"Where is he now?"

"I know not."

"You say that, at present, he is away."

"Not seeing him in front, I thought he had gone out; for he comes
and goes as he pleases. He is not a hired servant, but a guest. He
cut down the bushes here, in order that he might more easily kill
the snakes; for which, indeed, I am thankful to him, not only for
the food that they afford, but because they were in such abundance,
and so fearless, that they often came in here, knowing that they
had naught to fear from me."

"Then you think that he will return soon?"

"As he told me not of his intention of going out at all, I cannot
say. He is away, sometimes, for hours in the forest."

"Well, in any case, we shall watch here until his return. It may be
that he is some idle fellow, who prefers killing snakes to honest
work; but it may also be that he is the escaped prisoner of whom we
are in search."

"I hear little of what passes in the town," the priest said,
quietly. "News would disturb my meditations, and I never question
those who come here to ask for my prayers. I have heard of the
escape of no prisoner."

"It was a young English officer who got away. There has been a
great stir about it. Every house in the town has been searched, and
every guard boat on the river has been warned to allow no boat to
pass, without assuring themselves that he is not on board."

"This was a brown man, like ourselves, clad only in a petticoat of
rough cloth, like other peasants."

"He may have dyed his skin," the officer said. "At any rate, we
will stay until he returns, and question him. Two of my men shall
take their places just inside the entrance, and seize him as he
enters. Has he arms?"

"None, save his knife and the stick with which he kills the snakes.
It may be that he has seen you coming hither and, if he has
committed any crime, he would flee, and not return here at all."

"If he does not come back before it is the hour when I must return
to the town, I shall leave four men to watch for him; and they will
wait here, if it is for a week, until he comes back again."

"You can do as you please," the priest said, "only I pray you
withdraw your men from the neighbourhood of this cell. I would not
that my meditations were disturbed by their talk. I have come
hither for peace and quietness, and to be apart from the world and
its distractions."

"You shall not be disturbed," the officer said respectfully, and
Stanley heard a movement of feet, and then the closing of the door.

Thinking it probable that the officer might make a search round the
temple, he at once made off into the wood behind the temple. As
soon as he was well among the trees, he exchanged his cloth for the
disguise he had worn in the town and, folding it up to be used as a
blanket at night, he went further into the wood, sat down, and
proceeded to think what his next step had best be. It was evident
that he could not return to the temple for the present; and it was
clear, also, that the search for him was still maintained, and that
it would not be safe to attempt to descend the river. He regretted
that he had been obliged to leave the place without saying goodbye
to the priest, and again thanking him for the shelter that he had
given him; but he was sure that, when he did not return, the old
man would guess that he had caught sight of the officer and his
party entering the temple, and had at once fled. Had he not known
that the guard would remain there, he would have waited until they
returned to the town, and would then have gone in and seen the
priest; but as they would remain there for some days, he thought it
was as well to abandon all idea of returning, as the suspicions
that he might be the man sought for would be heightened by his
continued absence, and the watch might be continued for a long
time, on the chance of his coming back.

He concluded that, at any rate, his best course would be to
endeavour to make his way for a considerable distance down the
country; and then to try and get a boat. He knew that the country
near the river was comparatively thickly populated, and that the
distances between the villages were not great, so that he would
find no great difficulty in purchasing provisions. The dress he had
brought with him was not altogether unfavourable for such a
purpose, as he could easily pass as a sub-officer, whose duty it
was to inquire whether the villages had each sent all their
able-bodied men to the war. The only drawback to it would be that,
if instructions for his arrest had been sent down to the villages
along the road, as well as those by the river, they would have
probably been directed to specially look for one clad in such
attire. However, it would be open to him, at any moment, to take to
his peasant's disguise again.

He at last determined to make a start and, by nightfall, had
traversed several miles through the great forest stretching along
by the side of the Panlaung river. He had asked many questions of
his friend the officer, as they went up to the temple, as to the
roads. He was told that there was one running almost due south to
Ramuthayn, by which he could travel down to Rangoon, by way of
Tannoo. This, however, would take him a long distance from the main
river, and he decided that he would presently strike the road that
ran about halfway between the hills and the Irrawaddy. He would
follow that for a time, and would try and strike the river
somewhere between Meloun and Keow-Uan.

Below this point there was a network of rivers, and but few
villages, and the country was swampy and unhealthy. He infinitely
preferred the risks of the descent by the river to those by road;
and it seemed to him that, if he could but obtain possession of one
of the small native fishing boats, he could drop down at night,
unnoticed, as the width of the river at Ava was upwards of a
thousand yards and, below that town, often considerably exceeded
that breadth.

When it became too dark to proceed further, he sat down at the foot
of a tree. He regretted that he had no means of lighting a fire;
and determined that, at any risk, he would obtain the means of
doing so at the first village that he came to--for he knew that
there were both tigers and leopards in the jungles. He thought,
however, that they were not likely to be numerous, so near the
capital; and the old priest had never alluded to them as a source
of danger though, indeed, it had never occurred to him to ask.

In the morning he continued his way. He had gone but a mile when he
heard a sudden scream in the wood, a short distance to his left.
Feeling sure that it was a human being, in great fear or pain, he
drew his knife and ran, at the top of his speed, in the direction
of the cry; thinking that it might be some man, or woman, attacked
by the robbers of the forest.

Suddenly he came upon a small open space, some twenty yards in
diameter. He hesitated, when his eyes fell on a group in the
centre. Two men were lying on the ground, and a leopard stood with
a paw on each of them. They had guns lying beside them, and a fire
was burning close by. He guessed that the animal had sprung from a
tree, one of whose boughs extended almost as far as the centre of
the opening. Probably it had killed one of the men in its spring
for, at the moment when he saw the animal, it was licking the blood
from the shoulder of the man on whom its right paw rested. The
other was, as far as Stanley could see, unhurt.

Illustration: Stanley gave a sudden spring, and buried his knife in
the leopard.

His tread in the light Burmese shoes had been almost noiseless; and
the leopard, which was keeping up a low growling, and whose back
was towards him, had apparently not noticed it. He hesitated for a
moment, and then decided to endeavour to save the man who was still
alive. Creeping up stealthily, he gave a sudden spring upon the
leopard, and buried his knife to the hilt in its body, just behind
the shoulder.

With a terrible roar, it rolled over for a moment, and then
struggled to its feet. The time had been sufficient for Stanley to
pick up and cock one of the guns and, as the leopard turned to
spring at him, he aimed between its eyes and fired. Again the beast
rolled over, and Stanley caught up the other gun, thrust the muzzle
within a foot of its head, and fired. The leopard gave a convulsive
quiver, and lay dead.



Chapter 5: With Brigands.


Stanley uttered an involuntary hurrah as the leopard expired; and
at the sound the Burman, who had been lying motionless, leapt to
his feet. He looked at the leopard, and then at his rescuer, and
exclaimed in a tone of astonishment:

"You have slain the beast alone, and with no weapon but your
knife!"

"No," Stanley replied; "I began the fight with my knife, only; but
caught up one of those guns when I wounded him, and fired as he
charged me. Then I finished him with the other."

"Comrade," the Burman said, "you have done a great deed, with
courage. I, who am esteemed no coward, would never even have
thought of attacking that great leopard with but a knife, and that
to save the life of a stranger."

"I saw the guns lying on the ground. Had it not been for that, I
should not have dared to attack the leopard, for it would have been
certain death."

"Certain death, indeed. But tell me, first, how you did it. It
seems to me well nigh a miracle."

"I was passing along, not far distant, when I heard your cry,"
Stanley said. "Thinking that it was some person in distress, I ran
hither, and saw you both lying, with the leopard's forepaws upon
you. The beast's back was turned to me and, as it was growling, it
had not heard my approach. Seeing the guns lying there--and having
no doubt that they were loaded--I stole up, sprang suddenly on the
leopard, and drove my knife into it behind the shoulder. The blow
rolled it over, and gave me time to pick up the gun. The rest was
easy."

The man, without a word, examined the body of the leopard.

"It is as you say," he said. "It was well struck, and would
probably have been fatal; but the animal would have torn you in
pieces before he died, but for the guns.

"Well, comrade, you have saved my life; and I am your servant, so
long as I live. I thought all was over with me. The leopard, as it
sprang, threw its full weight on my comrade, here. We had just
risen to our feet; and the blow struck me, also, to the ground. I
raised that cry as I fell. I lay there, immovable. I felt the
leopard's paw between my shoulders, and heard its angry growlings;
and I held my breath, expecting every moment to feel its teeth in
my neck.

"I had but one hope, namely, that the beast would carry off my
comrade--who, I was well assured, was dead--to the jungle to devour
him, and would then come back to fetch me. I managed to breathe
once, very quietly, when I felt a movement of the leopard and,
hearing a low sound, guessed that he was licking my comrade's
blood; but slightly as I moved, the leopard noticed it, and stood
straight up again over me. I dared not breathe again, but the time
had come when I felt that I must do so, though I was sure that it
would be the signal for my death.

"Then I knew not what had happened. There was a sharp pain as the
leopard's claws contracted, and then there was a loud roar, and its
weight was removed from me. Then I heard it snarl, as if about to
spring. Then came the sound of a gun, a fall, and a struggle; and
then the sound of another gun. Then I heard your shout, and knew
the beast was dead.

"Now, sir, what can I do for you? Shall I first skin the leopard?"

"I care not for the skin," Stanley said. "It would be of no use to
me."

"Then, with your permission, I will take it off, and keep it as
long as I live, as a remembrance of the narrowest escape that I
ever had."

"Is your comrade dead?"

"Yes," the man replied. "The leopard struck him between the
shoulders as you see; and the force of the blow, and the weight of
the spring, must have killed him instantaneously."

"Then I will take his sword, gun, and cartridges."

So Stanley undid the sword belt, and buckled it round him; put the
bandolier of cartridges over his shoulders; and took up the gun and
reloaded it, while the man was at work skinning the leopard. This
operation the man performed with great speed. It was evidently one
that he had done before. As soon as the beast was flayed, he rolled
up the skin and placed it on his shoulder.

"You are an officer, sir?" he asked.

"No; I am a fugitive."

While he had been watching the man, Stanley had debated over
whether he should confide in him; and thought that, after the
service he had rendered him, he could do so with safety.

"I am an Englishman--I was captured by Bandoola, at Ramoo, and sent
a prisoner to Ava. I have escaped, and want to make my way down to
Rangoon; but I heard that orders had been sent along the river to
arrest me, and I do not, at present, know how to make my way down."

"Come with me," the man said. "I have friends in the forest, some
distance from here. They will receive you gladly, when I tell them
what you have done for me; and you will be safe until you choose to
go. We are outlaws but, at present, we are masters of the forest.
The government has its hands full, and there is no fear of their
disturbing us."

Stanley thought over the matter, for a minute or two. Doubtless it
was a robber band that he was asked to join, but the offer seemed
to promise safety, for a time.

"I agree," he said, "so that you do not ask me to take part in any
deeds of violence."

"About that, you shall do as you like," the man said; "but I can
tell you that we make good hauls, sometimes. Our difficulty is not
to capture booty, but to dispose of it.

"Have you a turban? For that helmet of yours is out of place, in
the woods. The rest of your dress has nothing peculiar about it,
and would attract no attention."

"I have a turban. I have been, lately, in the dress of a peasant.
The cloth I wore lies fifty yards away; I dropped it as I ran. It
will be useful to cover me at night, if for nothing else."

Stanley exchanged the helmet for the turban that he had before
worn, and fetched the cloth.

"Will you bury your companion?" he said.

"It would be useless. He will sleep above ground, as well as below
and, if we are to reach my comrades tonight, it is time for us to
be moving."

They at once set out. After five hours' walking, they came upon the
river Myitnge, the tributary that falls into the Irrawaddy at Ava.
It was some four hundred yards across. The Burman walked along its
banks for a short distance, and then pulled from a clump of bushes
a small boat, that was just capable of carrying two. He put it in
the water. They took their seats, and paddled across to the other
side; where he carefully concealed it, as before.

"That is our ferry boat," he said. "It is not often used, for our
headquarters are in the great forest we shall presently come to;
but it is as well when, occasionally, parties are sent out to hunt
us, to have the means of crossing to the other side."

Another two hours' walking, through cultivated fields, brought them
to the edge of the forest.

"Here you are as safe as if you were in Rangoon," the Burman said.
