
But the window still remained open, and through it the lion could easily
leap out.  Swartboy, of course, designed closing it in the same manner
as he had done the door.

But now arose a particular danger.  He had only one piece of cord.  That
was attached to the arrow that still stuck fast.  How was he to detach
and get possession of it?

There appeared to be no other way but by going up to the door and
cutting it from the shaft.  In this lay the danger; for, should the lion
perceive him and rush out by the window, it would be all over with the
Bushman.

Like most of his race, Swartboy was more cunning than brave--though he
was far from being a coward.  Still he was by no means inclined at that
moment to go up to the door of the kraal.

The angry growls from within would have made a stouter heart than
Swartboy's quail with fear.

In this dilemma Hendrik came to his relief.  Hendrik had conceived a way
of getting possession of the string, without going near the door!

Calling to Swartboy to be on his guard, he rode within thirty yards of
the entrance--but on the other side from where Swartboy was--and there
halted.  At the place there stood a post with several forks upon it,
that had been used as a bridle-post.

Hendrik dismounted, hooked his rein over one of these forks; rested his
yager across another; and then, sighting the shaft of the arrow, pulled
trigger.  The rifle cracked, the broken stick was seen to fly out from
the door, and the string was set free!

All were ready to gallop off; but the lion, although he growled fiercely
on hearing the shot, still lay close.

Swartboy now drew in the string; and, having adjusted it to a fresh
arrow, moved round so as to command a view of the window.  In a few
minutes the shaft had cut through the air and stuck deep into the
yielding wood, and then the shutter swung round on its hinges and was
drawn close.

All three now dismounted ran silently and rapidly up, and secured both
door and shutter with strong reins of raw-hide.

Hurrah! the lion was caged!



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE DEATH OF THE LION.

Yes, the fierce brute was fairly in the trap.  The three hunters
breathed freely.

But how was the affair to end?  Both door and window-shutter fitted
strongly and closely; and, although it was possible to glance through
the chinks, nothing could be seen inside--since, both being shut, it was
quite dark within.

Even could the lion have been seen, there was no hole through which to
thrust the muzzle of a gun and fire at him.  He was just as safe as his
captors; and, so long as the door remained closed, they could do him no
more harm than he could them!

They might leave him shut up, and let him starve.  He could live for a
while upon what the jackals had left, with the carcasses of the two
dogs, but that would not sustain him long, and in the end he would have
to give up and miserably perish.  After all, this did not seem so
certain to Von Bloom and his companions.  Finding that he was caged in
earnest, the brute might attack the door, and with his sharp claws and
teeth manage to cut his way through.

But the angry field-cornet had not the slightest intention of leaving
the lion such a chance.  He was determined to destroy the beast before
leaving the ground; and he now set to thinking how this could be
accomplished in the speediest and most effectual manner.

At first he thought of cutting a hole in the door with his knife, large
enough to see through and admit the barrel of his roer.  Should he not
succeed in getting a view of the beast through that one, he would make
another in the window-shutter.  The two being on adjacent sides of the
house, would give him the command of the whole interior--for the former
dwelling of the field-cornet comprised only a single apartment.  During
his residence there, there had been two, thanks to a partition of
zebra-skins; but these had been removed, and all was now in one room.

At first Von Bloom could think of no other plan to get at the enemy, and
yet this one did not quite please him.  It was safe enough, and, if
carried out, could only end in the death of the lion.

A hole in both door and window-shutter would enable them to fire at the
brute as many bullets as they pleased, while they would be quite secure
from his attack.  But the _time_ that would be required to cut these
holes--that was why the plan did not please the field-cornet.  He and
his party had no time to spare: their horses were weak with hunger, and
a long journey lay before them ere a morsel could be obtained.  No,--the
time could not be spared for making a breach.  Some more expeditious
mode of attack must be devised.

"Father," said Hendrik, "suppose we set the house on fire?"

Good.  The suggestion was a good one.  Von Bloom cast his eyes up to the
roof--a sloping structure with long eaves.  It consisted of heavy beams
of dry wood with rafters and laths, and all covered over with a thatch
of rushes, a foot in thickness.  It would make a tremendous blaze, and
the smoke would be likely enough to suffocate the lion even before the
blaze could get at him.  The suggestion of Hendrik was adopted.  They
prepared to fire the house.

There was still a large quantity of rubbish,--the collected firewood
which the locusts had not devoured.  This would enable them to carry out
their purpose; and all three immediately set about hauling it up, and
piling it against the door.

One might almost have fancied that the lion had fathomed their design;
for, although he had been for a long while quite silent, he now
commenced a fresh spell of roaring.  Perhaps the noise of the logs,
striking against the door outside, had set him at it; and, finding
himself thus shut up and baited, he had grown impatient.  What he had
sought as a _shelter_ had been turned into a _trap_, and he was now
anxious to get out of it.  This was evident by the demonstrations he
began to make.  They could hear him rushing about--passing from door to
window--striking both with his huge paws, and causing them to shake upon
their hinges--all the while uttering the most fiendish roars.

Though not without some apprehensions, the three continued their work.
They had their horses at hand, ready to be mounted in case the lion
might make his way through the fire.  In fact, they intended to take to
their saddles--as soon as the fire should be fairly under way--and watch
the conflagration from a safe distance.

They had dragged up all the bush and dry wood, and had piled them in
front of the door.  Swartboy had taken out his flint and steel, and was
about to strike, when a loud scratching was heard from the inside,
unlike anything that had yet reached their ears.  It was the rattling of
the lion's claws against the wall, but it had an odd sound as if the
animal was struggling violently; at the same time his voice seemed
hoarse and smothered, and appeared to come from a distance.

What was the brute doing?

They stood for a moment, looking anxiously in each other's faces.  The
scratching continued--the hoarse growling at intervals--but this ended
at length; and then came a snort, followed by a roar so loud and clear,
that all three started in airtight.  They could not believe that trails
were between them and their dangerous enemy!

Again echoed that horrid cry.  Great Heaven!  It proceeded no longer
from the inside--it came from above them!  Was the lion upon the roof?
All three rushed backward a step or two, and looked up.  A sight was
before them that rendered them almost speechless with surprise and
terror.  Above the funnel of the chimney appeared the head of the lion;
his glaring yellow eyes and white teeth showing more fearful from
contrast with the black soot that begrimed him.  He was dragging his
body up.  One foot was already above the capstone; and with this and his
teeth he was widening the aperture around him.

It was a terrible sight to behold--at least to those below.

As already stated, they _were_ alarmed; and would have taken to their
horses, had they not perceived that the animal had _stuck fast_!

It was evident that this was the case, but it was equally evident that
in a few moments he would succeed in clearing himself from the chimney.
His teeth and claws were hard at work, and the stones and mortar were
flying in all directions.  The funnel would soon be down below his broad
chest, and then--

Von Bloom did not stay to think what then.  He and Hendrik, guns in
hand, ran up near the bottom of the wall.  The chimney was but a score
of feet in height; the long roer was pointed upward, reaching nearly
half that distance.  The yager was also aimed.  Both cracked together.
The lion's eyes suddenly closed, his head shook convulsively, his paw
dropped loose over the capstone, his jaws fell open, and blood trickled
down his tongue.  In a few moments he was dead!

This was apparent to every one.  But Swartboy was not satisfied, until
he had discharged about a score of his arrows at the head of the animal,
causing it to assume the appearance of a porcupine.

So tightly had the huge beast wedged himself, that even after death he
still remained in his singular situation.

Under other circumstances he would have been dragged down for the sake
of his skin.  But there was no time to spare for skinning him; and
without further delay, Von Bloom and his companions mounted their horses
and rode off.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A TALK ABOUT LIONS.

As they rode back they conversed about lions, to beguile the time.  All
of them knew something about these animals; but Swartboy, who had been
born and brought up in the bush, in the very midst of their haunts as it
were, of course was well acquainted with their habits--ay, far better
than Monsieur Buffon himself.

To describe the personal appearance of a lion would be to waste words.
Every one of my readers must know the lion by sight, either from having
seen one in a zoological collection, or the stuffed skin of one in a
museum.  Every one knows the form of the animal, and his great shaggy
mane.  Every one knows, moreover, that the lioness is without this
appendage, and in shape and size differs considerably from the male.

Though there are not two _species_ of lions, there are what are termed
_varieties_, but these differ very little from each other--far less than
the varieties of most other animals.

There are seven acknowledged varieties.  The Barbary lion, the lion of
Senegal, the Indian lion, the Persian, the yellow Cape, the black Cape,
and the maneless lion.

The difference among these animals is not so great, but that at a glance
any one may tell they were all of one species and kind.  The Persian
variety is rather smaller than the others; the Barbary is of darker
brown and heavily maned; the lion of Senegal is of light shining yellow
colour, and thinly maned; while the maneless lion, as its name imports,
is without this appendage.  The existence of the last species is doubted
by some naturalists.  It is said to be found in Syria.

The two Cape lions differ principally in the colour of the mane.  In the
one it is black or dark brown--in the other of a tawny yellow, like the
rest of the body.

Of all lions, those of South Africa are perhaps the largest, and the
black variety the most fierce and dangerous.

Lions inhabit the whole continent of Africa, and the southern countries
of Asia.  They were once common in parts of Europe, where they exist no
longer.  There are no lions in America.  The animal known in
Spanish-American countries as the lion (_leon_) is the cougar or puma
(_Felis concolor_), which is not one-third the lion's size, and
resembles the king of beasts only in being of the same tawny colour.
The puma is not unlike a lion's cub six months old.

Africa is peculiarly the country of the lion.  He is found throughout
the whole extent of that continent--excepting of course a few thickly
inhabited spots, from which he has been expelled by man.

The lion has been called the "king of the forest."  This appears to be a
misnomer.  He is not properly a _forest_ animal.  He cannot climb trees,
and therefore in the forest would less easily procure his food than in
the open plain.  The panther, the leopard, and the jaguar, are all
tree-climbers.  They can follow the bird to its roost, and the monkey to
its perch.  The forest is their appropriate home.  They are forest
animals.  Not so the lion.  It is upon the open plains--where the great
ruminants love to roam, and among the low bushy thickets that skirt
them, that the lion affects to dwell.

He lives upon flesh,--the flesh of many kinds of animals, though he has
his favourites, according to the country in which he is found.  He kills
these animals for himself.  The story of the jackal being his
"provider,"--killing them for him,--is not true.  More frequently he
himself provides the skulking jackals with a meal.  Hence their being
often seen in his company--which they keep, in order to pick up his
"crumbs."

The lion "butchers" for himself, though he will not object to have it
done for him; and will take away their game from wolf, jackal, or
hyena--from the hunter if he can.

The lion is not a fast runner--none of the true _felidae_ are.  Nearly
all the ruminant animals can outrun him.  How, then, does he capture
them?

By stratagem, by the suddenness of his attack, and by the length and
velocity of his bound.  He lies in wait, or steals upon them.  He
springs from his crouching place.  His peculiar anatomical structure
enables him to spring to an immense distance--in fact, to an almost
incredible distance.  Sixteen paces have been alleged by writers, who
say they were eye-witnesses, and carefully measured the leap!

Should he fail to capture his prey at the first bound, the lion follows
it no farther, but turns and trots away in an opposite direction.

Sometimes, however, the intended victim tempts him to a second spring,
and even to a third; but failing then, he is sure to give up the
pursuit.

The lion is not gregarious, although as many as ten or a dozen are often
seen together.  They hunt in company at times, and drive the game
towards one another!

They attack and destroy all other species of animals that inhabit the
country around them--even the strong heavy rhinoceros is not feared by
them, though the latter frequently foils and conquers them.  Young
elephants sometimes become their prey.  The fierce buffalo, the giraffe,
the oryx, the huge eland, and the eccentric gnoo, all have to succumb to
their superior strength and armature.

But they are not universally victorious over these animals.  Sometimes
they are vanquished by one or other of them, and in turn become victims.
Sometimes both combatants leave their bodies upon the scene of the
struggle.

The lion is not hunted as a profession.  His spoils are worthless.  His
skin sells for but little, and he yields no other trophy of any value.
As hunting him is attended with great danger, and the hunter, as already
stated, may avoid him if he wishes, but few lions would be destroyed,
were it not for a certain offensive habit to which they are addicted--
that of robbing the vee-boor of his horses and his cattle.  This brings
a new passion into play,--the vengeance of the farmer; and with such a
motive to urge on the hunt, the lion in some parts is chased with great
zeal and assiduity.

But where there are no cattle-farms, no such motive exists; and there
but little interest is felt in the chase of this animal.  Nay, what is
still stranger: the Bushmen and other poor wandering tribes do not kill
the lion at all, or very seldom.  They do not regard him with feelings
of hostility.  The lion acts towards _them_ as a "provider!"

Hendrik, who had heard of this, asked Swartboy if it was true.

The Bushman answered at once in the affirmative.

His people, he said, were in the habit of watching the lion, or
following his spoor, until they came upon either himself, or the quarry
he had killed.  Sometimes the vultures guided them to it.  When the
"tao" chanced to be on the spot, or had not yet finished his meal, his
trackers would wait, until he had taken his departure, after which they
would steal up and appropriate what remained of the spoil.  Often this
would be the half, or perhaps three parts of some large animal, which
they might have found a difficulty in killing for themselves.

Knowing the lion will rarely attack them, the Bushmen are not much
