
After wandering a short distance he was involved in labyrinths of brick
and mortar, and suddenly became convinced that he was lost.  This was
however a small matter.  To find one's way by asking it is not
difficult, even in London, if one possesses average intelligence.

The first man he stopped was a Scot.  With characteristic caution that
worthy cleared his throat, and with national deliberation repeated
Aspel's query, after which, in a marked tone of regret, he said slowly,
"Weel, sir, I really div not ken."

Aspel thanked him with a sarcastic smile and passed on.  His next effort
was with a countryman, who replied, "Troth, sur, that's more nor I can
tell 'ee," and looked after his questioner kindly as he walked away.  A
policeman appearing was tried next.  "First to the right, sir, third to
the left, and ask again," was the sharp reply of that limb of the
Executive, as he passed slowly on, stiff as a post, and stately as a law
of fate.

Having taken the required turns our wanderer found himself in a
peculiarly low, dirty, and disagreeable locality.  The population was in
keeping with it--so much so that Aspel looked round inquiringly before
proceeding to "ask again."  He had not quite made up his mind which of
the tawdry, half-drunken creatures around him he would address, when a
middle-aged man of respectable appearance, dressed in black, issued from
one of the surrounding dens.

"A city missionary," thought George Aspel, as he approached, and asked
for direction to the abode of a man named Abel Bones.

The missionary pointed out the entrance to the desired abode, and looked
at his questioner with a glance which arrested the youth's attention.

"Excuse me, sir," he said, "but the man you name has a very bad
character."

"Well, what then?" demanded Aspel sharply.

"Oh! nothing.  I only meant to warn you, for he is a dangerous man."

The missionary was a thin but muscular man, with stern black eyes and a
powerful nose, which might have rendered his face harsh if it had not
been more than redeemed by a large firm mouth, round which played lines
that told unmistakably of the milk of human kindness.  He smiled as he
spoke, and Aspel was disarmed.

"Thank you," he said; "I am well able to take care of myself."

Evidently the missionary thought so too, for, with a quiet bow, he
turned and went his way.

At the end of a remarkably dark passage George Aspel ran his head
against a beam and his knee against a door with considerable violence.

"Come in," said a very weak but sweet little voice, as though doors in
that region were usually rapped at in that fashion.

Lifting the latch and entering, Aspel found himself confronted by Tottie
Bones in her native home.

It was a very small, desolate, and dirty home, and barely rendered
visible by a thin "dip" stuck into an empty pint-bottle.

Tottie opened her large eyes wide with astonishment, then laid one of
her dirty little fingers on her rosy lips and looked imploringly at her
visitor.  Thus admonished, he spoke, without knowing why in a subdued
voice.

"You are surprised to see me, Tottie?"

"I'm surprised at nothink, sir.  'Taint possible to surprise me with
anythink in _this_ life."

"D'you expect to be surprised by anything in any other life, Tottie?"
asked Aspel, more amused by the air of the child than by her answer.

"P'r'aps.  Don't much know, and don't much care," said Tottie.

"Well, I've come to ask something," said the youth, sitting down on a
low box for the convenience of conversation, "and I hope, Tottie, that
you'll tell me the truth.  Here's a half-crown for you.  The truth,
mind, whether you think it will please me or not; I don't want to be
pleased--I want the truth."

"I'd tell you the truth without _that_," said Tottie, eyeing the
half-crown which Aspel still held between his fingers, "but hand it
over.  We want a good many o' these things here, bein' pretty hard up at
times."

She spun the piece deftly in the air, caught it cleverly, and put it in
her pocket.

"Well, tell me, now, did you post the letter I gave you the night I took
tea with Miss Lillycrop?"

"Yes, I did," answered the child, with a nod of decision.

"You're telling the truth?"

"Yes; as sure as death."

Poor Tottie had made her strongest asseveration, but it did not convey
to Aspel nearly so much assurance as did the earnest gaze of her bright
and truthful eyes.

"You put it in the pillar?" he continued.

"Yes."

"At the end of the street?"

"Yes, at the end of the street; and oh, you've no idea what an awful
time I was about it; the slit was so high, an' I come down sitch a
cropper w'en it was done!"

"But it went in all right?"

"Yes, all right."

George Aspel sat for some moments in gloomy silence.  He now felt
convinced of that which at first he had only suspected--namely, that his
intending patron was offended because he had not at once called in
person to thank him, instead of doing so by letter.  Probably, also, he
had been hurt by the expressions in the letter to which Philip Maylands
had objected when it was read to him.

"Well, well," he exclaimed, suddenly giving a severe slap to his
unoffending thigh, "I'll have nothing to do with him.  If he's so
touchy--as that comes to, the less that he and I have to say to each
other the better."

"Oh! _please_, sir, hush!" exclaimed Tottie, pointing with a look of
alarm to a bundle which lay in a dark corner, "you'll wake 'im."

"Wake who?"

"Father," whispered the child.

The visitor rose, took up the pint-bottle, and by the aid of its flaring
candle beheld something that resembled a large man huddled together in a
heap on a straw mattress, as he had last fallen down.  His position,
together with his torn and disarranged garments, had destroyed all
semblance to human form save where a great limb protruded.  His visage
was terribly disfigured by the effects of drink, besides being partly
concealed by his matted hair.

"What a wretched spectacle!" exclaimed the young man, touching the heap
with his foot as he turned away in disgust.

Just then a woman with a black eye entered the room with a black bottle
in her hand.  She was the woman who had refused the beer from Aspel.

"Mother," said Tottie, running up to her, "here's the gent who--"

"'Av-'ee-go'-th'-gin?" growled a deep voice from the dark corner.

"Yes, Abel--"

"'Ave 'ee got th' gin, I say, Molly?" roared the voice in rising wrath.

"Yes, yes, Abel, here it is," exclaimed the woman, hastening towards the
corner.

The savage who lay there was so eager to obtain the bottle that he made
a snatch at it and let it slip on the stone floor, where it was broken
to pieces.

"O don't, Abel dear, don't!  I'll get another," pleaded the poor woman;
but Abel's disappointment was too great for endurance; he managed to
rise, and made a wild blow at the woman,--missed her, and staggered into
the middle of the room.  Here he encountered the stern glance of George
Aspel.  Being a dark, stern man himself, with a bulky powerful frame, he
rather rejoiced in the sight of a man who seemed a worthy foe.

"What d'ee wan' here, you long-legged--hah! would you?" he added, on
observing Aspel's face flush and his fists close, "Take that!"

He struck out at his adversary's face with tremendous violence.  Aspel
parried the blow and returned it with such good-will that Abel Bones
went headlong into the dark corner whence he had risen,--and lay there.

"I'm _very_ sorry," said the instantly-repentant George, turning to Mrs
Bones, "but I couldn't help it; really, I--"

"There, there; go away, sir, and thank you kindly," said the unfortunate
woman, urging--almost pushing--her visitor towards the door.  "It'll do
'im good, p'r'aps.  He don't get that every day, an' it won't 'urt 'im."

Aspel found himself suddenly in the dark passage, and heard the door
slammed.  His first impulse was to turn, dash in the door with his foot,
and take vengeance on Abel Bones, his next to burst into a sardonic
laugh.  Thereafter he frowned fiercely, and strode away.  In doing so he
drew himself up with sea-king-like dignity and assaulted a beam, which
all but crushed his hat over his eyes.  This did not improve his temper,
but the beer had not yet robbed him of all self-control; he stooped to
conquer and emerged into the street.

Well was it for George Aspel that his blow had been such an effective
one, for if a riot with Bones had followed the blow, there were numerous
kindred spirits there who would have been only too glad to aid their
chum, and the intruder would have fared badly among them, despite his
physical powers.  As it was, he soon regained a respectable
thoroughfare, and hastened away in the direction of his lodgings.

But a dark frown clouded his brow, for as he went along his thoughts
were busy with what he believed to be the insolent pride of Sir James
Clubley.  He also thought of May Maylands, and the resolution with which
she so firmly yet so gently repelled him.  The latter thought wounded
his pride as well as his feelings deeply.  While in this mood the spirit
of the sea-kings arose within him once again.  He entered a public-house
and had another pot of beer.  It was very refreshing--remarkably so!
True, the tall and stalwart young frame of George Aspel needed no
refreshment at the time, and he would have scorned the insinuation that
he _required_ anything to support him--but--but--it was decidedly
refreshing!  There could be no doubt whatever about that, and it induced
him to take a more amiable view of men in general--of "poor Abel Bones"
in particular.  He even felt less savagely disposed towards Sir James,
though he by no means forgave him, but made up his mind finally to have
nothing more to do with him, while as to May--hope told him flattering
tales.

At this point in his walk he was attracted by one of those traps to
catch the unwary, which are so numerous in London--a music-hall.  George
knew not what it was, and cared not.  It was a place of public
entertainment: that was enough for him.  He wanted entertainment, and in
he went.

It is not our purpose to describe this place.  Enough is told when we
have said that there were dazzling lights and gorgeous scenes, and much
music, and many other things to amuse.  There were also many gentlemen,
but--no ladies.  There was also much smoking and drinking.

Aspel soon observed that he was expected either to drink or smoke.  He
did not wish to do either, but, disliking singularity, ordered a cigar
and a glass of brandy-and-water.  These were followed by another cigar
and another glass.  Towards midnight he had reached that condition when
drink stimulates the desire for more drink.  Being aware, from former
experience, of the danger of this condition, and being, as we have said,
a man of some strength of will, he rose to go.

At the moment a half-tipsy man at the little table next him carelessly
flung the end of his cigar away.  It alighted, probably by accident, on
the top of Aspel's head.

"Hallo, sir!" shouted the enraged youth, starting up and seizing the man
by his collar.

"Hallo, sir!" echoed the man, who had reached his pugnacious cups, "let
go."

He struck out at the same moment.  Aspel would have parried the blow,
but his arm had been seized by one of the bystanders, and it took effect
on his nose, which instantly sent a red stream over his mouth and down
the front of his shirt.

Good-humour and kindliness usually served Aspel in the place of
principle.  Remove these qualities temporarily, and he became an
unguarded savage--sometimes a roaring lion.

With a shout that suspended the entertainments and drew the attention of
the whole house, he seized his adversary, lifted him in the air, and
would infallibly have dashed him on the floor if he had not been caught
in the arms of the crowd.  As it was, the offender went down, carrying
half-a-dozen friends and a couple of tables with their glasses along
with him.

Aspel was prevented from doing more mischief by three powerful
policemen, who seized him from behind and led him into the passage.
There a noisy explanation took place, which gave the offender time to
cool and reflect on his madness.  On his talking quietly to the
policemen, and readily paying for the damage he had done, he was allowed
to go free.  Descending the stair to the street, where the glare of the
entrance-lamps fell full upon him, he felt a sudden sensation of
faintness, caused by the combination of cold air, excitement, drink, and
smoke.  Seizing the railings with one hand, he stood for a moment with
his eyes shut.

Re-opening them, and gazing stupidly before him, he encountered the
horrified gaze of May Maylands!  She had been spending the evening with
Miss Lillycrop, and was on her way home, escorted by Solomon Flint.

"Come along, Miss May," said Solomon, "don't be afraid of 'im.  He can't
'urt you--too far gone for that, bless you.  Come on."

May yielded, and was out of sight in a moment.

Filled with horror, despair, madness, and self-contempt, George Aspel
stood holding on to the railings and glaring into vacuity.  Recovering
himself he staggered home and went to bed.



CHAPTER NINE.

MR. BLURT AND GEORGE ASPEL IN PECULIAR CIRCUMSTANCES.

When a man finds himself in a false position, out of which he sees no
way of escape, he is apt to feel a depression of spirits which reveals
itself in the expression of his countenance.

One morning Mr Enoch Blurt sat on a high stool in his brother's shop,
with his elbows on a screened desk, his chin in his hands, and a grim
smile on his lips.

The shop was a peculiar one.  It had somewhat the aspect of an old
curiosity shop, but the predominance of stuffed birds gave it a
distinctly ornithological flavour.  Other stuffed creatures were there,
however, such as lizards, frogs, monkeys, etcetera, all of which
straddled in attitudes more or less unlike nature, while a few wore
expressions of astonishment quite in keeping with their circumstances.

"Here am I," soliloquised Mr Blurt with a touch of bitterness, "in the
position of a shop-boy, in possession of a shop towards which I
entertain feelings of repugnance, seeing that it has twice ruined my
poor brother, and in regard to the details of which I know absolutely
nothing.  I had fancied I had reached the lowest depths of misfortune
when I became a ruined diamond-merchant, but this is a profounder deep."

"Here's the doctor a-comin' down-stairs, sir," said an elderly female,
protruding her head from the back shop, and speaking in a stage-whisper.

"Very well, Mrs Murridge, let him come," said Mr Blurt recklessly.

He descended from the stool, as the doctor entered the shop looking very
grave.  Every expression, save that of deep anxiety, vanished from Mr
Blurt's face.

"My brother is worse?" he said quickly.

"Not worse," replied the doctor, "but his case is critical.  Everything
will depend on his mind being kept at ease.  He has taken it into his
head that his business is going to wreck while he lies there unable to
attend to it, and asked me earnestly if the shop had been opened.  I
told him I'd step down and inquire."

"Poor Fred!" murmured his brother sadly; "he has too good reason to
fancy his business is going to wreck, with or without his attendance,
for I find that very little is doing, and you can see that the entire
stock isn't worth fifty pounds--if so much.  The worst of it is that his
boy, who used to assist him, absconded yesterday with the contents of
the till, and there is no one now to look after it."

"That's awkward.  We must open the shop how ever, for it is
all-important that his mind should be kept quiet.  Do you know how to
open it, Mr Blurt?"

Poor Mr Blurt looked helplessly at the closed shutters, through a hole
in one of which the morning sun was streaming.  Turning round he
encountered the deeply solemn gaze of an owl which stood on a shelf at
his elbow.

"No, doctor, I know no more how to open it than that idiot there," he
said, pointing to the owl, "but I'll make inquiries of Mrs Murridge."

The domestic fortunately knew the mysterious operations relative to the
opening of a shop.  With her assistance Mr Blurt took off the shutters,
stowed them away in their proper niche, and threw open the door to the
public with an air of invitation, if not hospitality, which deserved a
