At first Frank thought it was a small fish holding itself stationary in
the brook; but that could not be, and he stooped down to see more
clearly. With an exclamation, he dashed his hand into the water and
drew out a rough, irregular nugget nearly two inches in diameter each
way. It was bright yellow in color, and so heavy that there could be no
doubt of its nature.

"It's gold!" he exclaimed in a half-frightened undertone, as he passed
it to Roswell, who was as much excited as he. He "hefted" it and held
it up to the light.

[Illustration: "IT'S GOLD!" HE EXCLAIMED.]

"No mistake, it is. I wonder what it is worth."

"Several hundred dollars at least. I'll bet there are lots more about
here."

They straightway began a vigorous search up and down stream, confident
of finding other similar nuggets, but none was discovered, and finally
they reached the place where their baggage had been left, and where Tim
and Jeff were awaiting them.

"Look!" called the delighted Frank, holding up the nugget. "See what we
found!"

"Begorra, but I shouldn't wonder if that's worth something," remarked
Tim, catching the contagion. Jeff merely smiled and reached out his
hand without any appearance of excitement.

"Let me have a look at it."

He never used glasses, nor did he bring any acid with which to test
such yellow metals as they might find, for he needed neither. He had
been trained too well in his early manhood.

The instant he noted its great weight he was convinced of the truth.
But, without speaking for a minute or two, he turned the nugget over,
held it up to the light, and then put it between his big, sound teeth
as if it were a hickory-nut which he wished to crack. He looked at the
abrasion made by his teeth, tossed the nugget several feet in the air,
and, catching it in his palm as it descended, said:

"That's pure gold. Haven't you any more?"

"No," replied Frank; "we searched, but couldn't find any."

Jeff moved his hand up and down and closed one eye, as if that would
help him to estimate the weight more exactly.

"I should say that it is worth from six to eight hundred dollars; you
younkers have made purty good wages for to-day. I hope," he added
quizzically, "you'll be able to keep it up."

"And how have you made out?" asked Roswell.

"Tim says he didn't come onto anything that looks like pay dirt; but I
struck a spot that gives me hope. We'll locate here for a while."

Of course it was impossible for the party to bring any material with
them from which to construct a dwelling. The regulation miner's cabin
is twelve by fourteen feet, with walls six or seven feet high, and
gables two feet higher. It consists of a single room, with the roof
heavily earthed and the worst sort of ventilation, owing to the small
windows and the necessity of keeping warm in a climate that sometimes
drops to fifty or sixty degrees below zero. The miners keep close
within the cabins during the terrible winter weather, or, if it
permits, they sink a shaft to bed-rock and then tunnel in different
directions. The ground never thaws below a depth of two feet, so there
is no need of shoring to prevent its caving. The pay dirt is brought up
by means of a small windlass and thrown into a heap, where it remains
until spring, when it is washed out.

Since the season was well advanced, the men and boys prepared
themselves to wash the pay dirt whenever found. But, first of all, it
was necessary to establish a home for themselves while they remained in
the region. They had a single axe and a few utensils besides the
shovels, pans, and articles required in their work. While Tim was
prospecting, he gave more attention to searching for a site for a home
than for gold, and was fortunate enough to find a place among the
rocks, which was fitted up quite comfortably. The stone furnished three
and a part of four walls necessary, and they cut branches, which were
spread over the top and covered with dirt for the roof. Owing to the
moderate weather and the trouble from smoke, the fire was kindled on
the outside when required for cooking purposes. The Yukon stove,
because of its weight, was left at Dawson City, whither one of them
expected to go when it became necessary to replenish their stores.
Although the nights were still cold, the weather was comparatively
comfortable. Before long it would become oppressive during the middle
of the day.

As Jeff figured it out, they had enough food, tobacco, and supplies to
last for a couple of weeks, or possibly longer. If they struck a claim
which they wished to stake out, it would be necessary for one of them
to go to Dawson City to register it, the process being quite simple.

The prospector is forbidden to exceed five hundred feet up and down a
stream, following the course of the valley, but the width may run from
base to base of the mountains. Thus a miner's claim is one of the few
things that is often broader than it is long. Should the stream have no
other claims located upon it, the one thus made is known as "the
discovery claim," and the stakes used are marked 0. This claim is the
starting-point, the next one up and the next down the stream being
marked No. 1, and there can be only two such on any stream.

Next, four stakes must be driven in place, each being marked with the
owner's initials and the letters "M. L.," meaning "mining location,"
after which it must be bounded with cross or end lines, and within the
ensuing sixty days the claim has to be filed with the government's
recorder at Dawson City. Should a claim be staked before the discovery
of gold, the prospector has sixty days in which to find the metal. If
he fails to do so in the time mentioned, his claim lapses, since it is
absolutely essential that he shall find gold in order to hold it
permanently.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE CLAIM.


Not the least interesting feature of the stay of our friends in the
gold region was their dwelling during those memorable days. The rocks
came so nearly together that an irregular open space was left, which
averaged a width of twenty feet with a depth slightly less. Thus three
sides and the floor were composed of solid stone. When the roof, as
described, was put in place, the dwelling had the appearance of a
cavern fully open at the front. There the canvas composing the tent was
stretched, and so arranged that the dwelling, as it may be called, was
completed. It was inclosed on all sides, with the door composed of the
flaps of the tent, which could be lowered at night, so that the inmates
were effectually protected against the weather, though had there been
any prowling wild animals or intruding white men near, they would have
had little difficulty in forcing an entrance. It has been explained how
all trouble from the smoke of a fire was avoided.

One of the peculiarities of this primitive house was its interior
arrangement. There were so many projecting points on the walls that
they were utilized as pegs upon which to hang the extra garments. A
ledge a couple of feet above the floor served as a couch, upon which
the boys spread their blankets, while the men laid theirs on the floor
itself. The mining and cooking utensils were neatly arranged against
the rear wall, where were piled the small canvas bags intended to
contain the gold dust and nuggets that were to be gathered.

Jeff expressed the truth when he said:

"This will sarve us well while the weather is moderate; but if we
should be here when the thermometer goes down to fifty or sixty degrees
below zero, we'd turn into icicles before we could say Jack Robinson."

Hardly pausing to place their house in order, the party set out to
investigate the find which Jeff hoped he had made.

Going up the stream for a short distance, they turned off into a narrow
valley, which never would have attracted the attention of the boys.

The old miner stood for some minutes attentively studying his
surroundings, and then, instead of beginning to dig, as his companions
expected him to do, he said with an expression of disgust:

"Boys, I've made a mistake; there's no gold here."

"How can you tell until you search?" asked the astonished Roswell.

"It ain't what I thought it was; you don't find the stuff in places
like this. There's no use of wasting time; come on."

Wondering at his action, the three, smiling but silent, trailed after
him. Climbing over some intervening bowlders, they shortly emerged into
a place altogether different from any they had yet seen. It was a
valley two or three hundred feet in width, with the sides gently
sloping. There was no snow on the ground, and here and there a few
green blades of grass could be seen sprouting from the fertile soil.
Through the middle of this valley meandered a stream eight or ten feet
in width, but shallow, and so clear that the bottom could be plainly
seen while yet some distance away. The valley itself soon curved out of
sight above, and it was impossible, therefore, to guess its extent in
that direction. Below it terminated, not far from where they stood, the
rocks coming together so as to form a small canon, through which the
creek rushed with a velocity that reminded them of the dangerous ones
they had passed on their way from Chilkoot Pass.

"Wait here a bit," said Jeff, as he started toward the stream. The
others obeyed, watching his actions with interest.

He strode to the creek, along which he walked a few rods, his head bent
as he carefully scrutinized all that passed under his eye. Suddenly he
stopped and stared as if he had found that for which he was looking.
Then stooping down, he leaned as far out as he could, gathered a
handful of the gravelly soil, and put it in the washer which he had
taken with him. This was repeated several times. Then he dipped the pan
so as nearly to fill it with water, after which he whirled it round
several times with a speed that caused some of the water to fly out.
That part of his work completed, he set down the pan which served as a
washer, and walked rapidly back toward his friends.

"Another disappointment," remarked Frank; "it isn't as easy to find
gold as we thought."

"I don't know about that," said Tim McCabe. "Jiff looks to me as if he
has hit on something worth while. How is it, Jiff?" he called as the
old miner drew near.

"That's our claim," he replied; "we'll stake it out, and then I'm going
to Dawson to file it."

"Are you sure there is gold here?" asked Roswell, in some excitement.

"Yes, I hit it this time. We mustn't lose any days in staking it out,
or somebody else will get ahead of us."

The assurance of Jeff imparted confidence to the rest. The stakes were
cut and driven, according to the rule already stated, and then Jeff
breathed more freely.

"We've got sixty days to find the stuff," he said, "and nobody daren't
say a word to us. All the same, I'm going to Dawson to file the claim
and make things dead sure."

"When will you go?"

"Now, right off. I want to bring back some things with me, and I'll be
gone two or three days, but I won't lose no time."

Jeff was one of those men who do not require long to make up their
minds, and whom, having reached a decision, nothing can turn aside from
its execution. Ten minutes later he was hurrying toward Dawson City,
forty miles or more distant.

Inasmuch as Tim McCabe had practical knowledge of placer mining, the
three decided to improve the time while Jeff was absent in taking out
some of the gold which he assured them was there.

As has been explained, this form of mining is of the crudest and
cheapest nature. In winter, after sinking a shaft to bed-rock, tunnels
are run in different directions, and the frozen dirt piled up until
warm weather permits its washing out. The distance to bed-rock varies
from four to twenty feet. The gold is found in dust, grains, and
nuggets, the last varying from the size of a hickory-nut or larger to
small grains of pure gold.

It quite often occurs that the bed-rock is seamy, with many small
depressions. It is supposed that when the _debris_ containing the
original gold swept over this bed-rock, the great weight of the metal
caused it to fall and lodge in the crevices, where it has lain for
ages. Certain it is that the richest finds have been made in such
places.

Having fixed upon the spot where the work should begin, Tim McCabe and
the boys set to work to clear off the coarse gravel and stone from a
patch of ground. At the end of several hours they had completed enough
to begin operations. Tim dropped a few handfuls of the finer gravel or
sand into his pan, which was a broad, shallow dish of sheet iron. Then
water was dipped into the pan until it was full, when he whirled it
swiftly about and up and down. This allowed the gold, on account of its
greater specific gravity, to fall to the bottom, while the sand itself
was floated off by the agitation. Tim had learned the knack of dipping
the pan sideways, so as gradually to get rid of the worthless stuff,
while the heavy yellow particles remained below.

The boys stood attentively watching the operation, which was carried on
with such skill that by and by nothing was left in the bottom but the
yellow and black particles. The latter were pulverized magnetic iron
ore, which almost always accompanies the gold. Frank's and Roswell's
eyes sparkled as they saw so much of the yellow particles, even though
it looked almost as fine as the black sand.

[Illustration: THE BOYS STOOD ATTENTIVELY WATCHING THE OPERATION.]

"How will you separate them?" asked Frank.

"Now ye'll obsarve the use that that cask is to be put to," replied
Tim, "if ye'll oblige me by filling the same with water."

This was done, when Tim flung about a pound of mercury into the cask,
after which he dumped into it the black and yellow sand. As soon as the
gold came in contact with the mercury it formed an amalgam.

"This will do to start things," said Tim. "When we have enough to make
it pay, we'll squaze it through a buckskin bag."

"What is the result?"

"Nearly all the mercury will ooze through the bag, and we can use the
same agin in the cask. The impure goold will be placed on a shovel and
held over a hot fire till the mercury has gone off in vapor, and only
the pure goold is lift, or rather there's just a wee bit of the mercury
still hanging 'bout the goold; but we'll make a big improvement whin
Jiff comes back. The filing of this claim ain't the only thing that
takes him to Dawson City."

"What do you think of the deposit here?"

"I b'lave it's one of the richest finds in the Kloondike counthry, and
if it turns out as it promises, we shall go home and live like
gintlemen the rist of our lives."




CHAPTER XVII.

A GOLDEN HARVEST.


Tim McCabe and the boys wrought steadily through the rest of the day
and the following two days. Inasmuch as the summer sun in the Klondike
region does not thaw the soil to a greater depth than two feet, it was
necessary to pile wood upon the earth and set it afire. As this
gradually dissolved the frozen ground, the refuse dirt was cleared
away, so as to reach paying earth or gravel. The results for a time
were disappointing. The gold-hunters secured a good deal of yellow
grains or dust, and ordinarily would have been satisfied, but naturally
they were greedy for more.

There came times of discouragement, when the boys began to doubt the
truth of the wonderful stories that had reached them from the Klondike
region, or they thought that if perchance the reports were true, they
themselves and their friends had not hit upon a productive spot. Tim,
when appealed to, had little to say, but it was of a hopeful nature. It
would have been unnatural had he not been absorbed in the work in hand.

That there was gold was undeniable, for the evidence was continually
before them, but the question was whether it was to be found in paying
quantities upon their claim. At the close of the second day all they
had gathered was not worth ten dollars.

But the harvest rewarded them on the third day. Tim was working hard
and silently, when he suddenly leaped to his feet, flung down his pick,
and hurling his cap in the air, began dancing a jig and singing an
Irish ditty. The boys looked at him in amazement, wondering whether he
had bidden good-by to his senses.

"Do ye obsarve that beauty?" he asked, stopping short and holding up a
yellow nugget as large as the one the boys had taken from the brook
several days before. Roswell and Frank hurried up to him and examined
the prize. There could be no doubt that it was virgin gold and worth
several hundred dollars.

Twenty minutes later it was Roswell's turn to hurrah, for he came upon
one almost as large. And he did hurrah, too, and his friends joined in
with a vigor that could not be criticised. Congratulating one another,
the three paused but a few minutes to inspect the finds, when they were
digging harder than ever.

"I think it is my turn," remarked Frank; "you fellows are becoming so
proud, that if I don't find--by George, _I have found it_!"

Incredible as it seemed, it was true, and Frank's prize was larger than
any of the others. Instantly they were at work again, glowing with hope
and delight. No more nuggets were taken out that day, but the gravel
revealed greater richness than at any time before.

Jeff Graham put in an appearance while they were eating supper, and, to
the surprise of all, he was riding a tough little burro, which he had
bought at Dawson for five hundred dollars. His eyes sparkled when he
learned what had been done during his absence, but he quietly remarked,
"I knowed it," and having turned his animal loose, after unloading him,
he asked for the particulars.

Although it was quite cold, the four remained seated on the bowlders
outside of their primitive dwelling, the men smoking their pipes and
discussing the wonderful success they had had, and the still greater
that was fairly within their grasp.

"We're not so much alone as I thought," remarked Jeff, "for there are
fifty miners to the east and north, and some of them ain't far from
where we've staked out our claim, and more are coming."

"They can't interfere with us?" was the inquiring remark of Roswell.

"Not much. As a rule, folks don't file their claims till they've struck
onto a spot where the yaller stuff shows; but I've done both, 'cause I
was sartin that we'd hit it rich. If anybody tried to jump our claim,
the first thing I'd do would be to shoot him; then I'd turn him over to
the mounted police that are looking after things all through this
country."

"Ye mane that ye'd turn over what was lift of his remains," suggested
Tim gravely.

"It would amount to that. Things are in better shape here than they was
in the old times in Californy, where a man had to fight for what he
had, and then he wasn't always able to keep it."

"What do you intend to do with the burro?" asked Frank.

"Let him run loose till we need him. He brought a purty good load of
such things as we want, and I'm hoping he'll have another kind of load
to take back," was the significant reply of the old miner.

This was the nearest Jeff came to particulars. His natural reserve as
to what he had done and concerning his plans for the future prevented
any further enlightenment. The fact that they had neighbors at no great
distance was both pleasing and displeasing. Despite the assurance of
their leader, there was some misgiving that when the richness of the
find became known an attempt would be made to rob them. Gold will
incite many men to commit any crime, and with the vast recesses of the
Rocky Mountain spur behind them, the criminals might be ready to take
desperate chances.

It was hardly light the next morning when the party were at it again.
The pan or hand method of washing the gold is so slow and laborious
that with the help and superintendence of Jeff a "rocker" was set up.
This was a box about three feet long and two wide, made in two parts.
The upper part was shallow, with a strong sheet-iron bottom perforated
with quarter-inch holes. In the middle of the other part of the box was
an inclined shelf, which sloped downward for six or eight inches at the
lower end. Over this was placed a piece of heavy woollen blanket, the
whole being mounted upon two rockers, like those of an ordinary child's
cradle. These were rested on two strong blocks of wood to permit of
their being rocked readily.

This device was placed beside the running stream. As the pay dirt was
shovelled into the upper shallow box, one of the party rocked it with
one hand while with the other he ladled water. The fine particles with
the gold fell through the holes upon the blanket, which held the gold,
while the sand and other matter glided over it to the bottom of the
box, which was so inclined that what passed through was washed down and
finally out of the box. Thin slats were fixed across the bottom of the
box, with mercury behind them, to catch such particles of gold as
escaped the blanket.

The stuff dug up by our friends was so nuggety that many lumps remained
in the upper box, where they were detained by their weight, while the
lighter stuff passed through, and the smaller lumps were held by a
deeper slat at the further end of the bottom of the box. When the
blanket became surcharged with wealth it was removed and rinsed in a
barrel of water, the particles amalgamating with the mercury in the
bottom of the barrel.

Sluicing requires plenty of running water with considerable fall, and
is two or three times as rapid as the method just described, but since
it was not adopted by our friends, a description need not be given.

At the end of a week Jeff, with the help of his companions, made a
careful estimate of the nuggets and sand which they had gathered and
stowed away in the cavern where they slept and took their meals. As
nearly as they could figure it out the gold which they had collected
was worth not quite one hundred thousand dollars--very fair wages, it
will be conceded, for six days' work by two men and two boys. On Sunday
they conscientiously abstained from labor, though it can hardly be said
that their thoughts were elsewhere.

Since one hundred thousand dollars in gold weighs in the neighborhood
of four hundred pounds, it will be seen that the party had already
accumulated a good load to be distributed among themselves. It may have
been that the expectation of this result caused Jeff to bring the burro
back, for with his help it would not be hard to carry double the
amount, especially as everything else would be left behind.

To the surprise of his friends, Jeff announced that it was necessary
for him to make another visit to Dawson City. It was important business
that called him thither, but he gave no hint of its nature. He hoped to
be back within two or three days, and he departed on foot, leaving the
animal to recuperate, and, as he grimly added, "make himself strong
enough to carry a good load to town."

Jeff left early in the morning. The afternoon was about half gone, when
Tim with an expression of anxious concern announced that he had just
remembered something which required him to go to Dawson without an
hour's delay.

"It's queer that I didn't think of the same while Jiff was here," he
said, "so that he might have enj'yed the plisure of me society, but it
won't be hard for me to find him after I git there. Ye byes wont be
scared of being lift to yersilves fur a few days?" he asked with so
much earnestness that they hastened to assure him he need have no
misgivings on that point.

"We shall keep hard at it while you are away, but since Jeff is also
absent we shall be lonely."

"Luk fur me very soon. I'll advise Jiff to make ye an extra allowance
for yer wurruk while him and me is doing nothing."

Two hours after the departure of McCabe, Frank, who was working the
rocker while his chum was shovelling in the dirt, suddenly stopped,
with expanding eyes.

"I have just thought what Tim's business is at Dawson."

[Illustration: "I HAVE JUST THOUGHT WHAT TIM'S BUSINESS IS AT DAWSON,"
SAID FRANK.]

"What is it?"

"It is his longing for drink. He has gone on a spree, taking one of his
nuggets with him to pay the cost. Jeff will be sure to run across him,
and then there will be music."




CHAPTER XVIII.

A STARTLING DISCOVERY.
