interrupted the general flow of business.

At the Bab-Azoun gate, which occupied a position not many yards distant
from the spot on which now stands the principal theatre of Algiers, Ali
left Ted Flaggan for a few minutes, begging him to wait until he had
transacted a piece of business in the market held just outside the gate.

"Tell me before ye go, Ally, what may be the use of them three big hooks
close to the gate," said Flaggan, pointing upwards.

"Them's for throwin' down teeves an' murderers on to.--You stay here; me
not be wery long come back."

Rais Ali hurried away, leaving the sailor to observe and moralise on all
that passed around him.  And there was a good deal to induce thought in
one who had been accustomed to comparatively humane laws and merciful
dispensations in his native land, for, besides the scene which he had
just witnessed, and the huge hooks whose uses had just been explained to
him, he now noticed that several conspicuous places near him were
garnished with the heads of malefactors who had been recently executed.
He observed, also, that the innumerable donkeys which were being
constantly driven past him, overladen with market produce, were covered
with open sores, and that these sores appeared to be selected for
special flagellation when the brutal drivers wished to urge the wretched
creatures on.

He stood thus for some time watching with interest the throng of Turks,
Jews, Moors, negroes, and others that continually streamed to and fro,
some on foot, some on horseback, and others, especially the men with
marketable commodities, on mules and donkeys.  It was not difficult for
him to distinguish between the races, for Rais Ali had already told him
that none but Turks were permitted to wear the turban, not even the sons
of Turks by Algerine mothers, and that the Jews were by law commanded to
dress in sombre black.

Suddenly he observed a body of men advancing towards the gate, carrying
something in their arms, and followed by an orderly crowd at a
respectful distance.  With the curiosity of an idler he approached, and
found that they bore a man, who was firmly bound hand and foot.  The man
was a Moor, and the anxious look of his pale face showed that he was
about to suffer punishment of some kind.

The seaman mingled with the crowd and looked on.

Laying the man on the ground with his face downwards, the officers of
justice sent away two of their number, who speedily returned with a
blacksmith's anvil and forehammer.  On this they placed one of their
victim's ankles, and Flaggan now saw, with a sickening heart, that they
were about to break it with the ponderous hammer.  One blow sufficed to
crush the bones in pieces, and drew from the man an appalling shriek of
agony.  Pushing his leg farther on the anvil, the executioner broke it
again at the shin, while the other officials held the yelling victim
down.  A third blow was then delivered on the knee, but the shriek that
followed was suddenly cut short in consequence of the man having
fainted.  Still the callous executioner went on with his horrible task,
and, breaking the leg once more at the thigh, proceeded to go through
the same process with the other leg, and also with the arms.  When
twelve blows had thus been delivered, the writhing of the wretched
victim proved that he was still alive, though his labouring chest was
now incapable of giving vent to his agony in shrieks.

We would not describe such a scene as this were it not certainly true;
and we relate it, reader, not for the purpose of harrowing your
feelings, but for the sake of showing what diabolical deeds we men are
capable of, unless guarded therefrom by the loving and tender _spirit_
of Jesus Christ.  We say "spirit" advisedly, for we are well aware that
false professors of that blessed name have, many a time, committed deeds
even more horrible than that which we have just described.

Unable to bear the sight longer, the sailor turned and hurried away from
the spot.

Fortunately he met Rais Ali just outside the crowd.

"Come, lad, come," he cried, seizing that boastful man by the arm, in
such a grasp that Rais turned pale with alarm.  "I can't stop here.
Let's git away.  Sure it's divls they must be, an' not men!"

Blindly dragging the interpreter along by main force through several
streets, Flaggan stopped suddenly at last to recover breath and to wipe
the perspiration from his brow.

"Don't ask me wot I've seen," he said, to Ali's inquiries, "I can't
a-bear to think on it.  God help me!  I wish I could wipe it out of me
brain intirely.  Come along, let's finish our business, an' git out o'
this cursed place."

Proceeding rapidly and in silence towards the street at the base of the
triangular town, which followed the line of ramparts that faced the sea,
they discovered the great man of whom they were in search, Sidi Omar,
walking up and down with the cadi, or chief judge, to whose daughter he
was to be united on the following day.

"It won't do to 'trupt 'em jus' yit.  Hold on a littil," said Rais Ali
to his companion.

Ted Flaggan had no objection to "hold on," for the sight of the ocean
with its fresh breezes cooled his brow, and tended to turn his mind away
from the horrible thoughts that filled it.

While they are waiting, let you and me, reader, listen to the conclusion
of the converse held between the bridegroom and father-in-law.

The cadi was a stern old Turk, with a long grey beard.  The son-in-law
elect was, as we have elsewhere said, an ill-favoured elderly man with
only one eye.  He did not look quite so happy as one would have expected
in a bridegroom so near his wedding-day, but that was to be accounted
for, to some extent, by the fact that he already possessed four wives,
and was naturally somewhat used to weddings.

"No, no," said he, in a cautious tone, to the judge; "it won't do to be
hasty about it, Achmet is too popular at present."

"What has that to do with the question?" asked the cadi, in a tone of
contempt.  "If our party be strong enough we have only to strike; and I
tell you that I believe it to be quite strong enough."

"I know it," returned Omar impatiently, "but I also know that my enemy,
Sidi Hassan, is more than usually on the alert just now; I think it well
to delay for a time.  Besides," he added, smiling, "you surely would not
have me begin a revolution on the very eve of my marriage!"

"I would have you lose as little time as possible," replied the cadi.
"But see, if I mistake not, these two men are eyeing us rather
narrowly."

Seeing that they were observed, Rais Ali advanced, and, with a low
salaam, delivered his message to Sidi Omar, who gave him the necessary
reply, and dismissed him.

Resuming their conference, the two magnates turned to saunter along the
street, when Omar observed a dark object like a dog, coiled up in an
angle of the parapet.  Poking it with his cane, he caused it to uncoil
and display the vacant, features of a half-witted negro boy.  The poor
creature fell on his knees in alarm on seeing the well-known face of
Sidi Omar, but sprang to his feet with alacrity, and ran off at full
speed on being sternly told to "be gone."

Meanwhile Rais Ali led his friend safely through the Bab-el-Oued gate,
and, turning his face in the right direction said--

"Now, you git 'ome, fast.  Keep 'er steady--a point morer to the
westward--so, yoo can't go wrong."

Instead of obeying orders, Ted Flaggan turned, and, with an amused
smile, watched the retreating figure of the interpreter.  Then, after
sauntering on some distance in a reverie, he stopped and gazed long and
earnestly at the pirate city, whose white-washed domes and minarets
gleamed in the sunshine like marble, contrasting beautifully with the
bright green of the Sahel hills behind, and the intense blue of the sky
and sea.

"A whited sepulchre!" muttered the seaman, with a frown, as he turned
away and pushed forward at a rapid pace towards the residence of the
British consul.



CHAPTER NINE.

DESCRIBES A MOORISH BRIDE, A WEDDING, AND A METAMORPHOSIS, BESIDES
INDICATING A PLOT.

On the following morning Mrs Langley set out on horseback for the
palace of the cadi, to attend the wedding of his daughter with Sidi
Omar, and, true to her promise, turned aside on the way to pay a visit
to the imprisoned bride of Rais Ali.

She was accompanied, of course, by the remarkable bridegroom himself,
and also by her husband's janissary, Sidi Hassan, as well as by her
daughter Agnes, who rode a spirited Arab pony.

Immediately on entering the gate of the city, Rais and the ladies
dismounted, and leaving their horses in charge of a groom, ascended on
foot one of the narrow streets of the town.  So steep was this street
that it consisted of a flight of broad steps, which led ultimately to
the casba, or citadel, at the upper part of the town.  But before they
had ascended it very far, the interpreter diverged into a cross street,
which was much narrower.  It terminated in a _cul-de-sac_, at the bottom
of which stood the door of Rais Ali's town residence.

And a remarkable door it was, made of thick oaken planks, studded with
enormous nails, the heads of which were as large as a half-crown.  Just
above it there was a square hole grated with thick iron bars, which
served to enlighten the gloomy passage within.

Applying the key before mentioned to this door, Rais threw it open and
bade the visitors enter.

Having carefully shut and re-locked the door, the interpreter led them
through a narrow passage, which terminated in the usual square court of
Moorish houses.  This was very small, and, like all such courts, had no
roof, so that a pleasant gleam of sunshine flickered through the
creepers which twined up its pillars and gleamed on the drops that fell
from a tinkling fountain in the centre.

Entering an open doorway on the right of the court, the interpreter led
the way up a flight of marble steps to the second storey of the house.
A small gallery, such as one sees in public libraries in England, ran
round the four sides of the building over the balustrade, of which one
could look down on the leafy court with its ever singing _jet d'eau_.
The windows of the several private, apartments opened upon this gallery.

In the centre of one side of the square was a large open doorway, in the
form of a Moorish arch, by which entrance was obtained into a little
extremely ornate apartment.  The dome-shaped roof of this boudoir was
lighted by four little holes filled with stained-glass, and the walls
were covered with beautifully painted tiles.  Rich ornaments of various
Eastern and fanciful kinds were strewn about, and valuable Persian rugs
covered the marble floor.

On an ottoman, in the centre of all, sat Rais Ali's bride, cross-legged,
and on a cushion before her lay the cat, her only companion.

She was clothed in garments of the richest description, which glittered
with gold embroidery and jewels.  Seated thus, stroking the cat, and
with a self-satisfied smile on her fat pretty face, she seemed the very
personification of contentment.  Her soft brown neck was almost hidden
with rows of pearls, and long rows of the same jewels depended from the
high filigree cap which towered above her head.  Her dress consisted of
three open jackets or short caftans, one above the other, without
sleeves.  These were profusely garnished with gold lace, and fastened
only at the waist.  White linen trousers or drawers covered her limbs to
the ankles, but these were so immensely wide as to bear more resemblance
to female drapery than to the masculine appendages which their name
suggests.  A silken, gold-striped shawl was fastened by two corners
round her waist, and hung down in front like an apron.  Sleeves of fine
embroidered muslin and of great width covered her arms.  Her little feet
and ankles were bare, but the latter were ornamented with several thick
gold leglets.  In each ear she wore five large round ear-rings, two of
these fitting into two holes in the lower, and three into the upper part
of the ear.  One awkward result of this was that the upper ear-rings
pulled the ears down, and made them pendent like those of a poodle!

The visitors having been introduced, Madam Rais Ali received them with a
good-humoured stare, but said nothing.  Mrs Langley then tried to
engage her in conversation, but Mrs Ali continued to stare and smile
without speaking, for the good reason that she understood neither French
nor English.  Requesting Ali to interpret, Mrs Langley then put one or
two questions.  The bride turned her large dark eyes on her husband
while he was speaking, and then, instead of replying, turned them on her
visitors and laughed.  Whereupon little Agnes, unable to control
herself, also laughed; this unhinged Mrs Langley, who laughed likewise,
and Rais Ali followed suit from sympathy.

After this satisfactory ebullition, Mrs Langley again essayed to induce
conversation, but beyond yes, no, and a laugh, she could draw forth
nothing whatever from the bride, whose mind, in regard to all things
terrestrial, with the exception of household affairs, was a perfect
blank.  Mohammedan females are treated by their lords like babies.  They
receive no education worthy of the name, and are therefore apt to be
childish in their ideas.

After one or two fruitless attempts, the visitors took leave of the
happy bride, who was thereupon locked up again by her jealous husband,
and left to her own resources and the cat.

Returning to the place where their steeds had been left, the party
re-mounted, and proceeded to the palace of the cadi.

This palace, being situated in one of the narrow lanes of the town, had
a very undignified and dull exterior.  Indeed, no one could have
imagined it to be a palace, but for the spiral columns of marble and
other rich and costly carving around the entrance.  Inside, however, the
aspect of things was more in keeping with the dignity of the owner.

The lady and her daughter were ushered into a little square hall, in
which several guards were seated, cross-legged, on small stone seats or
niches round the walls, smoking long pipes.  Beyond this was the
principal entrance-hall or antechamber of the palace.  It was gorgeous
in marble pillars, stucco designs, horse-shoe arches, and other
Mooresque decorations.  Here a large party of officials and friends were
moving about.  Beyond this, they came to the square court, which is the
same in general arrangements, in all Moorish houses, though, of course,
not in size or luxury of detail.

Here the cadi himself met his guests, and conducted them to the suite of
chambers on the second storey, which were devoted to the ladies.  At the
principal entrance to these they were received by the cadi's wife, and,
with much display of friendliness and affection, were conducted into the
harem--that mysterious retreat which, in a Mohammedan household, is
never entered by mortal man, except the lord thereof.

It was Mrs Langley's first visit to such a scene, and, although she had
been prepared for something magnificent, the gorgeous nature of
everything far surpassed her expectations.  The rooms, indeed, were
small, being, like those of all Moorish dwellings, rather long and
narrow, with recesses or antechambers.  Some of these latter had
dome-shaped roofs, with little coloured glass skylights, such as we have
already described, and were delightfully snug retreats.  The walls and
ceilings of all the apartments were profusely ornamented, and the
hangings and furniture were of the richest material.

On a silken couch, at the farther end of one of these small apartments,
sat the bride, Zara, youngest daughter of the cadi, and a lovely girl of
nineteen.  Poor Zara!  Her history--not by any means an uncommon one in
that land--goes to prove that Mohammedan women, far more than English,
have need of a "Women's Rights Society."

Zara was already a widow with two beautiful children!  Her first
husband, to whom she had been married without her inclination being
consulted, had been strangled.

It was afterwards proved that he was innocent of the crime for which he
had suffered, but that gave very little pain to the consciences of those
who had strangled him, partly because their consciences were callous,
and partly because they regarded the event as one of the decrees of
"Fate."

After his death it became necessary that another husband should be found
for Zara.  She, poor creature, would have been thankful to have remained
in a state of widowed felicity; but this was not deemed proper by her
wealthy relatives.  Of course it was not difficult to find a suitor
where a pretty girl was the hook, and a large dower the bait.  Sidi Omar
came forward, and all the relatives said that it was an excellent
match--all save one, Zara's eldest sister, Hanyfa.

Hanyfa was--to speak plainly--a bad girl.  She was one of the wives of a
great officer of state--in other words, a particularly noted pirate--
named Sidi Hamet.  Now, Hamet was the Aga or commander-in-chief of the
cavalry.  He was an ambitious man, and a rival of Sidi Omar in this
respect.  Of course he hated Omar, and so did his wife Hanyfa, hence her
objection to him as her sister's husband.  But neither she nor Hamet
could stay the marriage; they therefore made up their minds to endure
it.

One thing that struck and surprised Mrs Langley was the extreme
fairness of many of the Moorish ladies; some of whom were quite as fair
as Europeans, and very beautiful, with much finer eyes than those of the
more northern belles.

Having laid aside the shroud-like veils which Moorish ladies wear when
exposed to the slightest chance of meeting the gaze of man, they now
stood confessed in all the magnificence of Oriental taste.  It is
impossible to describe the dazzling splendour of the jewels with which
their costumes absolutely blazed; especially those in the little golden
caps, or salmas, which some of them wore.  There were bouquets of roses,
jessamine, peacock's-feathers, and butterflies, formed of diamonds,
rubies, emeralds, and other precious gems.  We do not draw on our
imagination here, good reader.  It is probable that if a comparison had
