
"Well, Angut is there.  I hate Angut!"

"So do I," said Ippegoo, with emphasis quite equal to that of his
master.

"And Nunaga is there," continued Ujarak.  "I--I love Nunaga!"

"So do I," exclaimed Ippegoo fervently, but seeing by the wizard's
majestic frown that he had been precipitate, he took refuge in the hasty
explanation--"Of course I mean that--that--I love her because _you_ love
her.  I do not love her for herself.  If _you_ did not love her, I would
hate her.  To me she is not of so much value as the snout of a seal."

The wizard seemed pacified, for his frown relaxed, and after a few
moments' thought he went on savagely--

"Angut also loves Nunaga."

"The madman! the insolent! the fool!" exclaimed Ippegoo; "what can he
expect but death?"

"Nothing else, and nothing less," growled the wizard, clenching his
teeth--"_if_ he gets her!  But he shall never get her!  I will stop
that; and that is why I ask you to listen--for you must be ready to act,
and in haste."

As Ippegoo began to entertain uncomfortable suspicions that the wizard
was about to use him as an instrument of vengeance, he made no response
whatever to the last remark.

"Now," continued his master, "you will go to the hut of Okiok.  Enter it
hurriedly, and say to Nunaga that her father's grandmother, Kannoa, is
ill--ill in her mind--and will not rest till she comes to see her.  Take
a small sledge that will only hold her and yourself; and if Okiok or
Angut offer to go with you, say that old Kannoa wants to see the girl
alone, that there is a spell upon her, that she is bewitched, and will
see no one else.  They will trust you, for they know that your mind is
weak and your heart good."

"If my mind is weak," said Ippegoo somewhat sadly, "how can I ever
become an angekok?"

With much affectation of confidence, the wizard replied that there were
two kinds of men who were fit to be angekoks--men with weak minds and
warm hearts, or men with strong minds and cold hearts.

"And have you the strong mind?" asked Ippegoo.

"Yes, of course, very strong--and also the cold heart," replied Ujarak.

"But how can that be," returned the pupil, with a puzzled look, "when
your heart is warmed by Nunaga?"

"Because--because," rejoined the wizard slowly, with some hesitation and
a look of profound wisdom, "because men of strong mind do not love as
other men.  They are quite different--so different that you cannot
understand them."

Ippegoo felt the reproof, and was silent.

"So, when you have got Nunaga on the sledge," resumed Ujarak, "you will
drive her towards the village; but you will turn off at the Cliff of
Seals, and drive at full speed to the spot where I speared the white
bear last moon.  You know it?"

"Yes; near Walrus Bay?"

"Just so.  There you will find me with two sledges.  On one I will drive
Nunaga away to the far-south, where the Innuit who have much iron dwell.
On the other you will follow.  We will live there for ever.  They will
be glad to receive us."

"But--but--" said Ippegoo hesitatingly, and with some anxiety, for he
did not like to differ on any point from his master--"I cannot leave
my--my mother!"

"Why not?"

"I suppose it is because I love her.  You know you told me that the weak
minds have warm hearts--and my mind must be very, very weak indeed, for
my heart is _very_ warm--quite hot--for my mother."

The wizard perceived that incipient rebellion was in the air, so, like a
wise man, a true angekok, he trimmed his sails accordingly.

"Bring your mother with you," he said abruptly.

"But she won't come."

"Command her to come."

"Command my _mother_!" exclaimed Ippegoo, in amazement.

Again the wizard was obliged to have recourse to his wisdom in order to
subdue this weak mind.

"Yes, of course," he replied; "tell your mother that your torngak--no,
you haven't got one yet--that Ujarak's torngak--told him in a vision
that a visit to the lands of the far-south would do her good, would
remove the pains that sometimes stiffen her joints, and the cough that
has troubled her so much.  So you will incline her to obey.  Go, tell
her to prepare for a journey; but say nothing more, except that I will
call for her soon, and take her on my sledge.  Away!"

The peremptory tone of the last word decided the poor youth's wavering
mind.  Without a word more he ran to the place where his dogs were
fastened, harnessed them to his sledge, and was soon driving furiously
back to the Eskimo village over the frozen sea, while the wizard
returned to the place where the hunters of his tribe were still busy
hauling in the carcases of seals and other game, which they had
succeeded in killing in considerable numbers.

Approaching one of the band of hunters, which was headed by the jovial
Simek, and had halted for the purpose of refreshment, Ujarak accosted
them with--

"Have the young men become impatient women, that they cannot wait to
have their food cooked?"

"Ha! _ha_!" laughed Simek, holding up a strip of raw and bloody seal's
flesh, with which he had already besmeared the region of his mouth and
nose; "Yes, we have become like women; we know what is good for us, and
take it when we need it, not caring much about the cooking.  My young
men are hungry.  Must they wait till the lamps are lighted before they
eat?  Come, Ujarak, join us.  Even an angekok may find a bit of good fat
seal worth swallowing.  Did you not set them free?  You deserve a bit!"

There was a spice of chaff as well as jollity in the big Eskimo's tone
and manner; but he was such a gushing fellow, and withal so powerful,
that the wizard deemed it wise not to take offence.

"It is not long since I fed," he replied, with a grim smile; "I have
other work on hand just now."

"I also have work--plenty of it; and I work best when stuffed full."

So saying, Simek put a full stop, as it were, to the sentence with a
mass of blubber, while the wizard went off, as he said, to consult his
torngak as to state affairs of importance.

Meanwhile Ippegoo went careering over the ice, plying his long-lashed
whip with the energy of a man who had pressing business on hand.

Arrived at the village, he sought his mother's hut.  Kunelik, as his
mother was named, was seated therein, not exactly darning his socks, but
engaged in the Eskimo equivalent--mending his waterproof boots.  These
were made of undressed sealskin, with soles of walrus hide; and the
pleasant-faced little woman was stitching together the sides of a rent
in the upper leather, using a fine sharp fish-bone as a needle and a
delicate shred of sinew as a thread, when her son entered.

"Mother," he said in a somewhat excited tone, as he sat down beside his
maternal parent, "I go to the hut of Okiok."

Kunelik bestowed an inquiring glance upon her boy.

"Ippe," she said, (for Eskimos sometimes use endearing abbreviations),
"has Nunaga turned you upside down?"

The lad protested fervently that his head was yet in its proper
position.  "But," he added, "the mother of Oki--no, the grandmother of
Okiok--is sick--very sick--and I am to go and fetch the mother of--no, I
mean the daughter of--of Okiok, to see her, because--because--"

"Take time, Ippe," interrupted Kunelik; "I see that your head is down,
and your boots are in the air."

Again Ippegoo protested earnestly that he was in the reverse position,
and that Nunaga was no more to him than the snout of a seal; but he
protested in vain, for his pleasant little mother believed that she
understood the language of symptoms, and nodded her disbelief smilingly.

"But why do you say that Kannoa is very ill, Ippe?" she asked; "I have
just come from her hut where she was seemingly quite well.  Moreover,
she has agreed to sup this very night with the mother of Arbalik, and
she could not do that if she was ill, for that means much stuffing,
because the mother of Arbalik has plenty of food and cooks it very
fast."

"Oh, but it is not Kannoa's body that is ill," said Ippegoo quickly; "it
is her mind that is ill--very ill; and nothing will make it better but a
sight of Nunaga.  It was Ujarak that told me so; and you know, mother,
that whatever he says _must_ be true somehow, whether it be true or
not."

"Ujarak is a fool," said Kunelik quietly; "and you are another, my son."

We must again remind the reader here that the Eskimos are a simple as
well as straightforward folk.  They say what they mean and mean what
they say, without the smallest intention of hurting each other's
feelings.

"And, mother," continued the son, scarce noticing her remark, "I want
you to prepare for a journey."

Kunelik looked surprised.

"Where to, my son?"

"It matters not just now.  You shall know in time.  Will you get ready?"

"No, my son, I won't."

"But Ujarak says you are to get ready."

"Still, my son, I won't."

"Mother!" exclaimed Ippegoo, with that look and tone which usually
follows the saying of something very wicked; but the pleasant little
woman went on with her work with an air of such calm good-natured
resolution that her son felt helpless.

"Then, mother, I know not what to do."

"What did he tell you to do?" asked Kunelik abruptly.

The youth gave as much of his conversation with the wizard as sufficed
to utterly perplex his mother's mind without enlightening it much.  When
he had finished, or rather had come to an abrupt stop, she looked at him
calmly, and said--

"My son, whatever he told you to do, go and do it.  Leave the rest to
me."

From infancy Ippegoo had rejoiced in his wise little mother's decisions.
To be saved the trouble of thinking; to have a straight and simple
course clearly pointed out to him, so that he should have nothing to do
but shut his eyes and walk therein--or, if need be, run--was the height
of Ippegoo's ambition--next to solid feeding.  But be not hard on him,
good reader.  Remember that he was an ignorant savage, and that you
could not expect him to be as absolutely and entirely free from this low
type of spirit as civilised people are!

Without another word, therefore, the youth leaped on to his sledge,
cracked his whip, and set off on his delicate mission.  Poor lad!
disappointment was in store for him.  But compensation was in store
also.

While he was galloping along under the ice-cliffs on the east side of a
great berg, not far from the end of his journey, Okiok, with his wife
and daughter on a sledge, chanced to be galloping with equal speed in
the opposite direction on the west side of the same berg.  It was a
mighty berg--an ice-mountain of nearly half a mile in length--so that no
sound of cracking lash or yelping dogs passed from the one party to the
other.  Thus when Ippegoo arrived at his destination he found his fair
bird flown.  But he found a much more interesting personage in the
Kablunet, who had been left under the care of Angut and Ermigit.  This
great sight effectually banished disappointment and every other feeling
from his breast.

He first caught a glimpse of the wonderful man when half-way through the
tunnel-lobby, and the sight rooted him to the spot, for Red Rooney had
just finished making a full-dress suit of clothes for little Tumbler,
and was in the act of fitting them on when the young Eskimo arrived.

That day Ermigit had managed to spear a huge raven.  Rooney, being
something of a naturalist, had skinned it, and it was while little
Tumbler was gazing at him in open-eyed admiration that the thought
struck him--Tumbler being very small and the raven very large.

"Come," said he, seizing the child--with whom he was by that time on the
most intimate terms of affection--"Come, I'll dress you up."

Tumbler was naked at the moment, and willingly consented.  A few
stitches with needle and thread, which the sailor always carried in his
pocket, soon converted the wings of the bird into sleeves, a button at
the chest formed the skin into a rude cut-away coat, the head, with the
beak in front, formed a convenient cap, and the tail hung most naturally
down behind.  A better full-dress coat was never more quickly
manufactured.

Ermigit went into convulsions of laughter over it, and the sailor,
charmed with his work, kept up a running commentary in mingled English
and Eskimo.

"Splendid!" he cried; "the best slop-shop in Portsmouth couldn't match
it!  Cap and coat all in one!  The fit perfect--and what a magnificent
tail!"

At this point Ermigit caught sight of the gaping and glaring Ippegoo in
the passage.  With a bound he fell upon him, caught him by the hair, and
dragged him in.

Of course there followed a deal of questioning, which the hapless youth
tried to answer; but the fascination of the Kablunet was too much for
him.  He could do nothing but give random replies and stare; seeing
which, Rooney suggested that the best way to revive him would be to give
him something to eat.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

MRS. OKIOK'S LITTLE EVENING PARTY.

In Eskimo land, as in England, power and industry result in the
elevation and enrichment of individuals, though they have not yet
resulted there, as here, in vast accumulations of wealth, or in class
distinctions.  The elevating tendency of superior power and practice is
seen in the fact that while some hunters are nearly always pretty well
off--"well-to-do," as we would express it--others are often in a state
of poverty and semi-starvation.  A few of them possess two
establishments, and some even go the length of possessing two wives.  It
is but just to add, however, that these last are rare.  Most Eskimo men
deem one wife quite as much as they can manage to feed.

Our friend Okiok was what we may style one of the aristocracy of the
land.  He did not, indeed, derive his position from inheritance, but
from the circumstance of his being a successful hunter, a splendid
canoe-man, and a tremendous fighter.

When it is added that his fights were often single-handed against the
Polar bear, it may be understood that both his activity and courage were
great.  He was not an angekok, for, like his friend Angut, he did not
believe in wizards; nevertheless he was very truly an angekok, in the
sense of being an uncommonly wise man, and his countrymen, recognising
the fact, paid him suitable respect.

Okiok possessed a town and a country mansion.  That is to say, besides
the solitary residence already mentioned, close to the great glacier, he
owned the largest hut in the Eskimo village.  It was indeed quite a
palatial residence, capable of holding several families, and having
several holes in it--or windows--which were glazed, if we may say so,
with the scraped intestines of animals.

It was to this residence that Okiok drove on the afternoon of the day
that he missed Ippegoo's visit.

On finding that most of the men had gone southward to hunt, he resolved
to follow them, for his purpose was to consult about the Kablunet, who
had so recently fallen like a meteor from the sky into their midst.

"But you will stop here, Nuna, with Nunaga, and tell the women all about
the Kablunet, while I go south alone.  Make a feast; you have plenty to
give them.  Here, help me to carry the things inside."

Okiok had brought quite a sledge-load of provisions with him, for it had
been his intention to give a feast to as many of the community as could
be got inside his hut.  The carrying in of the supplies, therefore,
involving as it did creeping on hands and knees through a low tunnel
with each article, was not a trifling duty.

"Now," said he, when at last ready to start, "be sure that you ask the
liars and the stupid ones to the feast, as well as the wise; and make
them sit near you, for if these don't hear all about it from your own
mouth they will be sure to carry away nonsense, and spread it.  Don't
give them the chance to invent."

While her husband was rattling away south over the hummocky sea in his
empty sledge, Nuna lighted her lamps, opened her stores, and began to
cook.

"Go now, Nunaga," she said, "and tell the women who are to feed with us
to-night."

"Who shall I invite, mother?" asked pretty little Nunaga, preparing to
set forth on her mission.

"Invite old Kannoa, of course.  She is good."

"Yes, mother, and she is also griggy."

We may remark in passing that it is impossible to convey the exact
meaning of the Eskimo word which we have rendered "griggy."  Enough to
say, once for all, that in difficult words and phrases we give as nearly
as possible our English equivalents.

"And Kunelik," said Nuna, continuing to enumerate her guests; "I like
the mother of Ippegoo.  She is a pleasant little woman."

"But father said we were to ask liars," remarked Nunaga, with a sweet
look.

"I'm coming to them, child," said Mrs Okiok, with a touch of
petulance--the result of a gulp of lamp-smoke; "yes, you may ask
Pussimek also.  The wife of Simek is always full of wise talk, and her
baby does not squall, which is lucky, for she cannot be forced to leave
Pussi behind."

"But name the liars and stupid ones, mother," urged Nunaga, who, being a
dutiful child, and anxious to carry out her father's wishes to the
letter, stuck to her point.

