and I don't mean he shall know it, but I'd just as lieves tell you. Do
you know why Mr. Rockwell gave me this place?"

"No; I've wondered a little, not at that, but at his giving you so much
higher pay than boys usually receive."

"Then I'll tell you."

Dick proceeded to give an account of the manner in which he had rescued
little Johnny from drowning, as related in the adventures of "Ragged
Dick."

"It was a brave act," said Mr. Murdock.

"It was nothing at all," said Dick, modestly. "I could swim like a duck,
and I didn't mind the wetting."

"But you ran the risk of drowning."

"I didn't think of that."

"If you had been a coward or a selfish boy, it would have been the first
thing you would have thought of. So Mr. Rockwell gave you this place in
acknowledgment of your service. I am glad he did. You deserve it."

"He has done more," said Dick. Then he related the events of the evening
previous, and told Mr. Murdock of the two gifts he had received. "So,
with the money I had before, I have now eleven hundred dollars," Dick
concluded. "Shall I leave it in the savings bank, or can I do better
with it?"

"I'll tell you what I think will be a good investment," said Mr.
Murdock. "I know a party who owns four adjoining lots on Forty-Fifth
Street. He is pressed for money, and wishes to dispose of them. He
offered them to me at twenty-two hundred dollars, half cash. I offered
him a thousand dollars cash for two of them, but he wishes to sell the
whole together. I think it will be an excellent speculation, for the
laying out of Central Park is carrying up the price of lots in the
neighborhood rapidly."

"Why didn't you buy them, then?"

"Because I didn't want to buy anything that I couldn't pay for at once.
I've got a wife and three children to look out for, and so I can save
money but slowly. If I only had myself to take care of, I wouldn't
hesitate."

"Can't we club together, and buy it?" suggested Dick, eagerly.

"That is just what I was going to propose. I think the owner will take
two thousand dollars down for the lots. That will be a thousand dollars
apiece. I've got that money, and so have you. What do you think of it?"

"Tip-top," said Dick, enthusiastically. "It's just what I'd like to do."

"Of course it wouldn't bring us in anything, but would, instead, be an
expense for the present, as we should have to pay taxes on it. On the
other hand, you could invest the money in bank-stock, so as to receive
seventy or eighty dollars annually at interest. You must decide which
investment you prefer. The land we may have to keep on hand four or five
years, paying taxes yearly."

"But the price'll go up."

"There is no doubt of that. The city is extending northwards rapidly. I
shouldn't be surprised if the lots would bring a thousand dollars apiece
in less than five years. This would be equal to a very handsome
interest."

"I'm in for buying 'em," said Dick. "So, if you'll see the owner, I'll
have the money all ready whenever you want it."

"Very well, but perhaps you would like to see them first. We'll manage
to get off an hour earlier than usual this afternoon, and go up and take
a look at them."

"It seems to me Mr. Murdock and that boy are pretty thick together,"
said the book-keeper, glancing through the glass partition. He could see
that they were conversing earnestly, but of course couldn't hear a word
that was said. "What he or Mr. Rockwell can see in the young rascal
passes my comprehension."

He called sharply to Dick, and ordered him to go to the post-office for
letters.

"All right," said Dick.

"And mind you don't loiter by the way," said the book-keeper, sharply.
"You were gone long enough at the bank this morning. Did you come right
back?"

"No," said Dick.

"Why didn't you?"

"There was somewhere else I wanted to go."

"On your own business, or Mr. Rockwell's?"

"On my own business."

"So I thought. I shall report you to Mr. Rockwell," said Gilbert,
triumphantly.

"I wouldn't, if I were you," said Dick, coolly.

"And why not, you young rascal?"

"Because he knows it already."

"Knows it already," repeated the book-keeper, discomfited. "Well, I hope
he gave you a good scolding."

"I am sorry to disappoint you," said Dick; "but he knows it, because he
gave me leave to go."

"I don't believe it," said Gilbert, mortified to find that Dick was in
the right after all.

"Then perhaps you'd better ask Mr. Rockwell."

"I will," said Gilbert, who really had no intention of doing so. "You
must have had some very urgent private business," he added, with a
sneer.

"You're right, there," said Dick.

"Playing marbles with some of your ragamuffin friends, I suppose."

"Playin' marbles is a very refined and intellectual amusement," said
Dick; "but I don't play marbles in business hours."

"Where did you go?" said the book-keeper, impatiently. "I don't want any
of your impertinence."

"I went to the savings bank," said Dick.

"I suppose you have a very large account there," sneered Gilbert.

"Yes," said Dick, quietly; "pretty large."

"It's to be hoped you won't withdraw your patronage, or the bank might
fail."

"Then I won't," said Dick. "Shall I go to the post-office now?"

"Yes, and be quick about it."

The book-keeper had some curiosity as to the amount of Dick's account at
the savings bank, but there was no good chance for him to inquire, and
he accordingly returned to his writing, more prejudiced against Dick
than ever.

On the whole, I have some doubts whether Dick's manner was quite as
respectful as it ought to have been to one who was older and higher in
office than himself. I should not recommend my young readers to imitate
him in this respect. But it is my business to describe Dick just as he
was, and I have already said that he was not a model boy. Still in most
respects he tried to do what was right, and it must be admitted that the
book-keeper's treatment of him was not likely to inspire much attachment
or respect. Dick had no difficulty in perceiving the dislike entertained
by Gilbert for him, and he was beginning to cherish a similar feeling
towards the book-keeper. He determined, however, to give him no cause of
complaint, so far as he was entitled to command his services; but it
must be confessed he found much more satisfaction in obeying Mr.
Rockwell and Mr. Murdock.




CHAPTER VIII.

NEW PLANS.


At the close of the afternoon, as had been proposed, Mr. Murdock,
accompanied by Dick, rode up as far as Forty-Fifth Street, to look at
the lots which he had suggested buying. They were located in a very
eligible situation, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues. Some of my young
readers may not be aware that the dimensions of a city lot are
twenty-five feet front by one hundred feet in depth. The four lots
together made a plot of one hundred feet by one hundred, or a little
less than quarter of an acre. In the country the whole would scarcely
have been considered sufficient for a house with a good yard in front;
but if people choose to live in the city they must make up their minds
to be crowded.

"It looks small,--don't it?" said Dick. "I shouldn't think there was
four lots there."

"Yes," said Mr. Murdock, "they are of the regular size. Some lots are
only twenty feet wide. These are twenty-five. They don't look so large
before they are built on."

"Well," said Dick, "I'm in for buying them."

"I think it will be a good investment for both of us," said Mr. Murdock.

"The money shall be ready whenever you want it," said Dick.

"Very well. I will see the owner to-morrow, or rather this evening, as
it is best to be prompt, lest we might lose so favorable a bargain. I
will make the best terms I can with him, and let you know the result
to-morrow."

"All right!" said Dick. "Good-night, Mr. Murdock."

"Good-night. By-the-by, why won't you come round and take supper with
us? My wife and children will be glad to make your acquaintance."

"Thank you," said Dick. "I will come some other evening with pleasure;
but if I stay away without saying anything about it, Fosdick won't know
what's become of me."

Dick got back to Bleecker Street a little late for dinner. When he
entered the dining-room, the remainder of the boarders were seated at
the table.

"Come, Mr. Hunter, you must render an account of yourself," said Miss
Peyton, playfully. "Why are you late this evening?"

"Suppose I don't tell," said Dick.

"Then you must pay a fine,--mustn't he, Mrs. Browning?"

"That depends upon who is to benefit by the fines," said the landlady.
"If they are to be paid to me, I shall be decidedly in favor of it. That
reminds me that you were late to breakfast this morning, Miss Peyton."

"Oh, ladies mustn't be expected to pay fines," said Miss Peyton, shaking
her ringlets. "They never have any money, you know."

"Then I think we must let Mr. Hunter off," said Mrs. Browning.

"If he will tell us what has detained him. You must excuse my curiosity,
Mr. Hunter, but ladies, you know, are privileged to be curious."

"I don't mind telling," said Dick, helping himself to a piece of toast.
"I'm talking of buying some lots up-town, and went up with a friend to
look at them."

Fosdick looked at Dick, inquiringly, not knowing if he were in earnest
or not.

"Indeed!" said Mr. Clifton. "May I inquire where the lots are situated?"

"I'll tell you if I buy them," said Dick; "but I don't want to run the
risk of losing them."

"You needn't be afraid of my cutting you out," said Clifton. "I paid my
washerwoman this morning, and haven't got but a dollar and a half over.
I suppose that won't buy the property."

"I wish it would," said Dick. "In that case I'd buy half a dozen lots."

"I suppose, from your investing in lots, Mr. Hunter, that you are
thinking of getting married, and living in a house of your own," said
Miss Peyton, simpering.

"No," said Dick, "I shan't get married for a year. Nobody ought to be
married before they're seventeen."

"That's just my age," said Miss Peyton.

Mr. Clifton afterwards informed Dick that Miss Peyton was twenty-five,
but did not mention how he had ascertained. He likewise added that when
he first came to the boarding-house, she had tried her fascinations upon
him.

"She'd have married me in a minute," he said complacently; "but I'm too
old a bird to be caught that way. When you see Mrs. Clifton, gentlemen,
you'll see style and beauty, and--_money_" he added, after a moment's
reflection.

Mr. Clifton had a tolerably good opinion of himself, as may be inferred
from this remark. In fact, he valued himself rather more highly than the
ladies appeared to do; but such cases are not remarkable.

"Mrs. Clifton will be a lucky woman," said Dick, with a sober face.

"You're very kind to say so," said Mr. Clifton, modestly. "I believe I'm
tolerably good-looking, and nobody'll deny that I've got style. But
money,--that's my weak point. You couldn't lend me five dollars, could
you, till next week?"

"I'm afraid not," said Dick. "My up-town lots cost so much, and then
there'll be the taxes afterwards."

"Oh, it's of no consequence. I thought a little of going to the opera
to-night, and I need a new pair of gloves. It costs a sight to keep a
fellow in gloves."

"So it does," said Dick. "I bought a pair for fifty cents six months
ago, and now I've got to buy another pair."

"Ha, ha! good joke! By the way, I wonder you fellows don't take a better
room."

"Why should we? Isn't this good enough?" asked Fosdick.

"Oh, it's comfortable and all that," said Clifton; "but you know what I
mean. You wouldn't want any of your fashionable friends to call upon you
here."

"That's a fact," said Dick. "Suppose," he said, turning to Fosdick, with
a twinkle in his eye, "Johnny Nolan should call upon us here. What would
he think of our living in such a room?"

"He would probably be surprised," said Fosdick, entering into the joke.

"Is he one of your Madison-Avenue friends?" asked Clifton, a little
mystified.

"I don't know where he lives," said Dick, with truth; "but he's a friend
of mine, in business down town."

"Wholesale or retail?"

"Retail I should say,--shouldn't you, Fosdick?"

"Yes," said Fosdick, amused at Clifton's evident mystification.

"Well, good-evening, gents," said Clifton, sauntering out of the room.
"Call and see me when you haven't anything better to do."

"Thank you. Good-night."

"Were you in earnest, Dick, about the up-town lots," asked Fosdick,
after Clifton had left the room.

"Yes," said Dick. "It's an investment that Mr. Murdock advised. I'll
tell you about it, and then you can tell me what you think of it."

Dick thereupon gave an account of the conversation that had taken place
between him and the head clerk, and what they proposed to do. "What do
you think of it?" he concluded.

"I have no doubt it is an excellent plan," said Fosdick; "but of course
my opinion isn't worth much. I don't see but you stand a chance to be a
rich man some time, Dick."

"By the time I get to be a hundred," said Dick.

"A good while before that, I presume. But there's something else we must
not forget."

"What is that?"

"Money is a good thing to have, but a good education is better. I was
thinking to-day that since we have come here we haven't done any
studying to amount to anything."

"That is true."

"And the sooner we begin the better."

"All right. I agree to that."

"But we shall need assistance. I've taught you about all I know myself,
and now we want to go higher."

"What shall we do?"
