This was the severest rebuke that the good-natured Chingatok had yet
administered to Eemerk, but the latter, foolish though he was, had
wisdom enough not to resent it openly.  He sat in moody silence, with
his eyes fixed on the ground.

Of course Oolichuk was decidedly in favour of joining the white men, and
so was Ivitchuk, who soon brought round his hesitating friend Akeetolik,
and several of the others.  Oblooria, being timid, would gladly have
sided with Eemerk, but she hated the man, and, besides, would in any
case have cast in her lot with her mother and brother, even if free to
do otherwise.

The fair Tekkona, whose courage and faith were naturally strong, had
only one idea, and that was to follow cheerfully wherever Chingatok led;
but she was very modest, and gave no opinion.  She merely remarked: "The
Kablunets are handsome men, and seem good."

As for Toolooha, she had enough to do to attend to the serious duties of
the lamp, and always left the settlement of less important matters to
the men.

"You and yours are free to do what you please," said Chingatok to
Eemerk, when the discussion drew to a close.  "I go with the white men
to-morrow."

"What says Oblooria?" whispered Oolichuk when the rest of the party were
listening to Eemerk's reply.

"Oblooria goes with her brother and mother," answered that young lady,
toying coquettishly with her sealskin tail.

Oolichuk's good-humoured visage beamed with satisfaction, and his flat
nose curled up--as much as it was possible for such a feature to curl--
with contempt, as he glanced at Eemerk and said--

"I have heard many tales from Anders--the white man's mouthpiece--since
we met.  He tells me the white men are very brave and fond of running
into danger for nothing but fun.  Those who do not like the fun of
danger should join Eemerk.  Those who are fond of fun and danger should
come with our great chief Chingatok--huk!  Let us divide."

Without more palaver the band divided, and it was found that only eight
sided with Eemerk.  All the rest cast in their lot with our giant, after
which this Arctic House of Commons adjourned, and its members went to
rest.

A few days after that, Captain Vane and his Eskimo allies, having left
the camp with Eemerk and his friends far behind them, came suddenly one
fine morning on a barrier which threatened effectually to arrest their
further progress northward.  This was nothing less than that tremendous
sea of "ancient ice" which had baffled previous navigators and sledging
parties.

"Chaos! absolute chaos!" exclaimed Alf Vandervell, who was first to
recover from the shock of surprise, not to say consternation, with which
the party beheld the scene on turning a high cape.

"It looks bad," said Captain Vane, gravely, "but things often look worse
at a first glance than they really are."

"I hope it may be so in this case," said Leo, in a low tone.

"Good-bye to the North Pole!" said Benjy, with a look of despondency so
deep that the rest of the party laughed in spite of themselves.

The truth was that poor Benjy had suffered much during the sledge
journey which they had begun, for although he rode, like the rest of
them, on one of the Eskimo sledges, the ice over which they had
travelled along shore had been sufficiently rugged to necessitate
constant getting off and on, as well as much scrambling over hummocks
and broken ice.  We have already said that Benjy was not very robust,
though courageous and full of spirit, so that he was prone to leap from
the deepest depths of despair to the highest heights of hope at a
moment's notice--or _vice versa_.  Not having become inured to
ice-travel, he was naturally much cast down when the chaos
above-mentioned met his gaze.

"Strange," said the Captain, after a long silent look at the barrier,
"strange that we should find it here.  The experience of former
travellers placed it considerably to the south and west of this."

"But you know," said Leo, "Chingatok told us that the old ice drifts
about just as the more recently formed does.  Who knows but we may find
the end of it not far off, and perhaps may reach open water beyond,
where we can make skin canoes, and launch forth on a voyage of
discovery."

"I vote that we climb the cliffs and try to see over the top of this
horrid ice-jumble," said Benjy.

"Not a bad suggestion, lad.  Let us do so.  We will encamp here, Anders.
Let all the people have a good feed, and tell Chingatok to follow us.
You will come along with him."

A few hours later, and the Captain, Leo, Alf, Benjy, Chingatok, and the
interpreter stood on the extreme summit of the promontory which they had
named Cape Chaos, and from which they had a splendid bird's-eye view of
the whole region.

It was indeed a tremendous and never-to-be-forgotten scene.

As far as the eye could reach, the ocean was covered with ice heaped
together in some places in the wildest confusion, and so firmly wedged
in appearance that it seemed as if it had lain there in a solid mass
from the first day of creation.  Elsewhere the ice was more level and
less compact.  In the midst of this rugged scene, hundreds of giant
icebergs rose conspicuously above the rest, towering upwards in every
shape and of all sizes, from which the bright sun was flashed back in
rich variety of form, from the sharp gleam that trickled down an edge of
ice to the refulgent blaze on a glassy face which almost rivalled the
sun himself in brilliancy.  These icebergs, extending as they did to the
horizon, where they mingled with and were lost in the pearl-grey sky,
gave an impression of vast illimitable perspective.  Although no sign of
an open sea was at first observed, there was no lack of water to enliven
the scene, for here and there, and everywhere, were pools and ponds, and
even lakes of goodly size, which had been formed on the surface by the
melting ice.  In these the picturesque masses were faithfully reflected,
and over them vast flocks of gulls, eider-ducks, puffins, and other
wild-fowl of the north, disported themselves in garrulous felicity.

On the edge of the rocky precipice, from which they had a bird's-eye
view of the scene, our discoverers stood silent for some time, absorbed
in contemplation, with feelings of mingled awe and wonder.  Then
exclamations of surprise and admiration broke forth.

"The wonderful works of God!" said the Captain, in a tone of profound
reverence.

"Beautiful, beyond belief!" murmured Alf.

"But it seems an effectual check to our advance," said the practical
Leo, who, however, was by no means insensible to the extreme beauty of
the scene.

"Not effectual, lad; not effectual," returned the Captain, stretching
out his hand and turning to the interpreter; "look, Anders, d'ye see
nothing on the horizon away to the nor'ard?  Isn't that a bit of
water-sky over there?"

"Ya," replied the interpreter, gazing intently, "there be watter-sky
over there.  Ya.  But not possobubble for go there.  Ice too big an'
brokkin up."

"Ask Chingatok what he thinks," returned the Captain.

Chingatok's opinion was that the water-sky indicated the open sea.  He
knew that sea well--had often paddled over it, and his own country lay
in it.

"But how ever did he cross that ice?" asked the Captain; "what says he
to that, Anders?"

"I did not cross it," answered the Eskimo, through Anders.  "When I came
here with my party the ice was not there; it was far off yonder."

He pointed to the eastward.

"Just so," returned the Captain, with a satisfied nod, "that confirms my
opinion.  You see, boys, that the coast here trends off to the East'ard
in a very decided manner.  Now, if that was only the shore of a bay, and
the land again ran off to the nor'ard, it would not be possible for such
a sea of ice to have come from _that_ direction.  I therefore conclude
that we are standing on the most northern cape of Greenland; that
Greenland itself is a huge island, unconnected with the Polar lands;
that we are now on the shores of the great Polar basin, in which,
somewhere not very far from the Pole itself, lies the home of our friend
Chingatok--at least so I judge from what he has said.  Moreover, I feel
sure that the water-sky we see over there indicates the commencement of
that `open sea' which, I hold, in common with many learned men, lies
around the North Pole, and which I am determined to float upon before
many days go by."

"We'd better spread our wings then, father, and be off at once," said
Benjy; "for it's quite certain that we'll never manage to scramble over
that ice-jumble with sledges."

"Nevertheless, I will try, Benjy."

"But how, uncle?" asked Leo.

"Ay, how?" repeated Alf, "_that_ is the question."

"Come, come, Alf, let Shakespeare alone," said the pert Benjy, "if you
_must_ quote, confine yourself to Buzzby."

"Nay, Benjy, be not so severe.  It was but a slip.  Besides, our leader
has not forbidden our carrying a whole library in our heads, so long as
we take only one book in our pockets.  But, uncle, you have not yet told
us how you intend to cross that amazing barrier which Benjy has
appropriately styled an ice-jumble."

"How, boy?" returned the Captain, who had been gazing eagerly in all
directions while they talked, "it is impossible for me to say how.  All
that I can speak of with certainty as to our future movements is, that
the road by which we have come to the top of this cliff will lead us to
the bottom again, where Toolooha is preparing for us an excellent supper
of bear-steaks and tea.  One step at a time, lads, is my motto; when
that is taken we shall see clearly how and where to take the next."

A sound sleep was the step which the whole party took after that which
led to the bear-steaks.  Then Captain Vane arose, ordered the dogs to be
harnessed to the sledges, and, laying his course due north, steered
straight out upon the sea of ancient ice.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

DIFFICULTIES AND DANGERS INCREASE, AND THE CAPTAIN EXPOUNDS HIS VIEWS.

The first part of the journey over the rugged ice was not so difficult
as had been anticipated, because they found a number of openings--narrow
lanes, as it were--winding between the masses, most of which were wide
enough to permit of the passage of the sledges; and when they chanced to
come on a gap that was too narrow, they easily widened it with their
hatchets and ice-chisels.

There was, however, some danger connected with this process, for some of
the mighty blocks of ice amongst which they moved were piled in such
positions that it only required a few choppings at their base to bring
them down in ruins on their heads.  One instance of this kind sufficed
to warn them effectually.

Captain Vane's dog-sledge was leading the way at the time.  Leo drove
it, for by that time the Eskimos had taught him how to use the
short-handled whip with the lash full fifteen feet long, and Leo was an
apt pupil in every athletic and manly exercise.  Beside him sat the
Captain, Alf, Benjy, and Butterface--the black visage of the latter
absolutely shining with delight at the novelty of the situation.  Behind
came the sledge of Chingatok, which, besides being laden with bear-rugs,
sealskins, junks of meat, and a host of indescribable Eskimo implements,
carried himself and the precious persons of Toolooha and Tekkona.  Next
came the sledge of the laughter-loving Oolichuk, with the timid Oblooria
and another woman.  Then followed the sledges of Ivitchuk and Akeetolik,
laden with the rest of the Eskimo women and goods, and last of all came
Captain Vane's two English-made sledges, heavily-laden with the goods
and provisions of the explorers.  These latter sledges, although made in
England, had been constructed on the principle of the native sledge,
namely, with the parts fastened by means of walrus-sinew lashings
instead of nails, which last would have snapped like glass in the winter
frosts of the Polar regions, besides being incapable of standing the
twistings and shocks of ice-travel.

All the dogs being fresh, and the floor of the lanes not too rough, the
strangely-assorted party trotted merrily along, causing the echoes among
the great ice-blocks, spires, and obelisks, to ring to the music of
their chatting, and the cracks of their powerful whips.  Suddenly, a
shout at the front, and an abrupt pull up, brought the whole column to a
halt.  The Captain's dogs had broken into a gallop.  On turning suddenly
round a spur of a glacier about as big as Saint Paul's Cathedral, they
went swish into a shallow pond which had been formed on the ice.  It was
not deep, but there was sufficient water in it to send a deluge of spray
over the travellers.

A burst of laughter greeted the incident as they sprang off the sledge,
and waded to the dry ice a few yards ahead.

"No damage done," exclaimed the Captain, as he assisted the dogs to haul
the sledge out of the water.

"No damage!" repeated Benjy, with a rueful look, "why, I'm soaked from
top to toe!"

"Yes, you've got the worst of it," said Leo, with a laugh; "that comes
of being forward, Benjy.  You would insist on sitting in front."

"Well, it is some comfort," retorted Benjy, squeezing the water from his
garments, "that _Alf_ is as wet as myself, for that gives us an
opportunity of sympathising with each other.  Eh, _Alf_?  Does Buzzby
offer no consolatory remarks for such an occasion as this?"

"O yes," replied Alf; "in his beautiful poem on Melancholy, sixth canto,
Buzzby says:--

  "`When trouble, like a curtain spread,
  Obscures the clouded brain,
  And worries on the weary head
  Descend like soaking rain--
  Lift up th'umbrella of the heart,
  Stride manfully along;
  Defy depression's dreary dart,
  And shout in gleeful song.'"

"Come, Alf, clap on to this tow-rope, an' stop your nonsense," said
Captain Vane, who was not in a poetical frame of mind just then.

"Dat is mos' boosiful potry!" exclaimed Butterface, with an immense
display of eyes and teeth, as he lent a willing hand to haul out the
sledge.  "Mos' boosiful.  But he's rader a strong rem'dy, massa, don'
you tink?  Not bery easy to git up a gleefoo' shout when one's down in
de mout' bery bad, eh!"

Alf's reply was checked by the necessity for remounting the sledge and
resuming the journey.  Those in rear avoided the pond by going round it.

"The weather's warm, anyhow, and that's a comfort," remarked Benjy, as
he settled down in his wet garments.  "We can't freeze in summer, you
know, and--"

He stopped abruptly, for it became apparent just then that the opening
close ahead of them was too narrow for the sledge to pass.  It was
narrowed by a buttress, or projection, of the cathedral-berg, which
jutted up close to a vast obelisk of ice about forty feet high, if not
higher.

"Nothing for it, boys, but to cut through," said the Captain, jumping
out, and seizing an axe, as the sledge was jammed between the masses.
The dogs lay down to rest and pant while the men were at work.

"It's cut an' come again in dem regins," muttered the negro steward,
also seizing an axe, and attacking the base of the obelisk.

A sudden cry of alarm from the whole party caused him to desist and look
up.  He echoed the cry and sprang back swiftly, for the huge mass of ice
having been just on the balance, one slash at its base had destroyed the
equilibrium, and it was leaning slowly over with a deep grinding sound.
A moment later the motion was swift, and it fell with a terrible crash,
bursting into a thousand fragments, scattering lumps and glittering
morsels far and wide, and causing the whole ice-field to tremble.  The
concussion overturned several other masses, which had been in the same
nicely-balanced condition, some near at hand, others out of sight,
though within earshot, and, for a moment, the travellers felt as if the
surrounding pack were disrupting everywhere and falling into utter ruin,
but in a few seconds the sounds ceased, and again all was quiet.

Fortunately, the obelisk which had been overturned fell towards the
north--away from the party; but although it thus narrowly missed
crushing them all in one icy tomb, it blocked up their path so
completely that the remainder of that day had to be spent in cutting a
passage through it.

Need we say that, after this, they were careful how they used their axes
and ice-chisels?

Soon after the occurrence of this incident, the labyrinths among the ice
became more broken, tortuous, and bewildering.  At last they ceased
altogether, and the travellers were compelled to take an almost straight
course right over everything, for blocks, masses, and drifts on a
gigantic scale were heaved up in such dire confusion, that nothing
having the faintest resemblance to a track or passage could be found.

"It's hard work, this," remarked the Captain to Leo one evening, seating
himself on a mass of ice which he had just chopped from an obstruction,
and wiping the perspiration from his brow.

"Hard, indeed," said Leo, sitting down beside him, "I fear it begins to
tell upon poor Benjy.  You should really order him to rest more than he
does, uncle."

A grim smile of satisfaction played for a minute on the Captain's rugged
face, as he glanced at his son, who, a short distance ahead, was hacking
at the ice with a pick-axe, in company with Alf and Butterface and the
Eskimo men.

"It'll do him good, lad," replied the Captain.  "Hard work is just what
my Benjy needs.  He's not very stout, to be sure, but there is nothing
wrong with his constitution, and he's got plenty of spirit."

This was indeed true.  Benjy had too much spirit for his somewhat
slender frame, but his father, being a herculean man, did not quite
perceive that what was good for himself might be too much for his son.
Captain Vane was, however, the reverse of a harsh man.  He pondered what
Leo had said, and soon afterwards went up to his son.

"Benjy, my lad."

"Yes, father," said the boy, dropping the head of his pick-axe on the
ice, resting his hands on the haft, and looking up with a flushed
countenance.

"You should rest a bit now and then, Benjy.  You'll knock yourself up if
you don't."

"Rest a bit, father!  Why, I've just had a rest, and I'm not tired--that
is, not very.  Ain't it fun, father?  And the ice cuts up so easily, and
flies about so splendidly--see here."

