
On nearing the fire, they made a _detour_ to examine the tracks that led
to it, and found from their number and other signs that it was indeed
Hawk's party.

Robin advanced alone to reconnoitre.  On returning, he said--

"It's just the reptiles; there's forty of 'em if there's one, an'
they've got a white man bound with 'em; no doubt from what you said of
him, Slugs, it's Macdonell; but I don't see Wapaw.  I fear me that his
days are over.  Now, then, lads, here's our plan: we'll attack them from
six different points at once.  We'll all give the war-whoop at the same
moment, takin' the word from Walter there, who's got a loud pipe of his
own, then when the varmints start to their feet--for I don't like the
notion o' firin' at men off their guard--Walter, Larry, an' Stiff will
fire.  Black Swan, Slugs, an' I will reserve our fire while you reload;
the reptiles will scatter, of course, an' we'll give 'em a volley an' a
united yell as they cut stick, that'll keep 'em from waitin' for more."

The plan thus hastily sketched was at once carried out.  Advancing
stealthily to their several stations, the six men, as it were,
surrounded the savages, who, not dreaming of pursuit, had neglected to
place sentinels round the camp.  When Walter's loud "halloo!" rang in
their ears, the whole band sprang to their feet, and seized their arms,
but three shots laid three of them dead on the ground.  As they fled
right and left the reserve fired, and shot three others, among whom was
Hawk himself.  Black Swan had picked him out, and shot him through the
head.  Before they were quite out of shot, the three who had first fired
had reloaded and fired again with some effect, for blood was afterwards
observed on the snow.

Slugs now made a rush into the camp to unbind Macdonell, but to his
horror he discovered that a knife was plunged up to the handle in his
breast, and that he was almost dead.  Hawk had evidently committed this
cowardly deed on the first alarm, for the knife was known to be his.
Macdonell tried hard to speak, but all that he was able to say was,
"Wapaw, wounded, escaped--follow."  Then his head fell back, and he
died.  From the few words thus uttered, however, the pursuers concluded
that Wapaw was not dead, but wounded, and that he had escaped.

"If that be so," said Walter, "then they must have been on Wapaw's
tracks, an' if we search we shall find 'em, an' may follow 'em up."

"True," said Slugs, "and the sooner we're away from this the better, for
the reptiles may return, and find us not so strong a band as they
think."

Acting on this advice, the whole party set off at once.  Wapaw's track
was soon discovered, being, of course, a solitary one, and in advance of
his enemies, who were in pursuit.  Following the track with untiring
vigour, the party found that it led them out of the lower country into a
region high up amongst the hills.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE PURSUIT.

"Wapaw must have worked hard, for we should have overhauled him by this
time," said Walter to his uncle on the evening of the next day, as they
plodded steadily along through the snow.

"I would give up the pursuit," said Robin, somewhat gloomily, "for it's
losin' time that might be better spent on another search; but it won't
do to leave the crittur, for if he's badly wounded he may die for want
o' help."

"Guess he can't be very bad, else he'd niver travel so fast," observed
Stiff, who, now that the chief murderer was punished, did not care much
to go in search of the wounded Indian.

"When a man thinks a band o' yellin' redskins are follerin' up his
trail," said Slugs, "he's pretty sure to travel fast, wounded or not
wounded--leastways if he's able.  But I don't think we'll have to go
much farther now, for I've noticed that his stride ain't so long as it
was, and that's a sartin sure sign that he's failin'; I only hope he
won't go under before we find him."

"Niver a fear o' that," said Larry O'Dowd, with a grin.  "I've seed him
as far gone as any one iver I comed across, wi' starvation; but the way
that fellow walked into the grub when he got the chance was wonderful to
behold!  I thought he'd ait me out o' the house entirely; and he put so
much flesh on his bones in a week or two that he was able to go about
his business, though he warn't no fatter when he began to ait than a
consumptive darnin' needle.  True for ye--it's naither walkin',
starvin', nor cowld, as'll kill Wapaw."

"What does the Black Swan think?" inquired Robin.

"We shall see Wapaw when the sun is low to-morrow," replied the Indian.

"Mayhap we shall," quoth Robin, "but it behooves us to get the steam up
for to-morrow: so, comrades, as there's a good clump o' timber here
away, we'll camp."

Robin threw down his bundle as he spoke, and his example was at once
followed by the others, each of whom set to work vigorously to assist in
preparing the encampment.

They had all the requisite implements for this purpose, having returned,
after the attack on the Indians, for the things they had left behind
them.

"It's a pity that we shall have to keep watch to-night," said Walter;
"one of us will have to do it, I fancy; for though I don't believe these
murderin' redskins have pluck to attack us, it would not do to trust to
that."

Slugs, to whom this remark was addressed, lowered the axe with which he
was about to fell a neighbouring tree for firewood.

"That's true," said he, looking round him in all directions; "hold on,
comrades, yonder's a mound with a bare top, we'd better camp there.
Makin' a big blaze on sitch a place'll show the red reptiles we don't
care a gun-flint for them, and they'll not dare to come near, so we
won't have to watch."

"Arrah! an' a purty spot it'll be for the blackyirds to shoot us all
aisy as we're sottin' at supper," exclaimed Larry O'Dowd.

"Doubtless there's a hollow on it," rejoined Slugs, "for the top is
flat."

"Humph! maybe," growled Larry, who still seemed to object; but, as the
rest of the party were willing to adopt the suggestion, he said no more,
and they all went to the top of the little mound, which commanded a
clear view of the surrounding country.

As Slugs had surmised, there was a slight hollow on the summit of the
mound, which effectually screened the party from any one who might wish
to fire at them from below; and as there was no other mound in the
immediate neighbourhood, they felt quite secure.  Huge logs were cut and
carried to the top of the mound, the snow was cleared out of the hole,
pine branches were spread over it, the fire was kindled, the kettle put
on and filled with snow, and soon Larry O'Dowd was involved in the heat,
steam, smoke, and activities of preparing supper, while his comrades
spread out their blankets and lay down to smoke with their arms ready
beside them.

The fire roared up into the wintry sky, causing the mound to resemble
the cone or crater of a volcano, which could be seen for miles round.
Ever and anon, while supper was being eaten, the Black Swan or Slugs
would rise, and going stealthily to the edge of the mound would peep
cautiously over, to make sure that none of their enemies were
approaching.

Immediately after supper, they all lay down to sleep, but, for a time,
each motionless form that lay rolled tightly in its blanket like an
Egyptian mummy, sent a series of little puffs from its head.  At last
the stars came out, and the pipes dropped from each sleeper's lips.
Then the moon rose--a circumstance which rendered their position still
more secure--and the fire sank low.  But Slugs was too cautious a hunter
to trust entirely to the alleged cowardice of the savages.  He knew well
that many, indeed most of the redskins, bad as well as good, had quite
enough of mere brute courage to make them dare and risk a good deal for
the sake of scalping a white hunter, so he rose once or twice during the
night to replenish the fire and take a look round; and as often as he
rose for these purposes, so often did he observe the glittering eye of
the Black Swan glaring round the encampment, although its owner never
once moved from his recumbent posture.

Thus the night was spent.  The first glimmer of daylight found the whole
party up and equipped for the journey.

They did not breakfast before setting out, as they preferred to take
their morning meal later in the day.  Few words were spoken.  At that
early hour, and in the sleepy condition which usually results from a
_very_ early start, men are seldom inclined to talk.  Only one or two
monosyllables were uttered as each man rolled up his blanket with his
share of the provisions in it, and fastened on his snow-shoes.  A few
minutes later Robin led the way down the slope, and the whole party
marched off in single file, and re-entered the woods.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

INTERESTING THOUGH PUZZLING DISCOVERIES.

About eight o'clock they halted for breakfast, which Larry O'Dowd
prepared with his accustomed celerity, and assisted to consume with his
wonted voracity.

"There's nothin' like aitin' when yer hungry," observed Larry, with his
mouth full.

"'Xcept drinking when you're dry," said Stiff, ironically.

"Now I don't agree with ye," retorted Larry; "I used to think so wance,
before I left the owld country--my blissin' rest on it.  I used to think
there was nothin' like drink, an' sure I was right, for there niver
_was_ anythin' like it for turnin' a poor man into a baste; but when I
comed into the woods here I couldn't get drink for love or money, an'
sure I found, after a while, I didn't need it, and got on better widout
it, an' enjoyed me life more for want of it.  Musha! it's little I care
for drink now; but, och!  I've a mortal love for aitin'!"

It needed not Larry's assurance to convince his hearers of the fact, for
he consumed nearly twice as much dried meat as any of his comrades.

"Well, if ye don't drink gin-sling or cocktail," said Stiff, "you're
mighty hard on the tea."

"True for ye, Stiff, it was the fav'rite tipple o' me owld mother, an'
I'm fond of it on that score, not to mention other raisins of a private
natur'."

"Couldn't ye make these reasons public?" said Walter.

"Unpossible!" said Larry, with much gravity, as he helped himself to
another can of tea.

"Come, time's up," said Robin abruptly, as he rose to put on his
snow-shoes.

Larry swallowed the tea at a draught, the others rose promptly, and in a
few minutes more they were again on the march.

Towards noon they issued out of the woods upon a wide undulating
country, which extended, as far as the eye could see, to faint blue
mountains in the distance.  This region was varied in character and
extremely beautiful.  The undulations of the land resembled in some
places the waves of the sea.  In other places there were clumps of trees
like islets.  Elsewhere there were hollows in which lakelets and ponds
evidently existed, but the deep snow covered all these with a uniform
carpet.  In some parts the ground was irregular and broken by miniature
hills, where there were numerous abrupt and high precipices.

The party were approaching one of the latter in the afternoon, when
Robin suddenly paused and pointed to a projecting ledge on the face of
one of the cliffs.

"What would ye say yonder objic' was?" he inquired of Slugs.

The hunter shaded his eyes with his hand, and remained silent for a few
seconds.

"It _looks_ like a sled," said he, dropping his hand, "but how it got
thar' would puzzle even a redskin to tell, for there's no track up to
that ledge."

"It _is_ a sled," said Black Swan, curtly.

"An' how came it there?" asked Robin.

"It fell from the top," replied the Indian.

"Right, lad, yer right!" said Slugs, who had taken another long look at
the object in question; "I see somethin' like a broken tree near the top
o' the precipice.  I hope Wapaw hain't gone an' tumbled over that
cliff."

This supposition was received in silence and with grave looks, for all
felt that the thing was not impossible, but the Indian shook his head.

"Come, Black Swan," said Walter, "you don't agree with us--what think
ye?"

"Wapaw had no sled with him," replied the Indian.

"Right again!" cried Slugs; "I do believe my sense is forsakin' me; an
Injun baby might have thought of that, for his tracks are plain enough.
Hows'ever, let's go see, for it's o' no use standin' here guessin'."

The party at once advanced to the foot of the precipice, and for nearly
an hour they did their utmost to ascend to the ledge, on which the
sledge lay, but their efforts were in vain.  The rock was everywhere too
steep and smooth to afford foot-hold.

"It won't do," said Larry, wiping the perspiration from his brow; "av we
had wings we might, but we hain't got 'em, so it's o' no manner o' use
tryin'."

"We shall try from the top now," said Robin.  "If anybody _has_ tumbled
over, the poor crittur may be alive yet, for all we know."

They found their efforts to descend from the top of the precipice
equally fruitless and much more dangerous, and although they spent a
long time in the attempt, and taxed their wits to the utmost, they were
ultimately compelled to leave the place and continue their journey
without attaining their object.

One discovery was made, however.  It was ascertained by the old marks in
the snow at the edge of the precipice that, whatever members of the
party who owned the sledge had tumbled over, at least two of them had
escaped, for their track--faint and scarcely discernible--was traced for
some distance.  It was found, also, that Wapaw's track joined this old
one.  The wounded Indian had fallen upon it not far from the precipice,
and, supposing, no doubt, that it would lead him to some encampment, he
had followed it up.  Robin and his men also followed it--increasing
their speed as much as possible.

Night began to descend again, but Wapaw was not overtaken, despite the
Black Swan's prophecy.  This, however, was not so much owing to the
miscalculation of the Indian, as to the fact that a great deal of time
had been lost in their futile endeavour to reach the sledge that had
fallen over the precipice.

About sunset they came to a place where the track turned suddenly at a
right angle and entered the bushes.

"Ha! the first travellers must have camped here, and Wapaw has followed
their example," said Robin, as he pushed aside the bushes.  "Just so,
here's the place, but the ashes are cold, so I fear we are not so near
our Injun friend as we could wish."

"Well, it can't be helped," cried Stiff, throwing down his bundle;
"we've had plenty o' walkin' for one day, so I vote for supper right
off."

"I second the motion," said Walter, seizing his axe, "seein' that the
camp is ready made to hand.  Now, Larry, get your pot ready."

"Sure it's stuffed full a'ready--an' I only wish I was in the same
state," said the Irishman, as he pressed the snow tightly into a tin
kettle, and hung it over the fire, which Slugs had just kindled.

The supper scene of the previous night was, in most of its details,
enacted over again; but it was resolved that each of the party should
keep watch for an hour, as, if the Indians had followed, there was a
possibility of their having gained on them during the delay at the
precipice.

Before the watch was set, however, and while all the party were enjoying
their pipes after supper, the Black Swan suddenly exclaimed, "Ho!" and
pointed with his finger to something which peeped out of the snow at
Larry's elbow, that volatile individual having uncovered it during some
of his eccentric movements.

"It's only an owld mocassin," said Larry, plucking the object from the
snow as he spoke; "some Injun lad has throw'd it away for useless."

"Hand it here," said Robin, re-lighting his pipe, which had gone out.

Larry tossed the mocassin to his leader, who eyed it carelessly for a
moment.  Suddenly he started, and, turning the mocassin over, examined
it with close and earnest attention.  Then he smiled, as if at his
passing anxiety, and dropped it on the ground.

"It reminded me," said he to Walter, "of my Nelly, for it has something
of the same shape that she was fond of, an' for a moment I was foolish
enough to think it might ha' belonged to the dear child, but--.  Come,
Larry, have 'ee got any more tea there?"

"Is it tay ye want? faix, then, it's little more nor laves that's
remainin'," said Larry, draining the last drops into a pannikin; "well,
there's about half a mug-full, afther all; it's wonderful what can be
got out o' it sometimes by squaazin' the pot."

"Hand it over, that's enough," said Robin, "thank 'ee, lad--here's
luck."

He drained the pannikin as though it had been a glass of rum, and,
smacking his lips, proceeded leisurely to refill his pipe.

"Are ye sure it's _not_ one of Nelly's old mocassins?" asked Walter, as
he eyed the little shoe earnestly.

"Sure enough, nephy, I would know her mother's make among ten thousand,
an' although that one is oncommon like it in some respec's, it ain't one
o' _hers_."

"But Nelly might have made it herself," suggested Walter, "and that
would account for its bein' like her mother's in the make."

Robin shook his head.  "Not likely," said he.  "The child didn't use to
make mocassins.  I'm not sure if she could do it at all; besides she was
last heard of miles and miles away from here in another direction.  No,
no, Walter lad, we mustn't let foolish fancies bother us.  However, the
sight o' this has fixed me to push on to-morrow as hard as I can lay my
legs to it, for if Wapaw's alive we can't fail to come up wi' him afore
sundown; and I'm keen to turn about an' go after my children.  I'll push
on by myself if ye don't care to keep up wi me."

This latter remark was made to Stiff, whose countenance indicated that
he had no desire to undertake a harder day's march than usual.  The
effect of the remark was to stir up all the Yankee's pride.

"I'll tell 'ee what it is, _Mister_ Gore," said he, tartly; "you may
think yourself an oncommon hard walker, but Obadiah Stiff is not the man
to cave in to any white man alive.  I don't care to go trampin' over the
country day after day, like the Wandering Jew, after a redskin, as, I'll
go bound, ain't no better than the rest o' his kind; but if ye want to
see which of our legs is the best pair o' compasses, I'll walk with ye
from here to hereafter, I guess, or anywhar else ye choose; if I don't,
then my name ain't Stiff."

"It would be well av it worn't Stiff, for ye've no reason to be proud
o't," observed Larry O'Dowd, with a grin; "don't spake so loud, man, but
shut up yer potatie trap and go to roost.  Ye'll need it all if ye
wouldn't like to fall behind to-morrow.  There now, don't reply; ye've
no call to make me yer father confessor, and apologise for boastin';
good night, an' go to slape!"

The rest of the party, who had lain down, laughed at this sally, and
Stiff, on consideration, thought it best to laugh too.  In a few minutes
every one in the encampment was sound asleep, with the exception of
Robin Gore, who took the first hour of watching, and who sat beside the
sinking fire like a Indian in earnest meditation, with his eyes resting
dreamily on the worn-out mocassin.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

SHORT ALLOWANCE, AND A SURPRISE.

Once again we return to Silver Lake; but here we do not find affairs as
we left them.  True, Roy and Nelly are still there, the hut is as snug
as it used to be, and the scenery as beautiful, but provisions have
begun to fail, and an expression of real anxiety clouds the usually
cheerful countenance of Roy, while reflected anxiety sits on the sweet
little face of Nell.  The winter is far advanced, and the prospect of
resuming the journey home is farther off than ever.

One morning Roy entered the hut with a slow step and a sad countenance.

"Nell," said he, throwing down a small fish which he had just caught,
"things look very bad now; seems to me that we'll starve here.  Since we
broke the long line I've only caught little things like _that_; there's
no rabbits in the snares--I looked at every one this mornin'--and, as
for deer, they seem to have said good-bye for the winter.  I thought of
goin' out with the gun this forenoon, but I think it a'nt o' no use, for
I was out all yesterday without seeing a feather or a hoof-print."

The tone in which Roy said this, and the manner in which he flung
himself down on the ground beside the fire, alarmed his sister greatly,
so that she scarcely knew what to say.

"Don't know what's to be done at all," continued Roy somewhat peevishly.

This was so unlike himself that the little girl felt a strong tendency
to burst into tears, but she restrained herself.  After a short silence,
she said somewhat timidly--

"Don't you think we might try to pray?"

"What's the use," said Roy quickly; "I'm sure I've prayed often and
often, and so have you, but nothin's come of it."

It was quite evident that Roy was in a state of rebellion.  This was the
first time Nelly had suggested _united_ prayer to her brother; she did
it timidly, and the rebuff caused her to shrink within herself.

Roy's quick eye observed the shrinking; he repented instantly, and,
drawing Nelly to him, laid her head on his breast.

"Forgive me, Nell, I shouldn't have said it; for, after all, we've had
everything given to us here that we have needed up to this time.  Come,
I _will_ pray with you."

They both got upon their knees at once, but, strive as he might, not a
word would cross Roy's lips for several minutes.  Nelly raised her head
and looked at him.

"God help us!" he ejaculated.

