which kept for a considerable time near the top of the water, spouting
now and then, and going slowly to windward.  We at last got within a few
feet of the monster, and the captain suddenly gave the word, "Stand up."

This was to our harpooner, Tom Lokins, who jumped up on the instant, and
buried two harpoons deep in the blubber.

"Stern all!" was the next word, and we backed off with all our might.
It was just in time, for, in his agony, the whale tossed his tail right
over our heads, the flukes were so big that they could have completely
covered the boat, and he brought them down flat on the sea with a clap
that made our ears tingle, while a shower of spray drenched us to the
skin.  For one moment I thought it was all over with us, but we were
soon out of immediate danger, and lay on our oars watching the writhings
of the wounded monster as he lashed the ocean into foam.  The water all
round us soon became white like milk, and the foam near the whale was
red with blood.

Suddenly this ceased, and, before we could pull up to lance him, he went
down, taking the line out at such a rate that the boat spun round, and
sparks of fire flew from the logger-head, from the chafing of the rope.

"Hold on!" cried the captain, and next moment we were tearing over the
sea at a fearful rate, with a bank of white foam rolling before us, high
above our bows, and away on each side of us like the track of a steamer,
so that we expected it every moment to rush in-board and swamp us.  I
had never seen anything like this before.  From the first I had a kind
of feeling that some evil would befall us.

While we were tearing over the water in this way, we saw the other
whales coming up every now and then, and blowing quite near to us, and
presently we passed close enough to the first mate's boat to see that he
was fast to a fish, and unable, therefore, to render us help if we
should need it.

In a short time the line began to slack, so we hauled it in hand over
hand, and Tom Lokins coiled it away in the tub in the stern of the boat,
while the captain took his place in the bow to be ready with the lance.
The whale soon came up, and we pulled with all our might towards him.
Instead of making off again, however, he turned round and made straight
at the boat.  I now thought that destruction was certain, for, when I
saw his great blunt forehead coming down on us like a steamboat, I felt
that we could not escape.  I was mistaken.  The captain received him on
the point of his lance, and the whale has such a dislike to pain, that
even a small prick will sometimes turn him.

For some time we kept dodging round this fellow; but he was so old and
wise, that he always turned his head to us, and prevented us from
getting a chance to lance him.  At last he turned a little to one side,
and the captain plunged the lance deep into his vitals.

"Ha! that's touched his life," cried Tom, as a stream of blood flew up
from his blow-holes, a sure sign that he was mortally wounded.  But he
was not yet conquered.  After receiving the cruel stab with the lance,
he pitched right down, head foremost, and once more the line began to
fly out over the bow.  We tried to hold on, but he was going so straight
down that the boat was almost swamped, and we had to slack off to
prevent our being pulled under water.

Before many yards of the line had run out, one of the coils in the tub
became entangled.

"Look out, lads," cried Tom, and at once throwing the turn off the
logger-head, he made an attempt to clear it.  The captain, in trying to
do the same thing, slipped and fell.  Seeing this, I sprang up, and,
grasping the coil as it flew past, tried to clear it.  Before I could
think, a turn whipped round my left wrist.  I felt a wrench as if my arm
had been torn out of the socket, and in a moment I was overboard, [see
frontispiece] going down with almost lightning speed into the depths of
the sea.  Strange to say, I did not lose my presence of mind.  I knew
exactly what had happened.  I felt myself rushing down, down, down, with
terrific speed; a stream of fire seemed to be whizzing past my eyes;
there was a dreadful pressure on my brain, and a roaring, as if of
thunder, in my ears.  Yet, even in that dread moment, thoughts of
eternity, of my sins, and of meeting with my God, flashed into my mind,
for thought is quicker than the lightning flash.

Of a sudden the roaring ceased, and I felt myself buffeting the water
fiercely in my efforts to reach the surface.  I know not how I got free,
but I suppose the turn of the line must have slackened off somehow.  All
this happened within the space of a few brief moments; but oh! they
seemed fearfully long to me.  I do not think I could have held my breath
a second longer.

When I came to the surface, and tried to look about me, I saw the boat
not more than fifty yards off, and, being a good swimmer, I struck out
for it, although I felt terribly exhausted.  In a few minutes my
comrades saw me, and, with a cheer put out the oars and began to row
towards me.  I saw that the line was slack, and that they were hauling
it in--a sign that the whale had ceased running and would soon come to
the surface again.  Before they had pulled half-a-dozen strokes I saw
the water open close beside the boat, and the monstrous head of the
whale shot up like a great rock rising out of the deep.

He was not more than three feet from the boat, and he came up with such
force, that more than half his gigantic length came out of the water
right over the boat.  I heard the captain's loud cry--"_Stern all_!"
But it was too late, the whole weight of the monster's body fell upon
the boat; there was a crash and a terrible cry, as the whale and boat
went down together.

For a few moments he continued to lash the sea in his fury, and the
fragments of the boat floated all round him.  I thought that every man,
of course, had been killed; but one after another their heads appeared
in the midst of blood and foam, and they struck out for oars and pieces
of the wreck.

Providentially, the whale, in his tossings, had shot a little away from
the spot, else every man must certainly have been killed.

A feeling of horror filled my heart, as I beheld all this, and thought
upon my position.  Fortunately, I had succeeded in reaching a broken
plank; for my strength was now so much exhausted, that I could not have
kept my head above water any longer without its assistance.  Just then I
heard a cheer, and the next time I rose on the swell, I looked quickly
round and saw the mate's boat making for the scene of action as fast as
a stout and willing crew could pull.  In a few minutes more I was
clutched by the arm, and hauled into it.  My comrades were next rescued,
and we thanked God when we found that none were killed, although one of
them had got a leg broken, and another an arm twisted out of joint.
They all, however, seemed to think that my escape was much more
wonderful than theirs; but I cannot say that I agreed with them in this.

We now turned our attention to the whale, which had dived again.  As it
was now loose, we did not know, of course, where it would come up, so we
lay still awhile.  Very soon up he came, not far from us, and as fierce
as ever.

"Now, lads, we _must_ get that whale," cried the mate; "give way with a
will."

The order was obeyed.  The boat almost leaped over the swell, and,
before long, another harpoon was in the whale's back.

"Fast again, hurrah!" shouted the mate, "now for the lance."

He gave the monster two deep stabs while he spoke, and spouting the red
stream of life, it rolled on the sea in agony, obliging us to keep well
out of its way.

I could not look upon the dying struggles of this enormous fish without
feelings of regret and self-reproach, for helping to destroy it.  I felt
almost as if I were a murderer, and that the Creator would call me to
account for taking part in the destruction of one of His grandest living
creatures.  But the thought passed quickly from my mind as the whale
became more violent and went into its flurry.  It began to lash the sea
with such astonishing violence, that all the previous struggles seemed
as nothing.  The water all round became white like milk, with great
streaks of red blood running through it, and the sound of the quick
blows of its tail and fins resembled that of dull hollow thunder.  We
gazed at this scene in deep silence and with beating hearts.

All at once the struggles ceased.  The great carcass rolled over belly
up, and lay extended on the sea in death.  To me it seemed as if a dead
calm had suddenly fallen around us, after a long and furious storm, so
great was the change when that whale at length parted with its huge
life.  The silence was suddenly broken by three hearty cheers, and then,
fastening a rope to our prize, we commenced towing it to the ship, which
operation occupied us the greater part of the night, for we had no fewer
than eight miles to pull.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

DEATH ON THE SEA.

The whale which we had taken, as I have related in the last chapter, was
our largest fish of that season.  It produced ninety barrels of oil, and
was worth about 500 pounds sterling, so that we did not grieve much over
the loss of our boat.

But our next loss was of a kind that could not be made up for by oil or
money, for it was the loss of a human life.  In the whale-fishery men
must, like soldiers, expect to risk their lives frequently, and they
have too often, alas! to mourn over the loss of a shipmate or friend.
Up to this time our voyage had gone prosperously.  We had caught so many
fish that nearly half our cargo was already completed, and if we should
be as lucky the remainder of the voyage, we should be able to return
home to Old England much sooner than we had expected.

Of course, during all this time we had met with some disappointments,
for I am not describing everything that happened on that voyage.  It
would require a much thicker volume than this to tell the half of our
adventures.  We lost five or six fish by their sinking before we could
get them made fast to the ship, and one or two bolted so fast that they
broke loose and carried away a number of harpoons, and many a fathom of
line.  But such misfortunes were what we had to look for.  Every whaler
meets with similar changes of luck, and we did not expect to fare
differently from our neighbours.  These things did not cause us much
regret beyond the time of their occurrence.  But it was far otherwise
with the loss that now befell us.

It happened one forenoon.  I was standing close to the starboard gangway
early that morning, looking over the side into the calm water, for there
was not a breath of wind, and talking to the first mate, who was a
gruff, surly man, but a good officer, and kind enough in his way when
everything went smooth with him.  But things don't go very smooth
generally in whaling life, so the mate was oftener gruff than sweet.

"Bob Ledbury," said he, "have you got your cutting-in gear in order?
I've got a notion that we'll `raise the oil' this day."

"All right, sir," said I, "you might shave yourself with the
blubber-spades.  That was a good fish we got last, sir, wasn't it?"

"Pretty good, though I've seen bigger."

"He gave us a deal of trouble too," said I.

"Not so much as I've seen others give," said he.  "When I was fishing in
the Greenland Seas we made fast to a whale that cost us I don't know how
many hundred dollars."  (You must know the first mate was a Yankee, and
he reckoned everything in dollars.)

"How was that, sir?" asked I.

"Well, it was something in this fashion.  We were floating about in the
North Atlantic one calm, hot day, just something like this, only it was
the afternoon, not the morning.  We were doing nothing, and whistling
for a breeze, when, all of a sudden, up comes five or six whales all
round the ship, as if they had spied her from the bottom of the sea, and
had come up to have a squint at her.  Of course the boats were manned at
once, and in less than no time we were tearing after them like all
alive.  But them whales were pretty wildish, I guess.  They kept us
pullin' the best part of five hours before we got a chance at them.  My
boat was out of sight of the ship before we made fast to a regular
snorer, a hundred-barreller at the least.  The moment he felt the iron,
away he went like the shot out of a gun; but he didn't keep it up long,
for soon after, another of our boats came up and made fast.  Well, for
some two or three hours we held fast, but could not haul on to him to
use the lance, for the moment we came close up alongside of his tail he
peaked flukes and dived, then up again, and away as fast as ever.  It
was about noon before we touched him again; but by that time two more
harpoons were made fast, and two other boats cast tow-lines aboard of
us, and were hauled along.  That was four boats, and more than sixteen
hundred fathoms of line, besides four harpoons that was fast to that
whale, and yet, for all that, he went ahead as fast as we could have
rowed, takin' us along with him quite easy.

"A breeze having sprung up, our ship overhauled us in the course of the
afternoon, and towards evening we sent a line on board, to see if that
would stop the big fish, and the topsails were lowered, so as to throw
some of the ship's weight on him, but the irons drew out with the
strain.  However, we determined to try it again.  Another line was sent
aboard about eight o'clock, and the topsails were lowered, but the line
snapped immediately.  Well, we held on to that whale the whole of that
night, and at four o'clock next morning, just thirty-six hours after he
was first struck, two fast lines were taken aboard the ship.  The breeze
was fresh, and against us, so the top-gallant sails were taken in, the
courses hauled up, and the topsails clewed down, yet, I assure you, that
whale towed the ship dead against the wind for an hour and a half at the
rate of two miles an hour, and all the while beating the water with his
fins and tail, so that the sea was in a continual foam.  We did not kill
that fish till after forty hours of the hardest work I ever went
through."

Some of my shipmates seemed to doubt the truth of this story; but, for
my part, I believed it, because the mate was a grave, truthful man,
though he was gruff, and never told lies, as far as I knew.  Moreover, a
case of the same kind happened some years afterwards, to a messmate of
mine, while he was serving aboard the _Royal Bounty_, on the 28th of May
1817.

I know that some of the stories which I now tell must seem very wild and
unlikely to landsmen; but those who have been to the whale-fishery will
admit that I tell nothing but the truth, and if there are any of my
readers who are still doubtful, I would say, go and read the works of
Captain Scoresby.  It is well known that this whaling captain was a
truly religious man, who gave up the fishing, though it turned him in
plenty of money, and became a minister of the gospel with a small
income, so it is not likely that he would have told what was untrue.
Well, in his works we find stories that are quite as remarkable as the
one I have just told, some of them more so.

For instance, he tells us of one whale, in the Greenland Seas, which was
not killed till it had drawn out ten thousand four hundred and forty
yards, or about _six miles_ of line, fastened to fifteen harpoons,
besides taking one of the boats entirely under water, which boat was
never seen again.

The mate told us two or three more stories, and a lot of us were
gathered round him, listening eagerly, for there is nothing Jack likes
so much as a _good yarn_, when all of a sudden, the man at the mast-head
sang out that a large sperm whale was spouting away two points off the
lee-bow.  Of course we were at our posts in a moment.

"There she blows! there she breaches!" sung the look-out.

"Lower away!" roared the captain.

The boats were in the water, and the men on their seats in a moment.
