it.  She was a sister of Olaf Quarram, who was King of Dublin.  Gyda was
very wealthy, and her husband had died that year.  In the territory
there was a man called Alfin, who was a great champion and single-combat
man.  He had paid his addresses to Gyda, but she gave for answer that
she would choose a husband for herself; and on that account the Thing
was assembled, that she might choose a husband.  Alfin came there
dressed out in his best clothes, and there were many well-dressed men at
the meeting.  Gundalf and some of his men had gone there also, out of
curiosity, but we had on our bad-weather clothes, and Gundalf wore a
coarse over-garment.  We stood apart from the rest of the crowd, Gyda
went round and looked at each, to see if any appeared to her a suitable
man.  Now when she came to where we were standing, she passed most of us
by with a glance; but when she passed me, I noticed that she turned half
round and gave me another look, which I have always held was a proof of
her good judgment.  However, Gyda passed on, and when she came to King
Gundalf she stopped, looked at him straight in the face, and asked what
sort of a man he was.

"He said, `I am called Gundalf, and am a stranger here!'

"Gyda replies, `Wilt thou have me if I choose thee?'  He answered, `I
will not say No to that;' then he asked her what her name was, and her
family and descent.

"`I am called Gyda,' said she, `and am daughter of the King of Ireland,
and was married in this country to an earl who ruled over this district.
Since his death I have ruled over it, and many have courted me, but
none to whom I would choose to be married.'

"She was a young and handsome woman.  They afterwards talked over the
matter together and agreed, and so Gundalf and Gyda were betrothed.

"Alfin was very ill pleased with this.  It was the custom there, as it
is sometimes here, if two strove for anything, to settle the matter by
holm-gang.  [Note: or single combat: so called because the combatants in
Norway went to a holm, or uninhabited isle, to fight.] And now Alfin
challenged Gundalf to fight about this business.  The time and place of
combat were settled, and it was fixed that each should have twelve men.
I was one of the twelve on our side.  When we met, Gundalf told us to do
exactly as we saw him do.  He had a large axe, and went in advance of
us, and when Alfin made a desperate cut at him with his sword, he hewed
away the sword out of his hand, and with the next blow hit Alfin on the
crown with the flat of his axe and felled him.  We all met next moment,
and each man did his best; but it was hard work, for the Irishmen fought
well, and two of them cut down two of our men, but one of these I
knocked down, and Gundalf felled the other.  Then we bound them all
fast, and carried them to Gundalf's lodging.  But Gundalf did not wish
to take Alfin's life.  He ordered him to quit the country and never
again to appear in it, and he took all his property.  In this way
Gundalf got Gyda in marriage, and he lived sometimes in England and
sometimes in Ireland.  Thikskul the scald says in regard to this:--

  "`King Gundalf woo'd Queen Gyda fair,
  With whom no woman could compare,
  And won her, too, with all her lands,
  By force of looks and might of hands
  From Ireland's green and lovely isle
  He carried off the Queen in style.
  He made proud Alfin's weapon dull,
  And flattened down his stupid skull--
  This did the bold King Gundalf do
  When he went o'er the sea to woo.'"

The wholesale robbery and murder which was thus related by the old Norse
viking appeared quite a natural and proper state of things in the eyes
of all save two of those assembled in the hall, and the saga was
consequently concluded amid resounding applause.  It is to be presumed
that, never having seen or heard of any other course of life, and having
always been taught that such doings were quite in accordance with the
laws of the land, the consciences of the Northmen did not trouble them.
At all events, while we do not for a moment pretend to justify their
doings, we think it right to point out that there must necessarily have
been a wide difference between their spirits and feelings, and the
spirits and feelings of modern pirates, who know that they are
deliberately setting at defiance the laws of both God and man.

It has been said there were two in the hall at Ulfstede who did not
sympathise with the tale of the old warrior.  The reader will scarce
require to be told that one of these was Hilda the Sunbeam.  The other
was Christian the hermit.  The old man, although an occasional visitor
at the stede, never made his appearance at meal-times, much less at the
nightly revels which were held there; but on that day he had arrived
with important news, just as Guttorm began his story, and would have
unceremoniously interrupted it had not one of the young house-carles,
who did not wish to lose the treat, detained him forcibly at the lower
end of the hall until it was ended.  The moment he was released the
hermit advanced hastily, and told Ulf that from the door of his hut on
the cliff he had observed bands of men hastening in all directions down
the dale.

"Thy news, old man, is no news," said Ulf; "the token for a Thing has
been sent out, and it is natural that the bonders should obey the
summons.  We expect them.  But come, it is not often thou favourest us
with thy company.  Sit down by me, and take a horn of mead."

The hermit shook his head.

"I never taste strong liquor.  Its tendency is to make wise men
foolish," he said.

"Nay, then, thou wilt not refuse to eat.  Here, Hilda, fetch thy friend
a platter."

"I thank thee, but, having already supped, I need no more food.  I came
but to bring what I deemed news."

"Thou art churlish, old man," exclaimed Ulf angrily; "sit down and
drink, else--"

"Come, come," interrupted Haldor, laying his hand on Ulf's arm, "Let the
old man be; he seems to think that he has something worth hearing to
tell of; let him have his say out in peace."

"Go on," said Ulf gruffly.

"Was the token sent out a baton or a split arrow?" asked the hermit.

"A baton," said Ulf.

"Then why," rejoined the other, "do men come to a peaceful Thing with
all their war gear on?"

"What say ye? are they armed?" exclaimed Ulf, starting up.  "This must
be looked to.  Ho! my carles all, to arms--"

At that moment there was a bustle at the lower end of the hall, and
Alric was seen forcing his way towards Ulf's high seat.

"Father," he said eagerly, addressing Haldor, "short is the hour for
acting, and long the hour for feasting."

Haldor cast his eyes upon his son and said--

"What now is in the way?"

"The Danes," said Alric, "are on the fiord--more than six hundred men.
Skarpedin leads them.  One of them pitched me into the sea, but I marked
his neck to keep myself in his memory!  They have plundered and burnt at
the Springs, and Erling has gone away to attack them all by himself,
with only sixty house-carles.  You will have to be quick, father."

"Quick, truly," said Haldor, with a grim smile, as he drew tight the
buckle of his sword-belt.

"Aye," said Ulf, "with six hundred Danes on the fiord, and armed men
descending the vale, methinks--"

"Oh!  I can explain that" cried Alric, with an arch smile; "Erling made
me change the baton for the split arrow when I was sent round with the
token."

"That is good luck," said Haldor, while Ulf's brow cleared a little as
he busked himself for the fight; "we shall need all our force."

"Aye, and all our time too," said Guttorm Stoutheart, as he put on his
armour with the cheerful air of a man who dons his wedding dress.
"Come, my merry men all.  Lucky it is that my longships are at hand just
now ready loaded with stones:--

  "`O! a gallant sight it is to me,
  The warships darting o'er the sea,
  A pleasant sound it is to hear
  The war trump ringing loud and clear.'"

Ulf and his friends and house-carles were soon ready to embark, for in
those days the Norseman kept his weapons ready to his hands, being
accustomed to sudden assaults and frequent alarms.  They streamed out of
the hall, and while some collected stones, to be used as missiles,
others ran down to the shore to launch the ships.  Meanwhile Ulf,
Haldor, Guttorm, and other chief men held a rapid consultation, as they
stood and watched the assembling of the men of the district.

It was evident that the split arrow had done its duty.  From the grassy
mound on which they stood could be seen, on the one hand, the dark
recesses of Horlingdal, which were lost in the mists of distance among
the glaciers on the fells; and, on the other hand, the blue fiord with
branching inlets and numerous holms, while the skerries of the coast
filled up the background--looming faint and far off on the distant sea.
In whatever direction the eye was turned armed men were seen.  From
every distant gorge and valley on the fells they issued, singly, or in
twos and threes.  As they descended the dale they formed into groups and
larger bands; and when they gained the more level grounds around
Haldorstede, the heavy tread of their hastening footsteps could be
distinctly heard, while the sun--for although near midnight now it was
still above the horizon--flashed from hundreds of javelins, spears,
swords, and bills, glittered on steel headpieces and the rims of
shields, or trickled fitfully on suits of scale armour and shirts of
ring mail.  On the fiord, boats came shooting forth from every inlet or
creek, making their appearance from the base of precipitous cliffs or
dark-mouthed caves as if the very mountains were bringing forth warriors
to aid in repelling the foe.  These were more sombre than those on the
fells, because the sun had set to them by reason of the towering hills,
and the fiord was shrouded in deepest gloom.  But all in the approaching
host--on water and land--were armed from head to foot, and all converged
towards Ulfstede.

When they were all assembled they numbered five hundred fighting men--
and a stouter or more valiant band never went forth to war.  Six
longships were sufficient to embark them.  Three of these were of the
largest size--having thirty oars on each side, and carrying a hundred
men.  One of them belonged to Haldor, one to Ulf, and one--besides
several smaller ships--to Guttorm, who chanced to be on viking cruise at
the time he had turned aside to visit his kinsman.  The warlike old man
could scarce conceal his satisfaction at his unexpected good fortune in
being so opportunely at hand when hard blows were likely to be going!
Two of the other ships were cutters, similar to Erling's Swan, and
carrying sixty men each, and one was a little larger, holding about
eighty men.  It belonged to Glumm the Gruff; whose gruffness, however,
had abated considerably, now that there was a prospect of what we
moderns would call "letting the steam off" in a vigorous manner.

Soon the oars were dipped in the fiord, and the sails were set, for a
light favourable wind was blowing.  In a short time the fleet rounded
the ness, and came in sight of the ground where Erling and Skarpedin
were preparing to renew the combat.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE TALE RETURNS TO THE SPRINGS--DESCRIBES A GREAT LAND FIGHT, AND TELLS
OF A PECULIAR STYLE OF EXTENDING MERCY TO THE VANQUISHED.

In a previous chapter we left Skarpedin discussing with his chiefs the
best mode of attacking the small band of his opponents in the pass of
the Springs.  They had just come to a decision, and were about to act on
it, when they suddenly beheld six warships sweeping round the ness.

"Now will we have to change our plans," said Skarpedin.

Thorvold agreed with this, and counselled getting on board their ships
and meeting the enemy on the water; but the other objected, because he
knew that while his men were in the act of embarking, Erling would sally
forth and kill many of them before they could get away.

"Methinks," said he, "I will take forty of my best men, and try to
entice that fox out of his hole, before he has time to see the ships."

"Grief only will come of that," says Thorvold.

Skarpedin did not reply, but choosing forty of his stoutest carles he
went to the pass and defied Erling to come out and fight.

"Now here am I, Erling, with forty men.  Wilt thou come forth? or is thy
title of Bold ill bestowed, seeing thou hast more men than I?"

"Ill should I deserve the title," replies Erling, "if I were to meet
thee with superior force."

With that he chose thirty men, and, running down to the plain, gave the
assault so fiercely that men fell fast on every side, and the Danes gave
back a little.  When they saw this, and that Erling and Thorer hewed men
down wherever they went, the Danes made a shield circle round Skarpedin,
as was the custom when kings went into battle; because they knew that if
he fell there would be no one so worthy to guide them in the fight with
the approaching longships.  Thus they retreated, fighting.  When Erling
and his men had gone far enough, they returned to the pass, and cheered
loudly as they went, both because of the joy of victory, and because
they saw the warships of their friends coming into the bay.

King Haldor and his companions at once ran their ships on the beach near
the mouth of the river, and, landing, drew them up, intending to fight
on shore.  Skarpedin did not try to prevent this, for he was a bold man,
and thought that with so large a force he could well manage to beat the
Northmen, if they would fight on level ground.  He therefore drew up his
men in order of battle at one end of the plain, and Haldor the Fierce,
to whom was assigned the chief command, drew up the Northmen at the
other end.  Erling joined them with his band, and then it was seen that
the two armies were not equal--that of the Northmen being a little
smaller than the other.

Then Haldor said, "Let us draw up in a long line that they may not turn
our flanks, as they have most men."

This was done, and Haldor advanced into the plain and set up his banner.
The Danes in like manner advanced and planted their banner, and both
armies rushed to the attack, which was very sharp and bloody.  Wherever
the battle raged most fiercely there King Haldor and Erling were seen,
for they were taller by half a head than most other men.  Being clothed
alike in almost every respect, they looked more like brothers than
father and son.  Each wore a gilt helmet, and carried a long shield, the
centre of which was painted white, but round the edge was a rim of
burnished steel.  Each had a sword by his side, and carried a javelin to
throw, but both depended chiefly on their favourite weapon, the
battle-axe, for, being unusually strong, they knew that few men could
withstand the weight of a blow from that.  The defensive armour of
father and son was also the same--a shirt of leather, sewed all over
with small steel rings.  Their legs were clothed in armour of the same
kind, and a mantle of cloth hung from the shoulders of each.

Most of the chief men on both sides were armed in a similar way, though
not quite so richly, and with various modifications; for instance, the
helmet of Thorvold was of plain steel, and for ornament had the tail of
the ptarmigan as its crest.  Skarpedin's, on the other hand, was quite
plain, but partly gilded; his armour was of pieces of steel like fish
scales sewed on a leathern shirt, and over his shoulders he wore as a
mantle the skin of a wolf.  His chief weapon was a bill--a sort of hook
or short scythe fixed to a pole, and it was very deadly in his hands.
Most of the carles and thralls were content to wear thick shirts of wolf
and other skins, which were found to offer good resistance to a
sword-cut, and some of them had portions of armour of various kinds.
Their arms were spears, bows, arrows with stone heads, javelins, swords,
bills, and battle-axes and shields.

When both lines met there was a hard fight.  The combatants first threw
their spears and javelins, and then drew their swords and went at each
other in the greatest fury.  In the centre Haldor and Erling went
together in advance of their banner, cutting down on both sides of them.
Old Guttorm Stoutheart went in advance of the right wing, also hewing
down right and left.  With him went Kettle Flatnose, for that ambitious
thrall could not be made to remember his position, and was always
putting himself in front of his betters in war; yet it is due to him to
say that he kept modestly in the background in time of peace.  To these
was opposed Thorvold, with many of the stoutest men among the Danes.

Now, old Guttorm and Kettle pressed on so hard that they were almost
separated from their men; and while Guttorm was engaged with a very tall
and strong man, whom he had wounded severely more than once, another
stout fellow came between him and Kettle, and made a cut at him with his
sword.  Guttorm did not observe him, and it seemed as if the old
Stoutheart should get his death-wound there; but the thrall chanced to
see what was going on.  He fought with a sort of hook, like a
reaping-hook, fixed at the end of a spear handle, with the cutting edge
inside.  The men of Horlingdal used to laugh at Kettle because of his
fondness for this weapon, which was one of his own contriving; but when
they did so, he was wont to reply that it was better than most other
weapons, because it could not only make his friends laugh, but his
enemies cry!

With this hook the thrall made a quick blow at the Dane; the point of it
went down through his helmet into his brain, and that was his deathblow.

"Well done, Kettle!" cried old Guttorm, who had just cleft the skull of
his opponent with his sword.

At this Thorvold ran forward and said:

"Well done it may be, but well had it been for the doer had it not been
done.  Come on, thou flatnose!"

"Now, thou must be a remarkably clever man," retorted Kettle, with much
of that rich tone of voice which, many centuries later, came to be known
as "the Irish brogue", "for it is plain ye know my name without being
told it!"

So saying, with a sudden quick movement he got his hook round Thorvold's
neck.

"That is an ugly grip," said Thorvold, making a fierce cut at the haft
with his sword; but Kettle pulled the hook to him, and with it came the
head, and that was Thorvold's end.

While this was going on at the right wing, the left wing was led by Ulf
of Romsdal and Glumm the Gruff; but Ulf's men were not so good as
Haldor's men, for he was not so wise a man as Haldor, and did not manage
his house so well.

It was a common saying among the people of Horlingdal that Haldor had
under him the most valiant men in Norway--and as the master was, so were
the men.  Haldor never went to sea with less than a fully-manned ship of
thirty benches of rowers, and had other large vessels and men to man
them as well.  One of his ships had thirty-two benches of rowers, and
could carry at least two hundred men.  He had always at home on his farm
thirty slaves or thralls, besides other serving people, and about two
