was closed_, by which he meant to say that it would fly from a battery
and travel along a wire ever so far, if only that wire was to turn right
round and run back to the same battery again.  Now, if that's so, seems
to me that when you've got your cable to Newfoundland you'll have to run
another one back again to Ireland before it'll work."

"Ah, Slagg, that would indeed be the case," returned Robin, "were it not
that we have discovered the important fact that the earth--the round
globe on which we stand--itself acts the part of a grand conductor.  So
we have only to send down _earth-wires_ at the two ends--one into the
earth of Ireland, the other into the earth of Newfoundland, and
straightway the circuit is closed, and the electricity generated in our
batteries passes through the cable from earth to earth."

"Robin," said Slagg doubtingly, "d'you expect me for to believe _that_?"

"Indeed I do," said Robin simply.

"Then you're greener than I took you for.  No offence meant, but it's my
opinion some o' these 'cute electricians has bin tryin' the width of
your swallow."

"No, you are mistaken," returned Robin earnestly; "I have read the fact
in many books.  The books differ in their opinions as to the causes and
nature of the fact, but not as to the fact itself."

It was evident that Robin looked upon this as an unanswerable argument,
and his friend seemed perplexed.

"Well, I don' know how it is," he said, after a pause, "but I do believe
that this here wonderful electricity is fit for a'most anything, an'
that we'll have it revoloosionising everything afore long--I do indeed."

The intelligent reader who has noted the gigantic strides which we have
recently made in electric lighting of late will observe that Slagg,
unwittingly, had become almost prophetic at this time.

"We're going along splendidly now," said Mr Smith, coming up to Robin
that evening while he was conversing with Slagg, who immediately
retired.--"Who is that youth?  He seems very fond of you; I've observed
that he makes up to you whenever you chance to be on deck together."

"He is one of the steward's lads, sir; I met him accidentally in the
train; but I suspect the fondness is chiefly on my side.  He was very
kind to me when I first came on board, and I really think he is an
intelligent, good fellow--a strange mixture of self-confidence and
humility.  Sometimes, to hear him speak, you would think he knew
everything; but at the same time he is always willing--indeed anxious--
to listen and learn.  He is a capital fighter too."

Here Robin related the battle in the boys' berth, when Slagg thrashed
Stumps, whereat Mr Smith was much amused.

"So he seems a peculiar lad--modest, impudent, teachable, kindly, and
warlike!  Come below now, Robin, I have some work for you.  Did you make
the calculations I gave you yesterday?"

"Yes, sir, and they corresponded exactly with your own."

"Good.  Go fetch my little note-book: I left it in the grand saloon on
the furthest aft seat, port side."

Robin found the magnificent saloon of the big ship ringing with music
and conversation.  Joy over the recent restoration to health of the
ailing cable, the comfortable stability of the ship in rough weather,
and the satisfactory progress then being made, all contributed to raise
the spirits of every one connected with the great work, so that, while
some were amusing themselves at the piano, others were scattered about
in little groups, discussing the profounder mysteries of electric
science, or prophesying the speedy completion of the enterprise, while a
few were speculating on the probability of sport in Newfoundland, or
planning out journeys through the United States.

"There's lots of game, I'm told, in Newfoundland," said one of the
youthful electricians, whose ruling passion--next to the subtle fluid--
was the gun.

"So I've been told," replied an elder and graver comrade.  "Polar bears
are quite common in the woods, and it is said that walrus are fond of
roosting in the trees."

"Yes, I have heard so," returned the youthful sportsman, who, although
young, was not to be caught with chaff, "and the fishing, I hear, is
also splendid.  Salmon and cod are found swarming in the rivers by those
who care for mild occupation, while really exciting sport is to be had
in the great lakes of the interior, where there are plenty of
fresh-water whales that take the fly."

"The swan, you mean," said another comrade.  "The fly that is most
killing among Newfoundland whales is a swan fastened whole to a shark
hook--though a small boat's anchor will do if you haven't the right
tackle."

"Come, don't talk nonsense, but let's have a song!" said a brother
electrician to the sporting youth.

"I never sing," he replied, "except when hurt, and then I sing out.  But
see, our best musician has just seated himself at the instrument."

"I don't talk shop, Nimrod; call it the piano."

Most of those present drew towards the musical corner, where Ebenezer
Smith, having just entered the saloon in search of Robin, had been
prevailed on to sit down and enliven the company.  Robin, who had been
delayed by difficulty in finding the note-book, stopped to listen.

Smith had a fair average voice and a vigorous manner.

"You wouldn't object to hear the cook's last?" asked Smith, running his
fingers lightly over the keys.

"Of course not--go on," chorused several voices.

"I had no idea," lisped a simple youth, who was one of a small party of
young gentlemen interested in engineering and science, who had been
accommodated with a passage,--"I had no idea that our cook was a poet as
well as an admirable _chef de cuisine_."

"Oh, it's not _our_ cook he means," explained the sporting electrician;
"Mr Smith _refers_ to a certain sea-cook--or his son, I'm not sure
which--who is _chef des horse-marines_."

"Is there a chorus?" asked one.

"Of course there is," replied Smith; "a sea-song without a chorus is
like a kite without a tail--it is sure to fall flat, but the chorus is
an old and well-known one--it is only the song that is new.  Now then,
clear your throats, gentlemen."

  Song--The Loss of the Nancy Lee.

  I.

  'Twas on a Friday morning that I went off,
  An' shipped in the Nancy Lee,
  But that ship caught a cold and with one tremendous cough
  Went slap to the bottom of the sea, the sea, the sea,
  Went slap to the bottom of the sea.

  Chorus.--Then the raging sea may roar,
  An' the stormy winds may blow,
  While we jolly sailor boys rattle up aloft,
  And the landlubbers lie down below, below, below
  And the landlubbers lie down below.

  II.

  For wery nigh a century I lived with the crabs,
  An' danced wi' the Mermaids too,
  An' drove about the Ocean in mother o' pearl cabs,
  An' dwelt in a cavern so blue, so blue, so blue,
  An' dwelt in a cavern so blue.
  Chorus.--Then the raging sea, etcetera.

  III.

  I soon forgot the sorrows o' the world above
  In the pleasures o' the life below;
  Queer fish they made up to me the want o' human love,
  As through the world o' waters I did go, did go, did go;
  As through the world o' waters I did go.
  Chorus.--Then the raging sea, etcetera.

  IV.

  One day a horrid grampus caught me all by the nose,
  An' swung me up to the land,
  An' I never went to sea again, as everybody knows,
  And as everybody well may understand, 'derstand, 'derstand,
  And as everybody well may understand.
  Chorus.--Then the raging sea, etcetera.

The plaudits with which this song was received were, it need scarcely be
remarked, due more to the vigour of the chorus and the enthusiasm of the
audience than to intrinsic merit.  Even Robin Wright was carried off his
legs for the moment, and, modest though he was, broke in at the chorus
with such effect--his voice being shrill and clear--that, he
unintentionally outyelled all the rest, and would have fled in
consternation from the saloon if he had not been caught and forcibly
detained by the sporting electrician, who demanded what right he had to
raise his steam-whistle in that fashion.

"But I say, young Wright," he added in a lower tone, leading our hero
aside, "what's this rumour I hear about a ghost in the steward's cabin?"

"Oh! it is nothing to speak of," replied Robin, with a laugh.  "The lad
they call Stumps got a fright--that's all."

"But that's enough.  Let us hear about it."

"Well, I suppose you know," said Robin, "that there's a ghost in the
Great Eastern."

"No, I don't know it from personal experience, but I have heard a report
to that effect."

"Well, I was down in Jim Slagg's berth, having a chat with him about the
nature of electric currents--for he has a very inquiring mind,--and
somehow we diverged to ghosts, and began to talk of the ghost of the
Great Eastern.

"`I don't believe in the Great Eastern ghost--no, nor in ghosts of any
kind,' said Stumps, who was sitting near us eating a bit of cheese.

"`But I believe in 'em,' said the boy Jeff, who was seated on the other
side of the table, and looked at us so earnestly that we could scarce
help smiling--though we didn't feel in a smiling humour at the time, for
it was getting dark, and we had got to talking in low tones and looking
anxiously over our shoulders, you know--

"`Oh yes, I know,' replied the sportsman, with a laugh; `I have
shuddered and grue-oo-ed many a time over ghost-stories.  Well?'

"`_I_ don't believe in 'em, Jeff.  Why do _you_?' asked Stumps, in a
scoffing tone.

"`Because I hear one every night a'most when I go down into the dark
places below to fetch things.  There's one particular spot where the
ghost goes tap-tap-tapping continually.'

"`Fiddlededee,' said Stumps.

"`Come down, and you shall hear it for yourself,' said Jeff.

"Now, they say that Stumps is a coward, though he boasts a good deal--"

"You may say," interrupted the sportsman, "that Stumps is a coward
_because_ he boasts a good deal.  Boasting is often a sign of
cowardice--though not always."

"Well," continued Robin, "being ashamed to draw back, I suppose, he
agreed to accompany Jeff.

"`Won't you come too, Slagg?' said Stumps.

"`No; I don't care a button for ghosts.  Besides, I'm too busy, but
Wright will go.  There, don't bother me!' said Jim.

"I noticed, as I went last out of the room, that Slagg rose quickly and
pulled a sheet off one of the beds.  Afterwards, looking back, I saw him
slip out and run down the passage in the opposite direction.  I
suspected he was about some mischief, but said nothing.

"It was getting dark, as I have said, though not dark enough for
lighting the lamps, and in some corners below it was as dark as
midnight.  To one of these places Jeff led us.

"`Mind how you go now,' whispered Jeff; `it's here somewhere, and
there's a hole too--look-out--there it is!'

"`What! the ghost?' whispered Stumps, beginning to feel uneasy.  To say
truth, I began to feel uneasy myself without well knowing why.  At that
moment I fell over something, and came down with a crash that shook
Stumps's nerves completely out of order.

"`I say, let's go back,' he muttered in a tremulous voice.

"`No, no,' whispered Jeff seizing Stumps by the arm with a sudden grip
that made him give a short yelp, `we are at the place now.  It's in this
dark passage.  Listen!'

"We all held our breath and listened.  For a few seconds we heard
nothing, but presently a slight tapping was heard.

"`I've heard,' whispered Jeff in a low tone, `that when the big ship was
buildin', one o' the plate-riveters disappeared in some hole between the
two skins o' the ship hereabouts, and his comrades, not bein' able to
find him, were obliged at last to rivet him in, which they did so tight
that even his ghost could not get out, so it goes on tappin', as you
hear, an' is likely to go on tappin' for ever.'

"`Bosh!' whispered Stumps; thus politely intimating his disbelief, but I
felt him trembling all over notwithstanding.

"At that moment we saw a dim shadowy whitish object at the other end of
the dark passage.  `Wha'--wha'--what's that?' said I.

"Stumps gasped.  I heard his teeth chattering, and I think his knees
were knocking together.  Jeff made no sound, and it was too dark to see
his face.  Suddenly the object rushed at us.  There was no noise of
footsteps--only a muffled sound and a faint hissing.  I stood still,
unable to move.  So did Jeff.  I felt the hair of my head rising.
Stumps gasped again--then turned and fled.  The creature, whatever it
was, brushed past us with a hideous laugh.  I guessed at once that it
was Jim Slagg, but evidently Stumps didn't, for he uttered an awful yell
that would have roused the whole ship if she had been of an ordinary
size; at the same moment he tripped and fell on the thing that had upset
me, and the ghost, leaping over him, vanished from our sight.

"To my surprise, on returning to our cabin, we found Slagg as we had
left him, with both hands on his forehead poring over his book.  I was
almost as much surprised to see Jeff sit down and laugh heartily.--Now,
what _do_ you think it could have been?"

"It was Slagg, of course," answered the sporting electrician.

"Yes, but what causes the tapping?"

"Oh, that is no doubt some little trifle--a chip of wood, or bit of wire
left hanging loose, which shakes about when the ship heaves."

A sudden tramping of feet overhead brought this ghostly discussion to an
abrupt close, and caused every man in the saloon to rush on deck with a
terrible feeling in his heart that something had gone wrong.

"Not broken?" asked an electrician with a pale face on reaching the
deck.

"Oh no, sir," replied an engineer, with an anxious look, "not quite so
bad as that, but a whale has taken a fancy to inspect us, and he is
almost _too_ attentive."

So it was.  A large Greenland whale was playing about the big ship,
apparently under the impression that she was a giant of his own species,
and it had passed perilously close to the cable.

A second time it came up, rolling high above the waves.  It went close
past the stern--rose again and dived with a gentle flop of its great
tail, which, if it had touched the cable, would have cut it like a
thread.  At that trying moment, as they saw its huge back glittering in
the moonlight, the hearts of the helpless spectators appeared absolutely
to stand still.  When the monster dived its side even touched the cable,
but did not damage it.  Being apparently satisfied by that time that the
ship was not a friend, the whale finally disappeared in the depths of
its ocean home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Those who visited the Crystal Palace at Sydenham during the recent
Electrical Exhibition had an opportunity of seeing the shells here
referred to under a powerful microscope.



CHAPTER TEN.

TELLS OF GREAT EFFORTS AND FAILURES AND GRAND SUCCESS.

Thus happily and smoothly all things went, with little bursts of anxiety
and little touches of alarm, just sufficient, as it were, to keep up the
spirits of all, till the morning of the 30th July.  But on that morning
an appearance of excitement in the testing-room told that something had
again gone wrong.  Soon the order was given to slow the engines, then to
stop them!

The bursting of a thunder-clap, the explosion of a powder-magazine,
could not have more effectually awakened the slumberers than this abrupt
stoppage of the ship's engines.  Instantly all the hatchways poured
forth anxious inquirers.

"Another fault," was the reply to such.

"O dear!" said some.

"Horrible!" said others.

