were a footman named Rogers and a butler named Sutherland, both of whom
had been witnesses to the will; but the footman had gone to the bad, and
the butler had gone she knew not where.

Then Mr Dean began to smell another rat, besides that which he was just
then in pursuit of, for the Colonel had incidentally mentioned to him
the circumstance of the estate passing away from him, owing to a new
will having been recently discovered.  Although the matter was not the
detective's present business, he made a mental note of it.

After quitting the garden, and promising soon to return, the detective
had an interview with Mr Trumps in the parlour of the thieves'
missionary.  Many a fallen and apparently lost man and woman had been
brought to the Saviour in that parlour by that missionary--the same whom
we have introduced to the reader in the thieves' den.  Through the
medium of Tommy Splint the interview was brought about, and no sooner
did Trumps ascertain the object that Dean had in view than he became
suddenly confidential.

"Now, look here," he said, when he found himself alone with Mr Dean, "I
knows more about them Brentwoods and Westons than you think for."

"No doubt you do; and I suppose you wish to sell your knowledge at the
highest possible figure," said Dean, with a very slight smile.

"You're wrong for once," returned Trumps.  "If you'd said that to me two
days ago, I'd 'ave said `yes;' but I've 'eard things in this blessed
room w'ich 'as made me change my mind.  You're welcome to all I knows
for nothing."

Mr Dean did not believe in sudden conversion, nevertheless he expressed
gratification.  Being what the Yankees call 'cute, he avoided anything
like eagerness in gaining information.

"My business here, however," he said, "is to get information about that
Scotsman, you know, and the charge of theft by Mr Lockhart.  We believe
Laidlaw to be innocent and, understanding that you think as we do, and
that you know something about him, we hope you may be able to help us."

From this point Mr Dean began to pump and squeeze, and Trumps proved
worthy of his name in the way he submitted to both processes.  At last,
when nothing more was to be got Mr Dean said, in a somewhat careless
way, "You are acquainted, I believe, with old Mrs Morley--chimney-pot
Liz, they call her--are you not?"

"Yes, I am.  I've known her long.  Knew her when I was footman in a
family connected with the Brentwoods."

"Oho!" thought Mr Dean with sudden surprise, for he began to smell more
of his second rat, but he looked stolid; said nothing; did not move a
muscle; merely nodded his head gently as if to say, go on.

"Now I know what you're driving at," continued Trumps, with a very
knowing wink, "an' I'll help you.  First place, my name ain't Trumps."

"I know that--it's Rodgers," said the detective.

"Whew! how d'ee know _that_?" exclaimed the thief in extreme surprise.

"We detectives know everything," said Dean.

"Oh! then there's no need for me to tell you anything more," returned
Trumps, _alias_ Rodgers, with a grin.

"Well, I don't know exactly everything," returned Dean; "but I do know--
at least I guess--that you were a footman in the service of Richard
Weston, Esquire, of Weston Hall, in Kent; that the butler's name was
Sutherland, and that you and he were witnesses to Mr Weston's will."

"Just so.  You're right."

"Now, are you aware," said Mr Dean, "that Colonel Brentwood has lost,
or is going to lose, his estate because a new will by Richard Weston has
been found, leaving it to another man?"

"No, I did not know that, but that clears up to me the mystery of the
will that I witnessed.  You must know that when we were witnessing the
will, Sutherland and me both noticed that it was eight pages of big
paper, and that it seemed to have two beginnings--one bein' in the
middle.  Master couldn't see well, an' was very weak at the time--so
weak that when he came to the last page the pen fell out of his hand and
only half of the last name was signed.  Mr Lockhart said that would do,
however, an' we witnessed it.  Master never completed the signature, for
he took to his bed that very day, and no one ever saw him put pen to
paper again.  Sutherland often spoke to me about that, and wondered if a
will with an imperfect signature would pass.  Hows'ever, it was none of
our business, so we forgot about it, and soon after Sutherland went to
stay with a family in Pimlico as butler, where I think he is now.  As
for me--"

"Yes, I know," said Dean significantly; "you need not recall that just
now.  Can you give me the name and address of the family in Pimlico?"

"Good; now then," said Mr Dean after booking his information, "I'll
want to see you again, so don't get yourself into scrapes, and keep your
tongue quiet.  Your missionary will help you, I have no doubt.
Meanwhile, I will go and pay a visit to a certain Martha who lives on
the other side of the river."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

PUMPING AND SQUEEZING--THE GARRET CLASS, ETCETERA.

When Mr Dean succeeded, with some difficulty, in obtaining a private
interview with Mr Spivin's servant Martha, he proceeded with much
politeness and subtlety to pump and squeeze her.

And it may be remarked here that Mr Dean had what Martha afterwards
styled "a way with him" that was quite irresistible, insomuch that she
was led, somehow, to speak of things she never meant to mention, and to
reveal things she never intended to confess.

"You see, sir," she said, "it's the dooty of me an' Mary to do the
bedrooms w'en the family's at breakfast.  Well, that morning we went as
usual to Mr Laidlaw's room first, because 'e's quick with 'is meals an'
wants 'is boots put in 'is room so as he may get out immediately.  Mr
Laidlaw 'as no luggage, sir, only a shoulder-bag, an' it was lyin' open
on the table, so me an' Mary looked into it just to--to--"

"To see that nothing had tumbled out," suggested Mr Dean.  "I
understand."

"Just so, sir," assented Martha; "and there was nothink in it but a
spare shirt rolled up, and a pair of socks, and a small Bible--no money
or watch or anythink that would break even if it did tumble out,--'is
shavin' things and all that being on the dressin'-table--so--"

"So your mind was relieved, Martha--well, go on."

"But as we was agoin' to close the bag," continued the girl, "we
observed an inner pocket, an' Mary says, p'raps there was a love-letter
in it!  I laughed an' said, `Let's look an' see.'  So we looked an' saw
nothink."

"You both looked and were quite sure of that?" asked Mr Dean.

"Yes, quite sure, for we both felt the pocket all round as well as
looked into it."

"Well, go on."

"Then we shut the bag, and after we had finished the room, we was just
goin' out, when master he ran up-stairs as if he was in a hurry.  He
came into the room with a bit of paper in 'is 'and, somethink like a
bank note, but he started on seein' us, an' crumpled up the paper an'
stuffed it in 'is pocket.  At the same time 'e got very angry, scolded
us for being so slow, and ordered us off to the other rooms.  Not ten
minutes after that in comes Mr Lockhart, the lawyer, with two
policemen, an' seizes Mr Laidlaw, who was still at 'is breakfast.  At
first he got very angry an' shoved one policemen over the sofa and the
other into the coal-scuttle, at the same time sayin' in a growly voice,
`I think--'ee've--aw--geen--mad--thee--gither'--oh, I can't speak
Scotch!" exclaimed Martha, bursting into a laugh.

"Better not try, my dear," said Dean, with a peculiar smile.

"Well, then," continued Martha, on recovering herself, "when the
policemen got up again Mr Laidlaw said he had no intention of running
away (only 'e said rinnin' awa'), and that he would go with them quietly
if they'd only be civil ('e called it seevil!), and assured them they
had made a mistake.  They _was_ more civil after that, for Mr Laidlaw
'ad doubled 'is fists an' looked, oh my! like a Bengal tiger robbed of
its young ones.  So they all went straight to the bedroom, and me an'
Mary followed with master and missis and the waiters, an' they searched
all round the room, coming to the bag last though it was the only thing
on the table, and right under their noses, an sure enough they found a
50 pound note there in the little pocket!"

"And what said the Scotsman to that?" asked Mr Dean, with a slight
grin.

"He said, turning to master, `It was you did that--'ee--blagyird!'"
cried Martha, again bursting into laughter at her Scotch.  "And then,"
continued Martha, "one of the policemen said 'e 'ad seen Mr Laidlaw not
long ago in company with a well-known thief, and the other one swore 'e
'ad seen 'im the same night in a thieves' den, and that 'e was
hevidently on a friendly footin' wi' them for 'e 'ad refused to quit the
place, and was hinsolent.  At this lawyer Lockhart shook 'is 'ead and
said 'e thought it was a bad case, an' the poor Scotsman seemed so took
aback that 'e said nothink--only stared from one to another, and went
off quietly to prison."

After investigating the matter a little further, and obtaining, through
Martha, a private interview with Mary, who corroborated all that her
fellow-servant had said, Mr Dean went straight to Pimlico, and
interviewed the butler who had been in the service of the Weston family.
Thereafter he visited Colonel Brentwood, and, in the presence of his
wife and daughter discussed the whole affair from beginning to end.  We
will spare the reader that discussion, and turn towards Newgate.

On the evening of that day poor David Laidlaw found himself in durance
vile, with massive masonry around him, and a very Vesuvius of
indignation within him.  Fortunately, in the afternoon of the following
day, which chanced to be Sunday, a safety valve--a sort of crater--was
allowed to him in the shape of pen, ink, and paper.  Using these
materials, he employed his enforced leisure in writing to that
receptacle of his early and later joys and woes--his mother.

"Whar d'ye think I've gotten t' noo, mither?" the letter began.  "I'm in
Newgate!  It's an auld gate noo-a-days, an' a bad gate onyway, for it's
a prison.  Think o' that!  If onybody had said I wad be in jail maist as
soon as I got to Bawbylon I wad have said he was leein'!  But here I am,
hard an' fast, high and dry--uncom'on dry!--wi' naething but stane
aroond me--stane wa's, stane ceilin', stane floor; my very hairt seems
turned to stane.  Losh, woman, it bates a'!

"It's no maner o' use gaun into the hale story.  A buik wad scarce ha'd
it a'.  The details'll keep till you an' I meet again on the braes o'
Yarrow--if we iver meet there, which is by no means sure, for thae
Englishers'll be the death o' me afore I git hame, if they gang on as
they've begood.  Here's the ootline:--

"I've been thick wi' thieves, burglars, pickpockets, an' the like.
Veesitin' at their dens, an' gaun aboot the streets wi' them, an' I've
stolen a fifty-pun' note, an' it's been fund i' the pouch inside my bag.
That's the warst o't; but it seems that I've also resistet the poliss
in the dischairge o' their duty, which means that I flang ane ower a
sofa an' stappit anither into a coal-scuttle--though I didna mean it,
puir falla, for his breeks suffered in the way that ye've aften seen
mine whan I was a wee laddie.  But I was roused to that extent whan they
first gruppit me that I couldna help it!

"I wadna mind it muckle if it wasna that I've no a freend to help me--

"I was interruptit to receive a veesiter--an' a rebuik at the same time,
for he turned oot to be a freend, though a stranger, a Colonel Brentwud,
wha's been cheetit by that blagyird lawyer that's tryin' to play the
mischief wi' _me_.  But he'll fin' that I'm teuch!  The Colonel says
they'll hae nae diffeeculty in clearin' me, so let that comfort ye,
mither.--Yer ill-doin' son, DAVID.

"P.S.--There's a wee laddie I've faw'n in wi' since I cam' to Bawbylon,
they ca' him Tammy Splint.  O woman, but he _is_ a queer bairn.  He's
jist been to see me i' my cell, an' the moment he cam' in, though he was
half greetin', he lookit roond an' said, `_Isn't_ this a sell!'  Eh, but
he _is_ auld-farrant! wi' mair gumption than mony full-grown men, to say
naething o' women."

But David Laidlaw had more friends in London than he was aware of.  At
the very time that he was penning the foregoing epistle to his mother, a
number of disreputable-looking men were bewailing his fate and
discussing his affairs in the thieves' den, and two equally disreputable
women were quarrelling over the same subject in a wretched dwelling in
the presence of a third woman, who presided over a teapot.

One of the women, whose visage exhibited marks of recent violence,
struck her fist on the table and exclaimed, "No, Mrs Rampy, you are
wrong, as usual.  The story I 'eard about 'im was quite different an' I
believes it too, for them Scotsmen are a rough lot--no better than they
_should_ be."

"Mrs Blathers," remarked Mrs Rampy, in a soft sarcastic tone which she
was wont to assume when stung to the quick, and which her friend knew
from experience was the prelude to a burst of passion, "I may be wrong
_as usual_, but as you have never seen or conwersed with this Scotsman,
an' don't know nothink about 'im, _perhaps_ you will condescend to give
me an' Liz the kreckt wershion."

"Now, Mrs Rampy," interposed old Liz, grasping her teapot, "don't be
angry, for Mrs Blathers _is_ right.  Scotsmen _are_ no better than they
_should_ be.  Neither are English nor Irish nor Welshmen.  In fact,
there's none of us--men or women--nearly as good as we should be.  Now,
I am sure it won't be denied," continued Liz, in an argumentative tone,
"that Mrs Blathers _might_ be better--"

"Ha!  _I_ won't deny it," said Mrs Rampy, with emphasis.

"Nor," continued Liz, hastening to equalise her illustration, "nor that
Mrs Rampy might be better--"

"Right you are," said Mrs Blathers, with sarcasm.  "And I'm still
surer," said Liz hurriedly--a little put out at the ready reception of
her propositions--"that _I_ might be better--"

"Not at all," interrupted both ladies at once; "you're a trump, Liz,
you're a dear creetur!"

"Come, then," cried old Liz, with a laugh that set the fang wobbling,
"you are at all events agreed upon _that_ point so--have another cup,
Mrs Rampy."

"Thankee, Liz, and _plenty_ of sugar."

"H'm! you need it!" muttered Mrs Blathers; "no sugar at all for _me_,
Liz."

"Well, now," cried Liz, rendered bold by desperation, "I do wonder that
two such strong, warm-hearted women as you should so often fall out.
Each of you loves _some_ one--don't I know!--with powerful affection,
so, why couldn't you love each other?"

This tribute to their feelings so tickled the women that they set down
their tea-cups and laughed prodigiously.

"Now, do,--there's a couple of dears!--shake hands over your tea, an'
let's have a pleasant talk," said old Liz, following up her advantage.

The mollified women did not shake hands, but each raised her tea-cup to
her lips and winked.

"Your 'ealth, Blathers."

"Same to you, Rampy."

"And now, Liz," said the latter, as she pushed in her cup for more,
"let's 'ear all about it."

"Yes," said Mrs Blathers also pushing in her cup, "let's 'ave _your_
wersion, Liz."

While Liz gives her version of Laidlaw's misfortunes we will return to
the garden, where, being Sunday afternoon, Susy Blake was busy with a
small class of the most disreputable little ragged boys that the
neighbourhood produced.

The boys were emphatically bad boys.  They feared neither God nor man.
The property of other people was their chief source of livelihood, and
the streets, or the jails, were their homes.  Nevertheless, when in the
garden class, those boys were patterns of good behaviour, because each
boy knew that if he did not behave and keep quiet he would infallibly be
dismissed from the class, and this was a punishment which none of them
could endure.  Unlike many other teachers, Susy had not to go about
enticing boys to her Sabbath class.  Her chief difficulty was to prevent
them coming in such numbers as would have overflowed the garden
altogether.

And the secret of this was that Susy Blake possessed much of an
unconscious influence called loving-kindness.  No weapon of the
spiritual armoury is equal to this.  In the hands of a man it is
tremendous.  In those of a pretty girl it is irresistible.  By means of
it she brought the fiercest little arabs of the slums to listen to the
story of Jesus and His love.  She afterwards asked God, the Holy Spirit,
to water the good seed sown, and the result was success.

But loving-kindness was not her only weapon.  She had in addition quite
a glittering little armoury in which were such weapons as play of fancy,
lively imagination, fervent enthusiasm, resolute purpose, fund of
anecdote, sparkling humour, intense earnestness, and the like, all of
which she kept flashing around the heads of her devoted worshippers
until they were almost beside themselves with astonishment, repentance,
and good resolves.  Of course, when away from her influence the
astonishment was apt to diminish, the repentance to cease, and the good
resolves to vanish away; but resolute purpose had kept Susy at them
until in the course of time there was a perceptible improvement in the
environment of Cherub Court, and a percentage of souls rescued from the
ranks of the ragamuffins.

On this particular Sunday Tommy Splint, who was a regular attendant at
the garden class, arrived late.

"Why, Tommy," said the teacher, turning herself from a little boy on
whom she had been trying specially to impress some grand eternal truth,
"this is not like you.  Has anything happened to detain you?"

"No, Susy," answered the boy, slipping into his place--with a compound
expression in which the spirit of fun, whom no one doubted, gave the lie
to the spirit of penitence, in whom no one believed--"but I've bin to a
sort o' Sunday class a'ready."

"Indeed, where have you been?"

"At Mrs Rampy's, w'ere I see'd a most hedifyin' spectacle--granny
tryin' to bring Mrs Rampy an' Mrs Blathers to a 'eavenly state of mind
over a cup of tea, an' them both resistin' of 'er like one o'clock!"

"Ah! my boy," said Susy, shaking her head and a finger at the urchin,
"you've been eavesdropping again!"

"No, indeed, Susy, I ha'n't," returned the boy quite earnestly, "not
since the time you nabbed me with my ear to the key-'ole of quarrelsome
Tim's door.  I was a-sittin' at Mrs Rampy's open door quite openly
like--though not quite in sight, I dessay--an' they was pitchin' into
each other quite openly too, an' granny a-tryin' to pour ile on the
troubled waters!  It was as good as a play.  But w'en Mrs Rampy takes
up her cup to drink the 'ealth of Mrs B an' says, with _sitch_ a look,
`Your 'ealth, Blathers,' I could 'old on no longer.  I split and bolted!
That's wot brought me 'ere a little sooner than I might 'ave bin."

There was a tendency to laugh at this explanation, which Susy did not
check, but after a few moments she held up a finger, which produced
instant silence, while she drew a letter from her pocket.

"I'm sorry to disappoint you to-day, Tommy," she said, handing him the
letter, "but I must send you with this to my father.  Mr Brentwood
called with it not half an hour since, saying it was of importance to
have it delivered soon, as it was connected with the case of Mr
Laidlaw.  So be off with it as fast as you can.  You know where to find
father--on board the _Seacow_."

Tommy Splint was indeed disappointed at having to leave the garden class
thus abruptly.  He consoled himself, however, with the reflection that
he was perhaps doing important service to his friend Da-a-a-vid Laidlaw.
He further consoled himself, on reaching the court below, by uttering a
shriek which sent a cat that chanced to be reposing there in rampant
alarm into the depths of a convenient cellar.  Thereafter he went into a
contemplative frame of mind to the docks, and found Sam Blake as usual
in his bunk.

"I say, Sam, d'ee spend all yer time--night and day--in yer bunk?"

"Not exactly, lad," answered the seaman, with a smile, but without
