
  "The man convinced against his will
  Is of the same opinion still."

What I have written is for the benefit of those who know little or
nothing about South Africa.  I will only add to it my own conviction,
[see note 1], that the day is not far distant when a Cape man will
breakfast one morning in Capetown, and dine next day at Port Elizabeth,
(510 miles), run on to Grahamstown, (84 miles), to sup with a friend
there take the early train to Graaff-Reinet, (160 miles), so as to have
time for luncheon and a chat with a friend or relation before the
starting of the night train for Kimberley, (280 miles), where he has to
assist at the marriage of a sister with a diamond-digger who intends to
spend his honeymoon at the Cliff Hotel amid the romantic scenery of the
Catberg, and finish off with a week or two at Snowy Retreat, a
magnificent hotel, (yet to be), on the tiptop of the Compassberg
mountain.

This brings me back to the point at which I diverged--the Great Fish
River, which takes its rise in the Sneewberg range.

What tremendous floods are implied in the carrying away of this bridge!
What superabundance of water in that so-called land of drought!  What
opportunities for engineering skill to catch and conserve the water, and
turn the "barren land" into fruitful fields!  Don't you see this,
Periwinkle?  If not, I will say no more, for, according to the proverb,
"a nod is as good as a wink to the blind horse."

Having crossed the bridge in safety we continued our journey in the new
vehicle with fresh horses, and reached Grahamstown at four in the
afternoon.

Between sixty and seventy years is not a great age for a city.  Indeed,
as cities go, Grahamstown may be called quite infantile.  Nevertheless
this youthful city has seen much rough work in its brief career.

Grahamstown was born in smoke, and cradled in war's alarms.  It began
life in 1812, at which time the thieving and incorrigible Kafirs were
driven across the Great Fish River--then the colonial boundary--by a
strong force of British and Burgher troops under Colonel Graham.  During
these disturbed times it was established as headquarters of the troops
which guarded the frontier.

When the infant was seven years old its courage and capacity were
severely put to the proof.  In the year 1818-19--just before the arrival
of the "British settlers,"--it was deemed necessary to interfere in the
concerns of contending Kafir chiefs, and to punish certain tribes for
their continued depredations on the colony.  For these ends, as well as
the recovery of stolen cattle, a strong force was sent into Kafirland.
While the troops were absent, a body of Kafirs assembled in the bush of
the Great Fish River, from which they issued to attack Grahamstown.
They were led by a remarkable man named Makana.  He was also styled the
Lynx.

This Kafir, although not a chief, rose to power by the force of a
superior intellect and a strong will.  He was well-known in Grahamstown,
having been in the habit of paying it frequent visits, on which
occasions he evinced great curiosity on all subjects, speculative as
well as practical.

Makana appears to have been an apt scholar.  Being a man of eloquence as
well as originality, he soon acquired ascendency over most of the great
chiefs of Kafirland, was almost worshipped by the people, who
acknowledged him a warrior-chief as well as a prophet, and collected
around him a large body of retainers.  It has been thought by some that
Makana was a "noble" savage, and that although he imposed on the
credulity of his countrymen, his aim was to raise himself to sovereign
power in order to elevate the Kafir race nearer to a level with
Europeans.

But whatever be the truth regarding his objects, the invasion of
Kafirland by the white men gave Makana an opportunity of which he was
not slow to avail himself.  His followers had suffered, with others,
from the proceedings of the troops, and his soul was fired with a desire
to be revenged and "drive the white men into the sea,"--a favourite
fate, in the Kafir mind, reserved for the entire colonial family!

Makana was general enough to perceive that nothing effective could be
accomplished by the mere marauding habits to which his countrymen were
addicted.  He had learned that "union is strength," and, making use of
his spirit-rousing power of eloquence, went about endeavouring to
concentrate the aims of the savages and to direct their energies.  In
these efforts he was in some measure successful.  He pretended to have
received heavenly revelations, and to have been sent by the great spirit
to avenge their wrongs; predicted certain success to the enterprise if
his followers only yielded implicit obedience to his commands, and thus
managed to persuade most of the various clans to unite their forces for
a simultaneous attack on the headquarters of the British troops.  He
told them that he had power to call from their graves the spirits of
their ancestors to assist them in the war, and confidently affirmed that
it was decreed that they were to drive the white men across the
Zwartkops River into the ocean, after which they should "sit down and
eat honey!"

Early on the morning of the 22nd April 1819 this singular man led his
force of 9000 sable warriors towards Grahamstown, and the affair had
been conducted with so great secrecy that the few troops there were
almost taken by surprise.

Enemies in the camp are always to be more dreaded than open foes.
Makana had taken care to provide himself with a spy and informer, in the
person of Klaas Nuka, the Government Interpreter to Colonel Wilshire,
who was at that time in command of the troops.  Three days previous to
the attack, this villain--well aware of Makana's approach--informed the
Colonel that Kafirs had been seen in the precisely opposite direction.
The unsuspecting Colonel at once fell into the trap.  He detached the
light company of the 38th regiment to patrol in the direction pointed
out.  Thus was the garrison of the town, which consisted of 450 European
soldiers and a small body of mounted Hottentots, weakened to the extent
of 100 men.

On that same April morning Colonel Wilshire was quietly inspecting a
detachment of the mounted Cape Corps, when the Hottentot Captain Boezac,
chief of a band of buffalo-hunters, informed him that he had just
received information of Makana's advance.  The Colonel, mounted on a
fleet charger, at once rode off with an escort of ten men to
reconnoitre.  He came unexpectedly on the enemy in a ravine not far from
the town.  They were taking a rest before rushing to the assault, and so
sure were these poor savages of their irresistible power, that thousands
of their wives and children followed them with their mats, pots, and
cooking-jars ready to take possession of the place!

Colonel Wilshire retreated instantly, and there was need for haste.  The
Kafirs pursued him so closely that he reached his troops only a few
minutes before them.

The small band of defenders more than made up for the difference in
numbers, by the deadly precision of their fire.  The Kafirs came on in a
dense sable mass, led by their various chiefs, and generalled by the
Lynx, who had impressed his followers with the belief that the muskets
of the foe were charged only with "hot water!"

The field pieces of the troops were loaded with shrapnel shells, which
at the first discharge mowed long lanes in the advancing masses, while
musketry was discharged with deadly effect.  But Kafirs are stern and
brave warriors.  On they came with wild cries, sending a shower of short
spears, (assagais), before them, which, however, fell short.  Regardless
of the havoc in their ranks, they still came on, and the foremost men
were seen to break short their assagais, with the evident intention of
using them more effectively as daggers in hand-to-hand conflict.  This
was deliberately done by Makana's orders, and showed his wisdom, for,
with the great bodily strength, size, and agility of the Kafirs, and
their overwhelming numbers, the attack, if promptly and boldly made at
close quarters, could not have failed of success.

At this moment the Hottentot Captain Boezac created a diversion.  He
rushed with his band of a hundred and thirty men to meet the foe.  These
buffalo-hunters had among them some of the coolest and best marksmen in
the country.  Singling out the boldest of those who advanced, and were
encouraging their followers in the final charge, Boezac and his men laid
low many of the bravest chiefs and warriors.  This gave the Kafirs a
decided check.  The troops cheered and fired with redoubled speed and
energy.  Lieutenant Aitcheson of the Artillery plied the foe with a
withering fire of grapeshot.  Boezac and his hunters, turning their
flank, pressed them hotly in rear, and the Hottentot cavalry charged.
The Kafirs recoiled, though some of the boldest, scorning to give in,
rushed madly among the soldiers, and perished fighting.  Then a wild
panic and a total rout ensued, and the great host was scattered like
chaff, and driven into the ravines.

Brief though this fight had been, the carnage among the Kafirs was
terrible.  One who was an eye-witness of the fight tells us that the
bodies of about 2000 Kafir warriors strewed the field of battle, and
that many others perished of their wounds in the rivulet leading down to
the Cape Corps' barracks.  Nuka, the faithless interpreter, was shot,
but Makana escaped.

A few months afterwards, however, he delivered himself up, and the other
chiefs sued for peace.  With Makana's surrender the war of 1819 ended.
The Lynx himself was sent prisoner to Robben Island.  After nearly two
years' confinement he attempted to escape in a boat with some other
prisoners, but the boat was upset in the surf on Blueberg beach, and
Makana was drowned, while his companions escaped.

As Grahamstown grew in years and size, she bore her part well, both in
the suffering and the action which the colony has been called on to
endure and undertake, during all the vicissitudes of its career--in
peace and in war.  What that part has been would take a volume to tell.

She is now a large and beautiful town--the capital of the Eastern
Province--situated on the slopes of the Zuurberg range, near the head
waters of the Kowie River, 1760 feet above the sea, and thirty-six miles
distant therefrom.  She is also the focus where all the roads from the
interior converge to enter the only available gap through the
mountains--Howison's Poort.

Very pleasant to dwell in is this "City of the Settlers"--_alias_ the
"city of gardens," with its agreeable society, fresh breezes, and
charming situation; its "twenty miles" of well-gravelled and tree-lined
streets; its handsome shops and stores, its fine public buildings--
notably the Cathedral, and the Albany Hall--its three great reservoirs,
with their "twenty-four million gallons" of water, and its "twelve
miles" of main pipes, by means of which its inhabitants are watered.

But I must not linger in Grahamstown now.  When there in the body, I was
sorely tempted to do so, too long, by the kindness of friends and the
salubrity of the weather.  Adieu, Grahamstown! thou art a green spot in
memory, as well as in reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  The map of the present railways on page vi will enable the
reader to judge how far this has been realised.



LETTER TEN.

SALEM--A PECULIAR PICNIC--POLO UNDER DIFFICULTIES--LECTURING AND
SINGING--SPORTING AT NIGHT.

Salem is, as it should be, a peaceful spot.  It was not always so.
There was a time when its inhabitants had to toil, so to speak, with the
spade in one hand, and the musket in the other.  It lies in a hollow of
the great rolling plains, and was founded, like many of the eastern
towns, in the memorable "1820," when the "British settlers" came out,
and a new era for the colony began.

The arrival of the original settlers at Salem is thus described by one
who was a noted leader in the first days:

"Our Dutch wagon-driver intimating that we had at length reached our
proper location, we took our boxes out of the wagon, and placed them on
the ground.  He bade us _goeden dag_, or farewell, cracked his long
whip, and drove away, leaving us to our reflections.  My wife sat down
on one box, and I on another.  The beautiful blue sky was above us, and
the green grass beneath our feet.  We looked at each other for a few
moments, indulged in some reflections, and perhaps exchanged a few
sentences; but it was no time for sentiment, and hence we were soon
engaged in pitching our tent, and when that was accomplished, we removed
into it our trunks and bedding.  All the other settlers who arrived with
us were similarly engaged, and in a comparatively short time the
somewhat extensive valley of that part of the Assagai Bush River, which
was to be the site of our future village, presented a lively and
picturesque appearance."

Soon the spade, the plough, and the axe began their subduing work.  Some
of the beautiful grassy slopes were turned up.  Small clearings were
made in the bush.  Frail huts with doors of matting and windows of
calico began to arise.  Lime was found, white-wash was applied, and the
huts began to "smile."  So did the waters of the stream when partially
shorn of the bush-moustache by which, from time immemorial, they had
been partially concealed; the first crops were sown, and the work of
civilisation began.  There was a ruinous "wattle and daub" edifice which
had been deserted by a Dutch Boer before the arrival of the settlers.
This was converted into a church, town-hall, and hospital.

The yell of the Kafir and the whizzing assagai afterwards disturbed the
peace of Salem, and at that time the settlers proved that, though on
peaceful plans intent, they could bravely hold their own; but it was
peaceful enough, and beautiful, when I first beheld it.

At the door of a moderately handsome residence--which had succeeded the
wattle-and-daub style of thing--I was heartily welcomed by my friend and
his amiable spouse.  Here I had the pleasure of enjoying a South African
picnic.

A picnic is at all times interesting, doubly so when undertaken in
peculiar circumstances.  One of the peculiarities of this picnic was
that the invitation to it was publicly given, and embraced the entire
population.  Another peculiarity was that the population, almost in its
entirety, accepted the invitation.  But there were still other
peculiarities which will appear in the sequel.

The morning of the day fixed was bright and beautiful.  This, indeed,
was no peculiarity.  Most of the mornings, days, and nights in that
splendid region were of much the same stamp at that time.  The spot
fixed on for the scene of the picnic was about six miles from Salem,
where a wild buffalo had been killed the week before.

The killing of this buffalo was an "event," for that wild denizen of the
African Bush had long ago retired before the rifle of the settler to
safer retreats, and rarely returned to his old haunts.  A band of
buffaloes, however, had apparently taken a fancy to revisit the home of
their childhood at this time.  There was nothing to prevent them, for,
although the country is "settled," the original "Bush" is in many places
sufficiently extensive and impervious to afford safe shelter to the
wildest of animals.  At all events, a band of buffaloes did come to the
neighbourhood of Salem, and there met with a farmer-Nimrod, who "picked
off" one of their number.  I turned aside, during one of my rides, to
visit the head and horns, which lay near his house.

The place of rendezvous for those who dwelt in the village was an open
space in front of the church.  Here, at an early hour, there assembled
numerous equestrians, as well as vehicles of varied shape and character.
I was mounted on a smart brown pony kindly lent by Mr Shaw, teacher of
the flourishing school of Salem.  My friend Caldecott bestrode a
powerful steed suited to his size.  When the gathering had reached
considerable proportions, we started like an Eastern caravan.

Among the cavaliers there were stalwart men and fair damsels--also
little boys and girls, prancing in anxiety to get away.  There were
carts, and gigs, and buggies, or things that bore some resemblance to
such vehicles, in which were the more sedate ones of the gathering; and
there were great "Cape wagons," with fifteen or twenty oxen to each,
containing whole families--from hale old "grannies" down to grannies'
weaknesses in the shape of healthy lumps of live lard clad in amazement
and bibs.  It was a truly grand procession, as, after toiling up the
slope that leads from the valley of Salem, we debouched upon the wide
plain, and assumed our relative positions--that is, the riders dashed
away at speed, the carts and buggies, getting up steam, pushed on, and
the oxen trailed along at their unalterable gait, so that, in a few
minutes, the dense group spread into a moving mass which gradually drew
itself out into an attenuated line, whereof the head ultimately became
invisible to the tail.

My tall host led the way with enthusiastic vigour.  He was a hearty,
earnest man, who could turn quickly from the pleasant contemplation of
the trivialities of life to the deep and serious consideration of the
things that bear on the life to come.

One Sunday I rode over the plains with him to visit a native church in
which it was his duty to conduct worship.  The congregation was black
and woolly-headed--Hottentots chiefly, I believe, though there may have
been some Kafirs amongst them.

There is something very attractive to me in the bright, eager, childlike
look of black men and women.  The said look may be the genuine
expression of feeling--it may be, for aught I can tell, the result of
contrast between the dazzling whites of eyes and teeth, with
liquid-black pupils and swarthy cheeks,--but that does not alter the
fact that it is pleasant.

The Hottentot who translated my friend's discourse, sentence by
sentence, was a fine specimen--I won't say of his race, but of humanity.
He was full of intelligence and fire; caught the preacher's meaning
instantly, riveted with his glittering eye the attention of his
audience, and rattled out his words with a power that was most
impressive, and with the interspersion of those indescribable "clicks"
with which the native language abounds.

But to return to the picnic.

As we advanced, groups and couples of cavaliers and carts and wagons
joined the line of march from outlying farms, so that when we reached
the rendezvous we must have formed a body of two hundred strong, or
more.

The spot chosen was the summit of a woody knoll, from which we could
survey all the country round, and look down upon the river with its
miles and miles of dense bush, in which the buffaloes had vainly fancied
themselves free from the danger of human foes.

Was there plenty of food at that picnic?  I should think there was.
South Africans do not live upon air, by any means--though air has a good
deal to do with their living.  These comely maidens and strapping boys
had not been brought up on water-gruel.  These powerful men and ruddy
matrons, to say nothing of the aged and the juvenile, would not have
gone to that knoll on the plain without a prospect of "strong meat" of
some sort.  There were pies and joints, buns and beef, cakes and coffee,
tea and tongues, sugar and sandwiches, hams and hampers, mounds of
mealies, oceans of milk, and baskets of bread and butter.  I'm not sure
whether there were wines or spirits.  I culpably forget.  Probably there
were not, for "Good Templars" are powerful in that region, and so is
temperance.

Did we do justice to the viands?  Didn't we?  My notions of human
capacity were enlarged that day.  So was my own capacity--out of
sympathy, coupled with the ride.  But we did not linger over our food.
Seated in groups near the margin of, and partly in, the bush, we
refreshed ourselves in comparative silence.  Then we grew noisy over our
milk and tea.  Some of us even got the length of singing and
speech-making, but the younger portion of the band soon lost their
appetites and dispersed--some to romp, some to ramble, others to engage
in games.

A few of the more reckless among us extemporised a game of polo.

Most people know, though some may not, that this is a game played on
horseback with a club and ball--a species of equestrian "hockey," as it
is styled in England, "shinty" in Scotland.  To be well done it requires
good and trained horses, a wide expanse of level country, and expert
riders.  Our state of preparation for the game may be understood when I
say that we had indifferent and untrained horses, that the ground was
very uneven and covered with huge ant-hills, while the riders were not
expert--at least, not at polo.

We got sticks, however, and went at it.  Half a dozen men cut and
levelled several ant-hills, and marking off a square patch of ground,
four of us--I won't say who--were placed, one at each corner, while the
ball, a football, was put in the middle of the square.

Our innocent horses stood quietly there till the signal was given to
start.  Then each cavalier essayed to reach the ball first.  The sudden
urging of the steeds to instant action seemed to confuse them.  They did
not spring, as they should have done like arrows from bows.  One rider
wildly kicked with his heels and shook his reins.  The horse turned
round, as if in contempt, from the ball.  Another applied his whip with
vehemence, but his horse only backed.  A third shouted, having neither
whip nor spur, and brought his polo-stick savagely down on his animal's
flank, but it plunged and reared.  The only horse that behaved well was
that of a gallant youth who wore spurs.  A dig from these sent him into
the field.  He reached the ball, made a glorious blow at it, and hit the
terrestrial ball by mistake.  Before the mistake could be rectified
three of the other players were up, flourishing their long clubs in
reckless eagerness; the fourth rode into them; the horses then lost
patience and refused obedience to orders--no wonder, for one club, aimed
at the ball, fell on a horse's shins, while another saluted a horse's
ear.  Presently the ball spurted out from the midst of us; the horses
scattered, and one was seen to rise on its hind-legs.  Immediately
thereafter one of the players--I won't say which--was on the ground and
his horse was careering over the plain!  Regardless of this the other
three charged, met in the shock of conflict; clubs met clubs, and ears,
and shins--but not the ball--until finally an accidental kick, from one
of the horses I think, sent it towards the boundary at a considerable
distance from the players.

Then it was that the power of spurs became conspicuously apparent.
While two of the champions backed and reared, the gallant youth with the
armed heels made a vigorous rush at the ball, miraculously hit it, and
triumphantly won the game.

On the whole it was a failure in one sense, but a great success in
another, inasmuch as it afforded immense amusement to the spectators,
and pleasant excitement as well as exercise to the performers.

It must not be supposed, however, that the energies of the whole picnic
were concentrated on polo.  The party, as I have said, had broken up
into groups, one of which played hide-and-seek among the bushes on the
knoll, while another engaged in a game which involved sitting in a
circle, changing places, frequent collisions, constant mistakes on the
part of the ignorant, and shouts of laughter, with rectifying advice on
the part of the knowing.

All this time the sun was glowing as only a South African summer sun can
glow, in a cloudless sky, and it was not until that sun had become red
in the face, and sunk far down into the west, that the panting, but far
from exhausted revellers saddled up and inspanned, and began to quit the
scene.

Then it was, as my friend and I stood on the bush-topped knoll, that the
magnificence of our picnic fully impressed us, for, as we surveyed the
long line of riders, and trundling carts, and gigs, and carriages, and
heavy Cape wagons with their creeping teams winding over the plain, the
head of the column was seen almost on the horizon before the rear-guard
had left the scene of our festivities.  This was altogether one of the
pleasantest days I had spent in the colony; the people were so hearty
and vigorous, so varied in appearance, character, and age, so full of
life and fun and good-will.

But it is not always in the sunshine that the good people of Salem enjoy
themselves.  The hunters among them occasionally go out shooting at
night with the aid of a dark lantern, and the wretched creature which
they pursue on such occasions is called a spring-hare.  It seems a
mixture of the hare and the kangaroo--its size and aspect being those of
the former animal, while its long hind-legs and its action in springing
