had risen, and we could see the islands in and beyond the lagoon quite
plainly; but there was no object visible to account for such a cry.  A
strong gust of wind was blowing from the point whence the sound came,
but this died away while we were gazing out to sea.

"What can it be?" said Peterkin in a low whisper, while we all
involuntarily crept closer to each other.

"Do you know," said Jack, "I have heard that mysterious sound twice
before, but never so loud as to-night.  Indeed, it was so faint that I
thought I must have merely fancied it; so, as I did not wish to alarm
you, I said nothing about it."

We listened for a long time for the sound again; but as it did not come,
we returned to the bower and resumed our work.

"Very strange!" said Peterkin quite gravely.--"Do you believe in ghosts,
Ralph?"

"No," I answered, "I do not.  Nevertheless, I must confess that strange,
unaccountable sounds, such as we have just heard, make me feel a little
uneasy."

"What say you to it, Jack?"

"I neither believe in ghosts nor feel uneasy," he replied.  "I never saw
a ghost myself, and I never met with any one who had; and I have
generally found that strange and unaccountable things have almost always
been accounted for, and found to be quite simple, on close examination.
I certainly can't imagine what _that_ sound is; but I'm quite sure I
shall find out before long, and if it's a ghost I'll--I'll--"

"Eat it!" cried Peterkin.

"Yes, I'll eat it!--Now, then, my bow and two arrows are finished; so,
if you're ready, we had better turn in."

By this time Peterkin had thinned down his spear, and tied an iron point
very cleverly to the end of it; I had formed a sling, the lines of which
were composed of thin strips of the cocoa-nut cloth, plaited; and Jack
had made a stout bow, nearly five feet long, with two arrows, feathered
with two or three large plumes which some bird had dropped.  They had no
barbs; but Jack said that if arrows were well feathered they did not
require iron points, but would fly quite well if merely sharpened at the
point, which I did not know before.

"A feathered arrow without a barb," said he, "is a good weapon, but a
barbed arrow without feathers is utterly useless."

The string of the bow was formed of our piece of whip-cord, part of
which, as he did not like to cut it, was rolled round the bow.

Although thus prepared for a start on the morrow we thought it wise to
exercise ourselves a little in the use of our weapons before starting,
so we spent the whole of the next day in practising.  And it was well we
did so, for we found that our arms were very imperfect, and that we were
far from perfect in the use of them.  First, Jack found that the bow was
much too strong, and he had to thin it.  Also the spear was much too
heavy, and so had to be reduced in thickness, although nothing would
induce Peterkin to have it shortened.  My sling answered very well; but
I had fallen so much out of practice that my first stone knocked off
Peterkin's hat, and narrowly missed making a second Goliath of him.
However, after having spent the whole day in diligent practice, we began
to find some of our former expertness returning, at least Jack and I
did.  As for Peterkin, being naturally a neat-handed boy, he soon
handled his spear well, and could run full tilt at a cocoa-nut, and hit
it with great precision once out of every five times.

But I feel satisfied that we owed much of our rapid success to the
unflagging energy of Jack, who insisted that since we had made him
captain, we should obey him; and he kept us at work from morning till
night, perseveringly, at the same thing.  Peterkin wished very much to
run about and stick his spear into everything he passed; but Jack put up
a cocoa-nut, and would not let him leave off running at that for a
moment except when he wanted to rest.  We laughed at Jack for this, but
we were both convinced that it did us much good.

That night we examined and repaired our arms ere we lay down to rest,
although we were much fatigued, in order that we might be in readiness
to set out on our expedition at daylight on the following morning.



CHAPTER NINE.

PREPARE FOR A JOURNEY ROUND THE ISLAND--SAGACIOUS REFLECTIONS--
MYSTERIOUS APPEARANCES AND STARTLING OCCURRENCES.

Scarcely had the sun shot its first ray across the bosom of the broad
Pacific when Jack sprang to his feet, and hallooing in Peterkin's ear to
awaken him, ran down the beach to take his customary dip in the sea.  We
did not, as was our wont, bathe that morning in our Water Garden, but in
order to save time, refreshed ourselves in the shallow water just
opposite the bower.  Our breakfast was also despatched without loss of
time, and in less than an hour afterwards all our preparations for the
journey were completed.

In addition to his ordinary dress, Jack tied a belt of cocoa-nut cloth
round his waist, into which he thrust the axe.  I was also advised to
put on a belt and carry a short cudgel or bludgeon in it, for, as Jack
truly remarked, the sling would be of little use if we should chance to
come to close quarters with any wild animal.  As for Peterkin,
notwithstanding that he carried such a long and, I must add,
frightful-looking spear over his shoulder, we could not prevail on him
to leave his club behind; "for," said he, "a spear at close quarters is
not worth a button."  I must say that it seemed to me that the club was,
to use his own style of language, not worth a button-hole; for it was
all knotted over at the head, something like the club which I remember
to have observed in picture-books of Jack the Giant-killer, besides
being so heavy that he required to grasp it with both hands in order to
wield it at all.  However, he took it with him, and in this manner we
set out upon our travels.

We did not consider it necessary to carry any food with us, as we knew
that wherever we went we should be certain to fall in with cocoa-nut
trees--having which we were amply supplied, as Peterkin said, with meat
and drink and pocket-handkerchiefs!  I took the precaution, however, to
put the burning-glass into my pocket lest we should want fire.

The morning was exceedingly lovely.  It was one of that very still and
peaceful sort which made the few noises that we heard seem to be quiet
noises (I know no other way of expressing this idea)--noises which, so
far from interrupting the universal tranquillity of earth, sea, and sky,
rather tended to reveal to us how quiet the world round us really was.
Such sounds as I refer to were the peculiar, melancholy--yet, it seemed
to me, cheerful--plaint of sea-birds floating on the glassy waters or
sailing in the sky; also the subdued twittering of little birds among
the bushes, the faint ripples on the beach, and the solemn boom of the
surf upon the distant coral reef.  We felt very glad in our hearts as we
walked along the sands, side by side.  For my part, I felt so deeply
overjoyed that I was surprised at my own sensations, and fell into a
reverie upon the causes of happiness.  I came to the conclusion that a
state of profound peace and repose, both in regard to outward objects
and within the soul, is the happiest condition in which man can be
placed; for although I had many a time been most joyful and happy when
engaged in bustling, energetic, active pursuits or amusements, I never
found that such joy or satisfaction was so deep or so pleasant to
reflect upon as that which I now experienced.  And I was the more
confirmed in this opinion when I observed--and, indeed, as told by
himself--that Peterkin's happiness was also very great; yet he did not
express this by dancing, as was his wont, nor did he give so much as a
single shout, but walked quietly between us with his eye sparkling and a
joyful smile upon his countenance.  My reader must not suppose that I
thought all this in the clear and methodical manner in which I have set
it down here.  These thoughts did indeed pass through my mind; but they
did so in a very confused and indefinite manner, for I was young at that
time and not much given to deep reflections.  Neither did I consider
that the peace whereof I write is not to be found in this world--at
least in its perfection--although I have since learned that, by
religion, a man may attain to a very great degree of it.

I have said that Peterkin walked along the sands between us.  We had two
ways of walking together about our island.  When we travelled through
the woods we always did so in single file, as by this method we advanced
with greater facility, the one treading in the other's footsteps.  In
such cases Jack always took the lead, Peterkin followed, and I brought
up the rear.  But when we travelled along the sands, which extended
almost in an unbroken line of glistening white round the island, we
marched abreast, as we found this method more sociable and every way
more pleasant.  Jack, being the tallest, walked next the sea, and
Peterkin marched between us, as by this arrangement either of us could
talk to him or he to us, while if Jack and I happened to wish to
converse together we could conveniently do so over Peterkin's head.
Peterkin used to say, in reference to this arrangement, that had he been
as tall as either of us, our order of march might have been the same;
for, as Jack often used to scold him for letting everything we said to
him pass in at one ear and out at the other, his head could, of course,
form no interruption to our discourse.

We were now fairly started.  Half-a-mile's walk conveyed us round a bend
in the land which shut out our bower from view, and for some time we
advanced at a brisk pace without speaking, though our eyes were not
idle, but noted everything--in the woods, on the shore, or in the sea--
that was interesting.  After passing the ridge of land that formed one
side of our valley--the Valley of the Wreck--we beheld another small
vale lying before us in all the luxuriant loveliness of tropical
vegetation.  We had indeed seen it before from the mountain-top, but we
had no idea that it would turn out to be so much more lovely when we
were close to it.  We were about to commence the exploration of this
valley when Peterkin stopped us, and directed our attention to a very
remarkable appearance in advance along the shore.

"What's yon, think you?" said he, levelling his spear as if he expected
an immediate attack from the object in question, though it was full
half-a-mile distant.

As he spoke, there appeared a white column above the rocks, as if of
steam or spray.  It rose upwards to a height of several feet, and then
disappeared.  Had this been near the sea, we would not have been so
greatly surprised, as it might in that case have been the surf, for at
this part of the coast the coral reef approached so near to the island
that in some parts it almost joined it.  There was, therefore, no lagoon
between, and the heavy surf of the ocean beat almost up to the rocks.
But this white column appeared about fifty yards inland.  The rocks at
the place were rugged, and they stretched across the sandy beach into
the sea.  Scarce had we ceased expressing our surprise at this sight
when another column flew upwards for a few seconds, not far from the
spot where the first had been seen, and disappeared; and so, at long,
irregular intervals, these strange sights recurred.  We were now quite
sure that the columns were watery, or composed of spray; but what caused
them we could not guess, so we determined to go and see.

In a few minutes we gained the spot, which was very rugged and
precipitous, and, moreover, quite damp with the falling of the spray.
We had much ado to pass over dry-shod.  The ground, also, was full of
holes here and there.  Now, while we stood anxiously waiting for the
reappearance of these waterspouts, we heard a low, rumbling sound near
us, which quickly increased to a gurgling and hissing noise, and a
moment afterwards a thick spout of water burst upwards from a hole in
the rock and spouted into the air with much violence, and so close to
where Jack and I were standing that it nearly touched us.  We sprang
aside, but not before a cloud of spray descended and drenched us both to
the skin.

Peterkin, who was standing farther off; escaped with a few drops, and
burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter on beholding our miserable
plight.

"Mind your eye!" he shouted eagerly; "there goes another!"  The words
were scarcely out of his mouth when there came up a spout from another
hole, which served us exactly in the same manner as before.

Peterkin now shrieked with laughter; but his merriment was abruptly put
a stop to by the gurgling noise occurring close to where he stood.

"Where'll it spout this time, I wonder?" he said, looking about with
some anxiety and preparing to run.  Suddenly there came a loud hiss or
snort; a fierce spout of water burst up between Peterkin's legs, blew
him off his feet, enveloped him in its spray, and hurled him to the
ground.  He fell with so much violence that we feared he must have
broken some of his bones, and ran anxiously to his assistance; but
fortunately he had fallen on a clump of tangled herbage, in which he lay
sprawling in a most deplorable condition.

It was now our turn to laugh; but as we were not yet quite sure that he
was unhurt, and as we knew not when or where the next spout might arise,
we assisted him hastily to jump up and hurry from the spot.

I may here add that, although I am quite certain that the spout of water
was very strong, and that it blew Peterkin completely off his legs, I am
not quite certain of the exact height to which it lifted him, being
somewhat startled by the event, and blinded partially by the spray, so
that my power of observation was somewhat impaired for the moment.

"What's to be done now?" asked Peterkin ruefully.

"Make a fire, lad, and dry ourselves," replied Jack.

"And here is material ready to our hand," said I, picking up a dried
branch of a tree as we hurried up to the woods.

In about an hour after this mishap our clothes were again dried.  While
they were hanging up before the fire we walked down to the beach, and
soon observed that these curious spouts took place immediately after the
fall of a huge wave, never before it; and, moreover, that the spouts did
not take place excepting when the billow was an extremely large one.
From this we concluded that there must be a subterraneous channel in the
rock into which the water was driven by the larger waves, and finding no
way of escape except through these small holes, was thus forced up
violently through them.  At any rate, we could not conceive any other
reason for these strange waterspouts, and as this seemed a very simple
and probable one, we forthwith adopted it.

"I say, Ralph, what's that in the water?  Is it a shark?" said Jack just
as we were about to quit the place.

I immediately ran to the overhanging ledge of rock, from which he was
looking down into the sea, and bent over it.  There I saw a very faint,
pale object of a greenish colour, which seemed to move slightly while I
looked at it.

"It's like a fish of some sort," said I.

"Hallo, Peterkin!" cried Jack.  "Fetch your spear; here's work for it!"

But when we tried to reach the object, the spear proved to be too short.

"There, now," said Peterkin with a sneer; "you were always telling me it
was too long."

Jack now drove the spear forcibly towards the object, and let go his
hold.  But although it seemed to be well aimed, he must have missed, for
the handle soon rose again; and when the spear was drawn up, there was
the pale-green object in exactly the same spot, slowly moving its tail.

"Very odd!" said Jack.

But although it was undoubtedly very odd, and although Jack and all of
us plunged the spear at it repeatedly, we could neither hit it nor drive
it away, so we were compelled to continue our journey without
discovering what it was.  I was very much perplexed at this strange
appearance in the water, and could not get it out of my mind for a long
time afterwards.  However, I quieted myself by resolving that I would
pay a visit to it again at some more convenient season.



CHAPTER TEN.

MAKE DISCOVERY OF MANY EXCELLENT ROOTS AND FRUITS--THE RESOURCES OF THE
CORAL ISLAND GRADUALLY UNFOLDED--THE BANYAN TREE--ANOTHER TREE WHICH IS
SUPPORTED BY NATURAL PLANKS--WATER-FOWL FOUND--A VERY REMARKABLE
DISCOVERY, AND A VERY PECULIAR MURDER--WE LUXURIATE ON THE FAT OF THE
LAND.

Our examination of the little valley proved to be altogether most
satisfactory.  We found in it not only similar trees to those we had
already seen in our own valley, but also one or two others of a
different species.  We had also the satisfaction of discovering a
peculiar vegetable, which, Jack concluded, must certainly be that of
which he had read as being very common among the South Sea Islanders,
and which was named taro.  Also we found a large supply of yams, and
another root like a potato in appearance.  As these were all quite new
to us, we regarded our lot as a most fortunate one, in being thus cast
on an island which was so prolific and so well stored with all the
necessaries of life.  Long afterwards we found out that this island of
ours was no better in these respects than thousands of other islands in
those seas.  Indeed, many of them were much richer and more productive;
but that did not render us the less grateful for our present good
fortune.  We each put one of these roots in our pocket, intending to use
them for our supper--of which more hereafter.  We also saw many
beautiful birds here, and traces of some four-footed animal again.
Meanwhile the sun began to descend; so we returned to the shore and
pushed on, round the spouting rocks, into the next valley.  This was
that valley of which I have spoken as running across the entire island.
It was by far the largest and most beautiful that we had yet looked
upon.  Here were trees of every shape and size and hue which it is
possible to conceive of, many of which we had not seen in the other
valleys; for, the stream in this valley being larger, and the mould much
richer than in the Valley of the Wreck, it was clothed with a more
luxuriant growth of trees and plants.  Some trees were dark, glossy
green; others of a rich and warm hue, contrasting well with those of a
pale, light green, which were everywhere abundant.  Among these we
recognised the broad, dark heads of the bread-fruit, with its golden
fruit; the pure, silvery foliage of the candle-nut, and several species
which bore a strong resemblance to the pine; while here and there, in
groups and in single trees, rose the tall forms of the cocoa-nut palms,
