somewhat sternly.  "I didn't expect you to leave the sloop tonight."

"And I didn't intend to leave her," replied Jim, taking no notice of the
tone in which this was said; "but I thought I'd come up to ask if you
wished me to begin dischargin' early to-morrow morning."

"No, we're not going to discharge," returned Jones.

"Not going to discharge!" echoed Jim in surprise.  "No.  I find that
it's not worth while discharging any part of the cargo here.  On the
contrary, I mean to fill up with bloaters and run over with them to the
coast of France; so you can go and stow the top tier of casks more
firmly, and get ready for the noo ones.  Good-night."

The tone in which this was said left no excuse for Jim to linger, so he
bade the household good-night and departed.

He had not gone far, however, when he was arrested by the sound of a
light footstep.  It was that of Nora, who had followed him.

"Nora!" exclaimed the young sailor in surprise, returning quickly and
taking one of the girl's hands in both of his.

"Oh, Jim!" said Nora, with a look and tone of earnest entreaty, "don't,
don't forsake him just now--if the love which you have so often
professed for me be true, don't forsake him, I beseech you."

Jim protested in the most emphatic terms that he had no intention of
forsaking anybody, and made a great many more protestations, in the
midst of which there were numerous ardent and more or less appropriate
references to hearts that never deserted their colours, sheet-anchors
that held on through thick and thin, and needles that pointed, without
the smallest shadow of variation, to the pole.

"But what makes you think I'm going to leave him?" he asked, at the end
of one of those flights.

"Because he is so rough to 'ee, Jim," replied the girl, leaning her head
on her lover's shoulder; "he spoke so gruff even now, and I thought you
went away huffed.  Oh, Jim, you are the only one that has any influence
over him--"

"Not the only one," returned Jim, quietly smoothing the fair girl's hair
with his hard strong hand.

"Well, the only _man_, at any rate," continued Nora, "especially when he
is overcome with that dreadful drink.  Dear Jim, you won't forsake him,
will you, even though he should insult, even though he should _strike_
you?"

"No, never!  Because he is your father, Nora, I'll stick by him in spite
of all he can say or do to me, and try, God helping me, to save him.
But I cannot stick by him if--"

"If what?" asked the girl anxiously, observing that he hesitated.

"If he does anything against the laws," said Jim in a low voice.  "It
isn't that I'm afraid of my good name--I'd even let that go, for _your_
sake, if by so doing I could get him out of mischief; and as long as I
know nothing against him _for certain_, I'll stand by him.  But if he
does fall, and I come to know it, I _must_ leave him, Nora, because I
won't be art and part in it.  I could no longer go on my knees to pray
for him if I did that, Nora.  Moreover, if anything o' that sort should
happen, I must leave the country, because he'd be sure to be caught and
tried, and I will never stand witness against _your_ father if I can
avoid it by fair means."

Poor Nora hung her head as she asked in a low voice if Jim really
thought her father was engaged in illegal practices.

"I can't say that I do," replied the youth earnestly.  "Come, cheer up,
dearest Nora.  After all, it is chiefly through reports that my
suspicions have been aroused, and we all know how easy it is for an
enemy to raise an evil report.  But, Nora, I wish you had not bound me
to secrecy as to my reason for sticking by your father.  Why should I
not say boldly that it's all for love of you?"

"Why should you wish to give any reason at all, Jim, and above all,
_that_ reason?" asked Nora, looking up with a blush.

"Because," said the youth, with a perplexed look, "my secrecy about the
matter has puzzled my father to such an extent that his confidence in me
is entirely shaken.  I have been all my life accustomed to open all my
heart to him, and now, without rhyme or reason, as he thinks, I have
suddenly gone right round on the other tack, and at the same time, as he
says, I have taken up with doubtful company.  Now, if--"

The sound of approaching footsteps here brought the interview to an
abrupt close.  Nora ran back to her poor home, and Jim Welton, directing
his steps towards the harbour, returned on board the little sloop which
had been named after the girl of his heart.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

TREATS OF QUEEKER AND OTHERS--ALSO OF YOUTHFUL JEALOUSY, LOVE, POETRY,
AND CONFUSION OF IDEAS.

Returning, now, to the moon-struck and Katie-smitten Queeker, we find
that poetic individual walking disconsolately in front of Mr George
Durant's mansion.

In a previous chapter it has been said that, after composing his
celebrated lines to the lantern of the floating light, he resolved to
drop in upon the Durants about tea-time--and well did Queeker know their
tea-time, although, every time he went there uninvited, the miserable
hypocrite expressed surprise at finding them engaged with that meal, and
said he had supposed they must have finished tea by that time!

But, on arriving at the corner of the street, his fluttering heart
failed him.  The thought of the cousin was a stumbling-block which he
could not surmount.  He had never met her before; he feared that she
might be witty, or sarcastic, or sharp in some way or other, and would
certainly make game of him in the presence of Katie.  He had observed
this cousin narrowly at the singing-class, and had been much impressed
with her appearance; but whether this impression was favourable or
unfavourable was to him, in the then confused state of his feelings, a
matter of great uncertainty.  Now that he was about to face her, he felt
convinced that she must be a cynic, who would poison the mind of Katie
against him, and no power within his unfortunate body was capable of
inducing him to advance and raise the knocker.

Thus he hung in torments of suspense until nine o'clock, when--in a fit
of desperation, he rushed madly at the door and committed himself by
hitting it with his fist.

His equanimity was not restored by its being opened by Mr Durant
himself.

"Queeker!" exclaimed the old gentleman in surprise; "come in, my dear
sir; did you stumble against the door?  I hope you haven't hurt
yourself?"

"Not at all--a--no, not at all; the fact is, I ran up the steps rather
hastily, and--how do you do, Miss Durant?  I hope you are _quite_ well?"

Poor Queeker said this and shook hands with as much earnestness as if he
had not seen Katie for five years.

"Quite well, thank you.  My cousin, Fanny Hennings--Mr Queeker."

Fanny bowed and Mr Queeker bowed, and, with a flushed countenance,
asked her about the state of her health with unnatural anxiety.

"Thank you, Mr Squeeker, I am very well," replied Fanny.

The unhappy youth would have corrected her in regard to his name, but
hesitated and missed the opportunity, and when, shortly afterwards,
while engaged in conversation with Mr Durant, he observed Fanny
giggling violently in a corner by herself, he felt assured that Katie
had kindly made the correction for him.

The announcement of supper relieved him slightly, and he was beginning
to calm down over a piece of bread and cheese when the door-bell rang.
Immediately after a heavy foot was heard in the passage, the parlour
door was flung open, the maid announced Mr Hall, and a tall elegant
young man entered the room.  His figure was slender, but his chest was
deep and his shoulders were broad and square.  An incipient moustache of
fair hair floated like a summer cloud on his upper lip, which expanded
with a hearty smile as he advanced towards Mr Durant and held out his
hand.

"You have forgotten me, I fear," he said.

"Forgotten you!" exclaimed the old gentleman, starting up and seizing
the young man's hand, which he shook violently--"forgotten Stanley
Hall--little Stanney, as I used to call you?  Man, how you _are_ grown,
to be sure.  What a wonderful change!"

"For the worse, I fear!" exclaimed the youth, laughing.

"Come, no fishing for compliments, sir.  Let me introduce you to my
daughter Katie, my niece Fanny Hennings, and my young friend Queeker.
Now, then, sit down, and make yourself at home; you're just in time;
we've only just begun; ring the bell for another plate, Katie.  How glad
I am to see you, Stanney, my boy--I can't call you by any other than the
old name, you see.  How did you leave your father, and what brings you
here?  Come, out with it all at once.  I declare you have quite excited
me."

Well was it for poor Queeker that every one was too much occupied with
the newcomer to pay any attention to him, for he could not prevent his
visage from betraying something of the feelings which harrowed up his
soul.  The moment he set eyes on Stanley Hall, mortal jealousy--keen,
rampant, virulent jealousy of the worst type--penetrated every fibre of
his being, and turned his heart to stone!  We cannot afford space to
detail the various shades of agony, the degrees of despair, through
which this unfortunate young man passed during that evening.  A thick
volume would not suffice to contain it all.  Language is powerless to
express it.  Only those who have similarly suffered can conceive it.

Of course, we need scarcely add that there was no occasion for jealousy.
Nothing was further from the mind of Stanley than the idea of falling
in love with Katie.  Nevertheless, politeness required that he should
address himself to her occasionally.  At such times, Queeker's soul was
stabbed in an unutterable manner.  He managed to command himself,
notwithstanding.  To his credit, be it said, that he refrained from
using the carving-knife.  He even joined with some show of interest (of
course hypocritical) in the conversation.

Stanley Hall was not only good-looking, but good-humoured, and full of
quiet fun and anecdote, so that he quickly ingratiated himself with all
the members of the family.

"D'you know it makes me feel young again to hear these old stories about
your father's college-life," said Mr Durant.  "Have some more cheese,
Stanney--you look like a man who ought to have a good appetite--fill
your glass and pass the bottle--thanks.  Now, how comes it that you have
turned up in this out-of-the-way part of the world?  By-the-bye, I hope
you intend to stay some time, and that you will take up your quarters
with me?  You can't imagine how much pleasure it would give me to have
the son of my old companion as a guest for some time.  I'm sure that
Katie joins me heartily in this hope."

Queeker's spirit sank with horror, and when Katie smilingly seconded her
father's proposal, his heart stood still with dismay.  Fanny Hennings,
who had begun to suspect that there was something wrong with Queeker,
put her handkerchief to her mouth, and coughed with what appeared to be
unreasonable energy.

"I regret," said Stanley (and Queeker's breath came more freely), "that
my stay must necessarily be short.  I need not say that it would afford
me the highest pleasure to accept your kind invitation" (he turned with
a slight bow to Katie, and Queeker almost fainted), "but the truth is,
that I have come down on a particular piece of business, in regard to
which I wish to have your advice, and must return to London to-morrow or
next day at furthest."

Queeker's heart resumed its office.

"I am sorry to hear that--very sorry.  However, you shall stay to-night
at all events; and you shall have the best advice I can give you on any
subject you choose to mention.  By the way talking of advice, you're an
M.D. now, I fancy?"

"Not yet," replied Stanley.  "I am not quite fledged, although nearly
so, and I wish to go on a voyage before completing my course."

"Quite right, quite right--see a little of life first, eh?  But how
comes it, Stanney, that you took kindly to the work at last, for, when I
knew you first you could not bear the idea of becoming a doctor?"

"One's ideas change, I suppose," replied the youth, with a
smile,--"probably my making the discovery that I had some talent in that
direction had something to do with it."

"H'm; how did you make that discovery, my boy?" asked the old gentleman.

"That question can't easily be answered except by my inflicting on you a
chapter of my early life," replied Stanley, laughing.

"Then inflict it on us without delay, my boy.  I shall delight to
listen, and so, I am sure, will Katie and Fanny.  As to my young friend
Queeker, he is of a somewhat literary turn, and may perhaps throw the
incidents into verse, if they are of a sufficiently romantic character!"

Katie and Fanny declared they would be charmed to hear about it, and
Queeker said, in a savagely jesting tone, that he was so used to things
being inflicted on him, that he didn't mind--rather liked it than
otherwise!

"But you must not imagine," said Stanley, "that I have a thrilling
narrative to give you, I can merely relate the two incidents which fixed
my destiny in regard to a profession.  You remember, I daresay, that my
heart was once set upon going to sea.  Well, like most boys, I refused
to listen to advice on that point, and told my father that I should
never make a surgeon--that I had no taste or talent for the medical
profession.  The more my father tried to reason me out of my desire, the
more obstinate I became.  The only excuse that I can plead is that I was
very young, very ignorant, and very stupid.  One day, however, I was
left in the surgery with a number of dirty phials to wash--my father
having gone to visit a patient at a short distance, when our servant
came running in, saying that there was a cab at the door with a poor boy
who had got his cheek badly cut.  As I knew that my father would be at
home in less than quarter of an hour, I ordered him to be brought in.
The poor child--a little delicate boy--was very pale, and bleeding
profusely from a deep gash in the cheek, made accidentally by a knife
with which he had been playing.  The mouth was cut open almost to the
ear.  We laid him on a sofa, and I did what I could to stop the flow of
blood.  I was not sixteen at the time, and, being very small for my age,
had never before felt myself in a position to offer advice, and indeed I
had not much to offer.  But one of the bystanders said to me while we
were looking at the child,--

"`What do you think should be done, sir?'

"The mere fact of being asked my opinion gratified my vanity, and the
respectful `sir' with which the question concluded caused my heart to
beat high with unwonted emotion.  It was the first time I had ever been
addressed gravely as a man; it was a new sensation, and I think may be
regarded as an era in my existence.

"With much gravity I replied that of course the wound ought to be sewed
up.

"`Then sooner it's done the better, I think,' said the bystander, `for
the poor child will bleed to death if it is allowed to go on like that.'

"A sudden resolution entered into my mind.  I stroked my chin and
frowned, as if in deep thought, then, turning to the man who had spoken,
said,--`It ought certainly to be done with as little delay as possible;
I expect my father to return every minute; but as it is an urgent case,
I will myself undertake it, if the parents of the child have no
objection.'

"`Seems to me, lad,' remarked a country fellow, who had helped to carry
the child in, `that it beant a time to talk o' parients objectin' w'en
the cheeld's blood'n to deth.  Ye'd better fa' to work at once--if 'ee
knows how.'

"I cast upon this man a look of scorn, but made no reply.  Going to the
drawer in which the surgical instruments were kept, I took out those
that suited my purpose, and went to work with a degree of coolness which
astonished myself.  I had often seen my father sew up wounds, and had
assisted at many an operation of the kind, so that, although altogether
unpractised, I was not ignorant of the proper mode of procedure.  The
people looked on with breathless interest.  When I had completed the
operation, I saw my father looking over the shoulders of the people with
an expression of unutterable surprise not unmingled with amusement.  I
blushed deeply, and began some sort of explanation, which, however, he
cut short by observing in an off-hand manner, that the thing had been
done very well, and the child had better be carried into my bedroom and
left there to rest for some time.  He thus got the people out of the
surgery, and then, when we were alone, told me that I was a born
surgeon, that he could not have done it much better himself, and, in
short, praised me to such an extent that I felt quite proud of my
performance."

Queeker, who had listened up to this point with breathless attention,
suddenly said--

"D'you mean to say that you _really_ did that?"

"I do," replied Stanley with an amused smile.

"Sewed up a mouth cut all the way to the ear?"

"Yes."

"With a--a--"

