  Through bright eternal years."

"I think the light is dawning, auntie."

"I am _sure_ it is, Jeff."

Again they were silent, and thus they remained while the natural light
faded, until the western sky and sea were dyed in crimson.

The first thing that diverted their thoughts was a quick step outside,
then a thunderous knock at the door, and next moment the captain stood
before them, beaming with excitement, panting heavily, and quite unable
for some minutes to talk coherently.

"Sister," said he at last, "sit down an' listen.  Jeff, open your ears."

He drew a crumpled letter from his pocket, spread it on his knee, put on
his glasses, and read as follows:--

"`My DEAR CAPTAIN MILLET,--

"`You will, I know, be grieved, though not surprised, to hear that your
old friend Nibsworth is dead.  Poor fellow! his end came much as you and
I had anticipated when we last parted.  He followed his dear Clara about
two months after her death.  I suppose you know that she died three days
after you left their house.

"`My object in writing just now, however, is to convey to you a piece of
good news; namely, that Nibsworth has left you the whole of his
property, which, altogether, cannot amount to less, I should think, than
eighty thousand pounds.'"

At this point the captain paused and looked over his glasses at his
sister, who, with wide-open eyes, exclaimed--

"Brother! he must be joking!"

"Sister," returned the captain, "my friend _never_ jokes, except when in
extremely congenial society, and then his jokes are bad--so bad as to be
unworthy of repetition."

"Wonderful!" exclaimed Miss Millet.

"Singular," murmured Jeff, whose thoughts seemed to be engaged with some
far-off prospect.

"He goes on," continued the captain, reading: "`I am left the sole
executor of his affairs.  Pray, therefore, write as to what you wish
done.  I am not at present conversant with the precise duties of an
executor, but of course I will get the best advice possible in the
circumstances, and do the best I can.  I would recommend you to do the
same at your end of the world, and let me have your instructions as soon
as possible.  The enclosed statement will show you the nature of your
property.  The greater part, you will observe, is in hard cash.  I may
add that the house and grounds here would sell well at present, if you
feel inclined to dispose of them.

"`In conclusion, allow me to congratulate you on this piece of good
fortune--perhaps, knowing your character so well, I should have written,
this good gift from God.'"

"Ay, my friend," said the captain, folding the letter, "you might have
written, `this unexpected and undeserved gift from God.'  But now,
Molly, what think ye of it all?"

"Wonderful!" exclaimed the good lady in reply; and beyond this word she
seemed unable to go for a time, save that, after a strong mental effort,
she varied it to "amazing!"  Suddenly she seemed to recover, and said
with a quick, earnest look--

"Dick, what are you going to do?"

"Do?" exclaimed Captain Millet, smiting his knee and looking from his
sister to Jeff with a broad smile.  "I'll run up to London, an' take a
mansion in the West End, call at Long Acre in passing, and buy a
carriage and four.  Then I'll run down to Folkestone an' buy a villa
there, or a castle if they have one in stock; if not, I'll order one o'
the newest pattern, with gas, water, electricity, and steam laid on.
After that I'll buy a steam-yacht and take a trip round the world, so as
to calm my brain and think over it.  Of course I'll drop in at Hong
Kong, in passing, to have a look at my property; and then--"

"Hush, brother! don't run on with such nonsense when we ought to be only
filled with serious thoughts."

"How can a man be filled with serious thoughts, Molly, when a sort of
Arabian Nights' affair has tumbled on him all of a sudden--took him
aback like a white squall, and thrown him on his beam-ends?"

"And what a selfish fellow you are, too!" said Jeff; "not one word in
all you propose to do about anybody except yourself--no mention even of
Rosebud."

"Pooh!  Jeff, are you so green as not to know that a wise man never puts
his best foot foremost?  Don't you know that it is usual, when a man
makes a speech, to keep tumblin' out one point after another--clinkin'
'em all as he goes along--until he comes to the `last but not _least_'
point?  If you had let me alone, Molly, I was comin' to Rosebud and
yourself too; but as you've been so unmannerly, I'll keep these points
till another time.  By the way, when you write to Rosebud, not a word
about all this.  It might unsettle the darlin' with her lessons.  An'
that reminds me that one o' my first businesses will be to have her
supplied wi' the best of teachers--French, Italian, Spanish, German
masters--Greek an' Hebrew an' Dutch ones too if the dear child wants
'em--to say nothin' o' dancin' an' drawin' an' calisthenics an'
mathematics, an' the use o' the globes, an' conundrums o' that sort."

"Really, brother, if you go on like this, I'll begin to think your good
fortune, as you call it, has turned your brain."

"Never fear, Molly, when I come to say what I'm going to do about the
little church, an' the night-classes, an' the soup-kitchens, and the
model-houses and the swimming-bath, you'll whistle another tune.  But
come, Jeff; it's time to ask how you are gettin' along.  You look
better, my boy."

"I _am_ better, captain--much, _much_ better," returned the youth, with
a flushed cheek and sparkling eye, "for I, too, have got news this
morning of a fortune which exceeds yours in value, and the security is
better."

The captain was puzzled.  "A fortune, Jeff?"

"Yes; but my news will keep.  You are too much excited to hear about it
just now.  Enough to say that I am much better.  Now, if you are wise,
you will go without delay and take some steps about this affair."

"You're right, lad," returned the captain, rising quietly and clapping
on his hat; "so good-bye to 'ee both.  I'll soon be back.  At present
I'm off to consult my--my--solicitor! though I don't know who he is yet,
more than the man in the moon."



CHAPTER SEVEN.

AN UNQUIET, ADVENTUROUS MORNING IN THE SHELL-CAVE.

"I think," said Jeff Benson one fine morning, as he got up and stretched
himself, "that I feel well enough to-day to get down to the shore
without assistance.  You know, auntie, I shall never be able to walk
alone if I give way to laziness, and lean so much on others.  I'm like
the babies now, and must be encouraged to try it on my own hook."

He looked at Miss Millet with a half-pitiful smile, for there was
something woefully true in his words, and his good little nurse found it
necessary to go in search of the household keys for a minute or so
before answering.

"Well, Jeff, perhaps you are right and the day is splendid--sunny, calm,
and warm--so you won't be likely to catch cold.  Only don't go far, for
you might become tired out.  So, promise that you won't go far, and then
I will let you go."

Jeff promised; but of course he did not do exactly as his nurse wished,
for, in such circumstances, the word "far" has a wonderfully varied
significance.  At first, leaning on his stick and pausing frequently to
recover strength, he made his way to the shore; but when there, the
invigorating air and the exhilarating sound of ripples on the sand, and
a rest on the rocks, made him feel so much better, that he thought he
might walk the length of the shell-cave without breaking his promise.

He tried, and succeeded, but was so fatigued, when at length he threw
himself on the soft sand at the cave's mouth, that he felt uneasy about
getting home again.

The shell-cave was a favourite nook in a lonely part of the cliffs,
which Jeff had been wont to frequent in his coastguard days, especially
at that particular time when he seemed to expect the revival of the
smuggling traffic near Miss Millet's cottage.  He had frequently spoken
of it to Rose as a beautiful spot where innumerable sea-shells were to
be found, and had once taken her to see it.

It was, as we have said, a lonely spot, far removed from the fishing
town, and was sought out by Jeff because he did not yet feel strong
enough to hold much intercourse with his friends and former mates--none
of whom had seen him since his illness began.  But the poor invalid was
doomed to several interruptions that day.

The first comer was his comrade Wilson, of the coastguard, whose place
he had taken on the eventful night of the wreck.  On rounding the point
of rock, and coming suddenly on our hero, that worthy was struck dumb
and motionless for at least a minute, while his eyes gradually opened
wide with surprise, and his mouth partially followed suit.

"Not Jeff Benson!" said Wilson at last, in quite a solemn tone.

"What's left of him," answered Jeff, with a faint smile.

"An' it ain't much!" returned Wilson, with a kind of gasp, as he
approached softly.

"Not much more than the bones an' clothes," said Jeff, with a laugh at
his friend's expression; "also," he added more seriously, "a good deal
of the spirit, thank God.  How are all the lads, Wilson?"

The man tried to answer, but could not.  The sight of his old stalwart
chum so reduced was too much for him.  He could only go down on one
knee, and take the thin large hand in his.  Seeing this, Jeff returned
his squeeze, and relieved him by saying--

"You can beat me now, Wilson, but I could squeeze till I made you howl
once, and mayhap I'll do it again--who knows?  But you must not think me
unkind if I ask you to leave me, Wilson.  The Doctor is always insisting
that I must keep quiet; so, good-day to you, my boy, an' remember me
kindly to my comrades."

The next visitor, who appeared half an hour later, was the terrier dog
of the station.  Bounce belonged, of right, to David Bowers, but, being
amiable, it acknowledged the part-ownership of all the men.  On suddenly
beholding Jeff, it rushed at him with a mingled bark and squeal of joy,
and thereafter, for full two minutes, danced round him, a mass of
wriggling hair from tip of tail to snout, in uncontrollable ecstasy.
Mingled misery and surprise at Jeff's sudden and unaccountable
disappearance, prolonged agonies of disappointed expectation, the
sickness of heart resulting from hope long deferred, all were forgotten
in that supreme moment of joy at reunion with his long-lost human
friend!

Jeff had to rise and sit down on a shelf of rock to escape some of
Bounce's overwhelming affection.  Presently Bounce's owner appeared, and
went through something of a similar performance--humanised, however, and
with more of dignity.

"I can't tell 'ee how glad I am to see you again, Jeff," said Bowers,
sitting down beside him, and grasping his hand.  "But oh, man, how
thin--"

The huge coastguardsman choked at this point, as Wilson had done before
him; but, being more ready of resource, he turned it into a cough, and
declared, sternly, that night-work must have given him a cold, or
"suthin' o' that sort."  After which he made a great demonstration of
clearing his throat and blowing his nose.

"But you'll soon be yours--at least, somethin' like your old self,
before long, Jeff.  The doctor told us that, the last time he was at the
station."

"If God wills," returned Jeff, softly; "I am in His hands, and willing
to be what He chooses.  You remember, David, the talk we once had about
Miss Millet's argument, that God brings good out of evil.  I didn't
believe it then; I believe it now.  I've bin to school since I last saw
you, David, and I've learned a good lesson, for I can say from my heart
it has been good for me that I was afflicted."

Bowers did not reply, but looked at his friend with an expression of
puzzled surprise.

"Yes," continued Jeff, with rising enthusiasm; "I have lost my health--
the doctor thinks permanently.  I've lost the strength that I used to be
so proud of, and with it the hope of being able to make a living in any
active line of life; and I've lost much more besides.  But what I have
found in my Saviour far more than makes up for it all."

In the "much more besides," poor Jeff mentally referred to his loss of
all hope of ever gaining the hand of Rose Millet; for if his chance
seemed small before, how immeasurably was it reduced now that his health
was shattered, and his power even of supporting himself gone.  No; he
felt that that door was closed--that he must avoid the girl as much as
possible in future; and, above all, be particularly careful not to fall
in love with her.  Of course, it was only a passing fancy as yet, and,
like fruit, would never ripen unless the sun shone.  He would avoid the
sunshine!  Meanwhile, of all these rapidly fleeting thoughts, he said
never a word to his friend David Bowers, but after a little more
