contract it into the most compendious and striking form."

     (_a_) Write "When an author &c." (_b_) Can be omitted. (_c_)
     Assimilate the constructions: "Of which the former must, of
     course, be aimed at first, lest both be missed." (_d_) Use
     "expression" or else "phrase" in _both_ places. (_e_) Assimilate
     the construction to what follows; write "that is most forcible
     and brief." (_f_) Insert "also." (_g_) "understood." (_h_) "let
     him use ...; first let him expound." (_i_) Omit.

93. "When I say 'a great man,' I _not_ (22) _only_ mean a man
intellectually great but also morally, (38) _who_ (8) has no
preference for diplomacy (_a_) (23) _at all events which_ (10 _a_)
_is_ mean, petty, and underhanded to secure ends _which_ (8) can be
secured by an honest policy _equally_ (20) _well_, (38) _who_ (8) does
not resemble Polonius, (_b_) who prefers to get at truth by untruthful
tricks, and (_b_) who considers truth a carp _which_ (10 _g_) _is_ to
be caught by the bait falsehood. We cannot call a petty intriguer
great (_c_), (30) though we may be forced to call an unscrupulous _man
by that_ (15 _a_) _name_."

     (_a_) "at all events no preference." (_b_) Why is _who_ right
     here? If you like, you can write, "does not, like Polonius,
     prefer ... and consider." (_c_) End with "we cannot give the name
     to a petty intriguer."

94. "I regret that I have some (_a_) (3) _intelligence which_ (10 _a_)
_is of a most_ (3) _painful nature_, and which I must tell you at
once, though (_b_) _I should like to defer it_ on (_c_) (40 _a_)
account of your ill-health, and _because_ (_c_) (40 _a_) _you have
already had_ many troubles, and (40 _a_) _owing to_ the natural
dislike _which_ (8) a friend must always feel to say _that_ (10 _f_)
_which_ is unpleasant. Many old friends in this district have turned
against you: I scarcely like to write the words: _only_ (21) I remain
faithful to you, and I am sure you will believe that I am doing _that_
(10 _f_) _which_ is best for your interests."

     (_a_) "news." (_b_) In a letter these words should remain is they
     are; but if a _period_ is desired, they must (30) come last,
     after "unpleasant." (_c_) Write "because of your ill-health ...
     and the troubles ... and because of...."

95. "The general at once sent back word that the enemy had suddenly
appeared on the other side of the river, and [(35) or (37)] then (_a_)
retreated. (_b_) _It_ was thought that (_b_) _it_ would have shown
more (_c_) (1) _fortitude_ on his (3) _part_ if he had attacked the
fortifications, (_d_) _which_ were not tenable for more than a week at
all events. Such was the (54) _universal_ opinion, _at_ (23) _least,
of_ (54) _all_ the soldiers."

     (_a_) Point out the ambiguity. (_b_) "It was thought he would
     have shown &c." (_c_) Distinguish between "fortitude" and
     "bravery." (_d_) What would be the meaning if "that" were
     substituted for "which"? It will be perhaps better to substitute
     for "which," "since they."

96. "A notion has sprung up that the Premier, though he can legislate,
cannot govern, and has attained an influence which renders it
imperative, if this Ministry is to go on, that (_a_) _it_ should be
dispersed."

     (_a_) Who or what "has attained"? Write "and this notion has
     become so powerful that, unless it is dispersed...."

97. "Those who are _habitually silent_ (_a_) (3) _by disposition_ and
morose are less liable to the fault of exaggerating than those who are
_habitually_ (_a_) (3) _fond of talking_, and (40 _a_) _of_ (_a_) (3)
_a pleasant disposition_."

     (a) Each of these periphrases must be condensed into a single
     adjective.

98. "This author, (_a_) (31) though he is not (_b_) _altogether_ (_c_)
_guiltless of_ (_b_) _occasional_ (_c_) _faults_ of exaggeration,
which are to be found as plentifully in his latest works as in _those
which he_ (_d_) _published when he was beginning his career as an
author_, yet, _notwithstanding these_ (_e_) _defects_, surpassed all
_those who were living_ _at the_ (_f_) _same time with him_ in the
_clear_ (_g_) _manner in_ which he could, as it were, see into the
feelings of the people at large, and in the power--_a power that
indeed could not be_ (_f_) _resisted_--with which he _drew_ (_f_)
_toward himself_ the sympathy of _those who_ (_f_) _perused his
works_." See (54).

     (_a_) Convert the parenthesis into a separate sentence. (_b_) One
     of these words is unnecessary. (_c_) One of these is unnecessary.
     (_d_) Condense: "his earliest." (_e_) Omit these words as
     unnecessary. (_f_) Express all this in one word. (_g_) "clearness
     with."

99. "_Among the North_ (_a_) (23) _American Indians_ I had indeed
heard of the perpetration of similar atrocities; but it seemed
intolerable that such things should occur in a civilized land: and I
rushed from the room at once, leaving the wretch where he stood, with
his tale half told, (30) _horror-stricken at his crime_."

     (_a_) Make it evident whether the speaker once _lived_ among the
     North American Indians, or not, and show who is
     "horror-stricken."

100. "His (1) _bravery_ under this painful operation and the (1)
_fortitude_ he had shown in heading the last charge in the recent
action, (30) _though he was_ wounded at the time and had been unable
to use his right arm, and was the only officer left in his regiment,
out of twenty who were alive the day before, (19) inspired every one
with admiration."

     Begin, "Out of twenty officers &c.... Though wounded &c.... he
     had headed." "The bravery he had then shown and...."

101. "_Moral_ as well as (41) _other_ considerations must have weight
when we are selecting an officer (_a_) _that_ (10 _b_) _will be placed
in_ a position that will task his intelligence (_b_) (18) _and his
fidelity_."

     (_a_) The repetition of "that" is objectionable. Use "to fill."
     (_b_) "and" can be replaced by some other conjunction to suit
     what precedes.

102. "It happened that at this time there were a few Radicals in the
House _who_ (8) could not forgive the Prime Minister for being a
Christian."

     Point out the difference of meaning, according as we read "who"
     or "that."

103. "_It cannot be doubted_ (15 _b_) _that_ the minds of a vast
number of men would be left poor shrunken things, full of melancholy
and indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves, if (32) there were
taken out of men's minds vain opinions, false valuations, imaginations
as one (_a_) would, and _the_ (15 _a_) _like_."

     (_a_) The meaning (which cannot easily be more tersely expressed
     than in the original) is "castles in the air," "pleasant
     fancies."

104. "God never wrought a miracle to refute atheism, because His
ordinary works refute it. (_a_) A little philosophy inclines man's
mind to atheism: depth in philosophy brings men's minds back to
religion. (44) While the mind of man looks upon second causes
scattered, it may sometimes rest in them; (44) when it beholds the
chain of them confederate and linked together, it must needs
acknowledge a Providence. (44) That school which is most accused of
atheism most clearly demonstrates the truth of religion."

     (_a_) Insert a suspensive conjunction. See (34).

105. "The spirit of Liberty and the spirit of Nationality were once
for all dead; (_a_) (5) _it_ might be for a time a pious duty, but it
could not continue always _expedient or_ (_c_) (15) (18) _profitable
to_ (_b_) (13) _mourn_ (_c_) (15 _a_) _for their loss_. Yet this is
the (_b_) (13) _feeling_ of the age of Trajan."

     (_a_) Omit. (_b_) "To sit weeping by their grave;" "attitude."
     (_c_) Notice that "expedient or profitable" are emphatic, as is
     shown by "yet" in the next sentence. Make it evident therefore,
     by their position, that these words are more emphatic than "to
     mourn &c."

106. "(_a_) _If we ask_ (15 _b_) what was the nature of the force by
which this change was effected, (_a_) _we find it to have been_ (_b_)
the force that had seemed almost dead for many generations--(38) of
theology."

     (_a_) Omit these words. (_b_) Begin a new sentence: "It was a
     force &c."

107. "I remember Longinus highly recommends a description of a storm
by Homer, because (_a_) (5) (_c_) _he_ has not amused himself with
little fancies upon the occasion, as authors of an inferior genius,
whom he mentions, (_b_) (15 _a_) have done, (30) _but_ (_c_) _because_
he has gathered together those (_d_) (1) _events_ which are the most
apt to terrify the imagination, and (35) really happen in the raging
of a tempest."

     (_a_) "The poet." (_b_) Omit "have done" and write "like some
     authors." (_c_) Suspend the sentence by writing "the poet ...
     instead of ... has." (_d_) What is the word for "that which
     happens _around_ one, or in connection with some central object?"

108. "To have passed (_a_) (3) _in a self-satisfied manner_ through
twenty years of office, letting things take their own course; to have
(_b_) _sailed_ with consummate sagacity, never against the tide of
popular (_c_) _judgement_; to have left on record as the sole title to
distinction among English ministers a peculiar art of (_d_) _sporting
with_ the heavy, the awful responsibility of a nation's destiny with
the jaunty grace of a juggler (11) (_e_) _playing with_ his golden
ball; to have joked and intrigued, and bribed and (_f_) _deceived_,
with the result of having done nothing (_g_), (_h_) _either_ for the
poor, (_h_) _or_ for religion (for (_i_) which indeed he did worse
than nothing), (_h_) _or_ for art and science, (_h_) _or_ for the
honour or concord or even the financial prosperity of the nation, (38)
is surely a miserable basis on which the reputation of a great (15)
statesman _can be_ (_k_) (15 _a_) _founded_."

     (_a_) "complacently." (_b_) "Sail" implies will and effort: use a
     word peculiar to a helpless ship, so as to contrast paradoxically
     with "sagacity." (_c_) Use a word implying less thought and
     deliberation. (_d_) _With_ is too often repeated; write "bearing"
     so as to introduce the illustration abruptly. (_e_) "tossing."
     (_f_) Use a word implying a particular kind of "deceit," not
     "lying," but the next thing to "lying." (_g_) Insert the word
     with a preceding and intensifying adverb, "absolutely nothing."
     (_h_) Instead of "either," "or," repeat "nothing." (_i_) The
     parenthesis breaks the rhythm. Write "nothing, or worse than
     nothing." (_k_) "to found."

109. "A glance at the clock will make you (1) _conscious_ that it is
nearly three in the morning, and I therefore ask you, gentlemen,
instead of wasting more time, to put this question to yourselves, 'Are
we, or are we not, here, for the purpose of (1) _eliminating_ the
truth?'"

110. "The speech of the Right Honourable member, so far from
_unravelling_ (14) _the obscurities of this knotty question_, is
eminently calculated to mislead his supporters (_a_) (8 _a_) _who_
have not made a special study of it. It may be (_b_) (23) _almost_
asserted of every statement (8) _which_ he has made that the very (1)
_converse_ is the fact."

     (_a_) The meaning appears to be, not "_all_ his supporters," but
     "_those of_ his supporters who:" the convenience of writing "his
     supporters _that_" is so great that I should be disposed to use
     "that." (_b_) "Every," not "asserted," requires the juxtaposition
     of "almost."

111. "The provisions of the treaty _which_ (8) require the consent of
the Parliament of Canada await its assembling."

     Point out the meaning conveyed by _which_, and by _that_.

112. "Mrs. Smith demonstrated (26), in opposition to the general
dictum of the press, that (_a_) _there had been_ a reaction against
woman's suffrage, that there had really been a gain of one vote in the
House of Commons."

     (_a_) Substitute "instead of," and erase the second "that."

113. "The practice of smoking hangs like a gigantic (14 _a_) cloud of
evil over the country."


FOOTNOTES:

[18] That which treats of the thirteenth century.




CONTINUOUS EXERCISES.


CLEARNESS.

The following exercises consist of extracts from Burnet, Butler, and
Clarendon, modernized and altered with a view to remove obscurity and
ambiguity. The modernized version will necessarily be inferior to the
original in unity of style, and in some other respects. The charm of
the author's individuality, and the pleasant ring of the old-fashioned
English, are lost. It is highly necessary that the student should
recognize this, and should bear in mind that the sole object is to
show how the meaning in each case might have been more _clearly_
expressed.

Occasionally expressions have been altered, not as being in themselves
obscure or objectionable, but as indicating a habit of which beginners
should beware. For example, in the extract from Burnet, _he_ is often
altered, not because, in the particular context, the pronoun presents
any obscurity, but because Burnet's habit of repeating _he_ is faulty.

These exercises can be used in two ways. The pupil may either have his
book open and be questioned on the reasons for each alteration, or,
after studying the two versions, he may have the original version
dictated to him, and then he may reproduce the parallel version, or
something like it, on paper.

                         LORD CLARENDON.

The principal faults in this style are, long heterogeneous sentences
(43), use of phrases for words (47 _a_), ambiguous use of pronouns
(5), excessive separation of words grammatically connected together
(19).

        ORIGINAL VERSION.                      PARALLEL VERSION.

  (44) It will not be impertinent     And now, in order to explain, as
  nor _unnatural to this_ (50)        far as possible, how so prodigious
  _present discourse_, to set down    an alteration could take place in
  in this place the present temper    so short a time, and how the[19]
  and constitution of both  Houses    royal power could fall so low as
  of Parliament, and (34) of the      to be unable to support itself,
  court itself, (30) that (5) _it_    its dignity, or its faithful
  may be the less wondered at, that   servants, it will be of use to set
  so prodigious an alteration should  down here, where it comes most
  be made in so short a time, and     naturally, some account of the[20]
  (37) the crown fallen so low, that  present temper and composition,
  it could neither support itself     not only of both Houses of
  nor its own majesty, nor _those     Parliament, but also of the court
  who would_ (47 _a_) _appear         itself.
  faithful to it_.

    *     *     *     *     *           *     *     *     *     *

         (Here follows a description of the House of Lords.)

  In the House of Commons were many   In the House of Commons
  persons of wisdom and gravity, who  there were many men of wisdom
  (7) _being possessed_ of great and  and judgment whose high
  plentiful fortunes, though they     position and great wealth disposed
  were undevoted enough to the        them, in spite of their indifference
  court, (19) had all imaginable      to the court, to feel
  duty for the king, and affection    a most loyal respect for the
  to the government _established_(47  king, and a great affection for
  _a_) _by law_ or ancient custom;    the ancient constitutional
  (43) and without doubt, the _major  government of the country. Indeed,
  part of that_ (54) _body_           it cannot be doubted that
  consisted of men who had no mind    the majority had no intention to
  to break the peace of the kingdom,  break the peace of the kingdom
  or to make any considerable         or to make any considerable
  alteration in the government of     alteration in Church or State.
  Church or State: (43) and           Consequently, from the very
  therefore (18) _all_ inventions     outset, it was necessary to resort
  were set on _foot from the_ (15)    to every conceivable device
  _beginning_ to work upon (5)        for the purpose of perverting
  _them_, and (11) corrupt (5)        this honest majority into rebellion.
  _them_, (43) (45) by suggestions
  "of the dangers (8) _which_         With some, the appeal was
  threatened all that was precious    addressed to their patriotism.
  to the subject (19) in their        They were warned "of the
  liberty and their property, by      dangers that threatened [all
  _overthrowing_ (47 _a_) _or         that was precious in] the liberty
  overmastering_ the law, _and_ (47   and property of the subject,
  _a_) _subjecting_ it to _an         if the laws were to be made
  arbitrary_ (47_a_) _power_, and by  subservient to despotism, and
  countenancing Popery to the         if Popery was to be encouraged
  subversion of the Protestant        to the subversion of the Protestant
  religion," and then, by             religion."
  infusing terrible apprehensions
  into some, and so working upon      The fears of others were appealed
  their fears, (6 _b_) "of (11 _a_)   to. "There was danger," so[21] it
  being called in question for        was said, "that they might be
  somewhat they had done," by which   called to account for something
  (5) _they_ would stand in need of   they had done, and they would then
  (5) _their_ protection; and (43)    stand in need of the help of those
  (45) raising the hopes of others,   who were now giving them this
  "that, by _concurring_ (47 _a_)     timely warning." In others, hopes
  _with_ (5) _them_ (5) _they_        were excited, and offices,
  should be sure to obtain offices    honours, and preferments were held
  and honours and any kind of         out as the reward of adhesion.
  preferment." Though there were too  Too many were led away by one or
  many corrupted and misled by these  other of these temptations, and
  several temptations, and (19)       indeed some needed no other
  others (40 _a_) who needed no       temptation than their innate
  other temptations than from the     fierceness and barbarity and the
  fierceness and barbarity _of        malice they had contracted against
  their_ (47 _a_) _own natures_, and  the Church and the court. But the
  the malice they had contracted      leaders of the conspiracy were not
  against the Church and against the  many. The flock was large and
  court; (43) yet the number was not  submissive, but the shepherds were
  great _of those in whom the         very few.
  government of the rest_ (47 _a_)
  _was vested_, nor were there many
  who had the absolute authority
  (13) to lead, though there were a
  multitude (13) that was disposed
  to follow.

  (44) (30) Mr. Pym was looked upon   Of these, Mr. Pym was thought
  as the man of greatest experience   superior to all the rest in
  in parliaments, _where he had_      parliamentary experience. To this
  (50) _served very long_, and _was   advantage he added habits of
  always_ (50) _a man of business_,   business acquired from his
  (7) being an officer in the         continuous service in the
  Exchequer, (43) and of a good       Exchequer. He had also a good
  reputation generally, (30) though   reputation generally; for, though
  known to be inclined to the         known to be inclined to the
  Puritan party; yet not of those     Puritan party, yet he was not so
  furious resolutions against the     fanatically set against the Church
  Church as the other leading men     as the other leaders. In this
  were, and (44) wholly devoted to    respect he resembled the Earl of
  the Earl of Bedford, who had        Bedford, to whom he was
  nothing of that spirit.             thoroughly devoted.

            (Here follow descriptions of Hampden and Saint John.)

  It was generally believed that      These three persons, with the
  these three persons, with the       three peers mentioned before, were
  other three lords mentioned         united in the closest confidence,
  before, were of the most intimate   and formed the mainspring of the
  and entire trust with each other,   party. Such at least was the
  and made _the engine which_ (47     general belief. But it was clear
  _a_) _moved_ all the rest; (30)     that they also admitted to their
  yet it was visible, that (15)       unreserved confidence two others,
  _Nathaniel Fiennes, the second son  (45) whom I will now
  of the Lord Say, and Sir Harry      describe,--Nathaniel Fiennes,
  Vane, eldest son to the Secretary,  second son of Lord Say, and Sir
  and Treasurer of the House_, were   Harry Vane, eldest son of the
  received by them with full          Secretary, and Treasurer of the
  confidence and without reserve.     House.

  The former, being a man of good     Nathaniel Fiennes, a man of good
  parts of learning, and after some   parts, was educated at New
  years spent in New College in       College, Oxford, where[22] his
  Oxford, (43) of which his father    family claimed and enjoyed some
  had been formerly fellow, (43)      privileges in virtue of their
  that family pretending[23] and      kindred to the founder, and
  enjoying many privileges there, as  where[22] his father had formerly
  of kin to the founder, (43) (19)    been a fellow. He afterwards spent
  had spent his time abroad in        some time in Geneva and in the
  Geneva and amongst the cantons of   cantons of Switzerland, where[22]
  Switzerland, (30) where he          he increased that natural
  improved his disinclination to the  antipathy to the Church which he
  Church, with which milk he had      had imbibed almost with his
  been nursed. From his travels he    mother's milk.[24] By a singular
  returned through Scotland (52)      coincidence, he came home through
  (which[24] few travellers took in   Scotland (not a very common route
  their way home) at the time when    for returning travellers) just
  (5) _that_ rebellion was in bud:    when the Scotch rebellion was in
  (30) (43) (44) and was very little  bud. For some time he was scarcely
  known, except amongst (5) _that_    known beyond the narrow and
  people, _which conversed_ (47 _a_)  exclusive circle of his sect,
  _wholly amongst themselves,_ until  until at last he appeared in
  he was now (15) _found in           Parliament. Then, indeed, it was
  Parliament_, (30) (43) (44) when    quickly discovered that he was
  it was quickly discovered that,     likely to fulfil even the fond
  as he was the  darling of his       hopes of his father and the high
  father, so (5) _he_  was like to     promise of many years.
  make good whatsoever _he_ had
  for many years promised.

  (5) _The other_, Sir H. Vane, was   Fiennes' coadjutor, Sir H. Vane,
  a man of great natural parts[25]    was a man of great natural
  (45) and of very profound           ability.[25] Quick in understanding
  dissimulation, of a quick           and impenetrable in dissembling,
  conception, and of very ready,      he could also speak with
  sharp, and weighty expression. He   promptness, point, and weight. His
  had an (50) unusual aspect, which,  singular appearance, though it
  though it might naturally proceed   might naturally proceed from his
  from his father and mother,         parents, who were not noted for
  neither of which were beautiful     their beauty, yet impressed men
  persons, yet (19) made men think    with the belief that he had in him
  there was somewhat in him of        something extraordinary, an
  extraordinary: and (52) his whole   impression that was confirmed by
  life made good that imagination.    the whole of his life. His
  Within a very short time after he   behaviour at Oxford, where he
  returned from his studies in        studied at Magdalen College, was
  Magdalen College in Oxford, where,  not characterized, in spite of the
  (43) though he was under the care   supervision of a very worthy
  of a very worthy tutor, he lived    tutor, by a severe morality. Soon
  not with great exactness, (43) he   after leaving Oxford he spent some
  spent some little time in France,   little time in France, and more in
  and more in Geneva, and, (43)       Geneva. After returning to
  after his return into England,      England, he conceived an intense
  (38) contracted a full prejudice    hatred not only against the
  and bitterness against the Church,  government of the Church, which
  both against the form of the        was disliked by many, but also
  government and the Liturgy, (43)    against the Liturgy, which was
  which was generally in great        held in great and general
  reverence, (15 _a_) _even with      reverence.
  many of those who were not
  friends_ to (5) _the other_. In     Incurring or seeming to incur, by
  his giddiness, which then much      his giddiness, the displeasure of
  displeased, or seemed to            his father, who at that time,
  displease, (30) (43) his father,    beside strictly conforming to the
  who still appeared highly           Church himself, was very bitter
  conformable, and exceedingly sharp  against Nonconformists, the young
  against those who were not,         Vane left his home for New
  (5) _he_ transported himself into   England.
  New England, (43) a colony within
  few years before planted by a       This colony had been planted a few
  mixture of all religions,[26] which years before by men of all sorts of
  disposed the professors to dislike  religions, and their
  the government of the Church; who   differences[26] disposed them to
  (30) (43) (44) were qualified by    dislike the government of the
  the king's charter to choose their  Church. Now, it happened that their
  own government and governors,       privilege (accorded by the king's
  under the obligation, "that every   charter) of choosing their own
  man should take the oaths of        government and governors was
  allegiance and supremacy;" (30)     subject to this obligation, "that
  (43) (5) _which_ all the first      every man should take the oaths of
  planters did, when they received    allegiance and supremacy." These
  their charter, before they          oaths had been taken, not only by
  transported themselves from hence,  all the original planters, on
  nor was there in many years after   receiving their charter, before
  the least scruple amongst them of   leaving England, but also for many
  complying with those obligations:   years afterwards, without exciting
  so far men were, _in the infancy_   the slightest scruple. Indeed,
  (15) _of their schism_, from        scruples against lawful oaths were
  refusing to take lawful oaths.      unknown[27] in the infancy of the
  (45) He was no sooner landed        English schism. But with the
  there, but his parts made him       arrival of Vane all this was
  quickly taken notice of, (26) and   changed. No sooner had he landed
  very probably his quality, being    than his ability, and perhaps to
  the eldest son of a                 some extent his position, as eldest
  Privy-councillor, might give him    son of a Privy-councillor,
