brackets, is made of brass, one-half inch wide by one-sixteenth of an
inch thick.

Below the forward end of the key (A) is a cross bar of brass (F),
screwed to the base by a screw at one end, to receive the other line
wire. Directly below the key (A) is a screw (G), so that the key will
strike it when moved downwardly. The other end of the bar (F) contacts
with the forward end of the switch bar (E) when the latter is moved
inwardly.

[Illustration: _Fig. 67._ TELEGRAPH SENDING KEY]

The forward end of the key (A) has a knob (H) for the fingers, and the
rear end has an elastic (I) attached thereto which is secured to the end
of the base, so that, normally, the rear end is held against the base
and away from the screw head (G). The head (J) of a screw projects from
the base at its rear end. Key A contacts with it.

When the key A contacts with the screw heads G, J, a click is produced,
one when the key is pressed down and the other when the key is released.

You will notice that the two plates C, F are connected up in circuit
with the battery, so that, as the switch E is thrown, so as to be out of
contact, the circuit is open, and may be closed either by the key A or
the switch E. The use of the switch will be illustrated in connection
with the sounder.

[Illustration: _Fig. 68._ TELEGRAPH SOUNDER]

When the key A is depressed, the circuit of course goes through plate C,
key A and plate F to the station signalled.

THE SOUNDER.--The sounder is the instrument which carries the
electro-magnet.

In Fig. 68 this is shown in perspective. The base is six inches long and
four inches wide, being made, preferably, of wood. Near the forward end
is mounted a pair of electro-magnets (A, A), with their terminal wires
connected up with plates B, B', to which the line wires are attached.

Midway between the magnets and the rear end of the base is a pair of
upwardly projecting brackets (C). Between these are pivoted a bar (D),
the forward end of which rests between the magnets and carries, thereon,
a cross bar (E) which is directly above the magnets, and serves as the
armature.

The rear end of the base has a screw (F) directly beneath the bar D of
such height that when the rear end of the bar D is in contact therewith
the armature E will be out of contact with the magnet cores (A, A). A
spiral spring (G) secured to the rear ends of the arm and to the base,
respectively, serves to keep the rear end of the key normally in contact
with the screw F.

CONNECTING UP THE KEY AND SOUNDER.--Having made these two instruments,
we must next connect them up in the circuit, or circuits, formed for
them, as there must be a battery, a key, and a sounder at each end of
the line.

In Fig. 69 you will note two groups of those instruments. Now observe
how the wires connect them together. There are two line wires, one (A)
which connects up the two batteries, the wire being attached so that
one end connects with the positive terminal of the battery, and the
other end with the negative terminal.

[Illustration: _Fig. 69._ A TELEGRAPH CIRCUIT]

The other line wire (B), between the two stations, has its opposite ends
connected with the terminals of the electro-magnet C of the sounders.
The other terminals of each electro-magnet are connected up with one
terminal of each key by a wire (D), and to complete the circuit at each
station, the other terminal of the key has a wire (E) to its own
battery.

TWO STATIONS IN CIRCUIT.--The illustration shows station 2 telegraphing
to station 1. This is indicated by the fact that the switch F' of that
instrument is open, and the switch F of station 1 closed. When,
therefore, the key of station 2 is depressed, a complete circuit is
formed which transmits the current through wire E' and battery, through
line A, then through the battery of station 1, through wire E to the
key, and from the key, through wire D, to the sounder, and finally from
the sounder over line wire B back to the sounder of station 2,
completing the circuit at the key through wire D'.

When the operator at station 2 closes the switch F', and the operator at
station 1 opens the switch F, the reverse operation takes place. In both
cases, however, the sounder is in at both ends of the line, and only the
circuit through the key is cut out by the switch F, or F'.

THE DOUBLE CLICK.--The importance of the double click of the sounder
will be understood when it is realized that the receiving operator must
have some means of determining if the sounder has transmitted a dot or a
dash. Whether he depresses the key for a dot or a dash, there must be
one click when the key is pressed down on the screw head G (Fig. 62),
and also another click, of a different kind, when the key is raised up
so that its rear end strikes the screw head J. This action of the key is
instantly duplicated by the bar D (Fig. 68) of the sounder, so that the
sounder as well as the receiver knows the time between the first and the
second click, and by that means he learns that a dot or a dash is made.

ILLUSTRATING THE DOT AND THE DASH.--To illustrate: Let us suppose, for
convenience, that the downward movement of the lever in the key, and the
bar in the sounder, make a sharp click, and the return of the lever and
bar make a dull click. In this case the ear, after a little practice,
can learn readily how to distinguish the number of downward impulses
that have been given to the key.

_The Morse Telegraph Code_

A . -        N - .       & . ...
B - ...      O ..        1 . - - .
C .. .       P .....     2 .. - ..
D - . .      Q .. - .    3 ... - .
E .          R . ..      4 .... -
F . - .      S ...       5 - - -
G - - .      T -         6 ......
H ....       U .. -      7 - - ..
I ..         V ... -     8 - ....
J - . - .    W . - -     9 - .. -
K - . -      X . - ..    0 ---- ------
L --         Y .. ..
M - -        Z ... .

EXAMPLE IN USE.--Let us take an example in the word "electrical."

E    L    E    C    T    R    I    C    A    L
.   --   .   .. .   -  . ..  ..  .. .  . -  --

The operator first makes a dot, which means a sharp and a dull click
close together; there is then a brief interval, then a lapse, after
which there is a sharp click, followed, after a comparatively longer
interval, with the dull click. Now a dash by itself may be an L, a T, or
the figure 0, dependent upon its length. The short dash is T, and the
longest dash the figure 0. The operator will soon learn whether it is
either of these or the letter L, which is intermediate in length.

In time the sender as well as receiver will give a uniform length to the
dash impulse, so that it may be readily distinguished. In the same way,
we find that R, which is indicated by a dot, is followed, after a short
interval, by two dots. This might readily be mistaken for the single dot
for E and the two dots for I, were it not that the time element in R is
not as long between the first and second dots, as it ordinarily is
between the single dot of E when followed by the two dots of I.




CHAPTER X

HIGH TENSION APPARATUS, CONDENSERS, ETC.


INDUCTION.--One of the most remarkable things in electricity is the
action of induction--that property of an electric current which enables
it to pass from one conductor to another conductor through the air.
Another singular and interesting thing is that the current so
transmitted across spaces changes its direction of flow, and,
furthermore, the tension of such a current may be changed by
transmitting it from one conductor to another.

LOW AND HIGH TENSION.--In order to effect this latter change--that is,
to convert it from a low tension to a high tension--coils are used, one
coil being wound upon the other; one of these coils is called the
primary and the other the secondary. The primary coil receives the
current from the battery, or source of electrical power, and the
secondary coil receives charges, and transmits the current.

For an illustration of this examine Fig. 70, in which you will note a
coil of heavy wire (A), around which is wound a coil of fine wire (B).
If, for instance, the primary coil has a low voltage, the secondary
coil will have a high voltage, or tension. Advantage is taken of this
phase to use a few cells, as a primary battery, and then, by a set of
_Induction Coils_, as they are called, to build up a high-tension
electro-motive force, so that the spark will jump across a gap, as shown
at C, for the purpose of igniting the charges of gas in a gasoline
motor; or the current may be used for medical batteries, and for other
purposes.

[Illustration: _Fig. 70._ INDUCTION COIL AND CIRCUIT]

The current passes, by induction, from the primary to the secondary
coil. It passes from a large conductor to a small conductor, the small
conductor having a much greater resistance than the large one.

ELASTIC PROPERTY OF ELECTRICITY.--While electricity has no resiliency,
like a spring, for instance, still it acts in the manner of a cushion
under certain conditions. It may be likened to an oscillating spring
acted upon by a bar.

Referring to Fig. 71, we will assume that the bar A in falling down upon
the spring B compresses the latter, so that at the time of greatest
compression the bar goes down as far as the dotted line C. It is obvious
that the spring B will throw the bar upwardly. Now, electricity appears
to have a kind of elasticity, which characteristic is taken advantage of
in order to increase the efficiency of the induction in the coil.

[Illustration: _Fig. 71._ ILLUSTRATING ELASTICITY]

THE CONDENSER.--To make a condenser, prepare two pine boards like A,
say, eight by ten inches and a half inch thick, and shellac thoroughly
on all sides. Then prepare sheets of tinfoil (B), six by eight inches in
size, and also sheets of paraffined paper (C), seven by nine inches in
dimensions. Also cut out from the waste pieces of tinfoil strips (D),
one inch by two inches. To build up the condenser, lay down a sheet of
paraffined paper (C), then a sheet of tinfoil (B), and before putting
on the next sheet of paraffined paper lay down one of the small strips
(D) of tinfoil, as shown in the illustration, so that its end projects
over one end of the board A; then on the second sheet of paraffine paper
lay another sheet of tinfoil, and on this, at the opposite end, place
one of the small strips (D), and so on, using from 50 to 100 of the
tinfoil sheets. When the last paraffine sheet is laid on, the other
board is placed on top, and the whole bound together, either by wrapping
cords around the same or by clamping them together with bolts.

[Illustration: _Fig. 72._ CONDENSER]

You may now make a hole through the projecting ends of the strips, and
you will have two sets of tinfoil sheets, alternately connected together
at opposite ends of the condenser.

Care should be exercised to leave the paraffine sheets perfect or
without holes. You can make these sheets yourself by soaking them in
melted paraffine wax.

CONNECTING UP A CONDENSER.--When completed, one end of the condenser is
connected up with one terminal of the secondary coil, and the other end
of the condenser with the other secondary terminal.

[Illustration: _Fig. 73._ HIGH-TENSION CIRCUIT]

In Fig. 73 a high-tension circuit is shown. Two coils, side by side, are
always used to show an induction coil, and a condenser is generally
shown, as illustrated, by means of a pair of forks, one resting within
the other.

THE INTERRUPTER.--One other piece of mechanism is necessary, and that is
an _Interrupter_, for the purpose of getting the effect of the
pulsations given out by the secondary coil.

A simple current interrupter is made as follows: Prepare a wooden base
(A), one inch thick, six inches wide, and twelve inches long. Upon this
mount a toothed wheel (B), six inches in diameter, of thin sheet metal,
or a brass gear wheel will answer the purpose. The standard (C), which
supports the wheel, may be of metal bent up to form two posts, between
which the crankshaft (D) is journaled. The base of the posts has an
extension plate (E), with a binding post for a wire. At the front end of
the base is an L-shaped strip (F), with a binding post for a wire
connection, and the upwardly projecting part of the strip contacts with
the toothed wheel. When the wheel B is rotated the spring finger (F)
snaps from one tooth to the next, so that, momentarily, the current is
broken, and the frequency is dependent upon the speed imparted to the
wheel.

[Illustration: _Fig. 74._ CURRENT INTERRUPTER]

USES OF HIGH-TENSION COILS.--This high-tension coil is made use of, and
is the essential apparatus in wireless telegraphy, as we shall see in
the chapter treating upon that subject.




CHAPTER XI

WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY


TELEGRAPHING WITHOUT WIRES.--Wireless telegraphy is an outgrowth of the
ordinary telegraph system. When Maxwell, and, later on, Hertz,
discovered that electricity, magnetism, and light were transmitted
through the ether, and that they differed only in their wave lengths,
they laid the foundations for wireless telegraphy. Ether is a substance
which is millions and millions of times lighter than air, and it
pervades all space. It is so unstable that it is constantly in motion,
and this phase led some one to suggest that if a proper electrical
apparatus could be made, the ether would thereby be disturbed
sufficiently so that its impulses would extend out a distance
proportioned to the intensity of the electrical agitation thereby
created.

SURGING CHARACTER OF HIGH-TENSION CURRENTS.--When a current of
electricity is sent through a wire, hundreds of miles in length, the
current surges back and forth on the wire many thousands of times a
second. Light comes to us from the sun, over 90,000,000 of miles,
through the ether. It is as reasonable to suppose, or infer, that the
ether can, therefore, convey an electrical impulse as readily as does a
wire.

It is on this principle that impulses are sent for thousands of miles,
and no doubt they extend even farther, if the proper mechanism could be
devised to detect movement of the waves so propagated.

THE COHERER.--The instrument for detecting these impulses, or
disturbances, in the ether is generally called a _coherer_, although
detector is the term which is most satisfactory. The name coherer comes
from the first practical instrument made for this purpose.

[Illustration: _Fig. 75._ WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY COHERER]

HOW MADE.--The coherer is simply a tube, say, of glass, within which is
placed iron filings. When the oscillations surge through the secondary
coil the pressure or potentiality of the current finally causes it to
leap across the small space separating the filings and, as it were, it
welds together their edges so that a current freely passes. The
bringing together of the particles, under these conditions, is called
cohering.

Fig. 75 shows the simplest form of coherer. The posts (A) are firmly
affixed to the base (B), each post having an adjusting screw (C) in its
upper end, and these screw downwardly against and serve to bind a pair
of horizontal rods (D), the inner ends of which closely approach each
other. These may be adjusted so as to be as near together or as far
apart as desired. E is a glass tube in which the ends of the rods (D)
rest, and between the separated ends of the rods (D) the iron filings
(F) are placed.

THE DECOHERERS.--For the purpose of causing the metal filings to fall
apart, or decohere, the tube is tapped lightly, and this is done by a
little object like the clapper of an electric bell.

In practice, the coils and the parts directly connected with it are put
together on one base.

THE SENDING APPARATUS.--Fig. 76 shows a section of a coil with its
connection in the sending station. The spark gap rods (A) may be swung
so as to bring them closer together or farther apart, but they must not
at any time contact with each other.

The induction coil has one terminal of the primary coil connected up by
a wire (B) with one post of a telegraph key, and the other post of the
key has a wire connection (C), with one side of a storage battery. The
other side of the battery has a wire (D) running to the other terminal
of the primary.

