following three weeks.  They did not indeed shoot a tiger daily, but
they bagged several within that period, besides a number of deer and
other game.  We must hasten, however, to tell of an event which put a
sudden stop to our hero's hunting at that time, and resulted in the
breaking-up of that hitherto united and harmonious party.

One evening, a little before sunset, they came upon a small clearing, in
the midst of which was a little house erected, in the usual way, upon
wooden legs.  The hunters found, to their surprise, that it was
inhabited by an Englishman named Gordon, who received them with great
hospitality and evident pleasure.  He lived almost alone, having only
one negro man-servant, whose old mother performed the duties of
housekeeper.  Here they passed the night in pleasant intercourse with a
man, who, besides being a countryman--and therefore full of interest
about England, from which he heard regularly but at long intervals--was
remarkably intelligent, and had travelled in almost every quarter of the
globe.  As to his motive for secluding himself in such a wild spot, they
did not presume to inquire, and never found it out.

Next day they bade their host adieu, promising to make a point of
spending another night in his house on their return.  Our hunters had
not gone far when a growl in one of the bushes induced them to land and
search for the growler.  They found him in the person of a large tiger,
which Will Osten caught a glimpse of sneaking away with the lithe
motions of a gigantic cat.  A hurried shot wounded the beast, which,
instead of flying, turned round suddenly, and, with a bound, alighted on
our hero's shoulders.  The shock hurled him violently to the ground.
During the momentary but terrific struggle for life that followed, Will
had presence of mind to draw his hunting-knife, and plunge it, twice,
deep into the tiger's side, but the active claws of the creature tore
his thighs and arms; several large blood-vessels were injured; the light
faded from the eyes of Wandering Will; his strong arm lost its cunning,
and, in the midst of a loud report, mingled with a roar like thunder in
his ears, he fainted away.

When Will recovered his senses he found himself stretched on his back on
a low couch in a hut, with a man kneeling over him, and his comrades
gazing into his face with expressions of deep anxiety.  Will attempted
to speak, but could not; then he tried to move, and, in doing so,
fainted.  On recovering consciousness, he observed that no one was near
him except Larry O'Hale, who lay extended at his side, looking through
the open doorway of the hut, while a series of the most seraphic smiles
played on his expressive countenance!

It would have been an interesting study to have watched the Irishman on
that occasion.  Just before Will Osten opened his eyes, he was looking
into his pale face with an expression that was ludicrously woe-begone.
The instant he observed the slightest motion in his patient, however, he
became suddenly abstracted, and gazed, as we have said, with a seraphic
expression through the doorway.  Poor Larry acted thus, in order to
avoid alarming his patient by his looks, but, in spite of his utmost
caution, Will caught him in the transition state, which so tickled his
risible faculties that he burst into a laugh, which only got the length
of a sigh, however, and nearly produced another fainting fit.

"Ah, then, darlin'!" whispered Larry, with the tenderness of a woman,
"_don't_ do it now.  Sure ye'll go off again av ye do.  Kape quiet,
dear.  'Tis all right ye'll be in a day or two.  Bad luck to the baist
that did it!"

This latter remark brought the scene of the tiger-hunt suddenly to
Will's remembrance, and he whispered, for he had not strength to speak
aloud--

"Was he killed?  Who saved me?"

"Kilt!" cried Larry, forgetting his caution in his excitement; "faix he
was, an' Bunco did it, too--blissin's on his dirty face--putt the ball
betune his two eyes an' took the laist bit of skin off yer own nose, but
the blood was spoutin' from ye like wather, an' if it hadn't bin that
the cliver feller knowed all about tyin' up an'--there, honey, I wint
an' forgot--don't mind me--och! sure, he's off again!"

This was true.  Our hero had lost almost the last drop of blood that he
could spare with the slightest chance of recovery, and the mere exertion
of listening was too much for him.

For many weeks he lay in the hut of that hospitable Englishman, slowly
but gradually returning from the brink of the grave, and during this
period he found his host to be a friend in need, not only to his torn
and weak body, but also to his soul.

Day after day Gordon sat beside his couch with unwearied kindness,
chatting to him about the "old country," telling him anecdotes of his
former life, and gradually leading him to raise his thoughts from the
consideration of time to eternity.

Will Osten, like every unconverted man, rebelled at this at first; but
Gordon was not a man to be easily repulsed.  He did not _force_
religious thoughts on Will, but his own thoughts were so saturated, if
we may say so, with religion, that he could not avoid the subject, and
his spirit and manner were so winning that our hero was at last pleased
to listen.  Will's recovery was slow and tedious.  Before he was able to
leave Gordon's cottage his "independent" spirit was subdued by the
Spirit of God, and he was enabled to exchange slavery to Self, for
freedom in the service of Jesus Christ.  For many a day after that did
Will Osten lie helpless on his couch, perusing with deep interest the
Testament given to him by his mother when he left home.

During this period his companions did not forsake him, but spent their
time in hunting and conveying the proceeds to Tacames, where they
disposed of them profitably.  On one of these occasions they found that
an English ship had touched at the port in passing, and, among other
things, Larry brought a number of old newspapers to the invalid.  Among
the first that he opened Will read the announcement of the sudden death
of his own father!  No information was given beyond the usual and formal
statement, with the simple addition of the words "deeply regretted."

We need not say that this was a terrible shock to the poor wanderer--a
shock which was rendered all the more severe when he reflected that he
had parted from his father in anger.  In his weak condition, Will could
not bear up under the blow, and, for some days, he lay in such a
depressed state of mind and body that his comrades began to fear for his
life.  But after that he rallied, and a sudden improvement took place in
his health.

One day he called his companions round him, and said:--

"Friends, I have resolved to leave you, and return to Europe.  You know
my reasons.  I am not a companion, but only a drag upon you; besides, my
mother is left unprotected.  You will excuse me if I decline to enter
into a discussion on this point.  I have not strength for it, and my
resolve is fixed."

Will paused, and Larry O'Hale, with a leer on his countenance, asked by
what road he meant to travel.

"Across the Andes to the northern coast of South America," answered
Will, smiling.

"An' you as waik as wather, with legs like the pins of a
wather-wagtail!"

"That will soon mend," said Will, jumping up and pulling on his clothes;
"get ready to go out hunting with me, Larry, if you have a mind to!"

Despite the remonstrances of his friend, Will Osten went out with his
gun, trembling with weakness at every step.  He was soon induced to
return to the cottage, but his resolve was fixed.  Next day he went out
again, and, finally, in the course of a week or two, had recovered so
much of his old vigour that he felt able to set out on his journey.  Of
course there were many disputings and arguings as to who should go with
him, but it was finally agree that Larry and Bunco should be his
companions.  Indeed these two would take no denial, and vowed that, if
he declined to accept of them as comrades, they would follow him as a
rear-guard!  Muggins and Old Peter decided that they would return to
Tacames, and make their way thence to California.

Just before parting, Larry took Muggins aside and said, in as dismal a
tone as his jovial spirit was capable of, "It's little I thought, mate,
that you an' me would come for to part in this way, but ov coorse, I
couldn't leave Mr Osten in such a fix, so, d'ye see, I must say
farewell; but kape yer weather eye open, ould boy, for as sure as Larry
O'Hale has got two legs, which makes a pair, you'll see him in
Callyforny yit, diggin' for his fortin'.  In the main time, as I know
ye'll want money, an' as I've made a lot more than you by huntin'--
becase of being a better shot, d'ye see--here's a small sum which I axes
you to accept of as a testimoniyall of my ondyin' friendship."

Muggins bluntly refused the leathern bag which Larry thrust into his
hand, but he ultimately allowed him to force it into his pocket--and
turned away with a sigh.

It was a lovely morning when Wandering Will sorrowfully bade his friends
farewell, and, with his faithful followers, turned his face towards the
snow-capped range of the mighty Andes.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

WANDERING WILL TRAVELS, FINDS HIS PROFESSION PROFITABLE, AND SEES A GOOD
DEAL OF LIFE IN NEW FORMS.

The first part of the journey was performed in a canoe on the Tacames
river, up which they ascended with considerable speed.  The scenery was
delightfully varied.  In some places the stream was wide, in others very
narrow, fringed along the banks with the most luxuriant timber and
brushwood, in which the concert kept up by birds and beasts was
constant, but not disagreeable to the ears of such enthusiastic
sportsmen as Will Osten, Larry O'Hale, and Bunco.  The only disagreeable
objects in the landscape were the alligators, which hideously ugly
creatures were seen, covered with mud, crawling along the banks and over
slimy places, with a sluggish motion of their bodies and an antediluvian
sort of glare in their eyes that was peculiarly disgusting.  They were
found to be comparatively harmless, however.  If they had chanced to
catch a man asleep they would have seized him no doubt, and dragged him
into the water, but being arrant cowards, they had not the pluck to face
even a little boy when he was in motion.

Towards the afternoon of the first day, the hunters came to a long bend
in the river.  Here Will Osten resolved to leave Bunco to proceed alone
with the canoe, while he and Larry crossed the country in search of
game.  Their friend Gordon had given them an elaborate chart of the
route up to the mountains, so that they knew there was a narrow neck of
jungle, over which they might pass, and meet the canoe after it had
traversed the bend in the river.

"Have you got the tinder-box, Larry?" inquired Will, as they were about
to start.

"Ay, an' the powder an' shot too, not to mintion the bowie-knife.  Bad
luck to the wild baists as comes to close quarters wid me, anyhow."

He displayed an enormous and glittering knife as he spoke, with which he
made two or three savage cuts and thrusts at imaginary tigers before
returning it to its sheath.

Cautioning Bunco to keep a good look-out for them on the other side of
the neck of land, the hunters entered the forest.  For several hours
they trudged through bush and brake, over hill and dale, in jungle and
morass, meadow and ravine, without seeing anything worth powder and
shot, although they _heard_ the cries of many wild creatures.

"Och! there's wan at long last," whispered Larry, on coming to the edge
of a precipice that overlooked a gorge or hollow, at the bottom of which
a tiger was seen tearing to pieces the carcase of a poor goat that it
had captured.  It was a long shot, but Larry was impatient.  He raised
his gun, fired, and missed.  Will Osten fired immediately and wounded
the brute, which limped away, howling, and escaped.  The carcass of the
goat, however, remained, so the hunters cut off the best parts of the
flesh for supper, and then hastened to rejoin the canoe, for the shades
of night were beginning to fall.  For an hour longer they walked, and
then suddenly they both stopped and looked at each other.

"I do belaive we've gone an' lost ourselves again," said Larry.

"I am afraid you are right," replied Will, with a half smile; "come, try
to climb to the top of yonder tree on the eminence; perhaps you may be
able to see from it how the land lies."

Larry went off at once, but on coming down said it was so dark that he
could see nothing but dense forest everywhere.  There was nothing for it
now but to encamp in the woods.  Selecting, therefore, a large spreading
tree, Larry kindled a fire under it, and his companion in trouble
discharged several shots in succession to let Bunco know their position
if he should be within hearing.

Neither Will nor Larry took troubles of this kind much to heart.  As
soon as a roaring fire was blazing, with the sparks flying in clouds
into the trees overhead, and the savoury smell of roasting goat's flesh
perfuming the air, they threw care to the dogs and gave themselves up to
the enjoyment of the hour, feeling assured that Bunco would never desert
them, and that all should be well on the morrow.  After supper they
ascended the tree, for the howling of wild beasts increased as the night
advanced, warning them that it would be dangerous to sleep on the
ground.  Here they made a sort of stage or platform among the branches,
which was converted into a comfortable couch by being strewn six inches
deep with leaves.  Only one at a time dared venture to sleep, however,
for creatures that could climb had to be guarded against.  At first this
was a light duty, but as time passed by it became extremely irksome, and
when Larry was awakened by Will to take his second spell of watching, he
vented his regrets in innumerable grunts, growls, coughs, and gasps,
while he endeavoured to rub his eyes open with his knuckles.

"Have a care, lad," said Will, with a sleepy laugh as he lay down; "the
tigers will mistake your noise for an invitation to--"

A snore terminated the speech.

"Bad luck to them," yawned Larry, endeavouring to gaze round him.  In
less than a minute his chin fell forward on his breast, and he began to
tumble backwards.  Awaking with a start under the impression that he was
falling off the tree, he threw out both his arms violently and recovered
himself.

"Come, Larry," he muttered to himself, with a facetious smile of the
most idiotical description, "don't give way like that, boy.  Ain't ye
standin' sintry? an' it's death by law to slaip at yer post.  Och! but
the eyes o' me won't kape open.  Lean yer back agin that branch to kape
ye from fallin'.  There--now howld up like a man--like a--man--ould--
b-o-oy."  His words came slower and slower, until, at the last, his head
dropped forward on his chest, and he fell into a profound sleep, to the
immense delight of a very small monkey which had been watching his
motions for some time, and which now ventured to approach and touch the
various articles that lay beside the sleepers, with intense alarm, yet
with fiendish glee, depicted on its small visage.

Thus some hours of the night were passed, but before morning the rest of
the sleepers was rudely broken by one of the most appalling roars they
had yet heard.  They were up and wide awake instantly, with their guns
ready and fingers on the triggers!

"It's draimin' we must have--"

A rustling in the branches overhead checked him, and next moment the
roar was repeated.  Larry, with an irresistible feeling of alarm, echoed
it and fired right above his head--doing nothing more serious, however,
than accelerating the flight of the already horrified monkey.  The shot
was followed by another roar, which ended in something like a hideous
laugh.

"Sure 'tis a hieena!" exclaimed Larry, reloading in violent haste.

"A hyena!" exclaimed Will--"ay, and a black one, too!  Come down, Bunco,
you scoundrel, else I'll put a bullet in your thick skull."

At this invocation the rustling overhead increased, and Bunco dropped
upon the platform, grinning from ear to ear at the success of his
practical joke.

"Och, ye blackymoor!" cried Larry, seizing the native by the throat and
shaking him; "what d'ye mean be such doin's, eh?"

"Me mean noting," said Bunco, still chuckling prodigiously; "but it am
most glorus fun for fright de bowld Irishesman."

"Sit down, ye kangaroo, an' tell us how ye found us out," cried Larry.

"You heard our shots, I suppose?" said Will.  To this Bunco replied that
he had not only heard their shots, but had seen them light their fire,
and eat their supper, and prepare their couch, and go to sleep, all of
which he enjoyed so intensely, in prospect of the joke he meant to
perpetrate, that he was obliged to retire several times during the
