
"What! are they all dead?" asked Will Osten.

"Ay, all, and if you don't follow them it will only be by attending to
what I tell you.  My name is Buchanan, but the savages can only manage
to make Bukawanga out o' that.  The word means fire, and ain't a bad one
after all!"

The man smiled grimly as he said this, and then resumed, more rapidly
and sternly than before:--

"You have but one chance, and that is to join us.  I have come to the
village with the news that a neighbouring tribe is about to attack us.
If you agree to help us to fight, I may manage to save you; if not your
case is hopeless.  There is no time for consideration.  Ay or no, that's
the word."

"Sure I'll jine ye, Mr Bukkie Whangy," said Larry O'Hale, "wid all the
pleasure in life.  It's always for fightin' I am, at laist whin--"

"I don't like to shed human blood," said Captain Dall, interrupting,
"where I've no quarrel."

"Then your own must be shed," said Bukawanga firmly.

"There's no help for it, captain," said Will Osten.  "'Tis better to
fight for these men than to be murdered by them.  What say you, Mr
Cupples?"

"War," replied the mate emphatically.

"Ditto," said Muggins, nodding his head and buttoning his jacket.

"Then strip, and we'll paint you right off," said Bukawanga; "look
alive, now!"

He fastened the torch which he held in his hand to a beam of the hut,
and cut the bonds of the prisoners; then, going to the door, he summoned
two men, who came in with a basket made of leaves, in which were several
cocoa-nut shells filled with red, white, and black earth, or paint.

"What!" exclaimed Will Osten, "must we fight without clothing?"

"An' wid painted skins?" said Larry.

"Yes, unless you would be a special mark for the enemy," replied
Bukawanga; "but you have no chance if you don't become in every way like
one of us."

Seeing that the man was in earnest, they were fain to submit.  After
removing their clothes, the natives began diligently to paint them from
head to foot, laying on the colours so thickly, and in such bold
effective strokes, that ere long all appearance of nudity was removed.
Man is a strange being.  Even in the midst of the most solemn scenes he
cannot resist giving way at times to bursts of mirth.  Philosophy may
fail to account for it, and propriety may shudder at it, but the fact is
undeniable.  With death hovering, they knew not how near, over them, and
the memory of the fearful things they had just witnessed strong upon
them, they were compelled, now and then, to smile and even to laugh
aloud, as the process of painting went on.  There was some variety in
the adornment of each, but let that of Larry O'Hale serve as an example.
First of all his legs were rubbed all over with white earth, and his
body with yellow.  Then, down each lower limb, behind, a palm-tree was
drawn in red--the roots beginning at his heels, and the branches above
spreading out on his calves.  Various fanciful devices were drawn on his
breast and arms, and some striking circles on his back.  Last of all,
one-half of his face was painted red, and the other half black, with a
stripe of white extending from the root of his hair down to the point of
his nose.  It is needless to say that during the process the
enthusiastic Irishman commented freely on the work, and offered many
pieces of advice to the operator.  Indeed, his tendency to improve upon
existing customs had well-nigh put an end to the friendly relations
which now subsisted between the white men and the natives, for he took a
fancy to have a red stripe down each of his legs.  Either the native did
not understand him, or would not agree to the proposal, whereupon Larry
took the brush and continued the work himself.  At this the savage
indignantly seized him by the arm and pinched him so violently that he
lost temper, and, thrusting the red brush into the native's face, hurled
him to the ground.  There was a yell and a rush at once, and it is
probable that blood would have been shed had not Bukawanga interposed.

When the painting was completed, their protector led the white men (now
no longer white!) to the hut of the chief.  Bukawanga was received
somewhat coldly at first.  The chief, a large, fine-looking old man,
named Thackombau, with an enormous head of frizzled hair, looked askance
at the newcomers, and was evidently disposed to be unfriendly.
Observing this, and that the warriors around him scowled on them in a
peculiarly savage manner, most of the prisoners felt that their lives
hung, as it were, upon a thread.  The aspect of things changed, however,
when their friend stood up and addressed the assembly.

Bukawanga had not yet said a word about the cause of his sudden return
from the war expedition.  It was, therefore, with much concern that the
chief and his men learned that a neighbouring and powerful tribe, with
which they had always been at enmity, were actually on the way to attack
them; and when Bukawanga talked of the needful preparations for defence,
and, pointing to the prisoners, said that they were his countrymen, able
to fight well, and willing to help them, there was a perceptible
improvement in the looks of the party.  Finally, Thackombau condescended
to rub noses with them all, and they were ordered off to another hut to
have supper.  This latter arrangement was brought about by their
deliverer, who knew that if they remained to sup with the natives they
would be shocked, and, perhaps, roused to some act of desperate
violence, by the horrible sight of portions of the bodies of their poor
comrades, which, he knew, were to be eaten that night.  He therefore
sought to divert their thoughts from the subject by sitting down and
relating many anecdotes connected with his own adventurous history,
while they partook of a meal of which they stood much in need.

The dishes, although new to them, were by no means unpalatable.  They
consisted of baked pig and yams served on banana leaves, and soup in
cocoa-nut shells.  Also a dish made of taro-tops, and filled with a
creamy preparation of cocoa-nut done in an oven.  Bread-fruits were also
served, and these tasted so like the crumb of wheaten loaf, that it was
difficult to believe them to be the fruit of a tree.  For drink they had
the juice of the young cocoa--a liquid which resembles lemonade, and of
which each nut contains about a tumblerful.  There was also offered to
them a beverage named ava, which is intoxicating in its nature, and very
disgusting in its preparation.  This, however, Bukawanga advised them
not to touch.

"Now, Mr Bukkie Whangy," said Larry, after having appeased his
appetite, "if I may make so bowld as to ax--how came ye here?"

"The story is short enough and sad enough," replied his new friend.
"The fact is, I came here in a sandal-wood trader's ship; I was so
disgusted with the captain and crew that I ran away from them when they
touched at this island for water.  'Tis eight years ago now, and I have
bin here ever since.  I have regretted the step that I took, for the
devilry that goes on here is ten times worse than I ever saw aboard
ship.  However, it's too late for regret now."

"Ah! _too late_," murmured Will Osten, and his thoughts leaped back to
England.

"The worst of it is," continued the runaway sailor, "that I have no
chance of gettin' away, for the cruelty of sailors to the natives of
this island has rendered them desperate, and they murder every white man
they can get hold of.  Indeed there would have been no chance for you
but for the breaking out of war, and the fact that they are somewhat
short of fightin' men just now.  Not long after I landed on the island,
an American whaler sent her boats ashore for water.  They quarrelled,
somehow, with the natives, who drove them into their boats with
tremendous hooting and yells and some hard blows, although no blood was
spilt.  Well, what did the scoundrels do but pulled aboard their ship,
brought their big guns to bear on the people, and fired on several
villages--killing and wounding a good many of 'em, women and children
among the rest.  That's the way these fellows set the natives against
white men.  It was all I could do to prevent them from knocking out my
brains after the thing happened."

While Bukawanga was speaking, a great commotion was heard outside.

"They're gettin' ready for action," he said, springing up.  "Now, lads,
follow me.  I'll get you weapons, and, hark-'ee," he added, with a
somewhat peculiar smile, "I heerd some of 'ee say ye don't want to spill
blood where ye have no quarrel.  Well, there's no occasion to do so.
Only act in self-defence, and that'll do well enough; d'ye understand?"

The man gave vent to a short chuckle as he said this, and then, leading
his countrymen from the hut, conducted them towards a temple, near to
which a large band of warriors was busily engaged in making preparations
for the approaching fight.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A FIGHT, WHICH RESULTS IN A MISTAKE AND A HASTY FLIGHT.

The horrors of war are neither agreeable to write about nor to reflect
upon.  However much, therefore, it may disappoint those readers whose
minds delight to wallow in the abominations of human cruelty, we will
refrain from entering into the full particulars of the sanguinary fight
that ensued just after the arrival of Wandering Will and his friends in
the island.  It is sufficient to say that many lives were lost.  Of
course the loss of life bore no proportion to that which occurs in
civilised warfare.  One roar from the throats of our terrific engines of
destruction will sometimes send more souls into eternity in one moment
than all the fierce fury of a hundred savages can accomplish in an hour.
But what the savage lacks in power he more than makes up for in cruelty
and brutality.  During the few days in which the fight raged, the sights
that met the eyes of the white men, and the appalling sounds that filled
their ears, turned their hearts sick, and induced a longing desire to
escape.

The war was carried on chiefly in the way of bush fighting.  Our sailors
found this mode of warfare convenient, for it enabled them to act very
much as spectators.  Passing over the details of the brief campaign, we
touch only on those points which affected the subsequent movements of
the whites.

Bukawanga, who virtually acted the part of commander-in-chief, although
all the chiefs considered themselves above him, moved about actively at
all times to make sure that the village was properly guarded at every
point.  While thus employed he had, on one occasion, to pass through a
piece of scrub, or thick bush, in which he heard the shriek of a woman.
Turning aside he came to an opening where a man was endeavouring to kill
a little boy, whose mother was doing her best to defend him.  He
evidently wished to kill the child and to spare the woman, but she
stooped over the child and warded off the blows with her arms so
cleverly, that it was still uninjured, although the poor mother was
bleeding profusely from many wounds.  Bukawanga instantly rushed to the
rescue, and raised his club to deal the savage a deadly blow.
Unobserved by him, however, another savage had been attracted to the
spot, and, seeing what was about to happen, he ran up behind Bukawanga
and felled him with a blow of his club.  During the scuffle the woman
snatched up her boy and escaped.  The two savages then began to dispute
as to which had the best right to cut off the head of their fallen foe
and carry it away in triumph.  Both of them were much fatigued with
fighting, so they sat down on the back of the prostrate seaman to
conduct the discussion more comfortably.  The point was still undecided
when Bukawanga recovered consciousness, felt the heavy pressure on his
back and loins, and heard part of the interesting dialogue!

It chanced, at this point, that Will Osten and Larry O'Hale, who, from
natural affinity or some other cause, always kept together, came to the
spot and peeped through the bushes.  Seeing two men sitting on the body
of a third and engaged in an animated dispute, they did not see cause to
interfere, but remained for a few minutes almost amused spectators of
the scene, being utterly ignorant, of course, as to the purport of their
dispute.  Suddenly, to their great surprise, they beheld the two men
leap into the air; the supposed dead body sprang up, and, before either
savage could use his weapons, each received a strong British fist
between his eyes and measured his length on the sward, while the
conqueror sprang over them into the bush and disappeared.

"Man alive!" exclaimed Larry, "if it isn't Bukkie Whangy himself!  Och,
the murtherin' daimons!"

With that Larry leaped over the bushes flourishing his club and yelling
like a very savage.  But Will Osten was before him.  Both savages had
risen immediately after being knocked down, and now faced their new
enemies.  They were no match for them.  Being expert in all athletic
exercises, young Osten found no difficulty in felling the first of the
men, while Larry disposed of the other with equal celerity.  The
Irishman's blood had fired at the thought of the narrow escape of his
deliverer, and, still whirling his club round his head, he looked about
eagerly as if desirous of finding another foe on whom to expend his
fury.  At that moment he caught sight of a pair of savage eyes gleaming
at him from the bushes.

"Hah! ye dirty polecat," he cried, throwing his club at the eyes with
all his force.

Never was there a worse aim or a better shot!  The club flew high into
the air and would have fallen some fifty yards or more wide of the mark,
had it not touched the limb of a tree in passing.  It glanced obliquely
down, and, striking the owner of the eyes between the shoulders felled
him to the earth.

Larry sprang upon him with a yell of triumph, but the yell was changed
into a howl of consternation when he made the discovery that he had
knocked down, if not killed, one of the principal chiefs of the village!
To say that poor O'Hale wrung his hands, and wished bad luck to
fightin' in general, and to himself in particular, gives but a feeble
idea of the distress of his mind at this untoward event.

"D'ye think I've kilt him intirely, doctor dear?" he asked of Will
Osten, who was on his knees beside the fallen chief examining his hurt.

"No, not quite.  See, he breathes a little.  Come, Larry, the moment he
shows symptoms of reviving we must bolt.  Of course he knows who knocked
him down, and will never forgive us."

"That's true, O murther!" exclaimed Larry, with a mingled look of
contrition and anxiety.

"Depend upon it they'll kill us all," continued Osten.

"And bake an' ait us," groaned Larry.

"Come," said Will, rising hastily as the stunned chief began to move,
"we'll go search for our comrades."

They hurried away, but not before the chief had risen on one elbow and
shaken his clenched fist at them, besides displaying a terrible double
row of teeth, through which he hissed an unintelligible malediction.

They soon found their comrades, and related what had occurred.  A
hurried council of war was held on the spot, and it was resolved that,
as a return to the village would ensure their destruction, the only
chance of life which remained to them was to take to the mountains.
Indeed, so urgent was the necessity for flight, that they started off at
once, naked though they were, and covered with blood, paint, and dust,
as well as being destitute of provisions.

All that night they travelled without halt, and penetrated into the
wildest fastnesses of the mountains of the interior.  Bukawanga had
already told them, during intervals in the fight when they had met and
eaten their hasty meals together, that the island was a large, well
wooded, and fruitful one--nearly thirty miles in diameter; and that the
highest mountain in the centre was an active volcano.  There were
several tribes of natives on it, all of whom were usually at war with
each other, but these tribes dwelt chiefly on the coast, leaving the
interior uninhabited.  The fugitives, therefore, agreed that they should
endeavour to find a retreat amongst some of the most secluded and
inaccessible heights, and there hide themselves until a ship should
chance to anchor off the coast, or some other mode of escape present
itself.

The difficulties of the way were greater than had been anticipated.
There was no path; the rocks, cliffs, and gullies were precipitous; and
the underwood was thick and tangled, insomuch that Mr Cupples sat down
once or twice and begged to be left where he was, saying that he would
take his chance of being caught, and could feed quite well on
cocoa-nuts!  This, however, was not listened to.  Poor Cupples was
dragged along, half by persuasion and half by force.  Sailors, as a
class, are not celebrated for pedestrian powers, and Cupples was a
singularly bad specimen of his class.  Muggins, although pretty well
knocked up before morning, held on manfully without a murmur.  The
captain, too, albeit a heavy man, and fat, and addicted to panting and
profuse perspiration, declared that he was game for anything, and would
never be guilty of saying "die" as long as there was "a shot in the
locker."  As for Larry O'Hale, he was a man of iron mould, one of those
giants who seem to be incapable of being worn out or crushed by any
amount of physical exertion.  So far was he from being exhausted, that
he threatened to carry Mr Cupples if he should again talk of falling
behind.  We need scarcely say that Wandering Will was quite equal to the
occasion.  Besides being a powerful fellow for his age, he was lithe,
active, and hopeful, and, having been accustomed to hill-climbing from
boyhood, could have left the whole party behind with ease.
