NUMBER 1.

_Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, April 16, 1856.

Sir,--I hasten to communicate, for the information of Her Majesty's
Government, a discovery of much importance, made known to me by Mr
Angus McDonald, clerk in charge of Fort Colville, one of the Hudson's
Bay Company's trading posts on the Upper Columbia District.

That gentleman reports, in a letter dated on the 1st of March last, that
gold has been found in considerable quantities within the British
territory, on the Upper Columbia, and that he is, moreover, of opinion,
that valuable deposits of gold will be found in many other parts of that
country; he also states that the _daily earnings_ of person's then
employed in digging gold were ranging from 2 pounds to 8 pounds for each
man.  Such is the substance of his report on that subject, and I have
requested him to continue his communications in respect to any further
discoveries made.

I do not know if Her Majesty's Government will consider it expedient to
raise a revenue in that quarter, by taxing all persons engaged in gold
digging; but I may remark, that it will be impossible to levy such a tax
without the aid of a military force, and the expense in that case would
probably exceed the income derived from the mines.

I will not fail to keep you well informed in respect to the extent and
value of the gold discoveries made; and circumstances will probably be
the best indication of the course which it may be expedient to take,
that is, in respect to imposing a tax, or leaving the field free and
open to any persons who may choose to dig for gold.

Several interesting experiments in gold-washing have been lately made in
this colony, with a degree of success that will no doubt lead to further
attempts for the discovery of the precious metal.  The quantity of gold
found is sufficient to prove the existence of the metal, and the parties
engaged in, the enterprise entertain sanguine hopes of discovering rich
and productive beds.  I have, etcetera, (Signed) James Douglas,
Governor.

The Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  II.

_The Right Hon. Henry Labouchere to Governor Douglas_.

Downing Street, August 4, 1856.

Sir,--I have to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch, Number 10, of
the 16th April last, reporting the discovery of gold within the British
territory of the Upper Columbia River district.

In the absence of all effective machinery of Government, I perceive that
it would be quite abortive to attempt to raise a revenue from licences
to dig for gold in that region.  Indeed, as Her Majesty's Government do
not at present look for a revenue from this distant quarter of the
British dominions, so neither are they prepared to incur any, expense on
account of it.  I must, therefore, leave it to your discretion to
determine the best means of preserving order in the event of any
considerable increase of population flocking into this new gold
district; and I shall rely on your furnishing me with full and regular
accounts of any event of interest or importance which may occur in
consequence of this discovery.  I have, etcetera, (Signed) H.
Labouchere.

To Governor Douglas, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  III.

_Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, October 29, 1856.

Sir,--1.  I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your despatch,
Number 14, of the 4th of August, communicating the arrival of my
despatch, Number 10, of the 16th April last, in which was reported the
discovery of gold within the British territory in the Upper Columbia
River district.

2.  I have, since the date of that letter, received several other
communications from my correspondent in that part of the country, who,
however, scarcely makes any allusion to the gold discovery; but I have
heard through other almost equally reliable sources of information, that
the number of persons engaged in gold digging is yet extremely limited,
in consequence of the threatening attitude of the native tribes, who,
being hostile to the Americans, have uniformly opposed the entrance of
American citizens into their country.

3.  The people from American Oregon are, therefore, excluded from the
gold district, except such, as resorting to the artifice of denying
their country, succeed in passing for British subjects.  The persons at
present engaged in the search of gold are chiefly of British origin, and
retired servants of the Hudson's Bay Company, who, being well acquainted
with the natives, and connected by old acquaintanceship and the ties of
friendship, are more disposed to aid and assist each other in their
common pursuits than to commit injuries against persons or property.

4.  They appear to pursue their toilsome occupation in peace, and
without molestation from the natives, and there is no reason to suppose
that any criminal act has been lately committed in that part of the
country.

5.  It is reported that gold is found in considerable quantities, and
that several persons have accumulated large sums by their labour and
traffic, but I cannot vouch for the accuracy of these reports; though,
on the other hand, there is no reason to discredit them, as about 220
ounces of gold dust have been brought to Vancouver's Island direct from
the Upper Columbia, a proof that the country is at least auriferous.

From the successful result of experiments made in washing gold from the
sands of the tributary streams of Fraser River, there is reason to
suppose that the gold region is extensive, and I entertain sanguine
hopes that future researches will develop stores of wealth, perhaps
equal to the gold fields of California.  The geological formations
observed in the "Sierra Nevada" of California being similar in character
to the structure of the corresponding range of mountains in this
latitude, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the resemblance will be
found to include auriferous deposits.

6.  I shall not fail to furnish you with full and regular accounts of
every event of interest connected with the gold district, which may from
time to time occur.  I have, etcetera, (Signed) James Douglas, Governor.

The Right Hon. H. Labouchere; etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  V.

_Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, July 15, 1857.

Received, September 18, 1857.

Sir,--1.  I have the honour of communicating for your information the
substance of advices which I have lately received from the interior of
the continent north of the 49th parallel of latitude, corroborating the
former accounts from that quarter respecting the auriferous character of
certain districts of the country on the right bank of the Columbia
River, and of the extensive table land which divides it from Fraser
River.

2.  There is, however, as yet a degree of uncertainty respecting the
productiveness of those gold fields, for reports vary so much on that
point, some parties representing the deposits as exceedingly rich, while
others are of opinion that they will not repay the labour and outlay of
working, that I feel it would be premature for me to give a decided
opinion on the subject.

3.  It is, however, certain that gold has been found in many places by
washing the soil of the river beds, and also of the mountainsides; but,
on the other hand, the quantities hitherto collected are inconsiderable,
and do not lend much support to the opinion entertained of the richness
of these deposits; so that the question as to their ultimate value
remains thus undetermined, and will probably not be decided until more
extensive researches are made.

4.  A new element of difficulty in exploring the gold country has been
interposed through the opposition of the native Indian tribes of
Thompson River, who have lately taken the high-handed, though probably
not unwise course, of expelling all the parties of gold-diggers,
composed chiefly of persons from the American territories, who had
forced an entrance into their country.  They have also openly expressed
a determination to resist all attempts at working gold in any of the
streams flowing into Thompson River, both from a desire to monopolise
the precious metal for their own benefit, and from a well-founded
impression that the shoals of salmon which annually ascend those rivers,
and furnish the principal food of the inhabitants, will be driven off,
and prevented from making their annual migrations from the sea.

5.  The officers in command of the Hudson's Bay Company's posts in that
quarter, have received orders carefully to respect the feelings of the
natives in that matter, and not to employ any of the company's servants
in washing out gold, without their full approbation and consent.  There
is, therefore, nothing to apprehend on the part of the Hudson's Bay
Company's servants, but there is much reason to fear that serious
affrays may take place between the natives and the motley adventurers
who will be attracted by the reputed wealth of the country, from the
United States' possessions in Oregon, and may probably attempt to
overpower the opposition of the natives by force of arms, and thus
endanger the peace of the country.

6.  I beg to submit, if in that case, it: may not become a question
whether the natives are not entitled to the protection of Her Majesty's
Government, and if an officer invested with the requisite authority
should not, without delay, be appointed for that purpose.  I have,
etcetera, (Signed) James Douglas, Governor.

The Right Hon. H. Labouchere, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  VI.

_Extract of a Despatch from Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. Henry
Labouchere, M.P., dated Victoria, Vancouver's Island, December_ 29,
1857.  (Received March 2, 1858.)

Since I had the honour of addressing you on the 15th July last,
concerning the gold fields in the interior of the country north of the
49th parallel of latitude, which, for the sake of brevity, I will
hereafter speak of as the "Couteau mines" (so named after the tribe of
Indians who inhabit the country), I have received farther intelligence
from my correspondents in that quarter.

It appears from their reports that the auriferous character of the
country is becoming daily more extensively developed, through the
exertions of the native Indian tribes, who, having tasted the sweets of
gold finding, are devoting much of their time and attention to that
pursuit.

They are, however, at present almost destitute of tools for moving the
soil, and of washing implements for separating the gold from the earthy
matrix, and have therefore to pick it out with their knives, or to use
their fingers for that purpose; a circumstance which in some measure
accounts for the small products of gold up to the present time, the
export being only about 300 ounces since the 6th of last October.

The same circumstance will also serve to reconcile the opinion now
generally entertained of the richness of the gold deposits by the few
experienced miners who have seen the Couteau country, with the present
paucity of production.

The reputed wealth of the Couteau mines is causing much excitement among
the population of the United States territories of Washington and
Oregon, and I have no doubt that a great number of people from those
territories will be attracted thither with the return of the fine
weather in spring.

In that case, difficulties between the natives and whites will be of
frequent occurrence, and unless measures of prevention are taken, the
country will soon become the scene of lawless misrule.

In my letter of the 15th of July, I took the liberty of suggesting the
appointment of an officer invested with authority to protect the natives
from violence, and generally, so far as possible, to maintain the peace
of the country.  Presuming that you will approve of that suggestion, I
have, as a preparatory step towards the proposed measure for the
preservation of peace and order, this day issued a proclamation
declaring the rights of the Crown in respect to gold found in its
natural place of deposit, within the limits of Fraser River and Thompson
River districts, within which are situated the Couteau mines; and
forbidding all persons to dig or disturb the soil in search of gold,
until authorised on that behalf by Her Majesty's Government.

I herewith forward a copy of that proclamation, and also of the
regulations since published, setting forth the terms on which licences
will be issued to legalise the search for gold, on payment of a fee of
ten shillings a-month, payable in advance.

When mining becomes a remunerative employment, and there is a proof of
the extent and productiveness of the gold deposits, I would propose that
the licence fee be gradually increased, in such a manner, however, as
not to be higher than the persons engaged in mining can readily pay.  My
authority for issuing that proclamation, seeing that it refers to
certain districts of continental America, which are not, strictly
speaking, within the jurisdiction of this Government, may, perhaps, be
called in question; but I trust that the motives which have influenced
me on this occasion, and the fact of my being invested with the
authority over the premises of the Hudson's Bay Company, and the only
authority commissioned by Her Majesty within reach, will plead my
excuse.  Moreover, should Her Majesty's Government not deem, it
advisable to enforce the rights of the Crown, as set forth in the
proclamation, it may be allowed to fall to the ground, and to become a
mere dead letter.

If you think it expedient that I should visit the Couteau Mines in
course of the coming spring or summer, for the purpose of inquiring into
the state of the country, and authorise me to do so, if I can for a time
conveniently leave this colony, I freely place my services at the
disposal of Her Majesty's Government.

NO.  VII.

_The Governor of Vancouver's Island to the Right Hon. H. Labouchere,
M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, January 22, 1858.

[Received March 15, 1858.]

Sir,--1.  With reference to the proclamation and regulations legalising
the search for gold in the districts of Fraser River and Thompson River,
transmitted with my despatch, Number 35, of the 29th of December last, I
have now the honour to communicate for your information, that we have
since that date raised the licence fee from ten shillings to twenty-one
shillings a-month, payable in advance, which is the present charge for
gold licences.

2.  We are induced to make that change through a desire to place a large
amount of revenue at the disposal of Government to meet the expense of
giving protection to life and property in those countries, and at the
same time from a well-founded conviction that persons really bent upon
visiting the gold district will as readily pay the increased as the
lower rate of charge.

I have, etcetera, (Signed) James Douglas, Governor.

To the Right Hon. Henry Labouchere, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.

NO.  VIII.

_Governor Douglas to the Right Hon. H. Labouchere, M.P._

Victoria, Vancouver's Island, April 6, 1858.

Sir,--1.  Since I had last the honour of addressing you in my despatch,
Number 35, on the 29th of December last, in reference to the discovery
of gold in the Couteau, or Thompson River district, we have had much
communication with persons who have since visited that part of the
country.

2.  The search for gold and "prospecting" of the country, had, up to the
last dates from the interior, been carried on almost exclusively by the
native Indian population, who have discovered the productive beds, and
put out almost all the gold, about eight hundred ounces, which has been
hitherto exported from the country, and who are, moreover, extremely
jealous of the whites, and strongly opposed to their digging the soil
for gold.

3.  The few white men who passed the winter at the diggings--chiefly
retired servants of the Hudson's Bay Company--though well acquainted
with Indian character, were obstructed by the natives in their attempts
to search for gold.  They were on all occasions narrowly watched, and in
every instance, when they did succeed in removing the surface and
excavating to the depth of the auriferous stratum, they were quietly
hustled and crowded by the natives, who having by that means obtained
possession of the spot, then proceeded to reap the fruits of their
labours.

4.  Such conduct was unwarrantable and exceedingly trying to the temper
of spirited men, but the savages were far too numerous for resistance,
and they had to submit to their dictation.  It is, however, worthy of
remark, and a circumstance highly honourable to the character of those
savages, that they have on all occasions scrupulously respected the
persons and property of their white visitors, at the same that they have
expressed a determination to reserve the gold for their own benefit.

5.  Such being the purpose of the natives, affrays and collisions with
the whites will surely follow the accession of numbers, which the latter
are now receiving by the influx of adventurers from Vancouver's Island
and the United States territories in Oregon; and there is no doubt in my
mind that sooner or later the intervention of Her Majesty's Government
will be required to restore and maintain the peace.  Up to the present
time, however, the country continues quiet, but simply, I believe,
because the whites have not attempted to resist the impositions of the
natives.  I will, however, make it a part of my duty to keep you well
informed in respect to the state of the gold country.

6.  The extent of the gold region is yet but imperfectly known, and I
have, therefore, not arrived at any decided opinion as to its ultimate
value as a gold-producing country.  The boundaries of the gold district
have been, however, greatly extended since ay former report.

7.  In addition to the diggings before known on Thompson River and its
tributary streams, a valuable deposit has been recently found by the
natives, on a bank of Fraser River, about fifty miles beyond its
confluence with the Thompson, and gold in small quantities has been
found in the possession of the natives as far as the great falls of
Fraser River, about eighty miles above the Forks.  The small quantity of
gold hitherto produced--about eight hundred ounces--by the large native
population of the country is, however, unaccountable in a rich
gold-producing country, unless we assume that the want of skill,
industry, and proper mining tools on the part of the natives
sufficiently account for the fact.

8.  On the contrary, the vein rocks and its other geological features,
as described by an experienced gold miner, encourage the belief that the
country is highly auriferous.

9.  The miner in question clearly described the older slate formations
thrown up and pierced by beds of quartz, granite, porphyry, and other
igneous rocks; the vast accumulations of sand, gravel, and shingle
extending from the roots of the mountains to the banks of Fraser River
and its affluents, which are peculiar characteristics of the gold
districts of California and other countries.  We therefore hope, and are
