
OLD PEG.

Meanwhile, accustomed to think and act for herself, Old Peg, on the
first alarm, had made up her mind to do her fair share of work quietly.

She did not require to be told that danger threatened the family and
that flight had been resolved on.  A shout from some one that
Nor'-Westers were coming, coupled with the hasty preparations, might
have enlightened a mind much less intelligent than that of the old
woman.  She knew that she could do nothing to help where smart bodily
exercise was needed, but, down by the creek close by, there was a small
stable in which a sedate, lumbering old cart-horse dwelt.  The horse,
she felt sure, would be wanted.  She could not harness it, but she could
put a bridle on it and lead it up to the house.

This animal, which was named Elephant on account of its size, had been
totally forgotten by the family in the hurry of departure.

Old Peg found the putting of a bridle on the huge creature more
difficult work than she had expected, and only succeeded at last by dint
of perseverance, standing on three or four bundles of hay, and much
coaxing--for the creature had evidently taken it into its head that the
old woman had come there to fondle it--perhaps to feed it with sugar
after the manner of Elspie.

She managed the thing at last, however, and led the horse up towards the
house.

Now, while she had been thus engaged the family had left, and the
half-breeds--having combined their forces--had arrived.

Ben Nevis was the first house the scoundrels came to.  Dismounting, and
finding the place deserted, they helped themselves to whatever was
attractive and portable--especially to a large quantity of Canada twist
tobacco, which old Duncan had found it impossible to carry away.  Then
they applied fire to the mansion, and, in a wonderfully short time Ben
Nevis was reduced to a level with the plain.  Another party treated
Prairie Cottage in a similar manner.

It was when the first volume of black smoke rose into the sky that Old
Peg came to the edge of the bushes that fringed the creek and discovered
that Ben Nevis had suddenly become volcanic!  She instantly became fully
aware of the state of matters, and rightly judged that the family must
have escaped, else there would have been some evidence of resistance.

Fortunately the old woman had not yet passed quite from the shelter of
the bushes.  She drew back with a degree of caution worthy of a
Red-skin, leading the horse with her.  When well out of sight she paused
for the purpose of meditation.  What was now to be done!  As we have
said, she possessed decision of character in an eminent degree.  She
never at any time had taken long to make up her mind; she was not going
to begin now, though the position was probably the most perplexing that
she had ever experienced.  Suddenly she raised her head and laughed.

In the circumstances it would not have been surprising had hysteria
seized Old Peg, but there was nothing hysterical in her nature.  Calm,
cool, calculating courage dominated her every thought and feeling, but
the idea of what she was driven to in her old age had tickled her fancy.
Leading the big cart-horse close up to a bank, she prepared to mount
him--having previously broken off a good strong switch from a
neighbouring bush.

Never before in her life had Peg mounted a steed of any kind whatever.
She knew the lady's position on horseback by sight, of course, but not
by practice.  To attempt it even with a side-saddle would have been
impossible; but Elephant was barebacked.  Fortunately he was fat and
broad, and without a visible back-bone.  Old Peg at once made up her
mind, and, climbing the bank, scrambled on his back in gentleman's
position.  It was more comfortable than she had dared to hope.

But now an unexpected difficulty met her.  Elephant declined to move!
She pulled at his bridle, and he turned sluggishly, but he would not
advance.  Peg administered a sounding whack with the switch.  She might
as well have hit a neighbouring tree.  Elephant's hide was like that of
his namesake, and he had no feelings to speak of that could be touched,
or hurt, or worked upon.

In this dilemma the old woman had recourse to a weapon with which her
broad bosom was at all times furnished.  She drew a large pin, and drove
the point into Elephant's flank.  The result was instantaneous.  Up went
his hindquarters, and Peg found herself sprawling on his bushy mane.
She held on to that, however, and, gradually working her way back,
regained her old position--thankful that she had not been thrown to the
ground.

Another result was that Elephant condescended to walk.  But this was not
enough.  Escape at such a pace was impossible.  Old Peg prodded him
again--this time on the shoulder, for she rightly conjectured that he
could not well kick up with his fore-legs.  But he might rear!  The
thought caused her to grasp the bushy mane with both hands and hold on.
He did not rear, but he trotted, and poor Old Peg came to the conclusion
that there were disagreeable novelties in life, even for her.

When Elephant at length burst out of the fringe of wood and gained the
track that followed the course of the river, she was immediately seen by
the plunderers, who laughed at the strange rider but did not follow her,
with the exception of one man--an Indian, painted and feathered,--who
started in pursuit, hoping, possibly, for an easy scalp.

He soon came close up, and, being armed with a bow, sent an arrow in
advance of him.  The shaft was well aimed.  It grazed the flank of
Elephant, inflicting a painful wound.  This woke up the old horse
surprisingly, so that it not only broke into a gallop, but set off at
racing speed as it used to do when young.  The Indian was badly mounted,
and gradually lost ground, whereupon he sent after the fugitives several
more arrows which all fell wide of the mark.

The change to Old Peg was as a reprieve from death!  The trot had almost
dislocated her bones, and shaken her up like an addled egg, and the
change to racing speed afforded infinite relief.  She could scarcely
credit her senses, and she felt a tendency to laugh again as she glanced
over her shoulder.  But that glance removed the tendency, for it
revealed the Indian warrior, in all his paint and feathers and streaming
scalp-locks, in hot pursuit, while the whiz of another arrow close past
her ear convinced our heroine that it was not a dream.

The jolting to which the poor old creature was subjected had disturbed
her costume not a little.  Her shawl came nearly off, and, holding on by
one pin, fluttered like a flag of defiance.  Her slippers, which were of
the carpet pattern, were left behind on the prairie to perplex the
wolves, and her voluminous hair--once a rich auburn, but now a pearly
grey--having escaped its cap and fastenings, was streaming out gaily in
the breeze, as if to tempt the fingers and knife of the pursuer.

A stern-chase is a long one, whether ashore or afloat.  Pursuer and
pursued went rapidly down the Settlement until they came in sight of the
band which had come to rescue Peg.  They received her with a wild cheer
of surprise and joy, which turned the Red-skin to the right-about, and
sent him back to his friends much faster than he had come.

On receiving his report, the half-breeds at once dashed off in pursuit
of the settlers, and did not draw rein until they reached the place
where the Scotchmen had made a stand.  The latter were greatly
outnumbered, at least in fighting men, but they showed such a resolute
front, that Cuthbert Grant, the half-breed leader, again interfered to
prevent bloodshed if possible.  After calming his men, and advising
forbearance, he turned to Duncan McKay senior, who was the settlers'
spokesman, and said--

"If you will go peaceably away out of the colony, we will spare you, but
if you show fight your blood be on your own heads, for I cannot restrain
my men much longer."

"Iss it sparin' us you will be talkin' of, Cuthbert Grant?" answered the
Highlander, with scorn.  "Wow! but if it wass not for the weemen an'
children that's with us, you would hev a goot chance o' bein' in need o'
sparin' yoursels; an' it iss not much o' the blood o' the Grants,
either, that's in _your_ veins, or ye would scorn to consort wi' such
fire-raisin' cut-throats.  It iss the fortune of war--whatever, and we
can't affoord to leave our weemen an' bairns defenceless.  So we accept
your terms, if we are not hindered from carryin' away our arms."

"Carry away whatever you like," replied Grant, quietly, "only be off at
once, or I'll not answer for the consequences."

Thus the angry Highlander was dismissed, and in the end the unfortunate
settlers, being a second time driven into exile, took refuge, as before,
at Jack River.



CHAPTER TEN.

ARCHIE AND LITTLE BILL DO WONDERS.

We change the scene now to the margin of a small lake embosomed like a
gem in the great wilderness of the Far North.

It is autumn.  The sun is bright, the air is calm and clear.  There is a
species of warm haze which, paradoxically, does not seem to interfere
with the clearness, and a faint zephyr which appears rather to emphasise
than break the calm.  It sends a soft cat's-paw now and then across
parts of the lake, and thus, by contrast, brings into greater prominence
the bright reflection of trees and cloudland mirrored in its depths.
Instead of being the proverbial "dead" calm, it is, if we may so put it,
rather a lively, cheerful calm.

The liveliness of it is vastly increased by hundreds of water-fowl,
which disport themselves on the surface of the lake, as if coquetting
with their own reflections, or whistle round its margin while busy on
the feeding-grounds.

Myriads of mosquitoes were wont there to murmur their maddening career
in search of blood, but, happily, at the period we write of, an
incidental and premonitory night-frost had relegated these to the graves
of their forefathers, or to the mansions of Hiberna--we know not, and
care not, which.

We have styled the lake a "little" one, but we must remind the reader
that we use the expression in an American sense, and that where lakes
are two and three hundred miles long, a little one can well afford to be
twenty or thirty miles in diameter, with, perchance, a boundless
horizon.  The lake in question, however, was really a little one--not
more than two miles in length or breadth, with the opposite shore quite
visible, and a number of islets of various sizes on its bosom--all more
or less wooded, and all, more rather than less, the temporary homes of
innumerable wild-fowl, among which were noisy little gulls with pure
white bodies and bright red legs and bills.

On the morning in question--for the sun was not yet much above the
horizon--a little birch-bark canoe might have been seen to glide
noiselessly from a bed of rushes, and proceed quietly, yet swiftly,
along the outer margin of the bed.

The bow-paddle was wielded by a stout boy with fair curly hair.  Another
boy, of gentle mien and sickly aspect, sat in the stern and steered.

"Little Bill," said the stout boy in a low voice, "you're too light.
This will never do."

"Archie," returned the other with a languid smile, "I can't help it, you
know--at least not in a hurry.  In course of time, if I eat frightfully,
I may grow heavier, but just now there's no remedy except the old one of
a stone."

"That's true, Little Bill," responded Archie with a perplexed look, as
he glanced inquiringly along the shore; "nevertheless, if thought could
make you heavier, you'd soon be all right, for you're a powerful
thinker.  The old remedy, you see, is not available, for this side of
the lake is low and swampy.  I don't see a single stone anywhere."

"Never mind, get along; we'll come to one soon, I dare say," said the
other, dipping his paddle more briskly over the side.

The point which troubled Archie Sinclair was the difference in weight
between himself and his invalid brother, which, as he occupied the bow,
resulted in the stern of the light craft being raised much too high out
of the water.  Of course this could have been remedied by their changing
places, but that would have thrown the heavier work of the bow-paddle on
the invalid, who happened also to be the better steersman of the two.  A
large stone placed in the stern would have been a simple and effective
remedy, but, as we have seen, no large stone was procurable just then.

"It didn't much matter in the clumsy wooden things at Red River," said
Archie, "but this egg-shell of Okematan's is very different.  Ho!
there's one at last," he continued with animation as they rounded a
point of land, and opened up a small bay, on the margin of which there
were plenty of pebbles, and some large water-worn stones.

One of these having been placed in the stern of the canoe, and the
balance thus rectified, the voyage was continued.

"Don't you think that breakfast on one of these islets would be nice?"
said Billie.

"Just the very thing that was in my mind, Little Bill," answered his
brother.

It was a curious peculiarity in this sturdy youth, that whatever his
invalid brother wished, he immediately wished also.  Similarly, when
Billie didn't desire anything, Archie did not desire it.  In short
Billie's opinion was Archie's opinion, and Billie's will was Archie's
law.  Not that Archie had no will or opinion of his own.  On the
contrary, he was quite sufficiently gifted in that way, but his love and
profound pity for the poor and almost helpless invalid were such that in
regard to him he had sunk his own will entirely.  As to opinions--well,
he did differ from him occasionally, but he did it mildly, and with an
openness to conviction which was almost enviable.  He called him Bill,
Billie, or Little Bill, according to fancy at the moment.

Poor boys!  The sudden death of both parents had been a terrible blow to
them, and had intensified the tenderness with which the elder had
constituted himself the guardian of the younger.

When the Scotch settlers were banished from the colony, pity, as well as
friendship for their deceased parents, induced the Davidson family to
adopt the boys, and now, in exile, they were out hunting by themselves
to aid in replenishing the general store of provisions.

It need scarcely be said that at this period of the year the exiled
colonists were not subjected to severe hardships, for the air was alive
with wild-fowl returning south from their breeding-grounds, and the
rivers and lakes were swarming with fish, many of them of excellent
quality.

"This will do--won't it?" said Archie, pointing with his paddle to an
islet about a hundred yards in diameter.

"Yes, famously," responded Little Bill, as he steered towards a shelving
rock which formed a convenient landing-place.

The trees and shrubs covered the islet to the water's edge with dense
foliage, that glowed with all the gorgeous colouring for which North
American woods in autumn are celebrated.  An open grassy space just
beyond the landing-place seemed to have been formed by nature for the
express purpose of accommodating picnic parties.

"Nothing could have been better," said Archie, drawing up the bow of the
canoe, and stooping to lift his brother out.

"I think I'll try to walk--it's such a short bit," said Billie.

"D'ye think so? well, I've no doubt you can do it, Little Bill, for
you've got a brave spirit of your own, but there's a wet bit o' moss
you'll have to cross which you mayn't have noticed.  Would you like to
be lifted over that, and so keep your moccasins dry?"

"Archie, you're a humbug.  You're always trying to make me give you
needless trouble."

"Well, have it your own way, Little Bill.  I'll help you to walk up."

"No, carry me," said Billie, stretching out his arms; "I've changed my
mind."

"I will, if you prefer it, Little Bill," said Archie, lifting his
brother in his strong arms and setting him down on the convenient spot
before referred to.

Billie was not altogether helpless.  He could stand on his weak legs and
even walk a little without support, but to tramp through the woods, or
clamber up a hill, was to him an absolute impossibility.  He had to
content himself with enjoyments of a milder type.  And, to do him
justice, he seemed to have no difficulty in doing so.  Perhaps he owed
it to his mother, who had been a singularly contented woman and had
taught Billie from his earliest years the truth that, "contentment, with
godliness, is great gain."  Billie did not announce his belief in this
truth, but he proclaimed it unwittingly by the more powerful force of
example.

Breakfast is a pleasant meal at any time if the operator be hungry, but
who shall describe the delights of breakfast when eaten in company with
several thousand wild-fowl, in a romantic wilderness with fresh air
laden with the perfumes of the vegetable kingdom encircling the person;
the glorious sunshine dazzling the eyes; the sweet songs of animated
nature thrilling the ears, and the gentle solicitations of an expectant
appetite craving within?  Words are wasted in such an effort.  We feel
constrained to leave it--as we have not seldom left many a thing before
now--to the reader's more or less vivid imagination.

A blazing fire of pine-logs boiled two tin kettles and roasted two fat
wild-ducks.  In one of the kettles Archie compounded and stirred
robbiboo--of which, perhaps, the less said the better.  In the other,
Billie infused a small quantity of tea.  The roasting ducks--split open,
impaled on sticks and set up before the fire--looked after themselves
till they began to burn, when they were turned by Archie and again
neglected for a few minutes.

It was a glorious meal in all respects, and even Billie, whose appetite
was moderately strong, enjoyed it immensely--none the less that he had
asked a blessing on it before beginning, and all the more that he
sympathised fully with his brother in his possession of an amazing--a
shamelessly robust--capacity for food.

"Now, we'll go to work," remarked Archie, wiping his mouth with a sigh
of contentment, (he had nothing else to wipe it with!) after finishing
the last spoonful of robbiboo, the last limb of duck and the last mug of
tea.

Such a remark at such a period in the entertainment caused Billie to
laugh.

"Why, Archie, you've been at work this half-hour, and there's nothing
left to go to work upon now."

"You know quite well, Little Bill, that I refer to the _day's_ work.
What is it to be?  Provisions must be got if the camp is not to starve,
and you and I are bound to do our share.  Shall we go to Willow Point
and shoot ducks and geese, or cross the lake and trawl for fish?"

"Both," answered the invalid with decision.  "We'll do both.  We will
paddle to Willow Point, and try for jack-fish on the way."

"Just so--the very thing, Little Bill.  Are you ready to start?"

Billie professed himself quite ready.  Archie took him on his back,
replaced him in the stern of the canoe in company with the big stone,
and then stepped gently into his own place at the bow, where a common
trading gun, with the old-fashioned flint lock and single barrel, rested
against the gunwale.  Pushing off they soon left Breakfast-isle far
behind them, and crept swiftly along by the margin of the reeds.
