Anyhow, I shall go down and try to clear the matter up.  If I succeed--
well.  If not--"

His thoughts were diverted at this point by the entrance of Bob Smart.
That energetic individual had been to visit the frost-bitten seamen, for
whose comfort an old out-house had been made weather-tight, and fitted
up as a rough-and-ready hospital.

"They're all getting on famously," said Bob, rubbing his hands, as he
sat down and pulled out the little black pipe, to which he was so much
addicted.  "Green's left little toe looks beautiful this morning, quite
red and healthy, and, I think, won't require amputation, which is well,
for it is doubly a _left_ little toe since you cut off the right one
yesterday.  His big toe seems to my amateur eye in a thoroughly
convalescent state, but his left middle finger obviously requires
removal.  You'll do it to-day, I suppose?"

"Yes, I meant to do it yesterday," answered Redding, with much gravity,
"but gave it another chance.  How's Brixton?"

"Oh, he's all right.  He groans enough to make one believe he's the
worst of 'em all, but his hurts are mostly skin deep, and will heal no
doubt in course of time.  His nose, certainly, looks blobby enough, like
an over-ripe plum, and I rather think it's that which makes him growl so
horribly; but after all, it won't be shortened more than quarter of an
inch, which will be rather an advantage, for it was originally too long.
Then as to Harper and Jennings, they are quite cheery and their
appetites increasing, which is the best of signs, though, I fear, poor
fellows, that the first will lose a hand and the other a foot.  The
dressings you put on yesterday seem to have relieved them much.  I wish
I could say the same for the poor nigger.  His foot is sure to go.  It's
in such a state that I believe the cleverest surgeon alive couldn't save
it, and, even if he could, what's left of it would be of no use.  You
know I have a mechanical turn, and could make him a splendid wooden leg
if you will pluck up courage to cut it off."

"No," said Redding decidedly; "it's all very well to lop off a finger or
a toe with a razor, but I don't think it's allowable for an amateur to
attempt a foot except under circumstances of extreme urgency."

"Well, it don't much matter," continued Bob Smart, drawing vigorously at
the black pipe, "for we'll have an opportunity of sending them up to
Quebec in a week or so, and in the meantime the poor fellows are very
jolly considering their circumstances.  That man Ned Wright keeps them
all in good humour.  Although, as you know, he has suffered severely in
hands and feet, he feels himself well enough to limp about the room and
act the part, as he says, of `stooard and cook to the ship's company.'
He insisted on beginning last night just after you left, and I found him
hard at it this morning when I went to see them.  He must have been the
life of the ship before she went ashore, for he goes about continually
trolling out some verses of his own composing, though he has got no more
idea of tune in him than the main-top-mast back-stay, to which, or
something of the same kind, he makes very frequent reference.  Here is a
verse of his latest composition:--"

  O-o-o-o-h! it's once I froze the end of my nose,
  On the coast of Labrador, sir,
  An' I lost my smell, an' my taste as well,
  An' my pipe, which made me roar, sir;
  But the traders come, an' think wot they done!
  They poked an' pinched an' skewered me;
  They cut an' snipped, an' they carved an' ripped,
  An' they clothed an' fed an' cured me.

  Chorus.--Hooroo! it's true
  An' a sailor's life for me.

"Not bad, eh?" said Bob.

"Might be worse," answered Redding, with the air of one whose mind is
preoccupied.

"I've often wondered," continued Bob Smart, in a moralising tone, and
looking intently at the wreaths of smoke that curled from his lips as if
for inspiration, "I've often wondered how it is that sailors--especially
British sailors--appear to possess such an enormous fund of
superabundant rollicking humour, insomuch that they will jest and sing
sometimes in the midst of troubles and dangers that would take the
spirit out of ordinary men such as you and me."

"Bob Smart," said Redding earnestly.

"Yes," said Bob.

"D'you know it strikes me that I ought to go down to the wreck to see
how the McLeods are getting on."

"O ah! well, to change the subject, d'you know Mr Redding, that same
idea struck me some days ago, for Jonas Bellew has left them to look
after his own affairs, and the Indians were to go north on the 13th, so
the McLeods must have been living for some time on salt provisions,
unless they have used their guns with better success than has been
reported of them.  If you remember, I have mentioned it to you more than
once, but you seemed to avoid the subject."

"Well, perhaps I did, and perhaps I had my reasons for it.  However, I
am going down now, immediately after dressing the poor fellows' sores.
Will you therefore be good enough to get the small boat ready, with some
fresh meat, and tell Le Rue and Michel to be prepared to start in an
hour or so."

The day after the above conversation McLeod senior walked down to the
wreck accompanied by Flora.  Kenneth had been left in charge of the
invalid, whose system had received such a shock that his recovery was
extremely slow, and it had been deemed advisable not only to avoid, but
to forbid all reference to the wreck.  Indeed Roderick himself seemed to
have no desire to speak about it, and although he had roused himself on
the arrival of his relations, he had hitherto lain in such a weak
semi-lethargic state that it was feared his head must have received
severer injury than was at first supposed.  On the morning of the day in
question an Indian had arrived with a letter from Mr Gambart of
Partridge Bay, which had not tended to soothe the luckless father.

"It seems very unfortunate," said Flora, in a sympathetic tone.

"_Seems_ unfortunate?" exclaimed McLeod, with some asperity, "it _is_
unfortunate.  Why, what could be more so?  Just think of it, Flo!  Here
am I without a penny of ready cash in the world, and although Gambart
knows this as well as I do myself, he writes me, first, that he has sold
Loch Dhu to that fellow Redding, and now that he has bought Barker's
Mill for me without my sanction!"

"But you gave him leave to sell Loch Dhu," suggested Flora.

"Oh, yes, yes, of course, and I told him to let it go at a low sum, for
I needed cash very much at the beginning of this venture at Jenkins
Creek.  But I find that our expenses are so small that I could afford to
hold on for some time on the funds I have.  To be sure Gambart could not
know that, but--but--why did the fellow go and buy that mill for me?
It's being a great bargain and a splendid property, just now are no
excuse, for he knew my poverty, and also knew that I shall feel bound in
honour to take it off his hands when I manage to scrape the sum
together, because of course it was done in a friendly way to oblige me.
No doubt he will say that there's no hurry about repayment, and that he
won't take interest, and so forth, but he had no business to buy it at
all!"

Flora made no reply to this, for she saw that her father was waxing
wroth under his misfortunes.

Her silence tended rather to increase his wrath, for he was dissatisfied
with himself more than with others, and would have been glad even of
contradiction, in order that he might relieve his feelings by
disputation.

While this state of mind was strong upon him they reached a turn in the
path that brought the wreck into view, and revealed the fact that a boat
lay on the beach, from which three men had just landed.  Two of these
remained by the boat, while the third advanced towards the woods.

Flora's hand tightened on her father's arm.

"Surely that is Mr Redding," she said.

The frown which had clouded McLeod's brow instantly deepened.  "Go," he
said, "walk slowly back towards the hut.  I will overtake you in a few
minutes."

Flora hesitated.  "Won't you let me stay, father?"

"No, my dear, I wish to talk privately with Redding--go."

He patted her kindly on the head, and she left him with evident
reluctance.

"Good-morning, Mr McLeod," said Redding, as he approached.

"Good-morning," replied the other stiffly, without extending his hand.

Redding flushed, but restrained himself, and continued in a calm
matter-of-course tone:

"Thinking it probable that you might be in want of fresh provisions, I
have run down with a small supply, which is at your service."

"Thank you," replied McLeod, still stiffly, "I am not quite destitute of
fresh provisions, and happen to have a good supply of ammunition;
besides, if I were starving I would not accept aid from one who has
deceived me."

"Deceived you!" exclaimed Redding, waxing indignant more at McLeod's
tone and manner than his words, "wherein have I deceived you?"

As he put the question his mind leaped to the line of demarcation
between the properties at Jenkins Creek, and he racked his brains
hastily to discover what he could have said or done at their first
interview that could have been misunderstood.  McLeod was one of those
men in whom anger is easily increased by the exhibition of anger in
others.  It was therefore in a still more offensive tone that he said:--

"Sir, you deceived me by violating the laws of hospitality--by keeping
silence when candour required you to speak."

"Sir," exclaimed Redding, still thinking of the line of demarcation, and
losing his temper altogether, "in all that has passed between us I have
invariably spoken with candour, and if at any time I have kept silence I
consider that in so doing I have done you a favour."

When two fiery men clash, an explosion is the natural result.

"Very well, sir," said McLeod, with a look of withering contempt, "as I
don't accept your favours, I don't thank you for them, so you may take
yourself off as soon as you please."

He waited for no reply but turned abruptly on his heel and walked away,
while Redding, with a face of scarlet, strode down the beach and leaped
into his boat.

Not a word did he utter to his astonished men beyond ordering them to
pull back to the fort.  Apparently the rate of rowing was not fast
enough to please him, for in a few minutes he ordered Michel to take the
helm, and himself seized the oar, which he plied with such vigour that,
as Michel afterwards averred, the rudder had to be kept nearly hard
a-port all the time to prevent the boat being pulled round even though
Le Rue was working like a steam engine and blowing like a grampus!

Towards the afternoon this exercise, coupled with reflection, cooled
Reginald Redding's spirit while it warmed his body, and at last he
deemed it right to pause for the purpose of letting the men have a pipe
and a mouthful of food.  While they were busy refreshing themselves he
leant over the stern, gazed down into the water, and brooded over his
supposed wrongs.

Whether it was the clearness of the still water, through which he could
see the little fish and crabs floating and crawling placidly among the
pebbles at the bottom, or the soothing influence of the quiet afternoon,
or the sedative effect of a reflective condition of mind, we know not,
but it is certain that, before the pipes were smoked out, he fur-trader
observed that his reflected visage wore a very unpleasant-looking frown,
insomuch that a slight smile curled his lips.  The contrast between the
frowning brows and the smiling lips appeared so absurd that, to prevent
the impropriety of becoming too suddenly good-humoured, he turned his
eyes towards his men, and encountered the perplexed gaze of Le Rue, as
that worthy sat with his elbows on his knees in the calm enjoyment of
his pipe.

Redding at once resumed his frown.

"Francois," said he, "did you have much conversation with McLeod before
he dismissed you on the way down?"

"Oui, Monsieur, we had ver moche conversatione."

"Can you remember what it was about?"

"Oh oui.  'Bout a'most all tings.  I tell him de mos' part of my
histoire,--me fadder, me moder, broder, sister, an' all dat, 'bout vich
he seem not to care von buttin.  Den ve convarsatione 'bout de
fur-trade, an' de--"

"Well well," interrupted Redding, "but what was the last thing, just
before he sent you off?"

"Ah let me zee.  Oui--it was 'bout you'self.  I tell him 'bout de
property--de Lock Doo vat you was--"

"Le Rue," exclaimed Redding, suddenly and very angrily, "you're a
consummate ass!"

"Vraiment," said Le Rue, with a slight shrug of his shoulders, "I am so
for remaining in de service of von goose!"

There was such good-humoured impudence in the man's face as he said this
that Redding laughed in spite of himself.

"Well," he said, "your readiness to talk has at all events caused bad
feeling between me and the McLeods.  However, it don't matter.  Ship
your oars again and give way with a will."

The men obeyed, and as Redding sat buried in meditation at the helm he
became convinced that McLeod's anger had been aroused by his silence in
regard to the purchase of Loch Dhu, for he himself had almost forgotten
that the sudden entrance of the Indian had checked the words which were
at the moment on his lips.  When he thought of this, and of Flora, he
resolved to pull back and explain matters, but when he thought of
McLeod's tone and manner he determined to proceed to the fort.  Then,
when he thought of Roderick's precarious state, his mind again wavered,
but, other thoughts and plans suggesting themselves, he finally decided
on returning home.

That night he encamped in the woods and continued to brood over the
camp-fire long after his men were asleep.  Next day he reached the Cliff
Fort, when, after seeing to the welfare of the wrecked men, he informed
Bob Smart that he meant to absent himself for about a week, and to leave
him, Bob, in charge.  He also gave orders that no one should quit the
post, or furnish any assistance to the McLeods.

"But, sir," said Bob Smart, in surprise, "they will be sure to starve."

"No fear of them," replied Redding, "Kenneth is young and active, and
they have plenty of ammunition."

"If report be true," returned Bob, "neither Kenneth nor any of his kin
can hit a sheep at twenty yards off.  Bellew says they are as blind as
bats with the gun."

"No matter.  They have a boat, and one of them can row back to Jenkins
Creek for fresh meat.  Anyway, do as I bid you, and be very careful of
the wrecked men."

Smart, although fond of discussion, knew how to obey.  He therefore said
no more, but bade Redding good-night and retired to his humble couch,
which, he was wont to say, was a fine example of compensation, inasmuch
as the fact of its being three inches too narrow was counterbalanced by
its being six inches too long.



CHAPTER TEN.

A FRIEND IN NEED.

"Look here, my love," said plump little Mr Gambart to his plump little
wife, bustling into the parlour with an open letter in his hand, "isn't
this vexatious!  Just listen--it's from McLeod:--

  "`My dear Gambart,--I take the opportunity of Jonas Bellew leaving me
  to write a line in reply to your last, which was brought on to me by
  the Indian.  You will be sorry to learn that the _Betsy_ of Plymouth,
  in which all my goods were embarked, is lying here a total wreck, and
  the goods have been washed out of her--not a bale or cask saved!  But,
  worse than that, poor Roderick has been badly injured in getting
  ashore, and now lies here unable to move.  Many of the poor fellows
  who composed the crew have been lost, and those saved are in a sad
  condition.  I was sorry to hear of Loch Dhu being sold, but now that
  my fortunes have been so utterly and literally wrecked it is perhaps
  as well as it is.  I'm sorry, however, that you bought Barker's Mill
  for me.  In the circumstances I will find it difficult to repay you
  for a long time to come.'

"Now," said Gambart, "isn't this vexing?  I thought it would please him
so much, for of course he knows that I would never press him for the
money."

"Did you tell him," asked Mrs Gambart, "that in the event of his not
wanting the mill you would gladly take it yourself?"

"No, I didn't think that necessary."

"Didn't I," continued the little lady, pursing her little mouth, "didn't
