"So mother says," echoed Hal moodily. "But you get almighty sick of
waiting sometimes. Even knowing you were right doesn't put pennies in
your pocket." He laughed with a touch of bitterness.

Again Carl was tempted to break the silence and reveal the wonderful
secret, and again he clamped his lips together.

Hal would hear the tidings soon enough now and his spirits would soar
the higher because of the depths to which they had descended. It was
always so. This broad range of mood was one of his chief charms.

Ah, how well he knew his friend and how accurately did he forecast what
would happen!

It was not five minutes after the two parted at the corner before Hal
Harling came leaping up the McGregors' stairway and gave a loud knock
at their door.

"Oh, you old tight-jaw!" announced he, when on entering, he beheld Carl
grinning at him from across the room. "You might have put me out of my
misery."

The boy laughed.

"It wasn't my secret! I'd have been a cur to butt in on Louise's fun."

"So you would!"

Quietly Mrs. McGregor glanced up from the sea of delicate blue gauze
foaming about her.

"A ready tongue is a gift of silver, but a silent one is a treasure of
pure gold," observed she quaintly.




CHAPTER VII

THE COMING OF THE FAIRY GODMOTHER


With the Harlings safely out of their difficulties Christmas, as Carl
jestingly observed, was free to approach and approach it did with a
speed incredible of belief. A big blizzard a week before it, which
transformed the suburban districts into a wonderland of beauty, merely
worked havoc however in Baileyville, causing muddy streets and slippery
pavements, and wrecking the skating in the park.

"Snow doesn't seem to be made for cities," remarked Mrs. McGregor in
reply to Carl's lamentations. "It is an old-fashioned institution that
belongs to the past. Here in town there is neither a place for it nor
does it do an atom of good to anybody unless it is the unemployed who
hail the work it brings."

"I hate the snow," wailed Timmie. "It isn't snow, anyway; it's just
slush."

"Ah, laddie, you should see one of the snowstorms of the old country!"
protested his Scotch mother reminiscently. "Then you would not say you
hated the snow. It turned everything it touched white as a Tartary
lamb."

"What's a Tartary lamb, Mother?" inquired Tim with interest.

"A Tartary lamb? Ask your big brother; he goes to school."

"I never heard of a Tartary lamb, Ma," flushed Carl.

"Mary had a little lamb," began Nell, who had caught the phrase.

"So she did, darling," laughed her mother as she picked up the child
and kissed her, "and its fleece was white as snow, too, for the song
says so; but it wasn't a Tartary lamb, dearie. It was just a common
one."

"What is a Tartary lamb, anyway, Ma?" Mary demanded.

Mrs. McGregor paused to put a length of silk into her needle.

"Long ago," began she, "before there were ships and trains, to say
nothing of automobiles and aeroplanes people had to stay at home in the
places where they happened to be born. Of course they could go by coach
or on horseback to a near-by city, but they could not go far; nor
indeed did they think of going because they did not know there was
anywhere to go. Nobody did any traveling in those days and as a result
there were no maps or travel books to set you thinking you must pack up
your traps to-morrow and start for some place you never had seen. But
by and by the compass was invented, larger and better ships came to be
built, and men got the idea the world was round instead of flat (as
they had at one time supposed), a discovery that comforted vastly the
timid souls who had always been afraid of falling off the edge of it.
Therefore, when it was at last proved that should you sail far, far
away your ship, instead of dropping off into space, would circle the
great ball we live on and come home again, some of those who were
brave, adventurous, and had money enough set out on voyages to see what
there was to be seen in other lands than those they had been brought up
in. Frenchmen thought it would be a grand thing to discover new
countries for France; Englishmen wanted new territory for England. So
it was all over the world. Thus this one and that one began to travel."

"Just as Columbus came to America, Ma," put in Tim.

"Exactly, dear," nodded his mother. "Now you can imagine what a hero
such a traveler became; how people admired his daring; and how half of
them wished they were going with him and the other half rejoiced that
they weren't. And when he came back there was great excitement to hear
where he had been and what he had seen! Every word he spoke was passed
from mouth to mouth, each person who repeated it adding to the story
until it grew like a snowball. And as was inevitable the more raptly
the populace listened the more marvelous became the stories."

"Like Jack Murphy when he gets home from the circus," put in Tim.

"Yes, very much like Jack Murphy, I am afraid; only sometimes these
travelers really believed the tales they told. Sometimes the stories
had been passed on to them by the natives of the strange countries they
visited, and how could they know that all which was told them was not
true? Such a tale was the legend of the Tartary lamb."

"Tell it to us, Mother," urged Mary.

"Well, it actually isn't much of a story, my dear. You see, when the
travelers from England, France, and other western countries went to the
East for the first time, they saw cotton growing, or if they did not
really see it, they heard there was such a thing. Now cotton was
entirely new to the voyagers and it seemed unbelievable that such a
plant could be. Some of the eastern natives told the visitors that in
each pod grew a little lamb with soft, white fleece. Orientals were
very ignorant in those days. The Tartars went even farther and said the
lamb bent the stalk he lived on down to the ground and ate all the food
within reach; and when he had nibbled up all the grass and roots around
him he died, and then it was that people took his fleece and twisted it
into thread, which was woven into garments. Thus the legend became
established and the belief in the Tartary lamb became so firm that for
several hundred years people even in England thought that in the Far
East there grew this wonderful plant with a vegetable lamb sprouting
from the top of it."

"How silly of them!" sniffed Carl.

"No sillier than lots of the things we now believe, probably," replied
his mother. "Aren't we constantly discovering how mistaken some of our
cherished beliefs were? That is what progress is. We learn continually
to cast aside outgrown notions and adopt wiser and better ones. So it
was in the past. The world was very young in those days, you must
remember, and people did not know so much about it as we do now. And
even we, with all our wisdom, are going to be laughed at years hence,
precisely as you are laughing now about those who believed the story of
the Tartary lamb. Men are going to say: '_Think of those poor, stupid
old things back in nineteen hundred and twenty-three who believed
so-and-so! How could they have done it?_'"

Carl was silent.

"When you consider this you will understand how it was that the eager
readers of the past devoured with wide-open eyes the tale-telling of
Sir John Mandeville; and should you ever read that ancient story, as I
hope you will sometime, you will be less surprised to hear that even he
declared that he had seen cotton growing and that when the pod of the
plant was cut open inside it was a little creature like a lamb. The
natives of the East ate both the fruit of the plant and the wee beast,
he explained. In fact he said he had eaten the thing himself."

"Why, the very idea!" gasped Mary.

"What a lie!" Carl burst out.

"I'm afraid Sir John was either not very truthful or he had a great
imagination," smiled Mrs. McGregor. "Still, you see, he was not alone
in his belief about the Tartary lamb. So many other people believed the
yarn that he probably thought he was telling the truth. And as for
eating it--well, he just had a strain of Jack Murphy in him. Besides,
there were no schools in 1322 to teach Sir John Mandeville better. And
anyway, who was to contradict the fable? Sir John had been to the East
and the other people hadn't. Why shouldn't they believe what he and
other travelers told them?"

"He did sort of have them, didn't he?" grinned Carl.

"How long was it before the public stopped believing such a ridiculous
story?" demanded Mary.

"About three hundred years," answered her mother. "In the meantime much
traveling had been done by the peoples of all nations and learning had
made great strides. Scientific men began to whisper there could be no
such thing as the lamb of the Tartars; it was not possible. Cotton was
merely a plant. You can imagine what discussions such an assertion as
that raised. The public had come to like the notion of the Tartary lamb
and did not wish to give it up; besides, if the story were all a myth,
it put the travelers who had told it in a very bad light, and shook the
confidence of readers in some of the other tales they had published.
Science always upsets us. None of us like to be jolted out of the
beliefs we have been brought up with and exchange them for others, no
matter how good the new ones are. So it was in sixteen hundred. The
populace resented having the Tartary lamb taken away from them."

Mrs. McGregor laughed.

"It was a pity Sir John Mandeville and the rest did not live long
enough to learn how mistaken they had been," mused Mary.

"Poor old Sir John! I guess it was as well for him that he didn't, for
in his day he was, you see, quite a celebrity. He might not have
relished living to see his fame evaporate. At least he had the courage
to make a trip to a strange and distant land, and for that we should
respect him since it took nerve to travel in those days. Moreover he
did his part and was a link in a civilization that went on after he was
gone. So the history of the world is built up. Each generation builds
on the blunders of the one before it--or should."

"How queer it makes you feel; and how small!" Mary reflected.

"Why?"

"Well, it just seems as if we didn't count for much," sighed the girl.

"On the contrary, dear child, we count for a great deal," instantly
retorted her mother. "Each one of us can have a share in the vast plan
of the universe and help carry it forward."

"How, Mother?"

"By doing all we can during our lifetime to make the world better," was
the answer. "Good men and good women make a good world, don't they? And
the better the world the farther ahead will be its civilization.
Progress is not all in wonderful discoveries of science, in fine
architecture, or in great books; much of it lies in the peoples of the
globe learning to live peacefully together and help one another.
Kindness to our neighbor, therefore, helps civilization. It cannot
avoid doing so if we live it on a large enough scale."

"I never thought of that before," meditated Carl.

"But you can see it is so, laddie," responded his mother. "A lack of
kindness and fairness in nations causes wars, and wars put the world
backward. It is in the peaceful times that nations grow. You know
yourself that you cannot build up anything when somebody else is
waiting to knock it down the minute you have it finished. Under such
conditions it hardly seems worth while to build at all. So it is with
nations the world over. When they are snarling jealously at one
another's heels, and coveting what the other possesses, how can
progress be made?"

"I suppose when they get mad they forget about the work of the world,"
Tim announced.

"That is just the trouble," agreed his mother. "Engrossed in their own
little squabbles, they lose sight of the splendid big thing they were
put here to do. In other words they forget their job, which is to make
the world and themselves better."

Slowly she glanced from one earnest face into another.

"Well, I've read you quite a sermon, haven't I?" smiled she. "And it
was all because of the Tartary lamb. Now suppose we talk of something
else--Christmas. It will be here now before we know it. What shall we
do this year? Shall it be a tree? Or shall we hang our stockings, go
without a tree, and put the money into a Christmas dinner?"

Inquiringly she studied her children's faces.

"I suppose a tree does cost quite a lot before you are through with
it," reflected the prudent Mary.

"And we have the municipal tree in the park, anyway," Carl put in in an
attempt to be optimistic.

"But that tree isn't ours, our very own tree," Tim began to wail.

"It is lots bigger than any tree we could have, Timmie," asserted his
older brother. "And think of the lights! They are all electric. We
couldn't have lights like those here at home."

"I know," grieved Tim. "But it isn't our tree--just ours--in our
house."

"A Christmas tree costs ever so much money, Timmie," Mary explained
gently. "Mother can't buy us a tree always and a dinner, too."

"Oh, I could manage a small tree, perhaps," interrupted Mrs. McGregor,
touched at seeing the child so disappointed. "There are little ones at
the market."

"But I don't want a little one," objected Tim stubbornly. "I want a
big, big Christmas tree."

"Big as the ceiling--big as Mulberry Court," interrupted Martin,
extending his chubby arms to their full length.

"I wants a big tree, too," lisped Nell.

Mrs. McGregor sighed to herself. Evidently it was not going to be as
easy to coax her flock away from their established traditions as she
had at first supposed. Each year she had made a stupendous effort to
keep Christmas after the old fashion; and each season the ceremony,
before it was over, made appalling inroads on her slender purse. This
time it had been her plan to curtail expenses and put what was spent
into the more substantial and lasting things. But now as she glanced
about her her heart misgave her. Even Carl and Mary, valiantly as they
fought for economy, and grown up though they were, could not altogether
conceal the fact that they were disappointed; and as for the younger
children, they were on the brink of tears.

"Well, we won't decide to-day," announced their mother diplomatically.
"We will think it over until to-morrow. By that time perhaps some way
can be found----"

A knock at the door interrupted her.

"Run to the door like a good boy, Timmie," said she. "Very likely it's
the boy from the corner grocery with the bundles of wood I ordered."

Tim rose with importance. Visitors to the fifth floor of Mulberry Court
were so few that to admit even so prosaic a one as the grocer's boy
never ceased to thrill him.

To-day, however, it was not the grocer's boy who stood peering at him
from the dim hallway. In fact, it was no one he had ever seen before. A
little old man stood there, a man with ruddy cheeks, a stern mouth, and
blue eyes whose sharpness was softened by a moist, far-away expression.
From beneath a nautical blue cap strayed a wisp or two of white hair.
Otherwise, he was buttoned to his chin in a great coat, fastened with
imposing brass buttons, dulled by much fingering.

Apprehensive at the sight, Tim backed into the room. Brass buttons, in
his limited experience, meant either firemen or policemen and either of
these dignitaries was equally terrifying.

"You don't know your Uncle Frederick, do you, sonny?" observed the
stranger.

The voice, more than the words, brought Mrs. McGregor to her feet in an
instant, and what a rush she made for the door! Gauze, spangles,
scissors, and spool flew in all directions and the children, deciding
that some unprecedented evil had befallen, stampeded after her.

Open-mouthed, they watched, while in the arms of the little old
gentleman she laughed, cried, and uttered broken nothings quite
unintelligible to anybody.

"Who ever would have thought to see you, Frederick!" gasped she at
last, as wiping her eyes on the corner of her apron she dragged her
visitor into the room. "Children, come here one by one and speak to
your Uncle James Frederick Dillingham. This is Carl, the oldest one--a
good boy as ever lived (if he is always tearing his clothes). The next
is Mary; she's going on thirteen and is quite a little housekeeper even
now. Timmie, who let you in, is nine. And here are Martin and Nell--the
mites! James Frederick is asleep but when you see him you'll see the
finest baby you ever set your two eyes on. Kiss your uncle, children.
You know it's him you have to thank for many, many things."

Slowly the children advanced, wonder (and if the truth must be told) no
small measure of chagrin in their crestfallen countenances.

Was this apparition the fairy prince of their imaginings--this little
gray man with his long coat and oilskin bundle? Why, he might be Mike
Carrigan, the butcher; or Davie Ryan, the proprietor of the fruit
stand, for anything his appearance denoted. Their dreams were in the
dust. Still, youth is hopeful and they did not quite let go the
expectation that when the long coat that disguised him had been removed
and the magic bundle opened Uncle Frederick Dillingham would issue
forth in a garb startling, resplendent, and more in accordance with
their mental pictures of him. But to their profound disappointment,
when the great coat was tossed aside, it concealed no ermine-robed
hero; nor was there crown or scepter in the bundle. Instead there stood
in their midst a very plain, kindly little man arrayed in a shiny suit
of blue serge that was almost shabby. The buttons, to be sure, had
anchors on them; but they were dim, lusterless old anchors that looked
as if they had been sunk in the depths of the sea until their golden
glory had been tarnished by the washings of a million waves.

Nell eyed him and at length began to cry.

"Policeman!" she whimpered, hiding her face in her mother's skirt.

"Hush, girlie! Don't be silly," protested Mrs. McGregor hurriedly.
"Your uncle is no policeman, though he may get one if you don't stop
that noise."

At that the little old man laughed a hearty, ringing laugh, so good to
hear that in spite of themselves the whole family joined in it. After
that, everything was easy. Uncle James Frederick Dillingham tucked his
coat, cap, and bundle away in a corner and allowed his sister to seat
him in the rocking-chair before the stove.

"Put another shovelful of coal on the fire, Carl," said she briskly.
"And Mary, do you slip out to the market and fetch home a beefsteak and
some onions. You were ever fond of a steak smothered in onions,
Frederick. Timmie, you shall set the table with a place for your uncle
Frederick at the head, remember. And Nell, trot to the shed, darling,
and bring mother a nice lot of potatoes. Go softly so not to waken
James Frederick."

Promptly her host sprang to obey her.

"Well, well, Brother," murmured she, "I've scarcely got my breath yet.
I never was so surprised in all my born days as to see you standing
there on the mat! Wherever did you come from? We've not heard from you
for weeks and I had begun to fear something might have gone amiss."

Captain Dillingham patted her hand with his horny one.

"We had a long trip home, Nellie, because of strong head winds,"
explained he. "Then, too, there were ports to stop at and cargo to
