conclusion that the "head man" would protect him,--when he saw two men
enter the tent. They did not belong to the company, and Noddy was quite
sure he had often seen them in Whitestone.

"We don't allow visitors in here now," said the manager.

"We come on business. There is a boy here that we want to find," replied
one of the men.

"You must leave the tent," said the manager, rather sharply.

"I am a constable, and there is a boy about here that I want."

"What's his name?"

"They call him Noddy Newman."

"What do you want of him?"

"That's my business," answered the constable, rudely. "The boy came into
the ring this afternoon during the show, and I suppose he belongs to the
company."

"That's the fellow!" exclaimed the other constable, pointing to Noddy,
who was trying to take himself off without being noticed.

"That's Arthur De Forrest," interposed the manager.

"No, it isn't; I've known him this five years," said the man who had
recognized the culprit.

Both of them walked towards Noddy, with the intention, apparently, of
laying violent hands on him; but the young gentleman in "trunk and
tights" was not prepared to yield up his personal liberty, and he
retreated.

The officers were in a position where they could stop him from leaving
the tent by either of the two entrances; and Noddy, finding his exit
prevented, seized a rope which was hanging down by the centre-pole, and
climbed up out of the reach of his pursuers.

"What do you want of me?" demanded the young athlete, as he perched
himself in a comfortable position on the "slack-rope," which was
suspended to the pole.

"We shall not do you any harm, my boy," said one of the officers.

"What do you want of me?"

"There is good news for you; and you are wanted over at Squire Wriggs's
office."

"I know ye! You want to take me to the court-house. You can't humbug
me," said Noddy, fully confirmed in his suspicions by the conduct of the
men.

"We won't hurt you."

"You want to take me up."

"No, we don't; we only want to take you up to Squire Wriggs's office.
It's all for your good."

"No, you don't," replied Noddy. "You can't cheat me."

"We don't want to cheat you. We are only sent to find you. We will not
arrest you."

"I know better. You can't fool me. I heard Squire Wriggs say he wanted
to take me up to the court-house; and you don't catch me near no
court-house. I know what you mean."

"You are mistaken, my boy. Come down, and I will tell you all about it."

"When I do, you let me know," replied Noddy, who felt so secure from
arrest in his present quarters that he expressed his mind with perfect
freedom.

"We promise not to arrest you," persisted the constable who did the
talking. "We have been looking for you all day."

"You may look another day, if you like," added the defiant refugee. "You
want me for setting fire to the boat-house; but I am not to blame, if I
did do it."

"We don't know anything about the boat-house; Squire Wriggs has a lot of
money for you."

"You can't catch an old bird in any such trap as that," answered Noddy,
shaking his head significantly.

The officers used all their powers of persuasion to induce him to come
down; but Noddy, satisfied that they had been sent by Squire Wriggs, was
fully persuaded that they were trying to deceive him. The story about a
"lot of money" for a poor boy like him, who had not a friend in the
world, was too absurd, in his estimation, to be entertained for a
moment. He had heard the squire speak to Mr. Grant about thirty thousand
dollars; but such a sum was beyond his comprehension. He did not believe
any man, not even the owner of Woodville, had so much money; and of
course it was nothing to him.

The constables got out of patience at last; and though they showed no
signs of anger or malice, they exhibited an intention to catch him,
which was much worse. One of them commenced the ascent of the pole in
the centre of the tent. The circus people, who seemed to be in full
sympathy with Noddy, remained neutral, for the intruders were officers
of the law, and it was not prudent to oppose them.

Noddy perceived the object of his pursuers, and grasping one of the
tent-ropes, he scrambled up to the very apex of the canvas structure,
and crawled through the aperture around the pole. From this point he
slid down to the short poles, and then dropped upon the ground, before
the man in the ring could pass round to the outside of the tent. Dodging
under the curtains, he reached the place which served as a
dressing-room. Removing his "trunks," he hurried on his clothes, and
rushed out into the open air again.

His persecutors were not in sight, and he did not lose a moment in
putting a safe distance between himself and them. Precisely as a
well-educated duck or other water-fowl would have done, he hastened to
the river, as his most natural element. He had made a complete circuit
of the town in his flight. He did not dare to show himself to a living
being; for it seemed to him just as though the whole country was after
him. When he reached the river, he sat down on the bank, exhausted by
his efforts and by the excitement of the afternoon.

"I reckon I've got about circus enough," said he to himself,--for there
was no one else to whom he could say it. "That Whippleby is worse than a
heathen. I don't like any of them."

He rubbed his legs, which were not yet done smarting; and the pain
seemed to be an emphatic protest against circuses in general, and the
"Great Olympian Circus" in particular. But whether he liked the circus
or not, it was no longer safe for him to remain with the company. He had
taken "French leave" of the manager, and had cheated him out of the
tights which enveloped his body from neck to heels. This thought
reminded him that they did not feel at all comfortable, and he wished
the manager had his own again.

Having abandoned the circus profession in disgust, he wondered what he
should do next. It was useless for him to stay in the vicinity of
Woodville; and the only safe plan for him to adopt was, to go away to
some other part of the country, or go to sea at once. He could not
tolerate the idea of leaving without letting Bertha know where he was.
The officers were on his track, and he could not hope always to escape
them. The court-house was terrible, and prompt action was necessary.

He must have a sight of Bertha, even if he did not speak to her; and at
the risk of being captured, he determined to stay in the neighborhood of
Woodville till the next morning. Near the place where he sat there was a
skiff moored to the bank. He hauled it in, and took up the oars. He did
not mean to steal it, only to borrow it till the next morning. With this
comfortable reflection he cast off the painter, and pulled over to the
other side of the river.

It was now quite late in the evening. He had not eaten any supper, and,
like other boys, he was always hungry at meal times. He wanted something
to eat; and it occurred to him that there were generally some crackers
and cheese in the locker of the Greyhound, and he rowed down to her
moorings. He found what he wanted there, and made a hearty supper. He
was satisfied then, and soon went to sleep in the stern-sheets of the
sail-boat.

Fortunately for him he waked up about daylight, and was not seen by any
of the early risers at Woodville. Appropriating the rest of the crackers
and cheese for his breakfast, he got into the skiff and rowed up to the
Glen, where he hoped, in the course of the forenoon, to see Bertha.




CHAPTER VIII.

GOOD-BYE TO WOODVILLE.


Bertha often walked to the Glen before breakfast, and Noddy expected to
find her there on the present occasion. As she did not appear, he
followed the path toward Woodville, and actually reached the lawn which
surrounded the mansion before he thought of the danger he incurred. But
it was breakfast time in the servants' quarters, and he was not seen.

Keeping on the outskirts of the lawn, where he could make good his
retreat in case of necessity, he walked nearly around to the pier, and
was so fortunate as to discover Bertha at the turn of a winding path,
near his route. The sight of her filled him with emotion, and brought to
his mind the remembrance of the many happy days he had spent in her
presence. He could hardly restrain the tears which the thought of
leaving the place brought to his eyes, though Noddy was not given to
the feminine custom of weeping.

"Miss Bertha," said he, as she approached the spot where he stood.

She started back with alarm; but he stepped forward from the concealment
of the bushes, and with a smile of pleasure she recognized him.

"Why, Noddy, is that you?" said she, walking towards the spot where he
stood.

"It's me, Miss Bertha; but I suppose you don't want to see me now."

"I am very glad to see you. What did you go away for?"

"Because they were going to put me in the court-house."

"In the court-house!" exclaimed Bertha, who was better acquainted with
legal affairs than her pupil.

"Yes, for setting the boat-house afire."

"I don't think they intended to take you to the court-house."

"O, I know they did. I have had two constables after me; but I got away
from them. Besides, I heard Squire Wriggs say they were going to take me
to the court-house. I heard him say so myself."

"Perhaps it is so," said Bertha, musing. "Squire Wriggs came to see
father yesterday morning. They went out together, and were speaking of
you as they left the house."

"I'm glad you didn't have anything to do with it," said Noddy, delighted
to find that Bertha was not one of his persecutors.

Then, with the utmost simplicity, and apparently with the feeling that
he was a persecuted youth, he told her everything that had occurred from
the time he first saw Mr. Grant and Squire Wriggs on the lawn.

"I don't know what my father's plans are," said Bertha, sadly; "but he
thinks it is no longer safe to permit you to roam about the place. He is
afraid you will set the house on fire, or do some other terrible thing."

"But I wouldn't, Miss Bertha," protested Noddy.

"Why did you do such a wicked thing?"

"I couldn't help it."

"Yes, you could, Noddy. That's only making a bad matter worse. Of course
you could help setting a building on fire."

"It wasn't my fault, Miss Bertha," stammered he; "I can't explain it
now--perhaps some time I may; and when you understand it, you won't
think so bad of me."

"If there is anything about it I don't know, why don't you tell me?"
added Bertha, mystified by his strange remark.

"I can't say anything now. Please don't ask me anything about it, Miss
Bertha. I'm not half so much to blame as you think I am; but I set the
fire, and they are after me for it. They have used all sorts of tricks
to catch me; but I'm not going into any court-house, or any tinker's
shop."

"What tricks do you mean?"

"They said they had a lot of money for me, and that Squire Wriggs
wouldn't do me any harm."

"Well, I don't know anything about that. Father went over to Whitestone
with Squire Wriggs, after you ran away. He went over again last night,
after he came from the city, and I haven't seen him for more than a
moment since."

"He is going to send me to the court-house," said Noddy, fully satisfied
that Bertha knew nothing about the proceedings of her father. "I am
going to sea, now."

"To sea, Noddy?"

"Yes, I'm going to work and win, as you told me, and when I come back I
shall be respectable."

Bertha had her doubts on this point. She had almost lost all hope of her
_protege_, and she did not think that a voyage in the forecastle of a
ship would be likely to improve his manners or his morals.

"I can't let you go, Noddy," said she.

"I must go; if I stay here they will put me in prison. You don't want to
see me put in prison, Bertha."

"I don't."

"Then what can I do? The officers are after me this moment."

"But I shall have to tell my father that I have seen you."

"You may do that; and you may tell him, too, that it won't be any use
for him to try to find me, for I shall keep out of the way. If they
catch me they will be smarter than I am," added Noddy, confidently.

"I want to see you again, Noddy, after I have talked with father about
you. I don't believe he intends to send you to prison."

"I know he does. I come over here to see you before I went away. I
couldn't go without seeing you, or I shouldn't have come. I may never
see you again, for I shan't run any more risks after this."

Bertha said all she could to induce him to meet her again; but the
cunning youth was afraid that some trap might be set to catch him, and
he assured her that this was positively his last appearance at Woodville
for the present. He was satisfied that Mr. Grant had taken the case into
his own hands, and that she could not save him if she would.

"Now, good-bye, Miss Bertha," said he, wiping a tear from his face.

"Don't go, Noddy," pleaded she.

"I must."

"You haven't any clothes but those you have on, and you have no money."

"I don't want any. I can get along very well. Won't you shake hands with
me before I go?"

"Certainly, I will," replied she, giving him her hand. "You will not let
me do anything for you now?"

"You have done more than I deserve. Good-bye, Miss Bertha," said he,
pressing the hand he held.

"Good-bye, Noddy," replied she. "Good-bye, if you must go."

"There comes your father," exclaimed he, as he bounded off into the
grove with the speed of an antelope.

