delicate silken threads, and are of a long funnel shape; the spider
occupies the bottom part and soon rushes up should any insect get into
the trap, and quickly rushes down and escapes at the back door if your
hand enters the front. The top of the funnel is spread out into large
broad sheets, and the whole snare is attached by silken cords to the
twigs of the bushes. This is the snare and residence of a good-sized
species, the _Agelena labyrinthica_. Such webs are common on hedges,
on grass, heath, and gorse. Now you must distinguish between spiders'
nests and spiders' snares. The very common wheel-like webs, which you
see abundantly on hedges, are snares or traps for insects, and
beautiful they look on a dewy morning all strung with liquid pearls.
Here under this oak are a number of old acorn-cups of last autumn's
produce; the acorns have fallen out and the black cups remain. Do you
see a delicate spider's web filling this cup; inside are a quantity of
tiny round eggs, and a small spider is keeping guard within; this is a
spider's nest. Many spiders spin cocoons for their little round eggs,
place them in various situations, and leave them; others show the
greatest care for them and carry them about wherever they go. The
cocoons of the species whose web or trap we are now looking at are
made of strong white silk, each cocoon containing perhaps 100 round
eggs, rather yellowish in colour. They are fastened to the inside of a
web the spider spins by means of silken pillars formed by a number of
threads closely glued together. The sac containing the cocoons is
fastened to stems of grass or other objects, and partially hidden by a
few withered leaves. "For the purpose of securing their prey," says
Mr. Blackwall, the author of a splendid work on 'British Spiders,'
"spiders have recourse to divers expedients. Numerous species run
rapidly about in quest of those objects which constitute their food;
others, approaching their victims with great circumspection, spring
upon them from a distance; some lie concealed in flowers or among
leaves, seizing such insects as come within their reach; and many
species procure a supply of nutriment by means of complicated snares
of their own fabrication." Of these snares the most beautiful, as I
said, are the "wheel within wheel" nets of the various species of the
family _Epeiridae_. "What are those spider-like things," asked Willy,
"with long thin bodies, you often see skating along the water? they
are something like the spiders." They are not spiders at all, but
insects called "water-measurers," from their peculiar habit of taking
a short skate on the surface of the water and then stopping; having
measured that distance, off they go again. However, many spiders do
run along on the surface of the water, and you know there is one, the
great water-spider, that lives habitually in it. Some years ago I had
one of these water-spiders in a glass vessel of water, and saw it spin
its curious dome-shaped web which it attached to the sides of the
glass and some weeds. These domes are formed of closely woven white
silk, in the form of a diving bell or half a pigeon's egg, as De Geer
has said, with the opening below. It looks like a half-ball of silver;
this appearance is due to a quantity of air. It is, in fact, a huge
air-bubble surrounded by a covering of white silk, and, as you may
suppose, a very interesting and pretty object. Within this silver dome
the spider places her eggs, perhaps a hundred or more in number, which
are enveloped in a cocoon, this being attached to the inner side of
the dome. "But how," said Jack, "is the bubble formed? Where does the
air come from?" You have asked a very interesting question, and one
which can be answered; for the question was set at rest by Mr. Bell,
an excellent observer and well-known naturalist, about twelve years
ago, if I remember rightly. He found that the old spider actually took
the air down with her from the surface of the water, and deposited it
in her domed house. I shall now quote Mr. Bell's words: "The manner in
which the animal possesses itself of the bubble of air is very
curious, and, as far as I know, has never been exactly described. It
ascends to the surface slowly, assisted by a thread attached to a leaf
or other support below and to the surface of the water. As soon as it
comes near the surface it turns with the extremity of the abdomen
upwards, and exposes a portion of the body to the air for an instant,
then with a jerk it snatches, as it were, a bubble of air, which is
not only attached to the hairs which cover the abdomen, but is held on
by the two hinder legs, which are crossed at an acute angle near their
extremity; this crossing of the legs taking place at the instant the
bubble is seized. The little creature then descends more rapidly and
regains its cell, always by the same route, turns the abdomen within
it, and disengages the bubble." Spiders have strong jaws; at the
bottom of each hooked jaw there is a small sac which contains a
poisonous fluid; this fluid is conveyed by a narrow channel from the
sac along the jaw, and is pressed out at an opening or slit at the tip
of the fang into the wound inflicted on its victim. The feet of
spiders are generally terminated by two or more claws furnished with
teeth; by means of these combs the animal is enabled to manage the
threads of its web with great dexterity and efficiency.

[Illustration: SPIDER'S FANG, MAGNIFIED.]

[Illustration: SPIDER'S FOOT, MAGNIFIED.]

[Illustration]




WALK IX.

JULY.


Let us be off to the fields once more; the sun is very hot, but we can
find refreshing shade under the trees when we are tired. What is this
beautiful little plant with bright scarlet flowers fully expanded? It
is the scarlet pimpernel, or "poor man's weather-glass;" for on rainy
days, and even before the showers are coming, the little plant,
conscious of their approach, closes up its flowers. Other wild
flowers, such as the convolvulus, close before rain. The little
pimpernel, however, is supposed to be the best barometer. There is
another thing about the pimpernel; you will not often see its blossoms
expanded after three o'clock in the afternoon. In other countries,
also, the regular closing of the flowers has been noticed. Dr. Seeman,
who went as naturalist on one of the Arctic Expeditions, noticed the
flowers to close during the long day of an arctic summer. "Although,"
he says, "the sun never sets while it lasts, the plants make no
mistake about the time, when if it be not night it ought to be, but
regularly as the evening hours approach, and when a midnight sun is
several degrees above the horizon, they droop their leaves, and sleep
even as they do at sunset in more favoured climes." Look at the
bright scarlet flower, with its small purple eye. Excepting poppies,
with their dazzling brightness, I do not think there is another wild
flower that has scarlet petals. However, the blossoms are not always
scarlet; there is a white variety with a purple eye, and another
having a dark blue blossom.

[Illustration: SCARLET PIMPERNEL.]

Well, Jack, you have found something, have you? Ah! this is a queer
plant, it has queer habits, and a queer name; it is called
"Jack-go-to-bed at noon." We sometimes call you after the name of
another plant, "Jack-by-the-hedge." May, of course, is "May," or
hawthorn blossom, and Robin at home, from his often tearing his
clothes, is "Ragged Robin." Another name for the plant you hold in
your hand is goat's beard; the leaves are long and grass-like, the
flowers bright yellow; it is not yet quite eleven o'clock, and the
blossoms are expanded; they generally close about noon. Look at the
colour of the stem, it has a kind of sea-green bloom upon it. Well,
you would never find this plant with blossom expanded in the
afternoon; so "Jack-go-to-bed at noon" is really not a bad name for
it.

    "And goodly now the noon-tide hour
    When from his high meridian tower
    The sun looks down in majesty.
    What time about the grassy lea
    The goat's-beard prompt his rise to hail
    With broad expanded disc, in veil
    Close mantling wraps its yellow head,
    And goes, as peasants say, to bed."

Here we are at a stream; do you see those things at the bottom slowly
moving? They seem to be bits of stick. "I know what they are," said
Jack, "there is a good fat maggot in each of these cases; they are
caddis-worms." Quite right, and in time they will change to insects.
Here is another kind; the house is made of small bits of gravel, and
it is attached to this smooth stone. I will break open the case; do
you see inside is a long cylindrical case, with a thin covering; I
slit this open with my penknife, and now you see the creature inside.
There are a great variety of these caddis-worms, and most interesting
it is to notice the different kind of houses they build. Some of the
larvae live in movable cases, as we have seen, some in fixed
habitations; the materials, too, out of which the different cases are
constructed, are different, sometimes they are bits of gravel, or
sand, wood, leaves, grass, the empty shells of various fresh-water
molluscs. The fragments of stick and the small bits of gravel are held
together by a kind of cement which the larva spins from his mouth.
Sometimes we may meet with cases made of sand, having on either side
long slender bits of rush or stick. A lady once took a number of the
larvae out of their cases, and placed them in a vessel of water with
various materials, such as coloured glass, cornelian, agate, onyx,
brass filings, coralline, tortoiseshell; and these little maggoty
things made use of and built their houses out of them. The perfect
insect has four wings; and from these being closely covered with
hairs, the order to which they belong has received the name of
_Trichoptera_, which means "having hairy wings." You must know many of
these insects; they are very common near ponds and streams; generally
they fly in a zig-zag fashion, and have the appearance of moths.

[Illustration: _a, b, c, d._ Larva, cocoon, nympha, and insect of
Caddis-fly.]

Ah! here is a splendid bed of the forget-me-not growing on this bank
near the stream. Look at the blue enamel-like flowers, each with a
yellow centre-eye; the leaves are bright green and rather rough. There
are other species very much resembling this one you may often see in
hedgerows and fields; but they are generally smaller plants; this one
is the true forget-me-not. There are several stories about the origin
of the name. Here is one:--Many years ago, a lady and knight were
wandering by a river; the lady espied these bright blue flowers, on a
small islet I suppose, in the deep river, and wished to possess them.
Her lover immediately plunged in and plucked the plants, but the
strength of the stream was too much for him on his return. With a
great effort, however, he threw the flowers on the bank, exclaiming
"Forget-me-not," and sank!

    "But the lady fair of the knight so true
      Still remember'd his hapless lot;
    And she cherish'd the flower of brilliant hue
    And she braided her hair with the blossoms blue,
      And she call'd it 'Forget-me-not.'"

We must proceed on our walk and not linger too long here, though, I
must own, it is hard to tear oneself away from the banks of a
gently-flowing river. So good-by to

    "That blue and bright-eyed flowret of the brook,
    Hope's gentle gem, the sweet 'Forget-me-not.'"

[Illustration: GOLDFINCH.]

As we crossed the road we met two men with cage-traps, and a slender
twig covered thickly with bird-lime. In each cage-trap was a tame
goldfinch, which were the decoy birds. The men had only succeeded in
taking one goldfinch--for which they asked half a crown. The decoy
birds attract other goldfinches by their call-note; these sometimes
alight on the trap, which instantly closes upon them; sometimes they
alight on the twig smeared with bird-lime, which is so sticky that
they cannot free themselves from it. "Gay plumage, lively habits, an
agreeable form and song, with a disposition to become attached to
those who feed them, are such strong recommendations, that the
goldfinch has been, and will probably continue to be, one of the most
general cage favourites. So well also do the birds of this species
bear confinement, that they have been known to live ten years in
captivity, continuing in song the greater part of each year. This
tendency to sing and call make them valuable as brace-birds,
decoy-birds, and call-birds, to be used by the birdcatcher with his
ground nets, while the facility with which others are captured, the
numbers to be obtained, and the constant demand for them by the
public, render the goldfinch one of the most important species
included within the bird-dealer's traffic."

Mr. Mayhew says that a goldfinch has been known to exist twenty-three
years in a cage. The same person tells us that goldfinches are sold in
the streets of London from sixpence to a shilling each, and when there
is an extra catch, and the shops are fully stocked, at threepence and
fourpence each. Only think, it is computed that as many as 70,000 song
birds are captured every year about London; the street sale of the
goldfinch being about a tenth of the whole. Goldfinches may be taught
to perform many amusing tricks, to draw up water for themselves by a
small thimble-sized bucket, or to raise the lid of a small box to
obtain the seed within. A goldfinch has been trained to appear dead;
it could be held up by the tail or claw without exhibiting any signs
of life, or to stand on its head with its claws in the air, or to
imitate a Dutch milk-maid going to market with pails on its shoulders,
or to appear as a soldier, keeping guard as sentinel. One was once
trained to act as a cannoneer with a cap on its head, a firelock on
its shoulder, and a match in its claw; it would then discharge a small
cannon. "The same bird also acted as if it had been wounded. It was
wheeled in a barrow, to convey it, as it were, to the hospital; after
which it flew away before the company." Another turned a kind of
windmill; another stood in the midst of some fireworks, which were
discharged all around it, without showing any fear. When we consider
how docile and affectionate many birds become; when we think of their
beauty and the sweet music they pour from their little throats; when
we consider also of what immense use a great number of species are to
man in helping to check injurious insects and caterpillars; does it
not seem strange that they meet with so little protection? How often,
as you know, we have met lads and great strong men with helpless
fledglings in their hands, which they intend to torture in some way or
other; perhaps they will tie strings to their legs and drag them
about, or place them on a large stone and throw at them. To
expostulate with them on the wickedness of such barbarous conduct is
hopeless; one might as well quote Hebrew to a tadpole!

How noisy the grasshoppers are, with their incessant shrill chirpings;
how thoroughly they enjoy the heat and sun! Just catch me one or two,
Willy; there, one has hopped just before you; now he is on that blade
of grass. Have you got him? No? Well, take this gauze net. Now you
have him. "How does the grasshopper make that peculiar sound?" asked
May. If you will get near one of these insects while he is making the
noise you will see how he does it. There, one stands on that plantain
stem. Do you see how briskly he rubs his legs against the wing-covers?
Now he is quiet, and his legs are still; so it is evident that the
friction or rubbing of the legs against the wings causes the sound. I
rub the thigh of this specimen I hold in my hands against the wing.
You distinctly hear the shrill sound. It is the males only who make
the noise; the females are mute. Some people have described another
organ which seems to increase the sound. I have sometimes placed both
field-crickets and grasshoppers under a tumbler, and supplied them
with moist blades of grass; it is curious to see how fast they eat
them. You should remember that the grasshopper is a relative of the
locust, to which, indeed, it bears a close resemblance; only the
locust is a much larger insect. There are several species of locusts,
and all are extremely injurious. You have read in the Bible of the
fearful damage they are able to cause to the trees and various crops.
It is seldom that locusts visit this country, happily, for there is
not a greater insect scourge in existence. Our green grasshopper is
also related to the cricket, so merrily noisy in dwelling-houses.
Crickets are difficult to get rid of when they have thoroughly
established themselves in a house. Like many noisy persons, crickets
like to hear nobody louder than themselves; and some one relates that
a woman who had tried in vain every method she could think of to
banish them from her house, at last got rid of them by the noise made
by drums and trumpets, which she had procured to entertain her guests
at a wedding. It is said, but you need not believe the story, that
they instantly forsook the house, and the woman heard of them no more.
Possibly some half dozen more women in the house would have had the
same effect, without the musical instruments! What do you say to that
idea, May? "That is too bad of you, papa, but you know you are only
joking."

[Illustration: _a, b, c._ Leg, wing-cover, and wing of Grasshopper,
magnified.]

Here is a large pond, and from this bank we can look down into the
water. There are some yellow water-lilies with their broad expanded
leaves. I have noticed that the blossoms are often attacked by the
larvae of some two-winged flies. These flies lay their eggs within the
petals, "lily-cradled" literally; the eggs hatch and the larvae eat the
cradle. I do not know more of these flies: I have often meant to trace
their history, but have somehow forgotten to do so. Do you see that
pike basking on the top of the water; how still and motionless he
lies. He is a good-sized fish, at least I should say he was four
pounds weight. "I wish we could catch him," said Willy. We have no
tackle with us; besides, when pike are sunning themselves in that way
on the top of the water, they are seldom inclined to take a bait.
"What is the largest pike," asked Jack, "you ever saw caught?" The
largest I ever saw alive was caught in the canal about five years ago;
it weighed twenty-one pounds, and was really a splendid fish. What
voracious fish they are; they will often take young ducks, water-hens
and coots, and will sometimes try to swallow a fish much too large for
their throats. It is said that a pike once seized the head of a swan
as she was feeding under water, and gorged so much of it as killed
them both. The servants perceiving the swan with its head under water
for a longer time than usual, took the boat and found both swan and
pike dead. "Gesner relates that a pike in the Rhone seized on the lips
of a mule that was brought to water, and that the beast drew the fish
out before it could disengage itself. Walton was assured by his friend
Mr. Segrave, who kept tame otters, that he had known a pike, in
extreme hunger, fight with one of his otters for a carp that the otter
had caught and was then bringing out of the water. A woman in Poland
had her foot seized by a pike as she was washing clothes in a pond."
Mr. Jesse tells the story of a gentleman, who, as he was one day
walking by the side of the river Wey, saw a large pike in a shallow
creek. He immediately pulled off his coat, tucked up his shirt
sleeves, and went into the water to intercept the return of the fish
to the river, and to endeavour to throw it out upon the bank by
getting his hands under it. During this attempt the pike, finding he
could not make his escape, seized one of the arms of the gentleman,
and lacerated it so much that the marks of the wound were visible for
a long time afterwards. Pike will live to a great age, ninety years
or more. In the year 1497, according to old Gesner, a pike was taken
at Halibrun in Suabia with a brazen ring attached to it, on which was
the following inscription in Greek:--"I am the fish which was put into
the lake by the hands of the governor of the universe, Frederick the
Second, the 5th of October, 1230." This pike, therefore, would be two
hundred and sixty-seven years old; people said it weighed three
hundred and fifty pounds, and that its skeleton was nineteen feet
long. I will show you a picture of this ring in Gesner's book when we
get home.

[Illustration]




WALK X.

OCTOBER.


How pleasant is the season of autumn, with its yellow fields of ripe
corn, and its orchards laden with the fruits of the apple and the
pear. But now the golden grain is safely stored. The birds, too, have
done singing, with the exception of the robin and the hedge-warbler,
which even in the winter occasionally cheer us with their welcome
notes. There are yet, however, a few wild flowers to interest us, and
the ferns are still beautiful. The various kinds of fungi are
springing up in the fields and woodlands; it is a charming day for a
stroll; we will drive to the Wrekin and explore the woods at its base.
I am sure we shall be able to meet with many pretty forms. The woods
are rendered extremely beautiful by the rich autumnal tints of the
foliage. We will go through this wicket and follow the path in the
direction of Ten-Tree Hill. Now, who will be the first to find the
bright scarlet fly agaric? It is a poisonous species, though so
beautiful. We will put the wholesome fungi in one basket and the
suspected ones in another.

Here you see is the elegant parasol fungus, with its tall stem and top
spotted with brown flakes; it is a most delicious one to eat, and in
my opinion is superior to the common mushroom. "Shall we find the
beefsteak fungus, papa?" said Willy. I have never seen it growing
here; the beefsteak fungus prefers to grow on very old oak trees, and
it is, moreover, by no means common. It is so called from its
resemblance to a beefsteak when cut through; a reddish gravy-like
juice flows from the wound, and I think the whole fungus when young
very inviting. I have on three or four occasions eaten this species,
but I do not think it a very palatable one, though perfectly wholesome
and doubtless nutritious.

Here is a quantity of _Amanita phalloides_, very beautiful with its
green tints and white stem; but I should not like to eat any of this
kind. Do you notice what a very unpleasant smell it has?

[Illustration: FUNGI.

    1.--Beef-steak Fungus.
    2.--Latticed Stinkhorn, (very rare.)
    3.--Boletus.
    4.--Hedgehog Mushroom.
    5.--Fly Agaric.
    6.--Clavaria.
    7.--Bird's-nest Fungus; b, Sporangium of ditto, magnified.]

What a number of animals are nailed to that beech-tree! Let us see
what they are: two cats, three weasels, two stoats, four jays, two
magpies, two kestrils, an owl, and a sparrow-hawk. The keeper has
trapped or shot these as enemies to the game, and no doubt, with the
exception of the weasels, owl, and kestrils, the other animals often
destroy young pheasants or suck their eggs. Still I should not like to
see all wild animals destroyed that occasionally harm game preserves.
Gamekeepers have strong affection for their hares, partridges, and
pheasants, and consider all other wild animals as either enemies or
beneath notice. Indeed, a gamekeeper's zoology is confined to five
things--pheasants, partridges, hares, rabbits, and ants' eggs. Ah! I
do think I espy about twenty yards ahead the fly agaric (_Amanita
muscaria_). To be sure, here is a fine lot; some just appearing
above ground in the form of scarlet balls; others fully expanded. How
splendid they are! You notice many white patches on their tops; let us
see how these patches are formed. Here is a specimen hardly showing
itself. I will dig it up. There, now you see; the whole fungus is
wrapped up in a thin white envelope; this is called a _volva_, from
the Latin word volvo--"I roll up." When the _volva_ breaks, it leaves
scattered patches on the top. The gills are white or yellowish and the
stem is bulbous. This is not a very common fungus; it is, however,
frequent enough in the woods about the Wrekin. The effects of this
fungus on a person who has eaten it are of an intoxicating nature. Dr.
Badham, who used to eat various kinds of fungi and has written a very
good book on wholesome kinds, once gathered some specimens of the fly
agaric. He sent them to two lady friends, intending to call soon
afterwards and explain that he had sent them on account of their
extreme beauty solely. Dr. Badham did not come, but these two ladies
said, "Oh, of course Dr. Badham would never send us anything
unwholesome; let us have some cooked for tea." So they had some cooked
and ate thereof, and were taken very ill. The bad effects, however,
soon passed away. Look at that little squirrel, see how nimbly he
climbs the tree; now he hides on a forked branch and thinks we do not
see him. Well, I must not forget to tell you that this fungus, growing
in this spot so plentifully, is called fly agaric because a decoction
of it was once used to destroy flies. The people in Siberia swallow
portions of it to produce intoxication. Here is another species
closely related to the one we have been considering, and not unlike it
in form; this is the blushing agaric (_Amanita rubescens_); you see
its top also is covered with whitish flakes or warts; and persons who
are not in the habit of noticing differences might confuse this
species with the other. Now look; I will cut this specimen through
with my knife, and bruise it slightly; do you see how it changes to a
reddish hue, thus at once distinguishing itself from its unwholesome
relative? This quality gives the name to the fungus. The blushing
agaric is perfectly wholesome. You remember how often we had it cooked
last autumn, and how delicious it was both for breakfast and dinner. I
would never, however, advise persons who have not paid attention to
the study of fungi to gather and eat them without asking the opinion
of some one who had knowledge of the subject; and I am sure that you,
children, will never think of eating any kind that you have not first
brought to me. There sits the squirrel. Let us make him show us how he
can leap from one bough to another. I clap my hands and Jack throws a
stone, and off the little fellow goes, taking wonderful leaps. As the
winter approaches the squirrel will be busy laying up stores for
consumption during that season, such as nuts, acorns, and beech-mast.
For the greater part of the winter the squirrel is dormant; on fine
warm days, however, he ventures out of his retreat in the hole of a
tree, visits his cupboard, cracks a few nuts, and then goes to sleep
again. The nest of the squirrel is made of moss, leaves, and twigs
curiously intertwined, and is generally placed between the forked
branches; the young ones, two or three in number, are born in the
month of June. A gentleman, in a letter to Mr. Jenyns, says "a pair
which frequented a tree opposite the window of one of the rooms,
evinced great enmity to a couple of magpies with whom they kept up a
perpetual warfare, pursuing them from branch to branch, and from tree
to tree with untiring agility. Whether this persecution arose from
natural antipathy between the combatants, or from jealousy of
interference with their nests, is not known."

What are those black circular spots some four or five yards in
diameter, so common in the woods of the Wrekin? They are places where
wood has been burnt for charcoal. Always examine such spots, as you
may find rare plants growing upon them which scarcely grow anywhere
else. Here, for instance, is _Flammula carbonaria_ abundant. On these
charcoal spots this fungus delights to grow, and I do not think you
will find it elsewhere. Mr. Worthington Smith tells us it is a very
rare British fungus; it is not mentioned in Mr. Berkley's 'Outlines of
Fungology.' Here is a beautifully marked variety of _Polyporus
perennis_, also very rare; it is tinted with rich sienna, chocolate,
and black; it is found only in these charcoal rings. Let us go farther
on. Look at that splendid bright, orange-yellow fungus growing amongst
the moss in large tufts as it were. Each plant has a tender stem with
short branches; what a number are growing together with roots or lower
portions of the stem closely intertwined! This is _Clavaria
fastigiata_. Here we meet with the sticky _Gomphidius viscidus_, and
here with the handsome _Tricholoma scalpturatus_, and the lovely _T.
rutilans_. I am obliged to use Latin names as there are no English
ones. The ground here is covered with the small _Clitocyle fragrans_;
it smells like newly-mown hay. And now we meet with various _Boleti_.
Look at the under surface; you see it is riddled with numerous small
holes, very unlike the gills of the mushroom and all agarics. We shall
find _Boletus luteus_, _B. flavus_, _B. edulis_, _B. scaber_, the
handsome but poisonous _B. luridus_. _Boletus edulis_ is, as its name
imports, very good to eat and perfectly wholesome; so, too, is _B.
scaber_ and _B. luteus_. Holloa! what bird has just fled before us? it
is a woodcock evidently, and has probably lately arrived in this
country from the south of Europe, though woodcocks occasionally reside
here all through the year. The woodcock is a very handsome bird with
its dark mottled brown plumage, long bill, and large, full, black
eyes. "What do these birds feed upon?" asked Willy. You often hear
people say "they live upon suction," and "do not eat any food." That I
fancy is a common belief amongst sportsmen. It is, however, altogether
a mistake; for these birds eat quantities of earthworms, as has
frequently been witnessed. I will give an instance of this in the case
of a woodcock kept in an aviary somewhere in Spain. "There was a
fountain perpetually flowing to keep the ground moist and trees
planted for the same purpose; fresh sod was brought to it, the richest
in worms that could be found. In vain did the worms seek concealment;
when the woodcock was hungry it discovered them by the smell, stuck
its beak into the ground, but never higher than the nostrils, drew
them out singly, and raising its bill into the air, it extended upon
it the whole length of the worm, and in this way swallowed it smoothly
without any action of the jaws. This whole operation was performed in
an instant, and the action of the woodcock was so equal and
imperceptible that it seemed doing nothing; it never missed its aim;
for this reason, and because it never plunged its bill beyond the
