
"Hit went on dis a-way twel atter w'ile ole Miss Fox year de racket, en
den she lissen, en she know dat 'er ole man holler'n' fer de quills, en
she fotch um out en gun um ter Brer Tarrypin, en Brer Tarrypin, he let
go he holt. He let go he holt," Uncle Remus went on, "but long time
atter dat, w'en Brer Fox go ter pay he calls, he hatter go
_hoppity-fetchity, hoppity-fetchity_."

The old man folded his hands in his lap, and sat quietly gazing into the
lightwood fire. Presently he said:--

"I 'speck Miss Sally blessin' us all right now, en fus' news you know
she'll h'ist up en have Mars John a-trapesin' down yer; en ef she do
dat, den ter-morrer mawnin' my brekkuss'll be col', en lakwise my
dinner, en ef dey's sump'n' w'at I 'spizes hit's col' vittels."

Thereupon Uncle Remus arose, shook himself, peered out into the night to
discover that the rain had nearly ceased, and then made ready to carry
the little boy to his mother. Long before the chickens had crowed for
midnight, the child, as well as the old man, had been transported to the
land where myths and fables cease to be wonderful,--the land of pleasant
dreams.


FOOTNOTES:

[20] An allusion to the primitive mode of cleaning hogs by heating
rocks, and placing them in a barrel or tank of water.

[21] This word "lonesome," as used by the negroes, is the equivalent of
"thrilling," "romantic," etc., and in that sense is very expressive.

[22] An inquiry after his health. Another form is: "How does yo'
corporosity seem ter segashuate?"

[23] Exercise himself.




XVI

HOW BRER FOX FAILED TO GET HIS GRAPES


One night the little boy failed to make his appearance at the accustomed
hour, and the next morning the intelligence that the child was sick went
forth from the "big house." Uncle Remus was told that it had been
necessary during the night to call in two physicians. When this
information was imparted to the old man, there was an expression upon
his countenance of awe not unmixed with indignation. He gave vent to the
latter:--

"Dar now! Two un um! W'en dat chile rize up, ef rize up he do, he'll des
nat'ally be a shadder. Yer I is, gwine on eighty year, en I ain't tuck
none er dat ar docter truck yit, ceppin' it's dish yer flas' er
poke-root w'at ole Miss Favers fix up fer de stiffness in my j'ints.
Dey'll come en dey'll go, en dey'll po' in der jollup yer, en slap on
der fly-plarster dar, en sprinkle der calomy yander, twel bimeby dat
chile won't look like hisse'f. Dat's w'at! En mo'n dat, hit's mighty
kuse unter me dat ole folks kin go 'long en stan' up ter de rack en
gobble up der 'lowance, en yit chilluns is got ter be strucken down. Ef
Miss Sally'll des tu'n dem docter mens loose onter me, I lay I lick up
der physic twel dey go off 'stonish'd."

But no appeal of this nature was made to Uncle Remus. The illness of the
little boy was severe, but not fatal. He took his medicine and improved,
until finally even the doctors pronounced him convalescent. But he was
very weak, and it was a fortnight before he was permitted to leave his
bed. He was restless, and yet his term of imprisonment was full of
pleasure. Every night after supper Uncle Remus would creep softly into
the back piazza, place his hat carefully on the floor, rap gently on the
door by way of announcement, and so pass into the nursery. How patient
his vigils, how tender his ministrations, only the mother of the little
boy knew; how comfortable and refreshing the change from the bed to the
strong arms of Uncle Remus, only the little boy could say.

Almost the first manifestation of the child's convalescence was the
renewal of his interest in the wonderful adventures of Brother Rabbit,
Brother Fox, and the other brethren who flourished in that strange past
over which this modern AEsop had thrown the veil of fable. "Miss Sally,"
as Uncle Remus called the little boy's mother, sitting in an adjoining
room, heard the youngster pleading for a story, and after a while she
heard the old man clear up his throat with a great affectation of
formality and begin.

"Dey ain't skacely no p'int whar ole Brer Rabbit en ole Brer Fox made
der 'greements side wid one er 'n'er; let 'lone dat, dey wuz one p'int
'twix' 'um w'ich it wuz same ez fier en tow, en dat wuz Miss Meadows en
de gals. Little ez you might 'speck, dem same creeturs wuz bofe un um
flyin' 'roun' Miss Meadows en de gals. Ole Brer Rabbit, he'd go dar, en
dar he'd fine ole Brer Fox settin' up gigglin' wid de gals, en den he'd
skuze hisse'f, he would, en gallop down de big road a piece, en paw up
de san' same lak dat ar ball-face steer w'at tuck'n tuck off yo' pa'
coat-tail las' Feberwary. En lakwise ole Brer Fox, he'd sa'nter in, en
fine old man Rab. settin' 'longside er de gals, en den he'd go out down
de road en grab a 'simmon-bush in he mouf, en nat'ally gnyaw de bark
off'n it. In dem days, honey," continued Uncle Remus, responding to a
look of perplexity on the child's face, "creeturs wuz wuss dan w'at dey
is now. Dey wuz dat--lots wuss.

"Dey went on dis a-way twel, bimeby, Brer Rabbit 'gun ter cas' 'roun',
he did, fer ter see ef he can't bus' inter some er Brer Fox
'rangerments, en, atter w'ile, one day w'en he wer' settin' down by de
side er de road wukkin up de diffunt oggyment w'at strak pun he mine, en
fixin' up he tricks, des 'bout dat time he year a clatter up de long
green lane, en yer come ole Brer
Fox_toobookity--bookity--bookity-book--_lopin' 'long mo' samer dan a
bay colt in de bolly-patch. En he wuz all primp up, too, mon, en he look
slick en shiny lak he des come outen de sto'. Ole man Rab., he sot dar,
he did, en w'en ole Brer Fox come gallopin' 'long, Brer Rabbit, he up'n
hail 'im. Brer Fox, he fotch up, en dey pass de time er day wid one er
nudder monst'us perlite; en den, bimeby atter w'ile, Brer Rabbit, he
up'n say, sezee, dat he got some mighty good news fer Brer Fox; en Brer
Fox, he up'n ax 'im w'at is it. Den Brer Rabbit, he sorter scratch he
year wid his behime foot en say, sezee:--

"'I wuz takin' a walk day 'fo' yistiddy,' sezee, 'w'en de fus' news I
know'd I run up gin de bigges' en de fattes' bunch er grapes dat I ever
lay eyes on. Dey wuz dat fat en dat big,' sezee, 'dat de natal juice wuz
des drappin' fum um, en de bees wuz a-swawmin' atter de honey, en little
ole Jack Sparrer en all er his fambly conneckshun wuz skeetin' 'roun'
dar dippin' in der bills,' sezee.

"Right den en dar," Uncle Remus went on, "Brer Fox mouf 'gun ter water,
en he look outer he eye like he de bes' frien' w'at Brer Rabbit got in
de roun' worl'. He done fergit all 'bout de gals, en he sorter sidle up
ter Brer Rabbit, he did, en he say, sezee:--

"'Come on, Brer Rabbit,' sezee, 'en less you 'n me go git dem ar grapes
'fo' deyer all gone,' sezee. En den ole Brer Rabbit, he laff, he did, en
up'n 'spon', sezee:--

"'I hungry myse'f, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'but I ain't hankerin' atter
grapes, en I'll be in monst'us big luck ef I kin rush 'roun' yer some'rs
en scrape up a bait er pusley time nuff fer ter keep de breff in my
body. En yit,' sezee,' ef you take'n rack off atter deze yer grapes,
w'at Miss Meadows en de gals gwine do? I lay dey got yo' name in de
pot,' sezee.

"'Ez ter dat,' sez ole Brer Fox, sezee, 'I kin drap 'roun' en see de
ladies atterwards,' sezee.

"'Well, den, ef dat's yo' game,' sez ole man Rab., sezee, 'I kin squot
right flat down yer on de groun' en p'int out de way des de same ez
leadin' you dar by de han',' sezee; en den Brer Rabbit sorter chaw on he
cud lak he gedder'n up his 'membunce, en he up'n say, sezee:--

"'You know dat ar place whar you went atter sweetgum fer Miss Meadows en
de gals t'er day?' sezee.

"Brer Fox 'low dat he know dat ar place same ez he do he own
tater-patch.

"'Well, den,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'de grapes ain't dar. You git ter
de sweetgum,' sezee, 'en den you go up de branch twel you come ter a
little patch er bamboo brier--but de grapes ain't dar. Den you follow
yo' lef' han' en strike 'cross de hill twel you come ter dat big red oak
root--but de grapes ain't dar. On you goes down de hill twel you come
ter 'n'er branch, en on dat branch dars a dogwood-tree leanin' 'way
over, en nigh dat dogwood dars a vine, en in dat vine, dar you'll fine
yo' grapes. Deyer dat ripe,' sez ole Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'dat dey look
like deyer done melt tergedder, en I speck you'll fine um full er bugs,
but you kin take dat fine bushy tail er yone, Brer Fox,' sezee, 'en
bresh dem bugs away.'

"Brer Fox 'low he much 'blige, en den he put out atter de grapes in a
han'-gallop, en w'en he done got outer sight, en likewise outer year'n,
Brer Rabbit, he take'n git a blade er grass, he did, en tickle hisse'f
in de year, en den he holler en laff, en laff en holler, twel he hatter
lay down fer ter git he breff back 'gin.

"Den, atter so long time, Brer Rabbit he jump up, he do, en take atter
Brer Fox, but Brer Fox, he ain't look ter de right ner de lef', en
needer do he look behime; he des keep a-rackin' 'long twel he come ter
de sweetgum-tree, en den he tu'n up de branch twel he come ter de bamboo
brier, en den he tu'n squar ter de lef' twel he come ter de big red-oak
root, en den he keep on down he hill twel he come ter de yuther branch,
en dar he see de dogwood; en mo'n dat, dar nigh de dogwood he see de
vine, en in dat vine dar wuz de big bunch er grapes. Sho' nuff, dey wuz
all kivvud wid bugs.

"Ole Brer Rabbit, he'd bin a-pushin' 'long atter Brer Fox, but he des
hatter scratch gravel fer ter keep up. Las' he hove in sight, en he lay
off in de weeds, he did, fer ter watch Brer Fox motions. Present'y Brer
Fox crope up de leanin' dogwood-tree twel he come nigh de grapes, en den
he sorter ballunce hisse'f on a lim' en gun um a swipe wid his big bushy
tail, fer ter bresh off de bugs. But, bless yo' soul, honey! no sooner
is he done dat dan he fetch a squall w'ich Miss Meadows vow atterwards
she year plum ter her house, en down he come--_kerblim_!"

"What was the matter, Uncle Remus?" the little boy asked.

"Law, honey! dat seetful Brer Rabbit done fool ole Brer Fox. Dem ar
grapes all so fine wuz needer mo' ner less dan a great big was'-nes', en
dem bugs wuz deze yer red wassies--deze yer speeshy w'at's rank pizen
fum cen' ter cen'. W'en Brer Fox drap fum de tree de wassies dey drap
wid 'im, en de way dey wom ole Brer Fox up wuz sinful. Dey ain't mo'n
tetch' im 'fo' dey had 'im het up ter de b'ilin' p'int. Brer Fox, he
run, en he kick, en he scratch, en he bite, en he scramble, en he
holler, en he howl, but look lak dey git wuss en wuss. One time, hit
seem lak Brer Fox en his new 'quaintance wuz makin' todes Brer Rabbit,
but dey ain't no sooner p'int dat way, dan ole Brer Rabbit, he up'n make
a break, en he went sailin' thoo de woods wuss'n wunner dese
whully-win's, en he ain't stop twel he fetch up at Miss Meadows.

"Miss Meadows en de gals, dey ax 'im, dey did, wharbouts wuz Brer Fox,
en Brer Rabbit, he up'n 'spon' dat he done gone a-grape-huntin', en den
Miss Meadows, she 'low, she did:--

"'Law, gals! is you ever year de beat er dat? En dat, too, w'en Brer Fox
done say he comin' ter dinner,' sez she. 'I lay I done wid Brer Fox,
kaze you can't put no pennunce in deze yer men-folks,' sez she. 'Yer de
dinner bin done dis long time, en we bin a-waitin' lak de quality. But
now I'm done wid Brer Fox,' sez she.

"Wid dat, Miss Meadows en de gals dey ax Brer Rabbit fer ter stay ter
dinner, en Brer Rabbit, he sorter make like he wanter be skuze, but
bimeby he tuck a cheer en sot um out. He tuck a cheer," continued Uncle
Remus, "en he ain't bin dar long twel he look out en spy ole Brer Fox
gwine 'long by, en w'at do Brer Rabbit do but call Miss Meadows en de
gals en p'int 'im out? Soon's dey seed 'im dey sot up a monst'us
gigglement, kaze Brer Fox wuz dat swell up twel little mo'n he'd a bus'.
He head wuz swell up, en down ter he legs, dey wuz swell up. Miss
Meadows, she up'n say dat Brer Fox look like he done gone en got all de
grapes dey wuz in de neighborhoods, en one er de yuther gals, she
squeal, she did, en say:--

"'Law, ain't you 'shame', en right yer 'fo' Brer Rabbit!'

"En den dey hilt der han's 'fo' der face en giggle des like gals duz
deze days."




XVII

BRER FOX FIGURES AS AN INCENDIARY


The next night the little boy had been thoughtful enough to save some of
his supper for Uncle Remus, and to this "Miss Sally" had added, on her
own account, a large piece of fruit-cake. The old man appeared to be
highly pleased.

"Ef ders enny kinder cake w'at I likes de mos', hit's dish yer kine
w'at's got reezins strowed 'mongs' it. Wid sick folks, now," he
continued, holding up the cake and subjecting it to a critical
examination, "dish yer hunk 'ud mighty nigh las' a mont', but wid a well
man lak I is, hit won't las' a minnit."

And it did n't. It disappeared so suddenly that the little boy laughed
aloud, and wanted Uncle Remus to have some more cake; but the latter
protested that he did n't come there "fer ter git founder'd," but merely
to see "ef somebody's strenk uz strong 'nuff fer ter stan' 'n'er tale."
The little boy said if Uncle Remus meant him, he was sure his health was
good enough to listen to any number of stories. Whereupon, the old man,
without any tantalizing preliminaries, began:--

"Brer Fox done bin fool so much by Brer Rabbit dat he sorter look 'roun'
fer ter see ef he can't ketch up wid some er de yuther creeturs, en so,
one day, w'iles he gwine long down de big road, who should he strak up
wid but old Brer Tarrypin. Brer Fox sorter lick his chops, en 'low dat
ef he kin fling ennybody en gin um all-under holt, Brer Tarrypin de man,
en he march up, mighty biggity, like he gwine ter make spote un 'im.
W'en he git up nigh 'nuff, Brer Fox hail 'im:--

"'How you 'speck you fine yo'se'f dis mawnin', Brer Tarrypin?' sezee.

"'Slow, Brer Fox--mighty slow,' sez Brer Tarrypin, sezee. 'Day in en day
out I'm mighty slow, en it look lak I'm a-gittin' slower; I'm slow en
po'ly, Brer Fox--how you come on?' sezee.

"'Oh, I'm slanchindickler, same ez I allers is,' sez Brer Fox, sezee.
'W'at make yo' eye so red, Brer Tarrypin?' sezee.

"'Hit's all 'longer de trouble I see, Brer Fox,' sez Brer Tarrypin,
sezee. 'I see trouble en you see none; trouble come en pile up on
trouble,' sezee.

"'Law, Brer Tarrypin!' sez Brer Fox, sezee, 'you ain't see no trouble
yit. Ef you wanter see sho' 'nuff trouble, you des oughter go 'longer
me; I'm de man w'at kin show you trouble,' sezee.

"'Well, den,' sez ole Brer Tarrypin, sezee, 'ef youer de man w'at kin
show me trouble, den I'm de man w'at want a glimpse un it,' sezee.

"Den Brer Fox, he ax Brer Tarrypin is he seed de Ole Boy, en den Brer
Tarrypin, he make answer dat he ain't seed 'im yit, but he year tell un
'im. Wid dat, Brer Fox 'low de Ole Boy de kinder trouble he bin talkin'
'bout, en den Brer Tarrypin, he up'n ax how he gwine see 'im. Brer Fox,
he tak'n lay out de pogrance, en he up'n tell Brer Tarrypin dat ef he'll
step up dar in de middle er dat ole broom-sage fiel', en squot dar a
spell, 't won't be no time 'fo' he'll ketch a glimpse er de Ole Boy.

"Brer Tarrypin know'd ders sump'n' wrong some'rs, yit he mos' too
flat-flooted fer ter have enny scuffle wid Brer Fox, en he say ter
hisse'f dat he'll go 'long en des trus' ter luck; en den he 'low dat ef
Brer Fox he'p 'im 'cross de fence, he b'lieve he'll go up en resk one
eye on de Ole Boy. Co'se Brer Fox hope 'im 'cross, en no sooner is he
good en gone, dan Brer Fox, he fix up fer ter make 'im see trouble. He
lipt out ter Miss Meadows house, Brer Fox did, en make like he wanter
borry a chunk er fier fer ter light he pipe, en he tuck dat chunk, en he
run 'roun' de fiel', en he sot de grass a fier, en't wa'n't long 'fo' it
look lak de whole face er de yeth waz a-blazin' up."

"Did it burn the Terrapin up?" interrupted the little boy.

"Don't push me, honey; don't make me git de kyart 'fo' de hoss. W'en ole
Brer Tarrypin 'gun ter wade thoo de straw, de ve'y fus' man w'at he
strak up wid wuz ole man Rabbit layin' dar sleepin' on de shady side uv
a tussock. Brer Rabbit, he one er deze yer kinder mens w'at sleep wid
der eye wide open, en he wuz 'wake d'reckly he year Brer Tarrypin
scufflin' en scramblin' 'long thoo de grass. Atter dey shuck han's en ax
'bout one er n'er fambly, hit ain't take long fer Brer Tarrypin fer ter
tell Brer Rabbit w'at fotch 'im dar, en Brer Rabbit, he up'n say,
sezee:--

"'Hit's des na'tally a born blessin' dat you struck up wid me w'en you
did,' sezee, 'kaze little mo' en bofe un us would 'a' bin bobbycu'd,'
sezee.

"Dis kinder tarrify Brer Tarrypin, en he say he wanter git out fum dar;
but Brer Rabbit he 'low he'd take keer un 'im, en he tuck'n tuck Brer
Tarrypin in de middle er de fiel' whar dey wuz a big holler stump. Onter
dis stump Brer Rabbit lif' Brer Tarrypin, en den he lip up hisse'f en
crope in de holler, en, bless yo' soul, honey, w'en de fier come
a-snippin' en a-snappin', dar dey sot des ez safe en ez snug ez you iz
in yo' bed dis minnit.

"W'en de blaze blow over, Brer Tarrypin look 'roun', en he see Brer Fox
runnin' up'n down de fence lak he huntin' sump'n'. Den Brer Rabbit, he
stick he head up outen de hole, en likewise he seed 'im, and den he
holler like Brer Tarrypin" (Here Uncle Remus puckered his voice, so to
say, in a most amusing squeak):

"'Brer Fox! Brer Fox! O Brer Fox! Run yer--we done kotch Brer Rabbit!'

"En den Brer Fox, he jump up on de top rail er de fence en fetch a
spring dat lan' 'im 'way out in de bu'nin' grass, en it hurted 'im en
sting 'im in de footses dat bad, dat he squeal en he roll, en de mo' he
roll de wuss it bu'n him, en Brer Rabbit en Brer Tarrypin dey des holler
en laff. Bimeby Brer Fox git out, en off he put down de road, limpin'
fus' on one foot en den on de yuther."

The little boy laughed, and then there was a long silence--so long,
indeed, that Uncle Remus's "Miss Sally," sewing in the next room,
concluded to investigate it. An exceedingly interesting tableau met her
sight. The little child had wandered into the land of dreams with a
smile on his face. He lay with one of his little hands buried in both of
Uncle Remus's, while the old man himself was fast asleep, with his head
thrown back and his mouth wide open. "Miss Sally" shook him by the
shoulder and held up her finger to prevent him from speaking. He was
quiet until she held the lamp for him to get down the back steps, and
then she heard him say, in an indignantly mortified tone:--

"Now den, Miss Sally'll be a-riggin' me 'bout noddin', but stidder dat
she better be glad dat I ain't bus loose en sno' en 'larm de house--let
'lone dat sick baby. Dat's w'at!"




XVIII

A DREAM AND A STORY


"I dreamed all about Brother Fox and Brother Rabbit last night, Uncle
Remus," exclaimed the little boy when the old man came in after supper
and took his seat by the side of the trundle-bed; "I dreamed that
Brother Fox had wings and tried to catch Brother Rabbit by flying after
him."

"I don't 'spute it, honey, dat I don't!" replied the old man, in a tone
which implied that he was quite prepared to believe the dream itself was
true. "Manys en manys de time, deze long nights en deze rainy spells,
dat I sets down dar in my house over ag'in de chimbley-jam--I sets dar
en I dozes, en it seem lak dat ole Brer Rabbit, he'll stick he head in
de crack er de do' en see my eye periently shot, en den he'll beckon
back at de yuther creeturs, en den dey'll all come slippin' in on der
tip-toes, en dey'll set dar en run over de ole times wid one er n'er, en
crack der jokes same ez dey useter. En den ag'in," continued the old
man, shutting his eyes and giving to his voice a gruesome intonation
quite impossible to describe,--"en den ag'in hit look lak dat Brer
Rabbit'll gin de wink all 'roun', en den dey'll tu'n in en git up a
reg'lar juberlee. Brer Rabbit, he'll retch up en take down de trivet, en
Brer Fox, he'll snatch up de griddle, en Brer B'ar, he'll lay holt er de
pot-hooks, en ole Brer Tarrypin, he'll grab up de fryin' pan en dar
dey'll have it, up en down, en' roun' en 'roun'. Hit seem like ter me
dat ef I kin git my mine smoove down en ketch up some er dem ar chunes
w'at dey sets dar en plays, den I 'd lean back yer in dish yer cheer en
I'd intrance you wid um, twel, by dis time termorrer night, you'd be
settin' up dar at de supper-table 'sputin' 'longer yo' little brer 'bout
de 'lasses pitcher. Dem creeturs dey sets dar," Uncle Remus went on, "en
dey plays dem kinder chunes w'at moves you fum 'way back yander; en
manys de time w'en I gits lonesome kaze dey ain't nobody year um
'ceppin' it's me. Dey ain't no tellin' de chunes dey is in dat trivet,
en in dat griddle, en in dat fryin'-pan er mine; dat dey ain't. W'en dem
creeturs walks in en snatches um down, dey lays Miss Sally's pianner in
de shade, en Mars John's flute, hit ain't nowhars."

"Do they play on them just like a band, Uncle Remus?" inquired the
little boy, who was secretly in hopes that the illusion would not be
destroyed.

"Dey comes des lak I tell you, honey. W'en I shets my eyes en dozes, dey
comes en dey plays, but w'en I opens my eyes dey ain't dar. Now, den,
w'en dat's de shape er marters, w'at duz I do? I des shets my eyes en
hol' um shot, en let um come en play dem ole time chunes twel long atter
bed-time done come en gone."

Uncle Remus paused, as though he expected the little boy to ask some
question or make some comment, but the child said nothing, and presently
the old man resumed, in a matter-of-fact tone:--

"Dat dream er yone, honey, 'bout Brer Fox wid wings, fetches up de time
w'en Brer Fox en Brer Wolf had der fallin' out wid one er n'er--but I
'speck I done tole you 'bout dat."

"Oh, no, you have n't, Uncle Remus! You know you have n't!" the little
boy exclaimed.

"Well, den, one day, atter so long a time, Brer Wolf en Brer Fox dey got
ter 'sputin' 'longer one er n'er. Brer Wolf, he tuck'n 'buse Brer Fox
kaze Brer Fox let Brer Rabbit fool 'im, en den Brer Fox, he tuck'n quol
back at Brer Wolf, kaze Brer Wolf let ole man Rabbit lakwise fool 'im.
Dey keep on 'sputin' en 'sputin', twel bimeby dey clinch, en Brer Wolf,
bein' de bigges' man, 't would n't a bin long 'fo' he'd a wool Brer Fox,
but Brer Fox, he watch he chance, he did, en he gin 'im leg bail."

"Gave him what, Uncle Remus?"

"Gin 'im leg bail, honey. He juk loose fum Brer Wolf, Brer Fox did, en,
gentermens, he des mosey thoo de woods. Brer Wolf, he tuck atter 'm, he
did, en dar dey had it, en Brer Wolf push Brer Fox so close, dat de
onliest way Brer Fox kin save he hide is ter fine a hole some'rs, en de
fus' holler tree dat he come 'cross, inter it he dove. Brer Wolf fetcht
a grab at 'im, but he wuz des in time fer ter be too late.

"Den Brer Wolf, he sot dar, he did, en he study en study how he gwine
git Brer Fox out, en Brer Fox, he lay in dar, he did, en he study en
study w'at Brer Wolf gwine do. Bimeby, Brer Wolf, he tuck'n gedder up a
whole lot er chunks, en rocks, en sticks, en den he tuck'n fill up de
hole what Brer Fox went in so Brer Fox can't git out. Wiles dis wuz
gwine on, ole Brer Tukky Buzzud, he wuz sailin' 'roun' 'way up in de
