There were trees here and there and green bushes, while throughout the
thick grass were scattered brilliantly colored flowers. About a mile
away was a low hill that hid from them all the country beyond it, so
they realized they could not tell much about the country until they had
crossed the hill.

The Red Wagon having been left behind, it was now necessary to make
other arrangements for traveling. The Lion told Dorothy she could ride
upon his back, as she had often done before, and the Woozy said he could
easily carry both Trot and the Patchwork Girl. Betsy still had her mule,
Hank, and Button-Bright and the Wizard could sit together upon the long,
thin back of the Sawhorse, but they took care to soften their seat with
a pad of blankets before they started. Thus mounted, the adventurers
started for the hill, which was reached after a brief journey.

As they mounted the crest and gazed beyond the hill they discovered not
far away a walled city, from the towers and spires of which gay banners
were flying. It was not a very big city, indeed, but its walls were very
high and thick and it appeared that the people who lived there must
have feared attack by a powerful enemy, else they would not have
surrounded their dwellings with so strong a barrier.

[Illustration]

There was no path leading from the mountains to the city, and this
proved that the people seldom or never visited the whirling hills; but
our friends found the grass soft and agreeable to travel over and with
the city before them they could not well lose their way. When they drew
nearer to the walls, the breeze carried to their ears the sound of
music--dim at first but growing louder as they advanced.

"That doesn't seem like a very terr'ble place," remarked Dorothy.

"Well, it _looks_ all right," replied Trot, from her seat on the Woozy,
"but looks can't always be trusted."

"My looks can," said Scraps. "I _look_ patchwork, and I _am_ patchwork,
and no one but a blind owl could ever doubt that I'm the Patchwork
Girl." Saying which she turned a somersault off the Woozy and, alighting
on her feet, began wildly dancing about.

"Are owls ever blind?" asked Trot.

"Always, in the daytime," said Button-Bright. "But Scraps can see with
her button eyes both day and night. Isn't it queer?"

"It's queer that buttons can see at all," answered Trot; "but--good
gracious! what's become of the city?"

"I was going to ask that myself," said Dorothy. "It's gone!"

The animals came to a sudden halt, for the city had really
disappeared--walls and all--and before them lay the clear, unbroken
sweep of the country.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the Wizard. "This is rather disagreeable. It is
annoying to travel almost to a place and then find it is not there."

"Where can it be, then?" asked Dorothy. "It cert'nly was there a minute
ago."

"I can hear the music yet," declared Button-Bright, and when they all
listened the strains of music could plainly be heard.

"Oh! there's the city--over at the left," called Scraps, and turning
their eyes they saw the walls and towers and fluttering banners far to
the left of them.

"We must have lost our way," suggested Dorothy.

"Nonsense," said the Lion. "I, and all the other animals, have been
tramping straight toward the city ever since we first saw it."

"Then how does it happen--"

"Never mind," interrupted the Wizard, "we are no farther from it than we
were before. It is in a different direction, that's all; so let us hurry
and get there before it again escapes us."

So on they went, directly toward the city, which seemed only a couple of
miles distant; but when they had traveled less than a mile it suddenly
disappeared again. Once more they paused, somewhat discouraged, but in a
moment the button eyes of Scraps again discovered the city, only this
time it was just behind them, in the direction from which they had come.

"Goodness gracious!" cried Dorothy. "There's surely something wrong with
that city. Do you s'pose it's on wheels, Wizard?"

"It may not be a city at all," he replied, looking toward it with a
speculative gaze.

"What _could_ it be, then?"

"Just an illusion."

"What's that?" asked Trot.

"Something you think you see and don't see."

"I can't believe that," said Button-Bright. "If we only saw it, we might
be mistaken, but if we can see it and hear it, too, it must be there."

"Where?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"Somewhere near us," he insisted.

"We will have to go back, I suppose," said the Woozy, with a sigh.

So back they turned and headed for the walled city until it disappeared
again, only to reappear at the right of them. They were constantly
getting nearer to it, however, so they kept their faces turned toward it
as it flitted here and there to all points of the compass. Presently the
Lion, who was leading the procession, halted abruptly and cried out:
"Ouch!"

"What's the matter?" asked Dorothy.

"Ouch--ouch!" repeated the Lion, and leaped backward so suddenly that
Dorothy nearly tumbled from his back. At the same time Hank the Mule
yelled "Ouch!" almost as loudly as the Lion had done, and he also
pranced backward a few paces.

"It's the thistles," said Betsy. "They prick their legs."

Hearing this, all looked down, and sure enough the ground was thick with
thistles, which covered the plain from the point where they stood way up
to the walls of the mysterious city. No pathways through them could be
seen at all; here the soft grass ended and the growth of thistles began.

"They're the prickliest thistles I ever felt," grumbled the Lion. "My
legs smart yet from their stings, though I jumped out of them as quick
as I could."

"Here is a new difficulty," remarked the Wizard in a grieved tone. "The
city has stopped hopping around, it is true; but how are we to get to
it, over this mass of prickers?"

"They can't hurt _me_," said the thick-skinned Woozy, advancing
fearlessly and trampling among the thistles.

"Nor me," said the Wooden Sawhorse.

"But the Lion and the Mule cannot stand the prickers," asserted Dorothy,
"and we can't leave them behind."

"Must we all go back?" asked Trot.

"Course not!" replied Button-Bright scornfully. "Always, when there's
trouble, there's a way out of it, if you can find it."

"I wish the Scarecrow was here," said Scraps, standing on her head on
the Woozy's square back. "His splendid brains would soon show us how to
conquer this field of thistles."

"What's the matter with _your_ brains?" asked the boy.

"Nothing," she said, making a flip-flop into the thistles and dancing
among them without feeling their sharp points. "I could tell you in
half a minute how to get over the thistles, if I wanted to."

"Tell us, Scraps!" begged Dorothy.

"I don't want to wear my brains out with overwork," replied the
Patchwork Girl.

"Don't you love Ozma? And don't you want to find her?" asked Betsy
reproachfully.

"Yes, indeed," said Scraps, walking on her hands as an acrobat does at
the circus.

"Well, we can't find Ozma unless we get past these thistles," declared
Dorothy.

Scraps danced around them two or three times, without reply. Then she
said:

"Don't look at me, you stupid folks; look at those blankets."

The Wizard's face brightened at once.

"Of course!" he exclaimed. "Why didn't we think of those blankets
before?"

"Because you haven't magic brains," laughed Scraps. "Such brains as you
have are of the common sort that grow in your heads, like weeds in a
garden. I'm sorry for you people who have to be born in order to be
alive."

But the Wizard was not listening to her. He quickly removed the blankets
from the back of the Sawhorse and spread one of them upon the thistles,
just next the grass. The thick cloth rendered the prickers harmless, so
the Wizard walked over this first blanket and spread the second one
farther on, in the direction of the phantom city.

"These blankets," said he, "are for the Lion and the Mule to walk upon.
The Sawhorse and the Woozy can walk on the thistles."

So the Lion and the Mule walked over the first blanket and stood upon
the second one until the Wizard had picked up the one they had passed
over and spread it in front of them, when they advanced to that one and
waited while the one behind them was again spread in front.

"This is slow work," said the Wizard, "but it will get us to the city
after a while."

"The city is a good half mile away, yet," announced Button-Bright.

"And this is awful hard work for the Wizard," added Trot.

"Why couldn't the Lion ride on the Woozy's back?" asked Dorothy. "It's a
big, flat back, and the Woozy's mighty strong. Perhaps the Lion wouldn't
fall off."

"You may try it, if you like," said the Woozy to the Lion. "I can take
you to the city in a jiffy and then come back for Hank."

[Illustration]

"I'm--I'm afraid," said the Cowardly Lion. He was twice as big as the
Woozy.

"Try it," pleaded Dorothy.

"And take a tumble among the thistles?" asked the Lion reproachfully.
But when the Woozy came close to him the big beast suddenly bounded upon
its back and managed to balance himself there, although forced to hold
his four legs so close together that he was in danger of toppling over.
The great weight of the monster Lion did not seem to affect the Woozy,
who called to his rider: "Hold on tight!" and ran swiftly over the
thistles toward the city.

The others stood on the blankets and watched the strange sight
anxiously. Of course the Lion couldn't "hold on tight" because there was
nothing to hold to, and he swayed from side to side as if likely to fall
off any moment. Still, he managed to stick to the Woozy's back until
they were close to the walls of the city, when he leaped to the ground.
Next moment the Woozy came dashing back at full speed.

"There's a little strip of ground next the wall where there are no
thistles," he told them, when he had reached the adventurers once more.
"Now, then, friend Hank, see if you can ride as well as the Lion did."

"Take the others first," proposed the Mule. So the Sawhorse and the
Woozy made a couple of trips over the thistles to the city walls and
carried all the people in safety, Dorothy holding little Toto in her
arms. The travelers then sat in a group on a little hillock, just
outside the wall, and looked at the great blocks of gray stone and
waited for the Woozy to bring Hank to them. The Mule was very awkward
and his legs trembled so badly that more than once they thought he would
tumble off, but finally he reached them in safety and the entire party
was now reunited. More than that, they had reached the city that had
eluded them for so long and in so strange a manner.

"The gates must be around the other side," said the Wizard. "Let us
follow the curve of the wall until we reach an opening in it."

"Which way?" asked Dorothy.

"We must guess at that," he replied. "Suppose we go to the left? One
direction is as good as another."

They formed in marching order and went around the city wall to the left.
It wasn't a big city, as I have said, but to go way around it, outside
the high wall, was quite a walk, as they became aware. But around it our
adventurers went, without finding any sign of a gateway or other
opening. When they had returned to the little mound from which they had
started, they dismounted from the animals and again seated themselves on
the grassy mound.

"It's mighty queer, isn't it?" asked Button-Bright.

"There must be _some_ way for the people to get out and in," declared
Dorothy. "Do you s'pose they have flying machines, Wizard?"

"No," he replied, "for in that case they would be flying all over the
Land of Oz, and we know they have not done that. Flying machines are
unknown here. I think it more likely that the people use ladders to get
over the walls."

"It would be an awful climb, over that high stone wall," said Betsy.

"Stone, is it?" cried Scraps, who was again dancing wildly around, for
she never tired and could never keep still for long.

"Course it's stone," answered Betsy scornfully. "Can't you see?"

"Yes," said Scraps, going closer, "I can _see_ the wall, but I can't
_feel_ it." And then, with her arms outstretched, she did a very queer
thing. She walked right into the wall and disappeared.

"For goodness sake!" cried Dorothy amazed, as indeed they all were.

[Illustration]




The High Coco-Lorum of Thi

[Illustration]

CHAPTER 9


And now the Patchwork Girl came dancing out of the wall again.

"Come on!" she called. "It isn't there. There isn't any wall at all."

"What! No wall?" exclaimed the Wizard.

"Nothing like it," said Scraps. "It's a make-believe. You see it, but it
isn't. Come on into the city; we've been wasting time."

With this she danced into the wall again and once more disappeared.
Button-Bright, who was rather venturesome, dashed away after her and
also became invisible to them. The others followed more cautiously,
stretching out their hands to feel the wall and finding, to their
astonishment, that they could feel nothing because nothing opposed them.
They walked on a few steps and found themselves in the streets of a very
beautiful city. Behind them they again saw the wall, grim and forbidding
as ever; but now they knew it was merely an illusion, prepared to keep
strangers from entering the city.
