    I lived by myself,
  And all the bread and cheese I got
    I put upon the shelf.
  But the rats and the mice
    They made such a strife,
  I was forced to go to London
    To get myself a wife:
  The roads were so bad,
    And the lanes were so narrow,
  I was forced to bring my wife home
    In a wheelbarrow.
  The wheelbarrow broke,
    And my wife had a fall,
  Down came the wheelbarrow,
    My wife, and all.




[Illustration]

  Gay go up and gay go down,
  To ring the bells of London town.

  Oranges and lemons,
  Say the bells of St. Clement's.

  Bull's eyes and targets,
  Say the bells of St. Marg'ret's.

  Brickbats and tiles,
  Say the bells of St. Giles'.

  Halfpence and farthings,
  Say the bells of St. Martin's.

  Pancakes and fritters,
  Say the bells of St. Peter's.

  Two sticks and an apple,
  Say the bells of Whitechapel.

  Pokers and tongs,
  Say the bells of St. John's.




[Illustration]

  Kettles and pans,
  Say the bells of St. Ann's.

  Old Father Baldpate,
  Say the slow bells of Aldgate.

  You owe me ten shillings,
  Say the bells of St. Helen's.

  When will you pay me?
  Say the bells of Old Bailey.

  When I grow rich,
  Say the bells of Shoreditch.

  Pray when will that be?
  Say the bells of Stepney.

  I do not know,
  Says the great bell of Bow.

  Here comes a candle to light you to bed,
  And here comes a chopper to chop off your head.




[Illustration]

  We're all dry with drinking on't,
    We're all dry with drinking on't;
  The piper kiss'd the fiddler's wife,
    And I can't sleep for thinking on't.




  I have a little sister, they call her Peep, Peep,
  She wades in the water, deep, deep, deep,
  She climbs up the mountains, high, high, high;
  My poor little sister--she has but one eye!

  (A STAR.)




[Illustration]

  Old King Cole
  Was a merry old soul,
  And a merry old soul was he;
  He called for his pipe,
  And he called for his bowl,
  And he called for his fiddlers three.
  Every fiddler, he had a fiddle,
  And a very fine fiddle had he;
  Twee tweedle dee, tweedle dee, went the fiddlers.
  Oh, there's none so rare,
  As can compare
  With King Cole and his fiddlers three!




  Old Mother Goose, when
    She wanted to wander,
  Would ride through the air
    On a very fine gander.

  Mother Goose had a house,
    'Twas built in a wood,
  Where an owl at the door
    For sentinel stood.

  This is her son Jack,
    A plain-looking lad,
  He is not very good,
    Nor yet very bad.

  She sent him to market,
    A live goose he bought;
  "Here, mother," says he,
    "It will not go for nought."

  Jack's goose and her gander
    Grew very fond,
  They'd both eat together,
    Or swim in one pond.

  Jack found one morning,
    As I have been told,
  His goose had laid him
    An egg of pure gold.

  Jack rode to his mother,
    The news for to tell;
  She call'd him a good boy,
    And said it was well.

  Jack sold his gold egg
    To a rogue of a Jew,
  Who cheated him out of
    The half of his due.

  Then Jack went a-courting
    A lady so gay,
  As fair as the lily
    And sweet as the May.

  The Jew and the Squire
    Came close at his back,
  And began to belabour
    The sides of poor Jack.

  They threw the gold egg
    In the midst of the sea;
  But Jack he jump'd in,
    And got it back presently.

  The Jew got the goose,
    Which he vow'd he would kill,
  Resolving at once
    His pockets to fill.

  Jack's mother came in,
    And caught the goose soon,
  And, mounting its back,
    Flew up to the moon.

[Illustration]




HARRY'S LADDER TO LEARNING.

PART V.

HARRY'S SIMPLE STORIES.

_From Mrs. Barbauld's "Lessons for Children."_




SIMPLE STORIES.


Good morning, little boy; how do you do? Bring your little stool and sit
down by me, for I have a great deal to tell you.

I hope you have been a good boy, and read all the pretty words I wrote
for you before. You have, you say; you have read them till you are
tired, and you want some more new lessons. Come, then, sit down. Now you
and I will tell stories.

[Illustration]




JANUARY.


It is very cold. It snows. It freezes. There are no leaves upon the
trees. The oil is frozen, and the milk is frozen, and the river is
frozen, and everything in the fields is frozen.

All the boys are sliding: you must learn to slide. There is a man
skating. How fast he goes! You shall have a pair of skates. Take care!
there is a hole in the ice. Come in. It is four o'clock. It is dark.
Light the candles: and, Ralph! get some wood from the wood-house, and
get some coals, and make a very good fire.

Now get the large picture-book, and let us look at the pretty pictures,
and I will tell you stories about them.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




FEBRUARY.


It is still very cold, but the days are longer, and there is the yellow
crocus coming up, and the mezereon tree is in blossom, and there are
some white snow-drops peeping up their little heads. Pretty white
snow-drop, with a green stalk! May I gather it? Yes, you may; but you
must always ask leave before you gather a flower.

When spring comes again there will be green leaves and flowers, daisies
and pinks, and violets and roses; and there will be young lambs, and
warm weather. Come again, spring!

What a noise the rooks make! Caw! caw! caw! and how busy they are! They
are going to build their nests. There is a man ploughing the field. In a
few days the farmer will sow it with barley. Wheat is sown in the
autumn. In some places oxen draw the plough instead of horses.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




MARCH.


Now the wind blows. It will blow such a little fellow as you away,
almost. There is a tree blown down. Which way does the wind blow? Take
out your handkerchief. Throw it up. The wind blows it this way. The wind
comes from the north. The wind is north. It is a cold wind. The wind
was west yesterday: then it was warmer.

Here is a lady-bird upon a leaf. It is red, and has black spots. Ah! it
has wings: it has flown away. There is a black beetle. Catch it. How
fast it runs! Where is it gone? Into the ground. It makes a little hole
and runs into the ground.

There are some young lambs. Poor things! how they creep under the hedge.
What is this flower? A primrose. Where is Harry? He is sitting under a
tree.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




APRIL.


Now the birds sing, and the trees are in blossom, and flowers are coming
out, and butterflies, and the sun shines. Now it rains. It rains and the
sun shines. There is a rainbow. Oh, what fine colours! Pretty bright
rainbow! No, you cannot catch it; it is in the sky. It is going away.
It fades. It is quite gone. I hear the cuckoo. He says, Cuckoo! cuckoo!
He is come to tell us it is spring. Do you know the nursery rhyme about
the cuckoo?

  The cuckoo's a bonny bird,
    He sings as he flies;
  He brings us good tidings,
    And tells us no lies.
  He sucks little birds' eggs
    To make his voice clear,
  And always sings "Cuckoo"
    When spring-time is near.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




MAY.


Oh, pleasant May! Let us walk out in the fields. The hawthorn is in
blossom. Let us go and get some out of the hedges. And here are daisies,
and cowslips, and crow-flowers. We will make a nosegay. Smell, it is
very sweet! What has Harry got? He has got a nest of young birds. He has
been climbing a high tree for them. Poor little birds! they have no
feathers. Keep them warm. You must feed them with a quill. You must give
them bread and milk. They are young goldfinches. They will be very
pretty when they have got their red head and yellow wings.

We will drink tea out of doors. Bring the tea-things. It is very
pleasant. But here is no table. What must we do? Oh, here is a large
round stump of a tree! it will do very well for a table. But we have no
chairs. Here is a seat of turf, and a bank almost covered with violets:
we shall sit here, and Harry may lie on the soft grass carpet.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

