but no help came.

"We shall defend the fort as long as a man is living," Boone told the
people.

The fight began. The Indians fired at the fort. The white men fired
back. Everyone worked hard. The women and the children loaded guns and
carried food to the men. The white men were outnumbered, but the
Indians did not know this.

The men did not stop fighting for eight days and eight nights. By then
everyone was very tired. The Indians had shot flaming torches, and the
roofs of the cabins were on fire. Not a drop of water was left in the
fort.

"Look! Look!" someone shouted.

The sky had been dark all day. Now it was starting to rain. It rained
and it poured. The rain came down and put out the fires. It filled the
tubs and pails with water to drink. Everyone felt hopeful again.

When morning came, no Indians were in sight. Every single one of them
was gone. They had disappeared into the forest. The fort was saved.




Daniel Boone's Reward


The Indian raids kept on all over Kentucky. When the American
Revolution ended, the British stopped helping the Indians fight the
settlers. Some tribes kept on fighting on their own, but finally the
settlers defeated the Indians and forced them to sign a treaty. Things
slowly became more peaceful.

More and more settlers came west. They came over the Wilderness Road
that Boone and his men had made. They came down the Ohio River in big
flatboats. These settlers killed game in the forest. They cleared land,
grew crops, built houses, and started towns.

Daniel Boone was fifty years old now. One day he discovered that he did
not own any of the land he had thought was his.

"This does not seem right," he said. "I was one of the first to come to
Kentucky. My life was hard. I risked it for the people many times."

It was not right, but it was true. Boone had been too busy hunting and
trapping to put his claims on paper.

Boone lost almost all his land. He tried to farm, but he was not a good
farmer. He tried to keep a store, but his heart was not in it. His good
wife, Rebecca, often took his place in the store, while Daniel worked
as a guide showing new settlers the way down the Ohio River. And he
held some jobs with the new government.

One day hunters told Daniel Boone about land farther west near the
great Mississippi River. "It's wild and free," they said. "There are
bear and deer. There are herds of buffalo. It's the kind of land
Kentucky used to be."

"That's the place for me," Boone said. "It's too crowded here. The
other day I looked out of the window and saw the smoke of another man's
cabin. I'll go west. I want elbow room."

And besides elbow room, he wanted land. He had always dreamed about
owning a lot of land.

He was disappointed about losing his claims in Kentucky.

So Boone and his family went west. The land where they settled belonged
to Spain. Later it was traded to the French and then bought by America.
It is the land we now call Missouri.

The Spaniards were proud to have Daniel Boone live among them. They
gave him all the land he wanted. He hunted and trapped in the new
country as he had in the old. He sold the furs and skins for a good
price.

Then Boone made a trip back to Kentucky. He called together all the
people he had once known.

"I owed money to you when I left here," he said. "I want to pay my
debts."

When he returned to his family in Missouri, Boone was a poor man again.
But he had a smile on his face.

"I am a free man," he said. "I owe nothing to any man. That makes it
worth being poor again."

The United States Congress voted to give Boone one thousand acres of
land. It was a reward for all he had done in exploring and settling the
West. He hunted and fished until he was very old. He never stopped
exploring. He was still looking for adventure and elbow room!

But Daniel Boone, traveler, hunter, woodsman, and fighter, will be
remembered longest as the man who opened the way to Kentucky.


                     *      *      *      *      *


"Get out of Kentucky and stay out!" the Indians told Daniel Boone. But
Daniel Boone did not scare easily.

There was the time his daughter was kidnaped by the Indians. Boone
tracked the kidnapers through the forest and rescued her.

There was the time Boone was captured by the Shawnees. He escaped in
time to warn the people of Boonesborough: "The Indians are coming! Get
ready to fight!"

Boone's life was full of adventure. And this book tells his story.


SCHOLASTIC BOOK SERVICES, NEW YORK



