boy was trying to comfort her, though he was probably frightened as
much as she.

"Cheer up, my dears," said Jack, getting out of the saddle. "I have come
to take you back to your parents. But why are you bound to that tree?"

"Because," cried a small, sharp voice, "they are thieves and robbers.
That's why!"

"Dear me!" said Jack, looking around to see who had spoken. The voice
seemed to come from above.

A big grey squirrel was sitting upon a low branch of the tree. Upon the
squirrel's head was a circle of gold, with a diamond set in the center
of it. He was running up and down the limbs and chattering excitedly.

[Illustration]

"These children," continued the squirrel, angrily, "robbed our
storehouse of all the nuts we had saved up for winter. Therefore, being
King of all the Squirrels in this forest, I ordered them arrested and
put in prison, as you now see them. They had no right to steal our
provisions and we are going to punish them."

"We were hungry," said the boy, pleadingly, "and we found a hollow tree
full of nuts, and ate them to keep alive. We didn't want to starve when
there was food right in front of us."

"Quite right," remarked Jack, nodding his pumpkin head. "I don't blame
you one bit, under the circumstances. Not a bit."

Then he began to untie the ropes that bound the children to the tree.

"Stop that!" cried the King Squirrel, chattering and whisking about.
"You mustn't release our prisoners. You have no right to."

But Jack paid no attention to the protest. His wooden fingers were
awkward and it took him some time to untie the ropes. When at last he
succeeded, the tree was full of squirrels, called together by their
King, and they were furious at losing their prisoners. From the tree
they began to hurl nuts at the Pumpkinhead, who laughed at them as he
helped the two children to their feet.

[Illustration]

Now, at the top of this tree was a big dead limb, and so many squirrels
gathered upon it that suddenly it broke away and fell to the ground.
Poor Jack was standing directly under it and when the limb struck him it
smashed his pumpkin head into a pulpy mass and sent Jack's wooden form
tumbling, to stop with a bump against a tree a dozen feet away.

He sat up, a moment afterward, but when he felt for his head it was
gone. He could not see; neither could he speak. It was perhaps the
greatest misfortune that could have happened to Jack Pumpkinhead, and
the squirrels were delighted. They danced around in the tree in great
glee as they saw Jack's plight.

[Illustration]

The boy and girl were indeed free, but their protector was ruined. The
Sawhorse was there, however, and in his way he was wise. He had seen
the accident and knew that the smashed pumpkin would never again serve
Jack as a head. So he said to the children, who were frightened at this
accident to their new found friend:

"Pick up the Pumpkinhead's body and set it on my saddle. Then mount
behind it and hold on. We must get out of this forest as soon as we can,
or the squirrels may capture you again. I must guess at the right path,
for Jack's map is no longer of any use to him since that limb destroyed
his head."

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The two children lifted Jack's body, which was not at all heavy, and
placed it upon the saddle. Then they climbed up behind it and the
Sawhorse immediately turned and trotted back along the path he had
come, bearing all three with ease. However, when the path began to
branch into many paths, all following different directions, the wooden
animal became puzzled and soon was wandering aimlessly about, without
any hope of finding the right way. Toward evening they came upon a fine
fruit tree, which furnished the children a supper, and at night the
little ones lay upon a bed of leaves while the Sawhorse stood watch,
with the limp, headless form of poor Jack Pumpkinhead lying helpless
across the saddle.

Now, Ozma had seen in her Magic Picture all that had happened in the
forest, so she sent the little Wizard, mounted upon the Cowardly Lion,
to save the unfortunates. The Lion knew the forest well and when he
reached it he bounded straight through the tangled paths to where the
Sawhorse was wandering, with Jack and the two children on his back.

The Wizard was grieved at the sight of the headless Jack, but believed
he could save him. He first led the Sawhorse out of the forest and
restored the boy and girl to the arms of their anxious friends, and then
he sent the Lion back to Ozma to tell her what had happened.

[Illustration]

The Wizard now mounted the Sawhorse and supported Jack's form on the
long ride to the pumpkin field. When they arrived at Jack's house the
Wizard selected a fine pumpkin--not too ripe--and very neatly carved a
face on it. Then he stuck the pumpkin solidly on Jack's neck and asked
him:

"Well, old friend, how do you feel?"

"Fine!" replied Jack, and shook the hand of the little Wizard
gratefully. "You have really saved my life, for without your assistance
I could not have found my way home to get a new head. But I'm all right,
now, and I shall be very careful not to get this beautiful head
smashed." And he shook the Wizard's hand again.

"Are the brains in the new head any better than the old ones?" inquired
the Sawhorse, who had watched Jack's restoration.

"Why, these seeds are quite tender," replied the Wizard, "so they will
give our friend tender thoughts. But, to speak truly, my dear Sawhorse,
Jack Pumpkinhead, with all his good qualities, will never be noted for
his wisdom."

[Illustration]




THE SCARECROW AND THE TIN WOODMAN


There lived in the Land of Oz two queerly made men who were the best of
friends. They were so much happier when together that they were seldom
apart; yet they liked to separate, once in a while, that they might
enjoy the pleasure of meeting again.

One was a Scarecrow. That means he was a suit of blue Munchkin clothes,
stuffed with straw, on top of which was fastened a round cloth head,
filled with bran to hold it in shape. On the head were painted two eyes,
two ears, a nose and a mouth. The Scarecrow had never been much of a
success in scaring crows, but he prided himself on being a superior man,
because he could feel no pain, was never tired and did not have to eat
or drink. His brains were sharp, for the Wizard of Oz had put pins and
needles in the Scarecrow's brains.

The other man was made all of tin, his arms and legs and head being
cleverly jointed so that he could move them freely. He was known as the
Tin Woodman, having at one time been a woodchopper, and everyone loved
him because the Wizard had given him an excellent heart of red plush.

The Tin Woodman lived in a magnificent tin castle, built on his country
estate in the Winkie Land, not far from the Emerald City of Oz. It had
pretty tin furniture and was surrounded by lovely gardens in which were
many tin trees and beds of tin flowers. The palace of the Scarecrow was
not far distant, on the banks of a river, and this palace was in the
shape of an immense ear of corn.

One morning the Tin Woodman went to visit his friend the Scarecrow, and
as they had nothing better to do they decided to take a boat ride on the
river. So they got into the Scarecrow's boat, which was formed from a
big corncob, hollowed out and pointed at both ends and decorated around
the edges with brilliant jewels. The sail was of purple silk and
glittered gayly in the sunshine.

There was a good breeze that day, so the boat glided swiftly over the
water. By and by they came to a smaller river that flowed from out a
deep forest, and the Tin Woodman proposed they sail up this stream, as
it would be cool and shady beneath the trees of the forest. So the
Scarecrow, who was steering, turned the boat up the stream and the
friends continued talking together of old times and the wonderful
adventures they had met with while traveling with Dorothy, the little
Kansas girl. They became so much interested in this talk that they
forgot to notice that the boat was now sailing through the forest, or
that the stream was growing more narrow and crooked.

Suddenly the Scarecrow glanced up and saw a big rock just ahead of them.

"Look out!" he cried; but the warning came too late.

The Tin Woodman sprang to his feet just as the boat bumped into the
rock, and the jar made him lose his balance. He toppled and fell
overboard and being made of tin he sank to the bottom of the water in an
instant and lay there at full length, face up.

Immediately the Scarecrow threw out the anchor, so as to hold the boat
