"Yes, he is small, but he is quick and willing, and kind-hearted, too,
and then he wishes very much to come, and his father would like it;
and I know the master would like to give him the chance. He said if I
thought he would not do he would look out for a bigger boy; but I said I
was quite agreeable to try him for six weeks."

"Six weeks!" said James; "why, it will be six months before he can be of
much use! It will make you a deal of work, John."

"Well," said John with a laugh, "work and I are very good friends; I
never was afraid of work yet."

"You are a very good man," said James. "I wish I may ever be like you."

"I don't often speak of myself," said John, "but as you are going away
from us out into the world to shift for yourself I'll just tell you how
I look on these things. I was just as old as Joseph when my father and
mother died of the fever within ten days of each other, and left me and
my cripple sister Nelly alone in the world, without a relation that we
could look to for help. I was a farmer's boy, not earning enough to keep
myself, much less both of us, and she must have gone to the workhouse
but for our mistress (Nelly calls her her angel, and she has good right
to do so). She went and hired a room for her with old Widow Mallet, and
she gave her knitting and needlework when she was able to do it; and
when she was ill she sent her dinners and many nice, comfortable things,
and was like a mother to her. Then the master he took me into the stable
under old Norman, the coachman that was then. I had my food at the house
and my bed in the loft, and a suit of clothes, and three shillings a
week, so that I could help Nelly. Then there was Norman; he might have
turned round and said at his age he could not be troubled with a raw boy
from the plow-tail, but he was like a father to me, and took no end of
pains with me. When the old man died some years after I stepped into his
place, and now of course I have top wages, and can lay by for a rainy
day or a sunny day, as it may happen, and Nelly is as happy as a bird.
So you see, James, I am not the man that should turn up his nose at a
little boy and vex a good, kind master. No, no! I shall miss you very
much, James, but we shall pull through, and there's nothing like doing a
kindness when 'tis put in your way, and I am glad I can do it."

"Then," said James, "you don't hold with that saying, 'Everybody look
after himself, and take care of number one'?"

"No, indeed," said John, "where should I and Nelly have been if master
and mistress and old Norman had only taken care of number one? Why,
she in the workhouse and I hoeing turnips! Where would Black Beauty and
Ginger have been if you had only thought of number one? why, roasted to
death! No, Jim, no! that is a selfish, heathenish saying, whoever uses
it; and any man who thinks he has nothing to do but take care of number
one, why, it's a pity but what he had been drowned like a puppy or a
kitten, before he got his eyes open; that's what I think," said John,
with a very decided jerk of his head.

James laughed at this; but there was a thickness in his voice when he
said, "You have been my best friend except my mother; I hope you won't
forget me."

"No, lad, no!" said John, "and if ever I can do you a good turn I hope
you won't forget me."

The next day Joe came to the stables to learn all he could before James
left. He learned to sweep the stable, to bring in the straw and hay; he
began to clean the harness, and helped to wash the carriage. As he was
quite too short to do anything in the way of grooming Ginger and me,
James taught him upon Merrylegs, for he was to have full charge of
him, under John. He was a nice little bright fellow, and always came
whistling to his work.

Merrylegs was a good deal put out at being "mauled about," as he said,
"by a boy who knew nothing;" but toward the end of the second week he
told me confidentially that he thought the boy would turn out well.

At last the day came when James had to leave us; cheerful as he always
was, he looked quite down-hearted that morning.

"You see," he said to John, "I am leaving a great deal behind; my mother
and Betsy, and you, and a good master and mistress, and then the horses,
and my old Merrylegs. At the new place there will not be a soul that I
shall know. If it were not that I shall get a higher place, and be able
to help my mother better, I don't think I should have made up my mind to
it; it is a real pinch, John."

"Ay, James, lad, so it is; but I should not think much of you if you
could leave your home for the first time and not feel it. Cheer up,
you'll make friends there; and if you get on well, as I am sure you
will, it will be a fine thing for your mother, and she will be proud
enough that you have got into such a good place as that."

So John cheered him up, but every one was sorry to lose James; as for
Merrylegs, he pined after him for several days, and went quite off his
appetite. So John took him out several mornings with a leading rein,
when he exercised me, and, trotting and galloping by my side, got up the
little fellow's spirits again, and he was soon all right.

Joe's father would often come in and give a little help, as he
understood the work; and Joe took a great deal of pains to learn, and
John was quite encouraged about him.




18 Going for the Doctor


One night, a few days after James had left, I had eaten my hay and was
lying down in my straw fast asleep, when I was suddenly roused by the
stable bell ringing very loud. I heard the door of John's house open,
and his feet running up to the hall. He was back again in no time; he
unlocked the stable door, and came in, calling out, "Wake up, Beauty!
You must go well now, if ever you did;" and almost before I could think
he had got the saddle on my back and the bridle on my head. He just
ran round for his coat, and then took me at a quick trot up to the hall
door. The squire stood there, with a lamp in his hand.

"Now, John," he said, "ride for your life--that is, for your mistress'
life; there is not a moment to lose. Give this note to Dr. White; give
your horse a rest at the inn, and be back as soon as you can."

John said, "Yes, sir," and was on my back in a minute. The gardener who
lived at the lodge had heard the bell ring, and was ready with the gate
open, and away we went through the park, and through the village, and
down the hill till we came to the toll-gate. John called very loud and
thumped upon the door; the man was soon out and flung open the gate.

"Now," said John, "do you keep the gate open for the doctor; here's the
money," and off he went again.

There was before us a long piece of level road by the river side; John
said to me, "Now, Beauty, do your best," and so I did; I wanted no whip
nor spur, and for two miles I galloped as fast as I could lay my feet to
the ground; I don't believe that my old grandfather, who won the race
at Newmarket, could have gone faster. When we came to the bridge John
pulled me up a little and patted my neck. "Well done, Beauty! good old
fellow," he said. He would have let me go slower, but my spirit was up,
and I was off again as fast as before. The air was frosty, the moon was
bright; it was very pleasant. We came through a village, then through
a dark wood, then uphill, then downhill, till after eight miles' run we
came to the town, through the streets and into the market-place. It was
all quite still except the clatter of my feet on the stones--everybody
was asleep. The church clock struck three as we drew up at Dr. White's
door. John rang the bell twice, and then knocked at the door like
thunder. A window was thrown up, and Dr. White, in his nightcap, put his
head out and said, "What do you want?"

"Mrs. Gordon is very ill, sir; master wants you to go at once; he thinks
she will die if you cannot get there. Here is a note."

"Wait," he said, "I will come."

He shut the window, and was soon at the door.

"The worst of it is," he said, "that my horse has been out all day and
is quite done up; my son has just been sent for, and he has taken the
other. What is to be done? Can I have your horse?"

"He has come at a gallop nearly all the way, sir, and I was to give him
a rest here; but I think my master would not be against it, if you think
fit, sir."

"All right," he said; "I will soon be ready."

John stood by me and stroked my neck; I was very hot. The doctor came
out with his riding-whip.

"You need not take that, sir," said John; "Black Beauty will go till he
drops. Take care of him, sir, if you can; I should not like any harm to
come to him."

"No, no, John," said the doctor, "I hope not," and in a minute we had
left John far behind.

I will not tell about our way back. The doctor was a heavier man than
John, and not so good a rider; however, I did my very best. The man at
the toll-gate had it open. When we came to the hill the doctor drew me
up. "Now, my good fellow," he said, "take some breath." I was glad he
did, for I was nearly spent, but that breathing helped me on, and soon
we were in the park. Joe was at the lodge gate; my master was at the
hall door, for he had heard us coming. He spoke not a word; the doctor
went into the house with him, and Joe led me to the stable. I was glad
to get home; my legs shook under me, and I could only stand and pant. I
had not a dry hair on my body, the water ran down my legs, and I steamed
all over, Joe used to say, like a pot on the fire. Poor Joe! he was
young and small, and as yet he knew very little, and his father, who
would have helped him, had been sent to the next village; but I am sure
he did the very best he knew. He rubbed my legs and my chest, but he did
not put my warm cloth on me; he thought I was so hot I should not like
it. Then he gave me a pailful of water to drink; it was cold and very
good, and I drank it all; then he gave me some hay and some corn, and
thinking he had done right, he went away. Soon I began to shake and
tremble, and turned deadly cold; my legs ached, my loins ached, and my
chest ached, and I felt sore all over. Oh! how I wished for my warm,
thick cloth, as I stood and trembled. I wished for John, but he had
eight miles to walk, so I lay down in my straw and tried to go to sleep.
After a long while I heard John at the door; I gave a low moan, for I
was in great pain. He was at my side in a moment, stooping down by me. I
could not tell him how I felt, but he seemed to know it all; he covered
me up with two or three warm cloths, and then ran to the house for some
hot water; he made me some warm gruel, which I drank, and then I think I
went to sleep.

John seemed to be very much put out. I heard him say to himself over and
over again, "Stupid boy! stupid boy! no cloth put on, and I dare say the
water was cold, too; boys are no good;" but Joe was a good boy, after
all.

I was now very ill; a strong inflammation had attacked my lungs, and I
could not draw my breath without pain. John nursed me night and day; he
would get up two or three times in the night to come to me. My master,
too, often came to see me. "My poor Beauty," he said one day, "my good
horse, you saved your mistress' life, Beauty; yes, you saved her life."
I was very glad to hear that, for it seems the doctor had said if we had
been a little longer it would have been too late. John told my master he
never saw a horse go so fast in his life. It seemed as if the horse knew
what was the matter. Of course I did, though John thought not; at least
I knew as much as this--that John and I must go at the top of our speed,
and that it was for the sake of the mistress.




19 Only Ignorance


I do not know how long I was ill. Mr. Bond, the horse-doctor, came every
day. One day he bled me; John held a pail for the blood. I felt very
faint after it and thought I should die, and I believe they all thought
so too.

Ginger and Merrylegs had been moved into the other stable, so that I
might be quiet, for the fever made me very quick of hearing; any little
noise seemed quite loud, and I could tell every one's footstep going to
and from the house. I knew all that was going on. One night John had to
give me a draught; Thomas Green came in to help him. After I had taken
it and John had made me as comfortable as he could, he said he should
stay half an hour to see how the medicine settled. Thomas said he
would stay with him, so they went and sat down on a bench that had been
brought into Merrylegs' stall, and put down the lantern at their feet,
that I might not be disturbed with the light.

For awhile both men sat silent, and then Tom Green said in a low voice:

"I wish, John, you'd say a bit of a kind word to Joe. The boy is quite
broken-hearted; he can't eat his meals, and he can't smile. He says he
knows it was all his fault, though he is sure he did the best he knew,
and he says if Beauty dies no one will ever speak to him again. It goes
to my heart to hear him. I think you might give him just a word; he is
not a bad boy."

After a short pause John said slowly, "You must not be too hard upon me,
Tom. I know he meant no harm, I never said he did; I know he is not a
bad boy. But you see, I am sore myself; that horse is the pride of my
heart, to say nothing of his being such a favorite with the master and
mistress; and to think that his life may be flung away in this manner is
more than I can bear. But if you think I am hard on the boy I will try
to give him a good word to-morrow--that is, I mean if Beauty is better."

"Well, John, thank you. I knew you did not wish to be too hard, and I am
glad you see it was only ignorance."

John's voice almost startled me as he answered:

"Only ignorance! only ignorance! how can you talk about only ignorance?
Don't you know that it is the worst thing in the world, next to
wickedness?--and which does the most mischief heaven only knows. If
people can say, 'Oh! I did not know, I did not mean any harm,' they
think it is all right. I suppose Martha Mulwash did not mean to kill
that baby when she dosed it with Dalby and soothing syrups; but she did
kill it, and was tried for manslaughter."

"And serve her right, too," said Tom. "A woman should not undertake to
nurse a tender little child without knowing what is good and what is bad
for it."

"Bill Starkey," continued John, "did not mean to frighten his brother
into fits when he dressed up like a ghost and ran after him in the
moonlight; but he did; and that bright, handsome little fellow, that
might have been the pride of any mother's heart is just no better than
an idiot, and never will be, if he lives to be eighty years old. You
were a good deal cut up yourself, Tom, two weeks ago, when those young
ladies left your hothouse door open, with a frosty east wind blowing
right in; you said it killed a good many of your plants."

"A good many!" said Tom; "there was not one of the tender cuttings that
was not nipped off. I shall have to strike all over again, and the worst
of it is that I don't know where to go to get fresh ones. I was nearly
mad when I came in and saw what was done."

"And yet," said John, "I am sure the young ladies did not mean it; it
was only ignorance."

I heard no more of this conversation, for the medicine did well and sent
me to sleep, and in the morning I felt much better; but I often thought
of John's words when I came to know more of the world.




20 Joe Green


Joe Green went on very well; he learned quickly, and was so attentive
and careful that John began to trust him in many things; but as I have
said, he was small of his age, and it was seldom that he was allowed to
exercise either Ginger or me; but it so happened one morning that John
was out with Justice in the luggage cart, and the master wanted a
note to be taken immediately to a gentleman's house, about three miles
distant, and sent his orders for Joe to saddle me and take it, adding
the caution that he was to ride steadily.

The note was delivered, and we were quietly returning when we came
to the brick-field. Here we saw a cart heavily laden with bricks; the
wheels had stuck fast in the stiff mud of some deep ruts, and the carter
was shouting and flogging the two horses unmercifully. Joe pulled up. It
was a sad sight. There were the two horses straining and struggling with
all their might to drag the cart out, but they could not move it; the
sweat streamed from their legs and flanks, their sides heaved, and every
muscle was strained, while the man, fiercely pulling at the head of the
fore horse, swore and lashed most brutally.

"Hold hard," said Joe; "don't go on flogging the horses like that; the
