
THE BLESSED DAY

  "What shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
  What shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day in the morning?
  This shall little children bring
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
  Love and joy to Christ their king,
    On Christmas Day in the morning!

  "What shall little children sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day?
  What shall little children sing
    On Christmas Day in the morning?
  The grand old carols shall they sing
    On Christmas Day, on Christmas Day;
  With all their hearts, their offerings bring
    On Christmas Day in the morning."

Jack was carried off to bed in such haste that he had only time to call
out, "Good-night!" before he was rolled away, gaping as he went. Jill
soon found herself tucked up in the great white bed she was to share
with her mother, and lay looking about the pleasant chamber, while Mrs.
Pecq ran home for a minute to see that all was safe there for the night.

After the merry din the house seemed very still, with only a light
step now and then, the murmur of voices not far away, or the jingle of
sleigh-bells from without, and the little girl rested easily among the
pillows, thinking over the pleasures of the day, too wide-awake for
sleep. There was no lamp in the chamber, but she could look into the
pretty Bird Room, where the fire-light still shone on flowery walls,
deserted tree, and Christ-child floating above the green. Jill's eyes
wandered there and lingered till they were full of regretful tears,
because the sight of the little angel recalled the words spoken when it
was hung up, the good resolution she had taken then, and how soon it was
broken.

"I said I couldn't be bad in that lovely place, and I was a cross,
ungrateful girl after all they've done for Mammy and me. Poor Jack _was_
hurt the worst, and he _was_ brave, though he did scream. I wish I could
go and tell him so, and hear him say, 'All right.' Oh, me, I've spoiled
the day!"

A great sob choked more words, and Jill was about to have a comfortable
cry, when someone entered the other room, and she saw Frank doing
something with a long cord and a thing that looked like a tiny drum.
Quiet as a bright-eyed mouse, Jill peeped out wondering what it was, and
suspecting mischief, for the boy was laughing to himself as he stretched
the cord, and now and then bent over the little object in his hand,
touching it with great care.

"May be it's a torpedo to blow up and scare me; Jack likes to play
tricks. Well, I'll scream loud when it goes off, so he will be satisfied
that I'm dreadfully frightened," thought Jill, little dreaming what the
last surprise of the day was to be.

Presently a voice whispered,--

"I say! Are you awake?"

"Yes."

"Any one there but you?"

"No."

"Catch this, then. Hold it to your ear and see what you'll get."

The little drum came flying in, and, catching it, Jill, with some
hesitation, obeyed Frank's order. Judge of her amazement when she caught
in broken whispers these touching words:--

"Sorry I was cross. Forgive and forget. Start fair to-morrow. All right.
Jack."

Jill was so delighted with this handsome apology, that she could not
reply for a moment, then steadied her voice, and answered back in her
sweetest tone,--

"I'm sorry, too. Never, never, will again. Feel much better now.
Good-night, you dear old thing."

Satisfied with the success of his telephone, Frank twitched back the
drum and vanished, leaving Jill to lay her cheek upon the hand that
wore the little ring and fall asleep, saying to herself, with a farewell
glance at the children's saint, dimly seen in the soft gloom, "I will
not forget. I will be good!"




Chapter VII. Jill's Mission


The good times began immediately, and very little studying was done that
week in spite of the virtuous resolutions made by certain young persons
on Christmas Day. But, dear me, how was it possible to settle down to
lessons in the delightful Bird Room, with not only its own charms to
distract one, but all the new gifts to enjoy, and a dozen calls a day to
occupy one's time?

"I guess we'd better wait till the others are at school, and just go in
for fun this week," said Jack, who was in great spirits at the prospect
of getting up, for the splints were off, and he hoped to be promoted to
crutches very soon.

"_I_ shall keep my Speller by me and take a look at it every day, for
that is what I'm most backward in. But I intend to devote myself to you,
Jack, and be real kind and useful. I've made a plan to do it, and I
mean to carry it out, any way," answered Jill, who had begun to be a
missionary, and felt that this was a field of labor where she could
distinguish herself.

"Here's a home mission all ready for you, and you can be paying your
debts beside doing yourself good," Mrs. Pecq said to her in private,
having found plenty to do herself.

Now Jill made one great mistake at the outset--she forgot that she was
the one to be converted to good manners and gentleness, and devoted
her efforts to looking after Jack, finding it much easier to cure other
people's faults than her own. Jack was a most engaging heathen, and
needed very little instruction; therefore Jill thought her task would
be an easy one. But three or four weeks of petting and play had rather
demoralized both children, so Jill's Speller, though tucked under the
sofa pillow every day, was seldom looked at, and Jack shirked his Latin
shamefully. Both read all the story-books they could get, held daily
levees in the Bird Room, and all their spare minutes were spent in
teaching Snowdrop, the great Angora cat, to bring the ball when they
dropped it in their game. So Saturday came, and both were rather the
worse for so much idleness, since daily duties and studies are the
wholesome bread which feeds the mind better than the dyspeptic plum-cake
of sensational reading, or the unsubstantial _bon-bons_ of frivolous
amusement.

It was a stormy day, so they had few callers, and devoted themselves to
arranging the album; for these books were all the rage just then, and
boys met to compare, discuss, buy, sell, and "swap" stamps with as much
interest as men on 'Change gamble in stocks. Jack had a nice little
collection, and had been saving up pocket-money to buy a book in which
to preserve his treasures. Now, thanks to Jill's timely suggestion,
Frank had given him a fine one, and several friends had contributed a
number of rare stamps to grace the large, inviting pages. Jill wielded
the gum-brush and fitted on the little flaps, as her fingers were
skilful at this nice work, and Jack put each stamp in its proper place
with great rustling of leaves and comparing of marks. Returning, after a
brief absence, Mrs. Minot beheld the countenances of the workers adorned
with gay stamps, giving them a very curious appearance.

"My dears! what new play have you got now? Are you wild Indians?
or letters that have gone round the world before finding the right
address?" she asked, laughing at the ridiculous sight, for both were as
sober as judges and deeply absorbed in some doubtful specimen.

"Oh, we just stuck them there to keep them safe; they get lost if we
leave them lying round. It's very handy, for I can see in a minute what
I want on Jill's face and she on mine, and put our fingers on the
right chap at once," answered Jack, adding, with an anxious gaze at his
friend's variegated countenance, "Where the dickens _is_ my New Granada?
It's rare, and I wouldn't lose it for a dollar."

"Why, there it is on your own nose. Don't you remember you put it there
because you said mine was not big enough to hold it?" laughed Jill,
tweaking a large orange square off the round nose of her neighbor,
causing it to wrinkle up in a droll way, as the gum made the operation
slightly painful.

"So I did, and gave you Little Bolivar on yours. Now I'll have Alsace
and Lorraine, 1870. There are seven of them, so hold still and see how
you like it," returned Jack, picking the large, pale stamps one by one
from Jill's forehead, which they crossed like a band.

She bore it without flinching, saying to herself with a secret smile, as
she glanced at the hot fire, which scorched her if she kept near enough
to Jack to help him, "This really is being like a missionary, with a
tattooed savage to look after. I have to suffer a little, as the good
folks did who got speared and roasted sometimes; but I won't complain a
bit, though my forehead smarts, my arms are tired, and one cheek is as
red as fire."

"The Roman States make a handsome page, don't they?" asked Jack, little
dreaming of the part he was playing in Jill's mind. "Oh, I say, isn't
Corea a beauty? I'm ever so proud of that;" and he gazed fondly on a big
blue stamp, the sole ornament of one page.

"I don't see why the Cape of Good Hope has pyramids. They ought to go in
Egypt. The Sandwich Islands are all right, with heads of the black kings
and queens on them," said Jill, feeling that they were very appropriate
to her private play.

"Turkey has crescents, Australia swans, and Spain women's heads, with
black bars across them. Frank says it is because they keep women shut
up so; but that was only his fun. I'd rather have a good, honest green
United States, with Washington on it, or a blue one-center with old
Franklin, than all their eagles and lions and kings and queens put
together," added the democratic boy, with a disrespectful slap on a
crowned head as he settled Heligoland in its place.

"Why does Austria have Mercury on the stamp, I wonder? Do they wear
helmets like that?" asked Jill, with the brush-handle in her mouth as
she cut a fresh batch of flaps.

"May be he was postman to the gods, so he is put on stamps now. The
Prussians wear helmets, but they have spikes like the old Roman fellows.
I like Prussians ever so much; they fight splendidly, and always beat.
Austrians have a handsome uniform, though."

"Talking of Romans reminds me that I have not heard your Latin for two
days. Come, lazybones, brace up, and let us have it now. I've done my
compo, and shall have just time before I go out for a tramp with Gus,"
said Frank, putting by a neat page to dry, for he studied every day like
a conscientious lad as he was.

"Don't know it. Not going to try till next week. Grind away over your
old Greek as much as you like, but don't bother me," answered Jack,
frowning at the mere thought of the detested lesson.

But Frank adored his Xenophon, and would not see his old friend,
Caesar, neglected without an effort to defend him; so he confiscated the
gum-pot, and effectually stopped the stamp business by whisking away at
one fell swoop all that lay on Jill's table.

"Now then, young man, you will quit this sort of nonsense and do your
lesson, or you won't see these fellows again in a hurry. You asked me to
hear you, and I'm going to do it; here's the book."

Frank's tone was the dictatorial one, which Jack hated and always found
hard to obey, especially when he knew he ought to do it. Usually, when
his patience was tried, he strode about the room, or ran off for a race
round the garden, coming back breathless, but good-tempered. Now both
these vents for irritation were denied him, and he had fallen into
the way of throwing things about in a pet. He longed to send Caesar
to perpetual banishment in the fire blazing close by, but resisted the
temptation, and answered honestly, though gruffly: "I know I did, but I
don't see any use in pouncing on a fellow when he isn't ready. I haven't
got my lesson, and don't mean to worry about it; so you may just give me
back my things and go about your business."

"I'll give you back a stamp for every perfect lesson you get, and you
won't see them on any other terms;" and, thrusting the treasures into
his pocket, Frank caught up his rubber boots, and went off swinging them
like a pair of clubs, feeling that he would give a trifle to be able to
use them on his lazy brother.

At this high-handed proceeding, and the threat which accompanied it,
Jack's patience gave out, and catching up Caesar, as he thought, sent
him flying after the retreating tyrant with the defiant declaration,--

"Keep them, then, and your old book, too! I won't look at it till you
give all my stamps back and say you are sorry. So now!"

It was all over before Mamma could interfere, or Jill do more than
clutch and cling to the gum-brush. Frank vanished unharmed, but the poor
book dashed against the wall to fall half open on the floor, its gay
cover loosened, and its smooth leaves crushed by the blow.

"It's the album! O Jack, how could you?" cried Jill, dismayed at sight
of the precious book so maltreated by the owner.

"Thought it was the other. Guess it isn't hurt much. Didn't mean to
hit him, any way. He does provoke me so," muttered Jack, very red and
shamefaced as his mother picked up the book and laid it silently on
the table before him. He did not know what to do with himself, and was
thankful for the stamps still left him, finding great relief in making
faces as he plucked them one by one from his mortified countenance. Jill
looked on, half glad, half sorry that her savage showed such signs of
unconverted ferocity, and Mrs. Minot went on writing letters, wearing
the grave look her sons found harder to bear than another person's
scolding. No one spoke for a moment, and the silence was becoming
awkward when Gus appeared in a rubber suit, bringing a book to Jack from
Laura and a note to Jill from Lotty.

"Look here, you just trundle me into my den, please, I'm going to have a
nap, it's so dull to-day I don't feel like doing much," said Jack, when
Gus had done his errands, trying to look as if he knew nothing about the
fracas.

Jack folded his arms and departed like a warrior borne from the
battle-field, to be chaffed unmercifully for a "pepper-pot," while Gus
made him comfortable in his own room.

"I heard once of a boy who threw a fork at his brother and put his eye
out. But he didn't mean to, and the brother forgave him, and he never
did so any more," observed Jill, in a pensive tone, wishing to show that
she felt all the dangers of impatience, but was sorry for the culprit.

"Did the boy ever forgive himself?" asked Mrs. Minot.

"No, 'm; I suppose not. But Jack didn't hit Frank, and feels real sorry,
I know."

"He might have, and hurt him very much. Our actions are in our own
hands, but the consequences of them are not. Remember that, my dear, and
think twice before you do anything."

"Yes, 'm, I will;" and Jill composed herself to consider what
missionaries usually did when the natives hurled tomahawks and
boomerangs at one another, and defied the rulers of the land.

Mrs. Minot wrote one page of a new letter, then stopped, pushed her
papers about, thought a little, and finally got up, saying, as if she
found it impossible to resist the yearning of her heart for the naughty
boy,--

"I am going to see if Jack is covered up, he is so helpless, and liable
to take cold. Don't stir till I come back."

"No, 'm, I won't."

Away went the tender parent to find her son studying Caesar for dear
life, and all the more amiable for the little gust which had blown away
the temporary irritability. The brothers were often called "Thunder
and Lightning," because Frank lowered and growled and was a good while
clearing up, while Jack's temper came and went like a flash, and the air
was all the clearer for the escape of dangerous electricity. Of course
Mamma had to stop and deliver a little lecture, illustrated by sad tales
of petulant boys, and punctuated with kisses which took off the edge of
these afflicting narratives.

Jill meantime meditated morally on the superiority of her own good
temper over the hasty one of her dear playmate, and just when she was
feeling unusually uplifted and secure, alas! like so many of us, she
fell, in the most deplorable manner.

Glancing about the room for something to do, she saw a sheet of paper
lying exactly out of reach, where it had fluttered from the table
unperceived. At first her eye rested on it as carelessly as it did on
the stray stamp Frank had dropped; then, as if one thing suggested the
other, she took it into her head that the paper was Frank's composition,
or, better still, a note to Annette, for the two corresponded when
absence or weather prevented the daily meeting at school.

"Wouldn't it be fun to keep it till he gives back Jack's stamps? It
would plague him so if it was a note, and I do believe it is, for
compo's don't begin with two words on one side. I'll get it, and Jack
and I will plan some way to pay him off, cross thing!"

Forgetting her promise not to stir, also how dishonorable it was to read
