Jo kept out of sight until the wild horses each and all had drunk their
fill, for a thirsty animal always travels better than one laden with
water.

Jo then rode quietly forward. The Pacer took alarm at half a mile, and
led his band away out of sight on the soapweed mesa to the southeast. Jo
followed at a gallop till he once more sighted them, then came back and
instructed the cook, who was also teamster, to make for Alamosa Arroyo
in the south. Then away to the southeast he went after the mustangs.
After a mile or two he once more sighted them, and walked his horse
quietly till so near that they again took alarm and circled away to the
south. An hour's trot, not on the trail, but cutting across to where
they ought to go, brought Jo again in close sight. Again he walked
quietly toward the herd, and again there was the alarm and fright. And
so they passed the afternoon, but circled ever more and more to the
south, so that when the sun was low they were, as Jo had expected, not
far from Alamosa Arroyo. The band was again close at hand, and Jo,
after starting them off, rode to the wagon, while his pard, who had been
taking it easy, took up the slow chase on a fresh horse.

After supper the wagon moved on to the upper ford of the Alamosa, as
arranged, and there camped for the night.

Meanwhile, Charley followed the herd. They had not run so far as at
first, for their pursuer made no sign of attack, and they were getting
used to his company. They were more easily found, as the shadows fell,
on account of a snow-white mare that was in the bunch. A young moon in
the sky now gave some help, and relying on his horse to choose the path,
Charley kept him quietly walking after the herd, represented by that
ghost-white mare, till they were lost in the night. He then got off,
unsaddled and picketed his horse, and in his blanket quickly went to
sleep.

At the first streak of dawn he was up, and within a short half-mile,
thanks to the snowy mare, he found the band. At his approach, the shrill
neigh of the Pacer bugled his troop into a flying squad. But on the
first mesa they stopped, and faced about to see what this persistent
follower was, and what he wanted. For a moment or so they stood against
the sky to gaze, and then deciding that he knew him as well as he wished
to, that black meteor flung his mane on the wind, and led off at his
tireless, even swing, while the mares came streaming after.

Away they went, circling now to the west, and after several repetitions
of this same play, flying, following, and overtaking, and flying again,
they passed, near noon, the old Apache look-out, Buffalo Bluff. And
here, on watch, was Jo. A long thin column of smoke told Charley to come
to camp, and with a flashing pocket-mirror he made response. Jo, freshly
mounted, rode across, and again took up the chase, and back came Charley
to camp to eat and rest, and then move on up stream.

All that day Jo followed, and managed, when it was needed, that the herd
should keep the great circle, of which the wagon cut a small chord. At
sundown he came to Verde Crossing, and there was Charley with a fresh
horse and food, and Jo went on in the same calm, dogged way. All the
evening he followed, and far into the night, for the wild herd was now
getting somewhat used to the presence of the harmless strangers, and
were more easily followed; moreover, they were tiring out with perpetual
traveling. They were no longer in the good grass country, they were not
grain-fed like the horses on their track, and above all, the slight
but continuous nervous tension was surely telling. It spoiled their
appetites, but made them very thirsty. They were allowed, and as far
as possible encouraged, to drink deeply at every chance. The effect of
large quantities of water on a running animal is well known; it tends to
stiffen the limbs and spoil the wind. Jo carefully guarded his own horse
against such excess, and both he and his horse were fresh when they
camped that night on the trail of the jaded mustangs.

At dawn he found them easily close at hand, and though they ran at first
they did not go far before they dropped into a walk. The battle seemed
nearly won now, for the chief difficulty in the 'walk-down' is to keep
track of the herd the first two or three days when they are fresh.

All that morning Jo kept in sight, generally in close sight, of the
band. About ten o'clock, Charley relieved him near Jos. Peak and that
day the mustangs walked only a quarter of a mile ahead with much less
spirit than the day before and circled now more north again. At night
Charley was supplied with a fresh horse and followed as before.

Next day the mustangs walked with heads held low, and in spite of the
efforts of the Black Pacer at times they were less than a hundred yards
ahead of their pursuer.

The fourth and fifth days passed the same way, and now the herd was
nearly back to Antelope Springs. So far all had come out as expected.
The chase had been in a great circle with the wagon following a lesser
circle. The wild herd was back to its starting-point, worn out; and the
hunters were back, fresh and on fresh horses. The herd was kept from
drinking till late in the afternoon and then driven to the Springs to
swell themselves with a perfect water gorge. Now was the chance for the
skilful ropers on the grain-fed horses to close in, for the sudden heavy
drink was ruination, almost paralysis, of wind and limb, and it would be
easy to rope and hobble them one by one.

There was only one weak spot in the programme, the Black Stallion, the
cause of the hunt, seemed made of iron, that ceaseless swinging pace
seemed as swift and vigorous now as on the morning when the chase began.
Up and down he went rounding up the herd and urging them on by voice and
example to escape. But they were played out. The old white mare that
had been such help in sighting them at night, had dropped out hours ago,
dead beat. The half-bloods seemed to be losing all fear of the horsemen,
the band was clearly in Jo's power. But the one who was the prize of all
the hunt seemed just as far as ever out of reach.

Here was a puzzle. Jo's comrades knew him well and would not have been
surprised to see him in a sudden rage attempt to shoot the Stallion
down. But Jo had no such mind. During that long week of following he
had watched the horse all day at speed and never once had he seen him
gallop.

The horseman's adoration of a noble horse had grown and grown, till now
he would as soon have thought of shooting his best mount as firing on
that splendid beast.

Jo even asked himself whether he would take the handsome sum that was
offered for the prize. Such an animal would be a fortune in himself to
sire a race of pacers for the track.

But the prize was still at large--the time had come to finish up the
hunt. Jo's finest mount was caught. She was a mare of Eastern blood, but
raised on the plains. She never would have come into Jo's possession but
for a curious weakness. The loco is a poisonous weed that grows in these
regions. Most stock will not touch it; but sometimes an animal tries it
and becomes addicted to it.

It acts somewhat like morphine, but the animal, though sane for long
intervals, has always a passion for the herb and finally dies mad. A
beast with the craze is said to be locoed. And Jo's best mount had a
wild gleam in her eye that to an expert told the tale.

But she was swift and strong and Jo chose her for the grand finish of
the chase. It would have been an easy matter now to rope the mares, but
was no longer necessary. They could be separated from their black leader
and driven home to the corral. But that leader still had the look of
untamed strength. Jo, rejoicing in a worthy foe, went bounding forth to
try the odds. The lasso was flung on the ground and trailed to take out
every kink, and gathered as he rode into neatest coils across his left
palm. Then putting on the spur the first time in that chase he rode
straight for the Stallion a quarter of a mile beyond. Away he went, and
away went Jo, each at his best, while the fagged-out mares scattered
right and left and let them pass. Straight across the open plain the
fresh horse went at its hardest gallop, and the Stallion, leading off,
still kept his start and kept his famous swing.

It was incredible, and Jo put on more spur and shouted to his horse,
which fairly flew, but shortened up the space between by not a single
inch. For the Black One whirled across the flat and up and passed a
soap-weed mesa and down across a sandy treacherous plain, then over a
grassy stretch where prairie dogs barked, then hid below, and on came
Jo, but there to see, could he believe his eyes, the Stallion's start
grown longer still, and Jo began to curse his luck, and urge and spur
his horse until the poor uncertain brute got into such a state of
nervous fright, her eyes began to roll, she wildly shook her head from
side to side, no longer picked her ground--a badger-hole received her
foot and down she went, and Jo went flying to the earth. Though badly
bruised, he gained his feet and tried to mount his crazy beast. But she,
poor brute, was done for--her off fore-leg hung loose.

There was but one thing to do. Jo loosed the cinch, put Lightfoot out of
pain, and carried back the saddle to the camp. While the Pacer steamed
away till lost to view.

This was not quite defeat, for all the mares were manageable now, and Jo
and Charley drove them carefully to the 'L cross F' corral and claimed a
good reward. But Jo was more than ever bound to own the Stallion. He had
seen what stuff he was made of, he prized him more and more, and only
sought to strike some better plan to catch him.

IV

The cook on that trip was Bates--Mr. Thomas Bates, he called himself at
the post-office where he regularly went for the letters and remittance
which never came. Old Tom Turkeytrack, the boys called him, from
his cattle-brand, which he said was on record at Denver, and which,
according to his story, was also borne by countless beef and saddle
stock on the plains of the unknown North.

When asked to join the trip as a partner, Bates made some sarcastic
remarks about horses not fetching $12 a dozen, which had been literally
true within the year, and he preferred to go on a very meagre salary.
But no one who once saw the Pacer going had failed to catch the craze.
Turkeytrack experienced the usual change of heart. He now wanted to own
that mustang. How this was to be brought about he did not clearly see
till one day there called at the ranch that had 'secured his services,'
as he put it, one, Bill Smith, more usually known as Horseshoe Billy,
from his cattle-brand. While the excellent fresh beef and bread and the
vile coffee, dried peaches and molasses were being consumed, he of the
horseshoe remarked, in tones which percolated through a huge stop-gap of
bread:

"Wall, I seen that thar Pacer to-day, nigh enough to put a plait in his
tail."

"What, you didn't shoot?"

"No, but I come mighty near it."

"Don't you be led into no sich foolishness," said a 'double-bar H'
cow-puncher at the other end of the table. "I calc'late that maverick
'ill carry my brand before the moon changes."

"You'll have to be pretty spry or you'll find a 'triangle dot' on his
weather side when you get there."

"Where did you run across him?"

"Wail, it was like this; I was riding the flat by Antelope Springs and
I sees a lump on the dry mud inside the rush belt. I knowed I never seen
that before, so I rides up, thinking it might be some of our stock, an'
seen it was a horse lying plumb flat. The wind was blowing like--from
him to me, so I rides up close and seen it was the Pacer, dead as a
mackerel. Still, he didn't look swelled or cut, and there wa'n't no
smell, an' I didn't know what to think till I seen his ear twitch off a
fly and then I knowed he was sleeping. I gits down me rope and coils it,
and seen it was old and pretty shaky in spots, and me saddle a single
cinch, an' me pony about 700 again a 1,200 lbs. stallion, an' I sez to
meself, sez I: 'Tain't no use, I'll only break me cinch and git throwed
an' lose me saddle.' So I hits the saddle-horn a crack with the hondu,
and I wish't you'd a seen that mustang. He lept six foot in the air an'
snorted like he was shunting cars. His eyes fairly bugged out an' he
lighted out lickety split for California, and he orter be there about
now if he kep' on like he started--and I swear he never made a break the
hull trip."

The story was not quite so consecutive as given here. It was much
punctuated by present engrossments, and from first to last was more or
less infiltrated through the necessaries of life, for Bill was a healthy
young man without a trace of false shame. But the account was complete
and everyone believed it, for Billy was known to be reliable. Of all
those who heard, old Turkeytrack talked the least and probably thought
the most, for it gave him a new idea.

During his after-dinner pipe he studied it out and deciding that he
could not go it alone, he took Horseshoe Billy into his council and the
result was a partnership in a new venture to capture the Pacer; that is,
the $5,000 that was now said to be the offer for him safe in a box-car.

Antelope Springs was still the usual watering-place of the Pacer. The
water being low left a broad belt of dry black mud between the sedge and
the spring. At two places this belt was broken by a well-marked trail
made by the animals coming to drink. Horses and wild animals usually
kept to these trails, though the horned cattle had no hesitation in
taking a short cut through the sedge.

In the most used of these trails the two men set to work with shovels
and dug a pit 15 feet long, 6 feet wide and 7 feet deep. It was a
hard twenty hours work for them as it had to be completed between
the Mustang's drinks, and it began to be very damp work before it was
finished. With poles, brush, and earth it was then cleverly covered over
and concealed. And the men went to a distance and hid in pits made for
the purpose.

About noon the Pacer came, alone now since the capture of his band.
The trail on the opposite side of the mud belt was little used, and old
Tom, by throwing some fresh rushes across it, expected to make sure
that the Stallion would enter by the other, if indeed he should by any
caprice try to come by the unusual path.

What sleepless angel is it watches over and cares for the wild animals?
In spite of all reasons to take the usual path, the Pacer came along the
other. The suspicious-looking rushes did not stop him; he walked calmly
to the water and drank. There was only one way now to prevent utter
failure; when he lowered his head for the second draft which horses
always take, Bates and Smith quit their holes and ran swiftly toward
the trail behind him, and when he raised his proud head Smith sent a
revolver shot into the ground behind him.

Away went the Pacer at his famous gait straight to the trap. Another
second and he would be into it. Already he is on the trail, and already
they feel they have him, but the Angel of the wild things is with him,
that incomprehensible warning comes, and with one mighty bound he clears
the fifteen feet of treacherous ground and spurns the earth as he fades
away unharmed, never again to visit Antelope Springs by either of the
beaten paths.

V

Wild Jo never lacked energy. He meant to catch that Mustang, and when he
learned that others were bestirring themselves for the same purpose
he at once set about trying the best untried plan he knew--the plan by
which the coyote catches the fleeter jackrabbit, and the mounted Indian
the far swifter antelope--the old plan of the relay chase.

The Canadian River on the south, its affluent, the Pinavetitos Arroyo,
on the northeast, and the Don Carlos Hills with the Ute Creek Canyon on
the west, formed a sixty-mile triangle that was the range of the Pacer.
It was believed that he never went outside this, and at all times
Antelope Springs was his headquarters.

Jo knew this country well, all the water-holes and canon crossings as
well as the ways of the Pacer.

If he could have gotten fifty good horses he could have posted them to
advantage so as to cover all points, but twenty mounts and five good
riders were all that proved available.

The horses, grain-fed for two weeks before, were sent on ahead; each man
was instructed how to play his part and sent to his post the day before
the race. On the day of the start Jo with his wagon drove to the plain
of Antelope Springs and, camping far off in a little draw, waited.

At last he came, that coal-black Horse, out from the sand-hills at the
south, alone as always now, and walked calmly down to the Springs and
circled quite around it to sniff for any hidden foe. Then he approached
where there was no trail at all and drank.

Jo watched and wished that he would drink a hogs-head. But the moment
that he turned and sought the grass Jo spurred his steed. The Pacer
heard the hoofs, then saw the running horse, and did not want a nearer
view but led away. Across the flat he went down to the south, and kept
the famous swinging gait that made his start grow longer. Now through
the sandy dunes he went, and steadying to an even pace he gained
considerably and Jo's too-laden horse plunged through the sand and
sinking fetlock deep, he lost at every bound. Then came a level stretch
where the runner seemed to gain, and then a long decline where Jo's
horse dared not run his best, so lost again at every step.

But on they went, and Jo spared neither spur nor quirt. A mile--a
mile--and another mile, and the far-off rock at Arriba loomed up ahead.

And there Jo knew fresh mounts were held, and on they dashed. But the
night-black mane out level on the breeze ahead was gaining more and
more.

Arriba Canon reached at last, the watcher stood aside, for it was not
wished to turn the race, and the Stallion passed--dashed down, across
and up the slope, with that unbroken pace, the only one he knew.

And Jo came bounding on his foaming steed, and on the waiting mount,
then urged him down the slope and up upon the track, and on the upland
once more drove in the spurs, and raced and raced, and raced, but not a
single inch he gained.

Ga-lump, ga-lump, ga-lump, with measured beat he went--an hour--an hour,
and another hour--Arroyo Alamosa just ahead with fresh relays, and Jo
yelled at his horse and pushed him on and on. Straight for the place the
Black One made, but on the last two miles some strange foreboding turned
him to the left, and Jo foresaw escape in this, and pushed his jaded
mount at any cost to head him off, and hard as they had raced this was
the hardest race of all, with gasps for breath and leather squeaks at
every straining bound. Then cutting right across, Jo seemed to gain, and
drawing his gun he fired shot after shot to toss the dust, and so turned
the Stallion's head and forced him back to take the crossing to the
right.

Down they went. The Stallion crossed and Jo sprang to the ground. His
horse was done, for thirty miles had passed in the last stretch, and Jo
himself was worn out. His eyes were burnt with flying alkali dust. He
was half blind so he motioned to his 'pard' to "go ahead and keep him
straight for Alamosa ford."

Out shot the rider on a strong, fresh steed, and away they went--up and
down on the rolling plain--the Black Horse flecked with snowy foam.
His heaving ribs and noisy breath showed what he felt--but on and on he
Went.

And Tom on Ginger seemed to gain, then lose and lose, when in an hour
the long decline of Alamosa came.

And there a freshly mounted lad took up the chase and turned it west,
and on they went past towns of prairie dogs, through soapweed tracts and
cactus brakes by scores, and pricked and wrenched rode on. With dust and
sweat the Black was now a dappled brown, but still he stepped the same.
Young Carrington, who followed, bad hurt his steed by pushing at the
very start, and spurred and urged him now to cut across a gulch at which
the Pacer shied. Just one misstep and down they went.

The boy escaped, but the pony lies there yet, and the wild Black Horse
kept on.

This was close to old Gallego's ranch where Jo himself had cut across
refreshed to push the chase. Within thirty minutes he was again
scorching the Pacer's trail.

Far in the west the Carlos Hills were seen, and there Jo knew fresh men
and mounts were waiting, and that way the indomitable rider tried
to turn, the race, but by a sudden whim, of the inner warning born
perhaps--the Pacer turned. Sharp to the north he went, and Jo, the
skilful wrangler, rode and rode and yelled and tossed the dust with
shots, but down on a gulch the wild black meteor streamed and Jo
could only follow. Then came the hardest race of all; Jo, cruel to the
Mustang, was crueller to his mount and to himself. The sun was hot, the
scorching plain was dim in shimmering heat, his eyes and lips were burnt
with sand and salt, and yet the chase sped on. The only chance to win
would be if he could drive the Mustang back to the Big Arroyo Crossing.
Now almost for the first time he saw signs of weakening in the Black.
His mane and tail were not just quite so high, and his short half mile
of start was down by more than half, but still he stayed ahead and paced
and paced and paced.

An hour and another hour, and still they went the same. But they turned
again, and night was near when Big Arroyo ford was reached--fully twenty
miles. But Jo was game, he seized the waiting horse. The one he left
went gasping to the stream and gorged himself with water till he died.

Then Jo held back in hopes the foaming Black would drink. But he was
wise; he gulped a single gulp, splashed through the stream and then
passed on with Jo at speed behind him. And when they last were seen the
Black was on ahead just out of reach and Jo's horse bounding on.

It was morning when Jo came to camp on foot. His tale was briefly
told:--eight horses dead--five men worn out--the matchless Pacer safe
and free.

"Tain't possible; it can't be done. Sorry I didn't bore his hellish
carcass through when I had the chance," said Jo, and gave it up.

VI

Old Turkeytrack was cook on this trip. He had watched the chase with as
much interest as anyone, and when it failed he grinned into the pot and
said: "That mustang's mine unless I'm a darned fool." Then falling back
on Scripture for a precedent, as was his habit, he still addressed the
pot:

"Reckon the Philistines tried to run Samson down and they got done up,
an' would a stayed don ony for a nat'ral weakness on his part. An' Adam
would a loafed in Eden yit it ony for a leetle failing, which we all
onder stand. An' it aint $5,000 I'll take for him nuther."

Much persecution had made the Pacer wilder than ever. But it did not
drive him away from Antelope Springs. That was the only drinking-place
with absolutely no shelter for a mile on every side to hide an enemy.
Here he came almost every day about noon, and after thoroughly spying
the land approached to drink.

His had been a lonely life all winter since the capture of his harem,
and of this old Turkeytrack was fully aware. The old cook's chum had a
nice little brown mare which he judged would serve his ends, and taking
a pair of the strongest hobbles, a spade, a spare lasso, and a stout
post he mounted the mare and rode away to the famous Springs.

A few antelope skimmed over the plain before him in the early freshness
of the day. Cattle were lying about in groups, and the loud, sweet song
of the prairie lark was' heard on every side. For the bright snowless
winter of the mesas was gone and the springtime was at hand. The grass
was greening and all nature seemed turning to thoughts of love.

It was in the air, and when the little brown mare was picketed out to
graze she raised her nose from time to time to pour forth a long shrill
whinny that surely was her song, if song she had, of love.

Old Turkeytrack studied the wind and the lay of the land. There was the
pit he had labored at, now opened and filled with water that was rank
with drowned prairie dogs and mice. Here was the new trail the animals
were forced to make by the pit. He selected a sedgy clump near some
smooth, grassy ground, and first firmly sunk the post, then dug a hole
large enough to hide in, and spread his blanket in it. He shortened
up the little mare's tether, till she could scarcely move; then on the
ground between he spread his open lasso, tying the long end to the
post, then covered the rope with dust and grass, and went into his
hiding-place.

About noon, after long waiting, the amorous whinny of the mare was
answered from the high ground, away to the west, and there, black
against the sky, was the famous Mustang.

Down he came at that long swinging gait, but grown crafty with much
pursuit, he often stopped to gaze and whinny, and got answer that surely
touched his heart.

Nearer he came again to call, then took alarm, and paced all around in
a great circle to try the wind for his foes, and seemed in doubt. The
Angel whispered "Don't go." But the brown mare called again. He circled
nearer still, and neighed once more, and got reply that seemed to quell
all fears, and set his heart aglow.

Nearer still he pranced, till he touched Solly's nose with his own,
and finding her as responsive as he well could wish, thrust aside all
thoughts of danger, and abandoned himself to the delight of conquest,
until, as he pranced around, his hind legs for a moment stood within the
evil circle of the rope. One deft sharp twitch, the noose flew tight,
and he was caught.

A snort of terror and a bound in the air gave Tom the chance to add the
double hitch. The loop flashed up the line, and snake-like bound those
mighty hoofs.

Terror lent speed and double strength for a moment, but the end of the
rope was reached, and down he went a captive, a hopeless prisoner
at last. Old Tom's ugly, little crooked form sprang from the pit to
complete the mastering of the great glorious creature whose mighty
strength had proved as nothing when matched with the wits of a little
old man. With snorts and desperate bounds of awful force the great beast
dashed and struggled to be free; but all in vain. The rope was strong.

The second lasso was deftly swung, and the forefeet caught, and then
with a skilful move the feet were drawn together, and down went the
raging Pacer to lie a moment later 'hog-tied' and helpless on the
ground. There he struggled till worn out, sobbing great convulsive sobs
while tears ran down his cheeks.

Tom stood by and watched, but a strange revulsion of feeling came over
the old cow-puncher. He trembled nervously from head to foot, as he
had not done since he roped his first steer, and for a while could do
nothing but gaze on his tremendous prisoner. But the feeling soon passed
away. He saddled Delilah, and taking the second lasso, roped the great
horse about the neck, and left the mare to hold the Stallion's head,
while he put on the hobbles. This was soon done, and sure of him now old
Bates was about to loose the ropes, but on a sudden thought he stopped.
He had quite forgotten, and had come unprepared for something of
importance. In Western law the Mustang was the property of the first
man to mark him with his brand; how was this to be done with the nearest
branding-iron twenty miles away?

Old Tom went to his mare, took up her hoofs one at a time, and examined
each shoe. Yes! one was a little loose; he pushed and pried it with the
spade, and got it off. Buffalo chips and kindred fuel were plentiful
about the plain, so a fire was quickly made, and he soon had one arm of
the horse-shoe red hot, then holding the other wrapped in his sock
he rudely sketched on the left shoulder of the helpless mustang a
turkeytrack, his brand, the first time really that it had ever been
used. The Pacer shuddered as the hot iron seared his flesh, but it was
quickly done, and the famous Mustang Stallion was a maverick no more.

Now all there was to do was to take him home. The ropes were loosed, the
Mustang felt himself freed, thought he was free, and sprang to his feet
only to fall as soon as he tried to take a stride. His forefeet were
strongly tied together, his only possible gait a shuffling walk, or else
a desperate labored bounding with feet so unnaturally held that within a
few yards he was inevitably thrown each time he tired to break away.
Tom on the light pony headed him off again and again, and by dint of
driving, threatening, and maneuvering, contrived to force his foaming,
crazy captive northward toward the Pinavetitos Canyon. But the wild horse
would not drive, would not give in. With snorts of terror or of rage and
maddest bounds, he tried and tried to get away. It was one long cruel
fight; his glossy sides were thick with dark foam, and the foam was
stained with blood. Countless hard falls and exhaustion that a long
day's chase was powerless to produce were telling on him; his straining
bounds first this way and then that, were not now quite so strong, and
the spray he snorted as he gasped was half a spray of blood. But his
captor, relentless, masterful and cool, still forced him on. Down the
slope toward the canyon they had come, every yard a fight, and now
they were at the head of the draw that took the trail down to the only
crossing of the canon, the northmost limit of the Pacer's ancient range.

From this the first corral and ranch-house were in sight. The man
rejoiced, but the Mustang gathered his remaining strength for one more
desperate dash. Up, up the grassy slope from the trail he went, defied
the swinging, slashing rope and the gunshot fired in air, in vain
attempt to turn his frenzied course. Up, up and on, above the sheerest
cliff he dashed then sprang away into the vacant air, down--down--two
hundred downward feet to fall, and land upon the rocks below, a lifeless
wreck--but free.


