rusks now."

"No, it wouldn't do to trust you," said Felicity mercilessly. "You
might make some queer mistake and Aunt Eliza would tell it all over the
country. She's a fearful old gossip. I'll make the rusks myself. She
hates cats, so we mustn't let Paddy be seen. And she's a Methodist, so
mind nobody says anything against Methodists to her."

"Who's going to say anything, anyhow?" asked Peter belligerently.

"I wonder if I might ask her for her name for my quilt square?"
speculated Cecily. "I believe I will. She looks so much friendlier than
I expected. Of course she'll choose the five-cent section. She's an
estimable old lady, but very economical."

"Why don't you say she's so mean she'd skin a flea for its hide and
tallow?" said Dan. "That's the plain truth."

"Well, I'm going to see about getting tea," said Felicity, "so the rest
of you will have to entertain her. You better go in and show her the
photographs in the album. Dan, you do it."

"Thank you, that's a girl's job," said Dan. "I'd look nice sitting up
to Aunt Eliza and yelling out that this was Uncle Jim and 'tother Cousin
Sarah's twins, wouldn't I? Cecily or the Story Girl can do it."

"I don't know all the pictures in your album," said the Story Girl
hastily.

"I s'pose I'll have to do it, though I don't like to," sighed Cecily.
"But we ought to go in. We've left her alone too long now. She'll think
we have no manners."

Accordingly we all filed in rather reluctantly. Great-aunt Eliza
was toasting her toes--clad, as we noted, in very smart and shapely
shoes--at the stove and looking quite at her ease. Cecily, determined to
do her duty even in the face of such fearful odds as Great-aunt Eliza's
deafness, dragged a ponderous, plush-covered album from its corner and
proceeded to display and explain the family photographs. She did her
brave best but she could not shout like Felicity, and half the time, as
she confided to me later on, she felt that Great-aunt Eliza did not hear
one word she said, because she didn't seem to take in who the people
were, though, just like all deaf folks, she wouldn't let on. Great-aunt
Eliza certainly didn't talk much; she looked at the photographs in
silence, but she smiled now and then. That smile bothered me. It was so
twinkly and so very un-great-aunt-Elizaish. But I felt indignant with
her. I thought she might have shown a little more appreciation of
Cecily's gallant efforts to entertain.

It was very dull for the rest of us. The Story Girl sat rather sulkily
in her corner; she was angry because Felicity would not let her make
the rusks, and also, perhaps, a little vexed because she could not charm
Great-aunt Eliza with her golden voice and story-telling gift. Felix
and I looked at each other and wished ourselves out in the hill field,
careering gloriously adown its gleaming crust.

But presently a little amusement came our way. Dan, who was sitting
behind Great-aunt Eliza, and consequently out of her view, began making
comments on Cecily's explanation of this one and that one among the
photographs. In vain Cecily implored him to stop. It was too good fun
to give up. For the next half-hour the dialogue ran after this fashion,
while Peter and Felix and I, and even the Story Girl, suffered agonies
trying to smother our bursts of laughter--for Great-aunt Eliza could see
if she couldn't hear:

CECILY, SHOUTING:--"That is Mr. Joseph Elliott of Markdale, a second
cousin of mother's."

DAN:--"Don't brag of it, Sis. He's the man who was asked if somebody
else said something in sincerity and old Joe said 'No, he said it in my
cellar.'"

CECILY:--"This isn't anybody in our family. It's little Xavy Gautier who
used to be hired with Uncle Roger."

DAN:--"Uncle Roger sent him to fix a gate one day and scolded him
because he didn't do it right, and Xavy was mad as hops and said 'How
you 'spect me to fix dat gate? I never learned jogerfy.'"

CECILY, WITH AN ANGUISHED GLANCE AT DAN:--"This is Great-uncle Robert
King."

DAN:--"He's been married four times. Don't you think that's often
enough, dear great-aunty?"

CECILY:--"(Dan!!) This is a nephew of Mr. Ambrose Marr's. He lives out
west and teaches school."

DAN:--"Yes, and Uncle Roger says he doesn't know enough not to sleep in
a field with the gate open."

CECILY:--"This is Miss Julia Stanley, who used to teach in Carlisle a
few years ago."

DAN:--"When she resigned the trustees had a meeting to see if they'd ask
her to stay and raise her supplement. Old Highland Sandy was alive then
and he got up and said, 'If she for go let her for went. Perhaps she for
marry.'"

CECILY, WITH THE AIR OF A MARTYR:--"This is Mr. Layton, who used to
travel around selling Bibles and hymn books and Talmage's sermons."

DAN:--"He was so thin Uncle Roger used to say he always mistook him for
a crack in the atmosphere. One time he stayed here all night and went to
prayer meeting and Mr. Marwood asked him to lead in prayer. It had been
raining 'most every day for three weeks, and it was just in haymaking
time, and everybody thought the hay was going to be ruined, and old
Layton got up and prayed that God would send gentle showers on the
growing crops, and I heard Uncle Roger whisper to a fellow behind
me, 'If somebody don't choke him off we won't get the hay made this
summer.'"

CECILY, IN EXASPERATION:--"(Dan, shame on you for telling such
irreverent stories.) This is Mrs. Alexander Scott of Markdale. She has
been very sick for a long time."

DAN:--"Uncle Roger says all that keeps her alive is that she's scared
her husband will marry again."

CECILY:--"This is old Mr. James MacPherson who used to live behind the
graveyard."

DAN:--"He's the man who told mother once that he always made his own
iodine out of strong tea and baking soda."

CECILY:--"This is Cousin Ebenezer MacPherson on the Markdale road."

DAN:--"Great temperance man! He never tasted rum in his life. He took
the measles when he was forty-five and was crazy as a loon with them,
and the doctor ordered them to give him a dose of brandy. When he
swallowed it he looked up and says, solemn as an owl, 'Give it to me
oftener and more at a time.'"

CECILY, IMPLORINGLY:--"(Dan, do stop. You make me so nervous I don't
know what I'm doing.) This is Mr. Lemuel Goodridge. He is a minister."

DAN:--"You ought to see his mouth. Uncle Roger says the drawing string
has fell out of it. It just hangs loose--so fashion."

Dan, whose own mouth was far from being beautiful, here gave an
imitation of the Rev. Lemuel's, to the utter undoing of Peter, Felix,
and myself. Our wild guffaws of laughter penetrated even Great-aunt
Eliza's deafness, and she glanced up with a startled face. What we would
have done I do not know had not Felicity at that moment appeared in the
doorway with panic-stricken eyes and exclaimed,

"Cecily, come here for a moment."

Cecily, glad of even a temporary respite, fled to the kitchen and we
heard her demanding what was the matter.

"Matter!" exclaimed Felicity, tragically. "Matter enough! Some of you
left a soup plate with molasses in it on the pantry table and Pat got
into it and what do you think? He went into the spare room and walked
all over Aunt Eliza's things on the bed. You can see his tracks plain as
plain. What in the world can we do? She'll be simply furious."

I looked apprehensively at Great-aunt Eliza; but she was gazing
intently at a picture of Aunt Janet's sister's twins, a most stolid,
uninteresting pair; but evidently Great-aunt Eliza found them amusing
for she was smiling widely over them.

"Let us take a little clean water and a soft bit of cotton," came
Cecily's clear voice from the kitchen, "and see if we can't clean the
molasses off. The coat and hat are both cloth, and molasses isn't like
grease."

"Well, we can try, but I wish the Story Girl would keep her cat home,"
grumbled Felicity.

The Story Girl here flew out to defend her pet, and we four boys sat on,
miserably conscious of Great-aunt Eliza, who never said a word to us,
despite her previously expressed desire to become acquainted with us.
She kept on looking at the photographs and seemed quite oblivious of our
presence.

Presently the girls returned, having, as transpired later, been so
successful in removing the traces of Paddy's mischief that it was not
deemed necessary to worry Great-aunt Eliza with any account of it.
Felicity announced tea and, while Cecily conveyed Great-aunt Eliza out
to the dining-room, lingered behind to consult with us for a moment.

"Ought we to ask her to say grace?" she wanted to know.

"I know a story," said the Story Girl, "about Uncle Roger when he was
just a young man. He went to the house of a very deaf old lady and when
they sat down to the table she asked him to say grace. Uncle Roger had
never done such a thing in his life and he turned as red as a beet
and looked down and muttered, 'E-r-r, please excuse me--I--I'm not
accustomed to doing that.' Then he looked up and the old lady said
'Amen,' loudly and cheerfully. She thought Uncle Roger was saying grace
all the time."

"I don't think it's right to tell funny stories about such things," said
Felicity coldly. "And I asked for your opinion, not for a story."

"If we don't ask her, Felix must say it, for he's the only one who can,
and we must have it, or she'd be shocked."

"Oh, ask her--ask her," advised Felix hastily.

She was asked accordingly and said grace without any hesitation, after
which she proceeded to eat heartily of the excellent supper Felicity had
provided. The rusks were especially good and Great-aunt Eliza ate three
of them and praised them. Apart from that she said little and during the
first part of the meal we sat in embarrassed silence. Towards the last,
however, our tongues were loosened, and the Story Girl told us a tragic
tale of old Charlottetown and a governor's wife who had died of a broken
heart in the early days of the colony.

"They say that story isn't true," said Felicity. "They say what she
really died of was indigestion. The Governor's wife who lives there now
is a relation of our own. She is a second cousin of father's but we've
never seen her. Her name was Agnes Clark. And mind you, when father was
a young man he was dead in love with her and so was she with him."

"Who ever told you that?" exclaimed Dan.

"Aunt Olivia. And I've heard ma teasing father about it, too. Of course,
it was before father got acquainted with mother."

"Why didn't your father marry her?" I asked.

"Well, she just simply wouldn't marry him in the end. She got over being
in love with him. I guess she was pretty fickle. Aunt Olivia said father
felt awful about it for awhile, but he got over it when he met ma.
Ma was twice as good-looking as Agnes Clark. Agnes was a sight for
freckles, so Aunt Olivia says. But she and father remained real good
friends. Just think, if she had married him we would have been the
children of the Governor's wife."

"But she wouldn't have been the Governor's wife then," said Dan.

"I guess it's just as good being father's wife," declared Cecily
loyally.

"You might think so if you saw the Governor," chuckled Dan. "Uncle Roger
says it would be no harm to worship him because he doesn't look like
anything in the heavens above or on the earth beneath or the waters
under the earth."

"Oh, Uncle Roger just says that because he's on the opposite side of
politics," said Cecily. "The Governor isn't really so very ugly. I saw
him at the Markdale picnic two years ago. He's very fat and bald and
red-faced, but I've seen far worse looking men."

"I'm afraid your seat is too near the stove, Aunt Eliza," shouted
Felicity.

Our guest, whose face was certainly very much flushed, shook her head.

"Oh, no, I'm very comfortable," she said. But her voice had the effect
of making us uncomfortable. There was a queer, uncertain little sound
in it. Was Great-aunt Eliza laughing at us? We looked at her sharply
but her face was very solemn. Only her eyes had a suspicious appearance.
Somehow, we did not talk much more the rest of the meal.

When it was over Great-aunt Eliza said she was very sorry but she must
really go. Felicity politely urged her to stay, but was much relieved
when Great-aunt Eliza adhered to her intention of going. When Felicity
took her to the spare room Cecily slipped upstairs and presently came
back with a little parcel in her hand.

"What have you got there?" demanded Felicity suspiciously.

"A--a little bag of rose-leaves," faltered Cecily. "I thought I'd give
them to Aunt Eliza."

"The idea! Don't you do such a thing," said Felicity contemptuously.
"She'd think you were crazy."

"She was awfully nice when I asked her for her name for the quilt,"
protested Cecily, "and she took a ten-cent section after all. So I'd
like to give her the rose-leaves--and I'm going to, too, Miss Felicity."

Great-aunt Eliza accepted the little gift quite graciously, bade us
all good-bye, said she had enjoyed herself very much, left messages for
father and mother, and finally betook herself away. We watched her cross
the yard, tall, stately, erect, and disappear down the lane. Then,
as often aforetime, we gathered together in the cheer of the red
hearth-flame, while outside the wind of a winter twilight sang through
fair white valleys brimmed with a reddening sunset, and a faint, serene,
silver-cold star glimmered over the willow at the gate.

"Well," said Felicity, drawing a relieved breath, "I'm glad she's gone.
She certainly is queer, just as mother said."

"It's a different kind of queerness from what I expected, though," said
the Story Girl meditatively. "There's something I can't quite make out
about Aunt Eliza. I don't think I altogether like her."

"I'm precious sure I don't," said Dan.

"Oh, well, never mind. She's gone now and that's the last of it," said
Cecily comfortingly.

But it wasn't the last of it--not by any manner of means was it! When
our grown-ups returned almost the first words Aunt Janet said were,

"And so you had the Governor's wife to tea?"

We all stared at her.

"I don't know what you mean," said Felicity. "We had nobody to tea
except Great-aunt Eliza. She came this afternoon and--"

"Great-aunt Eliza? Nonsense," said Aunt Janet. "Aunt Eliza was in town
today. She had tea with us at Aunt Louisa's. But wasn't Mrs. Governor
Lesley here? We met her on her way back to Charlottetown and she told
us she was. She said she was visiting a friend in Carlisle and thought
she'd call to see father for old acquaintance sake. What in the world
are all you children staring like that for? Your eyes are like saucers."
