of it. The fact is, there's so much to be done every where that I don't
know where to catch on, and half wish I hadn't any money,' answered Dan,
knitting his brows in the perplexity all kind souls feel when anxious to
help at the great task of the world's charity.

'I'll keep it for you till you decide. You are such an impetuous lad
you'll give it to the first beggar that gets hold of you. I'll turn it
over while you are prospecting, and hand it back when you are ready to
invest, shall I?' asked Mr Laurie, who had learned wisdom since the days
of his own extravagant youth.

'Thanky, sir, I'd be glad to get rid of it. You just hold on till I say
the word; and if anything happens to me this time, keep it to help some
other scamp as you helped me. This is my will, and you all witness it.
Now I feel better.' And Dan squared his shoulders as if relieved of
a burden, after handing over the belt in which he carried his little
fortune.

No one dreamed how much was to happen before Dan came to take his money
back, nor how nearly that act was his last will and testament; and while
Mr Laurie was explaining how he would invest it, a cheery voice was
heard singing:

    'Oh, Peggy was a jolly lass,
     Ye heave ho, boys, ye heave ho!
     She never grudged her Jack a glass,
     Ye heave ho, boys, ye heave ho!
     And when he sailed the raging main,
     She faithful was unto her swain,
     Ye heave ho, boys, ye heave ho!'

Emil always announced his arrival in that fashion, and in a moment he
came hurrying in with Nat, who had been giving lessons in town all day.
It was good to see the latter beam at his friend as he nearly shook his
hand off; better still to see how Dan gratefully remembered all he owed
Nat, and tried to pay the debt in his rough way; and best of all to
hear the two travellers compare notes and reel off yarns to dazzle the
land-lubbers and home-keepers.

After this addition the house would not contain the gay youngsters, so
they migrated to the piazza and settled on the steps, like a flock of
night-loving birds. Mr March and the Professor retired to the study, Meg
and Amy went to look after the little refection of fruit and cake which
was to come, and Mrs Jo and Mr Laurie sat in the long window listening
to the chat that went on outside.

'There they are, the flower of our flock!' she said, pointing to the
group before them. 'The others are dead or scattered, but these seven
boys and four girls are my especial comfort and pride. Counting Alice
Heath, my dozen is made up, and my hands are full trying to guide these
young lives as far as human skill can do it.'

'When we remember how different they are, from what some of them came,
and the home influences about others, I think we may feel pretty well
satisfied so far,' answered Mr Laurie soberly, as his eyes rested on
one bright head among the black and brown ones, for the young moon shone
alike on all.

'I don't worry about the girls; Meg sees to them, and is so wise and
patient and tender they can't help doing well; but my boys are more care
every year, and seem to drift farther away from me each time they go,'
sighed Mrs Jo. 'They will grow up, and I can only hold them by one
little thread, which may snap at any time, as it has with Jack and Ned.
Dolly and George still like to come back, and I can say my word to them;
and dear old Franz is too true ever to forget his own. But the three
who are soon going out into the world again I can't help worrying about.
Emil's good heart will keep him straight, I hope, and

    '"A sweet little cherub sits up aloft,
    To look out for the life of poor Jack."'

Nat is to make his first flight, and he's weak in spite of your
strengthening influence; and Dan is still untamed. I fear it will take
some hard lesson to do that.'

'He's a fine fellow, Jo, and I almost regret this farming project. A
little polish would make a gentleman of him, and who knows what he might
become here among us,' answered Mr Laurie, leaning over Mrs Bhaer's
chair, just as he used to do years ago when they had mischievous secrets
together.

'It wouldn't be safe, Teddy. Work and the free life he loves will make a
good man of him, and that is better than any amount of polish, with
the dangers an easy life in a city would bring him. We can't change his
nature--only help it to develop in the right direction. The old impulses
are there, and must be controlled, or he will go wrong. I see that; but
his love for us is a safeguard, and we must keep a hold on him till he
is older or has a stronger tie to help him.'

Mrs Jo spoke earnestly, for, knowing Dan better than anyone else, she
saw that her colt was not thoroughly broken yet, and feared while she
hoped, knowing that life would always be hard for one like him. She was
sure that before he went away again, in some quiet moment he would give
her a glimpse of his inner self, and then she could say the word of
warning or encouragement that he needed. So she bided her time, studying
him meanwhile, glad to see all that was promising, and quick to detect
the harm the world was doing him. She was very anxious to make a success
of her 'firebrand' because others predicted failure; but having learned
that people cannot be moulded like clay, she contented herself with the
hope that this neglected boy might become a good man, and asked no more.
Even that was much to expect, so full was he of wayward impulses, strong
passions, and the lawless nature born in him. Nothing held him but
the one affection of his life--the memory of Plumfield, the fear
of disappointing these faithful friends, the pride, stronger than
principle, that made him want to keep the regard of the mates who always
had admired and loved him in spite of all his faults.

'Don't fret, old dear; Emil is one of the happy-go-lucky sort who always
fall on their legs. I'll see to Nat, and Dan is in a good way now. Let
him take a look at Kansas, and if the farm plan loses its charm, he
can fall back on poor Lo, and really do good out there. He's unusually
fitted for that peculiar task and I hope he'll decide to do it. Fighting
oppressors, and befriending the oppressed will keep those dangerous
energies of his busy, and the life will suit him better than sheep-folds
and wheat-fields.'

'I hope so. What is that?' and Mrs Jo leaned forward to listen, as
exclamations from Ted and Josie caught her ear.

'A mustang! a real, live one; and we can ride it. Dan, you are a
first-class trump!' cried the boy.

'A whole Indian dress for me! Now I can play Namioka, if the boys act
Metamora,' added Josie, clapping her hands.

'A buffalo's head for Bess! Good gracious, Dan, why did you bring such a
horrid thing as that to her?' asked Nan.

'Thought it would do her good to model something strong and natural.
She'll never amount to anything if she keeps on making namby-pamby gods
and pet kittens,' answered irreverent Dan, remembering that when he was
last here Bess was vibrating distractedly between a head of Apollo and
her Persian cat as models.

'Thank you; I'll try it, and if I fail we can put the buffalo up in the
hall to remind us of you,' said Bess, indignant at the insult offered
the gods of her idolatry, but too well bred to show it except in her
voice, which was as sweet and as cold as ice-cream.

'I suppose you won't come out to see our new settlement when the rest
do? Too rough for you?' asked Dan, trying to assume the deferential air
all the boys used when addressing their Princess.

'I am going to Rome to study for years. All the beauty and art of the
world is there, and a lifetime isn't long enough to enjoy it,' answered
Bess.

'Rome is a mouldy old tomb compared to the "Garden of the gods" and my
magnificent Rockies. I don't care a hang for art; nature is as much as I
can stand, and I guess I could show you things that would knock your old
masters higher than kites. Better come, and while Josie rides the horses
you can model 'em. If a drove of a hundred or so of wild ones can't show
you beauty, I'll give up,' cried Dan, waxing enthusiastic over the wild
grace and vigour which he could enjoy but had no power to describe.

'I'll come some day with papa, and see if they are better than the
horses of St Mark and those on Capitol Hill. Please don't abuse my gods,
and I will try to like yours,' said Bess, beginning to think the West
might be worth seeing, though no Raphael or Angelo had yet appeared
there.

'That's a bargain! I do think people ought to see their own country
before they go scooting off to foreign parts, as if the new world wasn't
worth discovering,' began Dan, ready to bury the hatchet.

'It has some advantages, but not all. The women of England can vote,
and we can't. I'm ashamed of America that she isn't ahead in all good
things,' cried Nan, who held advanced views on all reforms, and was
anxious about her rights, having had to fight for some of them.

'Oh, please don't begin on that. People always quarrel over that
question, and call names, and never agree. Do let us be quiet and happy
tonight,' pleaded Daisy, who hated discussion as much as Nan loved it.

'You shall vote as much as you like in our new town, Nan; be mayor and
aldermen, and run the whole concern. It's going to be as free as air,
or I can't live in it,' said Dan, adding, with a laugh, 'I see Mrs
Giddygaddy and Mrs Shakespeare Smith don't agree any better than they
used to.'

'If everyone agreed, we should never get on. Daisy is a dear, but
inclined to be an old fogy; so I stir her up; and next fall she will go
and vote with me. Demi will escort us to do the one thing we are allowed
to do as yet.'

'Will you take 'em, Deacon?' asked Dan, using the old name as if he
liked it. 'It works capitally in Wyoming.'

'I shall be proud to do it. Mother and the aunts go every year, and
Daisy will come with me. She is my better half still; and I don't mean
to leave her behind in anything,' said Demi, with an arm round his
sister of whom he was fonder than ever.

Dan looked at them wistfully, thinking how sweet it must be to have such
a tie; and his lonely youth seemed sadder than ever as he recalled its
struggles. A gusty sigh from Tom made sentiment impossible, as he said
pensively:

'I always wanted to be a twin. It's so sociable and so cosy to have
someone glad to lean on a fellow and comfort him, if other girls are
cruel.'

As Tom's unrequited passion was the standing joke of the family, this
allusion produced a laugh, which Nan increased by whipping out a bottle
of Nux, saying, with her professional air:

'I knew you ate too much lobster for tea. Take four pellets, and your
dyspepsia will be all right. Tom always sighs and is silly when he's
overeaten.'

'I'll take 'em. These are the only sweet things you ever give me.' And
Tom gloomily crunched his dose.

'"Who can minister to a mind diseased, or pluck out a rooted sorrow?"
quoted Josie tragically from her perch on the railing.

'Come with me, Tommy, and I'll make a man of you. Drop your pills and
powders, and cavort round the world a spell, and you'll soon forget
you've got a heart, or a stomach either,' said Dan, offering his one
panacea for all ills.

'Ship with me, Tom. A good fit of seasickness will set you up, and
a stiff north-easter blow your blue-devils away. Come along as
surgeon--easy berth, and no end of larks.'

    '"And if your Nancy frowns, my lad,
      And scorns a jacket blue,
      Just hoist your sails for other ports,
      And find a maid more true."'

added Emil, who had a fragment of song to cheer every care and sorrow,
and freely offered them to his friends.

'Perhaps I'll think of it when I've got my diploma. I'm not going to
grind three mortal years and have nothing to show for it. Till then,--'

'I'll never desert Mrs Micawber,' interrupted Teddy, with a gurgling
sob. Tom immediately rolled him off the step into the wet grass below;
and by the time this slight skirmish was over, the jingle of teaspoons
suggested refreshments of a more agreeable sort. In former times the
little girls waited on the boys, to save confusion; now the young men
flew to serve the ladies, young and old; and that slight fact showed
plainly how the tables were turned by time. And what a pleasant
arrangement it was! Even Josie sat still, and let Emil bring her
berries; enjoying her young lady-hood, till Ted stole her cake, when she
forgot manners, and chastised him with a rap on the knuckles. As guest
of honour, Dan was only allowed to wait on Bess, who still held the
highest place in this small world. Tom carefully selected the best of
everything for Nan, to be crushed by the remark:

'I never eat at this hour; and you will have a nightmare if you do.'

So, dutifully curbing the pangs of hunger, he gave the plate to Daisy,
and chewed rose-leaves for his supper.

When a surprising quantity of wholesome nourishment had been consumed,
someone said, 'Let's sing!' and a tuneful hour followed. Nat fiddled,
Demi piped, Dan strummed the old banjo, and Emil warbled a doleful
ballad about the wreck of the Bounding Betsey; then everybody joined
in the old songs till there was very decidedly 'music in the air'; and
passers-by said, as they listened smiling: 'Old Plum is gay tonight!'

When all had gone Dan lingered on the piazza, enjoying the balmy wind
that blew up from the hayfields, and brought the breath of flowers from
Parnassus; and as he leaned there romantically in the moonlight, Mrs Jo
came to shut the door.

'Dreaming dreams, Dan?' she asked, thinking the tender moment might have
come. Imagine the shock when, instead of some interesting confidence or
affectionate word, Dan swung round, saying bluntly:

'I was wishing I could smoke.'

Mrs Jo laughed at the downfall of her hopes, and answered kindly:

'You may, in your room; but don't set the house afire.'

Perhaps Dan saw a little disappointment in her face, or the memory of
the sequel of that boyish frolic touched his heart; for he stooped and
kissed her, saying in a whisper: 'Good night, mother.' And Mrs Jo was
half satisfied.



Chapter 5. VACATION

Everyone was glad of a holiday next morning, and all lingered over the
breakfast-table, till Mrs Jo suddenly exclaimed:

'Why, there's a dog!' And on the threshold of the door appeared a great
deer-hound, standing motionless, with his eyes fixed on Dan.

'Hallo, old boy! Couldn't you wait till I came for you? Have you cut
away on the sly? Own up now, and take your whipping like a man,' said
Dan, rising to meet the dog, who reared on his hind legs to look his
master in the face and bark as if uttering an indignant denial of any
disobedience.

'All right; Don never lies.' And Dan gave the tall beast a hug, adding
as he glanced out of the window, where a man and horse were seen
approaching:

'I left my plunder at the hotel over night, not knowing how I should
find you. Come out and see Octoo, my mustang; she's a beauty.' And Dan
was off, with the family streaming after him, to welcome the newcomer.

They found her preparing to go up the steps in her eagerness to reach
her master, to the great dismay of the man, who was holding her back.

'Let her come,' called Dan; 'she climbs like a cat and jumps like a
deer. Well, my girl, do you want a gallop?' he asked, as the pretty
creature clattered up to him and whinnied with pleasure as he rubbed her
nose and slapped her glossy flank.

'That's what I call a horse worth having,' said Ted, full of admiration
and delight; for he was to have the care of her during Dan's absence.

'What intelligent eyes! She looks as if she would speak,' said Mrs Jo.

'She talks like a human in her way. Very little that she don't know.
Hey, old Lass?' and Dan laid his cheek to hers as if the little black
mare was very dear to him.

'What does "Octoo" mean?' asked Rob.

'Lightning; she deserves it, as you'll see. Black Hawk gave her to me
for my rifle, and we've had high times together out yonder. She's saved
my life more than once. Do you see that scar?'

Dan pointed to a small one, half hidden by the long mane; and standing
with his arm about Octoo's neck, he told the story of it.

'Black Hawk and I were after buffalo one time, but didn't find 'em as
soon as we expected; so our food gave out, and there we were a hundred
miles from Red Deer River, where our camp was. I thought we were done
for, but my brave pal says: "Now I'll show you how we can live till
we find the herds." We were unsaddling for the night by a little pond;
there wasn't a living creature in sight anywhere, not even a bird, and
we could see for miles over the prairies. What do you think we did?' And
Dan looked into the faces round him.

'Ate worms like the Australian fellows,' said Rob. 'Boiled grass or
leaves,' added Mrs Jo.

'Perhaps filled the stomach with clay, as we read of savages doing?'
suggested Mr Bhaer.

'Killed one of the horses,' cried Ted, eager for bloodshed of some sort.

'No; but we bled one of them. See, just here; filled a tin cup, put some
wild sage leaves in it, with water, and heated it over a fire of sticks.
It was good, and we slept well.'

