"Ah," triumphantly, "they was all answers--they was the first answers I
ever 'ad.  When I first come 'ome an' it seemed as if I was goin' to be
swep' away in the dirt o' the street--one day when I was near drove wild
with cold an' 'unger, I set down on the floor an' I dragged the Bible to
me an' I ses:  'There ain't nothin' on earth or in 'ell as 'll 'elp me.
I'm goin' to do wot the lidy said--mad or not.'  An' I 'eld the book--
an' I 'eld my breath, too, 'cos it was like waitin' for the end o' the
world--an' after a bit I 'ears myself call out in a 'oller whisper,
'Speak, Lord, thy servant 'eareth. Show me a 'ope.'  An' I was tremblin'
all over when I opened the book.  An' there it was!  'I will go before
thee an' make the rough places smooth, I will break in pieces the doors
of brass and will cut in sunder the bars of iron.'  An' I knowed it was
a answer."

"You--knew--it--was an answer?"

"Wot else was it?" with a shining face.  "I'd arst for it, an' there it
was.  An' in about a hour Glad come runnin' up 'ere, an' she'd 'ad a bit
o' luck--"

"'T wasn't nothin' much," Glad broke in deprecatingly, "on'y I'd got
somethin' to eat an' a bit o' fire."

"An' she made me go an' 'ave a 'earty meal, an' set an' warm meself. An'
she was that cheerfle an' full o' pluck, she 'elped me to forget about
the things that was makin' me into a madwoman.  SHE was the answer--
same as the book 'ad promised.  They comes in different wyes the answers
does.  Bless yer, they don't come in claps of thunder an' streaks o'
lightenin'--they just comes easy an' natural--so's sometimes yer
don't think for a minit or two that they're answers at all.  But it
comes to yer in a bit an' yer 'eart stands still for joy. An' ever since
then I just go to me book an' arst.  P'raps," her smile an illuminating
thing, "me bein' the low an' pore in spirit at the beginnin', an'
settin' 'ere all alone by me-self day in an' day out, just thinkin' it
all over--an' arstin'--an' waitin'--p'raps light was gave me 'cos I was
in such a little place an' in the dark.  But I ain't pore in spirit now.
Lor', no, yer can't be when yer've on'y got to believe.  'An' 'itherto
ye 'ave arst nothin' in my name; arst therefore that ye may receive an'
yer joy be made full.'"

"Am I sitting here listening to an old female reprobate's disquisition
on religion?" passed through Antony Dart's mind.  "Why am I listening? I
am doing it because here is a creature who BELIEVES--knowing no
doctrine, knowing no church. She BELIEVES--she thinks she KNOWS her
Deity is by her side.  She is not afraid.  To her simpleness the awful
Unknown is the Known--and WITH her."

"Suppose it were true," he uttered aloud, in response to a sense of
inward tremor, "suppose--it--were--TRUE?"  And he was not speaking
either to the woman or the girl, and his forehead was damp.

"Gawd!" said Glad, her chin almost on her knees, her eyes staring
fearsomely.  "S'pose it was--an' us sittin' 'ere an' not knowin' it--an'
no one knowin' it--nor gettin' the good of it.  Sime as if--" pondering
hard in search of simile, "sime as if no one 'ad never knowed about
'lectricity, an' there wasn't no 'lectric lights nor no 'lectric
nothin'.  Onct nobody knowed, an' all the sime it was there--jest
waitin'."

Her fantastic laugh ended for her with a little choking, vaguely
hysteric sound.

"Blimme," she said.  "Ain't it queer, us not knowin'--IF IT'S TRUE."

Antony Dart bent forward in his chair.  He looked far into the eyes of
the ex-dancer as if some unseen thing within them might answer him.
Miss Montaubyn herself for the moment he did not see.

"What," he stammered hoarsely, his voice broken with awe, "what of the
hideous wrongs--the woes and horrors--and hideous wrongs?"

"There wouldn't be none if WE was right--if we never thought nothin' but
'Good's comin'--good 's 'ere.'  If we everyone of us thought it--every
minit of every day."

She did not know she was speaking of a millennium--the end of the world.
She sat by her one candle, threading her needle and believing she was
speaking of To-day.

He laughed a hollow laugh.

"If we were right!" he said.  "It would take long--long--long--to make
us all so."

"It would be slow p'raps.  Well, so it would--but good comes quick for
them as begins callin' it.  It's been quick for ME," drawing her thread
through the needle's eye triumphantly.  "Lor', yes, me legs is better--
me luck's better--people's better.  Bless yer, yes!"

"It's true," said Glad; "she gets on somehow.  Things comes.  She never
wants no drink.  Me now," she applied to Miss Montaubyn, "if I took it
up same as you--wot'd come to a gal like me?"

"Wot ud yer want ter come?" Dart saw that in her mind was an absolute
lack of any premonition of obstacle.  "Wot'd yer arst fer in yer own
mind?"

Glad reflected profoundly.

"Polly," she said, "she wants to go 'ome to 'er mother an' to the
country. I ain't got no mother an' wot I 'ear of the country seems like
I'd get tired of it.  Nothin' but quiet an' lambs an' birds an' things
growin.' Me, I likes things goin' on.  I likes people an' 'and organs
an' 'buses.  I'd stay 'ere--same as I told YOU," with a jerk of her hand
toward Dart. "An' do things in the court--if I 'ad a bit o' money.  I
don't want to live no gay life when I 'm a woman. It's too 'ard.  Us
pore uns ends too bad.  Wisht I knowed I could get on some 'ow."

"Good 'll come," said Miss Montaubyn.  "Just you say the same as me
every mornin'--'Good's fillin' the world, an' some of it's comin' to me.
It's bein' sent--an' I 'm goin' to meet it.  It's comin'--it's
comin'.'"  She bent forward and touched the girl's shoulder with her
astonishing eyes alight.  "Bless yer, wot's in my room's in yours; Lor',
yes."

Glad's eyes stared into hers, they became mysteriously, almost
awesomely, astonishing also.

"Is it?" she breathed in a hushed voice.

"Yes, Lor', yes!  When yer get up in the mornin' you just stand still
an' ARST it.  'Speak, Lord,' ses you; 'speak, Lord--'"

"Thy servant 'eareth," ended Glad's hushed speech.  "Blimme, but I 'm
goin' to try it!"

Perhaps the brain of her saw it still as an incantation, perhaps the
soul of her, called up strangely out of the dark and still new-born and
blind and vague, saw it vaguely and half blindly as something else.

Dart was wondering which of these things were true.

"We've never been expectin' nothin' that's good," said Miss Montaubyn.
"We 're allus expectin' the other.  Who isn't?  I was allus expectin'
rheumatiz an' 'unger an' cold an' starvin' old age.  Wot was you lookin'
for?" to Dart.

He looked down on the floor and answered heavily.

"Failing brain--failing life--despair--death!"

"None of 'em's comin'--if yer don't call 'em.  Stand still an' listen
for the other.  It's the other that's TRUE."

She was without doubt amazing. She chirped like a bird singing on a
bough, rejoicing in token of the shining of the sun.

"It's wot yer can work on--this," said Glad.  "The curick--'e's a good
sort an' no' 'arm in 'im--but 'e ses:  'Trouble an' 'unger is ter teach
yer ter submit.  Accidents an' coughs as tears yer lungs is sent you to
prepare yer for 'eaven.  If yer loves 'Im as sends 'em, yer 'll go
there.'  ''Ave yer ever bin?' ses I. ''Ave yer ever saw anyone that's
bin?  'Ave yer ever saw anyone that's saw anyone that's bin?' 'No,' 'e
ses.  'Don't, me girl, don't!' 'Garn,' I ses; 'tell me somethin' as 'll
do me some good afore I'm dead!  'Eaven's too far off.'"

"The kingdom of 'eaven is at 'and," said Miss Montaubyn.  "Bless yer,
yes, just 'ere."

Antony Dart glanced round the room.  It was a strange place.  But
something WAS here.  Magic, was it?  Frenzy--dreams--what?

He heard from below a sudden murmur and crying out in the street.  Miss
Montaubyn heard it and stopped in her sewing, holding her needle and
thread extended.

Glad heard it and sprang to her feet.

"Somethin's 'appened," she cried out.  "Someone's 'urt."

She was out of the room in a breath's space.  She stood outside
listening a few seconds and darted back to the open door, speaking
through it.  They could hear below commotion, exclamations, the wail of
a child.

"Somethin's 'appened to Bet!" she cried out again.  "I can 'ear the
child."

She was gone and flying down the staircase; Antony Dart and Miss
Montaubyn rose together.  The tumult was increasing; people were running
about in the court, and it was plain a crowd was forming by the magic
which calls up crowds as from nowhere about the door.  The child's
screams rose shrill above the noise.  It was no small thing which had
occurred.

"I must go," said Miss Montaubyn, limping away from her table.  "P'raps
I can 'elp.  P'raps you can 'elp, too," as he followed her.

They were met by Glad at the threshold.  She had shot back to them,
panting.

"She was blind drunk," she said, "an' she went out to get more.  She
tried to cross the street an' fell under a car.  She'll be dead in five
minits. I'm goin' for the biby."

Dart saw Miss Montaubyn step back into her room.  He turned
involuntarily to look at her.

She stood still a second--so still that it seemed as if she was not
drawing mortal breath.  Her astonishing, expectant eyes closed
themselves, and yet in closing spoke expectancy still.

"Speak, Lord," she said softly, but as if she spoke to Something whose
nearness to her was such that her hand might have touched it.  "Speak,
Lord, thy servant 'eareth."

Antony Dart almost felt his hair rise.  He quaked as she came near, her
poor clothes brushing against him.  He drew back to let her pass first,
and followed her leading.

The court was filled with men, women, and children, who surged about the
doorway, talking, crying, and protesting against each other's crowding.
Dart caught a glimpse of a policeman fighting his way through with a
doctor.  A dishevelled woman with a child at her dirty, bare breast had
got in and was talking loudly.

"Just outside the court it was," she proclaimed, "an' I saw it.  If
she'd bin 'erself it couldn't 'ave 'appened.  'No time for 'osspitles,'
ses I.  She's not twenty breaths to dror; let 'er die in 'er own bed,
pore thing!"  And both she and her baby breaking into wails at one and
the same time, other women, some hysteric, some maudlin with gin, joined
them in a terrified outburst.

"Get out, you women," commanded the doctor, who had forced his way
across the threshold.  "Send them away, officer," to the policeman.

There were others to turn out of the room itself, which was crowded with
morbid or terrified creatures, all making for confusion.  Glad had
seized the child and was forcing her way out into such air as there was
outside.

The bed--a strange and loathly thing--stood by the empty, rusty
fireplace.  Drunken Bet lay on it, a bundle of clothing over which the
doctor bent for but a few minutes before he turned away.

Antony Dart, standing near the door, heard Miss Montaubyn speak to him
in a whisper.

"May I go to 'er?" and the doctor nodded.

She limped lightly forward and her small face was white, but expectant
still.  What could she expect now--O Lord, what?

An extraordinary thing happened. An abnormal silence fell.  The owners
of such faces as on stretched necks caught sight of her seemed in a
flash to communicate with others in the crowd.

"Jinny Montaubyn!" someone whispered.  And "Jinny Montaubyn" was passed
along, leaving an awed stirring in its wake.  Those whom the pressure
outside had crushed against the wall near the window in a passionate
hurry, breathed on and rubbed the panes that they might lay their faces
to them.  One tore out the rags stuffed in a broken place and listened
