a girl. Here, Dora, let me liven you up a bit."

Davy's method of "livening up" was to grasp Dora's curls in his fingers
and give them a tug. Dora shrieked and then cried.

"How can you be such a naughty boy and your poor mother just laid in her
grave this very day?" demanded Marilla despairingly.

"But she was glad to die," said Davy confidentially. "I know, 'cause
she told me so. She was awful tired of being sick. We'd a long talk the
night before she died. She told me you was going to take me and Dora for
the winter and I was to be a good boy. I'm going to be good, but can't
you be good running round just as well as sitting still? And she said I
was always to be kind to Dora and stand up for her, and I'm going to."

"Do you call pulling her hair being kind to her?"

"Well, I ain't going to let anybody else pull it," said Davy, doubling
up his fists and frowning. "They'd just better try it. I didn't hurt her
much . . . she just cried 'cause she's a girl. I'm glad I'm a boy but I'm
sorry I'm a twin. When Jimmy Sprott's sister conterdicks him he just
says, 'I'm oldern you, so of course I know better,' and that settles
HER. But I can't tell Dora that, and she just goes on thinking diffrunt
from me. You might let me drive the gee-gee for a spell, since I'm a
man."

Altogether, Marilla was a thankful woman when she drove into her own
yard, where the wind of the autumn night was dancing with the brown
leaves. Anne was at the gate to meet them and lift the twins out. Dora
submitted calmly to be kissed, but Davy responded to Anne's welcome
with one of his hearty hugs and the cheerful announcement, "I'm Mr. Davy
Keith."

At the supper table Dora behaved like a little lady, but Davy's manners
left much to be desired.

"I'm so hungry I ain't got time to eat p'litely," he said when Marilla
reproved him. "Dora ain't half as hungry as I am. Look at all the
ex'cise I took on the road here. That cake's awful nice and plummy. We
haven't had any cake at home for ever'n ever so long, 'cause mother was
too sick to make it and Mrs. Sprott said it was as much as she could do
to bake our bread for us. And Mrs. Wiggins never puts any plums in HER
cakes. Catch her! Can I have another piece?"

Marilla would have refused but Anne cut a generous second slice.
However, she reminded Davy that he ought to say "Thank you" for it. Davy
merely grinned at her and took a huge bite. When he had finished the
slice he said,

"If you'll give me ANOTHER piece I'll say thank you for IT."

"No, you have had plenty of cake," said Marilla in a tone which Anne
knew and Davy was to learn to be final.

Davy winked at Anne, and then, leaning over the table, snatched Dora's
first piece of cake, from which she had just taken one dainty little
bite, out of her very fingers and, opening his mouth to the fullest
extent, crammed the whole slice in. Dora's lip trembled and Marilla
was speechless with horror. Anne promptly exclaimed, with her best
"schoolma'am" air,

"Oh, Davy, gentlemen don't do things like that."

"I know they don't," said Davy, as soon as he could speak, "but I ain't
a gemplum."

"But don't you want to be?" said shocked Anne.

"Course I do. But you can't be a gemplum till you grow up."

"Oh, indeed you can," Anne hastened to say, thinking she saw a chance to
sow good seed betimes. "You can begin to be a gentleman when you are a
little boy. And gentlemen NEVER snatch things from ladies . . .  or forget
to say thank you . . . or pull anybody's hair."

"They don't have much fun, that's a fact," said Davy frankly. "I guess
I'll wait till I'm grown up to be one."

Marilla, with a resigned air, had cut another piece of cake for Dora.
She did not feel able to cope with Davy just then. It had been a hard
day for her, what with the funeral and the long drive. At that moment
she looked forward to the future with a pessimism that would have done
credit to Eliza Andrews herself.

The twins were not noticeably alike, although both were fair. Dora had
long sleek curls that never got out of order. Davy had a crop of fuzzy
little yellow ringlets all over his round head. Dora's hazel eyes were
gentle and mild; Davy's were as roguish and dancing as an elf's. Dora's
nose was straight, Davy's a positive snub; Dora had a "prunes and
prisms" mouth, Davy's was all smiles; and besides, he had a dimple
in one cheek and none in the other, which gave him a dear, comical,
lopsided look when he laughed. Mirth and mischief lurked in every corner
of his little face.

"They'd better go to bed," said Marilla, who thought it was the easiest
way to dispose of them. "Dora will sleep with me and you can put Davy in
the west gable. You're not afraid to sleep alone, are you, Davy?"

"No; but I ain't going to bed for ever so long yet," said Davy
comfortably.

"Oh, yes, you are." That was all the much-tried Marilla said, but
something in her tone squelched even Davy. He trotted obediently
upstairs with Anne.

"When I'm grown up the very first thing I'm going to do is stay up ALL
night just to see what it would be like," he told her confidentially.

In after years Marilla never thought of that first week of the twins'
sojourn at Green Gables without a shiver. Not that it really was so much
worse than the weeks that followed it; but it seemed so by reason of its
novelty. There was seldom a waking minute of any day when Davy was not
in mischief or devising it; but his first notable exploit occurred two
days after his arrival, on Sunday morning . . . a fine, warm day, as
hazy and mild as September. Anne dressed him for church while Marilla
attended to Dora. Davy at first objected strongly to having his face
washed.

"Marilla washed it yesterday . . . and Mrs. Wiggins scoured me with hard
soap the day of the funeral. That's enough for one week. I don't see the
good of being so awful clean. It's lots more comfable being dirty."

"Paul Irving washes his face every day of his own accord," said Anne
astutely.

Davy had been an inmate of Green Gables for little over forty-eight
hours; but he already worshipped Anne and hated Paul Irving, whom he had
heard Anne praising enthusiastically the day after his arrival. If Paul
Irving washed his face every day, that settled it. He, Davy Keith,
would do it too, if it killed him. The same consideration induced him
to submit meekly to the other details of his toilet, and he was really
a handsome little lad when all was done. Anne felt an almost maternal
pride in him as she led him into the old Cuthbert pew.

Davy behaved quite well at first, being occupied in casting covert
glances at all the small boys within view and wondering which was
Paul Irving. The first two hymns and the Scripture reading passed off
uneventfully. Mr. Allan was praying when the sensation came.

Lauretta White was sitting in front of Davy, her head slightly bent
and her fair hair hanging in two long braids, between which a tempting
expanse of white neck showed, encased in a loose lace frill. Lauretta
was a fat, placid-looking child of eight, who had conducted herself
irreproachably in church from the very first day her mother carried her
there, an infant of six months.

Davy thrust his hand into his pocket and produced . . . a caterpillar, a
furry, squirming caterpillar. Marilla saw and clutched at him but she
was too late. Davy dropped the caterpillar down Lauretta's neck.

Right into the middle of Mr. Allan's prayer burst a series of piercing
shrieks. The minister stopped appalled and opened his eyes. Every head
in the congregation flew up. Lauretta White was dancing up and down in
her pew, clutching frantically at the back of her dress.

"Ow . . . mommer . . . mommer . . . ow . . . take it off . . . ow . . .
get it out . . . ow . . . that bad boy put it down my neck . . . ow . . .
mommer . . . it's going further down . . . ow . . . ow . . . ow. . . ."

Mrs. White rose and with a set face carried the hysterical, writhing
Lauretta out of church. Her shrieks died away in the distance and Mr.
Allan proceeded with the service. But everybody felt that it was a
failure that day. For the first time in her life Marilla took no notice
of the text and Anne sat with scarlet cheeks of mortification.

When they got home Marilla put Davy to bed and made him stay there for
the rest of the day. She would not give him any dinner but allowed him a
plain tea of bread and milk. Anne carried it to him and sat sorrowfully
by him while he ate it with an unrepentant relish. But Anne's mournful
eyes troubled him.

"I s'pose," he said reflectively, "that Paul Irving wouldn't have
dropped a caterpillar down a girl's neck in church, would he?"

"Indeed he wouldn't," said Anne sadly.

"Well, I'm kind of sorry I did it, then," conceded Davy. "But it was
such a jolly big caterpillar . . . I picked him up on the church steps
just as we went in. It seemed a pity to waste him. And say, wasn't it
fun to hear that girl yell?"

Tuesday afternoon the Aid Society met at Green Gables. Anne hurried home
from school, for she knew that Marilla would need all the assistance she
could give. Dora, neat and proper, in her nicely starched white dress
and black sash, was sitting with the members of the Aid in the parlor,
speaking demurely when spoken to, keeping silence when not, and in every
way comporting herself as a model child. Davy, blissfully dirty, was
making mud pies in the barnyard.

"I told him he might," said Marilla wearily. "I thought it would keep
him out of worse mischief. He can only get dirty at that. We'll have our
teas over before we call him to his. Dora can have hers with us, but
I would never dare to let Davy sit down at the table with all the Aids
here."

When Anne went to call the Aids to tea she found that Dora was not in
the parlor. Mrs. Jasper Bell said Davy had come to the front door and
called her out. A hasty consultation with Marilla in the pantry resulted
in a decision to let both children have their teas together later on.

Tea was half over when the dining room was invaded by a forlorn figure.
Marilla and Anne stared in dismay, the Aids in amazement. Could that be
Dora . . . that sobbing nondescript in a drenched, dripping dress and hair
from which the water was streaming on Marilla's new coin-spot rug?

"Dora, what has happened to you?" cried Anne, with a guilty glance at
Mrs. Jasper Bell, whose family was said to be the only one in the world
in which accidents never occurred.

"Davy made me walk the pigpen fence," wailed Dora. "I didn't want to but
he called me a fraid-cat. And I fell off into the pigpen and my dress
got all dirty and the pig runned right over me. My dress was just awful
but Davy said if I'd stand under the pump he'd wash it clean, and I did
and he pumped water all over me but my dress ain't a bit cleaner and my
pretty sash and shoes is all spoiled."

Anne did the honors of the table alone for the rest of the meal while
Marilla went upstairs and redressed Dora in her old clothes. Davy was
caught and sent to bed without any supper. Anne went to his room at
twilight and talked to him seriously . . . a method in which she had great
faith, not altogether unjustified by results. She told him she felt very
badly over his conduct.

"I feel sorry now myself," admitted Davy, "but the trouble is I never
feel sorry for doing things till after I've did them. Dora wouldn't help
me make pies, cause she was afraid of messing her clo'es and that made
me hopping mad. I s'pose Paul Irving wouldn't have made HIS sister walk
a pigpen fence if he knew she'd fall in?"

"No, he would never dream of such a thing. Paul is a perfect little
gentleman."

Davy screwed his eyes tight shut and seemed to meditate on this for a
time. Then he crawled up and put his arms about Anne's neck, snuggling
his flushed little face down on her shoulder.

"Anne, don't you like me a little bit, even if I ain't a good boy like
Paul?"

"Indeed I do," said Anne sincerely. Somehow, it was impossible to help
liking Davy. "But I'd like you better still if you weren't so naughty."

"I . . . did something else today," went on Davy in a muffled voice. "I'm
sorry now but I'm awful scared to tell you. You won't be very cross,
will you? And you won't tell Marilla, will you?"

"I don't know, Davy. Perhaps I ought to tell her. But I think I can
promise you I won't if you promise me that you will never do it again,
whatever it is."

"No, I never will. Anyhow, it's not likely I'd find any more of them
this year. I found this one on the cellar steps."

"Davy, what is it you've done?"

"I put a toad in Marilla's bed. You can go and take it out if you like.
But say, Anne, wouldn't it be fun to leave it there?"

"Davy Keith!" Anne sprang from Davy's clinging arms and flew across the
hall to Marilla's room. The bed was slightly rumpled. She threw back the
blankets in nervous haste and there in very truth was the toad, blinking
at her from under a pillow.

"How can I carry that awful thing out?" moaned Anne with a shudder. The
fire shovel suggested itself to her and she crept down to get it while
Marilla was busy in the pantry. Anne had her own troubles carrying that
toad downstairs, for it hopped off the shovel three times and once she
thought she had lost it in the hall. When she finally deposited it in
the cherry orchard she drew a long breath of relief.

"If Marilla knew she'd never feel safe getting into bed again in her
life. I'm so glad that little sinner repented in time. There's Diana
signaling to me from her window. I'm glad . . . I really feel the need of
some diversion, for what with Anthony Pye in school and Davy Keith at
home my nerves have had about all they can endure for one day."




IX

A Question of Color


"That old nuisance of a Rachel Lynde was here again today, pestering me
for a subscription towards buying a carpet for the vestry room," said
Mr. Harrison wrathfully. "I detest that woman more than anybody I know.
She can put a whole sermon, text, comment, and application, into six
words, and throw it at you like a brick."

Anne, who was perched on the edge of the veranda, enjoying the charm
of a mild west wind blowing across a newly ploughed field on a gray
November twilight and piping a quaint little melody among the twisted
firs below the garden, turned her dreamy face over her shoulder.

"The trouble is, you and Mrs. Lynde don't understand one another," she
explained. "That is always what is wrong when people don't like each
other. I didn't like Mrs. Lynde at first either; but as soon as I came
to understand her I learned to."

"Mrs. Lynde may be an acquired taste with some folks; but I didn't keep
on eating bananas because I was told I'd learn to like them if I did,"
growled Mr. Harrison. "And as for understanding her, I understand that
she is a confirmed busybody and I told her so."

"Oh, that must have hurt her feelings very much," said Anne
reproachfully. "How could you say such a thing? I said some dreadful
things to Mrs. Lynde long ago but it was when I had lost my temper. I
couldn't say them DELIBERATELY."

"It was the truth and I believe in telling the truth to everybody."

"But you don't tell the whole truth," objected Anne. "You only tell the
disagreeable part of the truth. Now, you've told me a dozen times that
my hair was red, but you've never once told me that I had a nice nose."

"I daresay you know it without any telling," chuckled Mr. Harrison.

"I know I have red hair too . . . although it's MUCH darker than it used
to be . . . so there's no need of telling me that either."

"Well, well, I'll try and not mention it again since you're so
sensitive. You must excuse me, Anne. I've got a habit of being outspoken
and folks mustn't mind it."

"But they can't help minding it. And I don't think it's any help
that it's your habit. What would you think of a person who went about
sticking pins and needles into people and saying, 'Excuse me, you
mustn't mind it . . . it's just a habit I've got.' You'd think he was
crazy, wouldn't you? And as for Mrs. Lynde being a busybody, perhaps she
is. But did you tell her she had a very kind heart and always helped the
poor, and never said a word when Timothy Cotton stole a crock of butter
out of her dairy and told his wife he'd bought it from her? Mrs. Cotton
cast it up to her the next time they met that it tasted of turnips and
Mrs. Lynde just said she was sorry it had turned out so poorly."
