Pool, and how terrible it would be if it should smile no more, and so
without another word he set to work.

Now Jerry Muskrat is a great worker, and he had made many long tunnels
into the bank around the Smiling Pool, so he had no doubt but that he
could soon make a hole through this dam. But almost right away he found
trouble. Yes, Sir, Jerry had hardly begun before he found real trouble.
You see, that dam was made mostly of sticks instead of mud, and so,
instead of digging his way in as he would have done into the bank of the
Smiling Pool, he had to stop every few minutes to gnaw off sticks that
were in the way.

It was hard work, the hardest kind of hard work. But Jerry Muskrat is
the kind that is the more determined to do the work the harder the work
is to be done. And so, while Grandfather Frog sat on one end of the dam
and pretended to keep watch, but really took a nap in the warm sunshine,
and while Spotty the Turtle sat on the other end of the dam doing the
same thing, and while Billy Mink and Little Joe Otter swam around in the
strange pond and enjoyed themselves, Jerry Muskrat worked and worked and
worked. And just as jolly, round, red Mr. Sun started down behind the
Purple Hills, Jerry broke through into the strange pond, and the water
began to run in the Laughing Brook once more.



CHAPTER XX: Jerry Has A Dreadful Disappointment

 There's nothing in this world that's sure,
  No matter how we scheme and plan.
 We simply have to be content
  With doing just the best we can.

Jerry Muskrat had curled himself up for the night, so tired that he
could hardly keep his eyes open long enough to find a comfortable place
to sleep. But he was happy. Yes, indeed, Jerry was happy. He could hear
the Laughing Brook beginning to laugh again. It was just a little low,
gurgling laugh, but Jerry knew that in a little while it would grow
into the full laugh that makes music through the Green Forest and puts
happiness into the hearts of all who hear it.

So Jerry was happy, for was it not because of him that the Laughing
Brook was beginning to laugh? He had worked all the long day to make a
hole through the dam which some one had built across the Laughing Brook
and so stopped its laughter. Now the water was running again, and soon
the new, strange pond behind the dam there in the Green Forest would
be gone, and the Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool would be their own
beautiful selves once more. It was because he had worked so hard all day
that he was going to sleep now. Usually he would rather sleep a part of
the day and be abroad at night.

Very pleasant dreams had Jerry Muskrat that night, dreams of the dear
Smiling Pool, smiling just as it had as long as Jerry could remember,
before this trouble had come. He was still dreaming when Spotty the
Turtle found him and waked him, for it was broad daylight. Jerry yawned
and stretched, and then he lay still for a minute to listen to the
pleasant murmur of the Laughing Brook. But there wasn't any pleasant
murmur. There wasn't any sound at all. Jerry began to wonder if he
really was awake after all. He looked at Spotty the Turtle, and he knew
then that he was, for Spotty's face had such a worried look.

"Get up, Jerry Muskrat, and come look at the hole you made yesterday in
the dam. You couldn't have done your work very well, for the hole has
filled up so that the water does not run any more," said Spotty.

"I did do it well!" snapped Jerry crossly. "I did it just as well as
I know how. You lazy folks who just sit and take sun-naps while
you pretend to keep watch had better get busy and do a little work
yourselves, if you don't like the way I work."

"I--I beg your pardon, Jerry Muskrat. I didn't mean to say just that,"
replied Spotty. "You see, we are all worried. We thought last night that
by this morning the Laughing Brook would be full of water again, and we
could go back to the Smiling Pool as soon as we felt like it, and here
it is as bad as ever."

"Perhaps the trouble is just that some sticks and grass drifted down in
the water and filled up the hole I made; that must be the trouble," said
Jerry hopefully, as he hurried towards the dam.

First he carefully examined it from the Laughing Brook side. Then he
dived down under water on the other side. He was gone a long time, and
Billy Mink was just getting ready to dive to see what had become of him
when he came up again.

"What is the trouble?" cried Spotty the Turtle and Grandfather Frog and
Billy Mink and Little Joe Otter together. "Is the hole filled up with
stuff that has drifted in?"

Jerry shook his head, as he slowly climbed out of the water. "No," said
he. "No, it isn't filled with drift stuff brought down by the water. It
is filled with sticks and mud that somebody has put there. Somebody has
filled up the hole that I worked so hard to make yesterday, and it will
take me all day to open it up again."

Then Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle and Billy Mink and Little
Joe Otter and Jerry Muskrat stared at one mother, and for a long time no
one said a word.



CHAPTER XXI: Jerry Muskrat Keeps Watch

 "The way in which to find things out,
  And what goes on all round about,
  Is just to keep my two eyes peeled
  And two ears all the time unsealed."

So said Jerry Muskrat, as he settled himself comfortably on one end
of the new dam across the Laughing Brook deep in the Green Forest and
watched the dark shadows creep farther and farther out into the strange
pond made by the new dam.

"I'm going to find out who it is that built this dam, and who it is that
filled the hole I made in it! I'm going to find out if I have to move up
here and live all summer!" The way in which Jerry said this and snapped
his teeth together showed that he meant just what he said.

You see Jerry had spent another long, weary day opening the hole in the
dam once more, only to have it closed again while he slept. That had
been enough for Jerry. He hadn't tried again. Instead he had made up
his mind that he would find out who was playing such a trick on him. He
would just watch until they came, and then if they were not bigger than
he, or there were not too many of them, he would--well, the way Jerry
gritted and clashed those sharp teeth of his sounded as if he meant to
do something pretty bad.

Billy Mink and Little Joe Otter had given up in disgust and started for
the Big River. They are great travelers, anyway, and so didn't mind so
much because there was no longer water enough in the Laughing Brook and
the Smiling Pool. Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, who are such
very, very slow travelers, had decided that the Big River was too far
away, and so they would stay and live in the strange pond for a while,
though it wasn't nearly so nice as their dear Smiling Pool. They bad
gone to sleep now, each in his own secret place where he would be safe
for the night.

So Jerry Muskrat sat alone and watched. The black shadows crept farther
and farther across the pond and grew blacker and blacker. Jerry didn't
mind this, because, as you know, his eyes are made for seeing in the
dark, and he dearly loves the night. Jerry had sat there a long
time without moving. He was listening and watching. By and by he saw
something that made him draw in his breath and anger leap into his eyes.
It was a little silver line on the water, and it was coming straight
towards the dam where he sat. Jerry knew that it was made by some one
swimming.

"Ha!" said Jerry. "Now we shall see!"

Nearer and nearer came the silver line. Then Jerry made out the head of
the swimmer. Suddenly all the anger left Jerry. He didn't have room for
anger; a great fear had crowded it out. The head was bigger than that of
any Muskrat Jerry had ever seen. It was bigger than the head of any of
Billy Mink's relatives. It was the head of a stranger, a stranger so big
that Jerry felt very, very small and hoped with all his might that the
stranger would not see him.

Jerry held his breath as the stranger swam past and then climbed out on
the dam. He looked very much like Jerry himself, only ever and ever so
much bigger. And his tail! Jerry had never seen such a tail. It was very
broad and flat. Suddenly the big stranger turned and looked straight at
Jerry.

"Hello, Jerry Muskrat!" said he. "Don't you know me?"

Jerry was too frightened to speak.

"I'm your big cousin from the North; I'm Paddy the Beaver, and if
you leave my dam alone, I think we'll be good friends," continued the
stranger.

"I--I--I hope so," said Jerry in a very faint voice, trying to be
polite, but with his teeth chattering with fear.



CHAPTER XXII: Jerry Loses His Fear

 "Oh, tell me, you and you and you,
   If it may hap you've ever heard
  Of all that wond'rous is and great
   The greatest is the spoken word?"

It's true. It's the truest thing that ever was. If you don't believe
it, you just go ask Jerry Muskrat. He'll tell you it's true, and Jerry
knows. You see, it's this way: Words are more than just sounds. Oh, my,
yes! They are little messengers, and once they have been sent out, you
can't call them back. No, Sir, you can't call them back, and sometimes
that is a very sad thing, because--well, you see these little messengers
always carry something to some one else, and that something may be anger
or hate or fear or an untruth, and it is these things which make most of
the trouble in this world. Or that something may be love or sympathy or
helpfulness or kindness, and it is these things which put an end to most
of the troubles in this world.

Just take the ease of Jerry Muskrat. There he sat on the new dam, which
had made the strange pond in the Green Forest, shaking with fear until
his teeth chattered, as he watched a stranger very, very much bigger
than he climb up on the dam. Jerry was afraid, because he had seen that
the stranger could swim as well as he could, and as Jerry had no secret
burrows there, he knew that he couldn't get away from the stranger if he
wanted to. Somehow, Jerry knew without being told that the stranger had
built the dam, and you know Jerry had twice made a hole in the dam to
let the water out of the strange pond into the Laughing Brook. Jerry
knew right down in his heart that if he had built that dam, he would be
very, very angry with any one who tried to spoil it, and that is just
what he had tried to do. So he sat with chattering teeth, too frightened
to even try to run.

"I wish I had let some one else keep watch," said Jerry to himself.

Then the big stranger had spoken. He had said: "Hello, Jerry Muskrat!
