the throng of houses, he set to work at once and his beautiful steeds
carried him rapidly from one roof to another, only the highest being
beyond the leaps of the agile deer.

At last the supply of toys was exhausted and Claus seated himself in
the sledge, with the empty sack at his feet, and turned the heads of
Glossie and Flossie toward home.

Presently Flossie asked:

"What is that gray streak in the sky?"

"It is the coming dawn of day," answered Claus, surprised to find that
it was so late.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Glossie; "then we shall not be home by
daybreak, and the Knooks will punish us and never let us come again."

"We must race for the Laughing Valley and make our best speed,"
returned Flossie; "so hold fast, friend Claus!"

Claus held fast and the next moment was flying so swiftly over the snow
that he could not see the trees as they whirled past.  Up hill and down
dale, swift as an arrow shot from a bow they dashed, and Claus shut his
eyes to keep the wind out of them and left the deer to find their own
way.

It seemed to him they were plunging through space, but he was not at
all afraid.  The Knooks were severe masters, and must be obeyed at all
hazards, and the gray streak in the sky was growing brighter every
moment.

Finally the sledge came to a sudden stop and Claus, who was taken
unawares, tumbled from his seat into a snowdrift.  As he picked himself
up he heard the deer crying:

"Quick, friend, quick!  Cut away our harness!"

He drew his knife and rapidly severed the cords, and then he wiped the
moisture from his eyes and looked around him.

The sledge had come to a stop in the Laughing Valley, only a few feet,
he found, from his own door.  In the East the day was breaking, and
turning to the edge of Burzee he saw Glossie and Flossie just
disappearing in the Forest.



9.  "Santa Claus!"

Claus thought that none of the children would ever know where the toys
came from which they found by their bedsides when they wakened the
following morning.  But kindly deeds are sure to bring fame, and fame
has many wings to carry its tidings into far lands; so for miles and
miles in every direction people were talking of Claus and his wonderful
gifts to children.  The sweet generousness of his work caused a few
selfish folk to sneer, but even these were forced to admit their
respect for a man so gentle-natured that he loved to devote his life to
pleasing the helpless little ones of his race.

Therefore the inhabitants of every city and village had been eagerly
watching the coming of Claus, and remarkable stories of his beautiful
playthings were told the children to keep them patient and contented.

When, on the morning following the first trip of Claus with his deer,
the little ones came running to their parents with the pretty toys they
had found, and asked from whence they came, they was but one reply to
the question.

"The good Claus must have been here, my darlings; for his are the only
toys in all the world!"

"But how did he get in?" asked the children.

At this the fathers shook their heads, being themselves unable to
understand how Claus had gained admittance to their homes; but the
mothers, watching the glad faces of their dear ones, whispered that the
good Claus was no mortal man but assuredly a Saint, and they piously
blessed his name for the happiness he had bestowed upon their children.

"A Saint," said one, with bowed head, "has no need to unlock doors if
it pleases him to enter our homes."

And, afterward, when a child was naughty or disobedient, its mother
would say:

"You must pray to the good Santa Claus for forgiveness.  He does not
like naughty children, and, unless you repent, he will bring you no
more pretty toys."

But Santa Claus himself would not have approved this speech.  He
brought toys to the children because they were little and helpless, and
because he loved them.  He knew that the best of children were
sometimes naughty, and that the naughty ones were often good.  It is
the way with children, the world over, and he would not have changed
their natures had he possessed the power to do so.

And that is how our Claus became Santa Claus.  It is possible for any
man, by good deeds, to enshrine himself as a Saint in the hearts of the
people.



10.  Christmas Eve

The day that broke as Claus returned from his night ride with Glossie
and Flossie brought to him a new trouble.  Will Knook, the chief
guardian of the deer, came to him, surly and ill-tempered, to complain
that he had kept Glossie and Flossie beyond daybreak, in opposition to
his orders.

"Yet it could not have been very long after daybreak," said Claus.

"It was one minute after," answered Will Knook, "and that is as bad as
one hour.  I shall set the stinging gnats on Glossie and Flossie, and
they will thus suffer terribly for their disobedience."

"Don't do that!" begged Claus.  "It was my fault."

But Will Knook would listen to no excuses, and went away grumbling and
growling in his ill-natured way.

For this reason Claus entered the Forest to consult Necile about
rescuing the good deer from punishment.  To his delight he found his
old friend, the Master Woodsman, seated in the circle of Nymphs.

Ak listened to the story of the night journey to the children and of
the great assistance the deer had been to Claus by drawing his sledge
over the frozen snow.

"I do not wish my friends to be punished if I can save them," said the
toy-maker, when he had finished the relation.  "They were only one
minute late, and they ran swifter than a bird flies to get home before
daybreak."

Ak stroked his beard thoughtfully a moment, and then sent for the
Prince of the Knooks, who rules all his people in Burzee, and also for
the Queen of the Fairies and the Prince of the Ryls.

When all had assembled Claus told his story again, at Ak's command, and
then the Master addressed the Prince of the Knooks, saying:

"The good work that Claus is doing among mankind deserves the support
of every honest immortal.  Already he is called a Saint in some of the
towns, and before long the name of Santa Claus will be lovingly known
in every home that is blessed with children.  Moreover, he is a son of
our Forest, so we owe him our encouragement.  You, Ruler of the Knooks,
have known him these many years; am I not right in saying he deserves
our friendship?"

The Prince, crooked and sour of visage as all Knooks are, looked only
upon the dead leaves at his feet and muttered: "You are the Master
Woodsman of the World!"

Ak smiled, but continued, in soft tones: "It seems that the deer which
are guarded by your people can be of great assistance to Claus, and as
they seem willing to draw his sledge I beg that you will permit him to
use their services whenever he pleases."

The Prince did not reply, but tapped the curled point of his sandal
with the tip of his spear, as if in thought.

Then the Fairy Queen spoke to him in this way: "If you consent to Ak's
request I will see that no harm comes to your deer while they are away
from the Forest."

And the Prince of the Ryls added: "For my part I will allow to every
deer that assists Claus the privilege of eating my casa plants, which
give strength, and my grawle plants, which give fleetness of foot, and
my marbon plants, which give long life."

And the Queen of the Nymphs said: "The deer which draw the sledge of
Claus will be permitted to bathe in the Forest pool of Nares, which
will give them sleek coats and wonderful beauty."

The Prince of the Knooks, hearing these promises, shifted uneasily on
his seat, for in his heart he hated to refuse a request of his fellow
immortals, although they were asking an unusual favor at his hands, and
the Knooks are unaccustomed to granting favors of any kind.  Finally he
turned to his servants and said:

"Call Will Knook."

When surly Will came and heard the demands of the immortals he
protested loudly against granting them.

"Deer are deer," said he, "and nothing but deer.  Were they horses it
would be right to harness them like horses.  But no one harnesses deer
because they are free, wild creatures, owing no service of any sort to
mankind.  It would degrade my deer to labor for Claus, who is only a
man in spite of the friendship lavished on him by the immortals."

"You have heard," said the Prince to Ak.  "There is truth in what Will
says."

"Call Glossie and Flossie," returned the Master.

The deer were brought to the conference and Ak asked them if they
objected to drawing the sledge for Claus.

"No, indeed!" replied Glossie; "we enjoyed the trip very much."

"And we tried to get home by daybreak," added Flossie, "but were
unfortunately a minute too late."

"A minute lost at daybreak doesn't matter," said Ak.  "You are forgiven
for that delay."

"Provided it does not happen again," said the Prince of the Knooks,
sternly.

"And will you permit them to make another journey with me?" asked
Claus, eagerly.

The Prince reflected while he gazed at Will, who was scowling, and at
the Master Woodsman, who was smiling.

Then he stood up and addressed the company as follows:

"Since you all urge me to grant the favor I will permit the deer to go
with Claus once every year, on Christmas Eve, provided they always
return to the Forest by daybreak.  He may select any number he pleases,
up to ten, to draw his sledge, and those shall be known among us as
Reindeer, to distinguish them from the others.  And they shall bathe in
the Pool of Nares, and eat the casa and grawle and marbon plants and
shall be under the especial protection of the Fairy Queen.  And now
cease scowling, Will Knook, for my words shall be obeyed!"

He hobbled quickly away through the trees, to avoid the thanks of Claus
and the approval of the other immortals, and Will, looking as cross as
ever, followed him.

But Ak was satisfied, knowing that he could rely on the promise of the
Prince, however grudgingly given; and Glossie and Flossie ran home,
kicking up their heels delightedly at every step.

"When is Christmas Eve?" Claus asked the Master.

"In about ten days," he replied.

"Then I can not use the deer this year," said Claus, thoughtfully, "for
I shall not have time enough to make my sackful of toys."

"The shrewd Prince foresaw that," responded Ak, "and therefore named
Christmas Eve as the day you might use the deer, knowing it would cause
you to lose an entire year."

"If I only had the toys the Awgwas stole from me," said Claus, sadly,
"I could easily fill my sack for the children."

"Where are they?" asked the Master.

"I do not know," replied Claus, "but the wicked Awgwas probably hid
them in the mountains."

Ak turned to the Fairy Queen.

"Can you find them?" he asked.

"I will try," she replied, brightly.

Then Claus went back to the Laughing Valley, to work as hard as he
could, and a band of Fairies immediately flew to the mountain that had
been haunted by the Awgwas and began a search for the stolen toys.

The Fairies, as we well know, possess wonderful powers; but the cunning
Awgwas had hidden the toys in a deep cave and covered the opening with
rocks, so no one could look in.  Therefore all search for the missing
playthings proved in vain for several days, and Claus, who sat at home
waiting for news from the Fairies, almost despaired of getting the toys
before Christmas Eve.

He worked hard every moment, but it took considerable time to carve out
and to shape each toy and to paint it properly, so that on the morning
before Christmas Eve only half of one small shelf above the window was
filled with playthings ready for the children.

But on this morning the Fairies who were searching in the mountains had
a new thought.  They joined hands and moved in a straight line through
the rocks that formed the mountain, beginning at the topmost peak and
working downward, so that no spot could be missed by their bright eyes.
And at last they discovered the cave where the toys had been heaped up
by the wicked Awgwas.

It did not take them long to burst open the mouth of the cave, and then
each one seized as many toys as he could carry and they all flew to
Claus and laid the treasure before him.

The good man was rejoiced to receive, just in the nick of time, such a
store of playthings with which to load his sledge, and he sent word to
Glossie and Flossie to be ready for the journey at nightfall.

With all his other labors he had managed to find time, since the last
trip, to repair the harness and to strengthen his sledge, so that when
the deer came to him at twilight he had no difficulty in harnessing
them.

"We must go in another direction to-night," he told them, "where we
shall find children I have never yet visited.  And we must travel fast
and work quickly, for my sack is full of toys and running over the
brim!"

So, just as the moon arose, they dashed out of the Laughing Valley and
across the plain and over the hills to the south.  The air was sharp
and frosty and the starlight touched the snowflakes and made them
glitter like countless diamonds.  The reindeer leaped onward with
strong, steady bounds, and Claus' heart was so light and merry that he
laughed and sang while the wind whistled past his ears:

     "With a ho, ho, ho!
      And a ha, ha, ha!
  And a ho, ho! ha, ha, hee!
      Now away we go
      O'er the frozen snow,
  As merry as we can be!"


Jack Frost heard him and came racing up with his nippers, but when he
saw it was Claus he laughed and turned away again.

The mother owls heard him as he passed near a wood and stuck their
heads out of the hollow places in the tree-trunks; but when they saw
who it was they whispered to the owlets nestling near them that it was
only Santa Claus carrying toys to the children.  It is strange how much
those mother owls know.

Claus stopped at some of the scattered farmhouses and climbed down the
chimneys to leave presents for the babies.  Soon after he reached a
village and worked merrily for an hour distributing playthings among
the sleeping little ones.  Then away again he went, signing his joyous
carol:

     "Now away we go
      O'er the gleaming snow,
  While the deer run swift and free!
      For to girls and boys
      We carry the toys
  That will fill their hearts with glee!"


The deer liked the sound of his deep bass voice and kept time to the
song with their hoofbeats on the hard snow; but soon they stopped at
another chimney and Santa Claus, with sparkling eyes and face brushed
red by the wind, climbed down its smoky sides and left a present for
every child the house contained.

It was a merry, happy night.  Swiftly the deer ran, and busily their
driver worked to scatter his gifts among the sleeping children.

But the sack was empty at last, and the sledge headed homeward; and now
again the race with daybreak began.  Glossie and Flossie had no mind to
be rebuked a second time for tardiness, so they fled with a swiftness
that enabled them to pass the gale on which the Frost King rode, and
soon brought them to the Laughing Valley.

It is true when Claus released his steeds from their harness the
eastern sky was streaked with gray, but Glossie and Flossie were deep
in the Forest before day fairly broke.

Claus was so wearied with his night's work that he threw himself upon
his bed and fell into a deep slumber, and while he slept the Christmas
sun appeared in the sky and shone upon hundreds of happy homes where
the sound of childish laughter proclaimed that Santa Claus had made
them a visit.

God bless him!  It was his first Christmas Eve, and for hundreds of
years since then he has nobly fulfilled his mission to bring happiness
to the hearts of little children.



11.  How the First Stockings Were Hung by the Chimneys

When you remember that no child, until Santa Claus began his travels,
had ever known the pleasure of possessing a toy, you will understand
how joy crept into the homes of those who had been favored with a visit
from the good man, and how they talked of him day by day in loving
tones and were honestly grateful for his kindly deeds.  It is true that
great warriors and mighty kings and clever scholars of that day were
often spoken of by the people; but no one of them was so greatly
beloved as Santa Claus, because none other was so unselfish as to
devote himself to making others happy.  For a generous deed lives
longer than a great battle or a king's decree of a scholar's essay,
because it spreads and leaves its mark on all nature and endures
through many generations.

The bargain made with the Knook Prince changed the plans of Claus for
all future time; for, being able to use the reindeer on but one night
of each year, he decided to devote all the other days to the
manufacture of playthings, and on Christmas Eve to carry them to the
children of the world.

But a year's work would, he knew, result in a vast accumulation of
toys, so he resolved to build a new sledge that would be larger and
stronger and better-fitted for swift travel than the old and clumsy one.

His first act was to visit the Gnome King, with whom he made a bargain
to exchange three drums, a trumpet and two dolls for a pair of fine
