upon the plain.

It was a wonderful day, the air was full of golden light and the sky of
such a blueness as never had been seen before. Out of the palace gates
he rode and he wore his crown, and his eyes were more brilliant than the
jewels in it, and his smile was more radiant than a sunrise as he looked
about him, for every breath he drew in was fragrant, every ugly place
was hidden, and every squalid corner filled with beauty, for it seemed
as if the whole world were waving with Blue Flowers. Tumble-down houses
and fences were covered with them because some of them climbed like
vines; neglected fields and gardens had been made neat so that they
would grow; rubbish and dirt had been cleaned away to make room for
clumps and patches of them. You could not grow the Blue Flower among
dirt and disorder any more than you could grow it while you were
spending your time in drinking and quarreling. By the road sides, in
courts, in windows, in cracks, in walls, in broken places in roofs, in
great people's gardens, on the window sills, or about the doorways of
poor people's hovels--fair and fragrant and waving, grew the Blue
Flower. Where it waved there was no room for dirt and rubbish, and
suddenly even the dullest people began to see that the face of the whole
land was changed as if by some strange magic, and the whole population
seemed changed with it. Everybody looked fresher and more cheerful,
people had actually learned to smile and keep themselves clean, and
there was not one who was not healthier. They had, in fact, been
noticing this for some time, and they had said to each other that the
power of the Blue Flower, of which the King had spoken, was beginning to
work. The children had grown gay and rosy, and the boy who was clever
and all his companions had found time to earn themselves new clothes,
because they had never forgotten their passwords. All the farmers wanted
them to work in their fields because they said there was no time to
idle, no time to fight, no time to play evil tricks.

On the King rode, and on and on and on, and the farther he went the more
splendid and joyous his smile grew.

But at no time during the day was it more beautiful than when he met the
little cripple who had sat on the outside of the crowd on the first
feast day, not expecting to see or hear anything.

The cripple lived in a tiny hovel on the edge of the city, and when the
glittering procession drew near it the small patch of garden was quite
bare and had not a Blue Flower in it. And the little cripple was sitting
huddled upon his broken door-step, sobbing softly with his face hidden
in his arms.

King Amor drew up his white horse and looked at him and looked at his
bare garden.

"What has happened here?" he said. "This garden has not been neglected.
It has been dug and kept free of weeds, but my Law has been broken.
There is no Blue Flower."

Then the little cripple got up trembling and hobbled through his rickety
gate and threw himself down upon the earth before the King's white
horse, sobbing hopelessly and heart-brokenly.

"Oh King!" he cried. "I am only a cripple, and small, and I can easily
be killed. I have no flowers at all. When I opened my package of seeds I
was so glad that I forgot the wind was blowing, and suddenly a great
gust carried them all away forever and I had not even one left. I was
afraid to tell anybody."

And then he cried so that he could not speak.

"Go on," said the young King gently. "What did you do?"

"I could do nothing," said the little cripple. "Only I made my garden
neat and kept away the weeds. And sometimes I asked other people to let
me dig a little for them. And always when I went out I picked up the
ugly things I saw lying about--the bits of paper and rubbish--and I dug
holes for them in the earth. But I have broken your Law."

Then the people gasped for breath, for King Amor dismounted from his
horse and lifted the little cripple up in his arms and held him against
his breast.

"You shall ride with me today," he said, "and go to my castle on the
mountain crag and live near the stars and the sun. When you kept the
weeds from your bare little garden, and when you dug for others and hid
away ugliness and disorder, you planted a Blue Flower every day. You
have planted more than all the rest, and your reward shall be the
sweetest, for you planted without the seeds."

And then the people shouted until the world seemed to ring with their
joy, and somehow they knew that King Mordreth's Land had come into fair
days and they thought it was the Blue Flower magic.

"But the earth is full of magic," Amor said to the Ancient One, after
the feast on the plain was over. "Most men know nothing of it and so
comes misery. The first law of the earth's magic is this one. If you
fill your mind with a beautiful thought there will be no room in it for
an ugly one. This I learned from you and from my brothers the stars. So
I gave my people the Blue Flower to think of and work for. It led them
to see beauty and to work happily and filled the land with bloom. I,
their King, am their brother, and soon they will understand this and I
can help them, and all will be well. They shall be wise and joyous and
know good fortune."

The little cripple lived near the sun and the stars in the castle on the
mountain crag until he grew strong and straight. Then he was the King's
chief gardener. The boy who was clever was made captain of his band,
which became the King's own guard and never left him. And the gloom of
King Mordreth's Land was forgotten, because it was known throughout all
the world as The Land of the Blue Flower.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Land of the Blue Flower, by 
Frances Hodgson Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAND OF THE BLUE FLOWER ***

