the fire, man, and put a bit of warmth in your veins. It's bitter cold
the day. And now tell me the Berwick news. Has Jean McLean made up
with her man yet? And is it true that Sandy McQuarrie is to marry Kate
Ferguson? 'Twill be a match now! Sure, with her red hair, Sandy will not
be like to lose his bride past finding.'

"Neil had plenty of news to tell. And the more whisky he drank the more
he told. He didn't notice that Donald was not taking much. Neil talked
on and on, and of course he soon began to tell things it would have been
much wiser not to tell. Finally he told Donald that he was going over
the bay to ask Nancy Sherman that very night to marry him. And if she
would have him, then Donald and all the folks should see a wedding that
WAS a wedding.

"Oh, wasn't Donald taken aback! This was more than he had expected. Neil
hadn't been courting Nancy very long, and Donald never dreamed he would
propose to her QUITE so soon.

"At first Donald didn't know what to do. He felt sure deep down in his
heart, that Nancy liked HIM. She was very shy and modest, but you know
a girl can let a man see she likes him without going out of her way. But
Donald knew that if Neil proposed first he would have the best chance.
Neil was rich and the Shermans were poor, and old Elias Sherman would
have the most to say in the matter. If he told Nancy she must take Neil
Campbell she would never dream of disobeying him. Old Elias Sherman was
a man who had to be obeyed. But if Nancy had only promised some one else
first her father would not make her break her word.

"Wasn't it a hard plight for poor Donald? But he was a Scotchman,
you know, and it's pretty hard to stick a Scotchman long. Presently a
twinkle came into his eyes, for he remembered that all was fair in love
and war. So he said to Neil, oh, so persuasively,

"'Have some more, man, have some more. 'Twill keep the heart in you in
the teeth of that wind. Help yourself. There's plenty more where that
came from.'

"Neil didn't want MUCH persuasion. He took some more, and said slyly,

"'Is it going over the bay the night that yourself will be doing?'

"Donald shook his head.

"'I had thought of it,' he owned, 'but it looks a wee like a storm, and
my sleigh is at the blacksmith's to be shod. If I went it must be on
Black Dan's back, and he likes a canter over the ice in a snow-storm
as little as I. His own fireside is the best place for a man to-night,
Campbell. Have another taste, man, have another taste.'

"Neil went on 'tasting,' and that sly Donald sat there with a sober
face, but laughing eyes, and coaxed him on. At last Neil's head fell
forward on his breast, and he was sound asleep. Donald got up, put on
his overcoat and cap, and went to the door.

"'May your sleep be long and sweet, man,' he said, laughing softly, 'and
as for the waking, 'twill be betwixt you and me.'

"With that he untied Neil's horse, climbed into Neil's sleigh, and
tucked Neil's buffalo robe about him.

"'Now, Bess, old girl, do your bonniest,' he said. 'There's more than
you know hangs on your speed. If the Campbell wakes too soon Black Dan
could show you a pair of clean heels for all your good start. On, my
girl.'

"Brown Bess went over the ice like a deer, and Donald kept thinking of
what he should say to Nancy--and more still of what she would say to
him. SUPPOSE he was mistaken. SUPPOSE she said 'no!'

"'Neil would have the laugh on me then. Sure he's sleeping well. And the
snow is coming soon. There'll be a bonny swirl on the bay ere long. I
hope no harm will come to the lad if he starts to cross. When he wakes
he'll be in such a fine Highland temper that he'll never stop to think
of danger. Well, Bess, old girl, here we are. Now, Donald Fraser, pluck
up heart and play the man. Never flinch because a slip of a lass looks
scornful at you out of the bonniest dark-blue eyes on earth.'

"But in spite of his bold words Donald's heart was thumping as he drove
into the Sherman yard. Nancy was there milking a cow by the stable door,
but she stood up when she saw Donald coming. Oh, she was very beautiful!
Her hair was like a skein of golden silk, and her eyes were as blue as
the gulf water when the sun breaks out after a storm. Donald felt more
nervous than ever. But he knew he must make the most of his chance. He
might not see Nancy alone again before Neil came. He caught her hand and
stammered out,

"'Nan, lass, I love you. You may think 'tis a hasty wooing, but that's a
story I can tell you later maybe. I know well I'm not worthy of you, but
if true love could make a man worthy there'd be none before me. Will you
have me, Nan?'

"Nancy didn't SAY she would have him. She just LOOKED it, and Donald
kissed her right there in the snow.

"The next morning the storm was over. Donald knew Neil must be soon
on his track. He did not want to make the Sherman house the scene of
a quarrel, so he resolved to get away before the Campbell came.
He persuaded Nancy to go with him to visit some friends in another
settlement. As he brought Neil's sleigh up to the door he saw a black
speck far out on the bay and laughed.

"'Black Dan goes well, but he'll not be quick enough,' he said.

"Half an hour later Neil Campbell rushed into the Sherman kitchen and
oh, how angry he was! There was nobody there but Betty Sherman, and
Betty was not afraid of him. She was never afraid of anybody. She was
very handsome, with hair as brown as October nuts and black eyes and
crimson cheeks; and she had always been in love with Neil Campbell
herself.

"'Good morning, Mr. Campbell,' she said, with a toss of her head. 'It's
early abroad you are. And on Black Dan, no less! Was I mistaken in
thinking that Donald Fraser said once that his favourite horse should
never be backed by any man but him? But doubtless a fair exchange is no
robbery, and Brown Bess is a good mare in her way.'

"'Where is Donald Fraser?' said Neil, shaking his fist. 'It's him I'm
seeking, and it's him I will be finding. Where is he, Betty Sherman?'

"'Donald Fraser is far enough away by this time,' mocked Betty. 'He is a
prudent fellow, and has some quickness of wit under that sandy thatch of
his. He came here last night at sunset, with a horse and sleigh not his
own, or lately gotten, and he asked Nan in the stable yard to marry him.
Did a man ask ME to marry him at the cow's side with a milking pail
in my hand, it's a cold answer he'd get for his pains. But Nan thought
differently, and they sat late together last night, and 'twas a bonny
story Nan wakened me to hear when she came to bed--the story of a braw
lover who let his secret out when the whisky was above the wit, and then
fell asleep while his rival was away to woo and win his lass. Did you
ever hear a like story, Mr. Campbell?'

"'Oh, yes,' said Neil fiercely. 'It is laughing at me over the country
side and telling that story that Donald Fraser will be doing, is it? But
when I meet him it is not laughing he will be doing. Oh, no. There will
be another story to tell!'

"'Now, don't meddle with the man,' cried Betty. 'What a state to be in
because one good-looking lass likes sandy hair and gray eyes better
than Highland black and blue! You have not the spirit of a wren, Neil
Campbell. Were I you, I would show Donald Fraser that I could woo and
win a lass as speedily as any Lowlander of them all; that I would!
There's many a girl would gladly say 'yes' for your asking. And here
stands one! Why not marry ME, Neil Campbell? Folks say I'm as bonny as
Nan--and I could love you as well as Nan loves her Donald--ay, and ten
times better!'

"What do you suppose the Campbell did? Why, just the thing he ought to
have done. He took Betty at her word on the spot; and there was a double
wedding soon after. And it is said that Neil and Betty were the happiest
couple in the world--happier even than Donald and Nancy. So all was well
because it ended well!"

The Story Girl curtsied until her silken skirts swept the floor. Then
she flung herself in her chair and looked at Mr. Campbell, flushed,
triumphant, daring.

The story was old to us. It had once been published in a Charlottetown
paper, and we had read in Aunt Olivia's scrapbook, where the Story Girl
had learned it. But we had listened entranced. I have written down the
bare words of the story, as she told it; but I can never reproduce the
charm and colour and spirit she infused into it. It LIVED for us. Donald
and Neil, Nancy and Betty, were there in that room with us. We saw the
flashes of expression on their faces, we heard their voices, angry or
tender, mocking or merry, in Lowland and Highland accent. We realized
all the mingled coquetry and feeling and defiance and archness in Betty
Sherman's daring speech. We had even forgotten all about Mr. Campbell.

That gentleman, in silence, took out his wallet, extracted a note
therefrom, and handed it gravely to the Story Girl.

"There are five dollars for you," he said, "and your story was well
worth it. You ARE a wonder. Some day you will make the world realize
it. I've been about a bit, and heard some good things, but I've never
enjoyed anything more than that threadbare old story I heard in my
cradle. And now, will you do me a favour?"

"Of course," said the delighted Story Girl.

"Recite the multiplication table for me," said Mr. Campbell.

We stared. Well might Mr. Campbell be called eccentric. What on earth
did he want the multiplication table recited for? Even the Story Girl
was surprised. But she began promptly, with twice one and went through
it to twelve times twelve. She repeated it simply, but her voice changed
from one tone to another as each in succession grew tired. We had never
dreamed that there was so much in the multiplication table. As she
announced it, the fact that three times three was nine was exquisitely
ridiculous, five times six almost brought tears to our eyes, eight times
seven was the most tragic and frightful thing ever heard of, and twelve
times twelve rang like a trumpet call to victory.

Mr. Campbell nodded his satisfaction.

"I thought you could do it," he said. "The other day I found this
statement in a book. 'Her voice would have made the multiplication
table charming!' I thought of it when I heard yours. I didn't believe it
before, but I do now."

Then he let us go.

"You see," said the Story Girl as we went home, "you need never be
afraid of people."

"But we are not all Story Girls," said Cecily.

That night we heard Felicity talking to Cecily in their room.

"Mr. Campbell never noticed one of us except the Story Girl," she said,
"but if I had put on MY best dress as she did maybe she wouldn't have
taken all the attention."

"Could you ever do what Betty Sherman did, do you suppose?" asked Cecily
absently.

"No; but I believe the Story Girl could," answered Felicity rather
snappishly.



CHAPTER VIII. A TRAGEDY OF CHILDHOOD

The Story Girl went to Charlottetown for a week in June to visit Aunt
Louisa. Life seemed very colourless without her, and even Felicity
admitted that it was lonesome. But three days after her departure Felix
told us something on the way home from school which lent some spice to
existence immediately.

"What do you think?" he said in a very solemn, yet excited, tone. "Jerry
Cowan told me at recess this afternoon that he HAD SEEN A PICTURE OF
GOD--that he has it at home in an old, red-covered history of the world,
and has looked at it OFTEN."

To think that Jerry Cowan should have seen such a picture often! We were
as deeply impressed as Felix had meant us to be.

"Did he say what it was like?" asked Peter.

"No--only that it was a picture of God, walking in the garden of Eden."

"Oh," whispered Felicity--we all spoke in low tones on the subject, for,
by instinct and training, we thought and uttered the Great Name with
reverence, in spite of our devouring curiosity--"oh, WOULD Jerry Cowan
bring it to school and let us see it?"

"I asked him that, soon as ever he told me," said Felix. "He said he
might, but he couldn't promise, for he'd have to ask his mother if
he could bring the book to school. If she'll let him he'll bring it
to-morrow."

"Oh, I'll be almost afraid to look at it," said Sara Ray tremulously.

I think we all shared her fear to some extent. Nevertheless, we went to
school the next day burning with curiosity. And we were disappointed.
Possibly night had brought counsel to Jerry Cowan; or perhaps his mother
had put him up to it. At all events, he announced to us that he couldn't
bring the red-covered history to school, but if we wanted to buy the
picture outright he would tear it out of the book and sell it to us for
fifty cents.

We talked the matter over in serious conclave in the orchard that
evening. We were all rather short of hard cash, having devoted most of
our spare means to the school library fund. But the general consensus
of opinion was that we must have the picture, no matter what pecuniary
sacrifices were involved. If we could each give about seven cents we
would have the amount. Peter could only give four, but Dan gave eleven,
which squared matters.

"Fifty cents would be pretty dear for any other picture, but of course
this is different," said Dan.

"And there's a picture of Eden thrown in, too, you know," added
Felicity.

"Fancy selling God's picture," said Cecily in a shocked, awed tone.

"Nobody but a Cowan would do it, and that's a fact," said Dan.

"When we get it we'll keep it in the family Bible," said Felicity.
"That's the only proper place."

"Oh, I wonder what it will be like," breathed Cecily.

We all wondered. Next day in school we agreed to Jerry Cowan's terms,
and Jerry promised to bring the picture up to Uncle Alec's the following
afternoon.

We were all intensely excited Saturday morning. To our dismay, it began
to rain just before dinner.

"What if Jerry doesn't bring the picture to-day because of the rain?" I
suggested.

"Never you fear," answered Felicity decidedly. "A Cowan would come
through ANYTHING for fifty cents."

After dinner we all, without any verbal decision about it, washed our
faces and combed our hair. The girls put on their second best dresses,
and we boys donned white collars. We all had the unuttered feeling that
we must do such honour to that Picture as we could. Felicity and Dan
began a small spat over something, but stopped at once when Cecily said
severely,

"How DARE you quarrel when you are going to look at a picture of God
to-day?"

Owing to the rain we could not foregather in the orchard, where we had
meant to transact the business with Jerry. We did not wish our grown-ups
around at our great moment, so we betook ourselves to the loft of the
granary in the spruce wood, from whose window we could see the main road
and hail Jerry. Sara Ray had joined us, very pale and nervous, having
had, so it appeared, a difference of opinion with her mother about
coming up the hill in the rain.

"I'm afraid I did very wrong to come against ma's will," she said
miserably, "but I COULDN'T wait. I wanted to see the picture as soon as
you did."

We waited and watched at the window. The valley was full of mist, and
the rain was coming down in slanting lines over the tops of the spruces.
But as we waited the clouds broke away and the sun came out flashingly;
the drops on the spruce boughs glittered like diamonds.

"I don't believe Jerry can be coming," said Cecily in despair. "I
suppose his mother must have thought it was dreadful, after all, to sell
such a picture."

"There he is now!" cried Dan, waving excitedly from the window.

"He's carrying a fish-basket," said Felicity. "You surely don't suppose
he would bring THAT picture in a fish-basket!"

Jerry HAD brought it in a fish-basket, as appeared when he mounted
the granary stairs shortly afterwards. It was folded up in a newspaper
packet on top of the dried herring with which the basket was filled. We
paid him his money, but we would not open the packet until he had gone.

"Cecily," said Felicity in a hushed tone. "You are the best of us all.
YOU open the parcel."

"Oh, I'm no gooder than the rest of you," breathed Cecily, "but I'll
open it if you like."

With trembling fingers Cecily opened the parcel. We stood around, hardly
breathing. She unfolded it and held it up. We saw it.

Suddenly Sara began to cry.
