"The good story-teller effects much; he has an ennobling effect upon
children,--so much the more ennobling that he does not appear to intend
it,"--FROEBEL.


All this time while George Washington had been growing up,--first a
little boy, then a larger boy, and then a young surveyor,--all this time
the French and English and Indians were unhappy and uncomfortable in the
country north of Virginia. The French wanted all the land, so did the
English, and the Indians saw that there would be no room for them,
whichever had it, so they all began to trouble each other and to quarrel
and fight.

These troubles grew so bad at last that the Virginians began to be
afraid of the French and Indians, and thought they must have some
soldiers of their own ready to fight.

George Washington was only nineteen then, but everybody knew he was wise
and brave, so they chose him to teach the soldiers near his home how to
march and to fight.

Then the king and the people of England grew very uneasy at all this
quarreling, and they sent over soldiers and cannon and powder, and
commenced to get ready to fight in earnest. Washington was made a major,
and he had to go a thousand miles, in the middle of winter, into the
Indian and French country, to see the chiefs and the soldiers, and find
out about the troubles.

When he came back again, all the people were so pleased with his courage
and with the wise way in which he had behaved, that they made him
lieutenant-colonel.

Then began a long war between the French and the English, which lasted
seven years. Washington fought through all of it, and was made a
colonel, and by and by commander of all the soldiers in Virginia. He
built forts and roads, he gained and lost battles, he fought the Indians
and the French; and by all this trouble and hard work he learned to be a
great soldier.

In many of the battles of this war, Washington and the Virginians did
not wear a uniform like the English soldiers, but a buckskin shirt and
fringed leggings like the Indians.

From beginning to end of some of the battles, Washington rode about
among the men, telling them where to go and how to fight; the bullets
were whistling around him all the time, but he said he liked the music.

By and by the war was over; the French were driven back to their own
part of the country, and Washington went home to Mt. Vernon to rest, and
took with him his wife, lovely Martha Washington, whom he had met and
married while he was fighting the French and Indians.

While he was at Mt. Vernon he saw all his horses again,--"Valiant" and
"Magnolia" and "Chinkling" and "Ajax,"--and had grand gallops over the
country.

He had some fine dogs, too, to run by his side, and help him hunt the
bushy-tailed foxes. "Vulcan" and "Bingwood" and "Music" and "Sweetlips"
were the names of some of them. You may be sure the dogs were glad when
they had their master home again.

But Washington did not have long to rest, for another war was coming,
the great war of the Revolution.

Little children cannot understand all the reasons for this war, but I
can tell you some of them.

You remember in the story of Thanksgiving I told you about the Pilgrim
fathers, who came from England to this country because their king would
not let them pray to God as they liked. That king was dead now, and
there was another in his place, a king with the name of George, like our
Washington.

Now our great-grandfathers had always loved England and Englishmen,
because many of their friends were still living there, and because it
was their old home.

The king gave them governors to help take care of their people, and
soldiers to fight for them, and they sent to England for many things to
wear and to eat.

But just before this Revolutionary War, the king and the great men who
helped him began to say that things should be done in this country
that our people did not think right at all. The king said they must
buy expensive stamps to put on all their newspapers and almanacs and
lawyer's papers, and that they must pay very high taxes on their tea and
paper and glass, and he sent soldiers to see that this was done.

This made our great-grandfathers very angry. They refused to pay the
taxes, they would not buy anything from England any more, and some men
even went on board the ships, as they came into Boston Harbor, and threw
the tea over into the water.

So fifty-one men were chosen from all over the country, and they met
at Philadelphia, to see what could be done. Washington was sent from
Virginia. And after they had talked very solemnly, they all thought
there would be great trouble soon, and Washington went home to drill the
soldiers.

Then the war began with the battle of Lexington, in New England, and
soon Washington was made commander in chief of the armies.

He rode the whole distance from Philadelphia to Boston on horseback,
with a troop of officers; and all the people on the way came to see him,
bringing bands of music and cheering him as he went by. He rode into
camp in the morning. The soldiers were drawn up in the road, and men and
women and children who had come to look at Washington were crowded all
about. They saw a tall, splendid, handsome man in a blue coat with buff
facings, and epaulets on his shoulders. As he took off his hat, drew his
shining sword and raised it in sight of all the people, the cannon began
to thunder, and all the people hurrahed and tossed their hats in the
air.

Of course he looked very splendid, and they all knew how brave he was,
and thought he would soon put an end to the war.

But it did not happen as they expected, for this was only the beginning,
and the war lasted seven long years.

Fighting is always hard, even if you have plenty of soldiers and plenty
for them to eat; but Washington had very few soldiers, and very little
powder for the guns, and little food for the men to eat.

The soldiers were not in uniform, as ours are to-day; but each was
dressed just as he happened to come from his shop or his farm.

Washington ordered hunting shirts for them, such as he wore when he went
to fight the Indians, for he knew they would look more like soldiers if
all were dressed alike.

Of course many people thought that our men would be beaten, as the war
went on; but Washington never thought so, for he was sure our side was
right.

I hardly know what he would have done, at last, if the French people had
not promised to come over and help us, and to send us money and men and
ships. All the people in the army thanked God when they heard it, and
fired their guns for joy.

A brave young man named Lafayette came with the French soldiers, and he
grew to be Washington's great friend, and fought for us all through the
Revolution.

Many battles were fought in this war, and Washington lost some of them,
and a great many of his men were killed.

You could hardly understand how much trouble he had. In the winter, when
the snow was deep on the ground, he had no houses or huts for his men to
sleep in; his soldiers were ragged and cold by day, and had not blankets
enough to keep them warm by night; their shoes were old and worn, and
they had to wrap cloths around their feet to keep them from freezing.

When they marched to the Delaware River, one cold Christmas night, a
soldier who was sent after them, with a message for Washington, traced
them by their footprints on the snow, all reddened with the blood from
their poor cut feet.

They must have been very brave and patient to have fought at all, when
they were so cold and ragged and hungry.

Washington suffered a great deal in seeing his soldiers so wretched, and
I am sure that, with all his strength and courage, he would sometimes
have given up hope, if he had not talked and prayed to God a great deal,
and asked Him to help him.

In one of the hardest times of the whole war, Washington was staying
at a farmer's house. One morning, he rode out very early to visit the
soldiers. The farmer went into the fields soon after, and as he was
passing a brook where a great many bushes were growing, he heard a deep
voice from the thicket. He looked through the leaves, and saw Washington
on his knees, on the ground, praying to God for his soldiers. He had
fastened his horse to a tree, and come away by himself to ask God to
help them.

At last the war came to an end; the English were beaten, and our armies
sent up praise and thanks to God.

Then the soldiers went quietly back to their homes, and Washington bade
all his officers good-by, and thanked them for their help and their
courage.

The little room in New York where he said farewell is kept to show to
visitors now, and you can see it some day yourselves.

Then Washington went home to Mt. Vernon to rest; but before he had been
there long, the people found out that they must have some one to help
take care of them, as they had nothing to do with the king of England
any more; and they asked Washington to come and be the first President
of the United States.

So he did as they wished, and was as wise and good, and as careful and
fine a President as he had been surveyor, soldier, and general.

You know we always call Washington the Father of his Country, because he
did so much for us and helped to make the United States so great.

After he died, there were parks and mountains and villages and towns and
cities named for him all over the land, because people loved him so and
prized so highly what he had done for them.

In the city of Washington there is a building where you can see many
of the things that belonged to the first President, when he was alive.
There is his soldier's coat, his sword, and in an old camp chest are the
plates and knives and forks that he used in the Revolution.

There is a tall, splendid monument of shining gray stone in that city,
that towers far, far above all the highest roofs and spires. It was
built in memory of George Washington, by the people of the United
States, to show that they loved and would always remember the Father of
his Country.




THE MAPLE-LEAF AND THE VIOLET.

"Story-telling must please children, so that it will influence,
strengthen, and elevate their lives."--FROEBEL


The Maple-tree lived on the edge of the wood. Beside and behind her
the trees grew so thick and tall that there was plenty of shade at her
roots; but as no one stood in front, she could always look across the
meadows to the brown house where Bessie lived, and could see what went
on in the world.

After the cold winter had gone by, and the spring had come again,
the Maple-tree sent out thousands of tiny leaf-buds, that stretched
themselves, and grew larger day by day in the warm sunshine. One little
Bud, on the end of a tall branch, worked so hard to grow that by and by
he finished opening all his folds, and found himself a tiny pale green
leaf.

He was curious, as little folks generally are, and as soon as he opened
his eyes wanted to see everything about him. First he looked up at the
blue sky overhead, but the sky only looked quietly back at him. Then
he looked across the meadows to where Bessie lived, but Bessie was at
school and the house was still.

Then he gazed far down below him on the ground; and there, just beneath,
was a little Violet, She had uncurled her purple petals a few days
before, and was waiting to welcome the first leaf-bud that came out.

So when the Maple-leaf looked down, she smiled up at him and said,
"Good-morning." He answered her politely, but he was very little, and
did not know quite what to say, so he didn't talk any more that day.

The next morning they greeted each other again, and soon they grew to be
good friends, and talked together very happily all day. The Maple-leaf
lived so high up in the tree that he could easily see across the fields,
and he watched every day for Bessie as she started for school. When she
came out of her door, he told the Violet, and the Violet always said
every morning, "Dear Bessie! I should like to see her, too!"

Sometimes, when the day was chilly and it was almost too damp in the
shade, the Violet used to wish she might be high up on the branch above
her, waving about in the sunshine like the Maple-leaf; but she was a
contented little thing, and never fretted long for what she could not
have.

It was generally pleasant on the ground, and the bugs and caterpillars
and worms, as they crawled about at her roots, often told her very
interesting things about their families and their troubles.

One day it was very dry and warm. The Maple-leaf was not at all
comfortable, high in the hot air, and he said to his mother,
"Mother-tree, won't you let me go down by the Violet and be cool?"

Then the Maple-tree answered, "No, no, little leaf, not now; if I once
let you go, you can never come back again. Stay quietly here; the time
will soon come for you to leave me."

The Maple-leaf told this to the Violet, and then they began to fear that
when the mother-tree let him go, by and by, he might not be able to fall
close beside the Violet.

So the next day, when the wind came whistling along, the Violet asked
him if he would kindly take care of the leaf, and send him to her when
the mother-tree let him go. The wind was rough and careless, and said he
really didn't know. He couldn't be sure how he'd feel then. They would
have to wait and see.

The two little friends were rather unhappy about this, but they waited
quietly. By and by the weather grew cold. The air was so chill that the
Maple-leaf shivered in the night, and in the morning, when the sun rose,
and he could see himself, he found he was all red, just as your hands
and cheeks are on a frosty morning. When the mother-tree saw him, she
told him he would soon leave her now, and she bade him good-by. He
was sorry to go, but then he thought of his dear Violet, and was happy
again.

By and by a gust of cold wind came blowing by, and twisted the little
leaf about, and fluttered him so that he could not hold to the tree any
longer. So at last he blew off, and the wind took him up and danced with
him and played with him until he was very tired and dizzy. But at last,
for he was a kind wind after all, he blew the leaf back, straight to the
side of the Violet. How close they cuddled to each other, and how happy
they were! You would have been very glad if you had seen them together.

In the morning, when the sun rose yellow and bright, Bessie came into
the woods with a basket and a trowel. It was nearly winter, and she knew
that soon the snow would fall and cover all the pretty growing things.
So she dug up, very carefully, roots of plumy fern and partridge berries
with their leaves, and wintergreen and boxberry plants, to grow in her
window-garden in the winter. She took the Violet too, bringing away so
much of the earth around her roots that the little thing scarcely felt
that she had been moved. As Bessie put her plants in the basket, she
saw the little Maple-leaf resting close by the violet, but he looked so
pretty, lying there, that she did not move him.

In the sunny window of the little brown house the Violet grew still
more fresh and green. But each day, as the plants were watered, the
Maple-leaf curled up a little more at the edges, and sank down farther
into the earth, until soon he was almost out of sight, and by and by
crumbled quite away. Still he was close beside his Violet, and all the
strength he had he gave to her roots.

She always loved him just the same, though she could not see him any
longer, and by and by, when she had lived her life, and her leaves
withered away, each one, as it fell from the stem, sank into the earth
where the Maple-leaf lay.




MRS. CHINCHILLA.

THE TALE OF A CAT.

"See what joyous faces, what shining eyes, and what glad jubilee welcome
the story-teller, and what a blooming circle of glad children press
around him!"--FROEBEL.


Mrs. Chinchilla was not a lovely lady, with a dress of soft gray cloth
and a great chinchilla muff and boa. Not at all. Mrs. Chinchilla was
a beautiful cat, with sleek fur like silver-gray satin, and a very
handsome tail to match, quite long enough to brush the ground when she
walked. She didn't live in a house, but she had a very comfortable home
in a fine drug-store, with one large bay-window almost to herself and
her kittens. She had three pretty fat dumplings of kittens, all in soft
shades of gray like their mother. She didn't like any other color in
kittens so well as a quiet ladylike gray. None of her children ever were
black, or white, or yellow, but sometimes they had four snow-white socks
on their gray paws. Mrs. Chinchilla didn't mind that, for white socks
were really a handsome finish to a gray kitten, though, of course, it
was a deal of trouble to keep them clean.

At the time my story begins the kits were all tiny catkins, whose eyes
had been open only a day or two, so Mrs. Chinchilla had to wash them
every morning herself. She had the most wonderful tongue! I'll tell
you what that tongue had in it: a hair-brush, a comb, a tooth-brush,
a nail-brush, a sponge, a towel, and a cake of soap! And when Mrs.
Chinchilla had finished those three little catkins, they were as fresh
and sweet, and shiny and clean, and kissable and huggable, as any baby
just out of a bath-tub.

One morning, just after the little kits had had their scrub in the sunny
bay-window, they felt, all at once, old enough to play; and so they
began to scramble over each other, and run about between the great
colored glass jars, and even to chase and bite the ends of their own
tails. They had not known that they had any tails before that morning,
and of course it was a charming surprise. Mrs. Chinchilla looked on
lazily and gravely. It had been a good while since she had had time or
had felt young and gay enough to chase her tail, but she was very glad
to see the kittens enjoy themselves harmlessly.

Now, while this was going on, some one came up to the window and looked
in. It was the Boy who lived across the street. Mrs. Chinchilla disliked
nearly all boys, but she was afraid of this one. He had golden curls and
a Fauntleroy collar, and the sweetest lips that ever said prayers, and
clean dimpled hands that looked as if they had been made to stroke cats
and make them purr. But instead of stroking them he rubbed their fur the
wrong way, and hung tin kettles to their tails, and tied handkerchiefs
over their heads. When Mrs. Chinchilla saw the Boy she humped her back,
so that it looked like a gray mountain, and said, "Sftt!" three times.
When the Boy found that she was looking at him, and lashing her tail,
and yawning so as to show him her sharp white teeth, he suddenly
disappeared from sight. So Mrs. Chinchilla gave the kittens their
breakfast, and they cuddled themselves into a round ball, and went fast
asleep. They were first rolled so tightly, and then so tied up with
their tails, that you couldn't have told whether they were three or six
little catkins. When their soft purr-r-r-r, purr-r-r-r had first
changed into sleepy little snores, and then died away altogether, Mrs.
Chinchilla jumped down out of the window, and went for her morning
airing in the back yard. At the same time the druggist passed behind a
tall desk to mix some medicine, and the shop was left alone.

Just then the Boy (for he hadn't gone away at all; he had just stooped
out of sight) rushed in the door quickly, snatched one of the kittens
out of the round ball, and ran away with it as fast as he could run.
Pretty soon Mrs. Chinchilla came back, and of course she counted the
kittens the very first thing. She always did it. To her surprise and
fright she found only two instead of three. She knew she couldn't be
mistaken. There were five kittens in her last family, and two less in
this family; and five kittens less two kittens is three kittens. One
chinchilla catkin gone! What should she do?

