
The boy whistled.

"What, at the old crazy man's that lives down here a piece?"

"Yes."

"What made you go there?"

"It began, to rain, and I had no other place to go."

"What did he say?" asked the new boy with curiosity.

"Did he cut up?"

"Cut up? No, unless you mean the bread. He cut up that."

"I mean, how did he act?"

"All right, except when he was talking about being General Jackson."

"Did you sleep there?"

"Yes."

"I wouldn't."

"Why not?"

"I wouldn't sleep in a crazy man's house."

"He wouldn't hurt you."

"I don't know about that. He chases us boys often, and threatens to kill
us."

"You plague him, don't you?"

"I guess we do. We call him 'Old Crazy,' and that makes him mad. He says
Henry Clay puts us up to it--ho, ho, ho!"

"He thinks Clay is his enemy. He told me so."

"What did you say?"

"Oh, I didn't contradict him. I called him general. He treated me
tip-top. He is going to make me Minister of France, when he is President
again."

"Maybe that was the best way to get along."

"How long has he lived here? What made him crazy?"

"I don't know. Folks say he was disappointed."

"Did he ever see Jackson?"

"Yes; he fit at New Orleans under him."

"Has he lived long around here?"

"Ever since I can remember. He gets a pension, I've heard father say.
That's what keeps him."

Here the boy reached the pasture to which he was driving the cows,
and Harry, bidding him "good-by," went on his way. He felt fresh and
vigorous, and walked ten miles before he felt the need of rest. When
this distance was accomplished, he found himself in the center of a
good-sized village. He felt hungry, and the provision which he brought
from home was nearly gone. There was a grocery store close at hand, and
he went in, thinking that he would find something to help his meal. On
the counter he saw some rolls, and there was an open barrel of apples
not far off.

"What do you charge for your rolls?" he asked.

"Two cents."

"I'll take one. How do you sell your apples?"

"A cent apiece."

"I'll take two."

Thus for four cents Harry made quite a substantial addition to his meal.
As he left the store, and walked up the road, with the roll in his
hand, eating an apple, he called to mind Benjamin Franklin's entrance of
Philadelphia with a roll under each arm.

"I hope I shall have as good luck as Franklin had," he thought.

Walking slowly, he saw, on a small building which he I had just reached,
the sign, "Post Office."

"Perhaps the postmaster will know if anybody about here wants a boy,"
Harry said to himself. "At any rate, it won't do any harm to inquire."

He entered, finding himself in a small room, with one part partitioned
off as a repository for mail matter. He stepped up to a little window,
and presently the postmaster, an elderly man, presented himself.

"What name," he asked.

"I haven't come for a letter," said Harry.

"What do you want, then?" asked the official, but not roughly.

"Do you know of anyone that wants to hire a boy?"

"Who's the boy?"

"I am. I want to get a chance to work."

"What kind of work?"

"Any kind that'll pay my board and a little over."

"I don't know of any place," said the postmaster, after a little
thought.

"Isn't there any shoe shop where I could get in?"

"That reminds me--James Leavitt told me this morning that his boy was
going to Boston to go into a store in a couple of months. He's been
pegging for his father and I guess they'll have to get somebody in his
place."

Harry's face brightened at this intelligence.

"That's just the kind of place I'd like to get," he said.

"Where does Mr. Leavitt live?"

"A quarter of a mile from here--over the bridge. You'll know it well
enough. It's a cottage house, with a shoe shop in the backyard."

"Thank you, sir," said Harry. "I'll go there and try my luck."

"Wait a minute," said the postmaster. "There's a letter here for Mr.
Leavitt. If you're going there, you may as well carry it along. It's
from Boston. I shouldn't wonder if it's about the place Bob Leavitt
wants."

"I'll take it with pleasure," said Harry.

It occurred to him that it would be a good introduction for him, and
pave the way for his application.

"I hope I may get a chance to work for this Mr. Leavitt," he said to
himself. "I like the looks of this village. I should like to live here
for a while."

He walked up the street, crossing the bridge referred to by the
postmaster, and looked carefully on each side of him for the cottage and
shop. At length he came to a place which answered the description, and
entered the yard. As he neared the shop he heard a noise which indicated
that work was going on inside. He opened the door, and entered.





CHAPTER XII. THE NEW BOARDER


Harry found himself in a room about twenty-five feet by twenty. The
floor was covered with scraps of leather. Here stood a deep wooden box
containing a case of shoes ready to send off. There was a stove in the
center, in which, however, as it was a warm day, no fire was burning.
There were three persons present. One, a man of middle age, was Mr.
James Leavitt, the proprietor of the shop. His son Robert, about
seventeen, worked at an adjoining bench. Tom Gavitt, a journeyman, a
short, thick-set man of thirty, employed by Mr. Leavitt, was the third.

The three looked up as Harry entered the shop.

"I have a letter for Mr. Leavitt," said our hero.

"That is my name," said the eldest of the party.

Harry advanced, and placed it in his hands.

"Where did you get this letter?"

"At the post office."

"I can't call you by name. Do you live about here?"

"No, I came from Granton."

No further questions were asked just then, as Mr. Leavitt, suspending
work, opened the letter.

"It's from your Uncle Benjamin," he said, addressing Robert. "Let us see
what he has to say."

He read the letter in silence.

"What does he say, father?" asked Robert.

"He says he shall be ready to take you the first of September. That's in
six weeks--a little sooner than we calculated. I wish it were a little
later, as work is brisk, and I may find it difficult to fill your place
without paying more than I want to."

"I guess you can pick up somebody," said Robert, who was anxious to go
to Boston as soon as possible.

"Won't you hire me?" asked Harry, who felt that the time had come for
him to announce his business.

Mr. Leavitt looked at him more attentively.

"Have you ever worked in a shop?"

"No, sir."

"It will take you some time to learn pegging."

"I'll work for my board till I've learned."

"But you won't be able to do all I want at first."

"Suppose I begin now," said Harry, "and work for my board till your son
goes away. By that time I can do considerable."

"I don't know but that's a good idea," said Mr. Leavitt. "What do you
think, Bob?"

"Better take him, father," said Robert, who felt that it would
facilitate his own plans.

"How much would you want after you have learned?" asked the father.

"I don't know; what would be a fair price," said Harry.

"I'll give you three dollars a week and board," said Mr. Leavitt, after
a little consideration--"that is, if I am satisfied with you."

"I'll come," said Harry, promptly. He rapidly calculated that there
would be about twenty weeks for which he would receive pay before the
six months expired, at the end of which the cow must be paid for. This
would give him sixty dollars, of which he thought he should be able to
save forty to send or carry to his father.

"How did you happen to come to me?" asked Mr. Leavitt, with some
curiosity.

"I heard at the post office that your son was going to the city to work,
and I thought I could get in here."

"Is your father living?"

"Yes, my father and mother both."

"What business is he in?"

"He is a farmer; but his farm is small, and not very profitable."

"So you thought you would leave home and try something else?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, we will try you at shoemaking. Robert, you can teach him what you
know about pegging."

"Come here," said Robert. "What is your name?"

"Harry Walton."

"How old are you?"

"Fifteen."

"Did you ever work much?"

"Yes, on a farm."

"Do you think you'll like shoemaking better?"

"I don't know yet, but I think I shall. I like almost anything better
than farming."

"And I like almost anything better than pegging. I began when I was only
twelve years old, and I'm sick of it."

"What kind of store is it you are going into?"

"Dry goods. My uncle, Benjamin Streeter, mother's brother, keeps a dry
goods store on Washington street. It'll be jolly living in the city."

"I don't know," said Harry thoughtfully. "I think I like a village just
as well."

"What sort of a place is Granton, where you come from?"

"It's a farming town. There isn't any village at all."

"There isn't much going on here."

"There'll be more than in Granton. There's nothing to do there but to
work on a farm."

"I shouldn't like that myself; but the city's the best of all."

"Can you make more money in a store than working in a shoe shop?"

"Not so much at first, but after you've got learned there's better
chances. There's a clerk, that went from here ten years ago, that gets
fifty dollars a week."

"Does he?" asked Harry, to whose rustic inexperience this seemed like an
immense salary. "I didn't think any clerk ever got so much."

"They get it often if they are smart," said Robert.

Here he was wrong, however. Such cases are exceptional, and a city fry
goods clerk, considering his higher rate of expense, is no better off
than many country mechanics. But country boys are apt to form wrong
ideas on this subject, and are in too great haste to forsake good
country homes for long hours of toil behind a city counter, and a poor
home in a dingy, third-class city boarding house. It is only in the
wholesale houses, for the most part, that high salaries are paid,
and then, of course, only to those who have shown superior energy and
capacity. Of course some do achieve success and become rich; but of the
tens of thousand who come from the country to seek clerkships, but a
very small proportion rise above a small income.

"I shall have a start," Robert proceeded, "for I go into my uncle's
store. I am to board at his house, and get three dollars a week."

"That's what your father offers me," said Harry.

"Yes; you'll earn more after a while, and I can now; but I'd rather live
in the city. There's lots to see in the city--theaters, circuses, and
all kinds of amusements."

"You won't have much money to spend on theaters," said Harry, prudently.

"Not at first, but I'll get raised soon."

"I think I should try to save as much as I could."

"Out of three dollars a week?"

"Yes."

"What can you save out of that?"

"I expect to save half of it, perhaps more."

"I couldn't do that. I want a little fun."

"You see my father's poor. I want to help him all I can."

"That's good advice for you, Bob," said Mr. Leavitt.

"Save up money, and help me."

Robert laughed.

"You'll have to wait till I get bigger pay," he said.

"Your father's better off than mine," said Harry.

"Of course, if he don't need it, that makes a difference."

Here the sound of a bell was heard, proceeding from the house.

"Robert," said his father "go in and tell your mother to put an extra
seat at the table. She doesn't know that we've got a new boarder."

He took off his apron, and washed his hands. Tom Gavitt followed his
example, but didn't go into the house of his employer. He lived in a
house of his own about five minutes' walk distant, but left the shop at
the same time. In a country village the general dinner hour is twelve
o'clock--a very unfashionably early hour--but I presume any of my
readers who had been at work from seven o'clock would have no difficulty
in getting up a good appetite at noon.

Robert went in and informed his mother of the new boarder. It made no
difference, for the table was always well supplied.

"This is Harry Walton, mother," said Mr. Leavitt, "our new apprentice.
He will take Bob's place when he goes."

"I am glad to see you," said Mrs. Leavitt, hospitably.

"You may sit here, next to Robert."

"What have you got for us to-day, mother?" asked her husband.

"A picked-up dinner. There's some cold beef left over from yesterday,
and I've made an apple pudding."

"That's good. We don't want anything better."
