"You're sure of that?"

"I never saw you before."

"Think again," spoke Frank. "I'll recall a little incident at Tipton, where
I came very near getting you into the hands of the town marshal."

With a frightened scowl Brady glared at Frank, the light of recognition now
in his eyes.

"I see you recall the incident," proceeded Frank steadily. "You are a
scamp, and you are up to some game about my friend, Ned Foreman. Now I've
something to say to you. If you hang around this place one single minute,
if you ever dare to come to this academy again, I'll have you in jail
inside of an hour."

"You impudent puppy!" shouted Brady, lifting his hand as if to strike
Frank. "You'll do what?"

"I'll have you arrested."

"What for?"

"For stealing a diamond bracelet from Mr. Samuel Mace of Tipton," was
Frank's reply.




CHAPTER XIX

A CLEAR CASE


The shot had told--Frank saw this at once.

Brady gasped for breath and turned white as a sheet.

"W--what diamond bracelet?" stammered the man.

"I guess you know," said Frank. "I guess, too, that the best and safest
thing for you to do is to get that bracelet back to the man you stole it
from before he sends an officer after you."

Brady simply stared at Frank. He was all taken aback. Frank saw that he was
dumfounded and scared. He followed up his advantage.

"You can't play any of your 'reformed man' tricks here, I can tell you," he
continued. "You practiced your game pretty well in that plug hat and
swallow-tail coat up at the cabin."

"The cabin?" repeated Brady, as though he was shocked.

"Yes; the cabin with those precious 'detectives' you told the professor
about, Jem and Dan."

"Say--look here--I don't see---- How do you know?"

"Never mind; you see I do," interrupted Frank. "Now, then, you follow my
advice. You get those two pieces of card together, and get that bracelet
from the man who has it in safekeeping for you."

Brady's eyes goggled. The amount of information Frank had about him, its
tremendous importance, staggered the man. He almost reeled where he stood.

"Send it at once to Samuel Mace at Tipton," went on Frank, "if you don't
want to be hunted down across the world if necessary. Then get as far as
you can from here. If you don't you're lost. Yes, sir," declared Frank
impressively, "a lost man."

"Thunder!" ejected the tramp in an overwhelmed sort of a way.

"You'd ought to be ashamed, hunting down an honest boy like Ned Foreman,
who is trying to make a man of himself," continued Frank indignantly.
"You've nigh ruined his chances already. You want to leave him alone. Mean
and low as you are, he is ashamed to tell the professor about it, but I'll
tell him, you bet. Now, then, you get away from here, double-quick."

The tramp started up as if he had been struck by a whip.

"And stay away," added our hero.

"I'm an abused man," sniffled Brady, trying the pathetic tack again.
"You're talking Greek to me about diamonds, and that such. Suppose I was a
bad one once, ain't I a reformed man now?"

"No, nor never will be, until you tell what dodge you're up to in getting
Ned into your clutches again."

"Boy, you mistake a poor old reformed man," said Brady, drawing a
handkerchief from his pocket to wipe his screwed-up eyes. As he did this a
lose pack of playing cards came out with the handkerchief and scattered all
around the ground, much on his confusion and assumed surprise.

"That looks like a reformed man, doesn't it?" said Frank. "You're a real,
right bad one, you are. Now you get away from here."

Brady went. He gave Frank an awful look of hatred and menace, but he
hurried his steps.

Frank stood watching him until the fellow was clear out of sight. Then,
very thoughtfully, he walked back to the school.

"Maybe I said too much; maybe I spoiled my own case," he reflected, "but I
was thinking of Ned's interests."

Frank had an idea in his mind that he would go to Professor Elliott, tell
him the whole story from beginning to end, and see if something could not
be done, here at Bellwood, to have the officers of the law try and find the
stolen diamond bracelet.

When Frank got to his room Bob Upton was awake, and, pale and
worried-looking, Ned Foreman sat conversing with him, and both occupied
Frank's thoughts for the next hour.

Frank had a reassuring talk with Ned. He told him that he need not worry
about Brady any further, that he had pretty effectually scared the rascal
away.

"All he can do is to try and kidnap you," explained Frank. "So you keep
pretty close to the academy for the next few days. Then I'll know if he is
hanging around here anywhere."

The next day Professor Elliott went away from Bellwood to visit a friend,
and Frank had no chance to talk with him about Ned, as he had planned.

Late that afternoon Frank strolled alone from the school grounds. He had no
definite purpose in view when he started. A little distance progressed,
however, he thought of the old hut, and made up his mind to see if he could
locate it.

For the first time since becoming a student at Bellwood Frank wore the
light checked suit of clothes, the counterpart of which he had given to
Ned.

Our hero had a pretty good idea as to the direction of the old cabin. He
must have gone a mile, when, as he was passing through a dense patch of
shrubbery, Frank became aware that some persons were following him.

Two men were skulking in his rear, advancing as he advanced, but keeping
well under the shadow and shelter of the bushes.

"It's those two men--Jem and Dan," said Frank to himself.




CHAPTER XX

FRANK A PRISONER


Our hero quickened his steps a little. Then he made up his mind what he
would do. He fancied he knew what the presence of the men, Jem and Dan,
meant. He smiled to himself as he strolled along, carelessly now.

Sidelong glances enabled him to make out the movements of his trailers
without awakening their suspicions. He could observe that they had branched
off from one another, aiming at a clear space, where they planned to head
him off.

This is just what they did do. Frank anticipated their action as they
suddenly moved toward him. He was as cool as a cucumber, and halting hailed
them with a nod and a familiar:

"Hello!"

"Hello, yourself, youngster," returned Jem, looking Frank over keenly,
while his comrade stood as if ready to pounce upon the lonely boy in the
woods at a given signal. "One of the school fellows, aren't you?"

Frank nodded.

"Thought so. Let's see, your name is----"

"Oh, call me Brown for short," retorted Frank with a laugh.

"You can't fool me," declared Jem, coming nearer.

"What do you want to know my name for?" demanded Frank.

"I'm sort of curious, that's all. Say, you give us the initial, and I'll
bet we can guess at the rest of it."

"Think so? All right, what do you say to N, now?"

"I'd say Ned, right off the handle," piped in Dan.

"All right," laughed Frank. "Then you might take F for the last name."

"Foreman--Ned Foreman!" shouted Dan excitedly. "It's him, Jem. The light
suit of clothes that Brady told us about----"

"Shut up--the bag!"

Quick as lightning Dan drew something from his breast and sprang forward.
It was to slip a canvas bag over Frank's head. Then each of the men
pinioned an arm, and Frank was a prisoner.

This was just as Frank had calculated it would be done, and he was not in
the least worried. He figured it out that these men had been sent by Brady
to kidnap Ned Foreman. The light suit of clothes had deceived them, and his
own verbal parrying had aided in their accepting him as the boy they had
been hired to capture.

The bag hung loosely about Frank's head. It was perforated at the top, and
he could breathe easily. He could not, however, see through the opaque
covering.

"Don't you make any noise now, if you're wise," ordered Jem.

"I'm not doing it, am I?" propounded Frank coolly in a muffled tone.

"Better not," said Dan. "I've got a heavy stick here, and I'd use it pretty
quick."

"Who are you, anyway, and what do you want of me?" asked Frank.

"Well, lad," answered Jem, "we're going to take you on a little journey. It
will take all night to do it, and we'll make you as comfortable as we can,
if you behave nicely. There's a real fine man you are to see. If you do as
he wants you to do, you won't be five minutes with him, and you'll leave
him with good pay for all the trouble we're putting you to."

"That's fair enough; I'm agreeable," said Frank.

"He's easy enough to handle," Frank heard Jem tell Dan.

"Maybe that's all put on," suggested the other. "Don't take any risks.
You'd better leave him with me when you get to the creek, and hurry on to
Middletown and get the horse and wagon."

Frank knew that Middletown was a small village not far from Bellwood. After
they had proceeded a little farther there was a halt. Dan made our hero sit
down on the grass and kept hold of his arm. The man Jem seemed to go away
somewhere.

It must have been nearly half an hour when Frank caught the echo of
rumbling wheels. Then there was a whistle as an approaching vehicle halted.

"Come on," said Dan, helping him to his feet. "We'll take a little ride."

"Anything for a change," laughed Frank. "What are you fellows up to,
anyhow?"

"You're pretty cheerful for a boy in the dark," observed Dan.

"Oh, that's all right--I'm thinking of that good pay you were talking
about."

"You're a sensible young fellow," commented Dan. "Don't you worry a bit.
You'll fare all right if you last through as you've begun. But if you
don't, then most everything fierce is likely to happen to you."

Frank was lifted into a wagon. Its back hinged out, and it was closed again
by Jem as Dan got into the vehicle after his prisoner. Frank dropped to a
pile of old blankets. Then Dan lifted the bag from his head.

"Don't try to see any further than the law allows," he remarked, "and it's
all right."

There was nothing to see, Frank found, but the sides, back and roof of a
shut-in delivery wagon. The driver's seat was obscured by a water-proof
blanket that came within a foot of the top of the wagon, leaving a small
space through which light and air might come.

"All right in there?" sang out Jem, and the vehicle started up.

"You can sleep or loaf, any way you like," said Dan. "If you get hungry or
thirsty we'll stop at some tavern and get you some food and something to
drink."

"I'm comfortable," declared Frank. "Say, look here, we've got quite
friendly. Maybe I can ask you a question or two."

"Ask away, youngster," directed Dan.

"Of course I guess what you are up to, or rather who put you up to it,"
said Frank.

"You wouldn't be Ned Foreman if you didn't," chuckled Dan.

"All right. Give me a guess, will you?"

"For certain."

"You're taking--me to see a man for five minutes, you said?"

"Yes, that's so."

"I'll bet you I know his name."

"Well, what is it?"

"Tim Brady."

"You've hit it wrong, youngster," declared the man Dan in apparent good
faith; "it's not Tim Brady."




CHAPTER XXI

A QUEER EXPERIENCE


Frank was a little surprised at the definite announcement of the man Dan.
The latter seemed to be telling the truth.

"If it's not Brady, who is behind this business?" began Frank.

"I didn't say that," retorted Dan.

"Why----"

"I said that it wasn't Brady you were going to meet."

"Oh!" uttered Frank vaguely.

"If you hadn't acted so sensible and handsomely," proceeded Dan, "I
wouldn't talk with you at all. You've got me sort of chummy, though. I like
you. I don't suppose there's any harm in telling you that it's a lawyer
you're going to see. He'll explain the business to you."

"What is the business?" persisted Frank.

"Bless me if I know," declared Dan. "We were to do something--get you. We
were to take you somewhere--we do it. After that we're paid off, and that's
our end of it."

Frank did some thinking and surmising; but he could only theorize. He saw
that now he was in the mix-up he must see it through.

How far they traveled in the next eight hours he could only guess at. The
vehicle had two horses attached; they were pretty good travelers, and the
road was a smooth and level one and in excellent condition.

A little after dark the team halted, and Jem went to some place near by and
bought some doughnuts. He gave them to Dan, who divided up with Frank. Then
Frank went to sleep, awoke, and went to sleep again on the heap of blankets
in the bottom of the wagon, to be aroused by Dan shaking his arm vigorously
and saying:

"Wake up, youngster."

"What time is it?" inquired Frank.

"Just struck midnight by the village clock," Dan informed him.

"What village?" asked Frank.

"You're not to know that, youngster," responded Dan with a chuckle, as
though he considered the prisoner a pretty keen lad. "You'll have to put on
this headgear again," and Frank did not demur as the bag was drawn over his
head.

Then our hero was lifted out of the wagon, and Jem took hold of one hand
and Dan of the other, and he was led across a yard, up a pair of outside
stairs, along a porch, and then there was a pause. Jem knocked at a door.
There was some delay, and then the door was opened.

"We're the men from Brady," said Jem.

"Pretty outlandish hour to disturb a man," snapped a sharp and domineering
voice in return.

"Acting on orders, judge," said Jem.

"This is the lad, is it?"

"It's him, judge," answered Jem, and they entered some kind of a room.

Frank was pushed down into a chair. Then Dan removed the bag from his head.
Frank looked about him with a good deal of curiosity.

He found himself in a room that he decided must be a lawyer's office. It
had cases full of law books. On a table stood a shaded lamp, and beside it
was the man who had admitted them.

This was a wiry, shrewd-looking individual, whose hair was all touseled and
who was only partially dressed, as if he had been aroused from sleep. He
moved to a chair and drew toward him a little package of documents with a
rubber band around it.

"This is the lad Foreman, is it?" he demanded.

"It's him, judge," declared Jem.

"Very good. Young man, I am acting for a client. Understand one thing. You
appear before me voluntarily. If at any future time
any--er--misunderstanding, complications arise out of this extraordinary
midnight--er--invasion, I simply act as attorney for my client. Here's a
document. It is to be signed by you. In consideration of the same, at a
later date, my client is to remit to some school or other the money to
pay for your schooling four years in advance."

"Don't say a word but 'uh-huh,'" whispered Dan quickly to Frank. "You'll be
glad if you do it. It's all right."

"Uh-huh," said Frank obediently, but thinking somethings that would have
startled the men with him if they had guessed them.

"_Ipse dixit, de facto,_ as we say in the law," proceeded the judge
pompously. "That's all, I think."

The speaker dipped a pen in ink. He set before Frank a two-paged document.
Its first page was turned over. Its second page our hero was not given time
to read, but Frank's keen glance took in words and phrases that plainly
indicated to him that the document alluded to a guardianship of some kind.

Frank signed a name that was no name at all. It was a meaningless scrawl.
He believed it would bring about a crisis, but he was now ready for just
that. The document was drawn from his hand, but before the judge could look
at it there was a ring at a telephone at the end of the room. The judge
hastily thrust the document into a drawer and hastened to the telephone.

He spoke to somebody over the phone and nodded to Jem, and said:

"It's Brady."

"No need of us waiting," responded Jem. "Here's my half of that card,
judge. I suppose you know the arrangement."

For reply the judge walked to a safe standing in the corner of the room,
opened it, took out a little box and handed it to Jem.

Frank felt somehow that this was the diamond bracelet that had been stolen
from Samuel Mace back at Tipton. The thought connected with the talk he had
overheard at the cabin near Bellwood about two pieces of card. He theorized
that it was the reward to Jem and Dan for agreeing to kidnap Ned Foreman.

"Got it?" spoke Dan eagerly, edging up to Jem. "Then our part's done. Let's
get away from here."

Frank took a last glance around the room. It was to note a row of law books
that had written on their calfskin backs the name "Grimm." Frank treasured
this clue. He did not doubt that it was the name of the "judge." He did not
know what town he was in, or how far away from Bellwood, but he believed he
now had learned the name of the "judge," and that it would afford a
starting point in a later investigation.

Frank smiled to himself as, the bag again over his face, he was taken back
to the covered wagon. He wondered what the "judge" and Brady would say when
they found a meaningless scrawl to the document they had gone to so much
trouble to have signed.

He made up his mind that, although he was a minor, the signature of Ned
Foreman to that paper meant something important. It probably gave some
power to Brady over Ned. What this was Frank felt sure that he could soon
find out, and he planned upon his return to Bellwood School to go straight
to Professor Elliott with the whole story.

"Now, then, youngster," observed Dan as the wagon started up, "you've
behaved fine. Nobody is hurt, and you've done yourself some good. I'll
promise you that your schooling bills will be paid, and you just want to
forget everything that's happened to-night. Don't be foolish and stir
things up. It'll be no use. You'll be provided for until you're of age, and
that's a good deal for a fellow who was grubbing for every cent yesterday."

Frank went to sleep after that. He was roused by Dan in broad daylight, and
Jem opened the back of the wagon. Dan walked a few steps with Frank.

"You're about two miles from your school," he said. "I've taken quite an
interest in you. If I was the right sort, I'd kind of like to adopt you.
Good-by."

"Good-by," answered Frank, starting in the direction of Bellwood School.

Frank walked on for a distance. He observed that the wagon had not started
up immediately, and he believed that the two men would satisfy themselves
that he was not delaying or lurking around before they resumed their
journey.

Frank chuckled to himself. He had gone through a night of considerable
mystery, but he fancied he had gathered up some pretty important points as
to the reason for all the planning and plotting regarding Ned Foreman. He
felt pretty well satisfied with himself.

"I don't want to pat myself on the shoulder any," was the way he put it to
himself, "but I think I've done pretty well for a young fellow about my
size. They would have it that I was Ned Foreman. They would have me sign
that paper. I didn't tell any lies, but I wonder what that lawyer will say
when he reads that signature? Grim he'll be, sure enough."

Frank at first was quite content to return to the academy. The wagon had
started up at a clattering rate and he did not attempt to follow it.
Suddenly, however, a crash and then the echo of loud voices halted him.

"Something happened to that wagon," decided Frank. "Jem and Dan are
discussing things at a great rate, too. I'm going to see what's up."

Frank made a short cut through the shrubbery and reached the road at the
point whither the loud voices of the two men led him. He came upon the
wagon with one hind wheel stuck in a muddy rut and the other one smashed at
the hub. From the shelter of a handy bush Frank surveyed the situation and
listened to what the recent captors were saying.

"There's no use, Jem," remarked Dan. "She's a goner and you've just got to
leave her here."

"But what about getting to Rockton?"

"Ain't that plain?"

"Not to me," asserted Jem.

"Why, unhitch the animal, and make it on horseback."

"Me?" hooted Jem. "Why, I never rode a horse twice in my life, and then
without a saddle--not much."

"Well, unhitch, anyway; it isn't far to the town. Let the livery stable man
come back after the wagon here and give you a new rig."

"There's no other way to do that I can make out," agreed Jem. "Yes, that's
just what we'll do."

Frank became interested in watching them unhitch the horse from the wagon.
They finally started off, Jem leading the horse. Frank was about to go
about his business, when a casual remark of Dan acted like a magnet in
attracting his attention away from his former purpose.

"I say, Jem," he observed in a somewhat anxious tone, "you are sure we can
settle the bracelet business right away?"

"Yes, right away," assented Jem.

"Cash?"

"Ready money, sure."

"Hope you will. I want my share so I can get away from these diggings and
the crowd into some new district and among new people."

"Oho! Going to turn respectable, are you?" jeered Jem.

"I'm going to try," announced Dan manfully. "I'm afraid of Brady. He's the
kind of a man who goes from bad to worse. He will be sure to get you in
trouble if you stick with him long enough."

"Well, as long as he pays the bills as he agrees I'm his man," said Jem.

"I'm not, and I'll cut loose just as soon as I get my share of the
plunder."

That little talk decided Frank that he would not return to the academy at
once. He resolved to play the detective, for a little time at least.

Frank believed that what he had done would result in the upsetting of all
the plans Brady had set on foot regarding Ned Foreman.

He felt certain that when he related the circumstances of the case to
Professor Elliott, the latter would speedily devise a way to protect Ned
and ferret out the object of the lawyer, Grimm, and also Brady, in securing
some kind of guardianship over the orphan boy.

About the bracelet, however, that was a different affair. From what Frank
had just heard he was convinced that Jem had this now in his possession.

"Yes," mused Frank, as almost involuntarily he followed Jem and Dan at a
safe distance, "that little box the lawyer gave Jem surely contains the
bracelet stolen from Lemuel Mace, back at Tipton. It's sure, too, from what
these men just said, that Jem is going to dispose of it right away. Why, if
that's so, all trace of it would be lost, and good-by to my chances of ever
convicting the real thieves. This man Dan, the best of the lot, is going to
disappear, and, of course, Brady and Jem will never admit they stole the
bracelet. I sort of feel that if I let these men slip me now I'll never be
able to clear myself of the charge of stealing Mace's jewelry."

Frank was so impressed with these ideas that he trailed on after the two
men. He did not know that it would do much good, but that bracelet was a
kind of a lodestone, and he felt that he would give a good deal to get it
into his possession.
