sitting at supper, the boy said to Theodorus, 'Father, why do you look
so sad. Tell me what is wrong, and perhaps I can help you.'

'Ah, my son, I have reason enough to be sad; but for me you would now
have been enjoying every kind of pleasure, instead of being buried in
this tiny house.'

'Oh, do not let that trouble you,' replied Fortunatus, 'it is time I
made some money for myself. To be sure I have never been taught any
trade. Still there must be something I can do. I will go and walk on the
seashore and think about it.'

Very soon--sooner than he expected--a chance came, and Fortunatus, like
a wise boy, seized on it at once. The post offered him was that of page
to the Earl of Flanders, and as the Earl's daughter was just going to
be married, splendid festivities were held in her honour, and at some of
the tilting matches Fortunatus was lucky enough to win the prize. These
prizes, together with presents from the lords and ladies of the court,
who liked him for his pleasant ways, made Fortunatus feel quite a rich
man.

But though his head was not turned by the notice taken of him, it
excited the envy of some of the other pages about the Court, and one of
them, called Robert, invented a plot to move Fortunatus out of his way.
So he told the young man that the Earl had taken a dislike to him and
meant to kill him; Fortunatus believed the story, and packing up his
fine clothes and money, slipped away before dawn.

He went to a great many big towns and lived well, and as he was generous
and not wiser than most youths of his age, he very soon found himself
penniless. Like his father, he then began to think of work, and tramped
half over Brittany in search of it. Nobody seemed to want him, and he
wandered about from one place to another, till he found himself in a
dense wood, without any paths, and not much light. Here he spent two
whole days, with nothing to eat and very little water to drink, going
first in one direction and then in another, but never being able to find
his way out. During the first night he slept soundly, and was too tired
to fear either man or beast, but when darkness came on for the second
time, and growls were heard in the distance, he grew frightened and
looked about for a high tree out of reach of his enemies. Hardly had he
settled himself comfortably in one of the forked branches, when a lion
walked up to a spring that burst from a rock close to the tree, and
crouching down drank greedily. This was bad enough, but after all, lions
do not climb trees, and as long as Fortunatus stayed up on his perch, he
was quite safe. But no sooner was the lion out of sight, than his
place was taken by a bear, and bears, as Fortunatus knew very well, are
tree-climbers. His heart beat fast, and not without reason, for as the
bear turned away he looked up and saw Fortunatus!

Now in those days every young man carried a sword slung to his belt, and
it was a fashion that came in very handily for Fortunatus. He drew his
sword, and when the bear got within a yard of him he made a fierce lunge
forward. The bear, wild with pain, tried to spring, but the bough he was
standing on broke with his weight, and he fell heavily to the ground.
Then Fortunatus descended from his tree (first taking good care to see
no other wild animals were in sight) and killed him with a single blow.
He was just thinking he would light a fire and make a hearty dinner off
bear's flesh, which is not at all bad eating, when he beheld a beautiful
lady standing by his side leaning on a wheel, and her eyes hidden by a
bandage.

'I am Dame Fortune,' she said, 'and I have a gift for you. Shall it be
wisdom, strength, long life, riches, health, or beauty? Think well, and
tell me what you will have.'

But Fortunatus, who had proved the truth of the proverb that 'It's ill
thinking on an empty stomach,' answered quickly, 'Good lady, let me have
riches in such plenty that I may never again be as hungry as I am now.'

And the lady held out a purse and told him he had only to put his hand
into it, and he and his children would always find ten pieces of gold.
But when they were dead it would be a magic purse no longer.

At this news Fortunatus was beside himself with joy, and could hardly
find words to thank the lady. But she told him that the best thing he
could do was to find his way out of the wood, and before bidding him
farewell pointed out which path he should take. He walked along it as
fast as his weakness would let him, until a welcome light at a little
distance showed him that a house was near. It turned out to be an inn,
but before entering Fortunatus thought he had better make sure of the
truth of what the lady had told him, and took out the purse and looked
inside. Sure enough there were the ten pieces of gold, shining brightly.
Then Fortunatus walked boldly up to the inn, and ordered them to get
ready a good supper at once, as he was very hungry, and to bring him the
best wine in the house. And he seemed to care so little what he spent
that everybody thought he was a great lord, and vied with each other who
should run quickest when he called.

After a night passed in a soft bed, Fortunatus felt so much better that
he asked the landlord if he could find him some men-servants, and tell
him where any good horses were to be got. The next thing was to provide
himself with smart clothes, and then to take a big house where he
could give great feasts to the nobles and beautiful ladies who lived in
palaces round about.

In this manner a whole year soon slipped away, and Fortunatus was so
busy amusing himself that he never once remembered his parents whom he
had left behind in Cyprus. But though he was thoughtless, he was not
bad-hearted. As soon as their existence crossed his mind, he set about
making preparations to visit them, and as he was not fond of being alone
he looked round for some one older and wiser than himself to travel with
him. It was not long before he had the good luck to come across an
old man who had left his wife and children in a far country many years
before, when he went out into the world to seek the fortune which he
never found. He agreed to accompany Fortunatus back to Cyprus, but only
on condition he should first be allowed to return for a few weeks to
his own home before venturing to set sail for an island so strange and
distant. Fortunatus agreed to his proposal, and as he was always fond of
anything new, said that he would go with him.

The journey was long, and they had to cross many large rivers, and climb
over high mountains, and find their way through thick woods, before they
reached at length the old man's castle. His wife and children had almost
given up hopes of seeing him again, and crowded eagerly round him.
Indeed, it did not take Fortunatus five minutes to fall in love with the
youngest daughter, the most beautiful creature in the whole world, whose
name was Cassandra.

'Give her to me for my wife,' he said to the old man, 'and let us all go
together to Famagosta.'

So a ship was bought big enough to hold Fortunatus, the old man and his
wife, and their ten children--five of them sons and five daughters. And
the day before they sailed the wedding was celebrated with magnificent
rejoicings, and everybody thought that Fortunatus must certainly be
a prince in disguise. But when they reached Cyprus, he learned to his
sorrow that both his father and mother were dead, and for some time
he shut himself up in his house and would see nobody, full of shame at
having forgotten them all these years. Then he begged that the old man
and his wife would remain with him, and take the place of his parents.

For twelve years Fortunatus and Cassandra and their two little boys
lived happily in Famagosta. They had a beautiful house and everything
they could possibly want, and when Cassandra's sisters married the purse
provided them each with a fortune. But at last Fortunatus grew tired of
staying at home, and thought he should like to go out and see the
world again. Cassandra shed many tears at first when he told her of his
wishes, and he had a great deal of trouble to persuade her to give her
consent. But on his promising to return at the end of two years she
agreed to let him go. Before he went away he showed her three chests
of gold, which stood in a room with an iron door, and walls twelve feet
thick. 'If anything should happen to me,' he said, 'and I should never
come back, keep one of the chests for yourself, and give the others to
our two sons.' Then he embraced them all and took ship for Alexandria.

The wind was fair and in a few days they entered the harbour, where
Fortunatus was informed by a man whom he met on landing, that if he
wished to be well received in the town, he must begin by making a
handsome present to the Sultan. 'That is easily done,' said Fortunatus,
and went into a goldsmith's shop, where he bought a large gold cup,
which cost five thousand pounds. This gift so pleased the Sultan that he
ordered a hundred casks of spices to be given to Fortunatus; Fortunatus
put them on board his ship, and commanded the captain to return to
Cyprus and deliver them to his wife, Cassandra. He next obtained an
audience of the Sultan, and begged permission to travel through the
country, which the Sultan readily gave him, adding some letters to the
rulers of other lands which Fortunatus might wish to visit.

Filled with delight at feeling himself free to roam through the world
once more, Fortunatus set out on his journey without losing a day. From
court to court he went, astonishing everyone by the magnificence of his
dress and the splendour of his presents. At length he grew as tired of
wandering as he had been of staying at home, and returned to Alexandria,
where he found the same ship that had brought him from Cyprus lying in
the harbour. Of course the first thing he did was to pay his respects to
the Sultan, who was eager to hear about his adventures.

When Fortunatus had told them all, the Sultan observed: 'Well, you
have seen many wonderful things, but I have something to show you more
wonderful still;' and he led him into a room where precious stones lay
heaped against the walls. Fortunatus' eyes were quite dazzled, but the
Sultan went on without pausing and opened a door at the farther end. As
far as Fortunatus could see, the cupboard was quite bare, except for a
little red cap, such as soldiers wear in Turkey.

'Look at this,' said the Sultan.

'But there is nothing very valuable about it,' answered Fortunatus.
'I've seen a dozen better caps than that, this very day.'

'Ah,' said the Sultan, 'you do not know what you are talking about.
Whoever puts this cap on his head and wishes himself in any place, will
find himself there in a moment.'

'But who made it?' asked Fortunatus.

'That I cannot tell you,' replied the Sultan.

'Is it very heavy to wear?' asked Fortunatus.

'No, quite light,' replied the Sultan, 'just feel it.'

Fortunatus took the cap and put it on his head, and then, without
thinking, wished himself back in the ship that was starting for
Famagosta. In a second he was standing at the prow, while the anchor
was being weighed, and while the Sultan was repenting of his folly in
allowing Fortunatus to try on the cap, the vessel was making fast for
Cyprus.

When it arrived, Fortunatus found his wife and children well, but the
two old people were dead and buried. His sons had grown tall and strong,
but unlike their father had no wish to see the world, and found their
chief pleasure in hunting and tilting. In the main, Fortunatus was
content to stay quietly at home, and if a restless fit did seize upon
him, he was able to go away for a few hours without being missed, thanks
to the cap, which he never sent back to the Sultan.

By-and-by he grew old, and feeling that he had not many days to live,
he sent for his two sons, and showing them the purse and cap, he said to
them: 'Never part with these precious possessions. They are worth more
than all the gold and lands I leave behind me. But never tell their
secret, even to your wife or dearest friend. That purse has served me
well for forty years, and no one knows whence I got my riches.' Then
he died and was buried by his wife Cassandra, and he was mourned in
Famagosta for many years.




The Goat-faced Girl


There was once upon a time a peasant called Masaniello who had twelve
daughters. They were exactly like the steps of a staircase, for there
was just a year between each sister. It was all the poor man could do to
bring up such a large family, and in order to provide food for them he
used to dig in the fields all day long. In spite of his hard work he
only just succeeded in keeping the wolf from the door, and the poor
little girls often went hungry to bed.

One day, when Masaniello was working at the foot of a high mountain, he
came upon the mouth of a cave which was so dark and gloomy that even
the sun seemed afraid to enter it. Suddenly a huge green lizard appeared
from the inside and stood before Masaniello, who nearly went out of his
mind with terror, for the beast was as big as a crocodile and quite as
fierce looking.

But the lizard sat down beside him in the most friendly manner, and
said: 'Don't be afraid, my good man, I am not going to hurt you; on the
contrary, I am most anxious to help you.'

When the peasant heard these words he knelt before the lizard and said:
'Dear lady, for I know not what to call you, I am in your power; but I
beg of you to be merciful, for I have twelve wretched little daughters
at home who are dependent on me.'

'That's the very reason why I have come to you,' replied the lizard.
'Bring me your youngest daughter to-morrow morning. I promise to bring
her up as if she were my own child, and to look upon her as the apple of
my eye.'

When Masaniello heard her words he was very unhappy, because he felt
sure, from the lizard's wanting one of his daughters, the youngest and
tenderest too, that the poor little girl would only serve as dessert for
the terrible creature's supper. At the same time he said to himself,
'If I refuse her request, she will certainly eat me up on the spot. If
I give her what she asks she does indeed take part of myself, but if I
refuse she will take the whole of me. What am I to do, and how in the
world am I to get out of the difficulty?'

As he kept muttering to himself the lizard said, 'Make up your mind to
do as I tell you at once. I desire to have your youngest daughter, and
if you won't comply with my wish, I can only say it will be the worse
for you.'

Seeing that there was nothing else to be done, Masaniello set off for
his home, and arrived there looking so white and wretched that his wife
asked him at once: 'What has happened to you, my dear husband? Have you
quarrelled with anyone, or has the poor donkey fallen down?'

'Neither the one nor the other,' answered her husband,' but something
far worse than either. A terrible lizard has nearly frightened me out
of my senses, for she threatened that if I did not give her our youngest
daughter, she would make me repent it. My head is going round like a
mill-wheel, and I don't know what to do. I am indeed between the Devil
and the Deep Sea. You know how dearly I love Renzolla, and yet, if I
fail to bring her to the lizard to-morrow morning, I must say farewell
to life. Do advise me what to do.'

When his wife had heard all he had to say, she said to him: 'How do you
know, my dear husband, that the lizard is really our enemy? May she not
be a friend in disguise? And your meeting with her may be the beginning
of better things and the end of all our misery. Therefore go and take
the child to her, for my heart tells me that you will never repent doing
so.'

Masaniello was much comforted by her words, and next morning as soon as
it was light he took his little daughter by the hand and led her to the
cave.

The lizard, who was awaiting the peasant's arrival, came forward to meet
him, and taking the girl by the hand, she gave the father a sack full
of gold, and said: 'Go and marry your other daughters, and give them
dowries with this gold, and be of good cheer, for Renzolla will have
both father and mother in me; it is a great piece of luck for her that
she has fallen into my hands.'

Masaniello, quite overcome with gratitude, thanked the lizard, and
returned home to his wife.

As soon as it was known how rich the peasant had become, suitors for the
hands of his daughters were not wanting, and very soon he married them
all off; and even then there was enough gold left to keep himself and
his wife in comfort and plenty all their days.

As soon as the lizard was left alone with Renzolla, she changed the cave
into a beautiful palace, and led the girl inside. Here she brought her
up like a little princess, and the child wanted for nothing. She gave
her sumptuous food to eat, beautiful clothes to wear, and a thousand
servants to wait on her.

Now, it happened, one day, that the king of the country was hunting in a
wood close to the palace, and was overtaken by the dark. Seeing a light
shining in the palace he sent one of his servants to ask if he could get
a night's lodging there.

When the page knocked at the door the lizard changed herself into
a beautiful woman, and opened it herself. When she heard the king's
request she sent him a message to say that she would be delighted to see
him, and give him all he wanted.

The king, on hearing this kind invitation, instantly betook himself
to the palace, where he was received in the most hospitable manner. A
hundred pages with torches came to meet him, a hundred more waited on
him at table, and another hundred waved big fans in the air to keep the
flies from him. Renzolla herself poured out the wine for him, and, so
gracefully did she do it, that his Majesty could not take his eyes off
her.

When the meal was finished and the table cleared, the king retired
to sleep, and Renzolla drew the shoes from his feet, at the same time
drawing his heart from his breast. So desperately had he fallen in love
with her, that he called the fairy to him, and asked her for Renzolla's
hand in marriage. As the kind fairy had only the girl's welfare at
heart, she willingly gave her consent, and not her consent only, but a
wedding portion of seven thousand golden guineas.

The king, full of delight over his good fortune, prepared to take his
departure, accompanied by Renzolla, who never so much as thanked the
fairy for all she had done for her. When the fairy saw such a base want
of gratitude she determined to punish the girl, and, cursing her, she
turned her face into a goat's head. In a moment Renzolla's pretty mouth
stretched out into a snout, with a beard a yard long at the end of it,
her cheeks sank in, and her shining plaits of hair changed into two
sharp horns. When the king turned round and saw her he thought he must
have taken leave of his senses. He burst into tears, and cried out:
'Where is the hair that bound me so tightly, where are the eyes that
pierced through my heart, and where are the lips I kissed? Am I to be
tied to a goat all my life? No, no! nothing will induce me to become the
laughing-stock of my subjects for the sake of a goat-faced girl!'

When they reached his own country he shut Renzolla up in a little turret
chamber of his palace, with a waiting-maid, and gave each of them ten
bundles of flax to spin, telling them that their task must be finished
by the end of the week.

The maid, obedient to the king's commands, set at once to work and
combed out the flax, wound it round the spindle, and sat spinning at her
wheel so diligently that her work was quite done by Saturday evening.
But Renzolla, who had been spoilt and petted in the fairy's house, and
was quite unaware of the change that had taken place in her appearance,
threw the flax out of the window and said: 'What is the king thinking
of that he should give me this work to do? If he wants shirts he can
buy them. It isn't even as if he had picked me out of the gutter, for he
ought to remember that I brought him seven thousand golden guineas as
my wedding portion, and that I am his wife and not his slave. He must be
mad to treat me like this.'

All the same, when Saturday evening came, and she saw that the
waiting-maid had finished her task, she took fright lest she should
