no rent, claiming the land for themselves, and defying those from whom
they hold it to show their titles as lords of the soil. There must be
some shrewd knaves among them. This Wat the Tyler and the men of the
towns can care naught for such matters; but they suffer those who have
an interest in the matter to do as they choose. They know that their
deeds have so far committed them that they will not dare to draw back,
and must follow Wat's leadership implicitly. You will see erelong that
from murdering lawyers they will take to murdering lords."

"If the council here is taking no steps to summon the knights of the
shire and the feudal lords to hasten hither with their levies and
retainers, how do they think to arrest the course of the ill-doers?"
Edgar asked.

"Their opinion is that the king has but to ride out and meet the
rebels, and that they will all, on seeing him, fall on their knees and
crave pardon, whereupon he will promise to redress their grievances,
and they will disperse to their homes. I have no such hope. Is it
likely that they will quietly go home, having once worked themselves up
to fight for what they call their rights, and with the thought of
taking vengeance on those they consider their enemies, and of unlimited
drinking and feasting, and, on the part of some, of rich plunder in
London, when they see that there is no one to prevent their taking this
satisfaction? Nothing but force will avail, and though something might
be done that way, it is more difficult than it looks.

"The knights of the shire could hardly raise their levies, for most of
those who would be called out are already with the mob, and of the
others few would venture to answer to the summons. When they returned
they might find their houses burned and their families slain. You see
we know not how far this fire may spread. We hear that both in Suffolk
and Hertfordshire men are assembling and parties marching away to join
those of Essex. In truth, lads, the thing is far more formidable than I
deemed it at first, for they say that two hundred thousand men will
march on London."

"But in the French Jacquerie there were as many as that, Sir Ralph, and
yet they were put down."

"They were so, but only after they had done vast damage. Besides, lad,
your English villein differs from your French serf. An Englishman, of
whatever rank, holds by what he considers his rights, and is ready to
fight for them. Our archers have proved that the commonalty are as
brave as the knights, and though badly armed, this rascaldom may fight
sturdily. The French peasant has no rights, and is a chattel, that his
lord may dispose of as he chooses. As long as they met with no
opposition all who fell into their hands were destroyed, and the
castles ravaged and plundered, the peasants behaving like a pack of mad
wolves. Our fellows are of sterner stuff, and they will have a mind to
fight, if it be but to show that they can fight as well as their
betters. Plunder is certainly not their first object, and it is
probable that whatever may be done that way will be the work of the
scum of the towns, who will join them solely with that object.

"I doubt whether less than five thousand men-at-arms and archers would
be able to show face to such an array as is said to be approaching,
especially as there will be many archers among them who, although not
to compare with those who fought at Poictiers, are yet capable of using
their weapons with effect. I see no prospect of gathering such a force,
and the matter is all the worse, as the rascaldom of London will be
with them, and we shall have these to keep in order, as well as cope
with those in the field. Besides, one must remember that in a matter
like this we cannot fully depend on any force that we may gather. The
archers and men-at-arms would be drawn largely from the same class as
the better portion of these rioters, and would be slack in fighting
against them. Certainly, those of the home counties could not be
depended upon, and possibly even in the garrison of the Tower itself
there may be many who cannot be trusted. The place, if well held,
should stand out for months, but I am by no means sure that it will do
so when the time comes. I shall certainly raise my voice against the
king abiding here. He with his friends could ride away without
difficulty, if he leaves before the place is beleaguered."

"I suppose you will take my mother and sister into the Tower, father,
should the mob come hither?"

"That I know not, nor can I say until I see the temper of the garrison
when these rioters approach."

On the day after the new clothes arrived, Sir Ralph took his son and
Edgar to the castle and presented them to the king.

"This is my son, your Majesty, of whom I spoke to you. I am happy to
say that I think he will some day be able to follow you to battle as I
followed the noble prince your father; for he has now resolved, should
his health remain good, to take up the profession of arms."

"I am glad to hear it," the young king said, "for indeed 'tis more
suited to the son of a valiant knight like yourself, Sir Ralph, than
that of the Church, excellent though that may be for those who have
inclinations for it. He seems to me a fair young gentleman, and one
whom it would please me to see often at Court."

"This, your Majesty, is Master Edgar Ormskirk, a young gentleman of
good family, but his father has not, although holding more than a
knight's feu, taken up that rank, his tastes being wholly turned
towards learning, he being a distinguished scholar, having passed
through our own university at Oxford, and those of Padua and Pisa. He
is one of my most esteemed friends. Master Edgar, as I told you, is
greatly skilled for his years in the use of the sword, to which he has
long devoted himself with great ardour. It is to him my son is indebted
for having gained health and strength, together with more skill in the
sword than I had ever looked for from him. I beg to recommend him
highly to your Majesty's favour, and can answer for his worth, as well
as for his strength and skill."

"You could have no better recommendation, Master Ormskirk," the young
king said, pleasantly, "and I trust that although your father cares not
for knighthood, you will have an opportunity of gaining that honour for
yourself."

"I should value it, if won fairly, your Majesty, as the greatest honour
I could gain. It is not that my father holds the honour more lightly
than I do, but I know that 'tis his opinion that if given merely for
possession of land 'tis but an accident of birth, but that if the
reward of bravery, 'tis an honour that is of the highest, and one that,
were it not that his thoughts are wholly turned towards scholarship and
to discovering the secrets of nature, he himself would gladly have
attained."

"Methinks that he is right," the king said. "In the time when every
landowner held his feu on condition of knightly service rendered
whenever called upon, it was well that he should be called a knight,
such being the term of military command; but now that many are allowed
to provide substitutes, methinks that it is an error to give the title
to stay-at-homes. I shall be glad, young sir, to see you also at Court,
though, methinks," he added, with a smile, "that you have inherited
some of your father's sobriety of nature, and will hold our pleasures
at small price."

"I thank your Majesty for your kindness," Edgar said, bowing; "but
indeed I should not presume to judge amusements as frivolous because I
myself might be unused to them; but in truth two years ago I studied at
the convent of St. Alwyth, and my spare time then and most of my time
since has been so occupied by my exercises in arms that I have had but
small opportunity for learning the ways of Courts, but I hope to do so,
seeing that a good knight should bear himself as well at Court as in
the field."

"You will have small opportunity now," the king said, rather dolefully.
"Our royal mother is absent, and our talk is all of riots and troubles,
and none seem even to think of pleasure."

After leaving the king Sir Ralph presented his son and Edgar to Sir
Michael de la Pole, who held high office; Robert de Vere, one of the
king's special favourites; and several other young nobles, who all
received them kindly for the sake of Sir Ralph.




CHAPTER V

A RESCUE


"Perhaps, boys, you could hardly have been introduced at Court better
than by myself," the knight said, as they returned to the lodgings.
"There are men much more highly placed, many more influential than I
am, but for that very reason I can be friends with all. The king's
mother is always most courteous to me, because I was the friend of the
Black Prince, her husband; and she has taught her son that, whatever
might come, he could rely upon my fidelity to his person. On the other
hand, no one has reason either to dislike or fear me. I am a simple
knight, longing most to be at home, and at the Court as seldom as may
be; besides, I hold myself aloof from both parties in the state, for
you must know that the Court is composed of two factions.

"The one is that of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, uncle of the
king. He is greatly ambitious; some men even say that he would fain
himself be king, but this I believe not; yet I am sure that he would
like to rule in the name of the king. He has a powerful party, having
with him the Duke of Gloucester, his brother, and other great nobles.
On the other hand, he is ill-liked by the people, and they say at
Canterbury the rioters made every man they met swear to obey the king
and commons--by which they meant themselves--never to accept a king
bearing the name of John, and to oppose Lancaster and Gloucester.

"The king's mother has surrounded him with a number of men who, being
for the most part of obscure birth, have no sympathy with John of
Gaunt's faction, and oppose it in every way.

"Doubtless the majority of these are well fitted for the office that
they hold, but unfortunately there are some amongst them, for the most
part young and with pleasant manners and handsome faces, whom the king
makes his favourites. This again is well-nigh as bad as that John of
Gaunt should have all the power in his own hands, for the people love
not king's favourites, and although the rabble at present talk much of
all men being equal, and rail against the nobles, yet at bottom the
English people are inclined towards those of good birth, and a king's
favourite is all the more detested if he lacks this quality. England,
however, would not fare badly were John of Gaunt its master; he is a
great warrior, and well-nigh equal in bravery to the Black Prince. It
is true that he is haughty and arrogant; but upon the other hand, he is
prudent and sagacious, and although he might rule England harshly, he
would rule it wisely.

"However, I hold myself aloof altogether from state matters, and I
trust that you will strive to do so. I would fain see the king take all
power into his own hands as soon as he gets somewhat older; but if he
must be ruled, I would prefer that it was by a great Englishman of
royal blood rather than by favourites, whose only merits are a fair
face, a gallant manner, and a smooth tongue, and who are sure not only
to become unpopular themselves, but to render the king himself
unpopular. It is for this reason that I journey so seldom to London,
and desire that you should also hold yourself aloof from the Court. I
could not be here without taking one side or the other. It cannot be
long, however, before the king becomes impatient of his tutelage by the
dukes, and we shall then see how matters go.

"It will be time enough then for you to frequent the Court, though it
were better even then that you should do as I did, and leave such
matters to those whom it concerns and content yourself with doing
service to England in the field. From my friendship for the Black
Prince I, of course, know John of Gaunt well, and should there be, as
seems likely, fierce fighting in France or in Spain--for, as you know,
the duke has a claim to the crown of Castile--I will cross the water
with you and present you to the duke, and place you in the train of
some of his knights, comrades of mine, but who are still young enough
to keep the field, while I shall only take up arms again in the event
of the king leading another great army into France."

The two friends spent much of their time in wandering about the streets
of London. To them all seemed peaceable and orderly; indeed, they kept
in the main thoroughfares where the better class of citizens were to be
seen, and knew little of those who lived in the lower haunts, issuing
out seldom in the daylight, but making the streets a danger for
peaceable folks after nightfall.

Upon one occasion, however, they took boat at Westminster and were
rowed to Richmond. They had ill-chosen the occasion, knowing nothing of
the hours of the tide, and so returned against it. It was therefore
eight o'clock when they reached the Stairs, and already growing dark.
They knew that orders had been given that the gates were to be closed
to all at eight, lest some of the great bodies of rioters should
approach suddenly and enter the city.

The watermen, wearied by their long row, refused to carry them any
further. There was nothing for it but to walk round the walls and so
return to their lodging. The moon was shining brightly, and it seemed
to them as they started that it would be a pleasant walk. They followed
the Strand, where on the right stood many houses of the nobles, and the
great palace of John of Gaunt at the Savoy, in which, after the battle
of Poictiers, the captive king of France had been lodged.

Turning off to the left some short distance before they reached the
city wall, they held their way round the north side of the city. London
had already overflowed its boundary, and although in some places fields
still stretched up to the foot of the walls, in others, especially
where the roads led from the gates, a large population had established
themselves. These were principally of a poorer class, who not only
saved rent from being outside the boundary of the city, but were free
from the somewhat strict surveillance exercised by its authorities.

They were just crossing the road leading north from Aldersgate when
they heard a scream and a clashing of swords a short distance away.

"Come, Albert, some evil deed is being done!" Edgar exclaimed, and,
drawing his sword, ran at the top of his speed in the direction of the
sound, accompanied by Albert. They soon arrived at the top of a street
leading off the main road. A short distance down it a number of men
were engaged in conflict; two of these, hearing the footsteps, turned
round, and with a savage oath, seeing that the new-comers were but
lads, fell upon them, thinking to cut them down without difficulty.
Their over-confidence proved their ruin. Edgar caught the descending
blow on his sword, close up to the hilt, and as his opponent raised his
arm to repeat the stroke, ran him through the body.

"Do you want help, Albert?" Edgar cried, as the man fell.

"No, I think that I can manage him," Albert said, quietly, and a moment
later slashed his opponent deeply across the cheek. The fellow turned
and took to his heels, roaring lustily. One of the other men, who was
stooping over a prostrate figure, with his dagger raised, paused for a
moment to look round on hearing the howl of his comrade, and as he did
so Edgar's sword fell on his wrist with such force that hand and dagger
both fell to the ground. The remaining ruffian, who was roughly
endeavouring to stifle the shrieks of a young girl, seeing himself
alone with two adversaries, also darted off and plunged into a narrow
alley a few yards away.

Edgar paid no more attention to them, but exclaimed to the girl: "Cease
your cries, I pray you, maiden, and help me to see what has happened to
your companion. I trust that he is unharmed, and that we have arrived
in time to prevent those villains from carrying out their intentions."
He stooped over the fallen man. "Are you hurt badly, sir?" he asked.
The answer was an effort on the part of the person he addressed to rise.

"I am hurt, but I think not sorely." He was unable for the moment to
rise, for the man whom Edgar last struck lay across him. Edgar at once
hauled the moaning wretch off him, and held out his hand to the other,
who grasped it with more heartiness than he had expected, and rose
without difficulty to his feet.

"Where is my daughter?" he exclaimed.

[Illustration: "IN A MOMENT EDGAR'S SWORD FELL ON THE RUFFIAN'S WRIST."]

"She is here and unhurt, I trust," Albert replied. "The villain
released her and ran off, and I saw her figure sway, and ran forward
just in time to save her from falling. I think she has but swooned."

"Thanks be to the saints!" the stranger exclaimed. "Gentlemen, I cannot
thank you at present for the service that you have rendered me, but of
that I will speak later. Know you any place where you can take my
child?"

"We are strangers, sir; but there should surely be some hostelry near
where travellers could put up outside the walls."

The noise of the combat had aroused some of the neighbours, and on
inquiry Edgar ascertained that there was an inn but a short distance
away.

"Let me carry the maid, Albert. Her weight would be naught to me."

Albert gladly relinquished his charge, whose dead weight hanging on his
arms was already trying him. Edgar raised her across his shoulder.

"Albert," he said, "I know you have a piece of thin cord in your
pocket. I pray you twist it round that man's arm as hard as you can
pull it, and fasten it tightly. I have shorn off his hand, and he would
very speedily bleed to death. If you staunch the wound he may last till
his comrades come back, as they doubtless will after we have left; they
will carry him away and maybe save his life. He is a villainous
ruffian, no doubt, but 'tis enough for me that I have one death on my
hands to-night."

"He is dead already," Albert said, as he leant over the man and placed
his hand on his heart. "He must have been wounded by the traveller
before we came up."

"Well, it cannot be helped," Edgar replied, as he walked on with his
burden.

"Did you see aught, kind sirs," their companion said, "of a servitor
with three horses?"

"Nothing whatever," Albert answered, "though methought I heard horses'
hoofs going down the road as we ran along; but I paid small attention
to them, thinking only of arriving in time to save someone from being
maltreated."

"I believe that he was in league with the robbers," the man said.
"But," and his voice faltered, "give me your arm, I pray you. My wound
is deeper than I thought, and my head swims."

Albert with difficulty assisted the man to the entrance of the
hostelry, for at each step he leant more heavily upon him. The door was
shut, but the light from the casement showed that those within had not
yet retired to bed. Edgar struck on the door loudly with the handle of
his dagger.

"Who is it that knocks?"

"Gentlemen, with a wounded man, who, with his daughter, have been beset
by knaves within a hundred yards of your door."

Some bolts were undrawn after some little delay, and a man appeared,
having a sword in his hand, with two servitors behind him similarly
armed.

"We are quiet people, my host," Edgar said. "Stand not on questioning.
Suffice that there is a wounded man who is spent from loss of blood,
and a young maid who has swooned from terror."

There was a tone of command in Edgar's voice, and the host, seeing that
he had to do with persons of quality, murmured excuses on the ground
that the neighbourhood was a rough one.

"You need hardly have told us that," Edgar said. "Our plight speaks for
itself. Call your wife, I pray you, or female servants; they will know
what to do to bring the young maid to herself. But tell her to let the
girl know as soon as she opens her eyes that her father is alive, and
is, I trust, not seriously wounded."

The landlord called, and a buxom woman came out from a room behind. Her
husband hastily told her what was required.

"Carry her in here, sir, I pray you," the woman said. "I will speedily
bring her round."

Edgar followed her into the room that she had left, which was a
kitchen, and laid her down on a settle. Two maids who were standing
there uttered exclamations of surprise and pity as the girl was carried
in.

"Hold your tongues, wenches, and do not make a noise! Margaret, fetch
me cold water, and do you, Elizabeth, help me to unlace the young
lady's bodice," for the light in the kitchen enabled her to see at once
that the girl was well dressed.
