have already given you.  That paw in your hand now might almost teach
you the whole science of natural history--the heavenly sort, I mean.'

'I will think,' said Curdie.  'But oh! please! one word more: may I
tell my father and mother all about it?'

'Certainly--though perhaps now it may be their turn to find it a little
difficult to believe that things went just as you must tell them.'

'They shall see that I believe it all this time,' said Curdie.

'Tell them that tomorrow morning you must set out for the court--not
like a great man, but just as poor as you are.  They had better not
speak about it.  Tell them also that it will be a long time before they
hear of you again, but they must not lose heart.  And tell your father
to lay that stone I gave him at night in a safe place--not because of
the greatness of its price, although it is such an emerald as no prince
has in his crown, but because it will be a news-bearer between you and
him.  As often as he gets at all anxious about you, he must take it and
lay it in the fire, and leave it there when he goes to bed.  In the
morning he must find it in the ashes, and if it be as green as ever,
then all goes well with you; if it have lost colour, things go ill with
you; but if it be very pale indeed, then you are in great danger, and
he must come to me.'

'Yes, ma'am,' said Curdie.  'Please, am I to go now?'

'Yes,' answered the princess, and held out her hand to him.

Curdie took it, trembling with joy.  It was a very beautiful hand--not
small, very smooth, but not very soft--and just the same to his
fire-taught touch that it was to his eyes.  He would have stood there
all night holding it if she had not gently withdrawn it.

'I will provide you a servant,' she said, 'for your journey and to wait
upon you afterward.'

'But where am I to go, ma'am, and what am I to do?  You have given me
no message to carry, neither have you said what I am wanted for. I go
without a notion whether I am to walk this way or that, or what I am to
do when I get I don't know where.'

'Curdie!' said the princess, and there was a tone of reminder in his
own name as she spoke it, 'did I not tell you to tell your father and
mother that you were to set out for the court?  And you know that lies
to the north.  You must learn to use far less direct directions than
that.  You must not be like a dull servant that needs to be told again
and again before he will understand.  You have orders enough to start
with, and you will find, as you go on, and as you need to know, what
you have to do.  But I warn you that perhaps it will not look the least
like what you may have been fancying I should require of you.  I have
one idea of you and your work, and you have another.  I do not blame
you for that--you cannot help it yet; but you must be ready to let my
idea, which sets you working, set your idea right.  Be true and honest
and fearless, and all shall go well with you and your work, and all
with whom your work lies, and so with your parents--and me too,
Curdie,' she added after a little pause.

The young miner bowed his head low, patted the strange head that lay at
the princess's feet, and turned away.  As soon as he passed the
spinning wheel, which looked, in the midst of the glorious room, just
like any wheel you might find in a country cottage--old and worn and
dingy and dusty--the splendour of the place vanished, and he saw but
the big bare room he seemed at first to have entered, with the
moon--the princess's moon no doubt--shining in at one of the windows
upon the spinning wheel.



CHAPTER 9

Hands

Curdie went home, pondering much, and told everything to his father and
mother.  As the old princess had said, it was now their turn to find
what they heard hard to believe.  If they had not been able to trust
Curdie himself, they would have refused to believe more than the half
of what he reported, then they would have refused that half too, and at
last would most likely for a time have disbelieved in the very
existence of the princess, what evidence their own senses had given
them notwithstanding.

For he had nothing conclusive to show in proof of what he told them.
When he held out his hands to them, his mother said they looked as if
he had been washing them with soft soap, only they did smell of
something nicer than that, and she must allow it was more like roses
than anything else she knew.  His father could not see any difference
upon his hands, but then it was night, he said, and their poor little
lamp was not enough for his old eyes.  As to the feel of them, each of
his own hands, he said, was hard and horny enough for two, and it must
be the fault of the dullness of his own thick skin that he felt no
change on Curdie's palms.

'Here, Curdie,' said his mother, 'try my hand, and see what beast's paw
lies inside it.'

'No, Mother,' answered Curdie, half beseeching, half indignant, 'I will
not insult my new gift by making pretence to try it.  That would be
mockery.  There is no hand within yours but the hand of a true woman,
my mother.'

'I should like you just to take hold of my hand though,' said his
mother.  'You are my son, and may know all the bad there is in me.'

Then at once Curdie took her hand in his.  And when he had it, he kept
it, stroking it gently with his other hand.

'Mother,' he said at length, 'your hand feels just like that of the
princess.'

'What!  My horny, cracked, rheumatic old hand, with its big joints, and
its short nails all worn down to the quick with hard work--like the
hand of the beautiful princess!  Why, my child, you will make me fancy
your fingers have grown very dull indeed, instead of sharp and
delicate, if you talk such nonsense.  Mine is such an ugly hand I
should be ashamed to show it to any but one that loved me.  But love
makes all safe--doesn't it, Curdie?'

'Well, Mother, all I can say is that I don't feel a roughness, or a
crack, or a big joint, or a short nail.  Your hand feels just and
exactly, as near as I can recollect, and it's not more than two hours
since I had it in mine--well, I will say, very like indeed to that of
the old princess.'

'Go away, you flatterer,' said his mother, with a smile that showed how
she prized the love that lay beneath what she took for its hyperbole.
The praise even which one cannot accept is sweet from a true mouth.
'If that is all your new gift can do, it won't make a warlock of you,'
she added.

'Mother, it tells me nothing but the truth,' insisted Curdie, 'however
unlike the truth it may seem.  It wants no gift to tell what anybody's
outside hands are like.  But by it I know your inside hands are like
the princess's.'

'And I am sure the boy speaks true,' said Peter.  'He only says about
your hand what I have known ever so long about yourself, Joan.  Curdie,
your mother's foot is as pretty a foot as any lady's in the land, and
where her hand is not so pretty it comes of killing its beauty for you
and me, my boy.  And I can tell you more, Curdie.  I don't know much
about ladies and gentlemen, but I am sure your inside mother must be a
lady, as her hand tells you, and I will try to say how I know it.  This
is how: when I forget myself looking at her as she goes about her
work--and that happens often as I grow older--I fancy for a moment or
two that I am a gentleman; and when I wake up from my little dream, it
is only to feel the more strongly that I must do everything as a
gentleman should.  I will try to tell you what I mean, Curdie.  If a
gentleman--I mean a real gentleman, not a pretended one, of which sort
they say there are a many above ground--if a real gentleman were to
lose all his money and come down to work in the mines to get bread for
his family--do you think, Curdie, he would work like the lazy ones?
Would he try to do as little as he could for his wages?  I know the
sort of the true gentleman pretty near as well as he does himself.  And
my wife, that's your mother, Curdie, she's a true lady, you may take my
word for it, for it's she that makes me want to be a true gentleman.
Wife, the boy is in the right about your hand.'

'Now, Father, let me feel yours,' said Curdie, daring a little more.

'No, no, my boy,' answered Peter.  'I don't want to hear anything about
my hand or my head or my heart.  I am what I am, and I hope growing
better, and that's enough.  No, you shan't feel my hand. You must go to
bed, for you must start with the sun.'

It was not as if Curdie had been leaving them to go to prison, or to
make a fortune, and although they were sorry enough to lose him, they
were not in the least heartbroken or even troubled at his going.

As the princess had said he was to go like the poor man he was, Curdie
came down in the morning from his little loft dressed in his working
clothes.  His mother, who was busy getting his breakfast for him, while
his father sat reading to her out of an old book, would have had him
put on his holiday garments, which, she said, would look poor enough
among the fine ladies and gentlemen he was going to.  But Curdie said
he did not know that he was going among ladies and gentlemen, and that
as work was better than play, his workday clothes must on the whole be
better than his playday Clothes; and as his father accepted the
argument, his mother gave in.  When he had eaten his breakfast, she
took a pouch made of goatskin, with the long hair on it, filled it with
bread and cheese, and hung it over his shoulder.  Then his father gave
him a stick he had cut for him in the wood, and he bade them good-bye
rather hurriedly, for he was afraid of breaking down.  As he went out
he caught up his mattock and took it with him.  It had on the one side
a pointed curve of strong steel for loosening the earth and the ore,
and on the other a steel hammer for breaking the stones and rocks.
Just as he crossed the threshold the sun showed the first segment of
his disc above the horizon.



CHAPTER 10

The Heath

He had to go to the bottom of the hill to get into a country he could
cross, for the mountains to the north were full of precipices, and it
would have been losing time to go that way.  Not until he had reached
the king's house was it any use to turn northwards.  Many a look did he
raise, as he passed it, to the dove tower, and as long as it was in
sight, but he saw nothing of the lady of the pigeons.

On and on he fared, and came in a few hours to a country where there
were no mountains more--only hills, with great stretches of desolate
heath.  Here and there was a village, but that brought him little
pleasure, for the people were rougher and worse mannered than those in
the mountains, and as he passed through, the children came behind and
mocked him.

'There's a monkey running away from the mines!' they cried. Sometimes
their parents came out and encouraged them.

'He doesn't want to find gold for the king any longer--the lazybones!'
they would say.  'He'll be well taxed down here though, and he won't
like that either.'

But it was little to Curdie that men who did not know what he was about
should not approve of his proceedings.  He gave them a merry answer now
and then, and held diligently on his way.  When they got so rude as
nearly to make him angry, he would treat them as he used to treat the
goblins, and sing his own songs to keep out their foolish noises.  Once
a child fell as he turned to run away after throwing a stone at him.
He picked him up, kissed him, and carried him to his mother.  The woman
had run out in terror when she saw the strange miner about, as she
thought, to take vengeance on her boy.  When he put him in her arms,
she blessed him, and Curdie went on his way rejoicing.

And so the day went on, and the evening came, and in the middle of a
great desolate heath he began to feel tired, and sat down under an
ancient hawthorn, through which every now and then a lone wind that
seemed to come from nowhere and to go nowhither sighed and hissed.  It
was very old and distorted.  There was not another tree for miles all
around.  It seemed to have lived so long, and to have been so torn and
tossed by the tempests on that moor, that it had at last gathered a
wind of its own, which got up now and then, tumbled itself about, and
lay down again.

Curdie had been so eager to get on that he had eaten nothing since his
breakfast.  But he had had plenty of water, for Many little streams had
crossed his path.  He now opened the wallet his mother had given him,
and began to eat his supper.  The sun was setting. A few clouds had
gathered about the west, but there was not a single cloud anywhere else
to be seen.

Now Curdie did not know that this was a part of the country very hard
to get through.  Nobody lived there, though many had tried to build in
it.  Some died very soon.  Some rushed out of it.  Those who stayed
longest went raving mad, and died a terrible death. Such as walked
straight on, and did not spend a night there, got through well and were
nothing the worse.  But those who slept even a single night in it were
sure to meet with something they could never forget, and which often
left a mark everybody could read. And that old hawthorn Might have been
enough for a warning--it looked so like a human being dried up and
distorted with age and suffering, with cares instead of loves, and
things instead of thoughts.  Both it and the heath around it, which
stretched on all sides as far as he could see, were so withered that it
was impossible to say whether they were alive or not.

And while Curdie ate there came a change.  Clouds had gathered over his
head, and seemed drifting about in every direction, as if not
'shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind,' but hunted in all directions
by wolfish flaws across the plains of the sky.  The sun was going down
in a storm of lurid crimson, and out of the west came a wind that felt
red and hot the one moment, and cold and pale the other.  And very
strangely it sang in the dreary old hawthorn tree, and very cheerily it
blew about Curdie, now making him creep close up to the tree for
shelter from its shivery cold, now fan himself with his cap, it was so
sultry and stifling.  It seemed to come from the deathbed of the sun,
dying in fever and ague.

And as he gazed at the sun, now on the verge of the horizon, very large
and very red and very dull--for though the clouds had broken away a
dusty fog was spread all over the disc--Curdie saw something strange
appear against it, moving about like a fly over its burning face.  This
looked as if it were coming out of the sun's furnace heart, and was a
living creature of some kind surely; but its shape was very uncertain,
because the dazzle of the light all around melted the outlines.

It was growing larger, it must be approaching!  It grew so rapidly that
by the time the sun was half down its head reached the top of the arch,
and presently nothing but its legs were to be seen, crossing and
recrossing the face of the vanishing disc.

When the sun was down he could see nothing of it more, but in a moment
he heard its feet galloping over the dry crackling heather, and seeming
to come straight for him.  He stood up, lifted his pickaxes and threw
the hammer end over his shoulder: he was going to have a fight for his
life!  And now it appeared again, vague, yet very awful, in the dim
twilight the sun had left behind.  But just before it reached him, down
from its four long legs it dropped flat on the ground, and came
crawling towards him, wagging a huge tail as it came.



CHAPTER 11

Lina

It was Lina.  All at once Curdie recognized her--the frightful creature
he had seen at the princess's.  He dropped his pickaxes and held out
his hand.  She crept nearer and nearer, and laid her chin in his palm,
and he patted her ugly head.  Then she crept away behind the tree, and
lay down, panting hard.

Curdie did not much like the idea of her being behind him. Horrible as
she was to look at, she seemed to his mind more horrible when he was
not looking at her.  But he remembered the child's hand, and never
thought of driving her away.  Now and then he gave a glance behind him,
and there she lay flat, with her eyes closed and her terrible teeth
gleaming between her two huge forepaws.

After his supper and his long day's journey it was no wonder Curdie
should now be sleepy.  Since the sun set the air had been warm and
pleasant.  He lay down under the tree, closed his eyes, and thought to
sleep.  He found himself mistaken, however.  But although he could not
sleep, he was yet aware of resting delightfully.

Presently he heard a sweet sound of singing somewhere, such as he had
never heard before--a singing as of curious birds far off, which drew
nearer and nearer.  At length he heard their wings, and, opening his
