so troublesome, and altogether so impossible to love, that to keep her
out of sight was the only thing that could be done for her. And this
tale she repeated so often, that at last the whole court believed it.
Things were in this state, and the Princess was about fifteen years old,
when Prince Narcissus, attracted by the report of Queen Frivola's gay
doings, presented himself at the court. He was not much older than
the Princess, and was as handsome a Prince as you would see in a day's
journey, and really, for his age, not so very scatter-brained. His
parents were a King and Queen, whose story you will perhaps read some
day. They died almost at the same time, leaving their kingdom to the
eldest of their children, and commending their youngest son, Prince
Narcissus, to the care of the Fairy Melinette. In this they did very
well for him, for the Fairy was as kind as she was powerful, and she
spared no pains in teaching the little Prince everything it was good for
him to know, and even imparted to him some of her own Fairy lore. But as
soon as he was grown up she sent him out to see the world for himself,
though all the time she was secretly keeping watch over him, ready to
help in any time of need. Before he started she gave him a ring which
would render him invisible when he put it on his finger. These rings
seem to be quite common; you must often have heard of them, even if you
have never seen one. It was in the course of the Prince's wanderings,
in search of experience of men and things, that he came to the court
of Queen Frivola, where he was extremely well received. The Queen was
delighted with him, so were all her ladies; and the King was very polite
to him, though he did not quite see why the whole court was making such
a fuss over him.

Prince Narcissus enjoyed all that went on, and found the time pass
very pleasantly. Before long, of course, he heard the story about the
Princess Potentilla, and, as it had by that time been repeated many
times, and had been added to here and there, she was represented as such
a monster of ugliness that he was really quite curious to see her, and
resolved to avail himself of the magic power of his ring to accomplish
his design. So he made himself invisible, and passed the guard without
their so much as suspecting that anyone was near. Climbing the wall was
rather a difficulty, but when he at length found himself inside it he
was charmed with the peaceful beauty of the little domain it enclosed,
and still more delighted when he perceived a slender, lovely maiden
wandering among the flowers. It was not until he had sought vainly
for the imaginary monster that he realised that this was the Princess
herself, and by that time he was deeply in love with her, for indeed it
would have been hard to find anyone prettier than Potentilla, as she
sat by the brook, weaving a garland of blue forget-me-nots to crown her
waving golden locks, or to imagine anything more gentle than the way she
tended all the birds and beasts who inhabited her small kingdom, and who
all loved and followed her. Prince Narcissus watched her every movement,
and hovered near her in a dream of delight, not daring as yet to appear
to her, so humble had he suddenly become in her presence. And when
evening came, and the nurse fetched the Princess into her little house,
he felt obliged to go back to Frivola's palace, for fear his absence
should be noticed and someone should discover his new treasure. But he
forgot that to go back absent, and dreamy, and indifferent, when he
had before been gay and ardent about everything, was the surest way
of awakening suspicion; and when, in response to the jesting questions
which were put to him upon the subject, he only blushed and returned
evasive answers, all the ladies were certain that he had lost his heart,
and did their utmost to discover who was the happy possessor of it. As
to the Prince, he was becoming day by day more attached to Potentilla,
and his one thought was to attend her, always invisible, and help her in
everything she did, and provide her with everything that could possibly
amuse or please her. And the Princess, who had learnt to find diversion
in very small things in her quiet life, was in a continual state of
delight over the treasures which the Prince constantly laid where she
must find them. Then Narcissus implored his faithful friend Melinette to
send the Princess such dreams of him as should make her recognise him as
a friend when he actually appeared before her eyes; and this device was
so successful that the Princess quite dreaded the cessation of
these amusing dreams, in which a certain Prince Narcissus was such a
delightful lover and companion. After that he went a step further and
began to have long talks with the Princess--still, however, keeping
himself invisible, until she begged him so earnestly to appear to her
that he could no longer resist, and after making her promise that, no
matter what he was like, she would still love him, he drew the ring from
his finger, and the Princess saw with delight that he was as handsome
as he was agreeable. Now, indeed, they were perfectly happy, and they
passed the whole long summer day in Potentilla's favourite place by the
brook, and when at last Prince Narcissus had to leave her it seemed to
them both that the hours had gone by with the most amazing swiftness.
The Princess stayed where she was, dreaming of her delightful Prince,
and nothing could have been further from her thoughts than any trouble
or misfortune, when suddenly, in a cloud of dust and shavings, by came
the enchanter Grumedan, and unluckily he chanced to catch sight of
Potentilla. Down he came straightway and alighted at her feet, and one
look at her charming blue eyes and smiling lips quite decided him that
he must appear to her at once, though he was rather annoyed to remember
that he had on only his second-best cloak. The Princess sprang to her
feet with a cry of terror at this sudden apparition, for really the
Enchanter was no beauty. To begin with, he was very big and clumsy, then
he had but one eye, and his teeth were long, and he stammered badly;
nevertheless, he had an excellent opinion of himself, and mistook the
Princess's cry of terror for an exclamation of delighted surprise. After
pausing a moment to give her time to admire him, the Enchanter made her
the most complimentary speech he could invent, which, however, did not
please her at all, though he was extremely delighted with it himself.
Poor Potentilla only shuddered and cried:

'Oh! where is my Narcissus?'

To which he replied with a self-satisfied chuckle: 'You want a
narcissus, madam? Well, they are not rare; you shall have as many as you
like.'

Whereupon he waved his wand, and the Princess found herself surrounded
and half buried in the fragrant flowers. She would certainly have
betrayed that this was not the kind of narcissus she wanted, but for the
Fairy Melinette, who had been anxiously watching the interview, and now
thought it quite time to interfere. Assuming the Prince's voice, she
whispered in Potentilla's ear:

'We are menaced by a great danger, but my only fear is for you, my
Princess. Therefore I beg you to hide what you really feel, and we will
hope that some way out of the difficulty may present itself.'

The Princess was much agitated by this speech, and feared lest the
Enchanter should have overheard it; but he had been loudly calling
her attention to the flowers, and chuckling over his own smartness in
getting them for her; and it was rather a blow to him when she said very
coldly that they were not the sort she preferred, and she would be glad
if he would send them all away. This he did, but afterwards wished to
kiss the Princess's hand as a reward for having been so obliging; but
the Fairy Melinette was not going to allow anything of that kind. She
appeared suddenly, in all her splendour, and cried:

'Stay, Grumedan; this Princess is under my protection, and the smallest
impertinence will cost you a thousand years of captivity. If you can win
Potentilla's heart by the ordinary methods I cannot oppose you, but I
warn you that I will not put up with any of your usual tricks.'

This declaration was not at all to the Enchanter's taste; but he knew
that there was no help for it, and that he would have to behave well,
and pay the Princess all the delicate attentions he could think of;
though they were not at all the sort of thing he was used to. However,
he decided that to win such a beauty it was quite worth while; and
Melinette, feeling that she could now leave the Princess in safety,
hurried off to tell Prince Narcissus what was going forward. Of course,
at the very mention of the Enchanter as a rival he was furious, and I
don't know what foolish things he would not have done if Melinette had
not been there to calm him down. She represented to him what a powerful
enchanter Grumedan was, and how, if he were provoked, he might avenge
himself upon the Princess, since he was the most unjust and churlish of
all the enchanters, and had often before had to be punished by the Fairy
Queen for some of his ill-deeds. Once he had been imprisoned in a tree,
and was only released when it was blown down by a furious wind; another
time he was condemned to stay under a big stone at the bottom of a
river, until by some chance the stone should be turned over; but nothing
could ever really improve him. The Fairy finally made Narcissus promise
that he would remain invisible when he was with the Princess, since she
felt sure that this would make things easier for all of them. Then began
a struggle between Grumedan and the Prince, the latter under the name
of Melinette, as to which could best delight and divert the Princess and
win her approbation. Prince Narcissus first made friends with all the
birds in Potentilla's little domain, and taught them to sing her name
and her praises, with all their sweetest trills and most touching
melodies, and all day long to tell her how dearly he loved her.
Grumedan, thereupon, declared that there was nothing new about that,
since the birds had sung since the world began, and all lovers had
imagined that they sang for them alone. Therefore he said he would
himself write an opera that should be absolutely a novelty and something
worth hearing. When the time came for the performance (which lasted five
weary hours) the Princess found to her dismay that the 'opera' consisted
of this more than indifferent verse, chanted with all their might by ten
thousand frogs:

'Admirable Potentilla, Do you think it kind or wise In this sudden way
to kill a Poor Enchanter with your eyes?'

Really, if Narcissus had not been there to whisper in her ear and divert
her attention, I don't know what would have become of poor Potentilla,
for though the first repetition of this absurdity amused her faintly,
she nearly died of weariness before the time was over. Luckily Grumedan
did not perceive this, as he was too much occupied in whipping up the
frogs, many of whom perished miserably from fatigue, since he did not
allow them to rest for a moment. The Prince's next idea for Potentilla's
amusement was to cause a fleet of boats exactly like those of Cleopatra,
of which you have doubtless read in history, to come up the little
river, and upon the most gorgeously decorated of these reclined the
great Queen herself, who, as soon as she reached the place where
Potentilla sat in rapt attention, stepped majestically on shore and
presented the Princess with that celebrated pearl of which you have
heard so much, saying:

'You are more beautiful than I ever was. Let my example warn you to make
a better use of your beauty!'

And then the little fleet sailed on, until it was lost to view in the
windings of the river. Grumedan was also looking on at the spectacle,
and said very contemptuously:

'I cannot say I think these marionettes amusing. What a to-do to make
over a single pearl! But if you like pearls, madam, why, I will soon
gratify you.'

So saying, he drew a whistle from his pocket, and no sooner had he blown
it than the Princess saw the water of the river bubble and grow muddy,
and in another instant up came hundreds of thousands of great oysters,
who climbed slowly and laboriously towards her and laid at her feet all
the pearls they contained.

'Those are what I call pearls,' cried Grumedan in high glee. And truly
there were enough of them to pave every path in Potentilla's garden and
leave some to spare! The next day Prince Narcissus had prepared for the
Princess's pleasure a charming arbour of leafy branches, with couches of
moss and grassy floor and garlands everywhere, with her name written in
different coloured blossoms. Here he caused a dainty little banquet
to be set forth, while hidden musicians played softly, and the silvery
fountains plashed down into their marble basins, and when presently
the music stopped a single nightingale broke the stillness with his
delicious chant.

'Ah!' cried the Princess, recognizing the voice of one of her
favourites, 'Philomel, my sweet one, who taught you that new song?'

And he answered: 'Love, my Princess.'

Meanwhile the Enchanter was very ill-pleased with the entertainment,
which he declared was dulness itself.

'You don't seem to have any idea in these parts beyond little squeaking
birds!' said he. 'And fancy giving a banquet without so much as an ounce
of plate!'

So the next day, when the Princess went out into her garden, there stood
a summer-house built of solid gold, decorated within and without with
her initials and the Enchanter's combined. And in it was spread an
enormous repast, while the table so glittered with golden cups and
plates, flagons and dishes, candlesticks and a hundred other things
beside, that it was hardly possible to look steadily at it. The
Enchanter ate like six ogres, but the Princess could not touch a morsel.
Presently Grumedan remarked with a grin:

'I have provided neither musicians nor singers; but as you seem fond of
music I will sing to you myself.'

Whereupon he began, with a voice like a screech-owl's, to chant the
words of his 'opera,' only this time happily not at such a length, and
without the frog accompaniment. After this the Prince again asked the
aid of his friends the birds, and when they had assembled from all the
country round he tied about the neck of each one a tiny lamp of some
brilliant colour, and when darkness fell he made them go through a
hundred pretty tricks before the delighted Potentilla, who clapped her
little hands with delight when she saw her own name traced in points of
light against the dark trees, or when the whole flock of sparks grouped
themselves into bouquets of different colours, like living flowers.
Grumedan leaning back in his arm-chair, with one knee crossed over the
other and his nose in the air, looked on disdainfully.

'Oh! if you like fireworks, Princess,' said he; and the next night all
the will-o'-the-wisps in the country came and danced on the plain, which
could be seen from the Princess's windows, and as she was looking out,
and rather enjoying the sight, up sprang a frightful volcano, pouring
out smoke and flames which terrified her greatly, to the intense
amusement of the Enchanter, who laughed like a pack of wolves
quarrelling. After this, as many of the will-o'-the-wisps as could
get in crowded into Potentilla's garden, and by their light the tall
yew-trees danced minuets until the Princess was weary and begged to
be excused from looking at anything more that night. But, in spite of
Potentilla's efforts to behave politely to the tiresome old Enchanter,
whom she detested, he could not help seeing that he failed to please
her, and then he began to suspect very strongly that she must love
someone else, and that somebody besides Melinette was responsible for
all the festivities he had witnessed. So after much consideration
he devised a plan for finding out the truth. He went to the Princess
suddenly, and announced that he was most unwillingly forced to leave
her, and had come to bid her farewell. Potentilla could scarcely hide
her delight when she heard this, and his back was hardly turned before
she was entreating Prince Narcissus to make himself visible once more.
The poor Prince had been getting quite thin with anxiety and annoyance,
and was only too delighted to comply with her request. They greeted one
another rapturously, and were just sitting down to talk over everything
cosily, and enjoy the Enchanter's discomfiture together, when out
he burst in a fury from behind a bush. With his huge club he aimed a
terrific blow at Narcissus, which must certainly have killed him but for
the adroitness of the Fairy Melinette, who arrived upon the scene just
in time to snatch him up and carry him off at lightning speed to her
castle in the air. Poor Potentilla, however, had not the comfort of
knowing this, for at the sight of the Enchanter threatening her beloved
Prince she had given one shriek and fallen back insensible. When she
recovered her senses she was more than ever convinced that he was dead,
since even Melinette was no longer near her, and no one was left to
defend her from the odious old Enchanter.

To make matters worse, he seemed to be in a very bad temper, and came
blustering and raging at the poor Princess.

'I tell you what it is, madam,' said he: 'whether you love this
whipper-snapper Prince or not doesn't matter in the least. You are going
to marry me, so you may as well make up your mind to it; and I am going
away this very minute to make all the arrangements. But in case you
should get into mischief in my absence, I think I had better put you to
sleep.'

So saying, he waved his wand over her, and in spite of her utmost
efforts to keep awake she sank into a profound and dreamless slumber.

As he wished to make what he considered a suitable entry into the King's
palace, he stepped outside the Princess's little domain, and mounted
upon an immense chariot with great solid wheels, and shafts like the
trunk of an oak-tree, but all of solid gold. This was drawn with great
difficulty by forty-eight strong oxen; and the Enchanter reclined at his
ease, leaning upon his huge club, and holding carelessly upon his knee
a tawny African lion, as if it had been a little lapdog. It was about
seven o'clock in the morning when this extraordinary chariot reached
the palace gates; the King was already astir, and about to set off on
a hunting expedition; as for the Queen, she had only just gone off
into her first sleep, and it would have been a bold person indeed who
ventured to wake her.

The King was greatly annoyed at having to stay and see a visitor at
such a time, and pulled off his hunting boots again with many grimaces.
Meantime the Enchanter was stumping about in the hall, crying:

'Where is this King? Let him be told that I must see him and his wife
also.'

The King, who was listening at the top of the staircase, thought
this was not very polite; however, he took counsel with his favourite
huntsman, and, following his advice, presently went down to see what
was wanted of him. He was struck with astonishment at the sight of the
chariot, and was gazing at it, when the Enchanter strode up to him,
exclaiming:

'Shake hands, Cloverleaf, old fellow! Don't you know me?'

'No, I can't say I do,' replied the King, somewhat embarrassed.

'Why, I am Grumedan, the Enchanter,' said he, 'and I am come to make
your fortune. Let us come in and talk things over a bit.'

Thereupon he ordered the oxen to go about their business, and they
bounded off like stags, and were out of sight in a moment. Then, with
one blow of his club, he changed the massive chariot into a perfect
mountain of gold pieces.

'Those are for your lackeys,' said he to the King, 'that they may drink
my health.'

Naturally a great scramble ensued, and at last the laughter and shouting
awoke the Queen, who rang for her maids to ask the reason of such an
unwonted hurry-burly. When they said that a visitor was asking for her,
and then proceeded each one to tell breathlessly a different tale of
wonder, in which she could only distinguish the words, 'oxen,' 'gold,'
'club,' 'giant,' 'lion,' she thought they were all out of their minds.
Meanwhile the King was asking the Enchanter to what he was indebted
for the honour of this visit, and on his replying that he would not
say until the Queen was also present, messenger after messenger was
dispatched to her to beg her immediate attendance. But Frivola was in a
very bad humour at having been so unceremoniously awakened, and declared
that she had a pain in her little finger, and that nothing should induce
her to come.

When the Enchanter heard this he insisted that she must come.

'Take my club to her Majesty,' said he, 'and tell her that if she smells
the end of it she will find it wonderfully reviving.'

So four of the King's strongest men-at-arms staggered off with it; and
after some persuasion the Queen consented to try this novel remedy.
She had hardly smelt it for an instant when she declared herself to be
perfectly restored; but whether that was due to the scent of the wood or
to the fact that as soon as she touched it out fell a perfect shower of
magnificent jewels, I leave you to decide. At any rate, she was now all
eagerness to see the mysterious stranger, and hastily throwing on her
royal mantle, popped her second-best diamond crown over her night-cap,
put a liberal dab of rouge upon each cheek, and holding up her largest
fan before her nose--for she was not used to appearing in broad
daylight--she went mincing into the great hall. The Enchanter waited
until the King and Queen had seated themselves upon their throne, and
then, taking his place between them, he began solemnly:

'My name is Grumedan. I am an extremely well-connected Enchanter; my
power is immense. In spite of all this, the charms of your daughter
Potentilla have so fascinated me that I cannot live without her. She
fancies that she loves a certain contemptible puppy called Narcissus;
but I have made very short work with him. I really do not care whether
you consent to my marriage with your daughter or not, but I am bound
to ask your consent, on account of a certain meddling Fairy called
Melinette, with whom I have reason for wishing to keep on good terms.'

The King and Queen were somewhat embarrassed to know what answer to make
to this terrible suitor, but at last they asked for time to talk over
the matter: since, they said, their subjects might think that the heir
to the throne should not be married with as little consideration as a
dairymaid.

'Oh! take a day or two if you like,' said the Enchanter; 'but in the
meantime, I am going to send for your daughter. Perhaps you will be able
to induce her to be reasonable.'

So saying, he drew out his favourite whistle, and blew one ear-piercing
note--whereupon the great lion, who had been dozing in the sunny
courtyard, come bounding in on his soft, heavy feet. 'Orion,' said the
Enchanter, 'go and fetch me the Princess, and bring her here at once. Be
gentle now!'

At these words Orion went off at a great pace, and was soon at the other
end of the King's gardens. Scattering the guards right and left, he
cleared the wall at a bound, and seizing the sleeping Princess, he threw
her on to his back, where he kept her by holding her robe in his teeth.
Then he trotted gently back, and in less than five minutes stood in the
great hall before the astonished King and Queen.

The Enchanter held his club close to the Princess's charming little
nose, whereupon she woke up and shrieked with terror at finding herself
in a strange place with the detested Grumedan. Frivola, who had stood
by, stiff with displeasure at the sight of the lovely Princess, now
stepped forward, and with much pretended concern proposed to carry off
Potentilla to her own apartments that she might enjoy the quiet she
seemed to need. Really her one idea was to let the Princess be seen by
as few people as possible; so, throwing a veil over her head, she led
her away and locked her up securely. All this time Prince Narcissus,
gloomy and despairing, was kept a prisoner by Melinette in her castle in
the air, and in spite of all the splendour by which he was surrounded,
and all the pleasures which he might have enjoyed, his one thought was
to get back to Potentilla. The Fairy, however, left him there, promising
to do her very best for him, and commanding all her swallows and
butterflies to wait upon him and do his bidding. One day, as he paced
sadly to and fro, he thought he heard a voice he knew calling to him,
