him with chains and send to his friends for ransom.

You may think we had no chains, but you are wrong, because we used
to keep two other dogs once, besides Pincher, before the fall of the
fortunes of the ancient House of Bastable. And they were quite big dogs.

It was latish in the afternoon before we started. We thought we could
lurk better if it was nearly dark. It was rather foggy, and we waited
a good while beside the railings, but all the belated travellers were
either grown up or else they were Board School children. We weren't
going to get into a row with grown-up people--especially strangers--and
no true bandit would ever stoop to ask a ransom from the relations of
the poor and needy. So we thought it better to wait.

As I said, it was Guy Fawkes Day, and if it had not been we should never
have been able to be bandits at all, for the unwary traveller we did
catch had been forbidden to go out because he had a cold in his head.
But he would run out to follow a guy, without even putting on a coat or
a comforter, and it was a very damp, foggy afternoon and nearly dark, so
you see it was his own fault entirely, and served him jolly well right.

We saw him coming over the Heath just as we were deciding to go home
to tea. He had followed that guy right across to the village (we call
Blackheath the village; I don't know why), and he was coming back
dragging his feet and sniffing.

'Hist, an unwary traveller approaches!' whispered Oswald.

'Muffle your horses' heads and see to the priming of your pistols,'
muttered Alice. She always will play boys' parts, and she makes Ellis
cut her hair short on purpose. Ellis is a very obliging hairdresser.

'Steal softly upon him,' said Noel; 'for lo! 'tis dusk, and no human
eyes can mark our deeds.'

So we ran out and surrounded the unwary traveller. It turned out to be
Albert-next-door, and he was very frightened indeed until he saw who we
were.

'Surrender!' hissed Oswald, in a desperate-sounding voice, as he caught
the arm of the Unwary. And Albert-next-door said, 'All right! I'm
surrendering as hard as I can. You needn't pull my arm off.'

We explained to him that resistance was useless, and I think he saw that
from the first. We held him tight by both arms, and we marched him home
down the hill in a hollow square of five.

He wanted to tell us about the guy, but we made him see that it was not
proper for prisoners to talk to the guard, especially about guys that
the prisoner had been told not to go after because of his cold.

When we got to where we live he said, 'All right, I don't want to tell
you. You'll wish I had afterwards. You never saw such a guy.'

'I can see _you_!' said H. O. It was very rude, and Oswald told him so
at once, because it is his duty as an elder brother. But H. O. is very
young and does not know better yet, and besides it wasn't bad for H. O.

Albert-next-door said, 'You haven't any manners, and I want to go in to
my tea. Let go of me!'

But Alice told him, quite kindly, that he was not going in to his tea,
but coming with us.

'I'm not,' said Albert-next-door; 'I'm going home. Leave go! I've got
a bad cold. You're making it worse.' Then he tried to cough, which was
very silly, because we'd seen him in the morning, and he'd told us where
the cold was that he wasn't to go out with. When he had tried to cough,
he said, 'Leave go of me! You see my cold's getting worse.'

'You should have thought of that before,' said Dicky; 'you're coming in
with us.'

'Don't be a silly,' said Noel; 'you know we told you at the very
beginning that resistance was useless. There is no disgrace in yielding.
We are five to your one.'

By this time Eliza had opened the door, and we thought it best to take
him in without any more parlaying. To parley with a prisoner is not done
by bandits.

Directly we got him safe into the nursery, H. O. began to jump about and
say, 'Now you're a prisoner really and truly!'

And Albert-next-door began to cry. He always does. I wonder he didn't
begin long before--but Alice fetched him one of the dried fruits we
gave Father for his birthday. It was a green walnut. I have noticed
the walnuts and the plums always get left till the last in the box; the
apricots go first, and then the figs and pears; and the cherries, if
there are any.

So he ate it and shut up. Then we explained his position to him, so that
there should be no mistake, and he couldn't say afterwards that he had
not understood.

'There will be no violence,' said Oswald--he was now Captain of the
Bandits, because we all know H. O. likes to be Chaplain when we
play prisoners--'no violence. But you will be confined in a dark,
subterranean dungeon where toads and snakes crawl, and but little of the
light of day filters through the heavily mullioned windows. You will be
loaded with chains. Now don't begin again, Baby, there's nothing to
cry about; straw will be your pallet; beside you the gaoler will set a
ewer--a ewer is only a jug, stupid; it won't eat you--a ewer with water;
and a mouldering crust will be your food.'

But Albert-next-door never enters into the spirit of a thing. He mumbled
something about tea-time.

Now Oswald, though stern, is always just, and besides we were all rather
hungry, and tea was ready. So we had it at once, Albert-next-door and
all--and we gave him what was left of the four-pound jar of apricot jam
we got with the money Noel got for his poetry. And we saved our crusts
for the prisoner.

Albert-next-door was very tiresome. Nobody could have had a nicer prison
than he had. We fenced him into a corner with the old wire nursery
fender and all the chairs, instead of putting him in the coal-cellar
as we had first intended. And when he said the dog-chains were cold the
girls were kind enough to warm his fetters thoroughly at the fire before
we put them on him.

We got the straw cases of some bottles of wine someone sent Father
one Christmas--it is some years ago, but the cases are quite good. We
unpacked them very carefully and pulled them to pieces and scattered
the straw about. It made a lovely straw pallet, and took ever so long to
make--but Albert-next-door has yet to learn what gratitude really is.
We got the bread trencher for the wooden platter where the prisoner's
crusts were put--they were not mouldy, but we could not wait till they
got so, and for the ewer we got the toilet jug out of the spare-room
where nobody ever sleeps. And even then Albert-next-door couldn't be
happy like the rest of us. He howled and cried and tried to get out, and
he knocked the ewer over and stamped on the mouldering crusts. Luckily
there was no water in the ewer because we had forgotten it, only dust
and spiders. So we tied him up with the clothes-line from the back
kitchen, and we had to hurry up, which was a pity for him. We might have
had him rescued by a devoted page if he hadn't been so tiresome. In fact
Noel was actually dressing up for the page when Albert-next-door kicked
over the prison ewer.

We got a sheet of paper out of an old exercise-book, and we made H. O.
prick his own thumb, because he is our little brother and it is our duty
to teach him to be brave. We none of us mind pricking ourselves; we've
done it heaps of times. H. O. didn't like it, but he agreed to do it,
and I helped him a little because he was so slow, and when he saw the
red bead of blood getting fatter and bigger as I squeezed his thumb he
was very pleased, just as I had told him he would be.

This is what we wrote with H. O.'s blood, only the blood gave out when
we got to 'Restored', and we had to write the rest with crimson lake,
which is not the same colour, though I always use it, myself, for
painting wounds.

While Oswald was writing it he heard Alice whispering to the prisoner
that it would soon be over, and it was only play. The prisoner left off
howling, so I pretended not to hear what she said. A Bandit Captain has
to overlook things sometimes. This was the letter--

    'Albert Morrison is held a prisoner by Bandits.
    On payment of three thousand pounds he will be
    restored to his sorrowing relatives, and all
    will be forgotten and forgiven.'

I was not sure about the last part, but Dicky was certain he had seen it
in the paper, so I suppose it must have been all right.

We let H. O. take the letter; it was only fair, as it was his blood it
was written with, and told him to leave it next door for Mrs Morrison.

H. O. came back quite quickly, and Albert-next-door's uncle came with
him.

'What is all this, Albert?' he cried. 'Alas, alas, my nephew! Do I find
you the prisoner of a desperate band of brigands?'

'Bandits,' said H. O; 'you know it says bandits.'

'I beg your pardon, gentlemen,' said Albert-next-door's uncle, 'bandits
it is, of course. This, Albert, is the direct result of the pursuit of
the guy on an occasion when your doting mother had expressly warned you
to forgo the pleasures of the chase.'

Albert said it wasn't his fault, and he hadn't wanted to play.

'So ho!' said his uncle, 'impenitent too! Where's the dungeon?'

We explained the dungeon, and showed him the straw pallet and the ewer
and the mouldering crusts and other things.

'Very pretty and complete,' he said. 'Albert, you are more highly
privileged than ever I was. No one ever made me a nice dungeon when I
was your age. I think I had better leave you where you are.'

Albert began to cry again and said he was sorry, and he would be a good
boy.

'And on this old familiar basis you expect me to ransom you, do you?
Honestly, my nephew, I doubt whether you are worth it. Besides, the sum
mentioned in this document strikes me as excessive: Albert really is
_not_ worth three thousand pounds. Also by a strange and unfortunate
chance I haven't the money about me. Couldn't you take less?'

We said perhaps we could.

'Say eightpence,' suggested Albert-next-door's uncle, 'which is all the
small change I happen to have on my person.'

'Thank you very much,' said Alice as he held it out; 'but are you sure
you can spare it? Because really it was only play.'

'Quite sure. Now, Albert, the game is over. You had better run home to
your mother and tell her how much you've enjoyed yourself.'

When Albert-next-door had gone his uncle sat in the Guy Fawkes armchair
and took Alice on his knee, and we sat round the fire waiting till it
would be time to let off our fireworks. We roasted the chestnuts he
sent Dicky out for, and he told us stories till it was nearly seven. His
stories are first-rate--he does all the parts in different voices. At
last he said--

'Look here, young-uns. I like to see you play and enjoy yourselves, and
I don't think it hurts Albert to enjoy himself too.'

'I don't think he did much,' said H. O. But I knew what
Albert-next-door's uncle meant because I am much older than H. O. He
went on--

'But what about Albert's mother? Didn't you think how anxious she would
be at his not coming home? As it happens I saw him come in with you, so
we knew it was all right. But if I hadn't, eh?'

He only talks like that when he is very serious, or even angry. Other
times he talks like people in books--to us, I mean.

We none of us said anything. But I was thinking. Then Alice spoke.

Girls seem not to mind saying things that we don't say. She put her arms
round Albert-next-door's uncle's neck and said--

'We're very, very sorry. We didn't think about his mother. You see we
try very hard not to think about other people's mothers because--'

Just then we heard Father's key in the door and Albert-next-door's uncle
kissed Alice and put her down, and we all went down to meet Father. As
we went I thought I heard Albert-next-door's uncle say something that
sounded like 'Poor little beggars!'

He couldn't have meant us, when we'd been having such a jolly time, and
chestnuts, and fireworks to look forward to after dinner and everything!



CHAPTER 8. BEING EDITORS

It was Albert's uncle who thought of our trying a newspaper. He said he
thought we should not find the bandit business a paying industry, as a
permanency, and that journalism might be.

We had sold Noel's poetry and that piece of information about Lord
Tottenham to the good editor, so we thought it would not be a bad idea
to have a newspaper of our own. We saw plainly that editors must be very
rich and powerful, because of the grand office and the man in the glass
case, like a museum, and the soft carpets and big writing-table. Besides
our having seen a whole handful of money that the editor pulled out
quite carelessly from his trousers pocket when he gave me my five bob.

Dora wanted to be editor and so did Oswald, but he gave way to her
because she is a girl, and afterwards he knew that it is true what it
says in the copy-books about Virtue being its own Reward. Because you've
no idea what a bother it is. Everybody wanted to put in everything just
as they liked, no matter how much room there was on the page. It was
simply awful! Dora put up with it as long as she could and then she said
if she wasn't let alone she wouldn't go on being editor; they could be
the paper's editors themselves, so there.

Then Oswald said, like a good brother: 'I will help you if you like,
Dora,' and she said, 'You're more trouble than all the rest of them!
Come and be editor and see how you like it. I give it up to you.'
But she didn't, and we did it together. We let Albert-next-door be
sub-editor, because he had hurt his foot with a nail in his boot that
gathered.

When it was done Albert-next-door's uncle had it copied for us in
typewriting, and we sent copies to all our friends, and then of course
there was no one left that we could ask to buy it. We did not think of
that until too late. We called the paper the Lewisham Recorder; Lewisham
because we live there, and Recorder in memory of the good editor. I
could write a better paper on my head, but an editor is not allowed to
write all the paper. It is very hard, but he is not. You just have to
fill up with what you can get from other writers. If I ever have time I
will write a paper all by myself. It won't be patchy. We had no time to
make it an illustrated paper, but I drew the ship going down with all
hands for the first copy. But the typewriter can't draw ships, so it was
left out in the other copies. The time the first paper took to write out
no one would believe! This was the Newspaper:

          THE LEWISHAM RECORDER

    EDITORS:  DORA AND OSWALD BASTABLE

             ------------             EDITORIAL NOTE

Every paper is written for some reason. Ours is because we want to sell
it and get money. If what we have written brings happiness to any sad
heart we shall not have laboured in vain. But we want the money too.
Many papers are content with the sad heart and the happiness, but we are
not like that, and it is best not to be deceitful. EDITORS.

There will be two serial stories; One by Dicky and one by all of us. In
a serial story you only put in one chapter at a time. But we shall put
all our serial story at once, if Dora has time to copy it. Dicky's will
