school though still in the third class, "that it's all gammon, just to
give himself a good name, and to do away with the bad repute the school
has got into for Hathorn's flogging. You will see how long it will last!
I ain't going to swallow all that soft soap."

Ned, who had been much touched at the master's address, at once fired
up:

"Oh! we all know how clever you are, Mather--quite a shining genius, one
of the sort who can see through a stone wall. If you say it's gammon, of
course it must be so."

There was a laugh among the boys.

"I will punch your head if you don't shut up, Sankey," Mather said
angrily; "there's no ink bottle for you to shy here."

Ned turned very white, but he checked himself with an effort.

"I don't want to fight today--it's the first day of the half year, and
after such a speech as we've heard I don't want to have a row on this
first morning. But you had better look out; another time you won't find
me so patient. Punch my head, indeed! Why, you daren't try it."

But Mather would have tried it, for he had for the last year been
regarded as the cock of the school. However, several of the boys
interfered.

"Sankey is right, Mather; it would be a beastly shame to be fighting
this morning. After what Porson said there oughtn't to be any rows
today. We shall soon see whether he means it."

Mather suffered himself to be dissuaded from carrying his threat into
execution, the rather that in his heart of hearts he was not assured
that the course would have been a wise one. Ned had never fought in
the school, but Tompkins' account of his fight on the moor with Bill
Swinton, and the courage he had shown in taking upon himself the office
of spokesman in the rebellion against Hathorn, had given him a very
high reputation among the boys; and in spite of Mather's greater age and
weight there were many who thought that Ned Sankey would make a tough
fight of it with the cock of the school.

So the gathering broke up and the boys set to at their games, which were
played with a heartiness and zest all the greater that none of them were
in pain from recent punishment, and that they could look forward to the
afternoon without fear and trembling.

When at twelve o'clock the boys of the first class came out from school
the others crowded round to hear the result of the morning's lessons.
They looked bright and pleased.

"I think he is going to turn out a brick," Ripon, the head of the first
class, said. "Of course one can't tell yet. He was very quiet with us
and had a regular examination of each of us. I don't think he was at
all satisfied, though we all did our best, but there was no shouting or
scolding. We are to go in again this afternoon with the rest. He says
there's something which he forgot to mention to us this morning."

"More speeches!" Mather grumbled. "I hate all this jaw."

"Yes," Ripon said sharply; "a cane is the thing which suits your
understanding best. Well, perhaps he will indulge you; obstinate
idleness is one of the things he mentioned in the address."

When afternoon school began Mr. Porson again rose.

"There is one thing I forgot to mention this morning. I understand that
you have hitherto passed your play time entirely in the playground,
except on Saturday afternoons, when you have been allowed to go where
you like between dinner and tea time. With the latter regulation I do
not intend to interfere, or at any rate I shall not do so so long as
I see that no bad effects come of it; but I shall do so only with this
proviso: I do not think it good for you to be going about the town. I
shall therefore put Marsden out of bounds. You will be free to ramble
where you like in the country, but any boy who enters the town will
be severely punished. I am not yet sufficiently acquainted with the
neighborhood to draw the exact line beyond which you are not to go, but
I shall do so as soon as I have ascertained the boundaries of the town.

"I understand that you look forward to Saturday for making such
purchases as you require. Therefore each Saturday four boys, selected by
yourselves, one from each class, will be allowed to go into the town to
make purchases for the rest, but they are not to be absent more than an
hour.

"In the second place, I do not think that the playground affords a
sufficient space for exercise, and being graveled, it is unsuitable for
many games. Therefore I have hired a field, which I dare say you all
know; it is called 'The Four Acre Field,' about a hundred yards down the
road on the left hand side. This you will use as your playground during
the six summer months. I have brought with me from York a box which I
shall place under the charge of Ripon and the two next senior to him.
It contains bats, wickets, and a ball for cricket; a set of quoits; trap
bat and ball for the younger boys; leaping bars and some other things.
These will give you a start. As they become used up or broken they
must be replaced by yourselves; and I hope you will obtain plenty of
enjoyment from them. I shall come and play a game of cricket with you
myself sometimes.

"You will bear in mind that it is my wish that you should be happy. I
expect you to work hard, but I wish you to play hard too. Unless the
body works the brain will suffer, and a happy and contented boy will
learn as easily again as a discontented, and miserable one. I will give
you the box after tea, so that you can all examine them together. The
second and third classes will now stay in; the fourth class can go out
in the playground with the first. I shall have time to examine them
while the others are doing their work tomorrow."

There was a suppressed cheer among the boys and Ripon, as the senior,
said:

"I am sure, sir, we are all very much obliged to you for your kindness,
and we will do our best to deserve it."

There was a chorus of assent, and then the elder and younger boys went
out into the playground while the work of examination of the second and
third classes began.

On the following day lessons began in earnest, and the boys found their
first impressions of the new master more than justified. A new era
had commenced. The sound of the cane was no longer heard, and yet the
lessons were far better done than had been the case before. Then the
whole work had fallen on the boys; the principal part of the day's
lessens had been the repeating of tasks learned by heart, and the master
simply heard them and punished the boys who were not perfect.

There was comparatively little of this mechanical work now; it was the
sense and not the wording which had to be mastered. Thus geography was
studied from an atlas and not by the mere parrot-like learning of the
names of towns and rivers. In grammar the boys had to show that they
understood a rule by citing examples other than those given in their
books. History was rather a lecture from the master than a repetition of
dry facts and dates by the boys. Latin and mathematics were made clear
in a similar way.

"It was almost too good to last," the boys said after the first
day's experience of this new method of teaching; but it did last.
A considerable portion of the work out of school was devoted to the
keeping up the facts they had learned, for Mr. Porson was constantly
going back and seeing that their memories retained the facts they had
acquired, and what they called examinations were a part of the daily
routine.

In some points upon which Mr. Hathorn had laid the greatest stress Mr.
Porson was indifferent--dates, which had been the bane of many a boy's
life and an unceasing source of punishment, he regarded but little,
insisting only that the general period should be known, and his
questions generally took the form of, "In the beginning or at the end of
such and such a century, what was the state of things in England or in
Rome?" A few dates of special events, the landmarks of history, were
required to be learned accurately, all others were passed over as
unimportant.

It was not that the boys worked fewer hours than before, but that they
worked more intelligently, and therefore more pleasantly to themselves.
The boys--and there were some--who imagined that under this new method
of teaching they could be idle, very soon found out their mistake,
and discovered that in his way Mr. Porson was just as strict as his
predecessor. He never lost his temper; but his cold displeasure was
harder to bear than Mr. Hathorn's wrath; nor were punishments wanting.
Although the cane was idle, those who would not work were kept in the
schoolroom during play hours; and in cases where this was found to be
ineffectual Mr. Porson coldly said:

"Your parents pay me to teach you, and if you do not choose to be taught
I have only to write home to them and request them to take you away. If
you are one of those boys who will only learn from fear of the cane you
had better go to some school where the cane is used."

This threat, which would have been ineffective in Mr. Hathorn's time
never failed to have an effect now; for even Mather, the idlest and
worst boy there, was able to appreciate the difference between the
present regime and the last. In a marvelously short time Mr. Porson
seemed to have gauged the abilities of each of the boys, and while he
expected much from those who were able' to master easily their tasks,
he was content with less from the duller intellects, providing they had
done their best.

After a week's experience of Mr. Porson, Ned gave so glowing an account
to his father of the new master and his methods that Captain Sankey went
down to the school and arranged that Charlie, now ten years old, should
accompany his brother. There were several boys no older than he; but
Charlie differed widely from his elder brother, being a timid and
delicate child, and ill fitted to take care of himself. Captain Sankey
felt, however, after what Ned had told him of Mr. Porson, that he
could trust to him during the school hours, and Ned would be an active
protector in the playground.

It was not until a fortnight after the school began that the Four Acre
Field was ready. By that time a flock of sheep had been turned into it,
and had eaten the grass smooth, and a heavy horse roller had been at
work for a day making a level pitch in the center.

It was a Saturday afternoon when the boys took possession of it for the
first time. As they were about to start in the highest glee, Mr. Porson
joined them. Some of their faces fell a little; but he said cheerfully:

"Now, boys, I am going with you; but not, you know, to look after you or
keep you in order. I want you all to enjoy yourselves just in your own
way, and I mean to enjoy myself too. I have been a pretty good cricketer
in my time, and played in the York Eleven against Leeds, so I may be
able to coach you up a little, and I hope after a bit we may be able to
challenge some of the village elevens round here. I am afraid Marsden
will be too good for us for some time; still, we shall see."

On reaching the field Mr. Porson saw the ground measured and the wickets
erected, and then said:

"Now I propose we begin with a match. There are enough of us to make
more than two elevens; but there are the other games. Would any of the
bigger boys like to play quoits better than cricket?"

Mather, who felt much aggrieved at the master's presence, said he should
prefer quoits; and Williamson, who always followed his lead, agreed to
play with him.

"Now," Mr. Porson said, "do you, Ripon, choose an eleven. I will take
the ten next best. The little ones who are over can play at trap bat, or
bowls, as they like."

There was a general approval of the plan. Ripon chose an eleven of the
likeliest boys, selecting the biggest and most active; for as there had
been no room for cricket in the yard their aptitude for the game was a
matter of guesswork, though most of them had played during the holidays.
Mr. Porson chose the next ten and after tossing for innings, which
Ripon won, they set to work. Mr. Porson played for a time as long stop,
putting on two of the strongest of his team as bowlers, and changing
them from time to time to test their capacity. None of them turned out
brilliant, and the runs came fast, and the wickets were taken were few
and far between, until at last Mr. Porson himself took the ball.

"I am not going to bowl fast," he said, "just straight easy lobs;" but
the boys found that the straight lobs were not so easy after all, and
the wickets of the boys who had made a long score soon fell. Most of
those who followed managed to make a few runs as well off Mr. Porson's
bowling as from that at the other end; for the master did not wish to
discourage them, and for a few overs after each batsman came to the
wicket aimed well off it so as to give them a chance of scoring.

The last wicket fell for the respectable score of fifty-four. The junior
eleven then went in, the master not going in until the last. Only twenty
runs had been made when he took the bat. In the five balls of the over
which were bowled to him he made three fours; but before it came to
his turn again his partner at the other end was out, and his side
were twenty-two behind on the first innings. The other side scored
thirty-three for the first four wickets before he again took the ball,
and the remaining six went down for twelve runs. His own party implored
him to go in first, but he refused.

"No, no, boys," he said; "you must win the match, if you can, without
much aid from me."

The juniors made a better defense this time and scored forty before the
ninth wicket fell. Then Mr. Porson went in and ran the score up to sixty
before his partner was out, the seniors winning the match by nine runs.
Both sides were highly pleased with the result of the match. The seniors
had won after a close game. The juniors were well pleased to have run
their elders so hard.

They all gathered round their master and thanked him warmly.

"I am glad you are pleased, my boys," he said; "I will come down two
or three times a week and bowl to you for an hour, and give you a
few hints, and you will find that you get on fast. There is plenty of
promise among you, and I prophesy that we shall turn out a fair eleven
by the end of the season."

The younger boys had also enjoyed themselves greatly, and had been
joined by many of the elders while waiting for their turn to go in.
Altogether the opening day of the Four Acre Field had been a great
success.

The old cake woman who had previously supplied the boys still came once
a week, her usual time being Wednesday evening, when, after tea, the
boys played for half an hour in the yard before going in to their usual
lessons. Ned was not usually present, but he one evening went back to
fetch a book which he needed. As he came in at the gate of the yard
Mather was speaking to the woman.

"No, I won't let you have any more, Master Mather. You have broken your
promises to me over and over again. That money you owed me last half
ain't been paid yet. If it had only been the money for the cakes and
sweets I shouldn't ha' minded so much, but it's that ten shillings you
borrowed and promised me solemn you would pay at the end of the week and
ain't never paid yet. I have got to make up my rent, and I tell ye if I
don't get the money by Saturday I shall speak to t' maister about it and
see what he says to such goings on."

"Don't talk so loud," Mather said hurriedly, "and I will get you the
money as seen as I can."

"I don't care who hears me," the woman replied in a still louder
voice, "and as soon as you can won't do for I. I have got to have it on
Saturday, so that's flat. I will come up to the field, and you'll best
have it ready for me."

Ned did not hear the last few words, but he had heard enough to know
that Mather owed ten shillings which he had borrowed, besides a bill for
cakes. Mather had not noticed him come into the yard, for his back was
toward the gate, and the noise which the boys made running about and
shouting prevented him hearing the gate open and close.

"It's a beastly shame," Ned muttered to himself as he went off to
school, "to borrow money from an old woman like that. Mather must have
known he couldn't pay it, for he has only a small allowance, and he is
always short of money, and of course he could not expect a tip before
the holidays. He might have paid her when he came back, but as he didn't
I don't see how he is to do so now, and if the old woman tells Porson
there will be a row. It's just the sort of thing would rile him most."

On the next Saturday he watched with some curiosity the entry of the
old woman into the field. Several of the boys went up and bought sweets.
When she was standing alone Mather strolled up to her. After a word or
two he handed her something. She took it, and said a few words. Mather
shook his head positively, and in a minute or two walked away, leaving
her apparently satisfied.

"I suppose he has given her something on account," Ned said to himself.
"I wonder where he got it. When Ripon asked him last Monday for a
subscription to buy another set of bats and wickets, so that two lots
could practise at once, he said he had only sixpence left, and Mather
would not like to seem mean now, for he knows he doesn't stand well with
any one except two or three of his own set, because he is always running
out against everything that Porson does."

A week later Mr. Porson said, at the end of school:

"By the way, boys, have any of you seen that illustrated classical
dictionary of mine? I had it in school about ten days ago when I was
showing you the prints of the dress and armor of the Romans, and I have
not seen it since. I fancy I must have left it on my table, but I cannot
be sure. I looked everywhere in my library for it last night and cannot
find it. Perhaps if I left it on the desk one of you has taken it to
look at the pictures."

There was a general silence.

"I think it must be so," Mr. Porson went on more gravely. "If the boy
who has it will give it up I shall not be angry, as, if I left it on the
desk, there would be no harm in taking it to look at the pictures."

Still there was silence.

"I value the book," Mr. Porson went on, "not only because it is an
expensive work, but because it is a prize which I won at Durham."

He paused a moment, and then said in a stern voice: "Let every boy open
his desk."

The desks were opened, and Mr. Porson walked round and glanced at each.

"This is a serious matter now," he said. "Ripon, will you come to the
study with me and help me to search again. It is possible it may still
be there and I may have overlooked it. The rest will remain in their
places till I return."

There was a buzz of conversation while the master was absent. On his
return he said:

