She told Clover of this plan, but nobody else. The two children, full of
their delightful secret, began to save pieces of bread and cookies from
their supper every evening. By degrees they collected a great heap of
dry crusts, and other refreshments, which they put safely away in the
garret. They also saved the apples which were given them for two weeks,
and made a bed in a big empty box, with cotton quilts, and the dolls'
pillows out of the baby-house. When all was ready, Katy broke the plan
to her beloved Marianne, and easily persuaded her to run away and take
possession of this new home.

"We won't tell Papa and Mamma till she's quite grown up," Katy said to
Clover; "then we'll bring her down stairs, and _won't_ they be
surprised? Don't let's call her Marianne any longer, either. It isn't
pretty. We'll name her Susquehanna instead--Susquehanna Carr. Recollect,
Marianne, you mustn't answer if I call you Marianne--only when I say
Susquehanna."

"Yes'm," replied Marianne, very meekly.

For a whole day all went on delightfully. Susquehanna lived in her
wooden box, ate all the apples and the freshest cookies, and was happy.
The two children took turns to steal away and play with the "Baby," as
they called Marianne, though she was a great deal bigger than Clover.
But when night came on, and nurse swooped on Katy and Clover, and
carried them off to bed, Miss O'Riley began to think that the garret was
a dreadful place. Peeping out of her box, she could see black things
standing in corners, which she did not recollect seeing in the day-time.
They were really trunks and brooms and warming-pans, but somehow, in the
darkness, they looked different--big and awful. Poor little Marianne
bore it as long as she could; but when at last a rat began to scratch in
the wall close beside her, her courage gave way entirely, and she
screamed at the top of her voice.

"What is that?" said Dr. Carr, who had just come in, and was on his way
up stairs.

"It sounds as if it came from the attic," said Mrs. Carr (for this was
before Mamma died). "Can it be that one of the children has got out of
bed and wandered up stairs in her sleep?"

No, Katy and Clover were safe in the nursery; so Dr. Carr took a
candle and went as fast as he could to the attic, where the yells were
growing terrific. When he reached the top of the stairs, the cries
ceased. He looked about. Nothing was to be seen at first, then a
little head appeared over the edge of a big wooden box, and a piteous
voice sobbed out:

"Ah, Miss Katy, and indeed I can't be stayin' any longer. There's
rats in it!"

"Who on earth _are_ you?" asked the amazed Doctor.

"Sure I'm Miss Katy's and Miss Clover's Baby. But I don't want to be a
baby any longer. I want to go home and see my mother." And again the
poor little midge lifted up her voice and wept.

I don't think Dr. Carr ever laughed so hard in his life, as when
finally he got to the bottom of the story, and found that Katy and
Clover had been "adopting" a child. But he was very kind to poor
Susquehanna, and carried her down stairs in his arms, to the nursery.
There, in a bed close to the other children, she soon forgot her
troubles and fell asleep.

The little sisters were much surprised when they waked up in the
morning, and found their Baby asleep beside them. But their joy was
speedily turned to tears. After breakfast, Dr. Carr carried Marianne
home to her mother, who was in a great fright over her disappearance,
and explained to the children that the garret plan must be given up.
Great was the mourning in the nursery; but as Marianne was allowed to
come and play with them now and then, they gradually got over their
grief. A few months later Mr. O'Riley moved away from Burnet, and that
was the end of Katy's first friendship.

The next was even funnier. There was a queer old black woman who lived
all alone by herself in a small house near the school. This old woman
had a very bad temper. The neighbors told horrible stories about her, so
that the children were afraid to pass the house. They used to turn
always just before they reached it, and cross to the other side of the
street. This they did so regularly, that their feet had worn a path in
the grass. But for some reason Katy found a great fascination in the
little house. She liked to dodge about the door, always holding herself
ready to turn and run in case the old woman rushed out upon her with a
broomstick. One day she begged a large cabbage of Alexander, and rolled
it in at the door of the house. The old woman seemed to like it, and
after this Katy always stopped to speak when she went by. She even got
so far as to sit on the step and watch the old woman at work. There was
a sort of perilous pleasure in doing this. It was like sitting at the
entrance of a lion's cage, uncertain at what moment his Majesty might
take it into his head to give a spring and eat you up.

After this, Katy took a fancy to a couple of twin sisters, daughters of
a German jeweller. They were quite grown-up, and always wore dresses
exactly alike. Hardly any one could tell them apart. They spoke very
little English, and as Katy didn't know a word of German, their
intercourse was confined to smiles, and to the giving of bunches of
flowers, which Katy used to tie up and present to them whenever they
passed the gate. She was too shy to do more than just put the flowers in
their hands and run away; but the twins were evidently pleased, for one
day, when Clover happened to be looking out of the window, she saw them
open the gate, fasten a little parcel to a bush, and walk rapidly off.
Of course she called Katy at once, and the two children flew out to see
what the parcel was. It held a bonnet--a beautiful doll's bonnet of blue
silk, trimmed with artificial flowers; upon it was pinned a slip of
paper with these words, in an odd foreign hand:

"To the nice little girl who was so kindly to give us some flowers."

You can judge whether Katy and Clover were pleased or not.

This was when Katy was six years old. I can't begin to tell you how many
different friends she had set up since then. There was an ash-man, and a
steam-boat captain. There was Mrs. Sawyer's cook, a nice old woman, who
gave Katy lessons in cooking, and taught her to make soft custard and
sponge-cake. There was a bonnet-maker, pretty and dressy, whom, to Aunt
Izzie's great indignation, Katy persisted in calling "Cousin Estelle!"
There was a thief in the town-jail, under whose window Katy used to
stand, saying, "I'm so sorry, poor man!" and "have you got any little
girls like me?" in the most piteous way. The thief had a piece of string
which he let down from the window. Katy would tie rosebuds and cherries
to this string, and the thief would draw them up. It was so interesting
to do this, that Katy felt dreadfully when they carried the man off to
the State Prison. Then followed a short interval of Cornelia Perham, a
nice, good-natured girl, whose father was a fruit-merchant. I am afraid
Katy's liking for prunes and white grapes played a part in this
intimacy. It was splendid fun to go with Cornelia to her father's big
shop, and have whole boxes of raisins and drums of figs opened for their
amusement, and be allowed to ride up and down in the elevator as much as
they liked. But of all Katy's queer acquaintances, Mrs. Spenser, to whom
Aunt Izzie had alluded, was the queerest.

Mrs. Spenser was a mysterious lady whom nobody ever saw. Her husband was
a handsome, rather bad-looking man, who had come from parts unknown, and
rented a small house in Burnet. He didn't seem to have any particular
business, and was away from home a great deal. His wife was said to be
an invalid, and people, when they spoke of him, shook their heads and
wondered how the poor woman got on all alone in the house, while her
husband was absent.

Of course Katy was too young to understand these whispers, or the
reasons why people were not disposed to think well of Mr. Spenser. The
romance of the closed door and the lady whom nobody saw, interested her
very much. She used to stop and stare at the windows, and wonder what
was going on inside, till at last it seemed as if she _must_ know. So,
one day she took some flowers and Victoria, her favorite doll, and
boldly marched into the Spensers' yard.

She tapped at the front door, but nobody answered. Then she tapped
again. Still nobody answered. She tried the door. It was locked. So
shouldering Victoria, she trudged round to the back of the house. As she
passed the side-door she saw that it was open a little way. She knocked
for the third time, and as no one came, she went in, and passing through
the little hall, began to tap at all the inside doors.

There seemed to be no people in the house, Katy peeped into the kitchen
first. It was bare and forlorn. All sorts of dishes were standing about.
There was no fire in the stove. The parlor was not much better. Mr.
Spenser's boots lay in the middle of the floor. There were dirty glasses
on the table. On the mantel-piece was a platter with bones of meat upon
it. Dust lay thick over everything, and the whole house looked as if it
hadn't been lived in for at least a year.

Katy tried several other doors, all of which were locked, and then she
went up stairs. As she stood on the top step, grasping her flowers, and
a little doubtful what to do next, a feeble voice from a bed-room
called out:

"Who is there?"

This was Mrs. Spenser. She was lying on her bed, which was very tossed
and tumbled, as if it hadn't been made up that morning. The room was as
disorderly and dirty as all the rest of the house, and Mrs. Spenser's
wrapper and night-cap were by no means clean, but her face was sweet,
and she had beautiful curling hair, which fell over the pillow. She was
evidently very sick, and altogether Katy felt sorrier for her than she
had ever done for anybody in her life.

"Who are you, child?" asked Mrs. Spenser.

"I'm Dr. Carr's little girl," answered Katy, going straight up to the
bed. "I came to bring you some flowers." And she laid the bouquet on the
dirty sheet.

Mrs. Spenser seemed to like the flowers. She took them up and smelled
them for a long time, without speaking.

"But how did you get in?" she said at last.

"The door was open," faltered Katy, who was beginning to feel scared at
her own daring, "and they said you were sick, so I thought perhaps you
would like me to come and see you."

"You are a kind little girl," said Mrs. Spenser, and gave her a kiss.

After this Katy used to go every day. Sometimes Mrs. Spenser would be up
and moving feebly about; but more often she was in bed, and Katy would
sit beside her. The house never looked a bit better than it did that
first day, but after a while Katy used to brush Mrs. Spenser's hair, and
wash her face with the corner of a towel.

I think her visits were a comfort to the poor lady, who was very ill and
lonely. Sometimes, when she felt pretty well, she would tell Katy
stories about the time when she was a little girl and lived at home with
her father and mother. But she never spoke of Mr. Spenser, and Katy
never saw him except once, when she was so frightened that for several
days she dared not go near the house. At last Cecy reported that she had
seen him go off in the stage with his carpet-bag, so Katy ventured in
again. Mrs. Spenser cried when she saw her.

"I thought you were never coming any more," she said.

Katy was touched and flattered at having been missed, and after that she
never lost a day. She always carried the prettiest flowers she could
find, and if any one gave her a specially nice peach or a bunch of
grapes, she saved it for Mrs. Spenser.

Aunt Izzie was much worried at all this. But Dr. Carr would not
interfere. He said it was a case where grown people could do nothing,
and if Katy was a comfort to the poor lady he was glad. Katy was glad
too, and the visits did her as much good as they did Mrs. Spenser, for
the intense pity she felt for the sick woman made her gentle and patient
as she had never been before.

One day she stopped, as usual, on her way home from school. She tried
the side-door--it was locked; the back-door, it was locked too. All the
blinds were shut tight. This was very puzzling.

As she stood in the yard a woman put her head out of the window of
the next house. "It's no use knocking," she said, "all the folks have
gone away."

"Gone away where?" asked Katy.

"Nobody knows," said the woman; "the gentleman came back in the middle
of the night, and this morning, before light, he had a wagon at the
door, and just put in the trunks and the sick lady, and drove off.
There's been more than one a-knocking besides you, since then. But Mr.
Pudgett, he's got the key, and nobody can get in without goin' to him."

It was too true. Mrs. Spenser was gone, and Katy never saw her again. In
a few days it came out that Mr. Spenser was a very bad man, and had been
making false money--_counterfeiting_, as grown people call it. The
police were searching for him to put him in jail, and that was the
reason he had come back in such a hurry and carried off his poor sick
wife. Aunt Izzie cried with mortification, when she heard this. She said
she thought it was a disgrace that Katy should have been visiting in a
counterfeiter's family. But Dr. Carr only laughed. He told Aunt Izzie
that he didn't think that kind of crime was catching, and as for Mrs.
Spenser, she was much to be pitied. But Aunt Izzie could not get over
her vexation, and every now and then, when she was vexed, she would
refer to the affair, though this all happened so long ago that most
people had forgotten all about it, and Philly and John had stopped
playing at "Putting Mr. Spenser in Jail," which for a long time was one
of their favorite games.

Katy always felt badly when Aunt Izzie spoke unkindly of her poor sick
friend. She had tears in her eyes now, as she walked to the gate, and
looked so very sober, that Imogen Clark, who stood there waiting,
clasped her hands and said:

"Ah, I see! Your aristocratic Aunt refuses."

Imogen's real name was Elizabeth. She was rather a pretty girl, with a
screwed-up, sentimental mouth, shiny brown hair, and a little round curl
on each of her cheeks. These curls must have been fastened on with glue
or tin tacks, one would think, for they never moved, however much she
laughed or shook her head. Imogen was a bright girl, naturally, but she
had read so many novels that her brain was completely turned. It was
partly this which made her so attractive to Katy, who adored stories,
and thought Imogen was a real heroine of romance.

"Oh no, she doesn't," she replied, hardly able to keep from laughing, at
the idea of Aunt Izzie's being called an "aristocratic relative"--"she
says she shall be my hap--" But here Katy's conscience gave a prick, and
the sentence ended in "um, um, um--" "So you'll come, won't you,
darling? I am so glad!"

"And I!" said Imogen, turning up her eyes theatrically.

From this time on till the end of the week, the children talked of
nothing but Imogen's visit, and the nice time they were going to have.
Before breakfast on Saturday morning, Katy and Clover were at work
building a beautiful bower of asparagus boughs under the trees. All the
playthings were set out in order. Debby baked them some cinnamon cakes,
the kitten had a pink ribbon tied round her neck, and the dolls,
including "Pikery," were arrayed in their best clothes.

About half-past ten Imogen arrived. She was dressed in a light-blue
barege, with low neck and short sleeves, and wore coral beads in her
hair, white satin slippers, and a pair of yellow gloves. The gloves and
slippers were quite dirty, and the barege was old and darned; but the
general effect was so very gorgeous, that the children, who were dressed
for play, in gingham frocks and white aprons, were quite dazzled at the
appearance of their guest.

"Oh, Imogen, you look just like a young lady in a story!" said simple
Katy; whereupon Imogen tossed her head and rustled her skirts about more
than ever.

Somehow, with these fine clothes, Imogen seemed to have put on a fine
manner, quite different from the one she used every day. You know some
people always do, when they go out visiting. You would almost have
supposed that this was a different Imogen, who was kept in a box most of
the time, and taken out for Sundays and grand occasions. She swam about,
