
Accordingly--for it must be understood that our pilgrimage was to be
performed on foot--we sallied joyously out of the wagon, each of us,
even the old gentleman in his white-top boots, giving a great skip as
we came down the ladder.  Above our heads there was such a glory of
sunshine and splendor of clouds, and such brightness of verdure below,
that, as I modestly remarked at the time, Nature seemed to have washed
her face, and put on the best of her jewelry and a fresh green gown,
in honor of our confederation.  Casting our eyes northward, we beheld
a horseman approaching leisurely, and splashing through the little
puddles on the Stamford road.  Onward he came, sticking up in his
saddle with rigid perpendicularity, a tall, thin figure in rusty
black, whom the showman and the conjurer shortly recognized to be,
what his aspect sufficiently indicated, a travelling preacher of great
fame among the Methodists.  What puzzled us was the fact, that his
face appeared turned from, instead of to, the camp-meeting at
Stamford.  However, as this new votary of the wandering life drew near
the little green space, where the guidepost and our wagon were
situated, my six fellow-vagabonds and myself rushed forward and
surrounded him, crying out with united voices,--

"What news, what news from the camp-meeting at Stamford?"

The missionary looked down, in surprise, at as singular a knot of
people as could have been selected from all his heterogeneous
auditors.  Indeed, considering that we might all be classified under
the general head of Vagabond, there was great diversity of character
among the grave old showman, the sly, prophetic beggar, the fiddling
foreigner and his merry damsel, the smart bibliopolist, the sombre
Indian, and myself, the itinerant novelist, a slender youth of
eighteen.  I even fancied that a smile was endeavoring to disturb the
iron gravity of the preacher's mouth.

"Good people," answered he, "the camp-meeting is broke up."

So saying, the Methodist minister switched his steed, and rode
westward.  Our union being thus nullified, by the removal of its
object, we were sundered at once to the four winds of heaven. The
fortune-teller, giving a nod to all, and a peculiar wink to me,
departed on his northern tour, chuckling within himself as he took the
Stamford road.  The old showman and his literary coadjutor were
already tackling their horses to the wagon, with a design to
peregrinate southwest along the seacoast.  The foreigner and the merry
damsel took their laughing leave, and pursued the eastern road, which
I had that day trodden; as they passed away, the young man played a
lively strain, and the girl's happy spirit broke into a dance; and
thus, dissolving, as it were, into sunbeams and gay music, that
pleasant pair departed from my view.  Finally, with a pensive shadow
thrown across my mind, yet emulous of the light philosophy of my late
companions, I joined myself to the Penobscot Indian, and set forth
towards the distant city.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Seven Vagabonds (From "Twice Told
Tales"), by Nathaniel Hawthorne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SEVEN VAGABONDS ***

***** This file should be named 9213.txt or 9213.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/2/1/9213/

Produced by David Widger.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).

