"Be cautious," said the calm voice which had before spoken to him.  "One
of the Gorgons is stirring in her sleep, and is just about to turn over.
That is Medusa.  Do not look at her!  The sight would turn you to stone!
Look at the reflection of her face and figure in the bright mirror of
your shield."

Perseus now understood Quicksilver's motive for so earnestly exhorting
him to polish his shield.  In its surface he could safely look at the
reflection of the Gorgon's face.  And there it was,--that terrible
countenance,--mirrored in the brightness of the shield, with the
moonlight falling over it, and displaying all its horror.  The snakes,
whose venomous natures could not altogether sleep, kept twisting
themselves over the forehead.  It was the fiercest and most horrible
face that ever was seen or imagined, and yet with a strange, fearful,
and savage kind of beauty in it.  The eyes were closed, and the Gorgon
was still in a deep slumber; but there was an unquiet expression
disturbing her features, as if the monster was troubled with an ugly
dream.  She gnashed her white tusks, and dug into the sand with her
brazen claws.

The snakes, too, seemed to feel Medusa's dream, and to be made more
restless by it.  They twined themselves into tumultuous knots, writhed
fiercely, and uplifted a hundred hissing heads, without opening their
eyes.

"Now, now!" whispered Quicksilver, who was growing impatient.  "Make a
dash at the monster!"

"But be calm," said the grave, melodious voice, at the young man's side.
"Look in your shield, as you fly downward, and take care that you do not
miss your first stroke."

Perseus flew cautiously downward, still keeping his eyes on Medusa's
face, as reflected in his shield.  The nearer he came, the more terrible
did the snaky visage and metallic body of the monster grow.  At last,
when he found himself hovering over her within arm's length, Perseus
uplifted his sword, while, at the same instant, each separate snake upon
the Gorgon's head stretched threateningly upward, and Medusa unclosed
her eyes.  But she awoke too late.  The sword was sharp; the stroke fell
like a lightning-flash; and the head of the wicked Medusa tumbled from
her body!

"Admirably done!"  cried Quicksilver.  "Make haste, and clap the head
into your magic wallet."

To the astonishment of Perseus, the small, embroidered wallet, which he
had hung about his neck, and which had hitherto been no bigger than a
purse, grew all at once large enough to contain Medusa's head.  As quick
as thought, he snatched it up, with the snakes still writhing upon it,
and thrust it in.

"Your task is done," said the calm voice.  "Now fly; for the other
Gorgons will do their utmost to take vengeance for Medusa's death."

It was, indeed, necessary to take flight; for Perseus had not done the
deed so quietly, but that the clash of his sword, and the hissing of the
snakes, and the thump of Medusa's head as it tumbled upon the sea-beaten
sand, awoke the other two monsters.  There they sat, for an instant,
sleepily rubbing their eyes with their brazen fingers, while all the
snakes on their heads reared themselves on end with surprise, and with
venomous malice against they knew not what.  But when the Gorgons saw
the scaly carcass of Medusa, headless, and her golden wings all ruffled,
and half spread out on the sand, it was really awful to hear what yells
and screeches they set up.  And then the snakes!  They sent forth a
hundred-fold hiss, with one consent, and Medusa's snakes answered them
out of the magic wallet.

No sooner were the Gorgons broad awake, than they hurtled upward into
the air, brandishing their brass talons, gnashing their horrible tusks,
and flapping their huge wings so wildly, that some of the golden
feathers were shaken out, and floated down upon the shore.  And there,
perhaps, those very feathers he scattered, till this day.  Up rose the
Gorgons, as I tell you, staring horribly about, in hopes of turning
somebody to stone.  Had Perseus looked them in the face, or had he
fallen into their clutches, his poor mother would never have kissed her
boy again!  But he took good care to turn his eyes another way; and, as
he wore the helmet of invisibility, the Gorgons knew not in what
direction to follow him; nor did he fail to make the best use of the
winged slippers, by soaring upward a perpendicular mile or so.  At that
height, when the screams of those abominable creatures sounded faintly
beneath him, he made a straight course for the island of Seriphus, in
order to carry Medusa's head to King Polydectes.

I have no time to tell you of several marvellous things that befell
Perseus, on his way homeward; such as his killing a hideous sea-monster,
just as it was on the point of devouring a beautiful maiden; nor how he
changed an enormous giant into a mountain of stone, merely by showing
him the head of the Gorgon.  If you doubt this latter story, you may
make a voyage to Africa, some day or other, and see the very mountain,
which is still known by the ancient giant's name.

Finally, our brave Perseus arrived at the island, where he expected to
see his dear mother.  But, during his absence, the wicked king had
treated Danae so very ill, that she was compelled to make her escape,
and had taken refuge in a temple, where some good old priests were
extremely kind to her.  These praiseworthy priests, and the kind-hearted
fisherman, who had first shown hospitality to Danae and little Perseus
when he found them afloat in the chest, seem to have been the only
persons on the island who cared about doing right.  All the rest of the
people, as well as King Polydectes himself, were remarkably ill-behaved,
and deserved no better destiny than that which was now to happen.

Not finding his mother at home, Perseus went straight to the palace and
was immediately ushered into the presence of the king.  Polydectes was
by no means rejoiced to see him; for he had felt almost certain, in his
own evil mind, that the Gorgons would have torn the poor young man to
pieces, and have eaten him up, out of the way.  However, seeing him
safely returned, he put the best face he could upon the matter and asked
Perseus how he had succeeded.

"Have you performed your promise?" inquired he.  "Have you brought me
the head of Medusa with the snaky locks?  If not, young man, it will
cost you dear; for I must have a bridal present for the beautiful
Princess Hippodamia, and there is nothing else that she would admire so
much."

"Yes, please your Majesty," answered Perseus, in a quiet way, as if it
were no very wonderful deed for such a young man as he to perform.  "I
have brought you the Gorgon's head, snaky locks and all!"

"Indeed!  Pray let me see it," quoth King Polydectes.  "It must be a
very curious spectacle, if all that travellers tell about it be true!"

"Your Majesty is in the right," replied Perseus.  "It is really an
object that will be pretty certain to fix the regards of all who look at
it.  And, if your Majesty think fit, I would suggest that a holiday be
proclaimed, and that all your Majesty's subjects be summoned to behold
this wonderful curiosity.  Few of them, I imagine, have seen a Gorgon's
head before, and perhaps never may again!"

The king well knew that his subjects were an idle set of reprobates, and
very fond of sight-seeing, as idle persons usually are.  So he took the
young man's advice, and sent out heralds and messengers, in all
directions, to blow the trumpet at the street-corners, and in the
market-places, and wherever two roads met, and summon everybody to
court.  Thither, accordingly, came a great multitude of good-for-nothing
vagabonds, all of whom, out of pure love of mischief, would have been
glad if Perseus had met with some ill-hap, in his encounter with the
Gorgons.  If there were any better people in the island (as I really
hope there may have been, although the story tells nothing about any
such), they stayed quietly at home, minding their own business, and
taking care of their little children.  Most of the inhabitants, at all
events, ran as fast as they could to the palace, and shoved, and pushed,
and elbowed one another, in their eagerness to get near a balcony, on
which Perseus showed himself, holding the embroidered wallet in his
hand.

On a platform, within full view of the balcony, sat the mighty King
Polydectes, amid his evil counsellors, and with his flattering courtiers
in a semicircle round about him.  Monarch, counsellors, courtiers, and
subjects, all gazed eagerly towards Perseus.

