
"I really pity the poor giant," thought Hercules.  "If it wearies me so
much in ten minutes, how must it have wearied him in a thousand years!"

O my sweet little people, you have no idea what a weight there was in
that same blue sky, which looks so soft and aerial above our heads!  And
there, too, was the bluster of the wind, and the chill and watery
clouds, and the blazing sun, all taking their turns to make Hercules
uncomfortable!  He began to be afraid that the giant would never come
back.  He gazed wistfully at the world beneath him, and acknowledged to
himself that it was a far happier kind of life to be a shepherd at the
foot of a mountain, than to stand on its dizzy summit, and bear up the
firmament with his might and main.  For, of course, as you will easily
understand, Hercules had an immense responsibility on his mind, as well
as a weight on his head and shoulders.  Why, if he did not stand
perfectly still, and keep the sky immovable, the sun would perhaps be
put ajar!  Or, after nightfall, a great many of the stars might be
loosened from their places, and shower down, like fiery rain, upon the
people's heads!  And how ashamed would the hero be, if, owing to his
unsteadiness beneath its weight, the sky should crack, and show a great
fissure quite across it!

I know not how long it was before, to his unspeakable joy, he beheld the
huge shape of the giant, like a cloud, on the far-off edge of the sea.
At his nearer approach, Atlas held up his hand, in which Hercules could
perceive three magnificent golden apples, as big as pumpkins, all
banging from one branch.

"I am glad to see you again," shouted Hercules, when the giant was
within hearing.  "So you have got the golden apples?"

"Certainly, certainly," answered Atlas; "and very fair apples they are.
I took the finest that grew on the tree, I assure you.  Ah! it is a
beautiful spot, that garden of the Hesperides.  Yes; and the dragon with
a hundred heads is a sight worth any man's seeing.  After all, you had
better have gone for the apples yourself."

"No matter," replied Hercules.  "You have had a pleasant ramble, and
have done the business as well as I could.  I heartily thank you for
your trouble.  And now, as I have a long way to go, and am rather in
haste,--and as the king, my cousin, is anxious to receive the golden
apples,--will you be kind enough to take the sky off my shoulders
again?"

"Why, as to that," said the giant, chucking the golden apples into the
air, twenty miles high, or thereabouts, and catching them as they came
down,--"as to that, my good friend, I consider you a little
unreasonable.  Cannot I carry the golden apples to the king, your
cousin, much quicker than you could?  As his majesty is in such a hurry
to get them, I promise you to take my longest strides.  And, besides, I
have no fancy for burdening myself with the sky, just now."

Here Hercules grew impatient, and gave a great shrug of his shoulders.
It being now twilight, you might have seen two or three stars tumble out
of their places.  Everybody on earth looked upward in affright, thinking
that the sky might be going to fall next.

"O, that will never do!" cried Giant Atlas, with a great roar of
laughter.  "I have not let fall so many stars within the last five
centuries.  By the time you have stood there as long as I did, you will
begin to learn patience!"

"What!" shouted Hercules, very wrathfully, "do you intend to make me
bear this burden forever?"

"We will see about that, one of these days," answered the giant.  "At
all events, you ought not to complain, if you have to bear it the next
hundred years, or perhaps the next thousand.  I bore it a good while
longer, in spite of the back-ache.  Well, then, after a thousand years,
if I happen to feel in the mood, we may possibly shift about again.  You
are certainly a very strong man, and can never have a better opportunity
to prove it.  Posterity will talk of you, I warrant it!"

"Pish! a fig for its talk!" cried Hercules, with another hitch of his
shoulders.  "Just take the sky upon your head one instant, will you?  I
want to make a cushion of my lion's skin, for the weight to rest upon.
It really chafes me, and will cause unnecessary inconvenience in so many
centuries as I am to stand here."

"That's no more than fair, and I'll do it!" quoth the giant; for he had
no unkind feeling towards Hercules, and was merely acting with a too
selfish consideration of his own ease.  "For just five minutes, then,
I'll take back the sky.  Only for five minutes, recollect!  I have no
idea of spending another thousand years as I spent the last.  Variety is
the spice of life, say I."

Ah, the thick-witted old rogue of a giant!  He threw down the golden
apples, and received back the sky, from the head and shoulders of
Hercules, upon his own, where it rightly belonged.  And Hercules picked
up the three golden apples, that were as big or bigger than pumpkins,
and straightway set out on his journey homeward, without paying the
slightest heed to the thundering tones of the giant, who bellowed after
him to come back.  Another forest sprang up around his feet, and grew
ancient there; and again might be seen oak-trees, of six or seven
centuries old, that had waxed thus again betwixt his enormous toes.

And there stands the giant, to this day; or, at any rate, there stands a
mountain as tall as he, and which bears his name; and when the thunder
rumples about its summit, we may imagine it to be the voice of Giant
Atlas, bellowing after Hercules!



TANGLEWOOD FIRESIDE.

AFTER THE STORY.

"Cousin Eustace," demanded Sweet Fern, who had been sitting at the
story-teller's feet, with his mouth wide open, "exactly how tall was
this giant?"

"O Sweet Fern, Sweet Fern!"  cried the student, "do you think I was
there, to measure him with a yardstick?  Well, if you must know to a
hair's-breadth, I suppose he might be from three to fifteen miles
straight upward, and that he might have seated himself on Taconic, and
had Monument Mountain for a footstool."

"Dear me!" ejaculated the good little boy, with a contented sort of a
grunt, "that was a giant, sure enough!  And how long was his little
finger?"

"As long as from Tanglewood to the lake," said Eustace.

"Sure enough, that was a giant!"  repeated Sweet Fern, in an ecstasy at
the precision of these measurements.  "And how broad, I wonder, were the
shoulders of Hercules?"

"That is what I have never been able to find out," answered the student.
"But I think they must have been a great deal broader than mine, or
than your father's, or than almost any shoulders which one sees
nowadays."

"I wish," whispered Sweet Fern, with his mouth close to the student's
ear, "that you would tell me how big were some of the oak-trees that
grew between the giant's toes."

"They were bigger," said Eustace, "than the great chestnut-tree which
stands beyond Captain Smith's house."
