schoolboys, and that is the principle that a man shall be considered
innocent until he has been clearly proved guilty.  Smarting under a
sense of shame which was entirely unmerited, every boy sought eagerly
for some object on which to vent his indignation; it became necessary,
to use the words of the comic opera, that "a victim should be found,"
and suspicion fell on Kennedy and Jacobs.  The result of Diggory's trap
seemed to show that the various thefts had been committed at night.
It was agreed that the two occupants of the "Main-top" had special
opportunity for getting out of the house if so minded; every other room
had one or more fellows in it who had suffered the loss of some
property; and lastly, Kennedy was known to possess a pair of hob-nailed
fishing-boots, which he usually kept under his bed.  The two boys
indignantly denied the accusation when it was first brought against
them, but the very vehemence with which they protested their innocence
was regarded as "put on," and accepted as an additional proof of their
guilt.  The evidence, however, was not thought sufficient to warrant
bringing a charge against them before the head-master, and accordingly
it was decided to send them both to Coventry until some fresh light
should be brought to bear upon the case.

To do full justice to the memory of Diggory Trevanock, he alone stood
out against this decision, and incurred the wrath both of Acton and Jack
Vance in so doing.  He continued to affirm that it must be the man he
had seen in the playground on the occasion of the first meeting of the
supper club; and that the footprint in the dust had been a man's, and
much larger than Kennedy's boot could have produced.

This outlawing of the "Main-top" and difference of opinion with Diggory
spoiled all chance of games and good fellowship.  Even the association
of the Triple Alliance seemed likely to end in an open rupture, and
very possibly might have done so if it had not been for an event which
caused the members to reunite against the common enemy.

One half-holiday afternoon Mugford and Diggory had gone down to
Chatford.  It was nearly dark when they started to come back, and the
latter proposed the short cut by Locker's Lane.

"I'm not afraid of the Philistines; besides, they won't see us now."

As they drew near to Horace House, a solitary figure was discovered
standing in the shadow of the brick wall.

"It's young Noaks," whispered Diggory.  "It's too late to turn back, but
most likely he won't notice us in this light if we walk straight on."

They passed him successfully, and were just opposite the entrance, when
three more boys sauntered through the doorway.  A gleam of light from
the house happened to fall on Diggory's cap and broad white collar, and
immediately the shout was raised, "_Birchites!_"

There was a rush of feet, a wild moment of grabbing and dodging, and
Mugford, who had managed somehow to shake himself free from the grasp of
his assailants, dashed off at full speed down the road.  After running
for about two hundred yards, and finding he was not followed, he pulled
up, waited and listened, and then began cautiously to retrace his steps.
There was no sign either of his companion or the enemy; and though he
ventured back as far as the double doors, which were now closed, not a
soul was to be seen.  He knew in a moment that his class-mate had been
captured, but all hope of attempting anything in the shape of a rescue
was out of the question.  It was impossible for him single-handed to
storm the fortress, and so, after lingering about for some minutes in
the hope that his friend would reappear, he ran home as fast as he
could, and bursting into the schoolroom, where most of his schoolfellows
sat reading round the fire, threw them into a great state of
consternation and dismay by proclaiming in a loud voice the alarming
intelligence that Diggory had been taken prisoner, and was at that
moment in the hands of the Philistines!



CHAPTER VI.


GUNPOWDER PLOT.

The news caused a profound sensation, the like of which had probably
never been witnessed at The Birches before--no, not even on that
memorable occasion when the intelligence arrived that Scourer, one of
the past seniors, had ridden his bicycle through the plate-glass window
of Brown's big crockery-shop, and was being brought home on a shutter.

All the boys threw down their books, and started to their feet.
Acton and Vance banished from their minds all thought of the
disagreement which had lately estranged them from their unfortunate
school-fellow, and joined heartily in the general outburst of wrath and
consternation.

The thought that Diggory, their well-beloved, was at that very moment
languishing, a prisoner of war, in the hands of the Philistines was
almost unbearable.

"What will they do with him?"--"Where have they put him?"--"How can we
rescue the fellow?" were questions which everybody was asking, but no
one could answer.  It seemed altogether beyond their power to do
anything, and yet there was not a boy who would not have given his
dearest possession, were it a white rat or a stamp collection, if by
parting with it he could have rendered some assistance to his ill-fated
comrade.

"There's only half an hour before tea," said Vance, looking up at the
clock; "if anything can be done, we must do it at once."

The precious moments sped away, but in vain did the assembly rack their
brains for some plan of action which might in any way be likely to serve
the purpose they had in view.  The first wild suggestion, that they
should go in a body and carry Horace House by storm, was abandoned as
impracticable; in hopeless inactivity they stood watching the long
hand of the clock creep up from six till twelve.

The first tea-bell had just finished ringing, when there was a sound of
footsteps hurrying along the passage, the door burst open, and in rushed
no other person than Diggory himself!

"Hullo! how did you get away?"--"What have they been doing?"--"How did
you escape?"

"Oh, such a lark!" cried the boy.  "They'll wish they'd never caught me!
I'll tell you all about it after tea."

As soon as the meal was over, Diggory was seized, hurried up into the
schoolroom, and there forced to relate his adventures.

"Well," he began, "they collared me, and dragged me through the gates
and along into their playground.  Noaks looked at me and said, 'Hullo,
here's luck!  This is the young beggar who tied that rope to the
scrapers; I vote we give him a jolly good licking.'  I told them that my
father was a lawyer, and if any of them touched me he'd take a summons
out against them for assault.  That frightened Noaks, for you can see
he's a regular coward, so he asked the others what they thought had
better be done with me.

"'I know,' said Hogson.  'There's an old cow-shed in the field next to
ours; let's shut him in and keep him there till after tea.  He'll get a
jolly row for being late when he gets back, and he won't dare to say
where he's been; because I know it's against their rules to come
anywhere near us, and Locker's Lane is out of bounds.  If he does tell,
we'll swear he was in the road chucking stones at the windows.'

"Some one said there was only a staple on the door of the shed, but
Noaks said he'd fetch the padlock off his play-box, and so he did.

"Well, they took me across their playing field, and over the hedge into
the next, and shut me up in this beastly old hovel.  'It's no use your
making a row,' said Hogson, 'because no one'll hear you; and if you
do, summons or no summons we'll come down and give you a licking.'
After that they left me, and went back to the house; and as soon as
they'd gone, I began to try to find some way of escape, but it was so
dark inside the shed I couldn't see anything.  Presently I heard a
knocking on the boards.  There was a wide crack between them in one
place, and looking through it I could just make out that there was some
boy standing there with what looked like a dirty apron over his
trousers.  I said, 'Hullo!' and he said, 'Hullo! what's up? who are you?
and what have they been a-sticking of you in there for?'

"I told him, and asked him who he was, and it turned out his name was
Joe Crump, and he's the boy who cleans the knives at Philips's.
He happened to be knocking about when they took me prisoner, and he
couldn't see who it was in the dark, and thought it might be his younger
brother who comes on errands from the grocer's; the Philistines are
always playing tricks on him.

"I said, 'Look here, Joe Crump, you let me out, there's a good chap.'
But he wouldn't; he was afraid of what young Noaks would do to him.
At last I gave him a shilling through the crack of the boards, and vowed
I wouldn't say who'd done it, and then he undid the door.  I fastened
the padlock again, and threw the key into the hedge, for Noaks had left
it in the keyhole; so now he won't be able to get his lock again unless
he either breaks it or the staple, and they're both pretty tough.
After that I got round through two other fields into the lane, and here
I am."

The conclusion of Diggory's story was hailed with shouts of triumph.
To imagine the disappointment of the Philistines when they discovered
that the bird had flown, and the chagrin of young Noaks when he found
that his play-box padlock was fastened to the door of the shed, was
simply delightful; and Acton was so carried away that he once more fell
on Diggory's neck, and pretended to shed tears of joy upon the latter's
broad turn-down collar.

"But that's not all," cried the youngster, shaking himself free from his
leader's embrace.  "The best is this.  I had a bit of a talk with Joe
Crump before I came away, and he says that young Noaks is going to leave
at the end of this term, and he's been telling the Philistines that
before he goes he means to do something that'll pay us out for his being
sent off the field in that football match.  Crump doesn't know what he
means to do, but I made him promise, if he finds out, to come and tell
me, and I'll give him another shilling.  Then we shall be prepared."

"I say, Diggy," exclaimed Jack Vance, "you are a _corker!_" and the bell
now commencing to ring for evening preparation, the meeting terminated.

It was an annual custom at The Birches for the boys to subscribe towards
getting a display of fireworks, which were let off in the playground
under the superintendence of Mr. Blake.  The head-master himself gave a
donation towards the fund, and allowed the boys to prepare the next
day's work in the afternoon instead of in the evening.

This year, however, when Acton went, as usual, to the library to
formally ask permission that the celebration should take place, he met
with a terrible rebuff.

"No, Acton," answered Mr. Welsby; "as long as the school continues to be
disgraced by these repeated thefts--as, for example, this recent
instance of Morris's watch and chain--I do not feel inclined to allow
the same privileges as before.  There will be no fireworks this term."

As may be imagined, when the dux reported the result of his visit to
head-quarters, the news created great excitement.  The unfortunate
occupants of the "Main-top," who were still in the position of
scapegoats, were hunted round the place by an indignant mob, and fled,
vainly protesting their innocence, from one shelter to another, until
they finally escaped from the playing field into the open country, where
they hid behind hedges for the remainder of the afternoon.

"Look here," exclaimed Jack Vance, as the Triple Alliance were wending
their way from the playground to the house, "there's only one thing to
be done, and that is, we must set Miss Eleanor on old Welsby's track.
She'll make him alter his mind.  Some one must go and ask her.--Acton,
you're the man; you must do it!"

"I'm shot if I do!" answered the dux, turning round to face the trio,
and walking backwards up the path; "why should I go more than any other
fellow?"

"Why, because you've got such a way with you," returned Diggory.
"She'd be sure to do it for you; why, the last time you spoke to her she
gave you a lump of cake."

Acton seized the speaker by the neck and shook him like a rat.
"You're the cheekiest little imp I ever came across," he said. "I've a
jolly good mind to give you a good licking, only I don't believe you'd
care tu'pence if I did!"

"Well, anyhow you've got to go," answered Diggory, calmly picking up his
cap, which had fallen to the ground; "and if you're afraid to go alone
for fear she should think it's another proposal, I'll come with you."

After some further discussion it was agreed that the thing should be
attempted.  The two boys found Miss Eleanor making cake, and the
conference began by Diggory's having his ears boxed for picking plums
out of the dough.  But no one ever appealed to Miss Eleanor without
being sure, at all events, of a patient hearing, and the following
morning Mr. Welsby informed the school that he had been led to
reconsider his decision regarding the fifth of November, and that they
might have their display as usual.

Accordingly, the fireworks were ordered, and arrived soon after
breakfast on the morning of the fourth.  Miss Eleanor had a dread of
gunpowder, and Mr. Blake sent Jack Vance to tell Noaks to carry the
box as usual down into the shed.

"Humph!" growled the man, as the boy gave him the message.  "It's a nice
thing that I should have to fetch and carry all your fooling playthings
for you; it's a pity you young gen'lemen can't do something for
yourselves, instead of bothering me."

"Well, it isn't my orders," answered Jack; "it's Mr. Blake's."

"Mr. Blake's, is it?  All right, I'll do it when I can spare the time."

When the boys came out at interval, the box was still lying about in the
yard, although there were heavy clouds overhead threatening rain.
Mr. Blake sent for Noaks, and a rather sharp passage of arms took place
between them, which ended in the man's being told to leave what he was
doing and carry the fireworks down to the shed.

"I believe he left them on purpose, in the hope they'd get wet," said
Shaw.  "He hates us all like poison, and I believe it's all because his
son's at the other school.  D'you remember what a row he kicked up when
he heard Acton say that the Philistines were cads for shooting at us
with catapults?"

"Yes," answered Morris; "and if he hates us, he hates Blake a jolly
sight worse.  He's been like it ever since that football match; and
he'll get sacked if he doesn't mind, for Blake won't stand his cheek
much longer."

The purchase of fireworks had this year been more extensive than on any
previous occasion, and every one was looking forward with great
anticipation to the business of the following evening.

"I say, Diggy," cried Acton at the close of afternoon school, "I wish
you'd run down into the playground and bring up that football flag
that's got to be mended; I left it in the corner by the shed.
I'd go myself, but I want to finish this letter before tea."

Diggory trotted off to fetch the flag, and Jack Vance, who was loitering
about one of the passages, accompanied him down into the playground.
It was very dark, the stars being hidden by heavy clouds.

"I say," exclaimed Diggory, "it'll be a splendid night for the fireworks
if it's like this to-morrow.  We must get--Hark! what's that?"

"I didn't hear anything."

"Yes, there was a sort of a rapping sound.  Hush! there it is again."

Jack heard it this time.  "It's some one knocking very gently against
that door leading into Locker's Lane," he whispered.

They groped their way across the playground until they reached the wall.
There was no mistake about it--some one was gently tapping with his
