"Dear me," it said. "How nervous I feel--actually nervous. What great
eyes they have, and how they shine! and what are those sharp white
things in their mouths? I really don't like them to look at me in
that way. It seems like something personal. I wish the farmer's wife
would come."

Such a chill ran over it, that it was quite cool when the woman came in,
and she put it away in the cupboard on a plate.

But, that very afternoon, she took it out again and set it on the table
on a glass cake-stand. She put some leaves around it to make it look
nice, and it noticed there were a great many other things on the table,
and they all looked fresh and bright.

"This is all in my honour," it said. "They know I am rich."

Then several people came in and took chairs around the table.

"They all come to sit and look at me," said the vain cake. "I wish the
learned grain could see me now."

There was a little high-chair on each side of the table, and at first
these were empty, but in a few minutes the door opened and in came the
two little boys. They had pretty, clean dresses on, and their "bangs" and
curls were bright with being brushed.

"Even they have been dressed up to do me honour," thought the cake.

[ILLUSTRATION: "THERE'S THE CAKE," HE SAID.]

But, the next minute, it began to feel quite nervous again, Vivian's
chair was near the glass stand, and when he had climbed up and seated
himself, he put one elbow on the table and rested his fat chin on his fat
hand, and fixing his eyes on the cake, sat and stared at it in such an
unnaturally quiet manner for some seconds, that any cake might well have
felt nervous.

"There's the cake," he said, at last, in such a deeply thoughtful voice
that the cake felt faint with anger.

Then a remarkable thing happened. Some one drew the stand toward them and
took the knife and cut out a large slice of the cake.

"Go away," said the cake, though no one heard it. "I am cake! I am rich!
I am not for boys! How dare you?"

Vivian stretched out his hand; he took the slice; he lifted it up, and
then the cake saw his red mouth open--yes, open wider than it could have
believed possible--wide enough to show two dreadful rows of little sharp
white things.

"Good gra--" it began.

But it never said "cious." Never at all. For in two minutes Vivian had
eaten it!!

And there was an end of its airs and graces.






BEHIND THE WHITE BRICK


It began with Aunt Hetty's being out of temper, which, it must be
confessed, was nothing new. At its best, Aunt Hetty's temper was none of
the most charming, and this morning it was at its worst. She had awakened
to the consciousness of having a hard day's work before her, and she had
awakened late, and so everything had gone wrong from the first. There was
a sharp ring in her voice when she came to Jem's bedroom door and called
out, "Jemima, get up this minute!"

Jem knew what to expect when Aunt Hetty began a day by calling her
"Jemima." It was one of the poor child's grievances that she had been
given such an ugly name. In all the books she had read, and she had read
a great many, Jem never had met a heroine who was called Jemima. But it
had been her mother's favorite sister's name, and so it had fallen to her
lot. Her mother always called her "Jem," or "Mimi," which was much
prettier, and even Aunt Hetty only reserved Jemima for unpleasant state
occasions.

It was a dreadful day to Jem. Her mother was not at home, and would not
be until night. She had been called away unexpectedly, and had been
obliged to leave Jem and the baby to Aunt Hetty's mercies.

So Jem found herself busy enough. Scarcely had she finished doing one
thing, when Aunt Hetty told her to begin another. She wiped dishes and
picked fruit and attended to the baby; and when baby had gone to sleep,
and everything else seemed disposed of, for a time, at least, she was so
tired that she was glad to sit down.

And then she thought of the book she had been reading the night before--a
certain delightful story book, about a little girl whose name was Flora,
and who was so happy and rich and pretty and good that Jem had likened
her to the little princesses one reads about, to whose christening feast
every fairy brings a gift.

"I shall have time to finish my chapter before dinner-time comes," said
Jem, and she sat down snugly in one corner of the wide, old fashioned
fireplace.

But she had not read more than two pages before something dreadful
happened. Aunt Hetty came into the room in a great hurry--in such a
hurry, indeed, that she caught her foot in the matting and fell, striking
her elbow sharply against a chair, which so upset her temper that the
moment she found herself on her feet she flew at Jem.

"What!" she said, snatching the book from her, "reading again, when I am
running all over the house for you?" And she flung the pretty little blue
covered volume into the fire.

Jem sprang to rescue it with a cry, but it was impossible to reach
it; it had fallen into a great hollow of red coal, and the blaze
caught it at once.

"You are a wicked woman!" cried Jem, in a dreadful passion, to Aunt
Hetty. "You are a wicked woman."

Then matters reached a climax. Aunt Hetty boxed her ears, pushed her back
on her little footstool, and walked out of the room.

Jem hid her face on her arms and cried as if her heart would break. She
cried until her eyes were heavy, and she thought she would be obliged to
go to sleep. But just as she was thinking of going to sleep, something
fell down the chimney and made her look up. It was a piece of mortar, and
it brought a good deal of soot with it. She bent forward and looked up to
see where it had come from. The chimney was so very wide that this was
easy enough. She could see where the mortar had fallen from the side and
left a white patch.

"How white it looks against the black!" said Jem; "it is like a white
brick among the black ones. What a queer place a chimney is! I can see a
bit of the blue sky, I think."

And then a funny thought came into her fanciful little head. What a many
things were burned in the big fireplace and vanished in smoke or tinder
up the chimney! Where did everything go? There was Flora, for
instance--Flora who was represented on the frontispiece--with lovely,
soft, flowing hair, and a little fringe on her pretty round forehead,
crowned with a circlet of daisies, and a laugh in her wide-awake round
eyes. Where was she by this time? Certainly there was nothing left of her
in the fire. Jem almost began to cry again at the thought.

"It was too bad," she said. "She was so pretty and funny, and I did
like her so."

I daresay it scarcely will be credited by unbelieving people when I tell
them what happened next, it was such a very singular thing, indeed.

Jem felt herself gradually lifted off her little footstool.

"Oh!" she said, timidly, "I feel very light." She did feel light, indeed.
She felt so light that she was sure she was rising gently in the air.

"Oh," she said again, "how--how very light I feel! Oh, dear, I'm going
up the chimney!"

It was rather strange that she never thought of calling for help, but she
did not. She was not easily frightened; and now she was only wonderfully
astonished, as she remembered afterwards. She shut her eyes tight and
gave a little gasp.

"I've heard Aunt Hetty talk about the draught drawing things up the
chimney, but I never knew it was as strong as this," she said.

She went up, up, up, quietly and steadily, and without any uncomfortable
feeling at all; and then all at once she stopped, feeling that her feet
rested against something solid. She opened her eyes and looked about her,
and there she was, standing right opposite the white brick, her feet on a
tiny ledge.

"Well," she said, "this is funny."

But the next thing that happened was funnier still. She found that,
without thinking what she was doing, she was knocking on the white brick
with her knackles, as if it was a door and she expected somebody to open
it. The next minute she heard footsteps, and then a sound, as if some one
was drawing back a little bolt.

"It is a door," said Jem, "and somebody is going to open it."

The white brick moved a little, and some more mortar and soot fell;
then the brick moved a little more, and then it slid aside and left an
open space.

"It's a room!" cried Jem, "There's a room behind it!"

And so there was, and before the open space stood a pretty little girl,
with long lovely hair and a fringe on her forehead. Jem clasped her hands
in amazement. It was Flora herself, as she looked in the picture, and
Flora stood laughing and nodding.

"Come in," she said. "I thought it was you."

"But how can I come in through such a little place?" asked Jem.

"Oh, that is easy enough," said Flora. "Here, give me your hand."

Jem did as she told her, and found that it was easy enough. In an instant
she had passed through the opening, the white brick had gone back to its
place, and she was standing by Flora's side in a large room--the nicest
room she had ever seen. It was big and lofty and light, and there were
all kinds of delightful things in it--books and flowers and playthings
and pictures, and in one corner a great cage full of lovebirds.

"Have I ever seen it before?" asked Jem, glancing slowly round.

"Yes," said Flora; "you saw it last night--in your mind. Don't you
remember it?"

Jem shook her head.

"I feel as if I did, but--"

"Why," said Flora, laughing, "it's my room, the one you read about
last night."

"So it is," said Jem. "But how did you come here?"

"I can't tell you that; I myself don't know. But I am here, and
so"--rather mysteriously--"are a great many other things."

"Are they?" said Jem, very much interested. "What things? Burned things?
I was just wondering--"

"Not only burned things," said Flora, nodding. "Just come with me and
I'll show you something."

She led the way out of the room and down a little passage with several
doors in each side of it, and she opened one door and showed Jem what was
on the other side of it. That was a room, too, and this time it was funny
as well as pretty. Both floor and walls were padded with rose color, and
the floor was strewn with toys. There were big soft balls, rattles,
horses, woolly dogs, and a doll or so; there was one low cushioned chair
and a low table.

"You can come in," said a shrill little voice behind the door, "only mind
you don't tread on things."

"What a funny little voice!" said Jem, but she had no sooner said it than
she jumped back.

The owner of the voice, who had just come forward, was no other
than Baby.

"Why," exclaimed Jem, beginning to feel frightened, "I left you fast
asleep in your crib."

"Did you?" said Baby, somewhat scornfully. "That's just the way with you
grown-up people. You think you know everything, and yet you haven't
discretion enough to know when a pin is sticking into one. You'd know
soon enough if you had one sticking into your own back."

"But I'm not grown up," stammered Jem; "and when you are at home you can
neither walk nor talk. You're not six months old."

"Well, miss," retorted Baby, whose wrongs seemed to have soured her
disposition somewhat, "you have no need to throw that in my teeth; you
were not six months old, either, when you were my age."

Jem could not help laughing.

"You haven't got any teeth," she said.

"Haven't I?" said Baby, and she displayed two beautiful rows with some
haughtiness of manner. "When I am up here," she said, "I am supplied
with the modern conveniences, and that's why I never complain. Do I
ever cry when I am asleep? It's not falling asleep I object to, it's
falling awake."

"Wait a minute," said Jem. "Are you asleep now?"

"I'm what you call asleep. I can only come here when I'm what you call
asleep. Asleep, indeed! It's no wonder we always cry when we have to
fall awake."

"But we don't mean to be unkind to you," protested Jem, meekly.

She could not help thinking Baby was very severe.

"Don't mean!" said Baby. "Well, why don't you think more, then? How would
you like to have all the nice things snatched away from you, and all the
old rubbish packed off on you, as if you hadn't any sense? How would you
like to have to sit and stare at things you wanted, and not to be able to
reach them, or, if you did reach them, have them fall out of your hand,
and roll away in the most unfeeling manner? And then be scolded and
called 'cross!' It's no wonder we are bald. You'd be bald yourself. It's
trouble and worry that keep us bald until we can begin to take care of
ourselves; I had more hair than this at first, but it fell off, as well
it might. No philosopher ever thought of that, I suppose!"

"Well," said Jem, in despair, "I hope you enjoy yourself when you
are here?"

"Yes, I do," answered Baby. "That's one comfort. There is nothing to
knock my head against, and things have patent stoppers on them, so that
they can't roll away, and everything is soft and easy to pick up."

There was a slight pause after this, and Baby seemed to cool down.

"I suppose you would like me to show you round?" she said.

"Not if you have any objection," replied Jem, who was rather subdued.

"I would as soon do it as not," said Baby. "You are not as bad as some
people, though you do get my clothes twisted when you hold me."

Upon the whole, she seemed rather proud of her position. It was evident
she quite regarded herself as hostess. She held her small bald head very
high indeed, as she trotted on before them. She stopped at the first door
she came to, and knocked three times. She was obliged to stand upon
tiptoe to reach the knocker.

"He's sure to be at home at this time of year," she remarked. "This is
the busy season."

"Who's 'he'?" inquired Jem.

But Flora only laughed at Miss Baby's consequential air.

"S.C., to be sure," was the answer, as the young lady pointed to the
door-plate, upon which Jem noticed, for the first time, "S.C." in very
large letters.

The door opened, apparently without assistance, and they entered the
apartment.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Jem, the next minute. "Good_ness_ gracious!"

She might well be astonished. It was such a long room that she could not
see to the end of it, and it was piled up from floor to ceiling with toys
of every description, and there was such bustle and buzzing in it that it
was quite confusing. The bustle and buzzing arose from a very curious
cause, too,--it was the bustle and buzz of hundreds of tiny men and women
who were working at little tables no higher than mushrooms,--the pretty
tiny women cutting out and sewing, the pretty tiny men sawing and
hammering and all talking at once. The principal person in the place
escaped Jem's notice at first; but it was not long before she saw him,--a
little old gentleman, with a rosy face and sparkling eyes, sitting at a
desk, and writing in a book almost as big as himself. He was so busy that
he was quite excited, and had been obliged to throw his white fur coat
and cap aside, and he was at work in his red waistcoat.

"Look here, if you please," piped Baby, "I have brought some one
to see you."

When he turned round, Jem recognized him at once.

"Eh! Eh!" he said. "What! What! Who's this, Tootsicums?"

Baby's manner became very acid indeed.

"I shouldn't have thought you would have said that, Mr. Claus," she
remarked. "I can't help myself down below, but I generally have my
rights respected up here. I should like to know what sane godfather or
godmother would give one the name of 'Tootsicums' in one's baptism. They
are bad enough, I must say; but I never heard of any of them calling a
person 'Tootsicums.'"
