    I used to be. The general opinion is that in giving for a
    present an object of permanent beauty, your friends think of you
    whenever they look upon it.

["That's so!" remarked Gilbert to Nancy.]

    This is true, no doubt, but there are other ways of making
    yourself remembered, and I am willing that you should think
    kindly of Cousin Ann whenever you use the new pump.

    The second improvement I wish made with the money is the
    instalment of a large furnace-like stove in the cellar, which
    will send up a little heat, at least, into the hall and lower
    rooms in winter. You will probably have to get the owner's
    consent, and I should certainly ask for a five years' lease
    before expending any considerable amount of money on the
    premises.

    If there is any money left, I should suggest new sills to the
    back doors and those in the shed. I noticed that the present
    ones are very rotten, and I dare say by this time you have
    processions of red and black ants coming into your house. It
    seemed to me that I never saw so much insect life as in Beulah.
    Moths, caterpillars, brown-tails, slugs, spiders, June bugs,
    horseflies, and mosquitoes were among the pests I specially
    noted. The Mr. Popham who drove me to the station said that
    snakes also abounded in the tall grass, but I should not lay any
    stress on his remarks, as I never saw such manners in my life in
    any Christian civilized community. He asked me my age, and when
    I naturally made no reply, he inquired after a few minutes'
    silence whether I was unmarried from choice or necessity. When I
    refused to carry on any conversation with him he sang jovial
    songs so audibly that persons going along the street smiled and
    waved their hands to him. I tell you this because you appear to
    have false ideas of the people in Beulah, most of whom seemed to
    me either eccentric or absolutely insane.

    Hoping that you can endure your life there when the water smells
    better and you do not have to carry it from the well, I am

    Yours affectionately,

    ANN CHADWICH.


"Children!" said Mrs. Carey, folding the letter and slipping the check
into the envelope for safety, "your Cousin Ann is really a very
good woman."

"I wish her bed hadn't come down with her," said Gilbert. "We could
never have afforded to get that water into the house, or had the little
furnace, and I suppose, though no one of us ever thought of it, that you
would have had a hard time doing the work in the winter in a cold house,
and it would have been dreadful going to the pump."

"Dreadful for you too, Gilly," replied Kathleen pointedly.

"I shall be at school, where I can't help," said Gilbert.

Mrs. Carey made no remark, as she intended the fact that there was no
money for Gilbert's tuition at Eastover to sink gradually into his mind,
so that he might make the painful discovery himself. His fees had
fortunately been paid in advance up to the end of the summer term, so
the strain on their resources had not been felt up to now.

Nancy had disappeared from the room and now stood in the doorway.

"I wish to remark that, having said a good many disagreeable things
about Cousin Ann, and regretting them very much, I have placed the four
black and white marble ornaments on my bedroom mantelpiece, there to be
a perpetual reminder of my sins. You Dirty Boy is in a hundred pieces in
the barn chamber, but if Cousin Ann ever comes to visit us again, I'll
be the one to confess that Gilly and I were the cause of the accident."

"Now take your pencil, Nancy, and see where we are in point of income,
at the present moment," her mother suggested, with an approving smile.
"Put down the pension of thirty dollars a month."

"Down.--Three hundred and sixty dollars."

"Now the hundred dollars over and above the rent of the Charlestown
house."

"Down; but it lasts only four years."

"We may all be dead by that time." (This cheerfully from Gilbert.)

"Then the interest on our insurance money. Four per cent on five
thousand dollars is two hundred; I have multiplied it twenty times."

"Down.--Two hundred."

"Of course if anything serious happens, or any great need comes, we have
the five thousand to draw upon," interpolated Gilbert.

"I will draw upon that to save one of us in illness or to bury one of
us," said Mrs. Carey with determination, "but I will never live out of
it myself, nor permit you to. We are five,--six, while Julia is with
us," she added hastily,--"and six persons will surely have rainy days
coming to them. What if I should die and leave you?"

"Don't, mother!" they cried in chorus, so passionately that Mrs. Carey
changed the subject quickly. "How much a year does it make, Nancy?"

"Three hundred and sixty plus one hundred plus two hundred equals six
hundred and sixty," read Nancy. "And I call it a splendid big lump
of money!"

"Oh, my dear," sighed her mother with a shake of the head, "if you knew
the difficulty your father and I have had to take care of ourselves and
of you on five and six times that sum! We may have been a little
extravagant sometimes following him about,--he was always so anxious to
have us with him,--but that has been our only luxury."

"We saved enough out of exchanging the grand piano to pay all the
expenses down here, and all our railway fares, and everything so far, in
the way of boards and nails and Osh Popham's labor," recalled Gilbert.

"Yes, and we are still eating the grand piano at the end of two months,
but it's about gone, isn't it, Muddy?" Nancy asked.

"About gone, but it has been a great help, and our dear little
old-fashioned square is just as much of a comfort.--Of course there's
the tapestry and the Van Twiller landscape Uncle gave me; they may
yet be sold."

"Somebody'll buy the tapestry, but the Van Twiller'll go hard," and
Gilbert winked at Nancy.

"A picture that looks just the same upside down as the right way about
won't find many buyers," was Nancy's idea.

"Still it is a Van Twiller, and has a certain authentic value for all
time!"

"The landscapes Van Twiller painted in the dark, or when he had his
blinders on, can't be worth very much," insisted Gilbert. "You remember
the Admiral thought it was partridges nesting in the underbrush at
twilight, and then we found Joanna had cleaned the dining room and hung
the thing upside down. When it was hung the other end up neither father
nor the Admiral could tell what it was; they'd lost the partridges and
couldn't find anything else!"

"We shall get something for it because it is a Van Twiller," said Mrs.
Carey hopefully; "and the tapestry is lovely.--Now we have been doing
all our own work to save money enough to make the house beautiful; yet,
as Cousin Ann says, it does not belong to us and may be taken away at
any moment after the year is up. We have never even seen our landlord,
though Mr. Harmon has written to him. Are we foolish? What do you
think, Julia?"



XV

BELONGING TO BEULAH


The Person without a Fault had been quietly working at her embroidery,
raising her head now and then to look at some extraordinary Carey, when
he or she made some unusually silly or fantastic remark.

"I'm not so old as Gilbert and Nancy, and I'm only a niece," she said
modestly, "so I ought not to have an opinion. But I should get a
maid-of-all-work at once, so that we shouldn't all be drudges as we are
now; then I should not spend a single cent on the house, but just live
here in hiding, as it were, till better times come and till we are old
enough to go into society. You could scrimp and save for Nancy's coming
out, and then for Kathleen's. Father would certainly be well long before
then, and Kathleen and I could debut together!"

"Who wants to 'debut' together or any other way," sniffed Nancy
scornfully. "I'm coming out right here in Beulah; indeed I'm not sure
but I'm out already! Mr. Bill Harmon has asked me to come to the church
sociable and Mr. Popham has invited me to the Red Men's picnic at
Greentown. Beulah's good for something better than a place to hide in!
We'll have to save every penny at first, of course, but in three or four
years Gilly and I ought to be earning something."

"The trouble is, I _can't_ earn anything in college," objected Gilbert,
"though I'd like to."

"That will be the only way a college course can come to you now,
Gilbert," his mother said quietly. "You know nothing of the expenses
involved. They would have taxed our resources to the utmost if father
had lived, and we had had our more than five thousand a year! You and I
together must think out your problem this summer."

Gilbert looked blank and walked to the window with his hands in his
pockets.

"I should lose all my friends, and it's hard for a fellow to make his
way in the world if he has nothing to recommend him but his graduation
from some God-forsaken little hole like Beulah Academy."

Nancy looked as if she could scalp her brother when he alluded to her
beloved village in these terms, but her mother's warning look stopped
any comment.

Julia took up arms for her cousin. "We ought to go without everything
for the sake of sending Gilbert to college," she said. "Gladys Ferguson
doesn't know a single boy who isn't going to Harvard or Yale."

"If a boy of good family and good breeding cannot make friends by his
own personality and his own qualities of mind and character, I should
think he would better go without them," said Gilbert's mother casually.

"Don't you believe in a college education, mother?" inquired Gilbert in
an astonished tone.

"Certainly! Why else should we have made sacrifices to send you? To
begin with, it is much simpler and easier to be educated in college. You
have a thousand helps and encouragements that other fellows have to get
as they may. The paths are all made straight for the students. A stupid
boy, or one with small industry or little originality, must have
_something_ drummed into him in four years, with all the splendid
teaching energy that the colleges employ. It requires a very high grade
of mental and moral power to do without such helps, and it may be that
you are not strong enough to succeed without them;--I do not know your
possibilities yet, Gilbert, and neither do you know them yourself!"

Gilbert looked rather nonplussed. "Pretty stiff, I call it!" he
grumbled, "to say that if you've got brains enough you can do
without college."

"It is true, nevertheless. If you have brains enough, and will enough,
and heart enough, you can stay here in Beulah and make the universe
search you out, and drag you into the open, where men have need of you!"
(Mrs. Carey's eyes shone and her cheeks glowed.) "What we all want as a
family is to keep well and strong and good, in body and mind and soul;
to conquer our weaknesses, to train our gifts, to harness our powers to
some wished-for end, and then _pull_, with all our might. Can't my girls
be fine women, fit for New York or Washington, London or Paris, because
their young days were passed in Beulah? Can't my boys be anything that
their brains and courage fit them for, whether they make their own
associations or have them made for them? Father would never have flung
the burden on your shoulders, Gilbert, but he is no longer here. You
can't have the help of Yale or Harvard or Bowdoin to make a man of you,
my son,--you will have to fight your own battles and win your
own spurs."

"Oh! mother, but you're splendid!" cried Nancy, the quick tears in her
eyes. "Brace up, old Gilly, and show what the Careys can do without
'advantages.' Brace up, Kitty and Julia! We three will make Beulah
Academy ring next year!"

"And I don't want you to look upon Beulah as a place of hiding while
adversity lasts," said Mother Carey. "We must make it home; as beautiful
and complete as we can afford. One real home always makes others, I am
sure of that! We will ask Mr. Harmon to write Mr. Hamilton and see if he
will promise to leave us undisturbed. We cannot be happy, or prosperous,
or useful, or successful, unless we can contrive to make the Yellow
House a home. The river is our river; the village is our village; the
people are our neighbors; Beulah belongs to us and we belong to Beulah,
don't we, Peter?"

Mother Carey always turned to Peter with some nonsensical appeal when
her heart was full and her voice a trifle unsteady. You could bury your
head in Peter's little white sailor jacket just under his chin, at which
he would dimple and gurgle and chuckle and wriggle, and when you
withdrew your flushed face and presented it to the public gaze all the
tears would have been wiped off on Peter.

So on this occasion did Mrs. Carey repeat, as she set Peter down, "Don't
we belong to Beulah, dear?"

"Yes, we does," he lisped, "and I'm going to work myself, pretty soon
bimebye just after a while, when I'm a little more grown up, and then
I'll buy the Yellow House quick."

"So you shall, precious!" cried Kathleen.

"I was measured on Muddy this morning, wasn't I, Muddy, and I was half
way to her belt; and in Charlestown I was only a little farder up than
her knees. All the time I'm growing up she's ungrowing down! She's
smallering and I'm biggering."

"Are you afraid your mother'll be too small, sweet Pete?" asked Mrs.
Carey.

"No!" this very stoutly. "Danny Harmon's mother's more'n up to the
mantelpiece and I'd hate to have my mother so far away!" said Peter as
he embraced Mrs. Carey's knees.

Julia had said little during this long conversation, though her mind was
fairly bristling with objections and negatives and different points of
view, but she was always more or less awed by her Aunt Margaret, and
never dared defy her opinion. She had a real admiration for her aunt's
beauty and dignity and radiant presence, though it is to be feared she
cared less for the qualities of character that made her personality so
luminous with charm for everybody. She saw people look at her, listen to
her, follow her with their eyes, comment on her appearance, her
elegance, and her distinction, and all this impressed her deeply. As to
Cousin Ann's present her most prominent feeling was that it would have
been much better if that lady had followed her original plan of sending
individual thirty-five-dollar checks. In that event she, Julia, was
quite certain that hers never would have gone into a water-pipe or a
door-sill.

"Oh, Kathleen!" sighed Nancy as the two went into the kitchen together.
"Isn't mother the most interesting 'scolder' you ever listened to? I
love to hear her do it, especially when somebody else is getting it.
When it's I, I grow smaller and smaller, curling myself up like a little
worm. Then when she has finished I squirm to the door and wriggle out.
Other mothers say: 'If you don't, I shall tell your father!' 'Do as I
tell you, and ask no questions.' 'I never heard of such behavior in my
life!' 'Haven't you any sense of propriety?' 'If this happens again I
shall have to do something desperate.' 'Leave the room at once,' and so
on; but mother sets you to thinking."

"Mother doesn't really scold," Kathleen objected.

"No, but she shows you how wrong you are, just the same. Did you notice
how Julia _withered_ when mother said we were not to look upon Beulah as
a place of hiding?"

"She didn't stay withered long," Kathleen remarked.

"And she said just the right thing to dear old Gilly, for Fred Bascom is
filling his head with foolish notions. He needs father to set
him right."

"We all need father," sighed Kitty tearfully, "but somehow mother grows
a little more splendid every day. I believe she's trying to fill
father's place and be herself too!"



XVI

THE POST BAG


Letter from Mr. William Harmon, storekeeper at Beulah Corner, to Hon.
Lemuel Hamilton, American Consul at Breslau, Germany.

    Beulah, _June 27th._

    Dear Lem: The folks up to your house want to lay out money on it
    and don't dass for fear you'll turn em out and pocket their
    improvements. If you haint got any better use for the propety
    I advise you to hold on to this bunch of tennants as they are
    O.K. wash goods, all wool, and a yard wide. I woodent like
    Mrs. Harmon _to know how I feel about the lady_, who is
    hansome as a picture and the children are a first class crop and
    no mistake. They will not lay out much at first as they are
    short of cash but if ever good luck comes along they will fit
    up the house like a pallis and your granchildren will reep the
    proffit. I'll look out for your interest and see they don't do
    nothing outlandish. They'd have hard work to beat that
    fool-job your boys did on the old barn, fixin it up so't
    nobody could keep critters in it, so no more from your old
    school frend

    BILL HARMON.

    P.S. We've been having a spell of turrible hot wether in Beulah.
    How is it with you? I never framed it up jest what kind of a
    job an American Counsul's was; but I guess he aint never het
    up with overwork! There was a piece in a Portland paper about
    a Counsul somewhere being fired because he set in his
    shirt-sleeves durin office hours. I says to Col. Wheeler if
    Uncle Sam could keep em all in their shirtsleeves, hustlin for
    dear life, it wood be all the better for him and us!

    BILL.

Letter from Miss Nancy Carey to the Hon. Lemuel Hamilton.

    BEULAH, _June 27th_.

    DEAR MR. HAMILTON,--I am Nancy, the oldest of the Carey
    children, who live in your house. When father was alive, he
    took us on a driving trip, and we stopped and had luncheon
    under your big maple and fell in love with your empty house.
    Father (he was a Captain in the Navy and there was never
    anybody like him in the world!)--Father leaned over the gate
    and said if he was only rich he would drive the horse into the
    barn and buy the place that very day; and mother said it would
    be a beautiful spot to bring up a family. We children had
    wriggled under the fence, and were climbing the apple trees by
    that time, and we wanted to be brought up there that very
    minute. We all of us look back to that day as the happiest one
    that we can remember. Mother laughs when I talk of looking
    back, because I am not sixteen yet, but I think, although we did
    not know it, God knew that father was going to die and we were
    going to live in that very spot afterwards. Father asked us
    what we could do for the place that had been so hospitable to
    us, and I remembered a box of plants in the carryall, that we
    had bought at a wayside nursery, for the flower beds in
    Charlestown. "Plant something!" I said, and father thought it
    was a good idea and took a little crimson rambler rose bush
    from the box. Each of us helped make the place for it by taking
    a turn with the luncheon knives and spoons; then I planted the
    rose and father took off his hat and said, "Three cheers for
    the Yellow House!" and mother added, "God bless it, and the
    children who come to live in it!"--There is surely something
    strange in that, don't you think so? Then when father died
    last year we had to find a cheap and quiet place to live, and
    I remembered the Yellow House in Beulah and told mother my
    idea. She does not say "Bosh!" like some mothers, but if our
    ideas sound like anything she tries them; so she sent Gilbert
    to see if the house was still vacant, and when we found it
    was, we took it. The rent is sixty dollars a year, as I
    suppose Bill Harmon told you when he sent you mother's check
    for fifteen dollars for the first quarter. We think it is very
    reasonable, and do not wonder you don't like to spend anything
    on repairs or improvements for us, as you have to pay taxes
    and insurance. We hope you will have a good deal over for your
    own use out of our rent, as we shouldn't like to feel under
    obligation. If we had a million we'd spend it all on the
    Yellow House, because we are fond of it in the way you are
    fond of a person; it's not only that we want to paint it and
    paper it, but we would like to pat it and squeeze it. If you
    can't live in it yourself, even in the summer, perhaps you
    will be glad to know we love it so much and want to take good
    care of it always. What troubles us is the fear that you will
    take it away or sell it to somebody before Gilbert and I are
    grown up and have earned money enough to buy it. It was Cousin
    Ann that put the idea into our heads, but everybody says it is
    quite likely and sensible. Cousin Ann has made us a splendid
