The game was now about to begin, and the excitement became intense. Even
the old judges leaned forward in their eagerness, while the brown bodies
of the warriors shone in the sun, and the taut muscles leaped up under
the skin. Fifty players on each side, sticks in hand, advanced to the
center of the ground, and arranged themselves somewhat after the fashion
of football players, to intercept the passage of the ball toward their
goals. Now they awaited the coming of the ball.

There were several young girls, the daughters of chiefs. The most
beautiful of these appeared. She was not more than sixteen or seventeen
years of age, as slender and graceful as a young deer, and she was
dressed in the finest and most richly embroidered deerskin. Her head was
crowned with a red coronet, crested with plumes, made of the feathers of
the eagle and heron. She wore silver bracelets and a silver necklace.

The girl, bearing in her hand the ball, sprang into the very center of
the arena, where, amid shouts from all the warriors, she placed it upon
the ground. Then she sprang back and joined the throng of spectators.
Two of the players, one from each side, chosen for strength and
dexterity, advanced. They hooked the ball together in their united bats
and thus raised it aloft, until the bats were absolutely perpendicular.
Then with a quick, jerking motion they shot it upward. Much might
be gained by this first shot or stroke, but on this occasion the two
players were equal, and it shot almost absolutely straight into the air.
The nearest groups made a rush for it, and the fray began.

Not all played at once, as the crowd was so great, but usually twenty or
thirty on each side struck for the ball, and when they became exhausted
or disabled were relieved by similar groups. All eventually came into
action.

The game was played with the greatest fire and intensity, assuming
sometimes the aspect of a battle. Blows with the formidable sticks were
given and received. Brown skins were streaked with blood, heads were
cracked, and a Cayuga was killed. Such killings were not unusual in
these games, and it was always considered the fault of the man who fell,
due to his own awkwardness or unwariness. The body of the dead Cayuga
was taken away in disgrace.

All day long the contest was waged with undiminished courage and zeal,
party relieving party. The meadow and the surrounding forest resounded
with the shouts and yells of combatants and spectators. The old squaws
were in a perfect frenzy of excitement, and their shrill screams of
applause or condemnation rose above every other sound.

On this occasion, as the contest did not last longer than one day, the
chiefs never cut down the score of the leading side. The game closed
at sunset, with the Senecas and Onondagas triumphant, and richer by far
than they were in the morning. The Mohawks and Cayugas retired, stripped
of their goods and crestfallen.

Timmendiquas and Thayendanegea, acting as umpires watched the game
closely to its finish, but not so the renegades Braxton Wyatt and
Blackstaffe. They and Quarles had wandered eastward with some Delawares,
and had afterward joined the band of Wyandots, though Timmendiquas gave
them no very warm welcome. Quarles had left on some errand a few days
before. They had rejoiced greatly at the trapping of the four, one by
one, in the deep bush. But they had felt anger and disappointment when
the fifth was not taken, also. Now both were concerned and alarmed over
the escape of Shif'less Sol in the night, and they drew apart from the
Indians to discuss it.

"I think," said Wyatt, "that Hyde did not manage it himself, all alone.
How could he? He was bound both hand and foot; and I've learned, too,
Blackstaffe, that four of the best Iroquois rifles have been taken. That
means one apiece for Hyde and the three prisoners that are left."

The two exchanged looks of meaning and understanding.

"It must have been the boy Ware who helped Hyde to get away," said
Blackstaffe, "and their taking of the rifles means that he and Hyde
expect to rescue the other three in the same way. You think so, too?"

"Of course," replied Wyatt. "What makes the Indians, who are so
wonderfully alert and watchful most of the time, become so careless when
they have a great feast?"

Blackstaffe shrugged his shoulders.

"It is their way," he replied. "You cannot change it. Ware must have
noticed what they were about, and he took advantage of it. But I don't
think any of the others will go that way."

"The boy Cotter is in here," said Braxton Wyatt, tapping the side of a
small hut. "Let's go in and see him."


"Good enough," said Blackstaffe. "But we mustn't let him know that Hyde
has escaped."

Paul, also bound hand and foot, was lying on an old wolfskin. He, too,
was pale and thin-the strict confinement had told upon him heavily-but
Paul's spirit could never be daunted. He looked at the two renegades
with hatred and contempt.

"Well, you're in a fine fix," said Wyatt sneeringly. "We just came in to
tell you that we took Henry Ware last night."

Paul looked him straight and long in the eye, and he knew that the
renegade was lying.

"I know better," he said.

"Then we will get him," said Wyatt, abandoning the lie, "and all of you
will die at the stake."

"You, will not get him," said Paul defiantly, "and as for the rest of
us dying at the stake, that's to be seen. I know this: Timmendiquas
considers us of value, to be traded or exchanged, and he's too smart
a man to destroy what he regards as his own property. Besides, we may
escape. I don't want to boast, Braxton Wyatt, but you know that we're
hard to hold."

Then Paul managed to turn over with his face to the wall, as if he were
through with them. They went out, and Braxton Wyatt said sulkily:

"Nothing to be got out of him."

"No," said Blackstaffe, "but we must urge that the strictest kind of
guard be kept over the others."

The Iroquois were to remain some time at the village, because all their
forces were not yet gathered for the great foray they had in mind. The
Onondaga runners were still carrying the wampum belts of purple shells,
sign of war, to distant villages of the tribes, and parties of warriors
were still coming in. A band of Cayugas arrived that night, and with
them they brought a half starved and sick, Lenni-Lenape, whom they had
picked up near the camp. The Lenni-Lenape, who looked as if he might
have been when in health a strong and agile warrior, said that news had
reached him through the Wyandots of the great war to be waged by the
Iroquois on the white settlements, and the spirits would not let him
rest unless he bore his part in it. He prayed therefore to be accepted
among them.

Much food was given to the brave Lenni-Lenape, and he was sent to a
lodge to rest. To-morrow he would be well, and he would be welcomed to
the ranks of the Cayugas, a Younger nation. But when the morning came,
the lodge was empty. The sick Lenni-Lenape was gone, and with him the
boy, Paul, the youngest of the prisoners. Guards bad been posted all
around the camp, but evidently the two had slipped between. Brave
and advanced as were the Iroquois, superstition seized upon them.
Hah-gweli-da-et-gah was at work among them, coming in the form of the
famished Lenni-Lenape. He had steeped them in a deep sleep, and then
he had vanished with the prisoner in Se-oh (The Night). Perhaps lie had
taken away the boy, who was one of a hated race, for some sacrifice or
mystery of his own. The fears of the Iroquois rose. If the Spirit of
Evil was among them, greater harm could be expected.

But the two renegades, Blackstaffe and Wyatt, raged. They did not
believe in the interference of either good spirits or bad spirits, and
just now their special hatred was a famished Lenni-Lenape warrior.

"Why on earth didn't I think of it?" exclaimed Wyatt. "I'm sure now by
his size that it was the fellow Hyde. Of Course he slipped to the lodge,
let Cotter out, and they dodged about in the darkness until they escaped
in the forest. I'll complain to Timmendiquas."

He was as good as his word, speaking of the laxness of both Iroquois and
Wyandots. The great White Lightning regarded him with an icy stare.

"You say that the boy, Cotter, escaped through carelessness?" he asked.

"I do," exclaimed Wyatt.

"Then why did you not prevent it?"

Wyatt trembled a little before the stern gaze of the chief.

"Since when," continued Timmendiquas, "have you, a deserter front your
own people, had the right to hold to account the head chief of the
Wyandots?" Braxton Wyatt, brave though he undoubtedly was, trembled yet
more. He knew that Timmendiquas did not like him, and that the Wyandot
chieftain could make his position among the Indians precarious.

"I did not mean to say that it was the fault of anybody in particular,"
he exclaimed hastily, "but I've been hearing so much talk about the
Spirit of Evil having a hand in this that I couldn't keep front saying
something. Of course, it was Henry Ware and Hyde who did it!"

"It may be," said Timmendiquas icily, "but neither the Manitou of the
Wyandots, nor the Aieroski of the Iroquois has given to me the eyes to
see everything that happens in the dark."

Wyatt withdrew still in a rage, but afraid to say more. He and
Blackstaffe held many conferences through the day, and they longed for
the presence of Simon Girty, who was farther west.

That night an Onondaga runner arrived from one of the farthest villages
of the Mohawks, far east toward Albany. He had been sent from a farther
village, and was not known personally to the warriors in the great camp,
but he bore a wampum belt of purple shells, the sign of war, and he
reported directly to Thayendanegea, to whom he brought stirring and
satisfactory words. After ample feasting, as became one who had come
so far, he lay upon soft deerskins in one of the bark huts and sought
sleep.

But Braxton Wyatt, the renegade, could not sleep. His evil spirit warned
him to rise and go to the huts, where the two remaining prisoners were
kept. It was then about one o'clock in the morning, and as he passed he
saw the Onondaga runner at the door of one of the prison lodges. He was
about to cry out, but the Onondaga turned and struck him such a violent
blow with the butt of a pistol, snatched from under his deerskin tunic,
that he fell senseless. When a Mohawk sentinel found and revived him
an hour later, the door of the hut was open, and the oldest of the
prisoners, the one called Ross, was gone.

Now, indeed, were the Iroquois certain that the Spirit of Evil was
among them. When great chiefs like Timmendiquas and Thayendanegea
were deceived, how could a common warrior hope to escape its wicked
influence!

But Braxton Wyatt, with a sore and aching head, lay all day on a bed of
skins, and his friend, Moses Blackstaffe, could give him no comfort.

The following night the camp was swept by a sudden and tremendous storm
of thunder and lightning, wind and rain. Many of the lodges were thrown
down, and when the storm finally whirled itself away, it was found that
the last of the prisoners, he of the long arms and long legs, had gone
on the edge of the blast.

Truly the Evil Spirit had been hovering over the Iroquois village.




CHAPTER VII. CATHARINE MONTOUR


The five lay deep in the swamp, reunited once more, and full of content.
The great storm in which Long Jim, with the aid of his comrades, had
disappeared, was whirling off to the eastward. The lightning was flaring
its last on the distant horizon, but the rain still pattered in the
great woods.

It was a small hut, but the five could squeeze in it. They were
dry, warm, and well armed, and they had no fear of the storm and the
wilderness. The four after their imprisonment and privations were
recovering their weight and color. Paul, who had suffered the most,
had, on the other hand, made the quickest recovery, and their present
situation, so fortunate in contrast with their threatened fate a few
days before, made a great appeal to his imagination. The door was
allowed to stand open six inches, and through the crevice he watched the
rain pattering on the dark earth. He felt an immense sense of security
and comfort. Paul was hopeful by nature and full of courage, but when he
lay bound and alone in a hut in the Iroquois camp it seemed to him that
no chance was left. The comrades had been kept separate, and he had
supposed the others to be dead. But here he was snatched from the very
pit of death, and all the others had been saved from a like fate.

"If I'd known that you were alive and uncaptured, Henry," he said, "I'd
never have given up hope. It was a wonderful thing you did to start the
chain that drew us all away."

"It's no more than Sol or Tom or any of you would have done," said
Henry.

"We might have tried it," said Long Jim Hart, "but I ain't sure that
we'd have done it. Likely ez not, ef it had been left to me my scalp
would be dryin' somewhat in the breeze that fans a Mohawk village. Say,
Sol, how wuz it that you talked Onondaga when you played the part uv
that Onondaga runner. Didn't know you knowed that kind uv Injun lingo."

Shif'less Sol drew himself up proudly, and then passed a thoughtful hand
once or twice across his forehead.

"Jim," he said, "I've told you often that Paul an' me hez the instincts
uv the eddicated. Learnin' always takes a mighty strong hold on me.
Ef I'd had the chance, I might be a purfessor, or mebbe I'd be writin'
poetry. I ain't told you about it, but when I wuz a young boy, afore I
moved with the settlers, I wuz up in these parts an' I learned to talk
Iroquois a heap. I never thought it would be the use to me it hez been
now. Ain't it funny that sometimes when you put a thing away an' it gits
all covered with rust and mold, the time comes when that same forgot
little thing is the most vallyble article in the world to you."

"Weren't you scared, Sol," persisted Paul, "to face a man like Brant,
an' pass yourself off as an Onondaga?"

"No, I wuzn't," replied the shiftless one thoughtfully, "I've been wuss
scared over little things. I guess that when your life depends on jest
a motion o' your hand or the turnin' o' a word, Natur' somehow comes to
your help an' holds you up. I didn't get good an' skeered till it wuz
all over, an' then I had one fit right after another."

"I've been skeered fur a week without stoppin'," said Tom Ross; "jest
beginnin' to git over it. I tell you, Henry, it wuz pow'ful lucky fur
us you found them steppin' stones, an' this solid little place in the
middle uv all that black mud."

"Makes me think uv the time we spent the winter on that island in
the lake," said Long Jim. "That waz shorely a nice place an' pow'ful
comf'table we wuz thar. But we're a long way from it now. That island uv
ours must be seven or eight hundred miles from here, an' I reckon it's
nigh to fifteen hundred to New Orleans, whar we wuz once."

"Shet up," said Tom Ross suddenly. "Time fur all uv you to go to sleep,
an' I'm goin' to watch."

"I'll watch," said Henry.

"I'm the oldest, an' I'm goin' to have my way this time," said Tom.

"Needn't quarrel with me about it," said Shif'less Sol. "A lazy man like
me is always willin' to go to sleep. You kin hev my watch, Tom, every
night fur the next five years."

He ranged himself against the wall, and in three minutes was sound
asleep. Henry and Paul found room in the line, and they, too, soon
slept. Tom sat at the door, one of the captured rifles across his knees,
and watched the forest and the swamp. He saw the last flare of the
distant lightning, and he listened to the falling of the rain drops
until they vanished with the vanishing wind, leaving the forest still
and without noise.

Tom was several years older than any of the others, and, although
powerful in action, he was singularly chary of speech. Henry was the
leader, but somehow Tom looked upon himself as a watcher over the other
four, a sort of elder brother. As the moon came out a little in the wake
of the retreating clouds, he regarded them affectionately.

"One, two, three, four, five," he murmured to himself. "We're all here,
an' Henry come fur us. That is shorely the greatest boy the world hez
ever seed. Them fellers Alexander an' Hannibal that Paul talks about
couldn't hev been knee high to Henry. Besides, ef them old Greeks an'
Romans hed hed to fight Wyandots an' Shawnees an' Iroquois ez we've
done, whar'd they hev been?"

Tom Ross uttered a contemptuous little sniff, and on the edge of that
sniff Alexander and Hannibal were wafted into oblivion. Then he went
outside and walked about the islet, appreciating for the tenth time what
a wonderful little refuge it was. He was about to return to the hut when
he saw a dozen dark blots along the high bough of a tree. He knew them.
They were welcome blots. They were wild turkeys that had found what had
seemed to be a secure roosting place in the swamp.

Tom knew that the meat of the little bear was nearly exhausted, and here
was more food come to their hand. "We're five pow'ful feeders, an' we'll
need you," he murmured, looking up at the turkeys, "but you kin rest
thar till nearly mornin'."

He knew that the turkeys would not stir, and he went back to the hut to
resume his watch. Just before the first dawn he awoke Henry.

"Henry," he said, "a lot uv foolish wild turkeys hev gone to rest on the
limb of a tree not twenty yards from this grand manshun uv ourn. 'Pears
to me that wild turkeys wuz made fur hungry fellers like us to eat. Kin
we risk a shot or two at 'em, or is it too dangerous?"

"I think we can risk the shots," said Henry, rising and taking his
rifle. "We're bound to risk something, and it's not likely that Indians
are anywhere near."

They slipped from the cabin, leaving the other three still sound asleep,
and stepped noiselessly among the trees. The first pale gray bar that
heralded the dawn was just showing in the cast.

"Thar they are," said Tom Ross, pointing at the dozen dark blots on the
high bough.

"We'll take good aim, and when I say 'fire!' we'll both pull trigger,"
said Henry.

He picked out a huge bird near the end of the line, but he noticed when
he drew the bead that a second turkey just behind the first was directly
in his line of fire. The fact aroused his ambition to kill both with
one bullet. It was not a mere desire to slaughter or to display
marksmanship, but they needed the extra turkey for food.

"Are you ready, Tom?" he asked. "Then fire."

They pulled triggers, there were two sharp reports terribly loud to both
under the circumstances, and three of the biggest and fattest of the
turkeys fell heavily to the ground, while the rest flapped their wings,
and with frightened gobbles flew away.

Henry was about to rush forward, but Silent Tom held him back.

"Don't show yourself, Henry! Don't show yourself!" he cried in tense
tones.

"Why, what's the matter?" asked the boy in surprise.

"Don't you see that three turkeys fell, and we are only two to shoot?
An Injun is layin' 'roun' here some whar, an' he drawed a bead on one uv
them turkeys at the same time we did."

Henry laughed and put away Tom's detaining hand.

