grate' ful
wist' ful ly
mit' tens
outstretched'
res' cue
un daunt' ed
an' ti qua ted



A LITTLE LADY.[001]


Going down a very steep street, where the pavement was covered with ice,
I saw before me an old woman, slowly and timidly picking her way. She
was one of the poor but respectable old ladies who dress in rusty black,
wear old-fashioned bonnets, and carry big bags.

Some young folks laugh at these antiquated figures; but those who are
better bred treat them with respect. They find something touching in the
faded suits, the withered faces, and the knowledge that these lonely old
ladies have lost youth, friends, and often fortune, and are patiently
waiting to be called away from a world that seems to have passed by and
forgotten them.

Well, as I slipped and shuffled along, I watched the little black bonnet
in front, expecting every minute to see it go down, and trying to hurry,
that I might offer my help.

At the corner, I passed three little school-girls, and heard one say to
another, "O, I wouldn't; she will do well enough, and we shall lose our
coasting, unless we hurry."

"But if she should tumble and break her poor old bones, I should feel so
bad," returned the second, a pleasant-faced child, whose eyes, full of a
sweet, pitiful expression, followed the old lady.

"She's such a funny-looking woman, I shouldn't like to be seen walking
with her," said the third, as if she thought it a kind thing to do, but
had not the courage to try it.

"Well, I don't care; she's old, and ought to be helped, and I'm going to
do it," cried the pleasant-faced girl; and, running by me, I saw her
overtake the old lady, who stood at a crossing, looking wistfully over
the dangerous sheet of ice before her.

"Please, ma'am, may I help you, it's so bad here?" said the kind little
voice, as the hands in the red mittens were helpfully out-stretched.

"O, thank you, dear. I'd no idea the walking was so bad; but I must get
home." And the old face lighted up with a grateful smile, which was
worth a dozen of the best coasts in Boston.

"Take my arm then; I'll help you down the street, for I'm afraid you
might fall," said the child, offering her arm.

"Yes, dear, so I will. Now we shall get on beautifully. I've been having
a dreadful time, for my over-socks are all holes, and I slip at every
step."

"Keep hold, ma'am, I won't fall. I have rubber boots, and can't tumble."

So chatting, the two went safely across, leaving me and the other girls
to look after them and wish that we had done the little act of kindness,
which now looked so lovely in another.

"I think Katy is a very good girl, don't you?" said one child to the
other.

"Yes, I do; let's wait till she comes back. No matter if we do lose some
coasts," answered the child who had tried to dissuade her playmate from
going to the rescue.

Then I left them; but I think they learned a lesson that day in real
politeness; for, as they watched little Katy dutifully supporting the
old lady, undaunted by the rusty dress, the big bag, the old socks, and
the queer bonnet, both their faces lighted up with new respect and
affection for their playmate.

_Louisa M. Alcott._

From "Little Women." Little, Brown & Co., Publishers.


       *       *       *       *       *


DISSUADE, to advise against; to turn from a purpose by reasons
given.

ANTIQUATED, grown old; old-fashioned.

Tell what each contraction met with in the selection stands for.


Use _their_ or _there_ properly in place of the blanks in
the following sentences: The girls were on -- way
to the Park. -- was an old lady at the crossing.
Our home is --. Katy and Mary said --
mother lived --.



Memory Gems:


       Count that day lost
         Whose low descending sun,
       Views from thy hands
         No worthy action done.


_Author unknown._



What I must do concerns me, not what people will think.

_Emerson_.



[Footnote 001: Copyrighted by Little, Brown & Company.]


       *       *       *       *       *




_24_



WHAT HOUSE TO LIKE.


For Recitation:


       Some love the glow of outward show,
         Some love mere wealth and try to win it;
       The house to me may lowly be
         If I but like the people in it.

       What's all the gold that glitters cold,
         When linked to hard or haughty feeling?
       Whate'er we're told, the noble gold
         Is truth of heart and manly dealing.

       A lowly roof may give us proof
         That lowly flowers are often fairest;
       And trees whose bark is hard and dark
         May yield us fruit and bloom the rarest.

       There's worth as sure 'neath garments poor
         As e'er adorned a loftier station;
       And minds as just as those, we trust,
         Whose claim is but of wealth's creation.

       Then let them seek, whose minds are weak,
         Mere fashion's smile, and try to win it;
       The house to me may lowly be
         If I but like the people in it.


_Anon_.


       *       *       *       *       *


What is meant by "haughty feeling"?

What does the author say "the noble gold" is?

Is "bloom" in the third stanza an action-word or a name-word? Why?

Give in your own words the thought of the fourth stanza.

Use _to, too, two,_ properly before each of the following words:

hard, win, people, minds, dark, yield.

What virtues does the poem recommend?

What "lowly flowers are often fairest"?

What "lowly" virtue does the following stanza suggest?


       The bird that sings on highest wing,
         Builds on the ground her lowly nest;
       And she that doth most sweetly sing,
         Sings in the shade when all things rest.


_Montgomery_.


Name the two birds referred to.


       *       *       *       *       *




_25_


sears
flecked
de signed'
strait'ened
il lu'mined



A SONG OF DUTY.


       Sorrow comes and sorrow goes;
         Life is flecked with shine and shower;
       Now the tear of grieving flows,
         Now we smile in happy hour;
       Death awaits us, every one--
         Toiler, dreamer, preacher, writer--
       Let us then, ere life be done,
         Make the world a little brighter!

       Burdens that our neighbors bear,
         Easier let us try to make them;
       Chains perhaps our neighbors wear,
         Let us do our best to break them.
       From the straitened hand and mind,
         Let us loose the binding fetter,
       Let us, as the Lord designed,
         Make the world a little better!

       Selfish brooding sears the soul,
         Fills the mind with clouds of sorrow,
       Darkens all the shining goal
         Of the sun-illumined morrow;
       Wherefore should our lives be spent
         Daily growing blind and blinder--
       Let us, as the Master meant,
         Make the world a little kinder!


_Denis A. McCarthy._

From "Voices from Erin."

Angel Guardian Press, Boston, Mass.


       *       *       *       *       *




_26_


Sod' om
spright' ly
the o lo' gi an
his' to ry
To bi' as
cre at' ed
pro ceed' ed
sep' a ra ted
min' is ter
Au gus' tine
crit' i cise
cat' e ehism
de ter' mined
As cen' sion
Res ur rec' tion



AN EVENING WITH THE ANGELS.


"Well, James," said a kind-voiced mother, "you promised to tell Maggie
all about the Catechism you heard this afternoon at school."

"All right, mother," answered sprightly James, "anything at all to make
Maggie happy. Let's begin right away."

"Maggie, you said," continued James, "that you never could find out
_when_ the angels were created. Neither could our teacher tell me. And
I'm told St. Augustine could only make a guess when they were created.

"He thought the angels were created when God separated the light from
the darkness. But that's no matter, anyhow. We're sure there are angels;
that's the chief point."

"Are you quite certain?" asked Maggie.

"To be sure I am," said James. "If I met a man in the street I would
know he must have a father and a mother, although I had never heard when
he was born."

"That's so," chimed in the proud mother.

"Well, then, mother, many angels have been seen on earth, and they must
have been created some time. Let me tell you some of the places where it
is said in the Bible that angels have been seen, and where they spoke,
too."

"Now, James," said the father, "let Maggie see if _she_ can find out
some of those places herself. Here is the Bible."

With the help of mother and James, Maggie soon found the history of Adam
and Eve, where it is recorded that an angel with a flaming sword was
placed at the gate of Paradise.

"Poor Adam and Eve," said Maggie, "they must have felt very sad."

"Yes," answered Father Kennedy, who dropped in just then, and beheld his
young theologians with the holy Book before them. "They felt very sorry,
indeed, but they were consoled when told that a Savior would come to
redeem them."

"So you told us last Sunday," chimed in James. "Then you spoke about the
angels at Bethlehem who sang glory to God in the highest."

"And there was an angel in the desert when our Lord was tempted,"
proceeded the father.

"Oh! did you hear papa say the devil was an angel?" exclaimed James.

"Of course the devil is an angel," said Maggie, glad to trip up her big
brother, "but he is a bad one."

"I say yet that there were angels with our Lord after His forty days'
