"Thank you, I will," replied Old Mr. Toad.




XX


OLD MR. TOAD IS PUFFED UP

Old Mr. Toad hopped slowly down the Lone Little Path. He usually does hop
slowly, but this time he hopped slower than ever. You see, he was so puffed
up that he couldn't have hopped fast if he had wanted to, and he didn't
want to. In the first place his stomach was so full of ants that there
wasn't room for another one. No, Sir, Old Mr. Toad couldn't have swallowed
another ant if he had tried. Of course they made his stomach stick out, but
it wasn't the ants that puffed him out all over. Oh, my, no! It was pride.
That's what it was--pride. You know nothing can puff any one up quite like
foolish pride.

Old Mr. Toad was old enough to have known better. It is bad enough to see
young and foolish creatures puffed up with pride, but it is worse to see
any one as old as Old Mr. Toad that way. He held his head so high that he
couldn't see his own feet, and more than once he stubbed his toes.
Presently he met his old friend, Danny Meadow Mouse. He tipped his head a
little higher, puffed himself out a little more, and pretended not to see
Danny.

"Hello, Mr. Toad," said Danny.

Mr. Toad pretended not to hear. Danny looked puzzled. Then he spoke again,
and this time he shouted: "Hello, Mr. Toad! I haven't seen you for some
time."

It wouldn't do to pretend not to hear this time. "Oh, how do you do,
Danny?" said Old Mr. Toad with a very grand air, and pretending to be much
surprised. "Sorry I can't stop, but I've been dining with, my friend,
Buster Bear, and now I must get home." When he mentioned the name of Buster
Bear, he puffed himself out a little more.

Danny grinned as he watched him hop on down the Lone Little Path. "Can't
talk with common folks any more," he muttered. "I've heard that pride is
very apt to turn people's heads, but I never expected to see Old Mr. Toad
proud."

[Illustration: "Can't talk with common folks any more," he muttered.]

Mr. Toad kept on his way, and presently he met Peter Rabbit. Peter stopped
to gossip, as is his way. But Old Mr. Toad took no notice of him at all. He
kept right on with his head high, and all puffed out. Peter might have been
a stick or a stone for all the notice Old Mr. Toad took of him. Peter
looked puzzled. Then he hurried down to tell Danny Meadow Mouse about it.

"Oh," said Danny, "he's been to dine with Buster Bear, and now he has no
use for his old friends."

Pretty soon along came Johnny Chuck, and he was very much put out because
he had been treated by Old Mr. Toad just as Peter Rabbit had. Striped
Chipmunk told the same story. So did Unc' Billy Possum. It was the same
with all of Old Mr. Toad's old friends and neighbors, excepting Bobby Coon,
who, you know, is Buster Bear's little cousin. To him Old Mr. Toad was very
polite and talked a great deal about Buster Bear, and thought that Bobby
must be very proud to be related to Buster.

At first everybody thought it a great joke to see Old Mr. Toad so puffed up
with, pride, but after a little they grew tired of being snubbed by their
old friend and neighbor, and began to say unpleasant things about him. Then
they decided that what Old Mr. Toad needed was a lesson, so they put their
heads together and planned how they would teach Old Mr. Toad how foolish it
is for any one to be puffed up with pride.




XXI


OLD MR. TOAD RECEIVES ANOTHER INVITATION

The friends and neighbors of Old Mr. Toad decided that he needed to be
taught a lesson. At first, you know, every one had laughed at him, because
he had grown too proud to speak to them, but after a little they grew tired
of being treated so, and some of them put their heads together to think of
some plan to teach Old Mr. Toad a lesson and what a very, very foolish
thing false pride is. The very next day Jimmy Skunk went into the Green
Forest to look for Buster Bear. You know Jimmy isn't afraid of Buster. He
didn't have to look long, and when he had found him, the very first thing
he did was to ask Buster if he had seen any fat beetles that morning. You
know Jimmy is very fond of fat beetles, and the first thing he asks any one
he may happen to meet is if they have seen any.

Buster Bear grinned and said he thought he knew where there might be a few,
and he would be pleased to have Jimmy go with him to see. Sure enough,
under an old log he found five fat beetles, and these Jimmy gobbled up
without even asking Buster if he would have one. Jimmy is usually very
polite, but this time he quite forgot politeness. I am afraid he is rather
apt to when fat beetles are concerned. But Buster didn't seem to mind. When
the last beetle had disappeared Jimmy smacked his lips, and then he told
Buster Bear what he had come for. Of course, at first Buster had thought it
was for the fat beetles. But it wasn't. No, Sir, it wasn't for the fat
beetles at all. It was to get Buster Bear's help in a plan to teach Old Mr.
Toad a lesson.

First Jimmy told Buster all about how puffed up Old Mr. Toad was because he
had dined with Buster, and how ever since then he had refused even to speak
to his old friends and neighbors. It tickled Buster Bear so to think that
little homely Old Mr. Toad could be proud of anything that he laughed and
laughed, and his laugh was deep and grumbly-rumbly. Then Jimmy told him the
plan to teach Old Mr. Toad a lesson and asked Buster if he would help.
Buster's eyes twinkled as he promised to do what Jimmy asked.

Then Jimmy went straight to where Old Mr. Toad was sitting all puffed up,
taking a sun-bath.

"Buster Bear has just sent word by me to ask if you will honor him by
dining with him to-morrow at the rotted chestnut stump near the edge of the
Green Forest," said Jimmy in his politest manner.

Now if Old Mr. Toad was puffed up before, just think how he swelled out
when he heard that. Jimmy Skunk was actually afraid that he would burst.

"You may tell my friend, Buster Bear, that I shall be very happy to honor
him by dining with him," replied Old Mr. Toad with a very grand air.

Jimmy went off to deliver his reply, and Old Mr. Toad sat and puffed
himself out until he could hardly breathe. "Honor him by dining with him,"
said he over and over to himself. "I never was so flattered in my life."




XXII


OLD MR. TOAD LEARNS A LESSON

  Pride is like a great big bubble;
    You'll find there's nothing in it.
  Prick it and for all your trouble
    It has vanished in a minute.

Old Mr. Toad was so puffed out with pride as he started for the Green
Forest to dine with Buster Bear that those who saw him wondered if he
wouldn't burst before he got there. Everybody knew where he was going, and
this made Old Mr. Toad feel more important and proud than ever. He might
not have felt quite so puffed up if he had known just how it had come about
that he received this second invitation to dine with Buster Bear. When
Jimmy Skunk brought it to him, Jimmy didn't tell him that Buster had been
asked to send the invitation, and that it was all part of a plan on the
part of some of Old Mr. Toad's old friends and neighbors to teach him a
lesson. No, indeed, Jimmy didn't say anything at all about that!

So Old Mr. Toad went hopping along and stumbling over his own feet, because
his head was held so high and he was so puffed out that he couldn't see
where he was going. He could think of nothing but how important Buster Bear
must consider him to invite him to dinner a second time, and of the
delicious ants he was sure he would have to eat.

"What very good taste Buster Bear has," thought he, "and how very fortunate
it is that he found out that I also am fond of ants."

He was so busy with these pleasant thoughts and of the good dinner that he
expected to have that he took no notice of what was going on about him. He
didn't see his old friends and neighbors peeping out at him and laughing
because he looked so foolish and silly. He was dressed in his very best,
which was nothing at all to be proud of, for you know Old Mr. Toad has no
fine clothes. And being puffed up so, he was homelier than ever, which is
saying a great deal, for at best Mr. Toad is anything but handsome.

He was beginning to get pretty tired by the time he reached the Green
Forest and came in sight of the rotted old chestnut stump where he was to
meet Buster Bear.

Buster was waiting for him. "How do you do this fine day? You look a little
tired and rather warm, Mr. Toad," said he.

"I am a little warm," replied Mr. Toad in his most polite manner, although
he couldn't help panting for breath as he said it. "I hope you are feeling
as well as you are looking, Mr. Bear."

[Illustration: "I am a little warm," replied Mr. Toad in his most polite
manner.]

Buster Bear laughed a great, grumbly-rumbly laugh. "I always feel fine when
there is a dinner of fat ants ready for me," said he. "It is fine of you to
honor me by coming to dine."

Here Mr. Toad put one hand on his stomach and tried to make a very grand
bow. Peter Rabbit, hiding behind a near-by tree, almost giggled aloud, he
looked so funny.

"I have ventured to invite another to enjoy the dinner with us," continued
Buster Bear. Mr. Toad's face fell. You see he was selfish. He wanted to be
the only one to have the honor of dining with Buster Bear. "He's a little
late," went on Buster, "but I think he will be here soon, and I hope you
will be glad to meet him. Ah, there he comes now!"

Old Mr. Toad looked in the direction in which Buster Bear was looking. He
gave a little gasp and turned quite pale. All his puffiness disappeared. He
didn't look like the same Toad at all. The newcomer was Mr. Blacksnake.
"Oh!" cried Old Mr. Toad, and then, without even asking to be excused, he
turned his back on Buster Bear and started back the way he had come, with
long, frightened hops.

"Ha, ha, ha!" shouted Peter Rabbit, jumping out from behind a tree.

"Ho, ho, ho!" shouted Jimmy Skunk from behind another.

"Hee, hee, hee!" shouted Johnny Chuck from behind a third.

Then Old Mr. Toad knew that his old friends and neighbors had planned this
to teach him a lesson.




