Happy Jack didn't dare go home. Can you think of anything more dreadful
than to be afraid to go to your own home? Why, home is the dearest place
in the world, and it should be the safest. Just think how you would feel
if you should be away from home, and then you should learn that it
wouldn't be safe for you to go back there again, and you had no other
place to go. It often happens that way with the little people of the
Green Meadows and the Green Forest. It was that way with Happy Jack
Squirrel now.

You see, Happy Jack knew that Shadow the Weasel is not one to give up
easily. Shadow has one very good trait, and that is persistence. He is
not easily discouraged. When he sets out to do a thing, usually he does
it. If he starts to get a thing, usually he gets it. No, he isn't easily
discouraged. Happy Jack knows this. No one knows it better. So Happy
Jack didn't dare to go home. He knew that any minute of night or day
Shadow might surprise him there, and that would be the end of him. He
more than half suspected that Shadow was at that very time hiding
somewhere along the way ready to spring out on him if he should try to
go back home.

He had stayed in the room of Farmer Brown's boy until Mrs. Brown had
come to make the bed. Then he had jumped out the window into the big
maple tree. He wasn't quite sure of Mrs. Brown yet. She had kindly eyes.
They were just like the eyes of Farmer Brown's boy. But he didn't feel
really acquainted yet, and he felt safer outside than inside the room
while she was there.

    "Oh dear, oh dear! What shall I do?
       I have no home, and so
    To keep me warm and snug and safe
       I have no place to go!"

Happy Jack said this over and over as he sat in the maple tree, trying
to decide what was to be done.

"I wonder what ails that Squirrel. He seems to be doing a lot of
scolding," said Mrs. Brown, as she looked out of the window. And that
shows how easy it is to misunderstand people when we don't know all
about their affairs. Mrs. Brown thought that Happy Jack was scolding,
when all the time he was just frightened and worried and wondering where
he could go and what he could do to feel safe from Shadow the Weasel.

Because he didn't dare to go back to the Green Forest, he spent most of
the day in the big maple tree close to Farmer Brown's house. The window
had been closed, so he couldn't go inside. He looked at it longingly a
great many times during the day, hoping that he would find it open. But
he didn't. You see, it was opened only at night when Farmer Brown's boy
went to bed, so that he would have plenty of fresh air all night. Of
course Happy Jack didn't know that. All his life he had had plenty of
fresh air all the time, and be couldn't understand how people could live
in houses all shut up.

Late that afternoon Farmer Brown's boy, who had been at school all day,
came whistling into the yard. He noticed Happy Jack right away. "Hello!
You back again! Isn't one good meal a day enough?" he exclaimed.

"He's been there all day," said his mother, who had come to the door
just in time to overhear him. "I don't know what ails him."

Then Farmer Brown's boy noticed how forlorn Happy Jack looked. He
remembered Happy Jack's fright that morning.

"I know what's the matter!" he cried. "It's that Weasel. The poor little
chap is afraid to go home. We must see what we can do for him. I wonder
if he will stay if I make a new house for him. I believe I'll try it and
see."




CHAPTER XXVIII

HAPPY JACK FINDS A NEW HOME

    They say the very darkest clouds
      Are lined with silver bright and fair,
    Though how they know I do not see,
      And neither do I really care.
    It's good to believe, and so I try
      To believe 'tis true with all my might,
    That nothing is so seeming dark
      But has a hidden side that's bright.

    _Happy Jack._


Certainly things couldn't look much darker than they did to Happy Jack
Squirrel as he sat in the big maple tree at the side of Farmer Brown's
house, and saw jolly, round, red Mr. Sun getting ready to go to bed
behind the Purple Hills. He was afraid to go to his home in the Green
Forest because Shadow the Weasel might be waiting for him there. He was
afraid of the night which would soon come. He was cold, and he was
hungry. Altogether he was as miserable a little Squirrel as ever was
seen.

He had just made up his mind that he would have to go look for a hollow
in one of the trees in the Old Orchard in which to spend the night, when
around the corner of the house came Farmer Brown's boy with something
under one arm and dragging a ladder. He whistled cheerily to Happy Jack
as he put the ladder against the tree and climbed up. By this time Happy
Jack had grown so timid that he was just a little afraid of Farmer
Brown's boy, so he climbed as high up in the tree as he could get and
watched what was going on below. Even if he was afraid, there was
comfort in having Farmer Brown's boy near.

For some time Farmer Brown's boy worked busily at the place where the
branch that Happy Jack knew so well started out from the trunk of the
tree towards the window of Farmer Brown's boy's room. When he had fixed
things to suit him, he went down the ladder and carried it away with
him. In the crotch of the tree he had left the queer thing that he had
brought under his arm. In spite of his fears, Happy Jack was curious.
Little by little he crept nearer. What he saw was a box with a round
hole, just about big enough for him to go through, in one end, and in
front of it a little shelf. On the shelf were some of the nuts that he
liked best.

For a long time Happy Jack looked and looked. Was it a trap? Somehow he
couldn't believe that it was. What would Farmer Brown's boy try to trap
him for when they were such good friends? At last the sight of the nuts
was too much for him. It certainly was safe enough to help himself to
those. How good they tasted! Almost before he knew it, they were gone.
Then he got up courage enough to peep inside. The box was filled with
soft hay. It certainly did look inviting in there to a fellow who had no
home and no place to go. He put his head inside. Finally he went wholly
in. It was just as nice as it looked.

"I believe," thought Happy Jack, "that he made this little house just
for me, and that he put all this hay in here for my bed. He doesn't know
much about making a bed, but I guess he means well."

With that he went to work happily to make up a bed to suit him, and by
the time the first Black Shadow had crept as far as the big maple tree,
Happy Jack was curled up fast asleep in his new house.




CHAPTER XXIX

FARMER BROWN'S BOY TAKES A PRISONER

    The craftiest and cleverest, the strongest and the bold
    Will make mistakes like other folks, young, middle-aged, and old.

    _Happy Jack._


Happy Jack Squirrel was happy once more. He liked his new house, the
house that Farmer Brown's boy had made for him and fastened in the big
maple tree close by the house in which he himself lived. Happy Jack and
Farmer Brown's boy were getting to be greater friends than ever. Every
morning Happy Jack jumped over to the window-sill and then in at the
open window of the room of Farmer Brown's boy. There he was sure to find
a good breakfast of fat hickory nuts. When Farmer Brown's boy overslept,
as he did sometimes, Happy Jack would jump up on the bed and waken him.
He thought this great fun. So did Farmer Brown's boy, though sometimes
when he was very sleepy he pretended to scold, especially on Sunday
mornings when he did not have to get up as early as on other days.

Of course, Black Pussy had soon discovered that Happy Jack was living in
the big maple tree, and she spent a great deal of time sitting at the
foot of it and glaring up at him with a hungry look in her eyes,
although she wasn't hungry at all, for she had plenty to eat. Several
times she climbed up in the tree and tried to catch him. At first he had
been afraid, but he soon found out that Black Pussy was not at all at
home in a tree as he was. After that, he rather enjoyed having her try
to catch him. It was almost like a game. It was great fun to scold at
her and let her get very near him and then, just as she was sure that
she was going to catch him, to jump out of her reach. After a while she
was content to sit at the foot of the tree and just glare at him.

Happy Jack had only one worry now, and this didn't trouble him a great
deal. It was possible that Shadow the Weasel might take it into his head
to try to surprise him some night. Happy Jack knew that by this time
Shadow must know where he was living, for of course Sammy Jay had found
out, and Sammy is one of those who tells all he knows. Still, being so
close to Farmer Brown's boy gave Happy Jack a very comfortable feeling.

Now all this time Farmer Brown's boy had not forgotten Shadow the Weasel
and how he had driven Happy Jack out of the Green Forest, and he had
wondered a great many times if it wouldn't be a kindness to the other
little people if he should trap Shadow and put him out of the way. But
you know he had given up trapping, and somehow he didn't like to think
of setting a trap, even for such a mischief-maker as Shadow. Then
something happened that made Farmer Brown's boy very, very angry. One
morning, when he went to feed the biddies, he found that Shadow had
visited the henhouse in the night and killed three of his best pullets.
That decided him. He felt sure that Shadow would come again, and he
meant to give Shadow a surprise. He hunted until he found the little
hole through which Shadow had got into the henhouse, and there he set a
trap.

"I don't like to do it, but I've got to," said he. "If he had been
content with one, it would have been bad enough, but he killed three
just from the love of killing, and it is high time that something be
done to get rid of him."

The very next morning Happy Jack saw Farmer Brown's boy coming from the
henhouse with something under his arm. He came straight over to the foot
of the big maple tree and put the thing he was carrying down on the
ground. He whistled to Happy Jack, and as Happy Jack came down to see
what it was all about, Farmer Brown's boy grinned. "Here's a friend of
yours you probably will be glad to see," said he.

At first, all Happy Jack could make out was a kind of wire box. Then he
saw something white inside, and it moved. Very suspiciously Happy Jack
came nearer. Then his heart gave a great leap. That wire box was a cage,
and glaring between the wires with red, angry eyes was Shadow the
Weasel! He was a prisoner! Right away Happy Jack was so excited that he
acted as if he were crazy. He no longer had a single thing to be afraid
of. Do you wonder that he was excited?




CHAPTER XXX

A PRISONER WITHOUT FEAR

A bad name is easy to get but hard to live down.

_Happy Jack._


Shadow the Weasel was a prisoner. He who always had been free to go and
come as he pleased and to do as he pleased was now in a little narrow
cage and quite helpless. For once he had been careless, and this was the
result. Farmer Brown's boy had caught him in a trap. Of course, he
should have known better than to have visited the henhouse a second time
after killing three of the best pullets there. He should have known
that Farmer Brown's boy would be sure to do something about it. The
truth is, he had yielded to temptation when common sense had warned him
not to. So he had no one to blame for his present difficulty but
himself, and he knew it.

At first he had been in a terrible rage and had bitten at the wires
until he had made his mouth sore. When he had made sure that the wires
were stouter than his teeth, he wisely stopped trying to get out in that
way, and made up his mind that the only thing to do was to watch for a
chance to slip out, if the door of the cage should happen to be left
unfastened.

Of course it hurt his pride terribly to be made fun of by those who
always had feared him. Happy Jack Squirrel was the first one of these to
see him. Farmer Brown's boy had put the cage down near the foot of the
big maple tree in which Happy Jack was living, because Shadow had driven
him out of the Green Forest. As soon as Happy Jack had made sure that
Shadow really and truly was a prisoner and so quite harmless, he had
acted as if he were crazy. Perhaps he was--crazy with joy. You see, he
no longer had anything to be really afraid of, for there was no one but
Shadow from whom he could not get away by running into his house. Billy
Mink was the only other one who could follow him there, and Billy was
not likely to come climbing up a tree so close to Farmer Brown's house.

So Happy Jack raced up and down the tree in the very greatest
excitement, and his tongue went quite as fast as his legs. He wanted
everybody to know that Shadow was a prisoner at last. At first he did
not dare go very close to the cage. You see, he had so long feared
Shadow that he was still afraid of him even though he was so helpless.
But little by little Happy Jack grew bolder and came very close. And
then he began doing something not at all nice. He began calling Shadow
names and making fun of him, and telling him how he wasn't afraid of
him. It was all very foolish and worse--it was like hitting a foe who
was helpless.

Of course Happy Jack hastened to tell everybody he met all about Shadow,
so it wasn't long before Shadow began to receive many visitors. Whenever
Farmer Brown's boy was not around there was sure to be one or more of
the little people who had feared Shadow to taunt him and make fun of
him. Somehow it seems as if always it is that way when people get into
trouble. You know it is very easy to appear to be bold and brave when
there is nothing to be afraid of. Of course that isn't bravery at all,
though many seem to think it is.

[Illustration: IT WASN'T LONG BEFORE SHADOW BEGAN TO RECEIVE MANY
VISITORS.]

Now what do you think that right down in their hearts all these little
people who came to jeer at Shadow the Weasel hoped they would see? Why,
they hoped they would see Shadow afraid. Yes, Sir, that is just what
they hoped. But they didn't. That is where they were disappointed. Not
once did Shadow show the least sign of fear. He didn't know what Farmer
Brown's boy would do with him, and he had every reason to fear that if
he was not to be kept a prisoner for the rest of his natural life,
something dreadful would be the end. But he was too proud and too brave
to let any one know that any such fear ever entered his mind. Whatever
his faults, Shadow is no coward. He boldly took bits of meat which
Farmer Brown's boy brought to him, and not once appeared in the least
afraid, so that, much as he disliked him, Farmer Brown's boy actually
had to admire him. He was a prisoner, but he kept just as stout a heart
as ever.




CHAPTER XXXI

WHAT FARMER BROWN'S BOY DID WITH SHADOW

    Ribble, dibble, dibble, dab!
    Some people have the gift of gab!
    Some people have no tongues at all
    To trip them up and make them fall.

    _Happy Jack._
