in the water were fried like fish in the frying-pan.

The Lion reflected: "At such a time, when the shell at the bottom of
the deep, like a fowl on a spit, is roasting, an affair of this
importance has occurred.  Who may there be among my attendants who
would not be affected by the labour and who, undeterred by the heat of
the atmosphere, would approach this undertaking?"

In the midst of this reflection the Tiger came in with the line of
attendants and observed that the Lion was thoughtful.  On the ground of
his tact and affection, he advanced near the throne of royalty, and was
emboldened to ask the cause of that thoughtfulness, and having learned
how the case stood, he took upon himself to accomplish the matter, and
having been honoured with permission, he set off with a body of
attendants, and, arriving at that place at noon, he betook himself to
the accomplishment of that affair, and the instant that the business
was settled to his satisfaction he changed his reins to return.

The officers who had been appointed to attend him unanimously
represented as follows: "In such heat as this, all this distance has
been traversed by the steps of completion, and now that the affair has
been settled and the confidence placed in you by his majesty been
demonstrated, it will certainly be advisable if you should repose a
short time in the shade of a tree and allay the fiery tongue of thirst
by drinking cool water."

The Tiger smiled and said: "My intimacy and rank with his majesty the
king is a banner that I have by toil and effort set up.  It would not
be well to level it with the ground by indulgence and sloth.  Without
supporting trouble it is impossible to arrive at the carrying off of
treasure, and unaccompanied by the thorn we cannot reap the enjoyment
of the rose garden."

The informers furnished intelligence of this to the Lion, and recited
the book of the affair, from preface to conclusion.  The Lion nodded
the head of approval, and said: "The people may be at peace in the just
reign of that ruler who does not place his head on the pillow of
repose."  He then sent for the Tiger, and having distinguished him with
special honours, committed that jungle to him, and, having bestowed on
him the place of his sire, conferred on him, in addition, the dignity
of being his heir.

And the use of this fable is, that thou mayest learn that to no one
does the sun of his wish rise from the eastern quarter of hope without
the diligent use of great exertion.



The Fox and the Drum

It is related that a Fox was once prowling over a moor, and was roaming
in every direction in hope of scenting food.  Presently he came to the
foot of a tree, at the side of which they had suspended a drum, and
whenever a gust of wind came, a branch of the tree was put in motion,
and struck the surface of the drum, when a terrible noise arose from it.

The Fox, seeing a domestic fowl under the tree, who was pecking the
ground with her beak, and searching for food, planted himself in
ambush, and wished to make her his prey, when all of a sudden the sound
of a drum reached his ear.  He looked and saw a very fat form, and a
prodigious sound from it reached his hearing.  The appetite of the Fox
was excited, and he thought to himself, "Assuredly its flesh and skin
will be proportioned to its voice."

He issued from his lurking-place and turned toward the tree.  The fowl
being put on its guard by that circumstance, fled, and the Fox, by a
hundred exertions, ascended the tree.  Much did he labour till he had
torn the drum, and then he found nought save a skin and a piece of
wood.  The fire of regret descended into his heart, and the water of
contrition began to run from his eyes, and he said: "Alas! that by
reason of this huge bulk which is all wind, that lawful prey has
escaped from my hand, and from this empty form no advantage has
resulted to me."

  Loudly ever sounds the labour,
    But in vain--within is nought:
  Art thou wise, for substance labour,
   Semblance will avail thee nought.



The Sparrows and the Falcon

Two Sparrows once fixed their nest on the branch of a tree; and of
worldly gear, water and grain sufficed them; while on the summit of a
mountain, beneath which that tree lay, a Falcon had its abode, which,
at the time of stooping on its quarry, issued from its lurking-place
like lightning, and, like heaven's bolt, clean consumed the feebler
birds.

Whenever the Sparrows produced young, and the time was near at hand for
them to fly, that Falcon, rushing forth from its ambush, used to carry
them off and make them food for its own young.  Now, to those
Sparrows--in accordance with the saying, "The law of home is a part of
faith"--to migrate from that place was impossible, and yet from the
cruelty of the tyrannous Hawk it was difficult to reside there.

On one occasion their young ones, having gained strength and put forth
feathers and wings, were able to move; and the father and mother,
pleased with the sight of their offspring, testified their joy at their
attempt to fly.

Suddenly the thought of the Falcon passed through their minds, and, all
at once, they began to lament from anxiety.

One of their children--in whose countenance the signs of ripe
discretion were visible--having inquired the reason of their
despondency, they recounted the history of the Falcon's oppression and
of its carrying off their young, with all the particulars.

The son said; "The Causer of Causes has sent a cure for every sorrow.
It is probable that if ye exert yourselves in repelling this misfortune
both this calamity will be averted from our heads and this burden
removed from your hearts."

These words pleased the Sparrows; and while one of them stopped to
attend the young ones, the other flew forth in search of relief.  He
resolved in his mind on the way that he would tell his story to
whatsoever animal his eyes first fell upon, and ask a remedy for his
heart's distress from it.

It happened that a Salamander, having come forth from a mine of fire,
was wandering in the spreading plain of the desert.  When the glance of
the Sparrow lighted upon him, and that strange form came into his view,
he said to himself: "I have fallen upon good!  Come on, I will disclose
the grief of my heart to this marvellous bird; perhaps he may undo the
knot of my affairs and may show me the way to a remedy."  Then with the
utmost respect, he advanced to the Salamander, and after the usual
salutation, paid the compliment of offering service.  The Salamander,
too, in a kind tone, expressed the courtesy required toward travellers
and said:  "The traces of weariness are discernible in thy countenance.
If this arises from journeying, be pleased to halt some days in this
neighbourhood; and if the case be aught else, explain it, that, to the
extent of my power, I may exert myself to remedy it."

The Sparrow loosed his tongue, and represented to the Salamander his
piteous condition, after a fashion, that, had he told it to a rock, it
would have been rent in pieces by his distress.

After hearing his tale, the Salamander, too, felt the fire of
compassion kindled, and he said; "Grieve not! for I will this night
take such measures as to consume the Falcon's abode and nest and all
that therein is.  Do thou point out to me thy dwelling, and go to thy
offspring until the time I come to thee."

The Sparrow indicated his dwelling in such a way as not to leave a
doubt in the mind of the Salamander; and with a glad heart turned
toward his own nest.  When the night came on, the Salamander, with a
number of its own kind, each carrying a quantity of naphtha and
brimstone, set off in the direction of the spot, and under the guidance
of that Sparrow conveyed themselves to the vicinity of the Falcon's
nest.

The latter, unaware of the impending misfortune, had, with its young,
eaten plentifully and fallen asleep.  The Salamanders cast upon their
nest all the naphtha and brimstone that they had brought with them and
turned back and the blast of justice fell upon those oppressors.  They
rose up from the sleep of negligence and all of them, with their abode
and nest, were at once consumed to ashes.

And this instance is given that thou mayest know that every one who
labours to repel an enemy, though he be small and weak, and his foe
great and strong, may yet hope for victory and triumph.



The Hermit, the Thief, and the Demon

It is related that a Hermit of pure disposition, abstemious and
virtuous, had made his cell in one of the environs of Baghdad, and
passed his morning and evening hours in the worship of the All-wise
King, and by these means had shaken his skirt clear from the dust of
worldly affairs.  He had bowed his head in the corner of contentment
under the collar of freedom from care, and rested satisfied with the
portion that was supplied to him from the invisible world.

One of his sincere disciples got knowledge of the poverty and fastings
of the Holy Man, and by way of offering, brought to the hermitage a she
buffalo, young and fat, with whose delicious milk the palate of desire
was oiled and sweetened.

A thief beheld the circumstance, and his hungry appetite was excited;
and he set off for the cell of the recluse.  A demon, too, joined him
in the likeness of a man.  The thief asked him: "Who art thou, and
whither goest thou?"  He replied: "I am a demon, who have assumed this
shape, and, putting on this guise, am going to the hermitage of the
recluse, for many of the people of this country, through the blessing
of his instruction, have begun to repent and to be converted and the
market of our temptations has become flat.  I wish to get an
opportunity and kill him.  This is my story which thou hast heard; now,
tell me, who art thou and what is thy story?"  The thief replied:

"I am a man whose trade is roguery, and I am occupied night and day
with thinking how to steal some one's goods and impose the scar of
affliction on his heart.  I am now going, as the recluse has got a fat
buffalo, to steal it and use it for my own wants."  The demon said;

"Praise be to God that the bond of kinship is strong between us, and
this alone is sufficient to ally us, since the object of both is to
assail him."

They then proceeded on their way, and at night reached the cell of the
recluse.  The latter had finished the performance of his daily worship,
and had gone to sleep, just as he was, on his prayer-carpet.  The thief
bethought himself, that if the demon attempted to kill him he would
probably awake and make an outcry; and the other people who were his
neighbours, would be alarmed, and in that case it would be impossible
to steal the buffalo.  The demon, too, reflected that if the thief
carried off the buffalo from the house, he must of course open the
door.  Then the noise of the door would very likely awaken the recluse,
and he should have to postpone killing him.  He then said to the thief:
"Do thou wait and give me time to kill the hermit, and then do thou
steal the buffalo."  The thief rejoined: "Stop thou till I steal the
buffalo, and then kill the hermit."

This difference was prolonged between them, and at last the words of
both came to wrangling.  The thief was so annoyed that he called out to
the recluse: "There is a demon here who wants to kill thee."  The
demon, too, shouted: "Here is a thief, who wants to steal thy buffalo."

The hermit was roused by the uproar, and raised a cry, whereupon the
neighbours came, and both the thief and the demon ran way; and the life
and property of the Holy Man remained safe and secure through the
quarrel of his enemies.

  When the two hostile armies fall to strife,
  Then from its sheath what need to draw the knife?



The King and the Hawk

It is related that in ancient times there was a King fond of hunting.
He was ever giving reins to the courser of his desire in the pursuit of
game, and was always casting the lasso of gladness over the neck of
sport.  Now this King had a Hawk, who at a single flight could bring
down a pebble from the peak of the Caucasus, and in terror of whose
claws the constellation Aquila kept himself in the green nest of the
sky; and the King had a prodigious fondness for this Hawk and always
cared for it with his own hands.

It happened one day that the Monarch, holding the Hawk on his hand, had
gone to the chase.  A stag leapt up before him and he galloped after it
with the utmost eagerness.  But he did not succeed in coming up with
it, and became separated from his retinue and servants; and though some
of them followed him, the King rode so hotly that the morning breeze
could not have reached the dust he raised.

Meantime the fire of his thirst was kindled, and the intense desire to
drink overcame the King.  He galloped his steed in every direction in
search of water until he reached the skirt of a mountain, and beheld
that from its summit limpid water was trickling.  The King drew forth a
cup which he had in his quiver, and riding under the mountain filled
the cup with that water, which fell drop by drop, and was about to take
a draught, when the Hawk made a blow with his wing, and spilled all the
water in the goblet.  The King was vexed at this action, but held the
cup a second time under the rock, until it was brimful.  He then raised
it to his lips again, and again the Hawk made a movement and overthrew
the cup.  The King rendered impatient by thirst, dashed the Hawk on the
ground and killed it.

Shortly after a stirrup-holder of the King came up and saw the Hawk
dead, and the Monarch athirst.  He then undid a water-vessel from his
saddle-cord and washed the cup clean, and was about to give the King a
drink.  The latter bade him ascend the mountain, as he had an
inclination for the pure water which trickled from the rock; and could
not wait to collect it in the cup, drop by drop.  The stirrup-holder
ascended the mountain and beheld a spring giving out a drop at a time
with a hundred stintings; and a huge serpent lay dead on the margin of
the fountain; and as the heat of the sun had taken effect upon it, the
poisonous saliva mixed with the water of that mountain, and it trickled
drop by drop down the rock.

The stirrup-holder was overcome with horror, and came down from the
mountain bewildered, and represented the state of the case, and gave
the King a cup of cold water from his ewer.  The latter raised the cup
to his lips, and his eyes overflowed with tears.  The attendant asked
the reason of his weeping.  The King drew a sigh from his anguished
heart and relating in full the story of the Hawk and the spilling of
the water in the cup, said: "I grieve for the death of the Hawk, and
bemoan my own deed in that without inquiry I have deprived a creature,
so dear to me, of life."  The attendant replied: "This Hawk protected
thee from a great peril, and has established a claim to the gratitude
of all the people of this country.  It would have been better if the
King had not been precipitate in slaying it, and had quenched the fire
of wrath with the water of mildness."

The King replied; "I repent of this unseemly action; but my repentance
is now unavailing, and the wound of this sorrow cannot be healed by any
salve"; and this story is related in order that it may be known that
many such incidents have occurred where, through the disastrous results
of precipitation, men have fallen into the whirlpool of repentance.



The Mouse and the Frog

It is related that a Mouse had taken up its abode on the brink of a
fountain and had fixed its residence at the foot of a tree.

A Frog, too, passed his time in the water there, and sometimes came to
the margin of the pool to take the air.  One day, coming to the edge of
the water, he continued uttering his voice in a heart-rending cadence
and assumed himself to be a nightingale of a thousand melodies.

At that time the Mouse was engaged in chanting in a corner of his cell.
Directly he heard the uproarious yelling of the Frog he was astounded,
and came out with the intention of taking a look at the reciter; and
while occupied with listening to him, kept smiting his hands together
and shaking his head.  These gestures, which seemed to display
approbation, pleased the Frog and he made advances toward acquaintance
with him.  In short, being mutually pleased with each other, they
became inseparable companions, and used to narrate to each other
entertaining stories and tales.

One day the Mouse said to the Frog: "I am oftentimes desirous of
disclosing to thee a secret and recounting to thee a grief which I have
at heart, and at that moment thou art abiding under the water.  However
much I shout thou nearest me not, owing to the noise of the water, and
in spite of my crying to thee, the sound cannot reach thee, because of
the clamour of the other frogs.  We must devise some means by which
thou mayest know when I come to the brink of the water, and thus mayest
be informed of my arrival without my shouting to thee."

The Frog said: "Thou speakest the truth.  I, too, have often pondered
uneasily, thinking, should my friend come to the brink of the water,
how shall I, at the bottom of this fountain, learn his arrival?  And it
sometimes happens that I, too, come to the mouth of thy hole, and thou
hast gone out from another side, and I have to wait long.  I had
intended to have touched somewhat on this subject before, but now the
arrangement of it rests with thee."

The Mouse replied: "I have got hold of the thread of a plan, and it
appears to me the best thing to get a long string, and to fasten one
end to thy foot, and tie the other tight around my own, in order that
when I come to the water's edge and shake the string, thou mayest know
what I want; and if thou, too, art so kind as to come to the door of my
cell, I may also get information by thy jerking the string."  Both
parties agreed to this, and the knot of friendship was in this manner
firmly secured, and they were also kept informed of one another's
condition.  One day, the Mouse came to the water's edge to seek the
Frog, in order to renew their friendly converse.  All of a sudden a
Crow, like an unforeseen calamity, flew down from the air, and
snatching up the Mouse, soared aloft, with him.  The string which was
tied to the leg of the Mouse drew forth the Frog from the bottom of the
water, and, as the other leg was fastened to the Frog's leg, he was
suspended head downward in the air.  The Crow flew on, holding the
