"I am sorry to hear it, Frank," said Herbert, soberly. "Do you think you
are acting wisely?"

"I am not acting as I would have done had my mother lived," answered
Frank; "but you must remember that my position in life has very much
changed. I am a poor boy."

"Hardly that, when there is so much property in the family."

"I know Mr. Manning too well to believe that I shall derive much
benefit from it. No, Herbert, I have my own living to make, and I want
to make it in my own way."

"It is a sad change for you, Frank."

"No, I can't say that. I don't know how it is, Herbert, but I am rather
glad to have all this thrown upon me. I enjoy feeling that I have got to
work."

"I have a chance of enjoying the same feelings," said Herbert, with a
smile.

"I wish we could start together, Herbert. Couldn't you go with me?"

Herbert shook his head.

"Father has a plan for me," he said. "I am to learn his trade, and shall
commence next week. I don't particularly like it, but it is well to have
a trade to fall back upon."

"Mr. Manning wanted me to learn a trade."

"There is no occasion for your doing so."

"I don't know about that. If I had a particular fancy for any, I
wouldn't mind choosing it, but I am better suited for something else."

"What is your plan? What will you do first?"

"My father has a cousin in the city of Newark, New Jersey, only a few
miles from New York. Four years ago, he and his family made us a visit,
and he was urgent then that we should return the visit. I will, first of
all, go to him, and ask his advice. He is a business man, and he may be
able to put me in the way of obtaining a position."

"I think you will succeed, Frank, but it will be harder than you think
for. You don't know what poverty is yet. I have never known anything
else."

"If I do succeed, Herbert, I may be able to find something for you."

"I wish you might," Herbert replied; but he was not as sanguine as
Frank.

He understood, better than his friend, that for a boy to set out alone
into the great world to earn a living is a serious undertaking.




CHAPTER XIV

GOOD-BYE


Frank had fixed upon the Tuesday morning succeeding the close of the
academic term for his departure from home. Monday was devoted to a few
necessary preparations and a few calls on old friends, among them Col.
Vincent, the owner of Ajax.

"My dear Frank," said the colonel, kindly, "I feel a strong interest in
your welfare, more especially because of the wrong which I do not
scruple to say has been done you. What does Mr. Manning say to your
plan?"

"He makes no objection," said Frank.

"Suppose he had done so?"

"I would not have run away. He is my stepfather and guardian, and I
would have endured staying at home as well as I could."

"There you are right, Frank. Though I have a poor opinion of Mr.
Manning, he is not likely to treat you in a manner to justify your going
away without his permission. From what I have heard within the last
week, I suspect that he feels relieved to have you go."

"What have you heard, sir?"

"That Mr. Manning will shortly sail for Europe, taking Mark with him."

Frank was surprised, having no suspicion of this.

"Now are you not sorry that you have decided to go out into the world to
earn a living when you might have seen something of the Old World?"

"Mr. Manning would never have taken me along," answered Frank, quietly,
"nor should I have enjoyed traveling with him and Mark."

"Of the two, who would interfere the more with your enjoyment?"

"Mark."

"Then you prefer the father to the son?" said the colonel.

"The father has much more agreeable manners. I don't think Mark could be
agreeable if he tried."

Col. Vincent smiled.

"Perhaps you are right, Frank," he said. "Now, as your father's old
friend, I shall exact a promise from you."

"What is it, sir?"

"You are going out into the world to earn your own living. Boys of your
age are apt to think it an easy thing. I have seen more of life, and I
am sure you will find it more difficult than you suppose. You may find
yourself in difficulty, possibly in want. In that case, promise to let
me know, and I will come to your assistance."

"I will, sir," answered Frank.

The time came for Frank to say good-bye to Mr. Manning and Mark, and the
house which had been his home from infancy.

His stepfather handed him a small pocketbook.

"Frank," he said, "in this pocketbook you will find twenty-five
dollars. It is not much, but--"

"I am satisfied, sir," said Frank. "It won't be long before I am earning
something."

"I hope your anticipations may be realized, but it is possible that you
may require help."

"I think not, sir."

"I will authorize my banker to pay you the same sum--twenty-five
dollars--every three months. Of course, it is not enough to support you;
but, as you say it is your intention to procure a place--"

"Yes, sir."

"It will probably be enough to make up any deficiency that may exist in
your income. I am aware that you do not regard me as--as I would like to
have you; but I am resigned to be misunderstood, and I merely call your
attention to the fact that I have given you my free permission to carry
out your own plans and have given you more assistance than you asked
for."

"That's true, sir."

"Should anyone in your hearing condemn me for what I have done, I depend
upon your defending me."

"I will state the facts, sir. I will take the entire responsibility for
anything that may result from the step I have taken."

Mr. Manning looked well pleased. Things were taking the course he
desired, and for the paltry sum of one hundred dollars a year, he was
getting rid of an obnoxious stepson, while appearing to confer a favor
upon him.

"Perhaps you are right, Frank," said his stepfather, disguising the
satisfaction he felt. "If, however, you should find that you have made a
mistake, you will do me the justice to remember that I gave you your
choice."

Knowing, as he did, that the offer was not genuine, Frank remained
silent. He could not make up his mind to express gratitude, and
therefore said nothing.

Here the carriage drove up to the door to convey Frank to the railway
station. Mindful of appearance, Mr. Manning accompanied him to the cars,
and in presence of several neighbors bade him an effusively affectionate
farewell.

So Frank was fairly started on his campaign.




CHAPTER XV

ERASTUS TARBOX, OF NEWARK


Erastus Tarbox kept a dry-goods store in the city of Newark, New Jersey.
He was well to do, not so much because of his enterprise and skill as a
merchant as because of his extreme poverty. Some people called it
parsimony. He only employed two clerks to assist him in his store, and
they, as well as the boy who carried out parcels and ran the errands,
were paid scarcely more than two-thirds the rates paid in neighboring
stores.

Mr. Tarbox prided himself upon his relationship to the Courtneys. They
were rich, and riches, in his eyes were a great merit. He often sighed
to think that there was no chance for him to benefit by a share of the
large property owned by his cousins. Without hope of personal advantage,
however, he had always been obsequious to them, and often took occasion
to mention them, by way of enhancing his own social credit somewhat.

Mr. Tarbox had heard of Mrs. Courtney's death, but had not heard the
particulars of the will. He took it for granted that Frank was sole
heir, and it did cross his mind more than once how very agreeable it
would be if he could be selected as guardian of the rich young heir. Of
course, he knew that there was no probability of it, since the
stepfather would undoubtedly be appointed to that position.

Mr. Tarbox had just sold a calico dress pattern to a poor woman, when
his attention was drawn to the entrance of Frank Courtney, who entered
his store, valise in hand.

Mr. Tarbox was rather short-sighted, and did not immediately recognize
the son of his rich cousin.

"What can I do for you, young man?" he asked, in his business tone.

"This is Mr. Tarbox, I believe?" said Frank, who did not know his
relatives very well.

"Yes, that is my name."

"I am Frank Courtney."

"Bless my soul!" ejaculated Mr. Tarbox, surprised and delighted. "When
did you arrive in Newark?"

"I have only just arrived."

"I do hope you are going to make us a visit," said Mr. Tarbox,
cordially.

"Thank you!" answered Frank, cheered by this warm reception. "If you are
sure it won't inconvenience you."

"Inconvenience me! We shall be delighted to have you with us."

"You must come up and see Mrs. Tarbox. She will be delighted to see
you."

Mr. Tarbox lived over his store. There was a door from the street
adjoining the shop front. Mr. Tarbox opened it with a pass-key, and
conducted Frank upstairs, ushering him into a gloomy parlor, with stiff,
straightbacked chairs, ranged at regular intervals along the sides of
the room, and a marble-topped center table, with two or three books
lying upon it. There was a framed engraving, representing Washington
crossing the Delaware, over the mantel, and two plaster figures and
similar ornaments on the mantelpiece. The whole aspect of the room
chilled Frank.

"Wait here, and I will call my wife," said Mr. Tarbox.

Frank sat down on a hard sofa and awaited the entrance of Mrs. Tarbox.

She came in, a tall, thin woman, about as handsome for a woman as her
husband was for a man. Indeed, they were very well matched. She was
quite as mean as he, and between them they managed to make annually a
sensible addition to their world possessions.

Mr. Tarbox privately hinted his hopes respecting Frank to his wife, and
she instantly agreed that it would be a most eligible arrangement.

"We must make him contented, my dear," said her husband. "Give him the
best bedroom, and I think it might be well to have something a little
extra for supper."

"I did intend to put on the rest of that cold mutton," said Mrs. Tarbox,
doubtfully.

"It won't do, Martha. There is only a little of it, you know, and the
boy has been traveling, and, of course, is hungry. What do you say, now,
to some nice beefsteak?"

"Beefsteak is high now," said Mrs. Tarbox. "Still, if we buy round
steak--that is cheaper than sirloin or tenderloin."

"And quite as good," said her economical partner. "We can tell Frank,
however, that no sirloin was to be had so late in the day at the
markets."

Mrs. Tarbox nodded her head, approving the suggestion.

This little matter being adjusted, the husband and wife entered the
parlor where our hero was waiting patiently.

"This is our young cousin, Martha," said Mr. Tarbox, smiling pleasantly.

"Welcome to Newark," said Mrs. Tarbox, extending her hand. "And how did
you leave your stepfather?"

"He is well," said Prank, coolly.

The two exchanged glances. It was clear that Frank did not like his
stepfather, and this was satisfactory to them. There was the more chance
of his leaving him and boarding with them.

"The children will be so glad to see you," said Mr. Tarbox; "won't they,
Martha?"

"Delighted!" assured the lady.

"Pliny must be about your age. How old are you, by the way?"

"Sixteen."

"Just Pliny's age. Do you remember him?"

Frank remembered a tall, thin stripling who had accompanied his parents
to the Cedars, and who appeared to have an inexhaustible appetite.

"Yes, I remember him. Does he go to school?"

"No; Pliny is in a store," answered Mr. Tarbox.

"Your store?"

"Oh, no! I thought it would be better for him to enter the employ of a
stranger. He is in a bookstore."

There was one great advantage in Pliny's entering the employ of a
stranger. He was paid four dollars a week, whereas Mr. Tarbox paid his
boy but two. Here, then, was a clear gain of two dollars a week.

"But you must be tired," said Mrs. Tarbox. "You will see the children at
supper. Martha, I think Frank would like to go to his room."

The best bedroom was over the parlor. It was rather more cheerful,
because lighter.

"Here," said Mr. Tarbox, "you must make yourself at home. Martha, isn't
one of the drawers in that bureau empty? I thought so. Take your clothes
out of the valise and put them away. Now, is there anything you would
like?"

"Only a little water to wash in," said Frank. "You are both very kind."

"We hope to make you comfortable. You are our relative, you know."

The water was brought up by Mrs. Tarbox herself, and Frank was left
alone, on the whole well pleased with his reception.




CHAPTER XVI

AN UNPLEASANT DISCOVERY


It never occurred to Frank that his cordial reception was wholly due to
his supposed wealth. Had he known the Tarbox family better, he would
have had no uncertainty on this point. As it was, the discovery was soon
made.

"All my olive branches are for you, my dear young cousin," said Mr.
Tarbox, waving his hand. "A peaceful, happy family. Children, this is
our esteemed relative, Frank Courtney. You remember visiting his
delightful home, the Cedars."

"Yes, pa," said Julia.

Pliny said nothing, but stared at Frank, inwardly considering whether it
would be possible to borrow some money of him.

"I am glad to meet you all. I hope we shall become better acquainted,"
said Frank politely.
