Unc' Billy Possum whose tracks he had followed. He had seen them
outside of the hen-house, just as Unc' Billy had been afraid that he
would. He couldn't very well have helped it, those tracks were so
very plain to be seen.

That had been a long, hard, anxious journey for Unc' Billy from Farmer
Brown's hen-house to the Green Forest. The snow was so deep that he
could hardly wade through it. When he reached that hollow tree, he was
so tired that it was all he could do to climb it. Of course it wasn't
his own hollow tree, where old Mrs. Possum and the eight little
Possums lived. He knew better than to go there, leaving a plain track
for Farmer Brown's boy to follow. So he had been very thankful to
climb up this hollow tree. And, just as he had feared, there was
Farmer Brown's boy.

Chop, chop, chop! The snow was covered with chips now. Chop, chop,
chop! The tree began to shiver and then to shake. Cra-a-ck! With a
great crash over it went!

Bowser the Hound barked excitedly, and with Farmer Brown's boy rushed
to the hollow near the top to catch Mr. Possum, if he should run out.
But he didn't run out. Farmer Brown's boy rapped on the tree with the
handle of his axe, but no one ran out.

"I guess he's playing dead," said Farmer Brown's boy, and began to
split open the tree, so as to get into the hollow. And as he chopped,
he began to sing again. Pretty soon he had split the tree wide open.
In the bottom of the hollow was an old nest of Chatterer the Red
Squirrel, and that was all. Farmer Brown's boy rubbed his eyes and
stared and stared and stared. There were Unc' Billy's tracks leading
straight up to that tree and none leading away. Did that Possum have
wings?




XXII

WHERE UNC' BILLY POSSUM WAS


Where was Unc' Billy Possum? That is what Farmer Brown's boy wanted to
know. That is what Bowser the Hound wanted to know. Where was Unc'
Billy Possum? He was in another hollow tree all the time and laughing
till his sides ached as he peeped out and saw how hard Farmer Brown's
boy worked.

"Ah done fool him that time," said Unc' Billy, as he watched Farmer
Brown's boy wading off home through the snow, with Bowser the Hound at
his heels.

"You certainly did, Unc' Billy! How did you do it?" asked a voice
right over Unc' Billy's head.

Unc' Billy looked up in surprise. There was Tommy Tit the Chickadee.
Unc' Billy grinned.

"Ah just naturally expected Ah was gwine to have visitors, and so Ah
prepared a little surprise. Yes, Sah, Ah done prepare a little
surprise. Yo' see, mah tracks in the snow was powerful plain. Yes,
Sah, they sho'ly was! When Ah had climbed up that tree and looked down
and saw all those tracks what Ah done made, Ah began to get powerful
anxious. Yes, Sah, Ah done get so anxious Ah just couldn't get any
rest in mah mind. Ah knew Farmer Brown's boy was gwine to find those
tracks, and when he did, he was gwine to follow 'em right smart quick.
Sho' enough, just before sundown, here he comes. He followed mah
tracks right up to the foot of the tree whar Ah was hiding in the
hollow, and Ah heard him say:

"So this is whar yo' live, is it, Mistah Possum? Ah reckon Bowser and
Ah'll make yo' a call to-morrow."

"When I heard him say that, Ah felt right bad. Yes, Sah, Ah sho'ly did
feel right smart bad. Ah studied and Ah studied how Ah was gwine to
fool Farmer Brown's boy and Bowser the Hound. If Ah climbed down and
went somewhere else, Ah would have to leave tracks, and that boy done
bound to find me just the same. Ah done wish Ah had wings like yo' and
Brer Buzzard.

"So po' ol' Unc' Billy sat studying and studying and getting mo' and
mo' troubled in his mind. By and by Ah noticed that a branch from that
holler tree rubbed against a branch of another tree, and a branch of
that tree rubbed against a branch of another tree, and if Ah made a
right smart jump from that Ah could get into this tree, which had a
holler just made fo' me. Ah didn't waste no mo' time studying. No,
Sah, Ah just moved right away, and here Ah am."

"And you didn't leave any tracks, and you didn't have any wings," said
Tommy Tit the Chickadee.

"No," said Unc' Billy, "but Ah done find that yo' can most always find
a way out, if yo' look hard enough. Just now, Ah am looking right
smart hard fo' a way to get home, but Ah reckon mah eyesight am
failing; Ah don' see any yet."

"Dee, dee, dee!" laughed Tommy Tit merrily. "Be patient, Unc' Billy,
and perhaps you will."




XXIII

HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL MAKES AN UNEXPECTED CALL


Happy Jack Squirrel likes the snow. He always has liked the snow. It
makes him feel frisky. He likes to run and jump in it and dig little
holes in it after nuts, which he hid under the leaves before the snow
fell. When his feet get cold, all he has to do is to scamper up a tree
and warm them in his own fur coat. So the big snowstorm which made so
much trouble for Unc' Billy Possum just suited Happy Jack Squirrel,
and he had a whole lot of fun making his funny little tracks all
through that part of the Green Forest in which he lives.

Happy Jack didn't know anything about Unc' Billy Possum's troubles. He
supposed that Unc' Billy was safe at home in his own big hollow tree,
fast asleep, as he had been most of the winter. Happy Jack couldn't
understand how anybody could want to sleep such fine weather, but that
was their own business, and Happy Jack had learned a long time ago not
to worry about other people's business.

After frisking about he would stop to rest. Then he would sit up very
straight and fold his hands across his breast, where they would get
nice and warm in the fur of his coat. His beautiful, great gray tail
would be arched up over his back. His bright eyes would snap and
twinkle, and then he would shout just for joy, and every time he
shouted he jerked his big tail. Farmer Brown's boy called it barking,
but it was Happy Jack's way of shouting.

   "I love to romp! I love to play!
    I'm happy, happy, all the day!
    I love the snow, so soft and white!
    I love the sun that shines so bright!
    I love the whole world, for, you see,
    The world is very good to me!"

By and by Happy Jack came to the hollow tree that Farmer Brown's boy
had cut down because he thought that Unc' Billy Possum was inside of
it.

"Hello!" exclaimed Happy Jack. "That's one of the old storehouses of
my cousin, Chatterer the Red Squirrel! I've got an old storehouse near
here, and I guess I'll see if I have left any nuts in it."

He scampered over to another hollow tree standing near. He scampered
up the tree as only Happy Jack can and whisked in at the open doorway
of the hollow. Now Happy Jack had been in that hollow tree so often
that he didn't once think of looking to see where he was going, and he
landed plump on something that was soft and warm! Happy Jack was so
surprised that he didn't know what to do for a second. And then all in
a flash that something soft and warm was full of sharp claws and
sharper teeth, and an angry growling tilled the hollow tree.

Happy Jack was so frightened that he scrambled out as fast as he
could. When he was safely outside, he grew very angry to think that
any one should be in his storehouse, even if it was an old one. He
could hear a very angry voice inside, and in a minute who should
appear at the doorway but Unc' Billy Possum.

Unc' Billy had been waked out of a sound sleep, and that was enough
to make any one cross. Besides, he had been badly frightened, and that
made him crosser still.

"What do yo' mean by trying to frighten honest people?" snapped Unc'
Billy, when he caught sight of Happy Jack.

"What do you mean by stealing into other folk's houses?" demanded
Happy Jack, just as angrily.




XXIV

HAPPY JACK SQUIRREL HELPS UNC' BILLY POSSUM


It is very startling, very startling indeed, to rush into your own
storehouse, which you had supposed was empty, and run right into some
one sleeping there as if he owned it. It is enough to make any one
lose his temper. Happy Jack Squirrel lost his.

And it is very startling, very startling, indeed, to be wakened out of
pleasant dreams of warm summer days by having some one suddenly jump
on you. It is enough to make any one lose his temper. Unc' Billy
Possum lost his.

So Happy Jack sat outside on a branch of the hollow tree where his old
storehouse was and scolded, and called Unc' Billy Possum names, and
jerked his tail angrily with every word he said. And Unc' Billy Possum
sat in the doorway of the hollow tree and showed his teeth to Happy
Jack and said unpleasant things. It really was very dreadful the way
those two did talk.

But Unc' Billy Possum is really very good-natured, and when he had
gotten over the fright Happy Jack had given him and began to
understand that he was in one of Happy Jack's storehouses, all his
temper vanished, and presently he began to grin and then to laugh. Now
it always takes two to make a quarrel, and one of the hardest things
in the world is to keep cross when the one you are cross with won't
keep cross, too. Happy Jack tried hard to stay angry, but every time
he looked at Unc' Billy Possum's twinkling eyes and broad grin, Happy
Jack lost a little of his own temper. Pretty soon he was laughing just
as hard as Unc' Billy Possum.

"Ho, ho, ho! Ha, ha, ha!" they laughed together. Finally they had to
stop for breath.

"What are you doing in my storehouse, Unc' Billy?" asked Happy Jack,
when he could stop laughing.

Then Unc' Billy told him all about how he had climbed there from
another tree, so as to leave no tracks in the snow for Farmer Brown's
boy to follow.

"But now Ah want to go to mah own home in the big hollow tree way down
in the Green Forest, but Ah can't, on account of mah tracks in the
snow," concluded Unc' Billy mournfully.

Happy Jack put his head on one side and thought very hard. "Why don't
you stay right here until the snow goes, Unc' Billy?" he asked.

"Because Ah 'spects that mah ol' woman am worried most to death," said
Unc' Billy, in a mournful voice. "Besides," he added, "Ah just done
found out that this right nice lil' house belongs to one of mah
neighbors." There was a twinkle in Unc' Billy's eyes.

Happy Jack laughed. "You're welcome to stay as long as you like, Unc'
