that Jack was anywhere else than with Acton when the gloves had been laid
aside. He seemed to have some business with Acton concerning which he
evidently did not want Jack to hear a single syllable.

Jack did not quite see at first that he was one too many after the boxing
was over, and that Hill, at any rate, did not mean there should be a
fourth to the deliberations of himself, Acton, and the Coon. Jack,
however, soon tumbled that he was _de trop_, and the minute young
Hill came in Jack would stalk solemnly and formally out of the stable and
kick up his heels in the farmyard until such time as Acton should be
ready for the run to school.

Jack certainly did not like this cavalier treatment, but found it rather
a bore pottering about the yard, "looking at the beastly ducks;" but
Acton was so profusely apologetic when he did come out that Jack
generally smoothed his ruffled plumes and pedalled home at peace with
himself and all the world.

"The fact is, Jack," said Acton, "young Hill has arranged for me to have
the stable for our practice, for old Hill himself was rather against it,
and as he has a prejudice against St. Amory fellows generally, but
especially when they're of the Junior School--some of your tribe scuttled
his punt for him on the moat, didn't you?--I thought you would not mind
humouring the man's amiabilities. The Coon and he talk rot--sporting
rot--and it would only bore you to listen to it."

Jack said, "It does not matter in the least. I'd as soon look at the
ducks as listen to Hill. It's a bit _infra dig._, though, that _he_
should object."

As a matter of fact, young Hill received letters for Acton which dealt
with many things, the burden of most of them being "betting," and the
other sweet things of the sporting shop. Acton was, as you will have
seen, not the very green innocent who would come to much harm in this
lovely form of diversion.

[Illustration: A LITTLE YELLOW, EAR-TORN DOG BUSTLED OUT OF SOME SHED.]

About a fortnight after the visits to the Lodestone had commenced, the
Coon brought down with him a long-legged, thin-faced, horsey-looking
individual, who introduced himself to Bourne as Raffles of Rotherhithe,
and who laid himself out to be excessively friendly to Jack. He took,
evidently, quite a professional interest in the sparring, and told Acton
that "his left was quite a colourable imitation of the Coon's."

"Not colourable, anyhow," said Acton, with a wink at Jack.

"What do you think, sir, of Alabama's 'blind hook'?"

Jack, who had not the remotest idea what a "blind hook" was, said it "was
simply stunning."

"Exactly my idea, sir. I see you know above a bit about the noble art."

Raffles, as he would have said in his own special slang, worked the
"friendly lay" so well upon Jack, that that young gentleman was captured
to the last gun; you can do an awful lot of execution by deferring to the
opinion of a young man of sixteen, or thereabouts, as to the merit of
relying exclusively on the left.

When the sparring was over, Raffles shuffled out with Jack into the yard
and whistled. A little yellow, ear-torn dog bustled out of some shed and
trotted demurely by Mr. Raffles' right boot.

"See that dog, Mr. Bourne?"

"By the way, Raffles, how did you know my name was Bourne?" asked Jack.

"Mr. Acting mentioned that it was so. No offence, I hope, sir?"

"Oh no!" said Jack.

"Mr. Acting mentioned to me as how Warmint might amuse you."

"Warmint! What the deuce is that?"

"Why, the dawg."

"Well, it's a pretty ugly brute anyhow, Raffles."

"It is so; it's the colour--yellow is a mean colour. But he's a terror to
go."

"Where?" said Jack, uncivilly; for the man's manner, a mixture of
familiarity and servility, had begun to pall on Jack's taste.

"Why, there ain't a better, quicker, neater dawg in all London after the
rats than Warmint. He holds the record south the Thames."

"Is there a record then for rat killing? How is it done?"

"Turn a sack o' long tails on to the floor and let the dawg among them.
He works against time, of course."

"Have the rats any chance of getting away?"

"No fear."

"Ugh!" said Jack, looking at the mongrel with intense disgust.

"Is time for twenty--but I say, Mr. Bourne, if you like I'll bring a bag
o' rats down, and you can see for yourself. While the other gentleman,
Mr. Acting, is with the Coon, we can bring it off in the barn."

"Man alive, no!" said Jack, with another spasm of disgust; "but if you've
any other plans, Raffles, of killing an hour or so whilst Hill makes
speeches, trot 'em out. I'm sick of pottering round his yard like an
idiot. Are you coming with the Coon again?"

"Pretty well every time. What do you say to a little game of billiards?"

"Where?" said Jack.

"Nice little 'ouse near 'ere, I know."

"No fear! That's clean against the rules. Besides, who wants to knock
balls about with a sticky cue on a torn billiard cloth, where the whole
place reeks of beer and stale tobacco? No, thanks!"

"Young gents used not to set so much store by rules when I was a lad."

"We've changed since then, Raffles," said Jack, drily.

"A little shooting?"

"What?"

"Sparrers?" suggested Raffles, off-hand.

"Rot!"

"Bunnies?"

"That's better, Raffles. If you can get me half an hour with Hill's
rabbits, I'd risk that. Of course, there'd be a row if it was known.
Acton won't inquire, I fancy, who's shooting?"

"Mr. Acton won't, Mr. Bourne; he's a gentleman."

"He's a monitor, though, Raffles, which is a different sort of animal."

Raffles of Rotherhithe did not appear to think that Acton's being a
monitor was a clinching argument barring young Bourne's sport. Perhaps he
had private reasons for his opinions. Anyhow, he glibly promised to have
a breech-loader and a ferret for young Bourne on the morrow.

"And old Hill? They're his rabbits, you know."

"That will be all right. Take Dan Raffles' word for it."

"Now look here, Raffles; I'll give you sixpence for every rabbit I shoot,
and I'll pay you for the cartridges. You'll keep all the rabbits, but you
will lend me the gun."

"Very good, sir," said Raffles, smartly.

"And, Raffles," said Jack, eyeing over that individual with a curious
mixture of amusement and dislike, "you needn't be too beastly friendly
and chummy. I'm going to pay you for what you do, and don't fancy I'm
going an inch further than I feel inclined. I'm paying the piper, and I'm
going to choose all the tunes."

"Orl right," said Raffles, considerably taken aback by the ultimatum.
"I'll not be friendlier than I can 'elp."

"Don't," said Jack.




CHAPTER XIII

"EASY IS THE DOWNWARD ROAD"


Aided by Raffles of Rotherhithe, young Bourne went royally through half
the rules of the school. He called the tune to that extent. In the first
place, one may believe that when he called in the aid of that horsey
gentleman he had no further idea in his head than that of passing away
those dull half-hours which Hill inflicted upon him.

But, like many a wiser man, young Bourne found it was easier to conjure
up a spirit than to lay one, and, having once accepted the aid of
Raffles, he found it beyond his power to dispense with it, despite his
brave word. So, unheedful of his brother's advice, he not merely put his
innocent feet into the stream of forbidden pleasures, but waded in
whole-heartedly up to the chin.

Raffles, as promised, turned up on the next occasion provided with a
ferret and a gun, and all difficulties were smoothed over with the
farmer. Thus Jack Bourne took his post as the noble British sportsman
just behind the Lodestone Moat, whilst Raffles, with his ferret, worked
the bank, which was honey-combed with rabbit-holes. As the rabbits
scurried out before the ferret, Jack blazed away noisily, and
occasionally he had the pleasure of seeing a rabbit turning a somersault
as it made its last bound. Certainly, Jack was not a dead shot, but when
he contemplated the slain lying stark on the flanks of the bank, he felt
the throaty joy of the slaughtering British schoolboy. He counted out to
his worthy henchman four sixpences for the four slain with all the pride
of the elephant-hunter paying his beaters yards of brass wire and calico.
Raffles was properly grateful, of course.

Then, as their acquaintance progressed, there were little competitions
between Jack and Raffles at artificial pigeon-shooting, Raffles having
fixed up the apparatus, and Jack, from the twenty-five yards' mark,
occasionally winged his clay pigeon. It was very good sport in Jack's
opinion. Further, that little "'ouse" which Raffles knew of also soon
made the acquaintance of Jack, and he and Raffles on rainy afternoons
snatched the fearful joys of hasty "hundreds up" or "fifties up," just as
time allowed, Jack did not find the cue quite so sticky nor the charms of
stale tobacco quite so unlovely as he had expected. The landlord, who
marked for the two worthies, told our young gentleman that he had "a
pretty 'and for the long jenny," and Jack felt he could not do less than
order a little of his favourite beverage in return for his good opinion.
And thus as ever. Under the expert tuition of Raffles, Jack became a
little more of a "man" every day, and a little less of a decent fellow.
He smoked, he could call for a "small port" in quite an off-hand fashion,
he had played "shell out" with loafers at the little "'ouse," and he
began to know a little more of betting, "gee-gees," and other kindred
matters, than an average young fellow should know.

"_Facilis descensus Averni_"--you know the old tag.

By insensible gradations Jack Bourne found himself with a ruin of broken
rules behind him, and still tied to the chariot-wheels of Raffles, who
dragged him wherever he would. Jack's pockets, too, began to feel the
drain, but luckily--or unluckily, if you look at it properly--he was
rather flush this term, and as he had more than the usual allowance, he
was not so short as he might have been.

One thing bothered Jack, though he did not exactly put the idea that
worried him into words. There was not much fun _really_ in this
shooting, billiards, etc., since Jack broke all the rules alone. Now, if
Poulett, or Wilson, or Rogers, or Grim had been with him, that would have
been jolly. Besides that, since he could give his old chums so precious
little of his time, and had perforce to head them off when they offered
to bear him company on half-holidays, they called him many choice names.

"I hear they sample all the public-houses between here and Westcote,"
said Rogers. "Look what a dissipated eye Mr. Bourne's got."

"Yours will soon be groggy, Rogers, my pet, though you are cock of your
beastly water-lilies." After Sharpe's memorable poem, Biffen's house were
always "water-lillies" to the rest of St. Amory's.

"Ah?" said Poulett, "Jack carries Acton's notes to some yellow-haired
dolly down at Westcote. She gives him milk whilst he's waiting for the
answer."

"Go and poach eggs, Poulett."

"Don't do anything too mean, dear Jack, so that you'll make us blush for
you."

"Keep Acton out of mischief, Jack, remember he's only a poor forsaken
monitor. Show him the ropes."

"Good-bye, you chaps," said Jack, hopping on his bike, "here's Acton
coming." The two would then pedal the well-known road to the Lodestone,
and the elevating company of the Coon and Raffles.

"Don't let Raffles bore you, young 'un," said Acton to Bourne one day as
the owner of Warmint hove in sight. "Make him useful, but keep out of
mischief."

Jack, had he thought about the matter, might have reasonably asked Acton
how he could make Raffles useful and yet keep out of mischief, but the
Coon appearing at the stable-door in all the glory of a fur-lined coat,
with a foot of fur round the collar and half a foot round the sleeves,
and a bigger cigar than ever in his mouth, drove Jack's thoughts in
another direction.

Acton had really made marvellous progress under the Coon's coaching, and
as Jack watched the usual concluding three rounds, he was puzzled in his
own mind as to who could hold a candle up to his friend. This particular
afternoon was to be the final appearance of the Coon, who was going to
figure shortly as principal in some contest at Covent Garden, and Jack
determined to miss no opportunity of catching the last wrinkles of the
great professor's skill. Therefore, instead of sallying out as usual
halfway through the performance in the stable, he sat on the corn-chest
until Hill came in.

"Good-bye, Coon! Hope you come off all right in your turn-up."

"Good-bye, sir! Hope I'll train you when you start for the Heavy."

"I'll give you the chance if I do. Come along, Raffles."

When they were outside, Jack said, "By the way, Raffles, this will be
your last appearance down here too, eh?"

"I suppose so," said Raffles, "unless you make it worth my while to come
down entirely on your account."

"H'm, no," said Jack. "I'm deucedly short now, and when I've paid for the
last fifty cartridges, and the last rabbits, I'll be still shorter."

"Let it stand over, sir."

"No," said Jack. "I've had the fun, and I'll pay, of course. Let's have a
last dozen pigeons at the twenty-five yards' rise."

Secretly, Jack was rather glad that Raffles' _role_ of entertainer
was finished; for his stolen pleasures had lost a considerable part of
their original sweetness, and their cost _was_ heavy. It would be
quite a change, too, to get back to Grim and the others, and be the
ordinary common sort of fellow again.

Raffles went and wound up the throwing apparatus, and set the clay pigeon
on the rest. Jack took his breech-loader, raised it to the shoulder, and
said, "Ready!" Raffles pulled the string, the dummy bird rocketed up, and
Jack pressed the trigger.

For one second afterwards Jack did not rightly know what had happened.
There was a blinding flash before his eyes, a something tore off his cap,
and something stung his cheeks like spirts of scalding water. His left
hand felt numb and dead. This all happened in the fraction of a moment.

Jack looked at the gun in stupid wonder. The breech was clean blown out!
With a groan of horror, he dropped the gun. He realized that he had
escaped death by a miracle. He put up his right hand to his face, which
felt on fire, and stared blankly at Raffles.

That worthy was scared out of his wits; but when he saw Jack was more or
less alive, he managed to jerk out--

"That was a squeak, young shaver! Hurt any?"

"Don't know," said Jack, blankly.

Raffles anxiously examined him, and it was with no end of relief he
said--

"Clean bill, sir--bar those flecks of powder on your cheek.
Considering--well you're--we're--lucky."

"Rather," said Jack, dizzily. "That's my cap isn't it?"

Yards away was Jack's cap, and Raffles brought it. His face was
white--white above a bit. There was a clean cut through the brim, and a
neat, straightforward tear-out of an inch or so of the front just above
the crest.

"Well," said Raffles, looking narrowly at that business-like damage. "All
I can say is you're lucky."

"Lucky! Yes," said Jack. "I suppose I'd better go. Let's have the thing.
An inch lower down, and I'd have had that piece of barrel in my head--or
through it. It wants thinking over."

"I suppose, sir, you're going to----"

"Oh, the cash you mean! Eh?"

"Yes, that was my meaning."

"Your cash will be all right, man. Come down for it on Friday--can't
you?"

"How if I can't, young shaver?" said Raffles of Rotherhithe.

"Then do without it! Anyhow, I'm going now--I'm too sick."

"All right," said Raffles, sulkily. "On Thursday."

Jack, without another word, stumbled across the fields into the farmyard,
and luckily found Acton ready for home. He shakily dropped into his
saddle; and, with a mind pretty busy, he tailed wearily after Acton to
St. Amory's.




CHAPTER XIV

IN THE STABLE


After tea that day Acton went down to the farm _solus_, not having,
as you will presently see, any need of Jack's company, even if Bourne had
felt any desire to accompany him, which he didn't.

The monitor tinkled his bell, and in answer to the ringing, Raffles
lounged out of a barn, the inseparable Warmint trotting at his master's
heels.

"Suppose we'd better go into the stable, Raffles."

The odour of the Coon's afternoon cigar still hung about the place, and
the stable was half dark, but as Acton had an idea that his conversation
with Raffles would not be a short one, and the night was rather cold,
they went in.

"Fire away, Raffles. Start at the beginning."

"Very good, sir," said Raffles, seating himself on the corn-chest.
"Agreeable to instructions received from Mr. Acting----"

"Acton," suggested that gentleman.

"Acting--I said so, didn't I? Very well! Agreeable to instructions
received from you, sir, I prepared----"
