go to-day. I heard the miller tell Will Davis that the water was too low.

4. S. You don't say so! That is bad, indeed; for in that case I shall be
obliged to gallop off to town for the meal. My wife would comb my head for
me if I should neglect it.

5. D. I can save you this journey, for I have plenty of meal at home, and
will lend your wife as much as she wants.

6. S. Ah! neighbor Derby, I am sure your meal would never suit my wife.
You can't conceive how whimsical she is.

7. D. If she were ten times more whimsical than she is, I
am certain she would like it; for you sold it to me yourself,
and you assured me it was the best you ever had.

8. S. Yes, yes! that's true, indeed; I always have the best of
everything. You know, neighbor Derby, that no one is more
ready to oblige a friend than I am; but I must tell you the
mare this morning refused to eat hay; and, truly, I am afraid
she will not carry you.

9. D. Oh, never fear! I will feed her well with oats on the road.

10.  S. Oats! neighbor; oats are very dear.

11. D. Never mind that. When I have a good job in view, I never stand for
trifles.

12. S. But it is very slippery; and I am really afraid she will fall and
break your neck.

13. D. Give yourself no uneasiness about that. The mare is certainly
sure-footed; and, besides, you were just now talking of galloping her to
town.

14. S. Well, then, to tell you the plain truth, though I wish to oblige
you with all my heart, my saddle is torn quite in pieces, and I have just
sent my bridle to be mended.

15. D. Luckily, I have both a bridle and a saddle hanging up at home.

16. S. Ah! that may be; but I am sure your saddle will never fit my mare.
She's very notional.

17. D. Why, then I'll borrow neighbor Clodpole's.

18. S. Clodpole's! his will no more fit than yours.

19. D. At the worst, then, I will go to my good friend, Squire Jones. He
has half a score of them; and I am sure he will lend me one that will fit
her.

20. S. You know, friend Derby, that no one is more willing to oblige his
neighbors than I am. I do assure you the beast should be at your service,
with all my heart; but she has not been curried, I believe, for three
weeks past. Her foretop and mane want combing and cutting very much. If
anyone should see her in her present plight, it would ruin the sale of
her.

21. D. Oh, a horse is soon curried, and my son Sam shall attend to it at
once.

22. S. Yes, very likely; but I this moment recollect the creature has no
shoes on.

23. D. Well, is there not a blacksmith hard by?

24. S. What, that tinker, Dobson? I would not trust such a bungler to
shoe a goat. No, no; none but uncle Tom Thumper shall shoe my mare.

25. D. As good luck will have it, then, I shall pass right by his door.

26. S. [Calling to his son.] Tim, Tim! here's neighbor Derby, who wants
the loan of the gray mare, to ride to town to-day. You know the skin was
rubbed off her back, last week, a hand's breadth or more. [Gives Tim a
wink.] However, I believe she is well enough by this time. You know, Tim,
how ready I am to oblige my neighbors; indeed, we ought to do all the good
we can in this world. We must certainly let neighbor Derby have her if she
will possibly answer his purpose. Yes, yes; I see plainly by Tim's
countenance, neighbor Derby, that he's disposed to oblige you. I would not
have refused you the mare for the worth of her. If I had, I should have
expected you to refuse me in turn. None of my neighbors can accuse me of
being backward in doing them a kindness whenever it is possible. Come,
Tim, what do you say?

27. Tim. What do I say, father? Why, sir, I say that I am no less ready
than you are to do a neighborly kindness. But the mare is by no means
capable of performing the journey. About a hand's breadth, did you say?
Why, sir, the skin is torn from the poor creature's back the bigness of
your broad-brimmed hat! And, besides, I have promised her, so soon as she
is able to travel, to Ned Saunders, to carry a load of apples to market.

28. S. Do you hear that, neighbor? I am very sorry matters are thus. I
would not have disobliged you for the price of two such mares. Believe me,
neighbor Derby, I am really sorry, for your sake, that matters turn out
thus.

29. D. And I as much for yours, neighbor Scrapewell; for to tell you the
truth I received a letter this morning from Mr. Griffin, who tells me if I
will be in town to-day he will give me the refusal of all that lot of
timber, which he is about cutting down, on the side of the hill; and I had
intended you should have shared half of it, which would have been not less
than fitly dollars in your pocket. But, as your--

30.  S. Fifty dollars, did you say?

31. D. Ay, truly, did I; but as your mare is out of order, I'll go and see
if I can get old Roan, the blacksmith's horse.

32. S. Old Roan! My mare is at your service, neighbor, Here, Tim, tell Ned
Saunders he can't have the mare: neighbor Derby wants her; and I won't
refuse so good a friend anything he asks for.

33. D. But what are you to do for meal?

34. S. My wife can do without it for a week if you want the mare so long.

35. D. But, then, your saddle is all in pieces.

36. S. I meant the old one. I have bought a new one since, and you shall
have the first use of it.

37. D. And shall I call at Thumper's and get the mare shod?

38. S. No, no; I had forgotten to tell you that I let neighbor Dobson shoe
her, last week, by way of trial; and, to do him justice, he shoes
extremely well.

39. D. But, if the poor creature has lost so much skin from off her back--

40. S. Poh, poh! That is just one of Tim's large stories. I do assure you
it was not, at first, bigger than my thumb nail, and I am certain it has
not grown any since.

41. D. At least, however, let her have something she will eat, since she
refuses hay.

42. S. She did, indeed, refuse hay this morning; but the only reason was
that she was crammed full of oats. You have nothing to fear, neighbor; the
mare is in perfect trim; and she will skim you over the ground like a
bird. I wish you a good journey and a profitable job.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Ex-treme'ly, very much. 6. Whim'si-cal, full of whims.
20. Cur'ried, cleaned. Fore'top, hair on the forepart of the head. 24.
Bun'gler, a clumsy workman. 26. Dis-posed', inclined to, Back'ward, slow,
unwilling. 27. Ca'pa-ble, possessing ability. Per-form'ing, accomplishing.
29. Re-fus'al, choice of tak-ing. 42. Crammed, stuffed.



XXXIII. THE NOBLEST REVENGE. (94)

1. "I will have revenge on him, that I will, and make him heartily repent
it," said Philip to himself, with a countenance quite red with anger. His
mind was so engaged that he did not see Stephen, who happened at that
instant to meet him.

2. "Who is that," said Stephen, "on whom you intend to be revenged?"
Philip, as if awakened from a dream, stopped short, and looking at his
friend, soon resumed a smile that was natural to his countenance. "Ah,"
said he, "you remember my bamboo, a very pretty cane which was given me by
my father, do you not? Look! there it is in pieces. It was farmer
Robinson's son who reduced it to this worthless state."

3. Stephen very coolly asked him what had induced young Robinson to break
it. "I was walking peaceably along," replied he, "and was playing with my
cane by twisting it round my body. By accident, one of the ends slipped
out of my hand, when I was opposite the gate, just by the wooden bridge,
where the ill natured fellow had put down a pitcher of water, which he was
taking home from the well."

4. "It so happened that my cane, in springing back, upset the pitcher, but
did not break it. He came up close to me, and began to call me names, when
I assured him that what I had done had happened by accident, and that I
was sorry for it. Without regarding what I said, he instantly seized my
cane, and twisted it, as you see; but I will make him repent of it."

5. "To be sure," said Stephen, "he is a very wicked boy, and is already
very properly punished for being such, since nobody likes him or will have
anything to do with him. He can scarcely find a companion to play with
him; and is often at a loss for amusement, as he deserves to be. This,
properly considered, I think will appear sufficient revenge for you."

6. "All this is true," replied Philip, "but he has broken my cane. It was
a present from my father, and a very pretty cane it was. I offered to fill
his pitcher for him again, as I knocked it down by accident. I will be
revenged."

7. "Now, Philip;" said Stephen, "I think you will act better in not
minding him, as your contempt will be the best punishment you can inflict
upon him. Be assured, he will always be able to do more mischief to you
than you choose to do to him. And, now I think of it, I will tell you what
happened to him not long since."

8. "Very unluckily for him, he chanced to see a bee hovering about a
flower which he caught, and was going to pull off its wings out of sport,
when the animal stung him, and flew away in safety to the hive. The pain
put him into a furious passion, and, like you, he vowed revenge. He
accordingly procured a stick, and thrust it into the beehive."

9. "In an instant the whole swarm flew out, and alighting upon him stung
him in a hundred different places. He uttered the most piercing cries, and
rolled upon the ground in the excess of his agony. His father immediately
ran to him, but could not put the bees to flight until they had stung him
so severely that he was confined several days to his bed."

l0. "Thus, you see, he was not very successful in his pursuit of revenge.
I would advise you, therefore, to pass over his insult. He is a wicked
boy, and much stronger than you; so that your ability to obtain this
revenge may be doubtful."

11. "I must own," replied Philip, "that your advice seems very good. So
come along with me, and I will tell my father the whole matter, and I
think he will not be angry with me." They went, and Philip told his father
what had happened. He thanked Stephen for the good advice he had given his
son, and promised Philip to give him another cane exactly like the first.

12. A few days afterward, Philip saw this ill-natured boy fall as he was
carrying home a heavy log of wood, which he could not lift up again.
Philip ran to him, and helped him to replace it on his shoulder. Young
Robinson was quite ashamed at the thought of this unmerited kindness, and
heartily repented of his behavior. Philip went home quite satisfied.
"This," said he, "is the noblest vengeance I could take, in returning good
for evil. It is impossible I should repent of it."


DEFINITIONS.--l. Re-venge', return for an injury.  Re-pent', to feel sorry
for. Coun'te-nance, the face. 2. Re-sumed', took again. 3. In-duced',
caused. 4. As-sured, declared positively. Re-gard'ing, noticing. 5.
Con-sid'ered, thought of care'fully. 7. Con-tempt', disdain, scorn.
In-flict', to impose, to put on. 8. Hov'er-ing, hanging over or about. 9.
Ag'o-ny, very great pain. 10. A-bil'i-ty, power.


EXERCISES.--What is revenge? Is it right to take revenge on those who
injure us? How should we treat such persons?



XXXIV. EVENING HYMN. (97)

1. Come to the sunset tree,
     The day is past and gone;
   The woodman's ax lies free,
     And the reaper's work is done;
   The twilight star to heaven,
     And the summer dew to flowers,
   And rest to us is given,
     By the soft evening hours.

2. Sweet is the hour of rest,
     Pleasant the woods' low sigh,
   And the gleaming of the west,
     And the turf whereon we lie,
   When the burden and the heat
     Of the laborer's task is o'er,
   And kindly voices greet
     The tired one at the door.

3. Yes, tuneful is the sound
     That dwells in whispering boughs:
   Welcome the freshness round,
     And the gale that fans our brows;
   But rest more sweet and still
     Than ever the nightfall gave,
   Our yearning hearts shall fill,
     In the world beyond the grave.

4. There, shall no tempests blow,
     Nor scorching noontide heat;
   There, shall be no more snow,
     No weary, wandering feet;
   So we lift our trusting eyes
     From the hills our fathers trod,
   To the quiet of the skies,
     To the Sabbath of our God.



XXXV. HOW MARGERY WONDERED. (99)
By Lucy Larcom.

1. One bright morning late in March, little Margery put on her hood and
her Highland plaid shawl, and went trudging across the beach. It was the
first time she had been trusted out alone, for Margery was a little girl;
nothing about her was large, except her round gray eyes, which had yet
scarcely opened upon half a dozen springs and summers.

2. There was a pale mist on the far-off sea and sky, and up around the sun
were white clouds edged with the hues of pinks and violets. The sunshine
and the mild air made Margery's very heart feel warm, and she let the soft
wind blow aside her Highland shawl, as she looked across the waters at the
sun, and wondered! For, somehow, the sun had never looked before as it did
to-day;--it seemed like a great golden flower bursting out of its
pearl-lined calyx,--a flower without a stem. Or was there a strong stem
away behind it in the sky, that reached down below the sea, to a root,
nobody could guess where?

3. Margery did not stop to puzzle herself about the answer to her
question, for now the tide, was coming in, and the waves, little at first,
but growing larger every moment, were crowding up along the sand and
pebbles, laughing, winking, and whispering, as they tumbled over each
other, like thousands of children hurrying home from somewhere, each with
its own precious little secret to tell.

4. Where did the waves come from? Who was down there under the blue wall
of the horizon, with the hoarse, hollow voice, urging and pushing them
across the beach at her feet? And what secret was it they were lisping to
each other with their pleasant voices? Oh, what was there beneath the sea,
and beyond the sea, so deep, so broad, and so dim, too, away off where the
white ships, that looked smaller than sea birds, were gliding out and in?

5. But while Margery stood still for a moment on a dry rock, and wondered,
there came a low, rippling warble to her ear from a cedar tree on the
cliff above her. It had been a long winter, and Margery had forgotten that
there were birds, and that birds could sing. So she wondered again what
the music was.

6. And when she saw the bird perched on a yellow-brown bough, she wondered
yet more. It was only a bluebird, but then it was the first bluebird
Margery had ever seen. He fluttered among the prickly twigs, and looked as
if he had grown out of them, as the cedar berries had, which were dusty
blue, the color of his coat. But how did the music get in his throat? And
after it was in his throat, how could it untangle itself, and wind itself
off so evenly? And where had the bluebird flown from, across the snow
banks down to the shore of the blue sea?

7. The waves sang a welcome to him, and he sang a welcome to the waves;
they seemed to know each other well; and the ripple and the warble sounded
so much alike, the bird and the wave must have both learned their music of
the same teacher. And Margery kept on wondering as she stepped between the
song of the bluebird and the echo of the sea, and climbed a sloping bank,
just turning faintly green in the spring sunshine.

8. The grass was surely beginning to grow! There were fresh, juicy shoots
running up among the withered blades of last year, as if in hopes of
bringing them back to life; and closer down she saw the sharp points of
new spears peeping from their sheaths. And scattered here and there were
small, dark green leaves folded around buds shut up so tightly that only
those who had watched them many seasons could tell what flowers were to be
let out of their safe prisons by and by. So no one could blame Margery for
not knowing that they were only common things, nor for stooping over the
tiny buds, and wondering.

9. What made the grass come up so green out of the black earth? And how
did the buds know when it was time to take off their little green hoods,
and see what there was in the world around them? And how came they to be
buds at all? Did they bloom in another world before they sprung up
here?--and did they know, themselves, what kind of flowers they should
blossom into? Had flowers souls, like little girls, that would live in
another world when their forms had faded away in this?

10. Margery thought she would like to sit down on the bank, and wait
beside the buds until they opened; perhaps they would tell her their
secret if the very first thing they saw was her eyes watching them. One
bud was beginning to unfold; it was streaked with yellow in little stripes
that she could imagine became wider every minute. But she would not touch
it, for it seemed almost as much alive as herself. She only wondered, and
wondered!

11. Margery heard her mother calling her, and she trudged home across the
shells and pebbles with a pleasant smile dimpling her cheeks; for she felt
very much at home in this large, wonderful world, and was happy to be
alive, although she neither could have told, nor cared to know, the reason
why. But when her mother unpinned the little girl's Highland shawl, and
took off her hood, she said, "O mother, do let me live on the doorstep! I
don't like houses to stay in. What makes everything so pretty and so glad?
Don't you like to wonder?"

12. Margery's mother was a good woman. But then there was all the
housework to do, and, if she had thoughts, she did not often let them
wander outside of the kitchen door. And just now she was baking some
gingerbread, which was in danger of getting burned in the oven. So she
pinned the shawl around the child's neck again, and left her on the
doorstep, saying to herself, as she returned to her work, "Queer child! I
wonder what kind of a woman she will be!"

13. But Margery sat on the doorstep, and wondered, as the sea sounded
louder, and the sunshine grew warmer around her. It was all so strange,
and grand, and beautiful! Her heart danced with joy to the music that went
echoing through the wide world from the roots of the sprouting grass to
the great golden blossom of the sun.

14. And when the round, gray eyes closed that night, at the first peep of
the stars, the angels looked down and wondered over Margery. For the
wisdom of the wisest being God has made, ends in wonder; and there is
nothing on earth so wonderful as the budding soul of a little child.


DEFINITIONS.-l. Trudg'ing, walking sturdily. 2. Hues, colors. Ca'lyx, the
outer covering of a flower. 4. Ho-ri'zon, the line where the sky and earth
seem to meet. 5. War'ble, a trill of the voice. Spears, shoots of grass.
Sheaths, coverings.


EXERCISES.--Name the things about which Margery
wondered. What did she wonder about each? What is still
more wonderful than all that at which Margery wondered?



XXXVI. THE CHILD'S WORLD. (103)

1. "Great, wide, beautiful, wonderful world,
   With the wonderful water round you curled,
   And the wonderful grass upon your breast,--
   World, you are beautifully drest."

2. "The wonderful air is over me,
   And the wonderful wind is shaking the tree;
   It walks on the water, and whirls the mills,
   And talks to itself on the tops of the hills."

3. "You friendly Earth! how far do you go
   With the wheat fields that nod, and the rivers that flow;
   With cities and gardens, and cliffs and isles,
   And people upon you for thousands of miles?"

4. "Ah, you are so great, and I am so small,
   I tremble to think of you, World, at all:
   And yet, when I said my prayers, to-day,
   A whisper inside me seemed to say,
   You are more than the Earth, though you are such a dot:
   You can love and think, and the Earth can not!'"



XXXVII. SUSIE'S COMPOSITION. (104)
