"Thank you, but I don't think I care for it," replied Conrad, coldly.

He felt a pang of mortification to think that the farmer's son should
have a boat so much superior to his own.

"If you change your mind, let me know," said Andy.

"Conrad is jealous," remarked Walter Gale. "He doesn't like to have you
own a boat that is superior to his."

"I think you are right, Mr. Gale. If the case were reversed I would not
mind."

"Because you are not disposed to be envious or jealous."

When Conrad returned home there was a cloud upon his brow. It was easy
for any one to see that he was in bad humor.

"What is the matter, Conrad?" asked his father. "You look as if you had
lost your best friend."

"I hate Andy Grant," exploded Conrad, his eyes flashing with anger.

"Why, what has Andy done now? You haven't had a fight, have you?"

"No; I wouldn't demean myself by fighting with him."

"What is it, then?"

"He is always doing something to annoy me."

"I am still in the dark."

"He has got a new boat, far handsomer than mine. I shouldn't wonder if
it cost twice as much."

Squire Conrad was surprised.

"Where did he get it?" he inquired.

"It was a present from Mr. Gale, the young man at the hotel."

"He must like young Grant very much?"

"It is ridiculous that a poor boy should own such a boat."

"I don't see how we can help it," said the squire, philosophically.

He did not take the superiority of Andy's boat so much to heart as his
son.

"I'll tell you how you can make it right, father."

"How?"

"By buying me a boat as good or better than the new one."

"Why should I buy you another boat? The one you have is only six months
old, and it cost me a pretty penny, I assure you."

"That may be, but I shall not feel any more satisfaction in it, now that
Andy has a better one."

"All this is foolish, my son."

"Then you won't buy me a new boat?"

"Most certainly I won't," said the squire, firmly.

Conrad's countenance fell, but another idea came to him.

"Suppose Andy is willing to exchange with me for something to boot?"

"You say the boat is a fine one?"

"Elegant."

"You may offer him ten dollars."

"Won't you say fifteen, father? I assure you it is worth much more than
that difference."

"You can offer him ten dollars, and see what he has to say to it."

Conrad managed to see Andy the next day, and made him the offer.

"Do you think I would part with Mr. Gale's gift?" said Andy,
indignantly.

"He wouldn't care; and ten dollars is a good deal of money," said
Conrad, insinuatingly.

"If you offered me fifty dollars I would say the same. I am not
particularly in want of money."

"I suppose you say that because you are earning three dollars a week."

"Who told you how much Mr. Gale paid me?" asked Andy, smiling.

"Then he does get three dollars a week," reflected Conrad.

He redoubled his entreaties, but Andy refused firmly.

Half an hour later Conrad met on the street a shabby figure with whom we
are already acquainted. It was the tramp who figured in an encounter
with Andy when on his way to Benton.

"Young gentleman," said the tramp, with a whine, "you look rich and
generous. Can't you spare a poor man a trifle?"

"You look as if you drank," replied Conrad, with brutal frankness. "Your
nose is red."

"That's owing to a skin disease. I have belonged to the Temperance
Society for five years."

"Humph! you don't look like it. Why don't you work?"

"Because I can find nothing to do."

Here a contemptible suggestion offered itself to Conrad.

"If you will do something for me, and keep mum, I'll give you two
dollars."

"I'll do it if it isn't too hard."

"Then I'll tell you what it is. There's a boat on the pond that belongs
to an enemy of mine. He is always crowing over me. Now, if you'll manage
this evening to set it on fire, I'll give you two dollars."

"How shall I set it on fire? With a match?"

"No; I'll supply you with some shavings, a few pieces of board, and some
pitch. There won't be any trouble about it."

"Who owns the boat?"

Conrad described Andy.

"That's the boy who--but never mind! I'll do it."

Once convinced that in this way he could get revenge on the boy who had
humiliated and got the best of him, the tramp was only too willing to
help Conrad in his scheme.

When Conrad went home at nine o'clock, after supplying the tramp with
combustibles, he said to himself:

"There won't be much left of Andy's boat in the morning."




CHAPTER X.

THE TRAMP'S MISTAKE.


Conrad went to bed with the comfortable conviction that before morning
Andy's beautiful boat would be ruined. I am sorry to say that the
meanness of the act which he had instigated did not strike him.

Whatever feeling he had was of exultation at the injury done to his
enemy, as he persisted in regarding Andy.

It did seem a pity that such an elegant boat should be destroyed. If
Andy would only have agreed to exchange for ten--even fifteen--dollars
to boot, this would have been avoided.

"He was a fool not to accept," soliloquized Conrad. "He will regret it
when he sees what has happened."

He got up at the usual hour and took breakfast. Every time the bell rang
he thought it might be some one to bring him the desired news.

Just after supper Andy met his friend, Valentine, and told him of the
beautiful gift he had received.

"Come down and look at it, Val," he said. "It is elegant."

Valentine's curiosity was excited, and he at once accepted the
invitation.

He uttered an exclamation of surprise when he saw the new boat.

"It is a little beauty!" he said. "It is far ahead of Conrad's or of
mine."

"Conrad wants to exchange. He offered me ten dollars to boot."

"You wouldn't think of accepting?"

"No; it is worth much more than that. Besides, it is Mr. Gale's gift,
and even if he had offered fifty dollars I should still refuse."

"And you would do right, too. But are you going to leave it out all
night?"

"I shall have to. I have no boathouse to put it in."

"There is room in my boathouse for two boats," said Valentine. "I will
help you put it inside."

"Thank you, Val. I will be glad to pay you rent for the use of the
place."

"I don't want any money, Andy; I will do it out of friendship."

"Thank you; but you mustn't forget that I am quite able to pay."

"That's true, and I am glad of it; but, all the same, I don't want any
money."

"I wonder Conrad doesn't have a boathouse."

"He tells me his father has promised him one. He has not yet decided
upon a location."

The two boys got into Andy's boat and rowed it a few rods till they
reached the boathouse. There was no difficulty in putting it away. The
boathouse was double, and there was room for two boats.

"I will have another key made, Andy, so that you can get at your boat
when I am not with you."

"All right! That will be very nice."

"How do you like Mr. Gale?"

"Tiptop. I was very fortunate to fall in with him. It will be a great
loss to me when he goes away."

"Is he thinking of going soon?"

"I don't think so--I hope not."

It was later in the evening when the tramp went down to the pond,
provided with the shavings and other combustibles which Conrad had
provided.

Conrad, after meeting him, had gone home at once. He thought it more
prudent, in view of the plot in which he was engaged, to avoid suspicion
by not being seen in company with the tramp.

"Give me the two dollars now," said the tramp, when the fuel was handed
him.

"Do you think I am a fool?" answered Conrad, sharply. "If I should do
that, you would go off and not do the work."

"I'll do the work fast enough. I want to get even with that young
rascal."

"What! Do you know him?"

"I have met him," answered the tramp, evasively. "He played me a mean
trick, and I want to get even with him."

"What sort of a trick was it?"

"I will tell you some other time--I haven't time now. I wish I had a
hatchet."

"What for?"

"Then, if the fire didn't spoil the boat, I'd hack it up."

"I think I can get you a hatchet, but you must not leave it on the bank,
for my father's initial, 'C,' is on it."

"All right. I'll be careful."

The hatchet was delivered to the tramp a little later.

About eight o'clock the tramp went down to the lake and looked for
Andy's boat.

There was but one in sight--Conrad's--but he never doubted that this was
the one he was to destroy. He waited till half-past eight, when he
considered it dark enough for his purpose.

He carefully laid the shavings in one end of the boat, covered them over
with pieces of board, which, with the help of the hatchet, he split into
smaller pieces, and then set them on fire.

The flames blazed fiercely and did considerable damage to the boat, not
ruining it, however. But to finish the work he used the hatchet, and
hacked vigorously at the woodwork till it was mutilated and its
usefulness and beauty spoiled.

The tramp contemplated this work with satisfaction.

"I've done the job pretty well," he chuckled to himself. "I'd like to be
lookin' on when the boy sees it."

Now that he had done the job he wanted his pay. Conrad had agreed to
meet him at an old ruined barn not far from his house at eight o'clock
in the morning.

"It won't do to call for me earlier," he said, "for it might excite
suspicion."

From the breakfast table Conrad directed his steps to the barn.

The tramp was sitting outside, smoking a pipe.

"I've been waiting for you," he said. "I haven't had any breakfast."
