they'll watch the door closest. Be careful where you put your feet."

But the very dampness prevented any rustle in the weeds and grass, and
they passed to the other side of the cabin without an alarm coming from
the forest. There they paused again, and once more Henry whispered his
instructions.

"I think we'd better get down and crawl," he said. "It's a hard thing to
do with two rifles each, but we must do it until we get to the woods."

It was difficult, as Henry had said, and Paul felt, too, a sense of
humiliation; but then one's life was at stake, and without hesitation he
dropped to his knees, crawling slowly after the dark figure of his
comrade. Henry made no sound and Paul but a little, not enough to be heard
ten feet away. Henry stopped now and then, as if he would listen intently
a moment or two, and Paul, of course, stopped just behind him. Fortune
seemed to favor their daring. The great silence lasted, broken only by
puffs of wind and rain, and the wet leaves of the forest rubbing softly
against each other. Paul looked back once. The cabin was already melting
into a blur, although not twenty yards distant, and in as many yards more
it would be lost completely in the surrounding darkness.

Now the forest was only a few yards away, but to Paul it seemed very far.
His knees and wrists began to ache, and the two rifles became awkward for
him to carry. He wondered how Henry could go forward with so much ease,
but he resolved to persist as long as his comrade led the way.

The dark outline of the wood slowly came nearer, then nearer yet, and then
they entered it, pressing silently among the hushes and the black shadows
of the lofty trees. Here Henry rose to his feet and Paul imitated him,
thankful to rest his aching knees and wrists, and to stand up in the form
and spirit of a man.

"We may slip through unseen and unheard," whispered Henry, "and then again
we may not. Come on; we'll need all our caution now."

But as they took the first step erect, a cry arose behind them, a cry so
full of ferocity and chagrin that Paul absolutely shuddered from head to
foot. It came from the clearing, near the hut, and Paul, without the
telling of it, knew what had happened.

"They've tried the door of the cabin, only to find it open and the place
empty," whispered Henry. "Now, we must not go too fast, Paul. In this
pitchy darkness not even a Shawnee could see us ten feet away, but he
could hear us. No noise, Paul!"

They stole forward, one close behind the other, going but slowly, seeking
with sedulous care to avoid any noise that would bring the savages upon
them. The rain, which had grown steadier, was a Godsend. It and the wind
together kept up a low, moaning sound that hid the faint pressure of
Paul's footsteps. The cry behind them at the cabin was repeated once,
echoing away through the black and dripping forest. After that Paul heard
nothing, but to the keener ears of Henry came now and then the soft,
sliding sound of rapid footsteps, a word or two uttered low, and the faint
swish of bushes, swinging back into place after a body passed. He knew
that the warriors were now seeking eagerly for them, but with the aid of
the intense darkness he hoped that he and Paul would steal safely through
their lines. They went slowly forward for perhaps half an hour, stopping
often and listening. Once Henry's hand on Paul's shoulder, they sank a
little lower in the bushes, and Henry, but not Paul, saw the shadowy
outline of a figure passing near.

Fortunately the forest was very dense, but unfortunately the clouds began
to thicken, and a rumble dull and low came from the far horizon. Then the
clouds parted, cut squarely down the middle by a flash of lightning, and
for a moment a dazzling glow of light played over the dripping forest.
Everything was revealed by it, every twig and leaf stood out in startling
distinctness, and Paul, by impulse, sank lower to hide himself among the
bushes.

The glow vanished and Henry had seen nothing; he was sure, too, that no
one had seen them, but he knew that it was only luck; another flash might
reveal them, and he and Paul must now hasten, taking the chances of
discovery by noise. He spoke a word to his comrade, and they plunged more
rapidly through the undergrowth. The thunder kept up an unceasing and
threatening murmur on the far horizon, and the lightning flared fitfully
now and then, but they were still unseen, and Henry hoped that they had
now passed the ring of savages in the forest and the dusk.

Paul had dropped back from Henry's side, but was following closely behind
him. He was deeply impressed by a situation so extraordinary for one of
his type. The thunder, the lightning, the darkness and the danger
contained for him all the elements of awe and mystery.

"I think we've shaken them off," said Henry presently, "and unless the
lightning shows us to some stray member of the band they can't pick up our
trail again before morning."

Paul was grateful for the assurance, and he noticed, too, that the danger
of the lightning's revelation was decreasing, as the flashes were becoming
less frequent and vivid. His breathing now grew easier and his spirits
rose. Much of the gloom departed from the forest. The thunder that had
kept up a continuous low rolling, like a dirge, died away, and the
lightning, after a few more weak and ineffectual flashes, ceased.

"We won't have any further trouble to-night, that's sure," said Henry.
"They could not possibly find our trail before day, and I think we'd
better push on, as nearly as we can, in the direction of our hidden
powder. You know we still mean to do what we started out to do."

They traveled all night, with brief periods of rest, through rough and
densely wooded country. Toward morning the rain ceased, and the clouds all
floated away. The stars came out in a clear sky, and a warm wind blew over
the wet forest. Henry looked more than once at Paul, and his look was
always full of sympathy. Paul's face was pale, but his expression was set
in firm resolve, and Henry knew that he would never yield.

After a while the dark began to lighten, and Henry stopped short in
surprise. Paul was walking in such automatic fashion that he almost ran
against him before he stopped. Henry pointed with a long forefinger to a
red spot deep in the forest.

"See that?" he said.

"Yes, I guess it's the sun rising," said Paul, who was staggering a
little, and who saw through a cloud, as it were.

Henry looked at him and laughed.

"The sun!" he said. "Well, Paul, it's the first time I ever knew the sun
to rise in the west."

"The sun's likely to do anything out here where we are," rejoined Paul.

"That's a fire, a camp fire, Paul," said Henry, "and I'm thinking it must
be made by white men."

"White men! Friends!" exclaimed Paul. He stood up straight, and his eyes
grew brighter. An hour or two ago it had scarcely seemed possible to him
that they should ever see white faces again.

"It's only my belief," said Henry. "We've got to make sure. Now, you wait
here, Paul, and I'll do a little bit of scouting. Sit down among those
bushes there and I'll be back soon."

Paul was fully content to do what Henry said. He found a good place in a
thick clump of underbrush, and sank down easily. He would have been quite
willing to lie down, because he was terribly tired and sleepy, but with an
effort he held himself to a sitting posture and watched Henry. He was
conscious of a vague admiration as the tall form of his comrade went
forward swiftly, making no noise and hiding itself so quickly in the
forest that he could not tell where it had gone.

Then Paul was conscious of a great peace, and a heavy tugging at his
eyelids. Never in his life before was he so tired and sleepy. The last
raindrop was gone, and the bushes and grass were drying in the gentle
wind. A fine golden sun was bringing with it a silver dawn, and a pleasant
warmth stole all through him. His head sank back a little more and his
elbow found a soft place in the turf.

The boy, with his half-closed eyes and pale face, was not alone as he lay
there among the bushes. Little neighbors came and looked at the newcomer.
A hare gazed solemnly at him for a moment or two, and then hopped solemnly
away. A bluebird flew down to the very tip of a bough, surveyed him at
leisure, and then flew off in search of food. Neither hare nor bird was
scared. Tiny creeping things scuttled through the grass, but the boy did
not move, and they scuttled on undisturbed.

Paul was just sinking away into a pleasant unknown land when a shout
brought him back to earth. He sprang to his feet, and there was Henry
returning through the forest.

"Friends, Paul! Old friends!" he cried. "Up with you and we'll pay 'em a
surprise visit!"

Paul shook his head to clear his thoughts, and followed Henry. Henry
walked swiftly now, not seeming to care whether or not he made noise, and
Paul followed him toward the fire, which now rapidly grew larger.




CHAPTER VI

THE BATTLE ON THE HILL


Six men were sitting around a camp fire, and they showed every sign of
comfort and cheerfulness. It was a big fire, a glowing fire, a warm fire,
and it took all trace of damp from the rain or cold of the autumn morning.
They were just having breakfast, and their food was buffalo hump, very
tender as it came from beneath a huge bed of red-hot embers.

The men seemed to have no fear of an enemy, perhaps because their fire was
in an open space, too far from the forest for the rifle shot of an
ambushed foe to reach them. Perhaps, too, they felt security in their
numbers and valor, because they were certainly a formidable-looking party.
All were stalwart, dressed in wilderness fashion--that is, in tanned
deerskin--and every one carried the long, slender-barreled Kentucky rifle,
with knife and hatchet at his belt. There was Tom Ross, the guide, of
middle years, with a powerful figure and stern, quiet face, and near him
lounged a younger man in an attitude of the most luxurious and indolent
ease, Shif'less Sol Hyde, who had attained a great reputation for laziness
by incessantly claiming it for himself, but who was nevertheless a hunter
and scout of extraordinary skill. Jim Hart, a man of singular height and
thinness, whom Sol disrespectfully called the "Saplin'"--that is, the
sapling, a slim young tree--was doing the cooking. The others were typical
frontiersmen--lean, big of build, and strong.

The shiftless one curled himself into an easier position against a log,
and regarded with interest a particularly juicy piece of the buffalo hump
that lay on the grass some distance from him.

"Say, Saplin'," he drawled, "I wish you'd bring me that piece o' hump. I
think it would just suit my teeth."

"Git it yourself," replied Saplin' indignantly. "Do you think I'm goin' to
cook for a lazy bag o' bones like you, an' then wait on you, too?"

"Well, I think you might," said Shif'less Sol sorrowfully. "I'm pow'ful
tired."

"If I wuz to wait on you when you wuz tired, I'd wait on you all my life."

"Which 'ud he puttin' yourself to a mighty good use," said Sol tolerantly.
"But if you won't bring it to me, I reckon I'll have to go after it."

He rose, with every appearance of reluctance, and secured the buffalo
meat. But he stood with it in his hand and regarded the forest to the
east, from which two figures were coming. Ross had already seen them, but
he had said nothing. The keen eyes of the shiftless one were not at fault
for a moment.

"Paul Cotter an' Henry Ware," he said.

"Yes," said Tom Ross.

"And Paul's just about done up."

"Yes," said Tom Ross.

"Looks like they've had a big fight or a big run, one or t'other or both."

"Yes," said Tom Ross.

Then all went forward to meet the two boys, so well known to them. Paul
was staggering a little, and there was a high color, as of fever, in his
face, but Henry showed signs of neither fatigue nor excitement.

"We're glad to find you," said Henry briefly.

"We're glad, awful glad!" began Paul, with more fervor; but he suddenly
reeled, and everything grew dim about him. Shif'less Sol caught him.

"Here, Paul," he said, "stand up. You're a heavy weight for a tired man to
hold."

His words were rough, but his tone was kindly. Paul, all his pride
aroused, made a great effort and stood straight again. Slowly the world
about him swam back, into its proper position.

"Who said I wasn't standing up?" he asked.

"Nobody," replied Shif'less Sol; "but if I'd been through what I reckon
you've been through, I'd fall flop on the ground, an' Jim Hart would have
to come an' feed me or I'd starve to death right before his eyes."

Paul laughed, and then he felt more like himself. Ross, too, had been
regarding him with sympathy, but he glanced inquiringly at Henry.

"You've had it hot an' hard?" he said.

"Yes," replied the boy laconically; "we've run against Shawnees, and about
everything that could has happened to us."

"Then it's fire, warmth, meat, rest, an' sleep for Paul right away," said
Ross.

Henry nodded.

Paul was looking at the fire, which seemed to him the most glorious one
ever built, and he did not notice anything more until he was lying beside
it, stretched on a blanket, and eating the very piece of tender buffalo
meat that Shif'less Sol had coveted for himself. Despite his relaxed and
half-dreamy condition, his imagination leaped up at once to magnificent
heights. All danger and hardship were gone. He was surrounded by a ring
of dauntless friends, and the fire glowed splendidly.

Shif'less Sol sat down near him, and regarded him with the deepest
sympathy, mingled with a certain amount of envy.

"Paul," he said, "I wish I wuz in your place for an hour or two. They've
jest got to wait on you. Nobody ever believes me when I say I'm sick,
though I'm took pow'ful bad sometimes, an' they don't care whether I'm
tired or not. Now, Paul, take all the advantages o' your position. Don't
you reach your hand for a thing. Make 'em bring it to you. Ef I can't get
waited on myself, I like to see another fellow waited on. Here, Saplin',
some more o' that buffalo steak for Paul, who is mighty hungry."

Saplin' cast a look of scorn upon Shif'less Sol, but he brought the steak,
and Paul ate again, for he was voraciously hungry. But one cannot eat
always, and by and by he had enough. Then his restful, dreamy feeling
grew. He saw Henry and the men talking, but he either did not hear what
they said or he was not interested. Soon the whole world faded out, and he
slept soundly. And as he slept the touch of fever left him. Shif'less Sol
looked down at him kindly.

"I'm tired, too," he said, "but I suppose if I wuz to go to sleep some o'
you 'ud be mean enough to shove me in the side with his foot."

"I'd try to be the first," said Jim Hart, "an' I'd shove pow'ful hard."

"It 'ud be jest like you," said Shif'less Sol, "but I suppose you can't
any more help bein' mean, Jim, than I can help bein' tired."

Jim shrugged his shoulders and returned to his cooking, his tall, lean
