Above all, he had counseled them, in case they were beaten, to cherish
no hard feelings towards their rivals. Not a shadow of envy or ill-will
was to obscure the harmony of the occasion. And if they were so
fortunate as to win the race they were to wear their honors with
humility; and most especially, they were not to utter a word which could
create a hard feeling in the minds of their competitors. Whatever the
result, there was to be the same kindness in the heart, and the same
gentlemanly deportment in the manners, which had thus far characterized
the intercourse of the two clubs.

"All aboard!"

The Zephyrs were more quiet and dignified in their deportment than
usual. There was no loud talk, no jesting; even Fred Harper looked
thoughtful and serious. Each member seemed to feel the responsibility of
winning the race resting like a heavy burden upon his shoulders.

The boat was hauled out into the lake, and once more Frank cautioned
them to keep cool and obey orders.

"Don't look at the Butterfly after we get started," said he. "You must
permit me to keep watch of her. Keep both eyes on me, and think only of
having your stroke perfectly accurate, perfectly in time with the
others. Now, remember, don't look at the Butterfly; if you do, we shall
lose the race. It would distract your attention and add to your
excitement. If she gets two or three lengths ahead of us, as I think she
will on the first mile, don't mind it. Pull your best, and leave the
rest with me."

"Ay, ay!" replied several, quietly.

"Do you think we shall win, Frank?" asked Charles, who had put the same
question a dozen times before.

"We must _think_ that we shall," replied Frank, with a smile. "Here
comes the Butterfly. Now, give her three cheers. One!"

"Hurrah!"

"Two!"

"Hurrah!"

"Three!"

"Hurrah!"

This compliment was promptly returned by the Butterfly, as she came
alongside the Zephyr.

"Quarter of three, Frank," said Tony.

"Time we were moving then," replied Frank, as he ordered the oars out,
and the boats started for the spot where the Sylph, the judges' boat,
had taken position.

They pulled with a very slow stroke, and not only did the respective
crews keep the most exact time, but each timed its stroke with the
other. It was exhibition day with them, and they were not only to run
the race, but to show off their skill to the best advantage. Hundreds of
people, their fathers and their mothers, their sisters and their
brothers, were observing them from the shore, and this fact inspired
them to work with unusual care.

It was a very beautiful sight, those richly ornamented boats, their gay
colors flashing in the bright sunshine, with their neatly uniformed
crews, their silken flags floating to the breeze, and their light,
graceful oars dipping with mechanical precision in the limpid waters. As
they glided gently over the rippling waves, like phantoms, to the middle
of the lake, a long and deafening shout from the shore saluted their
ears. The white handkerchiefs of the ladies waved them a cheerful
greeting, and the Rippleton Brass Band, which had volunteered for the
occasion, struck up Hail Columbia.

"Cease--rowing!" said Frank, as he rose in his seat.

Tony followed his example, though this movement had not been laid down
in the program.

Frank then took the American flag which floated at the stern, and Tony
did the same.

"All up!" said he. "Let us give them three cheers."

"Mind the coxswain of the Zephyr," added Tony, "and let them be all
together and with a will."

"Hats off, and swing them as you cheer."

The cheers were given with all the vigor which stout lungs could impart,
and the flags waved and the hats swung.

The salute was reiterated from the shore, and above the martial strains
of the band rose the deafening hurrahs.

"Ready--pull!" and the boats resumed their slow and measured stroke, and
the band changed the tune to the Canadian Boat Song.

When they reached the judges' boat, the two coxswains drew lots for the
choice of "position," and the Butterfly obtained this advantage. The two
boats then took their places, side by side, about two rods apart, ready
to commence the race.

"Tony," said Frank, rising, "before we start I have a word to say.
Whatever may be the result of the race, for myself and my crew, I pledge
you there shall be no hard feeling among the Zephyrs."

"No, no, no!" added the club, earnestly.

"If you beat, it shall not impair our friendship; there shall be no
envy, no ill-will. Do you all say so, Zephyrs?"

"Ay, ay!"

The Butterflies clapped their hands vigorously, in token of their
approbation of the pledge, and Tony promised the same thing for his
club.

"Now we are ready," added Frank. "Keep perfectly cool, and mind all I
have said. Ready!"

Uncle Ben stood in the bow of the Sylph, with a burning slow match in
his hand, ready to discharge the cannon which was to be the signal for
starting. It was a moment of intense excitement, not only to the crews
of the boats, but to hundreds of spectators on the shore.

It was undeniably true that the Zephyrs, in spite of the warnings which
Frank had given them, were very much excited, and various were the
expedients which the boys used to calm their agitation, or at least to
conceal it. But it was also true that the Butterflies were much more
excited. Discipline and experience had not schooled them in the art of
"being mere machines," and they found it much more difficult than the
Zephyrs to subdue their troublesome emotions.

The eventful moment had come. The oarsmen were bent forward ready to
strike the first stroke, and the coxswains were leaning back ready to
time the movement. Captain Sedley was gazing intently at the dial of his
"second indicator," prepared to give Uncle Ben the word to fire.

"Ready, Ben--fire!"

Bang! went the cannon.

"Pull!" shouted Frank and Tony in the same breath.

Fortunately every oarsman in both boats hit the stroke exactly, and away
leaped the gallant barks.

As Frank had deemed it probable, the Butterfly shot a length ahead of
her rival after pulling a few strokes; but though the noise of the oars
informed his crew of their relative positions, not an eye was turned
from him, not a muscle yielded in the face of the dispiriting fact, and
not a member quickened his stroke in order to retrieve the lost ground.
Even Tim Bunker, who was supposed to have more feeling in regard to the
race than the others, maintained an admirable self-possession. However
much the hearts of the crew beat with agitation, they were outwardly as
cool as though the Butterfly had been a mile behind them.

It is true, some of the Zephyrs, as they continued to gaze at Frank's
calm and immovable features, wondered that he did not quicken the
stroke; but no one for an instant lost confidence in him. "Frank knew
what he was about." This was the sentiment that prevailed, and each
member looked out for himself, leaving all the rest to him.

The Butterflies were quickening their stroke every moment, and
consequently were continuing to increase the distance between the two
boats. Every muscle was strained to its utmost tension. Every particle
of strength was laid out, until Tony, fearful that some of the weaker
ones might "make a slip," dared require no more of them. But they were
already more than two boats' lengths ahead of their rival, and he had
everything to hope.

Still the Zephyr pulled that same steady stroke. As yet she had made no
extraordinary exertion. Her crew were still fresh and vigorous, while
those of her rival, though she was every moment gaining upon her, were
taxing their strength to the utmost.

They rounded the stake boat, which had been placed nearly opposite the
mouth of the Rippleton River, and the Butterfly was still three lengths
ahead. They had begun upon the last two miles of the race. Though the
Zephyr still pursued her former tactics, her rival was no longer able to
gain upon her. The latter had thus far done her best, and for the next
half mile the boats maintained the same relative positions.

Frank was still unmoved, and there was some inward grumbling among his
crew. An expression of deep anxiety had begun to supplant the look of
hope and confidence they had worn, and some of them were provoked to a
doubt whether Frank, in the generosity of his nature, was not intending
to let Tony bear off the honors.

"Come, Frank, let her have, now!" said Tim, who could no longer restrain
his impatience.

"Silence! Not a word!" said the self-possessed coxswain.

It was in the "order of the day" that no member should speak during the
race; and none did, except Tim, and he could easily have been pardoned
under the circumstances.

Not yet did Frank quicken the stroke of the Zephyr, though at the end of
the next half mile she was only two boats' lengths astern of her
competitor, which had lost this distance by the exhaustion of her crew.
They had pulled three miles with the expenditure of all their strength.
They lacked the power of endurance, which could only be obtained by long
practice. "It is the last pound that breaks the camel's back;" and it
was so with them. With a little less exertion they might have preserved
some portion of their vigor for the final struggle, which was yet to
come.

They had begun upon the last mile. The crew of the Butterfly were as
confident of winning the race as though the laurel of victory had
already been awarded to them; and though their backs ached and their
arms were nearly numb, a smile of triumph rested on their faces.

"Now for the tug of war," said Frank, in a low, subdued tone, loud
enough to be heard by all his crew, but so gentle as not to create any
of that dangerous excitement which is sometimes the ruin of the best
laid plans.

As he spoke the motions of his body became a little quicker, and
gradually increased in rapidity till the stroke was as quick as was
consistent with perfect precision. The result of this greater
expenditure of power was instantly observed, and at the end of the next
quarter of a mile the boats were side by side again.

"They are beating us!" said Tony, in a whisper. "Dip a little
deeper--pull strong!"

The exciting moment of the race had come. The spectators on the shore
gazed with breathless interest upon the spectacle, unable, though
"Zephyr stock was up," to determine the result.

Not a muscle in Frank's face moved, and steadily and anxiously his crew
watched and followed his movements.

"Steady!" said he, in his low, impressive tone, as he quickened a trifle
more the stroke of the crew.

The Butterflies were "used up," incapable of making that vigorous effort
which might have carried them in ahead of the Zephyr.

"A little deeper," continued Frank. "Now for it!"

As he spoke, with a sudden flash of energy he drove his oarsmen to their
utmost speed and strength, and the Zephyr shot by the judges' boat full
a length and a half ahead of the Butterfly.

"Cease--rowing!" said he. "Ready--up!"

The Butterfly came in scarcely an instant behind, and her oars were
poised in air, like those of her rival.

A long and animating shout rang along the shore, when the result of the
race was apparent, and the band struck up "See the conquering hero
comes."




CHAPTER IX.

LITTLE PAUL.


"You have won the race, Frank, and I congratulate you," said Tony
Weston, as the Butterfly came alongside the Zephyr.

"Thank you, Tony; that is noble and generous," replied Frank.

"But it is the feeling in our club--isn't it, fellows?"

"Ay, ay, that it is!" shouted Little Paul. "Let us give them three
cheers, to show the folks on shore that there are no hard feelings."

The cheers were given lustily--at least, as lustily as the exhausted
condition of the Butterflies would permit. Each member of the defeated
club seemed to feel it his duty to banish even the semblance of envy;
and it was pleasant to observe how admirably they succeeded.

I do not wish my young readers to suppose that Tony's crew felt no
disappointment at the result; only that there were no hard feelings, no
petty jealousy. They had confidently expected to win the race, even up
to the last quarter of a mile of the course; and to have that hope
suddenly dashed down, to be beaten when they felt sure of being the
victors, was regarded as no trivial misfortune. But so thoroughly had
Tony schooled them in the necessity of keeping down any ill will, that
I am sure there was not a hard feeling in the club. Perhaps they
displayed more disinterestedness in their conduct after the race than
they really felt. If they did, it was no great harm, for their motives
were good, and they were all struggling to feel what their words and
their actions expressed.

"Zephyr, ahoy!" hailed Mr. Hyde, from the Sylph.

"Ay, ay, sir!"

"The prize is ready for the winner."

The oars were dropped into the water again, and the Zephyr pulled up to
the judges' boat.

"You have won the prize handsomely, Frank, and it affords me great
pleasure to present it to you," said Mr. Hyde, as he handed him a purse
containing the prize. "After the noble expressions of kindness on the
part of your rival, I am sure the award will awaken no feeling of
exultation in the minds of the Zephyrs, and none of envy in the
Butterflies. I congratulate you on your victory."

Frank bowed, and thanked the schoolmaster for his hopeful words; and the
Butterflies gave three cheers again as he took the prize. The Zephyr was
