"Cousin Olivia never did seem to care much for Clarence," remarked Clover,
after they were gone. "He would have been a great deal nicer if he had had
a pleasanter time at home. It makes such a difference with boys. Now Mr.
Templestowe has a lovely mother, I'm sure."

"Oh!" was all the reply that Phil would vouchsafe.

"How queer people are!" thought little Clover to herself afterward.
"Neither of those boys quite liked our going on this expedition, I
think,--though I'm sure I can't imagine why; but they behaved so
differently. Mr. Templestowe thought of us and something which might give
us pleasure; and Clarence only thought about himself. Poor Clarence! he
never had half a chance till he came here. It isn't all his fault."

The party in the director's car proved a merry one. Mrs. Wade, a jolly,
motherly woman, fond of the good things of life, and delighting in making
people comfortable, had spared no pains of preparation. There were
quantities of easy-chairs and fans and eau-de-cologne; the larder was
stocked with all imaginable dainties,--iced tea, lemonade, and champagne
cup flowed on the least provocation for all the hot moments, and each
table was a bank of flowers. Each lady had a superb bouquet; and on the
second day a great tin box of freshly-cut roses met them at Pueblo, so
that they came back as gayly furnished forth as they went. Having the
privilege of the road, the car was attached or detached to suit their
convenience, and this enabled them to command daylight for all the finest
points of the excursion.

First of these was the Royal Gorge, where the Arkansas River pours through
a magnificent canyon, between precipices so steep and with curves so sharp
that only engineering genius of the most daring order could, it would
seem, have devised a way through. Then, after a pause at the pretty town
of Salida, with the magnificent range of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains in
full sight, they began to mount the pass over long loops of rail, which
doubled and re-doubled on themselves again and again on their way to the
summit. The train had been divided; and the first half with its two
engines was seen at times puffing and snorting directly overhead of the
second half on the lower curve.

With each hundred feet of elevation, the view changed and widened. Now it
was of over-lapping hills set with little mesas, like folds of green
velvet flung over the rocks; now of dim-seen valley depths with winding
links of silver rivers; and again of countless mountain peaks sharp-cut
against the sunset sky,--some rosy pink, some shining with snow.

The flowers were a continual marvel. At the top of the pass, eleven
thousand feet and more above the sea, their colors and their abundance
were more profuse and splendid than on the lower levels. There were whole
fields of pentstemons, pink, blue, royal purple, or the rare scarlet
variety, like stems of asparagus strung with rubies. There were masses of
gillias, and of wonderful coreopsis, enormous cream-colored stars with
deep-orange centres, and deep yellow ones with scarlet centres; thickets
of snowy-cupped mentzelia and of wild rose; while here and there a tall
red lily burned like a little lonely flame in the green, or regiments of
convolvuli waved their stately heads.

From below came now and again the tinkle of distant cow-bells. These, and
the plaintive coo of mourning-doves in the branches, and the rush of the
wind, which was like cool flower-scented wine, was all that broke the
stillness of the high places.

    "To think I'm so much nearer heaven
     Than when I was a boy,"

misquoted Clover, as she sat on the rear platform of the car, with Poppy,
and Thurber Wade.

"Are you sure your head doesn't ache? This elevation plays the mischief
with some people. My mother has taken to her berth with ice on her
temples."

"Headache! No, indeed. This air is too delicious. I feel as though I could
dance all the way from here to the Black Canyon."

"You don't look as if your head ached, or anything," said Mr. Wade,
staring at Clover admiringly. Her cheeks were pink with excitement, her
eyes full of light and exhilaration.

"Oh dear! we are beginning to go down," she cried, watching one of the
beautiful peaks of the Sangre de Cristos as it dipped out of sight. "I
think I could find it in my heart to cry, if it were not that to-morrow
we are coming up again."

So down, down, down they went. Dusk slowly gathered about them; and the
white-gloved butler set the little tables, and brought in broiled chicken
and grilled salmon and salad and hot rolls and peaches, and they were all
very hungry. And Clover did not cry, but fell to work on her supper with
an excellent appetite, quite unconscious that they were speeding through
another wonderful gorge without seeing one of its beauties. Then the car
was detached from the train; and when she awoke next morning they were at
the little station called Cimmaro, at the head of the famous Black Canyon,
with three hours to spare before the train from Utah should arrive to take
them back to St. Helen's.

Early as it was, the small settlement was awake. Lights glanced from the
eating-house, where cooks were preparing breakfast for the "through"
passengers, and smokes curled from the chimneys. Close to the car was a
large brick structure which seemed to be a sort of hotel for locomotives.
A number of the enormous creatures had evidently passed the night there,
and just waked up. Clover now watched their antics with great amusement
from her window as their engineers ran them in and out, rubbed them down
like horses, and fed them with oil and coal, while they snorted and backed
and sidled a good deal as real horses do. Clover could not at all
understand what all these manoeuvres were for,--they seemed only designed
to show the paces of the iron steeds, and what they were good for.

"Miss Clover," whispered a voice outside her curtains, "I've got hold of a
hand-car and a couple of men; and don't you want to take a spin down the
canyon and see the view with no smoke to spoil it? Just you and me and
Miss Chase. She says she'll go if you will. Hurry, and don't make a noise.
We won't wake the others."

Of course Clover wanted to. She finished her dressing at top-speed,
hurried on her hat and jacket, stole softly out to where the others
awaited her, and in five minutes they were smoothly running down the
gorge, over high trestle-work bridges and round sharp curves which made
her draw her breath a little faster. There was no danger, the men who
managed the hand-car assured them; it was a couple of hours yet before the
next train came in; there was plenty of time to go three or four miles
down and return.

Anything more delicious than the early morning air in the Black Canyon it
would be difficult to imagine. Cool, odorous with pines and with the
breath of the mountains, it was like a zestful draught of iced summer.
Close beside the track ran a wondrous river which seemed made of melted
jewels, so curiously brilliant were its waters and mixed of so many hues.
Its course among the rocks was a flash of foaming rapids, broken here and
there by pools of exquisite blue-green, deepening into inky-violet under
the shadow of the cliffs. And such cliffs!--one, two, three thousand feet
high; not deep-colored like those about St. Helen's, but of steadfast
mountain hues and of magnificent forms,--buttresses and spires; crags
whose bases were lost in untrodden forests; needle-sharp pinnacles like
the Swiss Aiguilles. The morning was just making its way into the canyon;
and the loftier tops flashed with yellow sun, while the rest were still in
cold shadow.

Breakfast was just ready when the hand-car arrived again at the upper end
of the gorge, and loud were the reproaches which met the happy three as
they alighted from it. Phil was particularly afflicted.

"I call it mean not to wake a fellow," he said.

"But a fellow was _so_ sound asleep," said Clover, "I really hadn't the
heart. I did peep in at your curtain, and if you had moved so much as a
finger, _perhaps_ I should have called you; but you didn't."

The return journey was equally fortunate, and the party reached St.
Helen's late in the evening of the second day, in what Mr. Wade called
"excellent form." Monday brought the young men from the ranch in again;
and another fortnight passed happily, Clover's three "leaves" being most
faithfully attentive to their central point of attraction. "Three is a
good many," as Marian Chase had said, but all girls like to be liked, and
Clover did not find this, her first little experience of the kind, at all
disagreeable.

The excursion to the Marshall Pass, however, had an after effect which was
not so pleasant. Either the high elevation had disagreed with Phil, or he
had taken a little cold; at all events, he was distinctly less well. With
the lowering of his physical forces came a corresponding depression of
spirits. Mrs. Watson worried him, the sick people troubled him, the sound
of coughing depressed him, his appetite nagged, and his sleep was broken.
Clover felt that he must have a change, and consulted Dr. Hope, who
advised their going to the Ute Valley for a month.

This involved giving up their rooms at Mrs. Marsh's, which was a pity, as
it was by no means certain that they would be able to get them again
later. Clover regretted this; but Fate, as Fate often does, brought a
compensation. Mrs. Watson had no mind whatever for the Ute Valley.

"It's a dull place, they tell me, and there's nothing to do there but ride
on horseback, and as I don't ride on horseback, I really don't see what
use there would be in my going," she said to Clover. "If I were young, and
there were young men ready to ride with me all the time, it would be
different; though Ellen never did care to, except with Henry of course,
after they--And I really can't see that your brother's much different from
what he was, though if Dr. Hope says so, naturally you--He's a queer kind
of doctor, it seems to me, to send lung patients up higher than
this,--which is high already, gracious knows. No; if you decide to go, I
shall just move over to the Shoshone for the rest of the time that I'm
here. I'm sure that Dr. Carr couldn't expect me to stay on here alone,
just for the chance that you may want to come back, when as like as not,
Mrs. Marsh won't be able to take you again."

"Oh, no; I'm quite sure he wouldn't. Only I thought," doubtfully, "that as
you've always admired Phil's room so much, you might like to secure it now
that we have to go."

"Well, yes. If you were to be here, I might. If that man who's so sick had
got better, or gone away, or something, I dare say I should have settled
down in his room and been comfortable enough. But he seems just about as
he was when we came, so there's no use waiting; and I'd rather go to the
Shoshone anyway. I always said it was a mistake that we didn't go there in
the first place. It was Dr. Hope's doing, and I have not the least
confidence in him. He hasn't osculated me once since I came."

"Hasn't he?" said Clover, feeling her voice tremble, and perfectly aware
of the shaking of Phil's shoulders behind her.

"No; and I don't call just putting his ear to my chest, listening. Dr.
Bangs, at home, would be ashamed to come to the house without his
stethoscope. I mean to move this afternoon. I've given Mrs. Marsh
notice."

So Mrs. Watson and her belongings went to the Shoshone, and Clover packed
the trunks with a lighter heart for her departure.

The last day of July found Clover and Phil settled in the Ute Park. It was
a wild and beautiful valley, some hundreds of feet higher than St.
Helen's, and seemed the very home of peace. A Sunday-like quiet pervaded
the place, whose stillness was never broken except by bird-songs and the
rustle of the pine branches.

The sides of the valley near its opening were dotted here and there with
huts and cabins belonging to parties who had fled from the heat of the
plains for the summer. At the upper end stood the ranch house,--a large,
rather rudely built structure,--and about it were a number of cabins and
cottages, in which two, four, or six people could be accommodated. Clover
and Phil were lodged in one of these. The tiny structure contained only a
sitting and two sleeping rooms, and was very plain and bare. But there was
a fireplace; wood was abundant, so that a cheerful blaze could be had for
cool evenings; and the little piazza faced the south, and made a sheltered
sitting place on windy days.

One pleasant feature of the spot was its nearness to the High Valley.
Clarence and Geoff Templestowe thought nothing of riding four miles; and
scarcely a day passed when one or both did not come over. They brought
wild-flowers, or cream, or freshly-churned butter, as offerings from the
ranch; and, what Clover valued as a greater kindness yet, they brought
Phil's beloved broncho, Sorrel, and arranged with the owner of the Ute
ranch that it should remain as long as Phil was there. This gave Phil
hours of delightful exercise every day; and though sometimes he set out
early in the morning for the High Valley, and stayed later in the
afternoon than his sister thought prudent, she had not the heart to chide,
so long as he was visibly getting better hour by hour.

Sundays the friends spent together, as a matter of course. Geoff waited
till his little home service for the ranchmen was over, and then would
gallop across with Clarence to pass the rest of the day. There was no lack
of kind people at the main house and in the cottages to take an interest
in the delicate boy and his sweet, motherly sister; so Clover had an
abundance of volunteer matrons, and plenty of pleasant ways in which to
spend those occasional days on which the High Valley attaches failed to
appear.

It was a simple, healthful life, the happiest on the whole which they had
led since leaving home. Once or twice Mr. Thurber Wade made his
appearance, gallantly mounted, and freighted with flowers and kind
messages from his mother to Miss Carr; but Clover was never sorry when he
rode away again. Somehow he did not seem to belong to the Happy Valley, as
in her heart she denominated the place.

There was a remarkable deal of full moon that month, as it seemed; at
least, the fact served as an excuse for a good many late transits between
the valley and the park. Now and then either Clarence or Geoff would lead
over a saddle-horse and give Clover a good gallop up or down the valley,
which she always enjoyed. The habit which she had extemporized for her
visit to the High Valley answered very well, and Mrs. Hope had lent her a
hat.

On one of these occasions she and Clarence had ridden farther than usual,
quite down to the end of the pass, where the road dipped, and descended to
the little watering-place of Canyon Creek,--a Swiss-like village of hotels
and lodging-houses and shops for the sale of minerals and mineral waters,
set along the steep sides of a narrow green valley. They were chatting
gayly, and had just agreed that it was time to turn their horses' heads
homeward, when a sudden darkening made them aware that one of the
unexpected thunder-gusts peculiar to the region was upon them.

They were still a mile above the village; but as no nearer place of
shelter presented itself, they decided to proceed. But the storm moved
more rapidly than they; and long before the first houses came in sight the
heavy drops began to pelt down. A brown young fellow, lying flat on his
back under a thick bush, with his horse standing over him, shouted to them
to "try the cave," waving his hand in its direction; and hurrying on, they
saw in another moment a shelving brow of rock in the cliff, under which
was a deep recess.

To this Clarence directed the horses. He lifted Clover down. She half sat,
half leaned on the slope of the rock, well under cover, while he stretched
himself at full length on a higher ledge, and held the bridles fast. The
horses' heads and the saddles were fairly well protected, but the
hindquarters of the animals were presently streaming with water.

"This isn't half-bad, is it?" Clarence said. His mouth was so close to
Clover's ear that she could catch his words in spite of the noisy thunder
and the roar of the descending rain.

"No; I call it fun."

"You look awfully pretty, do you know?" was the next and very unexpected
remark.

"Nonsense."

"Not nonsense at all."

At that moment a carriage dashed rapidly by, the driver guiding the horses
as well as he could between the points of an umbrella, which constantly
menaced his eyes. Other travellers in the pass had evidently been
surprised by the storm besides themselves. The lady who held the umbrella
looked out, and caught the picture of the group under the cliff. It was a
suggestive one. Clover's hat was a little pushed forward by the rock
against which she leaned, which in its turn pushed forward the waving
rings of hair which shaded her forehead, but did not hide her laughing
eyes, or the dimples in her pink cheeks. The fair, slender girl, the dark,
stalwart young fellow so close to her, the rain, the half-sheltered
horses,--it was easy enough to construct a little romance.

The lady evidently did so. It was what photographers call an
"instantaneous effect," caught in three seconds, as the carriage whirled
past; but in that fraction of a minute the lady had nodded and flashed a
brilliant, sympathetic smile in their direction, and Clover had nodded in
return, and laughed back.

"A good many people seem to have been caught as we have," she said, as
another streaming vehicle dashed by.

"I wish it would rain for a week," observed Clarence.

"My gracious, what a wish! What would become of us if it did?"

"We should stay here just where we are, and I should have you all to
myself for once, and nobody could come in to interfere with me."

"Thank you extremely! How hungry we should be! How can you be so absurd,
Clarence?"

"I'm not absurd at all. I'm perfectly in earnest."

"Do you mean that you really want to stay a week under this rock with
nothing to eat?"

"Well, no; not exactly that perhaps,--though if you could, I would. But I
mean that I would like to get you for a whole solid week to myself. There
is such a gang of people about always, and they all want you. Clover," he
went on, for, puzzled at his tone, she made no answer, "couldn't you like
me a little?"

"I like you a great deal. You come next to Phil and Dorry with me."

"Hang Phil and Dorry! Who wants to come next to them? I want you to like
me a great deal more than that. I want you to love me. Couldn't you,
Clover?"

"How strangely you talk! I do love you, of course. You're my cousin."

"I don't care to be loved 'of course.' I want to be loved for myself.
Clover, you know what I mean; you must know. I can afford to marry now;
won't you stay in Colorado and be my wife?"

"I don't think you know what you are saying, Clarence. I'm older than you
are. I thought you looked upon me as a sort of mother or older sister."

"Only fifteen months older," retorted Clarence. "I never heard of any
one's being a mother at that age. I'm a man now, I would have you
remember, though I am a little younger than you, and know my own mind as
well as if I were fifty. Dear Clovy," coaxingly, "couldn't you? You liked
the High Valley, didn't you? I'd do anything possible to make it nice and
pleasant for you."

"I do like the High Valley very much," said Clover, still with the feeling
that Clarence must be half in joke, or she half in dream. "But, my dear
boy, it isn't my home. I couldn't leave papa and the children, and stay
out here, even with you. It would seem so strange and far away."

"You could if you cared for me," replied Clarence, dejectedly; Clover's
kind, argumentative, elder-sisterly tone was precisely that which is most
discouraging to a lover.

"Oh, dear," cried poor Clover, not far from tears herself; "this is
dreadful!"

"What?" moodily. "Having an offer? You must have had lots of them before
now."

"Indeed I never did. People don't do such things in Burnet. Please don't
say any more, Clarence. I'm very fond of you, just as I am of the boys;
but--"

"But what? Go on."

"How can I?" Clover was fairly crying.

"You mean that you can't love me in the other way."

"Yes." The word came out half as a sob, but the sincerity of the accent
was unmistakable.

"Well," said poor Clarence, after a long bitter pause; "it isn't your
fault, I suppose. I'm not good enough for you. Still, I'd have done my
best, if you would have taken me, Clover."

"I am sure you would," eagerly. "You've always been my favorite cousin,
you know. People can't _make_ themselves care for each other; it has to
come in spite of them or not at all,--at least, that is what the novels
say. But you're not angry with me, are you, dear? We will be good friends
always, sha'n't we?" persuasively.

"I wonder if we can," said Clarence, in a hopeless tone. "It doesn't seem
likely; but I don't know any more about it than you do. It's my first
offer as well as yours." Then, after a silence and a struggle, he added in
a more manful tone, "We'll try for it, at least. I can't afford to give
you up. You're the sweetest girl in the world. I always said so, and I say
so still. It will be hard at first, but perhaps it may grow easier with
time."

"Oh, it will," cried Clover, hopefully. "It's only because you're so
lonely out here, and see so few people, that makes you suppose I am better
than the rest. One of these days you'll find a girl who is a great deal
nicer than I am, and then you'll be glad that I didn't say yes. There! the
rain is just stopping."

"It's easy enough to talk," remarked Clarence, gloomily, as he gathered up
the bridles of the horses; "but I shall do nothing of the kind. I declare
I won't!"




CHAPTER X.

NO. 13 PIUTE STREET.


Clover did not see Clarence again for several days after this
conversation, the remembrance of which was uncomfortable to her. She
feared he was feeling hurt or "huffy," and would show it in his manner;
and she disliked very much the idea that Phil might suspect the reason,
or, worse still, Mr. Templestowe.

But when he finally appeared he seemed much the same as usual. After all,
she reflected, it has only been a boyish impulse; he has already got over
it, or not meant all he said.

In this she did Clarence an injustice. He had been very much in earnest
when he spoke; and it showed the good stuff which was in him and his real
regard for Clover that he should be making so manly a struggle with his
disappointment and pain. His life had been a lonely one in Colorado; he
could not afford to quarrel with his favorite cousin, and with him, as
with other lovers, there may have been, besides, some lurking hope that
she might yet change her mind. But perhaps Clover in a measure was right
in her conviction that Clarence was still too young and undeveloped to
have things go very deep with him. He seemed to her in many ways as boyish
and as undisciplined as Phil.

With early September the summering of the Ute Park came to a close. The
cold begins early at that elevation, and light frosts and red leaves
warned the dwellers in tents and cabins to flee.

Clover made her preparations for departure with real reluctance. She had
grown very fond of the place; but Phil was perfectly himself again, and
there seemed no reason for their staying longer.

So back to St. Helen's they went and to Mrs. Marsh, who, in reply to
Clover's letter, had written that she must make room for them somehow,
though for the life of her she couldn't say how. It proved to be in two
small back rooms. An irruption of Eastern invalids had filled the house to
overflowing, and new faces met them at every turn. Two or three of the
last summer's inmates had died during their stay,--one of them the very
sick man whose room Mrs. Watson had coveted. His death took place "as if
on purpose," she told Clover, the very week after her removal to the
Shoshone.

Mrs. Watson herself was preparing for return to the East. "I've seen the
West now," she said,--"all I want to see; and I'm quite ready to go back
to my own part of the country. Ellen writes that she thinks I'd better
start for home so as to get settled before the cold--And it's so cold here
that I can't realize that they're still in the middle of peaches at home.
Ellen always spices a great--They're better than preserves; and as for the
canned ones, why, peaches and water is what I call them. Well--my dear--"
(Distance lends enchantment, and Clover had become "My dear" again.) "I'm
glad I could come out and help you along; and now that you know so many
people here, you won't need me so much as you did at first. I shall tell
Mrs. Perkins to write to Mrs. Hall to tell your father how well your
brother is looking, and I know he'll be--And here's a little handkerchief
for a keepsake."

It was a pretty handkerchief, of pale yellow silk with embroidered
corners, and Clover kissed the old lady as she thanked her, and they
parted good friends. But their intercourse had led her to make certain
firm resolutions.

"I will try to keep my mind clear and my talk clear; to learn what I want
and what I have a right to want and what I mean to say, so as not to
puzzle and worry people when I grow old, by being vague and helpless and
fussy," she reflected. "I suppose if I don't form the habit now, I sha'n't
be able to then, and it would be dreadful to end by being like poor Mrs.
Watson."

Altogether, Mrs. Marsh's house had lost its homelike character; and it was
not strange that under the circumstances Phil should flag a little. He was
not ill, but he was out of sorts and dismal, and disposed to consider the
presence of so many strangers as a personal wrong. Clover felt that it was
not a good atmosphere for him, and anxiously revolved in her mind what was
best to do. The Shoshone was much too expensive; good boarding-houses in
St. Helen's were few and far between, and all of them shared in a still
greater degree the disadvantages which had made themselves felt at Mrs.
Marsh's.

The solution to her puzzle came--as solutions often do--unexpectedly. She
was walking down Piute Street on her way to call on Alice Blanchard, when
her attention was attracted to a small, shut-up house, on which was a
sign: "No. 13. To Let, Furnished." The sign was not printed, but written
on a half-sheet of foolscap, which was what led Clover to notice it.

She studied the house a while, then opened the gate, and went in. Two or
three steps led to a little piazza. She seated herself on the top step,
and tried to peep in at the closed blinds of the nearest window.

While she was doing so, a woman with a shawl over her head came hastily
down a narrow side street or alley, and approached her.

"Oh, did you want the key?" she said.

"The key?" replied Clover, surprised; "of this house, do you mean?"

"Yes. Mis Starkey left it with me when she went away, because, she said,
it was handy, and I could give it to anybody who wished to look at the
place. You're the first that has come; so when I see you setting here, I
just ran over. Did Mr. Beloit send you?"

"No; nobody sent me. Is it Mr. Beloit who has the letting of the house?"

"Yes; but I can let folks in. I told Mis Starkey I'd air and dust a little
now and then, if it wasn't took. Poor soul! she was anxious enough about
it; and it all had to be done on a sudden, and she in such a heap of
trouble that she didn't know which way to turn. It was just lock-up and
go!"

"Tell me about her," said Clover, making room on the step for the woman to
sit down.

"Well, she come out last year with her man, who had lung trouble, and he
wasn't no better at first, and then he seemed to pick up for a while; and
they took this house and fixed themselves to stay for a year, at least.
They made it real nice, too, and slicked up considerable. Mis Starkey
said, said she, 'I don't want to spend no more money on it than I can
help, but Mr. Starkey must be made comfortable,' says she, them was her
very words. He used to set out on this stoop all day long in the summer,
and she alongside him, except when she had to be indoors doing the work.
She didn't keep no regular help. I did the washing for her, and come in
now and then for a day to clean; so she managed very well.

"Then,--Wednesday before last, it was,--he had a bleeding, and sank away
like all in a minute, and was gone before the doctor could be had. Mis
Starkey was all stunned like with the shock of it; and before she had got
her mind cleared up so's to order about anything, come a telegraph to say
her son was down with diphtheria, and his wife with a young baby, and both
was very low. And between one and the other she was pretty near out of her
wits. We packed her up as quick as we could, and he was sent off by
express; and she says to me, 'Mis Kenny, you see how 't is. I've got this
house on my hands till May. There's no time to see to anything, and I've
got no heart to care; but if any one'll take it for the winter, well and
good; and I'll leave the sheets and table-cloths and everything in it,
because it may make a difference, and I don't mind about them nohow. And
if no one does take it, I'll just have to bear the loss,' says she. Poor
soul! she was in a world of trouble, surely."

"Do you know what rent she asks for the house?" said Clover, in whose mind
a vague plan was beginning to take shape.

"Twenty-five a month was what she paid; and she said she'd throw the
furniture in for the rest of the time, just to get rid of the rent."

Clover reflected. Twenty-five dollars a week was what they were paying at
Mrs. Marsh's. Could they take this house and live on the same sum, after
deducting the rent, and perhaps get this good-natured-looking woman to
come in for a certain number of hours and help do the work? She almost
fancied that they could if they kept no regular servant.

"I think I _would_ like to see the house," she said at last, after a
silent calculation and a scrutinizing look at Mrs. Kenny, who was a faded,
wiry, but withal kindly-looking person, shrewd and clean,--a North of
Ireland Protestant, as she afterward told Clover. In fact, her accent was
rather Scotch than Irish.

They went in. The front door opened into a minute hall, from which another
door led into a back hall with a staircase. There was a tiny sitting-room,
an equally tiny dining-room, a small kitchen, and above, two bedrooms and
a sort of unplastered space, which would answer to put trunks in. That was
all, save a little woodshed. Everything was bare and scanty and rather
particularly ugly. The sitting-room had a frightful paper of mingled
mustard and molasses tint, and a matted floor; but there was a good-sized
open fireplace for the burning of wood, in which two bricks did duty for
andirons, three or four splint and cane bottomed chairs, a lounge, and a
table, while the pipe of the large "Morning-glory" stove in the
dining-room expanded into a sort of drum in the chamber above. This
secured a warm sleeping place for Phil. Clover began to think that they
could make it do.

Mrs. Kenny, who evidently considered the house as a wonder of luxury and
convenience, opened various cupboards, and pointed admiringly to the glass
and china, the kitchen tins and utensils, and the cotton sheets and
pillow-cases which they respectively held.

