"I should not have thought so."

"But I am. It is awfully lonely for a girl like me, who has got dozens
of cousins at home, and uncles and aunts and all the rest of the goodly
fry, to be stranded. I like David. I am quite smitten with David; and I
like you, too. You can be a _great_ friend of mine."

"Oh, I don't mind," said Ben.

He thought it would be very good fun to tell the other fellows about
the charming Irish girl who liked him so much.

"I wonder if you'd help me, Ben."

"What can I do?" asked Ben.

"Sit down, and let's be cozy. I will sit in the tired one's chair, and
you can sit on that little stool at my feet. Now isn't that nice?"

"Who do you mean by the tired one?"

"Your mother, silly boy, of course."

"It is a very ridiculous name to call her."

"It belongs to the Palace of Home Truths. Your mother is tired, and
you--you lazy omadhauns--"

"Well, go on," said Ben. "I see by your manner that you want me to do
something. I suppose it's something a little bit--a little bit not quite
good."

"It is perfectly good. I'll love you ever so much if you will do it."

"What is it?"

"I am going out this evening. I may not be in until late. If the others
are in bed, will you come and unlock the door for me when I throw gravel
up at your window? You must tell me which is your window."

"I sleep in the north attic. It doesn't look out on to the street; and I
can't--I can't possibly do it."

"You can come down and wait for me in the hall."

"How can I?"

"When the tired one goes to bed, you can come down. She goes to bed at
ten, I know, and I shall not be in until about half-past ten. I don't
want Dave to know--well, because I don't. I don't want Alice to know,
because I dislike Alice very much."

"Really, Kathleen, you ought not to speak like that."

"Well, I do, and I can't help myself. Will you do what I want? Here, do
you think you'd like this in your possession?"

As Kathleen spoke she held out a golden sovereign in the palm of her
little hand.

"I don't want to be bribed."

"It isn't bribery really; it is paying you for giving me a great
convenience. I must go out on important business. I want to help those
who are down-trodden and distressed. Will you do what I want, Ben--will
you, dear Ben? You know I like you so much. Will you--will you?"

Of course, Ben fought against Kathleen's rather wicked suggestion; of
course in the end he yielded. When he finally got up to his attic to
thumb over his well-worn lesson-books he had Kathleen's golden sovereign
in his pocket. He took it out and looked at it; he turned it round and
round and examined it all over. He rubbed it lovingly against his
freckled cheek, held it until it got warm in the palm of his hand, and
then put it back in his pocket and jingled it against a couple of
pennies which were its only companions.

"A whole sovereign," he said to himself--"a whole sovereign, and I never
had so much as five shillings of my own in the whole course of my life.
Well, she is a little witch. I suppose Dave would beat me black and blue
for doing a thing of this sort. But how could I--how could I withstand
her?"

Supper at the Tennants' generally consisted of cold pudding, cold meat,
bread-and-butter, and a little jam when there happened to be any in the
house. It was not a particularly tempting meal, and those who ate it
required to have good, vigorous appetites. Kathleen, although she had
been brought up in a considerable amount of wasteful splendor, was
indifferent to what she ate. She soon jumped up and walked across the
little passage into the drawing-room. Ben, looking very red and
shamefaced, would not meet her eyes. Ben's face annoyed Kathleen. It did
not occur to her for a minute that he would not be faithful to her, but
she was afraid that others might notice his extraordinary and perturbed
expression. Once, too, he jingled the sovereign in his pocket; she heard
him, and wondered why David did not ask him where he had got the money.
But no remark was made, and the meal came safely to an end. Kathleen
took up the first book she could find and pretended to read.

"I shall feign sleepiness at a quarter to nine," she said to herself,
"and go upstairs. I shall be awfully polite and sweet to dear Alice. She
never comes to bed before ten, so I shall be quite safe getting out of
the house. I can drop from the window, but I should prefer going by the
back door; and I don't think Maria will betray me."

Just then Alice strolled into the room. She looked rather nice; she wore
a very pretty pink muslin blouse, which suited her well. Her hair was
neatly arranged; her face was calm. She stood before Kathleen.

"I wish--" she said suddenly.

Kathleen raised her head.

"And I wish you wouldn't stand between me and the lamp. Don't you see
that I am reading?"

"I want you to stop reading. I have something to say."

"Indeed!"

Kathleen longed to be very rude, but she thought of her delightful plan
so close at hand, and refrained.

"I must humor her if I can by any possibility keep my temper," was her
thought. Then aloud: "What is it you want? I hope you will be very
quick, for I am rather sleepy and intend to go to bed soon."

"I hope you won't do it again, that's all."

"Do what again?" asked Kathleen.

"Spend your money on buying food for us. We are not so poor as all that.
My mother is paid by your father to give you your meals; your father
doesn't expect you to buy them over again."

"Dad always likes me to do what I wish," replied Kathleen calmly.

"Well, don't do it again. It's extremely displeasing both to David and
me."

Kathleen laughed.

"Dave gobbled up his sausage and his sardines," she said.

"Don't do it again, that's all."

Kathleen nodded her head, and again buried herself in her book.

"And there is another thing," continued Alice, dropping into a chair by
Kathleen's side. "You are very low down in the school. Two of the
mistresses spoke to me about you to-day. They don't like to see a great
overgrown girl like you in a class with little children; it does neither
you nor the school credit. They fear that during this term you may be
forced to continue in your present low position; but they earnestly hope
that you will work very hard, so as to be removed into a higher form.
You ought, after Christmas, to get into a class at least two removes
higher up in the school. That is what I came to say. I suppose you have
a certain sense of honor, and you don't want your father's money to be
thrown away."

"Bedad, then! he has plenty of money, and I don't much care," replied
Kathleen.

She lay back in her chair and whistled "Garry Owen" in a most insolent
manner.

"If you have really made up your mind not to improve yourself in the
very least, mother had better write to Squire O'Hara and suggest that
you don't come back after Christmas."

"And Squire O'Hara will decide that point for himself," replied
Kathleen. "There are other houses where I can be entertained and fussed
over, and regarded as I ought to be regarded, besides the home of Alice
Tennant. The fact is this, Alice: you aggravate me; you don't understand
me; I am at my worst in your presence. Perhaps I am a bit wild
sometimes, but your way would never drive me to work or anything else. I
have no real dislike to learning, and if another girl spoke to me as you
have done I might be very glad."

"What do you mean?" said poor Alice. "I really and truly, Kathleen, do
want to help you. You and I could work every evening together; I could,
and would, see you through your lessons. Thus you would very quickly get
to the head of your class, and get your removes without trouble at
Christmas."

"I suppose you mean to be kind," said Kathleen. "I will think it over.
Let me alone now."

She gave a portentous yawn. Ben heard her, came and sat down on an
ottoman not far off, and began kicking his legs.

"Benny," said his sister, "if you have done your lessons, you had better
go to bed."

"I don't want to go so early. You always treat me as if I were a baby."

"Well, please yourself. I am going upstairs to fetch my books. I have a
good hour and a half of hard work to get through before bedtime."

The moment Kathleen and Ben were alone, Ben rushed up to her side and
began to whisper.

"It is all as right as possible," he said. "I am going up to bed as
usual, and when mother and Alice and Dave are safe in their rooms I'll
slip down again. I'll be in the hall. Don't ring when you come back;
just walk up the steps and scratch against the door with your knuckles,
and I'll hear you and let you in in a trice. I am awfully pleased about
that sovereign; it will make me one of the greatest toffs in the school.
I'll have more money than any of the other fellows. I'm so excited I can
scarcely think of anything else. I know I'm doing wrong, but you did
offer me such a tremendous temptation. Now I hear Alice's step. It will
be all right, Kathleen; don't you fear."

Kathleen smiled to herself. The rest of her programme was carried out to
a nicety. At a quarter to nine she complained of fatigue, bade Mrs.
Tennant an affectionate good-night, nodded to Alice, and left the room.

"Be sure you don't lock the door," called Alice after her. "I sha'n't be
up for quite an hour, and you will be sound asleep by that time."

"I won't lock it," replied Kathleen gently.

When Kathleen had gone upstairs, Mrs. Tennant turned and spoke to her
daughter.

"You know, Alice," she said, "the child is very lovable and
kind-hearted--a little barbarian in some senses of the word, but a fine
nature--of that I am certain."

"I am so busy to-night, mother," replied Alice. "Can't we defer talking
of the charms of Kathleen's character until after I have done my
lessons?"

"Of course, dear," said her mother.

She drew her basket of mending towards her, put stitch after stitch
into the shabby garments, and thought all the time of Kathleen with her
bright face and beautiful, merry eyes.

Meanwhile that young lady, having arranged a bolster in her bed to look
as like a human being as possible, put on her hat and jacket and ran
downstairs. There was no one in the hall, and she was absolutely daring
enough to go out by that door. Mrs. Tennant raised her head when she
heard the door gently shut.

"Can that be the post?" she said; but as no one replied, she forgot the
circumstance and went on with her mending.

A few doors down the street Susy Hopkins was waiting for Kathleen.

"Oh, there you are!" she said. "We are so excited! There will be about
eight of us waiting for you in the old quarry. You are good to come. You
don't know what this means in our lives. You are good--you are
wonderfully good."

"Where's the quarry?" asked Kathleen. "You have chosen such a funny
place. I should not have imagined that a quarry--a dear, romantic
quarry--could be found anywhere in this neighborhood."

"Yes, but there is, and a good big one, too. It is about half a mile
away, just at the back of Colliers' Buildings. It is the safest place
you can possibly imagine, for no one will ever look for us there. Now do
be quick; we will find the others before us. You can't think how excited
we are."

"Oh, I'm willing to be quick," replied Kathleen. "I am doing all this
for you, you know, because I am sorry for the foundationers, and think
it so very ridiculous that there should be distinctions made. Why, you
are quite as good as the others. They are none of them much to boast
of."

"What fun this is!" cried Susy again. "I assure you the paying girls
think no end of themselves. They are under the supposition that there
never were such fine ladies to be found in the land before. Oh, we will
take it out of them, sha'n't we?"

Kathleen made no reply. Presently they reached the opening that led into
the quarry. They had to go down a narrow sloping path, and then by a
doorway cut in the solid rock. After they had passed through they found
themselves in a large circular cavern open to the sky. There was no moon
and the night was dark; but one girl had brought a lantern. She opened
it and placed it on the ground; a bright shaft of light now fell on
several young figures all huddled together. Susy gave a sharp whistle;
the girls started to their feet.

"Here we are, girls. See, this is our queen," and she presented Kathleen
to the assembled girls.

"Does the queen mind our looking at her face in turns?" said Kate
Rourke. "I have not specially noticed you before," she continued, "but
after we have each had a good stare we will know what sort of girl you
are."

For reply Kathleen herself lifted the lantern and flung the full light
upon her radiant and lovely face and figure. The intense light made her
golden hair shine, and brought out the delicate perfection of each
feature; the merry eyes framed in their dark lashes, the gleaming white
teeth, the rosy lips were all apparent. But beyond the mere beauty of
feature Kathleen had to a remarkable degree the far more fascinating
beauty of expression: her face was capable of almost every shade of
emotion, being sorrowful and pathetic one moment, and brimful of
irrepressible mirth and roguery the next.

There was a silence amongst the girls until Mary Rand shouted:

"Hip! hip! hurrah!"

The whole eight immediately broke into a ringing cheer.

"Welcome, Queen Kathleen," they said--"welcome;" and they held out their
hands and clasped the hands of the Irish girl.

"I am glad," said Kathleen.

"What about?" said Clara Sawyer.

"Why, you have crowned me queen yourselves. Now I can do what I like
with you all."

"You certainly can," said Susy Hopkins.--"We are devoted to our queen,
aren't we, girls?"

"We have fallen in love with her on the spot," said Rosy Myers.

"I never saw any one quite so lovely before as the queen," said Mary
Rand.

"It isn't only that she's lovely, she is so genteel," said Susy Hopkins.

"Aristocratic!" cried Kate.--"Hannah Johnson, you haven't given your
opinion yet.--And, Ruth Craven, you haven't given yours."

"I reserve my opinion," said Ruth.

"And I say there's a great deal of humbug and balder-dash in the world,"
said Hannah Johnson.

Ruth's remark was unexpected, but the girls pooh-poohed Hannah's. Who
was Hannah Johnson that she dared to speak so rudely to one so charming
and beautiful as Kathleen O'Hara? There was a disconcerting pause, and
then Kathleen said:

"Hannah, doubtless you are right. There is plenty of humbug in the
world; but I don't think I am one. Now the question is: Shall I be on
the side of the foundationers, or shall I be on the side of the paying
girls in the Great Shirley School?"

"Indeed, darling," said Rosy Myers, "you shall be on our side. Those
horrid, stuck-up paying girls don't want you; and we do. Nothing will
induce us to give you up. It is a chance to get a girl like you, so
lovely and so sweet and so rich, to be one of us."

"Well, I think I can give you a good time, and I can show those others
with their snobbish ways--"

"Hear, hear!" cried the excited girls.

"I can show the others what I think of them. They won't snub me, but
perhaps I shall snub them. Well, girls, as we have decided to band
together, we must draw up rules; and when they are drawn up we must obey
them. I, of course, will be your head; as you have made me queen, that
is the natural thing to expect."

"Of course," said Susy.

Kathleen clapped her hands.

"This is going to be a real good secret society," she said. "What fun it
all will be!"

The girls laughed, and clustered with more and more friendliness round
Kathleen.

"You are our queen," said Kate. "There are eight of us here, and we all
swear allegiance to you.--Don't we, girls?"

"Certainly," said Susy.

"Unquestionably," remarked Mary.

"With all my heart," said Rose.

"And mine," echoed Clara.

"And mine," said Kate.

"I will join the others, although I don't approve," said Hannah Johnson,
with a somewhat unwilling nod.

"And I am neutral. I don't think I ought to join at all," said Ruth.

"Oh, yes, you will, Ruth. I want you to be my Prime Minister, I want you
to be with me in all things."

"I don't know that I can."

"And why should she be your Prime Minister?" said Kate in an ugly voice.
"She's no better than the others, and she's very new. Some of us have
been at the school for some time. Ruth Craven has only just joined.

"The queen must have her way," said Kathleen, stamping her foot. "The
queen must have her way in all particulars, and she wishes to elect Ruth
Craven as her Prime Minister--that is, if Ruth will consent."

They were headstrong and big girls, most of them older than Kathleen,
but they submitted, for her ways were masterful and her tone full of
delicate sympathy.
