"Coora is gone, husband!" she cried. "It must have been her own voice
which we heard just now. Hark! She speaks again!"

Again from the tree they heard a sweet voice calling, "Mother, O Mother,
I have left my earrings and bracelets behind the door and my little
sister in the hammock. Good-by, Coo-o-o-ra!" As she spoke her own name
Coora's voice warbled and crooned into the soft _coo_ of a
Ground-Pigeon's note, and her parents glancing up saw that this bird
must be their child, their Coora, magically changed.

"Let us cut down the tree and catch the wicked girl!" cried the father.
And seizing his axe he chopped away lustily until the tree fell with a
crash. But even at that moment the Pigeon fluttered away to another
tree, crooning again the soft syllables which she has spoken ever since,
"Coo-ra, coo-ra, coo!"

From tree to tree about the rice plantation the distracted parents
pursued the Pigeon; but it was in vain to try to capture her. Ever she
escaped them when they seemed about to lay hands upon her soft feathers.
After following her flight for many miles they were obliged to return
home, sad and sorry and repentant. For they knew now that it was their
own unkindness and their broken promises which had driven their daughter
away from the cottage, never to return.

The beautiful Ground-Pigeon still lingers near the rice plantations
which she had so longed to visit. Still she plaintively calls her name,
and still she wears the necklace about her pretty little neck. And the
little Malay maidens love her very dearly because she was once a girl
like them.




SISTER HEN AND THE CROCODILE


The Crocodile is one of the hungriest bodies that ever lived. When he is
looking for a dinner he will eat almost anything that comes within
reach. Sometimes the greedy fellow swallows great stones and chunks of
wood, in his hurry mistaking them for something more digestible. And
when he is smacking his great jaws over his food he makes such a greedy,
terrible noise that the other animals steal away nervously and hide
until it shall be Master Crocodile's sleepy-time. He is too lazy to
waddle in search of a dinner far from the river where he lives. But any
animal or even a man-swimmer had best be careful how he ventures into
the water near the Crocodile's haunts. For what seems to be a
greenish-brown, knobby log of wood floating on the water, has little
bright eyes which are on the lookout for anything which moves. And below
the water two great jaws are ready to open and swallow in the prey of
Mr. Hungry-Mouth.

But no matter how hungry the Crocodile may be, he will not touch the
Hen, even if she should venture into his very jaws; at least, that is
what the Black Men of the Congo River will tell you. And surely, as they
are the nearest neighbors of the big reptile they ought to know if any
one does. Now this is the story which they tell to explain why the
Crocodile will not eat the Hen.

Once upon a time there was a Hen, a common, plump, clucky mother Hen,
who used every day to go down to the river and pick up bits of food on
the moist banks, where luscious insects were many. She did not know that
this Congo River was the home of the Crocodile, the biggest, fiercest,
scaliest, hungriest Crocodile in all Africa. But one day when she went
down to the water as usual she hopped out onto what looked like a mossy
log, saying to herself:--

"Aha! This is a fine old timber-house. It is full of juicy bugs, I know.
I shall have a great feast!"

Tap-tap! Pick-pick! The Hen began to scratch and peck upon the rough
bark of the log, but Oh dear me! suddenly she began to feel very
seasick. The log was rolling over! The log was teetering up on end like
a boat in a storm! And before she knew what was really happening the
poor Hen found herself floundering in the water in the very jaws of the
terrible Crocodile.

"Ha, ha!" cried the Crocodile in his harsh voice. "You took me for a
log, just as the other silly creatures do. But I am no log, Mrs. Hen, as
you shall soon see. I am Hungry Crocodile, and you will make the fifth
dinner which I have had this evening."

The Hen was frightened almost to death, but she kept her presence of
mind and gasped frantically as she saw the great jaws opening to swallow
her:--

"O _Brother_, don't!"

Now the Crocodile was so surprised at hearing the Hen call him Brother
that he kept his jaws wide open and forgot to swallow his dinner. He
kept them open for some time, gaping foolishly, wondering what the Hen
could mean, and how he could possibly be her brother. And by the time he
had remembered how hungry he was, there was nothing for him to eat. For
the Hen had skipped away just as fast as her feet would take her.

"Pouf!" snorted the Crocodile. "Her brother, indeed! I am not her
brother, and she knows it very well. What a fool I was to be caught by
such a word! Just wait till I catch her again and we will see. I will
_brother_ her!" And he swam sulkily away to hide his mortification in
the Congo mud, with only the end of his long nose poking out as a
ventilator for his breathing.

Now, though the Hen had had so narrow an escape, it had not sufficiently
taught her a lesson. A few days afterwards once more she went down to
the river, for she could not resist the temptation of the bug-dinner
which she knew she should find there. But she kept her eyes open sharply
for any greeny log which might be floating on the water, saying to
herself, "Old Hungry-Mouth shall not catch me napping this time. I know
his wicked tricks!"

But this time the Crocodile was not floating on the water like a greeny
log. He was lying still as still, sunning himself on the river bank
behind some tall reeds. Mrs. Hen came trotting down to the water, a
plump and tempting sight, cocking her head knowingly on one side as she
spied a real log floating out beyond, which she took to be her enemy.
And as she scratched in the soft mud, chuckling to think how sly she
was, with a rush and a rustle down pounced the Crocodile upon her, and
once more, before she knew it, she found herself in the horrid gateway
of his jaws, threatened by the double rows of long, white teeth.

[Illustration: "_O Brother, don't!_"]

"Oho!" snapped the Crocodile. "You shall not escape me this time. I
am a log, am I? Look at me again, Mrs. Hen. Am I a log?" And he came at
her to swallow her at once.

But again the Hen squawked, "O _Brother_, don't!"

Again the Crocodile paused, thunderstruck by this extraordinary word.
"Oh, bother the Hen!" he cried, "what can she mean, really? How can I be
her brother? She lives in a town on the land, and I live in my kingdom
of mud and water. How could two creatures possibly be more unlike?
How"--but while he had been thinking of these hows, once more the Hen
had managed to escape, and was pelting back to her barnyard as fast as
she could go.

Then indeed the Crocodile was angry. He determined to go and see Nzambi,
the wise witch princess, about the matter. She would tell him what it
all meant. But it was a long journey to her palace and he was awkward
and slow in traveling upon land. Before he had gone very far he was
tired and out of breath, and stopped to rest under a banana tree.

As he lay panting in the shade he saw his friend Mbambi, the great
Lizard, hurrying past through the jungle.

"Oh, Mbambi!" cried old Hungry-Mouth, "stop a moment. I want to speak
with you. I am in great trouble."

So the Lizard drew near, wagging her head wisely, for it pleased her to
be consulted by the big Crocodile. "What can it be, dear friend, that is
troubling you this day?" she said amiably. "Surely, no one would be so
rude or rash as to offend the King of Congo River. But tell me your
trouble and perhaps I can advise you."

"Listen to me, then," said the Crocodile. "Almost every day a nice fat
Hen,--Oh, Mbambi! so delightfully fat and tempting!--comes to my river
to feed. Well, why don't I make her my dinner? you ask. Now hearken:
each time, just as I am about to catch her and carry her to my home she
startles me by calling me '_Brother_.' Did you ever hear of anything so
maddening? Twice I have let her escape because of the word. But I can
stand it no longer, and I am on the way to Princess Nzambi to hold a
palaver about it." (By "palaver" the slangy Crocodile meant a long,
serious talk.)

"Silly idiot!" cried the Mbambi, not very politely. "Do nothing of the
kind. You will only get the worst of the palaver and show your ignorance
before the wise Nzambi. Now listen to me. Don't you know, dear
Crocodile, that the Duck lives on the water, though she is neither a
fish nor a reptile? And the Duck lays eggs. The Turtle does the same,
though she is no bird. The Hen lays eggs, just as I do; and I am Mbambi,
the great Lizard. As for you, dear old Hungry-Mouth, you know that at
this moment"--here she whispered discreetly, looking around to see that
no one was listening,--"at this moment in a snug nest dug out of the
sand on the banks of the Congo, Mrs. Crocodile has covered with leaves
to hide them from your enemies sixty smooth white eggs. And in a few
weeks out of these will scamper sixty little wiggly Crocodiles, your
dear, homely, scaly, hungry-mouthed children. Yes, we all lay eggs, my
silly friend, and so in a sense we are all brothers, as the Hen has
said."

"Sh!" whispered the Crocodile, nervously. "Don't mention those eggs of
mine, I beg of you. Some one might overhear. What you say is undoubtedly
true," he added pensively, after thinking a few moments. "Then I suppose
I must give up my tempting dinner of Hen. I cannot eat my Sister, can
I?"

"Of course you cannot," said the Mbambi, as he rustled away through the
jungle. "We can't have everything we want in this world."

"No, I see we cannot," sighed the Crocodile, as he waddled back towards
the banks of the Congo. Now in the same old spot he found the Hen, who
had been improving his absence by greedily stuffing herself on
beetle-bugs, flies, and mosquitoes until she was so fat that she could
not run away at the Crocodile's approach. She could only stand and
squawk feebly, fluttering her ridiculous wings.

But the Crocodile only said, "Good evening, Sister," very politely, and
passing her by with a wag of his enormous tail sank with a plop into the
waters of the Congo.

And ever since that time the Hen has eaten her dinner in tranquil peace,
undisturbed by the sight of floating log or basking shape of knobby
green. For she knows that old Hungry-Mouth will not eat his Sister, the
Hen.




THE THRUSH AND THE CUCKOO


In the wonderful days of old it is said that Christ and Saint Peter went
together upon a journey. It was a beautiful day in March, and the earth
was just beginning to put on her summer gorgeousness. As the two
travelers were passing near a great forest they spied a Thrush sitting
on a tree singing and singing as hard as he could. And he cocked his
head as if he was very proud of something.

Saint Peter stopped at the foot of the tree and said, "I wish you a good
day, Thrush!"

"I have no time to thank you," chirped the Thrush pertly.

"Why not, pretty Thrush?" asked Saint Peter in surprise. "You have all
the time in the world and nothing to do but sing."

"You mistake," cried the Thrush. "I am making the summer! It is I, I, I
who make the green grass grow and the flowers bud. Look, how even now
the world is growing beautiful in answer to my song." And the conceited
little bird continued to warble as hard as he could,--

    "To-day I shall marry, I and no other!
    To-morrow my brother."

Christ and Saint Peter looked at each other and smiled, then went upon
their way without another word, leaving the Thrush to continue his task
of making the summer.

This was in the morning. But before midday the clouds gathered and the
sky darkened, and at noon a cold rain began to drip. The poor Thrush
ceased his jubilant song and began to shiver in the March wind. By night
the snow was felling thick and fast, and where there had been a green
carpet on the earth was now spread a coverlet of snowy white. Shivering
and like to die of cold the Thrush took refuge under the tree in the
moss and dead leaves. He thought no more of his marriage, nor of his
brother's, but only of the danger which threatened him, and of the
discomfort.

The next morning Christ and Saint Peter, plodding through the
snow-drifts, came upon him again, and Saint Peter said as before, "I
wish you good day, Thrush."

"Thank you," answered the Thrush humbly, and his voice was shaky with
cold and sorrow.

"What do you here on the cold ground, O Thrush-who-make-the-summer, and
why are you so sad?" asked Saint Peter. And the Thrush piped feebly,--

    "To-day I must die, I and no other!
    To-morrow my brother."

"O foolish little bird," said Saint Peter. "You boasted that you made
the summer. But see! The Lord's will has sent us back to the middle of
winter, to punish your boasting. You shall not die, he will send the sun
again to warm you. But hereafter beware how you take too much credit for
your little efforts."

Since that time March has ever been a treacherous and a changeful month.
Then the Thrush thinks not of marriage, but of his lesson learned in
past days, and wraps himself in his warmest feathers, waiting for the
Lord's will to be done. He is no longer boastful in his song, but sings
it humbly and sweetly to the Lord's glory, thanking him for the summer
which his goodness sends every year to happy bird and beast and child of
man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now after this adventure with the Thrush, Christ and Saint Peter went
upon their journey for many miles. At last, weary and hungry, they
passed a Baker's shop. From the window came the smell of new warm bread
baking in the oven, and Christ sent Saint Peter to ask the Baker for a
loaf. But the Baker, who was a stingy fellow, refused.

"Go away with you!" he cried. "I give no bread to lazy beggars!"

"I ask it for my Master, who has traveled many miles and is most faint
and weary," said Saint Peter. But the Baker frowned and shook his head,
then strode into the inner shop, banging the door after him.

The Baker's wife and six daughters were standing at one side when these
things happened, and they heard all that took place. They were generous
and kind-hearted bodies, and tears stood in their eyes at the Baker's
rough words. As soon as he had gone out they wrapped up the loaf and
gave it stealthily to Saint Peter saying,--

"Take the loaf for your Master, good man, and may he be refreshed by
it."

Saint Peter thanked and blessed them and took the loaf to Christ. And
for their charity the Lord set these good women in the sky as the Seven
Stars,--you may see them to this day shining in love upon the sleeping
world. But the wicked Baker he changed into a Cuckoo; and as long as he
sings his dreary song, "Coo-coo! Coo-coo!" in the spring, so long the
Seven Stars are visible in the heaven, so folk say.




THE OWL AND THE MOON


When the moon is round and full, if you look very carefully at the
golden disk you can see in shadowy outline the profile of a beautiful
lady. She is leaning forward as if looking down upon our earth, and
there is a little smile upon her sweet lips. This fair dame is Putri
Balan, the Princess of the Moon, and she smiles because she remembers
how once upon a time she cheated old Mr. Owl, her tiresome lover.

Putri Balan, so they tell you in Malay, was always very, very beautiful,
as we see her now. Like all the Malay women, Putri Balan loved to chew
the spicy betel-nut which turns one's lips a bright scarlet. It is
better, so they say, than any kind of candy, and it is considered much
nicer and more respectable than chewing-gum. So Putri Balan was not
unladylike, although she chewed her betel-nut all night long.

Now, ever since the day when Mr. Owl carelessly let the naughty little
Wren escape from prison, the shamed and sorry old fellow had never
dared to show his face abroad in daylight. Gradually his eyes grew
blurred and blinky, till now he could not see anything by day, even if
he were to try.

So it happens that there are many delightful things about which old Mr.
Owl does not know,--things which take place while the beautiful sun is
shining. But also there are marvelous sights, unknown to early-sleeping
birds, which he enjoys all by himself. For at night his queer eyes are
wonderfully strong and bright. All day long he sits in his hollow tree,
but when the other feathered folk are drowsing upon their roosts, or are
snugly rolled up in their little nests, with their heads tucked under
their downy wings, old Mr. Owl puts on his round spectacles and goes
a-prowling up and down the world through the woods and meadows (like
Haroun-al-Rashid in the streets of Bagdad), spying all sorts of queer
doings.

And this is how old Mr. Owl happened to see the fair Princess Putri
Balan, smiling down from her moon upon the sleeping world of birds who
had never seen her and never would see her in all her loveliness.

How beautiful she was! How bright and wonderful! Old Mr. Owl stared up
in wide-eyed astonishment, and then and there fell in love with her,
and resolved to ask her to be his wife.

Cramming on his spectacles more tightly and ruffling the feathers about
his neck, he flew up and up and up, as high as ever he dared to go,
until he was within hailing distance of the moon. Then he called out in
his softest tones,--which were harsh enough to any ears,--

"O fair Moon-Maiden, O beautiful Princess, will you marry me? For I love
you very dearly."

The Princess Putri Balan stopped chewing her betel-nut for a moment and
looked down to see what daring creature might thus be addressing her.
Soon she spied Mr. Owl with his goggle-eyes looking up at her adoringly.
He was such a ridiculous old creature, and his spectacles glinted so
queerly in the moonlight, that Putri Balan began to laugh and answered
him not at all. She laughed so hard that she almost swallowed her
betel-nut, which might have been a serious matter.

Mr. Owl continued to stare, for he saw nothing funny in the situation.
Again he repeated in his hoarse voice, "O fair Moon-Maiden, O beautiful
Princess, will you marry me? For I love you very dearly."

Again the Princess laughed, for she thought it a tremendous joke; and
again she nearly choked. Mr. Owl waited, but she made him no other
answer. However, he was a persistent lover. All night long he went on
asking the same question, over and over again, until the Princess Putri
Balan was quite worn out trying not to choke with laughter while she
chewed the betel-nut. At last she said impatiently,--

"O Mr. Goggle-Eyes! Do give me a moment's peace! You make me laugh so
that I cannot chew my betel-nut. Yes, I will say _yes_, if you will only
leave me to finish my betel-nut undisturbed. I will marry you. But you
must go away until I have quite done."

Then Mr. Owl was filled with joy. "Thanks, thanks, O most gracious
lady!" he said. "I will go away and leave you to finish your betel-nut
undisturbed. But I shall come again to-morrow night, and by that time
you will have done with it, and then you will be mine!"

Mr. Owl flew back to his home in the hollow tree, for it was almost
morning, and already he was growing so blind that he could hardly find
the way. But the Princess Putri Balan went on chewing the betel-nut, and
to herself she said,--

[Illustration: _Putri Balan began to laugh_]

"How am I to rid myself of this bore? I cannot chew this little
betel-nut forever; there must be an end to it before long. Mr. Owl
will certainly come again to-morrow night, and then, according to my
promise, I must become his wife. I cannot marry old Goggle-Eyes. Oh
dear! What shall I do?"

As she chewed her betel-nut the Princess Putri Balan hit upon a plan.
She would manage to cheat old Mr. Owl after all. She would never finish
the betel-nut! She took the little bit that remained,--and it was a
dangerously little bit, for the Princess had been chewing all night
long, except when she was laughing,--and reaching out from the moon she
tossed it down, down, down upon the earth. At the same time she said a
magic moon-charm: and when the bit of betel-nut reached the earth, it
became a little bird,--the same which the Malay people call the Honey
Bird, with brilliant, beautiful plumage. And the Princess Putri Balan
cried out to it from her golden house,--

"Fly away, pretty little bright bird! Fly as far and as fast as ever you
can, and keep out of Mr. Owl's way. For it is you who must save me from
becoming his unhappy wife."

So the Honey Bird flew away, a brilliant streak, through the Malay
woods, and hid himself in a little nest.

When night came out stole Mr. Owl, with his spectacles in place, and up
he flew to his Princess, whom he now hoped to call his very own.

"Good evening, my beautiful Princess!" he cried. "Have you finished your
betel-nut at last, and are you ready to keep your promise?"

But the Princess Putri Balan looked down at him, pretending to be sad,
though there was a twinkle in her beautiful eye; and she said,--

"Alas! Mr. Owl, a dreadful thing has happened. I lost my betel-nut,
before it was quite finished. It fell down, down, down, until I think it
reached the earth. And I cannot marry you, according to my promise,
until it is finished."

"Then it must be found!" cried Mr. Owl. "I will find it. My eyes are
sharp at night and nothing escapes them. Shine kindly on me, Princess,
and I will find the betel-nut for you, and you shall yet be mine."

"Go then, Mr. Owl," said the Princess, smiling to herself. "Go and look
for the betel-nut which I must finish before I marry you. Search
carefully and you may find it soon."

Poor Mr. Owl searched carefully, but he could not find the bit of
betel-nut. Of course he could not find it, when it had changed and flown
away as a beautiful, many-colored bird! All that night he sought, till
the sun sent him blinking to his tree. And all the next night he
sought, and the next, and the next. And he kept on seeking for days and
months and years, while the Princess Putri Balan smiled down upon him
and was happy at heart because of her clever scheme.

Old Mr. Owl never found out the trick, nor suspected the innocent little
Honey Bird, whom indeed he scarcely ever saw, because it was a
sunset-sleeping bird, while he was a wistful, lonely, sad night-prowler.
Up and down, up and down the world he goes, still looking for the
betel-nut of the Princess Putri Balan, which he will never find. And as
he flies in the moonlight he glances ever longingly at the beautiful
lady in the moon, and sobs "Hoo-hoo! Hoo-hoo!" in grief and despair. For
after all these centuries he begins to fear that she will never be his
wife.




THE TUFTED CAP


One dark night Master Owl left his hollow tree and went prowling about
the world as usual upon his hopeless hunt for the Princess's betel-nut.
As soon as he was out of hearing a long, lean, hungry Rat crept to the
house and stole the dainties which the lonely old bachelor had stored
away for the morrow's dinner. The thief dragged them away to his own
hole and had a splendid feast with his wife and little ones. But the Owl
