his return to the village.  In spite of the exciting drama that was now
commencing, and in which he was to play such a prominent part, the most
vivid picture that presented itself to him was his irate wife, waiting
at the wigwam to pounce upon him, and he could not force the dire
consequences of his temerity from his mind.

Slowly and tremblingly he approached the lodge, but saw none of its
inmates.  The profound silence filled him with an ominous misgiving.
He paused and listened.  Not a breath was audible.  He stepped softly
forward and cautiously peered in.  He saw Miss Prescott apparently
asleep in one corner, and his wife trimming the fire.  Hans hesitated a
moment, and no pen can describe or artist depict the shivering horror
with which he stepped within the lodge.  His heart beat like a
trip-hammer, and when his wife lifted her dark eyes upon him, he nearly
fainted from excess of terror.  Great was his amazement, therefore,
when, instead of rebukes and blows, she came smilingly forward and
asked:

"Has my husband been sick?"

That question explained everything.  Believing him to be sick, her
feelings were not of wrath, but of solicitude.  Hans wiped the
perspiration from his forehead and, hardly conscious of what he was
doing, replied:

"B'lieves I didn't feel very much well--kinder empty in de stomach as
dough I'd like to have dinner."

"You shall have it at once."

Now, to insure the success of Hans Vanderbum's plans, it was necessary
that he should cook the fish, in order that he might find opportunity
to mix the gum with it; but the wife, out of pure kindness refused to
allow this.  He was taken all aback at this unfortunate slip in his
programme.  By resorting again to intense thought, he hit upon an
ingenious plan to outwit her, even at this disadvantage.  The children
needed no commands to remain out doors.

The food was nicely cooking, when Hans started up as if alarmed.

"What's the matter?" inquired his wife.

"I t'inks I hears some noise outside.  Hadn't you better goes out, my
dear, good, kind Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock, and see vot it is?"

The obliging woman instantly darted forward, and Hans proceeded to his
task with such trembling eagerness that there was danger of its
failure.  First flattening the gum between his thumb and finger, he
dropped it upon one of the fish, where it instantly dissolved like
butter.  He was busy stirring this, when his partner entered.

"Good man," said she; "kind to Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock."

Hans Vanderbum felt as if he were the greatest monster upon earth thus
to deceive his trusting wife, and there was a perceptible tremor in his
voice, as he replied:

"I will tends to de fish."

He saw that the gum had united thoroughly with the food, and then with
a flushed face, he resigned his place to his wife.  The dinner, or more
properly the supper, was soon completed, when Hans concluded that he
was too unwell to eat anything.  The squaw was somewhat surprised when
Miss Prescott, after being awakened from a feigned sleep, turned her
head away from the tempting food in disgust.

"You sick too?" she asked.

"No--no--no," shutting her eyes and turning her back upon her.

"I wouldn't coax her to eat, my good, dear frow," said Hans.  "Let de
little Dutchmen eat it; dey're hungry enough."

In answer to a shrill call, Quanonshet and Madokawandock came tumbling
in, and fell upon the food like a couple of wolves.  After two or three
mouthfuls they stopped and smacked their lips as if there was something
peculiar in the taste of their fish, and Hans' heart thumped as he saw
the mother do the same.  To forestall any inquiries, he remarked that
he had caught the fish in another portion of the stream, and perhaps
they might taste bitter, but he guessed "dey was all right."  This
satisfied them, and in a few minutes more there was nothing left but a
few bones.  Thus far all went well.

As the sun descended in the western sky, and the magnificent American
twilight gathered upon the forest and river, the excited Hans Vanderbum
could scarcely conceal his impatience and anxiety.  Never before, since
his marriage, had he been in such a predicament, and never again, he
hoped, would he feel the misery that was now torturing him.  Time
always passes wearily to the watcher.  It seemed an age to him ere the
sun slipped down behind the wilderness out of sight.  At length,
however, the dusk of early evening enveloped the lodge, and shortly
after Quanonshet and Madokawandock came in, and dropping down fell
almost immediately asleep.

To expedite matters, Hans Vanderbum feigned slumber, but he kept one
eye upon the movements of his wife.  He marked her listless, absent
air, and he could scarcely conceal his joy when she stretched herself
in front of the door, without speaking or ordering him to lie beside
her, as was her usual custom.  Five minutes later, she was as
unconscious as though she were never to wake again.  To make "assurance
doubly sure," he waited full half an hour without moving.  Then he
raised his head, and called in a whisper to Miss Prescott:

"I say dere."

"Well! what is it?" she responded, rising.

"You ishn't ashleep bees you?"

"No, I am ready."

"Well, I guesses it bees purty near times."

"Are they all sound asleep--your Lily and children?"

"Yaw, dey's won't wake if you pound 'em."

"Would it not be best to take a look outside and see whether there is
any danger of our being discovered?"

"Yaw--I finks so."

In passing out, Hans trod upon the outstretched arm of his wife, but
her sleep was so sound that she did not awaken.  The situation of the
lodge was such that all the Shawnees visible were upon one side of it,
so that the chances of discovery were comparatively slight, if the
least precaution was used.  Appearing at the entrance of the wigwam,
without entering, he motioned for the captive to come out.  She arose,
stepping cautiously and carefully, and when she found herself in the
open air once more, with the cool night-wind blowing upon her fevered
cheek, she almost fainted from excessive emotion.

"Come, now, walks right behind me, and if you sees--dunder and blixen!
dere comes an Injin!"

The girl had caught a glimpse of two shadowy figures, and without
thought, she did the wisest possible thing for her to do under the
circumstances.  Springing back within the lodge, she reseated herself
beyond the form of her prostrate sentinel, and waited for them to pass.

"How do you do, brother?" asked one of them, in the Shawnee tongue, as
they halted.  "How gets along our prisoner?"

"Pretty good; she is in de lodge."

"She is safe in the hands of Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock, but I will
look in."  The savage stepped to the entrance and merely glanced
inside.  The darkness was so great that he saw nothing but the figure
of the squaw before him, and he and his companion passed on.  The
captive waited until she was sure they were beyond sight and hearing,
and then she stepped forth again.

"Let us hurry," said she, eagerly.  "There may be others near."

"Yaw, but don't push me over on mine nose."

"Oh! if she awakes, or we are seen!"

"She won't do dat.  She shleeps till morning, and bimeby I shleeps too,
and won't wake up afore she does."

"Be careful, be careful, my good friend, and do not linger so," said
the girl, nearly beside herself with excitement, "and let us stop
talking."

"Yaw, I bees careful!  I ain't talking.  It bees you all de time dat is
making de noise.  I knows better dan for to make noise, when dey might
hear.  Doesn't you fink I does?"

"Yes, yes, yes."

"I'm glad dat you t'inks so.  I knowed a gal once; she was a good 'eal
like you; Annie Stanton was her name; she had a feller dat was a good
'eal like de Lieutenant, and dey didn't t'ink I knowed much, but dey
found dey was mistaken.  Don't you b'lieve dey did?"

"Yes, yes--but you are talking all the while."

"Dat ish so--I doesn't talk no more."

Finally, the impression reached the brain of Hans Vanderbum that he was
making rather more noise than was prudent, and he resolutely sealed his
lips--so resolutely that, being compelled to breathe through his
nostrils, Miss Prescott feared that the noise thus made was more
dangerous than had been his indulgence in conversation.  She endeavored
to warn him, but he firmly refused to hear, waddling ahead, his huge
form stumbling and lumbering forward like a young elephant just
learning to walk.  The moon being directly before them, his massive
shoulders were clearly outlined against the sky, when the woods were
open enough to permit an unobstructed entrance to its light.  A dozen
yards from the wigwam, and the two were clear of the Shawnee village,
their only danger being from any wandering Indian whom they might
chance to meet.  They had gone perhaps a quarter of a mile, when the
captive's heart nearly stopped beating as she saw the hand of a savage
outlined against the sky.  As she observed that he was steadily
approaching, she halted and was debating whether or not to dart off in
the woods, and depend upon herself for safety, when Hans spoke:

"Dat you, Oonomoo?"

"Yeh--'tis me."  The quick eye of the Huron had caught a glimpse of the
girl behind the Dutchman, and he now came up and addressed her:

"Is my friend 'fraid?"

"No, no; thank Heaven! is that you, my good, kind Oonomoo?" asked the
girl, reeling forward, until sustained by the gentle grasp of the
Indian.

"Yeh--me take care of you.  Here somebody else--t'ink he know how
better--guess like him, too."  She caught a glimpse of another form as
the savage spoke in his jesting manner.  She needed nothing more to
assure her of its identity.  Lieutenant Canfield came forward, and
placing one arm around her waist, and drawing her fervently to him, he
said:

"Oh! my _dear_ Mary, I am so glad to see you again.  Are you unharmed?"

"Not a hair of my head has been injured.  And how is my dear father and
mother and sister Helen?"

"Your father was perfectly well and in good spirits when I left him a
few days since, and as he knows nothing of this calamity, there is no
reason for believing it is any different with him.  Your mother and
sister I think know nothing of this, although I fear their
apprehensions must be excited."

"I trust I shall soon be with them, and oh! I pray----"

"I's gettin' shleepy," suddenly exclaimed Hans Vanderbum.

"Take gum?"

"Yaw; took much as Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock."

"Git sleep soon--go back--don't wake up."

"Yaw, I will."  And before any one could speak, Hans was lumbering
through the bushes and woods on his way back to his lodge, fearful that
if he delayed he would fall asleep.  It was the wish of Lieutenant
Canfield to thank him for his kindness to his betrothed, and the
latter, very grateful for his honest friendship, intended to assure him
of it, but his hasty exit prevented.

The gum of which Hans Vanderbum had partaken, began soon to have a
perceptible effect.  He stumbled forward against the bushes and trees,
blinking and careless of what he did, until he reached the door of his
wigwam.  Here he summoned all his energies, and, stepping carefully
over his wife, lay down beside her, and almost immediately was asleep.

As might be expected, the wife was the first to awaken.  So profound
had been her sleep that the forenoon of the next day was fully half
gone before she opened her eyes, and then it required a few minutes to
regain entire possession of her faculties.  Looking around, she saw the
inanimate forms of her children, and close beside her the unconscious
Hans Vanderbum, and, horror of horrors, the captive was gone!  She was
now thoroughly awakened.  With a shrill scream she sprung to her feet.
Giving her husband several violent kicks, and shouting his name, she
ran outside to arouse the Shawnees, and set them upon the track, if it
was not already too late.  Hans opened one eye, and, seeing how matters
stood, he shut it again, to ruminate upon the story he should tell to
the pressing inquiries of his friends, and, in a few minutes, he had
prepared everything to his satisfaction.  Five minutes later he heard a
dull thumping upon the ground, and the next minute the lodge was filled
with Shawnees.  Sharp yells--the signals of alarm--could be heard in
every quarter, even as far distant as the river.  All seemed centering
toward one spot.  In answer to repeated shoutings, and kicks, and
twitches of the hair, Hans opened his big, blue eyes, and stared around
him with an innocent, wondering look.

"Where's the girl?  Where's the pale-faced captive?" demanded several,
including his wife.

"Ober dere; (pointing to her usual resting-place; and then, discovering
her absence) no, dunder and blixen, she isn't."

"You helped her away in the night.  We saw you when the moon was up
standing in the lodge."  His accuser was the Indian who had peered into
the lodge the night before.

"Mine Gott! dat Huron, Oonomoo, has got her!"  The name of the famous
scout was familiar to all, and called forth a general howl of fury.
Understanding that it was expected he should give some explanation, he
said: "I see'd de Injin last night, and he gived me something dat he
said I musht eat and mix wid my fish.  I done so, and it made me, and
Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock, and Quanonshet and Madokawandock go to
shleep, and shust now we wakes up and de gal ain't here!"

This brief, concise statement was generally believed, all knowing the
trustful, verdant nature of the Dutchman, and there was a general
clearing of the wigwam, for the purpose of ascertaining which direction
the Huron had taken; but they met with no success, as the woods were so
thoroughly trodden by numerous feet, that it was impossible to
distinguish any particular trail.  One or two Shawnees, however, were
not satisfied with what Hans had said, and, after making several more
inquiries, they remarked:

"Oonomoo, the Huron, is a brave Indian, but could not enter the Shawnee
lodges unless the door was opened from within.  Our white brother----"

Hans' wife sprung up like a catamount, whose young were attacked.  "You
say my brave Hans let her go, eh?  My brave warriors, I will show you,"
she exclaimed, springing at them in such a perfect fury that they tore
out of the wigwam and were seen no more.

"My _dear_ Hans."

"My _dear, good_ Keewaygooshturkumkankangewock! de same shape all de
way down."

And the loving wife and husband embraced with all the fervor of
youthful lovers.  And locked thus together, trusting, contented and
happy, we take our final leave of them.




CHAPTER IX.

A NEW DANGER.


      Tis too late
  To crush the hordes who have the power and will
  To rob thee of thy hunting-grounds and fountains,
  And drive thee backward to the Rocky Mountains.--EDWARD SANFORD.


The moon was now well up in the sky, although it was still
comparatively early in the night.  It was hardly possible that the
escape of Miss Prescott could be discovered before morning, yet the
Huron was too prudent not to guard against the most remote probability,
by taking up their march at once in a direct line for the settlement.
The eight or ten hours of unmolested travel that were before them, were
amply sufficient to place all beyond danger, at least from the Shawnees
who had just been left behind.  Taking the lead, as usual, he proceeded
at a moderate walk, timing his progress to the endurance of the maiden
with him, still keeping the impatient Cato behind.

"I say, Oonomoo," called out Lieutenant Canfield, in a suppressed
voice, "suppose Miss Prescott and myself should indulge in
conversation, would you have any objection?"

"No--don't care--talk sweet--talk love--so no one hear but gal--gal
talk low, sweet, so no one but him hear," returned the Indian,
pleasantly.

Falling a rod or so in the rear, the Lieutenant took the willing hand
of his betrothed, and said:

"Tell me, dear Mary, of your captivity--of all that happened to you
since they took you from your home."

The girl proceeded to relate what is already known to the reader,
adding that but for the friendship of Hans Vanderbum and Oonomoo, she
never would have hoped to escape from her captivity.

"The Dutchman is a stupid, honest-hearted fellow, whose heart is in the
right place, and the Huron has endeared himself to hundreds of hearts
by his self-sacrificing devotion in their hour of affliction."

"What possible motive could influence him to risk his life in my
rescue?"

"His own nature.  He has been with those holy men, the Moravians, and
he is, what is so rarely seen, a Christian Indian.  But, he has been
thus friendly to the whites for many years.  The Shawnees inflicted
some great injury upon him.  What it was I do not know.  I have heard
that his father was a chief, and, while Oonomoo was still a boy, he was
broken of his chiefdom, and both he and his wife inhumanly massacred.
This is the secret of his deadly hostility to that tribe, and, I am
told, that among the _scores and scores_ of scalps which grace his
lodge, there is not one which has not been torn from the head of a
Shawnee.  But for a year or two, he has refrained from scalping his
foes, and he has killed none except in honorable warfare."

"Has he a wife and family?"

"He has a wife and son, and his lodge is deep in the forest, no one
knows where.  Its location is so skillfully chosen that it has baffled
all search for years.  His wife, I have been told, has been a sincere
Christian from childhood, and her piety and faithfulness have had a
good influence on him."

"He is a noble man, and my dear father will reward him for this."

"No, he will not.  Oonomoo has never accepted a reward for his services
and never will.  Presents and mementoes have been showered upon him,
but his proud soul scorns anything like payment for his services.  Do
you suppose that _I_ could ever remunerate him for the happiness he has
brought _me_?" asked the Lieutenant, pressing the hand of his beloved.

"I am sure my joy is very great, too.  Oh! how my dear mother and
sister must have agonized over this calamity."

"They probably have known nothing of it."

"But you say you saw the light of the fire, and you were fully as far
off as they."

"It is true, but I had not the remotest suspicion of its being your
home.  It seems unlikely that your mother should have suspected the
truth, as she had every reason to believe the Indians were friendly to
your family."

"They must have seen the illumination in the sky, and, knowing the
location of our home so well, they could but have their worst
apprehensions aroused."

"If such indeed be the case, let us congratulate ourselves that we are
so soon to undeceive them."

"I am glad that father cannot possibly hear of this until he is assured
of our safety."

"I am not so sure of that.  When I left, the chances were that he might
follow me almost immediately on a visit to the block-house at the
settlement, and from what I heard I am pretty certain that if he has
not already been, he soon will be appointed to the command of the
garrison at that place.  It is not at all impossible that he may be in
charge of it this very minute."

"We will reach there to-morrow, when, as you said, their anxiety will
be relieved, although it will be no trifling loss to father when he
finds his house and all his possessions destroyed by the savages."

"But, as nothing when weighed in the balance with his loved child."

"And then the poor servants!  Oh! what an awful sight to see them
tomahawked when praying for mercy."

"And, I am told, by their only survivor, Cato there, that none implored
so earnestly for them as did you yourself, never once asking for your
own life, which was in such peril."

"I thought that I might accomplish something for them, but it was
useless.  Cato only escaped, and it was Providence, alone, that saved
him."

"What ye 'scussin' ob my name for?" called out the negro, who had
caught a word or two of the last remark.

"Stop noise," commanded Oonomoo, peremptorily.

"Hebens, golly! ain't dem two talkin', and can't I frow in an
obserwashun once in a while, eh?"

"Dey love--talk sweet--you nigger and don't love!"

"Oh, dat's de difference, am it?  Well, den, I forefwif proceeds all
for to cease making remarks.  But before ceasing altogever, I will
obsarve that you are a pretty smart feller, Oonymoo, and I hain't see'd
de Shawnee Injine yet dat knows as much as your big toe.  Hencefofe I
doesn't say noffin more;" and the negro held strict silence for a
considerable time.

Lieutenant Canfield and Miss Prescott conversed an hour or so longer,
in tones so low that they were but a mere murmur to the Huron, and then
as the forest grew more tangled and gloomy, their words became fewer in
number, until the conversation gradually ceased altogether.

The party were walking thus silently, when they reached a portion of
the wood where, for a short distance, it was perfectly open, as if it
had been totally swept over by a tornado.  In this they were about
entering, when, brought in relief against the moon-lit sky beyond, the
form of an Indian was seen standing as motionless as a statue.  At
first sight, the form appeared gigantic in its proportions, but a
second glance showed that instead of being a man it was a mere boy.  He
stood in the attitude of listening, as if he had just caught the sound
of the approaching company.

The Huron, disdaining to draw his rifle upon such a foe, halted and
looked steadily at him, while those in the rear, who had all discovered
the savage, did the same, the negro's teeth chattering like a dice-box,
as he fully believed him to be the advance-guard of an overwhelming
force.  The boy standing thus a moment, sprung with the quickness of
lightning to the cover of the trees.  As he did so, there was something
about the movement which awakened the suspicion of Oonomoo, and without
stirring, he gave utterance to a low, trilling whistle.  Instantly
there came a similar response, and the boy appeared again to view,
bounding forward quickly toward Oonomoo.

"Niniotan."

"Oonomoo."

"What brings you thus far in the woods?"

"_The Shawnees have discovered the home of Oonomoo!_"

"And where is Fluellina?" demanded the Huron, starting as if stricken
by a thunderbolt.

"She is hid in the woods, waiting for Oonomoo."

"Did she send Niniotan for him?"

"She sent him this morning, and he searched the woods until now, when
he found him in this opening."

"When did Fluellina and my son leave their home on the island in the
water?"

"Last night, shortly after the moon had come above the tree-tops, they
left in the canoe, and they went far before the morning light had
appeared, when they dared not return."

"And when saw you the Shawnees?"

"Yesterday, after you had gone, a canoe-full of their warriors passed
by the island in their canoe.  We saw them through the trees, and hid
in the bushes until they had passed, and they searched until night for
us."

"Where is Fluellina hid?"

"Close by the side of the stream which floats by the island, but many
miles from it."

"How long will it take Niniotan to guide Oonomoo there?"

"Four or five hours.  The wood is open and clear from briers."
