
[Illustration: "Don't You Dare Leave This House With My Property."]

"Come on, Mabel," said Grace, putting her arm around the shrinking
little figure. "Don't pay any attention to her. She isn't worth
bothering over. You can send her back her ridiculous things. You are
going to be happy now, and forget all about this cruel, terrible woman."

"You brazen imp, you," screamed the woman, and rushed at Grace, who
stood perfectly still, looking the angry woman in the face with such
open scorn in her gray eyes that Miss Brant drew back and stood scowling
at her, her hands working convulsively.

"Come, girls," said Mr. Bright. "We have no more time to waste. If you
have anything to say to me, Miss Brant, you can always find me at my
office on East Main Street. The clothing now worn by Miss Mabel will be
returned to you in due season. Good afternoon."

Mr. Bright, bowing politely, motioned to the three young girls to
precede him, and the party went quietly down the walk, leaving Miss
Brant in the open door, shaking her fist and uttering dire threats.

As for Mabel, she collapsed utterly, crying as though her heart would
break. Grace and Jessica exerted every effort to quiet her sobs, and
after a little she looked up, and, smiling through her tears, said
brokenly: "I can't believe that it's all true--that I shall never have
to go back there again. I'm afraid that it's all a dream and that I'll
wake up and find her standing over me. Can she get me again?" she said,
turning piteously to Mr. Bright.

"My dear little girl," he said, taking her hand, "she can't touch you.
I'll adopt you myself before I'll let you go back to her. Now run along
with Jessica and forget all about what has passed. Good-bye, Grace. You
see, your rescue party proved a success. Good-bye, daughter. Take good
care of Mabel. I'll have to hurry now, or miss my appointment."

Mr. Bright beamed on the three girls, raised his hat and hurried down
the street, leaving them to proceed slowly toward Jessica's home.
Passersby glanced curiously at the hatless, shabby young girl, as she
walked between Grace and Jessica, clinging to their hands as though
expecting every minute to be snatched from them.

"Well, girls," said Grace, "here is my street. I must leave you now. Be
good children, and----"

She was interrupted by an exultant shriek, and a second later five girls
appeared as by magic and gleefully surrounded the rescue party. The Phi
Sigma Tau was out in full force.

"Hurrah!" shrieked Nora, waving her school bag. "'We have met the enemy
and they are ours.' Tell us about it quickly. Why didn't you let me go
along? I was dying to cross swords with that old stone face."

Then everyone talked at once, surrounding Mabel and asking her questions
until Grace said, laughing: "Stop it, girls; let her get used to you
gradually. Don't come down on her like an avalanche."

Mabel, however, was equal to the occasion. She answered their questions
without embarrassment, and seemed quietly pleased at their
demonstrations.

"You are the child of the sorority now, Mabel," said Miriam Nesbit, "and
we are your adopted mothers. You will have your hands full trying to
please all of us."

"Stop teasing her," said Anne, "or she'll run away before she is fairly
adopted."

"It is very uncertain as to whether she will ever go further than my
house," said Jessica calmly. "I need Mabel more than do the rest of you,
but perhaps if you're good I'll loan her to you occasionally. Come on,
Mabel, let's go home before they spoil you completely."

"Considering the fact that the Bright family did two thirds of the
rescuing, I suppose we shall have to respect your claim," said Nora,
"but remember, Jessica, that generosity is a beautiful virtue to
cultivate."




CHAPTER X

JULIA PERFORMS A SACRED DUTY


"What have we ever done that we should be so neglected?" said David
Nesbit, swinging himself from his motorcycle and landing squarely in
front of Grace Harlowe and Anne Pierson while they were out walking one
afternoon.

"Why, David Nesbit, how can you make such statements?" replied Grace,
looking at the young man in mock disapproval. "You know perfectly well
that you've been shut up in your old laboratory all fall. We have
scarcely seen you since the walking party. You have even given football
the go by, and I'm so sorry, for you were a star player last year."

"I see you have discovered the secrets of my past life," replied David,
laughing. "That's what comes of having a sister who belongs to a
sorority. However, you folks are equally guilty, you've all gone mad
over your sorority, and left Hippy and Reddy and me to wander about
Oakdale like lost souls. I hear you've adopted a girl, too. Reddy is
horribly jealous of her. He says Jessica won't look at him any more."

"Reddy is laboring under a false impression," said Anne. "He is head
over heels in football practice and has forgotten he ever knew Jessica.
As for Hippy, Nora says that he is studying night and day, and that he
is actually wearing himself away by burning midnight oil."

"Yes, Hippy is studying some this year," replied David. "You see this is
our senior year, and we are going to enter the same college next year,
if all goes well. You know Hippy never bothered himself much about
study, just managed to scrape through. But now he'll have to hustle if
he gets through with High School this year, and he's wide awake to that
fact."

"Under those circumstances, Hippy is forgiven, but not you and Reddy!"
said Grace severely. "You'll have to have better excuses than football
and experiments."

"I'll tell you what we'll do to square ourselves," said David, smiling.
"We'll take you girls to the football game next Thursday. It's
Thanksgiving Day, you know, and Oakdale is going to play Georgetown
College. Reddy's on the team, but Hippy and I will do the honors."

"Fine," replied Grace. "But are you willing to burden yourselves with
some extra girls? You see it's this way. One of the things that our
sorority has pledged itself to do this year is to look up the stray
girls in High School, and see that they are not lonely and homesick
during holiday seasons. I used to know nearly all the girls in school,
but ever so many new ones have crept in, and some of them have come here
from quite a distance, on account of the excellence of our High School.
After we adopted Mabel Allison, we began looking about us for other fish
to fry, and found out about these girls. So every girl in the sorority
has invited one or more of these lonely ones for Thanksgiving Day. They
are to come in the morning and stay until the lights go out, which will
be late, for mother has consented to let me have a party and all those
new girls are to be the guests of honor.

"Mrs. Gray is in it, too. She insists on having Anne with her on
Thanksgiving, although Anne had invited two girls to her house,"
continued Grace. "Mrs. Gray had planned a party for us, but when we told
her what we were about to do, she gave up her party and agreed to go to
mine instead, on condition that Anne's family, plus Anne's two guests,
should have dinner with her."

"Bless her dear heart," said David, "she is always thinking of the
pleasure of others. Now about the football game. Bring your girls along
and I'll do my best to give them a good time, although I'm generally
anything but a success with new girls. However, Hippy makes up for what
I lack. He can entertain a regiment of them, and not even exert himself.
Now I must leave you, for I have a very important engagement at home."

"In the laboratory, I suppose," said Anne teasingly.

"Just so," replied David. "Good-bye, girls. Let me know how many tickets
you want for the game." He raised his cap, mounted his machine and was
off down the street.

"It will seem good to have a frolic with the boys again, won't it?" said
Grace to Anne as they strolled along.

"We do seem to be getting awfully serious and settled of late," replied
Anne. "Why, this sorority business has taken up all our spare time
lately. We've had so many special meetings."

"I know it," replied Grace, "but after Thanksgiving we'll only meet once
in two weeks, for I must get my basketball team in shape, and you see
all the members belong to the society."

"You ought to do extra good work this year," observed Anne, "for the
team is absolutely harmonious. Last season seems like a dream to me
now."

"It was real enough then," replied Grace grimly. "I have forgiven, long
ago, but I have not forgotten the way some of those girls performed last
year. It was remarkable that things ever straightened themselves. The
clouds looked black for a while, didn't they?"

Anne pressed Grace's hand by way of answer. The sophomore year had been
crowded with many trials, some of them positive school tragedies, in
which Anne and Grace had been the principal actors.

"What are you two mooning over?" asked a gay voice, and the two girls
turned with a start to find Julia Crosby grinning cheerfully at them.

"O Julia, how glad I am to see you at close range!" exclaimed Grace.
"Admiring you from a distance isn't a bit satisfactory."

"Business, children, business," said Julia briskly. "That's the only
thing that keeps me from your side. The duties of the class president
are many and irksome. At the present moment I've a duty on hand that
I don't in the least relish, and I want your august assistance. Will you
promise to help before I tell you?"

"Why, of course," answered Grace and Anne in the same breath. "What is
it you want us to do?"

"Well, it seems that some of your juniors are still in need of
discipline. You remember the hatchet that we buried last year with such
pomp and ceremony?"

"Yes, yes," was the answer.

"This morning I overheard certain girls planning to go out to the
Omnibus House after school to-morrow and dig up the poor hatchet and
flaunt it in the seniors' faces the day of the opening basketball game,
simply to rattle us. Just as though it wouldn't upset your team as much
as ours. It's an idiotic trick, at any rate, and anything but funny. Now
I propose to take four of our class, and you must select four of yours.
We'll hustle out there the minute school is over to-morrow, and be ready
to receive the marauders when they arrive. Select your girls, but don't
tell them what you want or they may tell some one about it beforehand."

"Well, of all impudence!" exclaimed Anne. "Who are the girls, Julia? Are
you sure they're juniors?"

"The two I heard talking are juniors. I don't know who else is in it.
They'll be very much astonished to find us 'waiting at the
church'--Omnibus House, I mean," said Julia, "and I imagine they'll feel
rather silly, too."

"Tell us who they are, Julia," said Grace. "We don't want to go into
this blindfolded."

"Wait and see," replied Julia tantalizingly. "Then you'll feel more
indignant and can help my cause along all the better. I give you my word
that the girls I overheard talking are not particular friends of yours.
You aren't going to back out, are you, and leave me without proper
support?"

"Of course not," laughed Grace. "Don't worry. We'll support you, only
you must agree to do all the talking."

"I shall endeavor to overcome their insane freshness with a few
well-chosen words," Julia promised. "Be sure and be on hand early."

Grace chose Anne, Nora, Jessica and Marian Barber, the latter three
being considerably mystified at her request, but nevertheless agreeing
to be on hand when school closed. They were met at the gate by Julia and
four other seniors, and the whole party set out for the Omnibus House
without delay.

Grace walked with Julia, and the two girls found plenty to say to each
other during the walk. Julia was studying hard, she told Grace. She
wanted to enter Smith next year.

"I don't know where I shall go after I finish High School," said Grace.
"Ethel Post wants me to go to Wellesley. She'll be a junior when I'm a
freshman. You know, she was graduated from High School last June and she
could help me a lot in getting used to college. But I don't know
whether I should like Wellesley. I shall not try to decide where I want
to go for a while yet."

"Wherever we are we'll write and always be friends," said Julia, and
Grace warmly acquiesced.

As they neared the old Omnibus House they could see no one about.

"We're early!" exclaimed Julia. "The enemy has not arrived. Thank
goodness, it's not cold to-day or we might have a chilly vigil. Now
listen, all ye faithful, while I set forth the object of this walk." She
thereupon related what Grace and Anne already knew.

"What a shame!" cried Marian Barber. "It isn't the hatchet we care for,
it's the principle of the thing. Give them what they deserve, Julia."

"Never fear," replied Julia. "I'll effectually attend to their case. Now
we'd better dodge around the corner and keep out of sight until they get
here. Then we'll swoop down upon them unawares."

The avengers hurriedly concealed themselves at the side of the old house
where they could not be seen by an approaching party.

They had not waited long before they heard voices.

"They're coming," whispered Julia. "There are eight of them. Form in
line and when they get nicely started, we'll circle about them and hem
them in. I'll give you the signal."

The girls waited in silence. "They have trowels," Julia informed them
from time to time. "They have a spade. They've begun to dig, and they
are having their own troubles, for the ground is hard. All ready!
March!"

Softly the procession approached the spot where the marauders were
energetically digging. Grace gave a little gasp, and reaching back
caught Anne's hand.

The girl using the spade was Eleanor.

"Now I'm in for it," groaned Grace. "She's down on me now, and she'll be
sure to think I organized the whole thing." For an instant Grace
regretted making the promise to Julia, before learning the situation;
then, holding her head a trifle more erect, she decided to make the best
of her unfortunate predicament.

"It isn't Julia's fault," she thought. "She probably knows nothing about
our acquaintance with Eleanor; besides, Eleanor has no business to play
such tricks. Edna Wright must have told her all about last year."

Her reflections were cut short, for one of the girls glanced up from her
digging with a sudden exclamation which drew all eyes toward Julia and
her party.

"Well, little folks," said Julia in mock surprise, "what sort of a party
is this? Are you making mud pies or are you pretending you are at the
seashore?"

At Julia's first words Eleanor dropped the small spade she held and
straightened up, the picture of defiance. Her glance traveled from girl
to girl, and she curled her lip contemptuously as her eye rested on
Grace and Anne. The other diggers looked sheepishly at Julia, who stood
eyeing them in a way that made them feel "too foolish for anything," as
one of them afterwards expressed it.

"Why don't you answer me, little girls?" asked Julia. "Has the kitty
stolen your tongue?"

This was too much for Eleanor.

"How dare you speak to us in that manner and treat us as though we were
children?" she burst forth. "What business is it of yours why we are
here? Do you own this property?"

"Mercy, no," replied Julia composedly. "Do you?"

"No," replied Eleanor a trifle less rudely, "but we have as much right
here as you have."

"Granted," replied Julia calmly. "However, there is this difference.
You are here to make mischief and we are here to prevent it, and,
furthermore, are going to do so."

"What do you mean?" retorted Eleanor, her eyes flashing.

"Just this," replied Julia. "Last year the girls belonging to the
present senior and junior classes met on this very spot and amicably
disposed of a two-year-old class grudge. Emblematic of this they buried
a hatchet, once occupying a humble though honorable position in the
Crosby family, but cheerfully sacrificed for the good of the cause.

"Yesterday," continued Julia, "I overheard two juniors plotting to get
possession of this same hatchet for the purpose of flaunting it in the
faces of the seniors at the opening basketball game. Therefore I decided
to take a hand in things, and here I am, backed by girls from both
classes, who are of the self-same mind."

"Really, Miss Crosby," said Edna Wright, "you are very amusing."

"My friends all think so," returned Julia sweetly, "but never mind now
about my amusing qualities, Edna. Let's talk about the present
situation."

She looked at Edna with the old-time aggravating smile that was always
warranted to further incense her opponent. It had its desired effect,
for Edna fairly bristled with indignation and was about to make a
furious reply when she was pushed aside by Eleanor, who said loftily,
"Allow me to talk to this person, Edna."
