are savage--puss is tame. Like them, it is a beast of prey--that is, it
catches and eats other animals. They cannot hear it coming with its
soft, padded feet.

3. The cat leaps upon its prey. It sticks its strong, sharp claws into a
mouse, and soon kills it with its sharp teeth.

4. Puss is covered with fur; she has five claws on each fore-paw, and
four on each hind one. She draws them into little sheaths when not
angry.

5. With its rough tongue the cat can lap up milk, and also clean its
fur. It likes to be clean. It opens its eyes wider in the dark, and can
see to run about at night. On each side of its head are long whiskers,
with which it feels its way.

_Write and learn:_

Cats have--
    Padded feet.
    Sharp claws and teeth.
    Rough tongues.
    Good sight at night.

Cats like--
    Milk.
    Meat.
    Mice and rats.
    Birds and fish.

Cats are--
    Domestic.
    Tame.
    Useful.
    Cleanly.




THE DOG.                      [_Page 12._


1. The dog is larger and more active than the cat. It is also of more
use to man, for it guards the house, minds the sheep, and will not allow
any one to harm its master.

2. There are many kinds of dogs. All are of some use--from the large
Newfoundland dog to the little fox-terrier.

3. Dogs are like cats in some things. They have padded feet and strong
claws. But their claws are blunt. They cannot draw them into sheaths as
puss does; so they make more noise in walking.

4. The dog is also a beast of prey. But it is not so fierce as the wolf
or the fox, which belong to the same tribe of animals. It likes meat and
bones, but will also eat bread and vegetables. Its teeth are very strong
and sharp.

5. Most dogs have keen scent, pointed noses, and quick sight.

_Write and learn:_

Dogs have--
    Blunt claws.
    Sharp, strong teeth.
    Keen scent.
    Quick sight.

Dogs--
    Bark.
    Watch.
    Jump.
    Hunt.

Dogs are--
    Useful.
    Faithful.
    Friendly.
    Wise.




BUTTERCUPS.                   [_Page 15._


1. Buttercups grow wild. They are of a golden yellow colour. Each flower
has five yellow leaves growing out from the middle of five smaller green
ones.

2. The flowers are something like a cup in shape, with a little tuft of
grass-like threads standing in each one. In the green ball in the middle
there are tiny seeds from which other buttercups will grow if they fall
into the ground.

3. Buttercups come in spring. They grow on taller stems than daisies.
They have no nice scent such as violets or roses have.

_Write and learn:_

Buttercups--
    Grow wild.
    Come in spring.

Buttercups have--
    Five yellow leaves.
    Five green ones.

Buttercups are--
    Pretty and shiny.
    Eaten by cattle.




WHEAT.                        [_Page 20._


1. Wheat is a plant of the _grass_ kind, but grows higher than common
grass. It is grown from seed, which is grains of wheat kept until hard
and dry.

2. Ruts are made in the soil by a plough, and into these the seed is
cast. Then the soil is covered over them by a harrow, drawn by a horse.

3. Rain and warm sunshine help the grains to grow. They grow into tall,
jointed stems, and soon the ears of wheat appear. They are green at
first, but the sun ripens them and turns them yellow.

4. Then the wheat is cut, and the new grains are threshed out from the
husks which are called chaff. The tall stems make straw. The grains are
ground into flour by the miller. We use flour for making bread, cakes,
and puddings.

_Write and learn:_

Wheat is--
    A grass plant.
    Grown from seed.
    Green at first.
    Yellow when ripe.

Wheat has--
    A tall stem.
    Graceful leaves.
    An ear.
    Grains.

Wheat makes--
    Flour.
    Foods.
    Chaff.
    Straw.




SLATE.                        [_Page 26._


1. Slate is a kind of stone. Rocks, and even mountains, are sometimes
made of slate. The great hole made in the rocks by getting it out, is
called a quarry. It is got out in very large blocks. Sometimes gunpowder
is used to crack the rocks before the blocks can be got out.

2. Slate is very hard and brittle. It is used for many purposes. Houses
are roofed with slates. Sometimes it is used for pavements. It can be
made so smooth that we use it for writing upon. Slate-pencil is made
from soft slate-stone.

_Write and learn:_

Slate is--
    A kind of stone.
    Very hard.
    Brittle.

Slate is found in--
    Cumberland.
    Wales.
    Cornwall and Devon.

Slate is useful for--
    Roofing houses.
    Making pavements.
    Writing upon.




CHALK.                        [_Page 31._

1. Like slate, chalk comes out of the hills. It is white and soft. It is
used for many purposes. The farmer puts it on the fields sometimes, to
make the soil better. It holds water and keeps the soil moist.

2. We get lime and whiting from chalk. We use it in these forms for
making our ceilings and walls clean. It is used, too, for writing on the
blackboard. Chalk is found in many parts of England. Kent and Hampshire
have most. Chalk-pits are often seen in the hills.

3. Chalk is formed of thousands of tiny shells.

_Write and learn:_

Chalk is--
    White.
    Soft.
    Crumbly.

Chalk is found in--
    Hampshire.
    Kent.
    Isle of Wight.

Chalk makes--
    Lime.
    Whiting.
    Chalk-pencils.




THE MOUSE.                    [_Page 36._


1. The mouse is a very small animal, with pointed nose and long tail. It
has large bright eyes, large ears, strong sharp teeth, and is very
timid.

2. The mouse gnaws through the walls and floors of our houses with its
sharp, strong teeth. It makes a little nest in a hole. It comes out when
all is quiet to look for crumbs, or anything left about that it can eat.
It gets into the pantry sometimes.

3. Some mice live in fields and woods. The tiny harvest-mouse makes its
nest on a wheat-stalk. It often does great harm to the wheat.

4. But for puss there would soon be so many mice that we should not know
what to do.

_Write and learn:_

Mice have--
    Long tails.
    Sharp teeth.
    Large ears.
    Bright eyes.

Mice like--
    Bread.
    Meat.
    Cheese.
    Milk.

Mice are--
    Very small.
    Very timid.
    Very quick.
    Very quiet.




THE RABBIT.                   [_Page 41._


1. The rabbit is about the size of the cat, and is covered with short
fur. It burrows a hole in the ground and makes a nest there for its
young.

2. Rabbits have long ears and large eyes. They can hear a very slight
sound, and can see _behind_ as well as before them.

3. Their hind-legs are longer than their fore-legs; so they do not run,
but leap.

4. Rabbits like to live where there is plenty of furze, which they eat
for food. They do much mischief in corn-fields by eating the young corn.
They also eat the bark off young trees, and so spoil them.

_Write and learn:_

Rabbits have--
    Long ears.
    Large eyes.
    Long hind-legs.
    Warm fur.

Rabbits eat--
    Grass.
    Roots.
    Leaves.
    Bark.

Rabbits--
    Burrow.
    Make nests for their young.
    Leap.
    Play.




IVY.                          [_Page 43._


1. Ivy is an evergreen, climbing plant. It grows on old walls, houses,
and churches, and sometimes on trees.

2. There are several kinds of ivy. The leaves of each kind are of a
different shape. All ivy leaves are very pretty.

3. The leaves have little marks called veins, crossing them in all ways.
These veins are full of sap, or moisture, which the roots of the plant
suck up from the earth.

4. Some ivy flowers, and bears berries.

_Write and learn:_

Ivy is--
    An evergreen.
    A climber.

Ivy has--
    Different forms of leaf.
    Many veins.

Ivy grows--
    On old buildings.
    Sometimes round trees.




A TREE.                       [_Page 47._


1. There are many kinds of trees. The oak, elm, and beech are very
common.

2. Trees have roots, trunks, branches, leaves, and often flowers and
fruit. The brown covering of the trunk is called bark. This keeps the
tree warm and dry.

3. Their leaves fall off in autumn, except those of evergreens like the
holly and the laurel.

4. Trees are both beautiful and useful. They provide us with timber and
firewood, and give shade and shelter to our houses and gardens.

_Write and learn:_

Trees have--
    Roots.
    Branches.
    Leaves.

Trees--
    Shed leaves.
    Live long.

Trees give us--
    Timber.
    Fruits.
    Shade and shelter.




BRICKS.                       [_Page 50._


1. Bricks are made of clay. The clay is very damp and heavy when it is
dug out of the ground.

2. It is put into moulds to make bricks, and slowly baked in a kiln.
Then the bricks are dry and not so heavy as the clay was. They are
porous.

3. Most bricks are of oblong shape. This is the shape used for building
houses, schools, walls. Sometimes they are made into very pretty shapes,
are glazed and used for floors and other things.

_Write and learn:_

Bricks are--
    Made of clay.
    Shaped in moulds.
    Baked in a kiln.

Bricks are--
    Not so heavy as stone.
    Hard.
    Oblong.

Bricks are used--
    For building.
    For ornament.




THE DONKEY.                   [_Page 53._


1. The donkey is a useful animal when well treated. It is cheaper to buy
and to keep than a pony.

2. The donkey has hoofs like the horse, and wears shoes. It is very
patient and gentle, and can do with coarse food.

3. The donkey's coat is rough, and its mane short. It has a black stripe
down its back and across its shoulders. Its head and ears are very long.

4. The donkey can climb high rugged paths better than the horse. It can
also carry heavy loads up hill, because it is strong and sure-footed.

_Write and learn:_

The donkey has--
    Hoofed feet.
    Long ears.
    A shaggy coat.
    A short mane.

The donkey is--
    Strong.
    Sure-footed.
    Gentle.
    Patient.

The donkey likes--
    Hay.
    Grass.
    Thistles.
    Carrots.




SHEEP.                        [_Page 55._

1. Sheep live mostly in the fields. They often climb very high hills.
Their feet are not like the donkey's; they are cloven, like the cow's.

2. Their legs are so slender that their bodies seem almost too large for
them. The thick wool which grows upon them makes them look large.

3. Sheep eat grass. They tear it off, as the cow does. They cannot bite,
since they have no front teeth in the upper jaw.

4. They are very timid, gentle creatures. They do not like to be alone.
They live in flocks. They make a great noise when bleating.

5. Sheep are very useful. Their flesh gives us mutton; their wool makes
clothing; their skin makes leather.

_Write and Learn:_

Sheep have--
    Cloven hoofs.
    Slender legs.
    Thick wool.

Sheep are--
    Gentle.
    Timid.
    Climbers.

Sheep give us--
    Food.
    Clothing.
    Leather.




TURNIPS.                      [_Page 59._


1. Turnips are grown both in fields and gardens. The tops are green. The
turnip is almost round; but it tapers towards the bottom. Most of the
turnip grows under ground; but we can see part of it above ground when
nearly ripe.

