march in, it will be to a city of dead people. We had such hopes when the
fleet came. If the people could have caught Kirk, they would have torn
him in pieces. He had five thousand soldiers on board, and, if he had
landed them, we could have sallied out and fought, instead of dying of
hunger."

"Yes," Walter agreed, "we should have retired at once. We have only seven
or eight thousand men here now, and if five thousand English soldiers had
landed, we must have raised the siege at once. I can tell you that,
though he is on the other side, I was almost as angry at Kirk's cowardice
as you must have been. I shall be glad when this awful business is over.
I knew it was bad enough before, but after what you have told me about
the women and children, I shall never think of anything else, and I will
gladly help you in any way I can. There can't be any treason in trying to
prevent children from starving to death. What do you want me to do?"

"What would do the children more good than anything, the women say, would
be milk. If I could get a keg that would hold two or three gallons--and a
watertight box with about twenty pounds of bread, I could swim back with
them just as I came. I would show you the exact spot where I landed, and
would come out again in four days. If you could put a supply ready for
me, every fourth night, among the bushes at the mouth of the river, with
a little lantern to show me the exact spot, I could come down with the
tide, get the things, and float back again when the tide turns."

"I could do that, easily enough," Walter said. "The mouth of the river is
quite beyond our lines. But it is very risky for you, John. You might get
shot, if a sentry were to see you."

"I do not think that there is much fear of that," John said. "Just
floating along as I do, without swimming at all, there is only just my
face above water, and it would be hardly possible for a sentry to see me;
but if I were shot, I could not die in a better cause."

"I think, John, if you don't mind, I should like to tell my father. I am
quite sure he would not object, and, in case you should happen to get
caught, you could refer at once to him to prove that you were not a spy.
They make very short work of spies. But if you were to demand to be
brought to Captain Davenant, and say you were acting in accordance with
his knowledge, no doubt they would bring you."

"Do as you think best, Walter, but don't tell him, unless you feel almost
sure that he will not object."

"There is no fear of that," Walter said. "He is constantly lamenting over
the sufferings of the people of Derry, and has, all along, been in favour
of attempting to storm the place by force, so as to put a stop to all
this useless suffering. Now, John, you had better lie down on that straw
bed of mine, and get a sleep. After that, you will be ready for another
meal. I will tell Larry to go out among the market people, and buy three
gallons of milk and twenty pounds of bread. There are plenty of small
spirit kegs about, which will do capitally for the milk, and I don't
think that we can have anything better than one of them for the bread. We
can head it up, and make it watertight. How do you mean to get into the
town? I should have thought that they were likely to be seized."

"So they would be," John said. "I shall hide them in some bushes at the
foot of the walls, at the side of the town facing the river. There are
only a few sentries there. Then, when it is light, I shall go in and tell
my cousin; and get him, after dark, to lower a rope from the wall. I
shall of course be below, to tie on the kegs. He can then walk with them
boldly through the street to our house, which is only a short distance
from that part of the walls. If anyone saw him, they would only suppose
he was taking home water from one of the wells."

John was soon fast asleep. Walter sat watching him until, two hours
later, his father returned with his troop. John still slept on, while
Walter told his father the errand on which he had come.

"He is a brave lad," Captain Davenant said, "and I honour him for his
conduct. It is not many men who, at a time like this, would risk their
lives for a number of children who are not any relation to them.
Certainly, I will gladly assist him. I am sick at heart at all this. My
only consolation is, that it is brought on solely by the acts of these
men, who, though comparatively a handful, set themselves up against the
voice of all Ireland. If they had risen when an English army arrived to
their assistance, I should say nothing against it. As it is, without
doing any good to their cause, they are entailing this horrible suffering
upon thousands of women and children.

"By all means, help the poor lad, and if he should fall into the hands of
our people, let him mention my name. Rosen would no doubt disapprove of
it, but I cannot help that. All the Irish gentlemen in the army would
agree that I had done rightly, and, even if they didn't, my own
conscience would be quite sufficient for me to act upon. I am fighting
against the king's enemies, not warring against women and children.

"How soundly the poor lad sleeps, and how changed he is! He is a mere
skeleton. I should not have known him in the least. If this is the
condition into which a strong, healthy lad has fallen, what must the
women and children have suffered! I wish Kirk had not turned coward, but
had landed his troops. We could then have brought up our scattered
forces, and could have fought them in a fair field, with something like
equal forces. That would have been vastly more to my taste than starving
them, like rats in a hole."



Chapter 5: The Relief Of Derry.


It was late in the afternoon before John woke. He started up, as his eyes
fell upon Captain Davenant.

"You have had a good sleep, and I hope you are all the better for it,"
Captain Davenant said, kindly. "My son has been telling me all about your
expedition, and I honour you very much, for the courage you have shown in
thus risking your life to get food for those starving children. I quite
approve of the promise Walter has given to assist you, and if you should,
by any chance, be taken prisoner, I will stand your friend."

John expressed his gratitude warmly.

"It is a sad thing, in these civil wars, when friends are arrayed against
friends," Captain Davenant said. "Who would have thought, three months
ago, that you and Walter would be arrayed on opposite sides? It is true
you are neither of you combatants, but I have no doubt you would gladly
have joined in some of the sallies, just as Walter is eager to be riding
in my troop. If we must fight, I wish, at any rate, that it could be so
managed that all the suffering should fall upon the men who are willing
to take up the sword, and not upon the women and children. My heart
bleeds as I ride across the country. At one time, one comes upon a ruined
village, burned by the midnight ruffians who call themselves rapparees,
and who are a disgrace to our cause. At another, upon a place sacked and
ruined by one of the bands of horsemen from Enniskillen, who are as cruel
and merciless as the rapparees. Let the armies fight out their quarrels,
I say, but let peaceful people dwell in quiet and safety. But wholesale
atrocities have ever been the rule on both sides, in warfare in Ireland,
and will, I suppose, remain so to the end.

"And now, we are just going to have dinner, and another hearty meal will
do you good. Each night, when my son brings down the supplies for you, he
will bring a substantial meal of cold meat and bread, and you must give
me your promise, now, that you will eat this at once. You will need it,
after being so long in the water, and having another swim before you,
besides. Although I approve of sending in milk for the children, I can be
no party to the supply of food for the garrison. Do you promise?"

"Yes, sir, I promise," John said, "though I would rather save all but a
mouthful or two for the people who are starving at home. Still, of
course, if you insist upon it, I will promise."

"I do insist upon it, John. The lives of these children of yours depend
on your life, and even one good meal, every four days, will help you to
keep enough strength together to carry out the kind work you have
undertaken."

Larry now brought in the dinner. He had been told by Walter of John's
arrival, but he otherwise would have failed to recognize, in him, the boy
who had sometimes come down to the village with Walter.

"Are you quite well, Larry?" John asked him.

"I am," Larry replied; "but I need not ask the same question of yourself,
for you are nothing but skin and bone, entirely. Dear, dear, I wouldn't
have known you at all, at all, and such a foine colour as ye used to
have."

"I don't think starving would suit you, Larry," Captain Davenant said
with a smile.

"Sure an' it wouldn't, yer honour. It's always ready to eat I am, though,
as mother says, the victuals don't seem to do me much good, anyway."

"You won't be able to come out and go back again the same night next
week, John," Captain Davenant said, presently. "The tide won't suit, so
you must come up here, as you have done today. You will always find a
hearty welcome, and Walter shall go down and meet you early in the
morning, near the mouth of the river, so you can come up with him; and
then, if you fall in with any of the other parties, no questions will be
asked. I think everyone in camp knows him now.

"I wonder what your grandfather would say, if he saw you sitting here at
dinner with Walter and me?"

John laughed.

"I am afraid he would disown me, then and there, without listening to
explanations."

"I have no doubt it's a sore grievance to him that he is not in Derry, at
present," Captain Davenant said.

"I am sure it is," John replied; "but the fasting would be a great trial
to him. My grandfather is a capital trencherman. Still, I am sure he
would have borne his part."

"That he would," Captain Davenant agreed. "He and the men of his class
are thorough, fanatics as I consider them. Hard and pitiless as they
proved themselves, to those against whom they fought, one cannot but
admire them, for they were heart and soul in their cause. There was no
flinching, no half measures, no concessions for the sake of expediency.
On the ground on which they took their stand, they conquered or died.
Would that a like spirit animated all my countrymen!"

After nightfall, Larry brought round Walter's horse, saddled, and his own
rough pony. Walter mounted the former, and John the latter. The two kegs
were slung across Walter's horse.

"Will you meet me at the clump of trees, half a mile out of camp, Larry?"
Walter said. "In the dark, no one will notice the difference between you
and John."

Captain Davenant had furnished Walter with a password, and now walked
beside the two boys till they were well beyond the camp, and then
returned to his tent. The lads made their way, without meeting with
anyone, down to the mouth of the river. The kegs were then taken off the
horse and placed in the water--they floated just above the surface.

"That is exactly right," John said. "They will not show any more than
will my face. When I come down next time, I shall fill them with water,
so as to keep them just at this level."

"I am afraid the moon will be up next time, John."

"Yes, it will. I shall lay some boughs of bush across my face and the
kegs, so that there will be no fear of my face showing; and if a sentry
should happen to catch sight of it, he will suppose that it is merely a
bush drifting in the stream."

"Well, goodbye, John, and may you get through without trouble."

"I have no fear, Walter. I am in God's hands, and He will take me safely
through, if He thinks fit."

The journey was achieved without detection, the only difficulty being the
sinking of the kegs under the boom; this, however, was successfully
accomplished, and by midnight, the kegs were safely hidden in some bushes
at the foot of the wall, and there John lay down and waited for morning.

As he entered the yard, the children ran out to meet him. There were no
loud rejoicings; they had no longer strength or spirit to shout and
laugh; but the joy in the thin worn faces was more eloquent than any
words could have been.

"We have missed you so, John. We have wanted you so much. Lucy and Kate
and Deby were so bad yesterday, and they did cry so for you. We were all
so hungry. We don't mind so much, when you are here to talk to us and
tell us stories. Why did you stop away, John, when we wanted you so?"

"I went away to see if I could manage to get you something to eat."

"And did you?" was the anxious cry.

"I have got a little; but you must wait till evening, and then you will
each have--" and he stopped.

"What, John? Oh, do tell us!"

"You will each have some milk and bread.

"Not much, dears," he went on, as there was a cry of gladness, which was
pitiful from the intensity of joy it expressed, "but there will be some
for tonight, and a little curds and whey and bread for you tomorrow and
next day, and I hope always, as long as this lasts. Now go, dears, into
your castle. I will come to you presently. I have brought you some water,
as usual."

"I am heartily glad to see you back, John," his cousin said, as he
entered the house. "The children were in a sad state without you,
yesterday. I suppose you can tell me, now, what you have been doing. You
told me you would be away two nights, and begged me not to ask any
questions; but, although I know you to be discreet and prudent, I have
been worrying."

"I will tell you now," John said, and he recounted the details of the
expedition which he had accomplished.

"And you have swum the river twice, and been in the camp of the Papists.
Truly it is surprising, John, and I know not what to do. Should your
visit there be discovered, you will assuredly be accused of treachery."

"They may accuse me of what they like," John said quietly. "I have done
it, and I am going to do it again, every fourth night, and there is the
milk and bread at the foot of the wall, ready for you to haul up as soon
as it gets dark."

"It ought to be fairly divided," the tanner said.

"It will be fairly divided, between our children," John said; "but nobody
else will get a drop or a crumb. I have risked my life to get it for
them. If other people want to get it, let them do the same. Besides, as I
told you, Captain Davenant and his son both procured it for me for the
sake of the children, and them only, and I should be breaking faith with
them if any others touched it, save those for whom it was given me. It is
little enough among eighteen children for four days--a pound of bread and
a little over a pint of milk, each. They must each have a quarter of a
pint, when you bring it in tonight, and the rest had better be curdled.
That way it will keep, and they can have a portion each day of curds and
whey, and a fourth share of their bread. It is little enough; but I trust
that it may keep life in them."

"Well, John, I will do as you say," the tanner said, after a pause. "It
goes somewhat against my conscience; but, as you say, it will make but a
meagre portion for each of them, and would be nothing were it fairly
divided; besides, you have brought it with the risk of your life, and I
know not that any save you have a right to a voice in its partition."

Before the gates were closed, John went out, and presently had the
satisfaction of hearing a small stone drop from the wall above him,
followed presently by the end of a rope. He sent up the kegs, and then
lay down among the bushes, and enjoyed the satisfaction of thinking of
the joy of the little ones, when the milk and bread were served out to
them. As soon as the gates were open in the morning, he went in.

"Thank you, oh, so much, for the milk and bread last night. We heard how
you had swum so far, and gone into danger to get it for us, and we're
going to have some more for breakfast."

"It was not much, dears," John said.

"Oh, no, it was not much; but it was so nice, and we did all sleep so
well last night--even little Lucy didn't waken and cry once--and Ruth
Hardy said we ought to call you the Raven; but we don't like that name
for you."

"The Raven, Ruth!" John said, mystified. "Why did you want to call me the
Raven?"

"I wouldn't do it if you didn't like it, dear John; but you know that
chapter that Master Williams read us, the other day, about the ravens
that fed somebody in a cave, and we have been wishing the ravens would
feed us; and so you see, when you sent us the milk last night, I thought
you ought to be called the Raven. I did not mean any harm."

"No, my dear, of course not, and you can all call me the Raven, if you
like."

"No, no, John. You are John, and that's much better than the Raven. They
brought the man food, but they didn't nurse him and tell him stories, as
you do."

"Now, run inside the castle," John said, "and I will go in and get your
breakfasts."

John soon returned, with a great bowl of curds and whey, a platter piled
