"I think so, mother. Baby's mine because I love her, and so are you.
Love makes the only _my-ness_, doesn't it, mother?"

"Perhaps so, Diamond. Yes, I think it does," said his mother.

When his father came home for his dinner he looked very sad. He had not
got a single fare the whole morning.

"We shall just have to go to the work-house," he said and dropped into a
chair in despair. Just then, came a knock at the door and in walked Mr.
Raymond! Of course, he wanted to see the horses at once. And when he saw
how fat Ruby was and how poor was faithful old Diamond--and when,
moreover, he remembered how poor and starved the family looked though
Nanny was still there and kindly treated--he knew that Diamond's father
had been stanch and true to his bargain, though it had turned out to be
a hard one. He was a man worth helping--that was clear! And Mr. Raymond
was now ready to help him as much as he needed.

He first pointed out that old Diamond needed only to be fattened up and
Ruby thinned down to make of them a fine pair of horses for his country
home to which he was now going. And Diamond's father should go along as
coachman. There would be regular wages again and a much more comfortable
home in the country.

"And now, will you sell me old Diamond?" asked Mr. Raymond. "If you
will, here are twenty pounds for him, if you think that is enough."

"I will sell him to you, sir," answered Diamond's father, "if you
promise to let me buy him back if I can, if you ever wish to sell him. I
could _not_ part with him without that. Though as to who calls him his,
that is nothing. For I believe it's true what my little Diamond
says--that it's loving a thing that makes it yours."

"You shall have that chance," said Mr. Raymond. So the bargain was made.
How Diamond capered about at the thought of going to the beautiful
country to live and having a yard and grass to play on! It would be like
the old home at Mr. Coleman's--perhaps even nicer than that. How he
danced the baby and sang to it!

"And North Wind told me, Baby dear! She sang in my ears how bad things
are just a chance to make good things come!"




CHAPTER X

DIAMOND IN HIS NEW HOME


Before the end of the month, Ruby had got a great deal thinner and old
Diamond a good deal fatter. They really began to look fit to go in
double harness. Diamond's father and mother got their things all packed
up and were ready to go into the country at the shortest notice. They
were now so peaceful, and so happy over the prospect that they believed
it worth all the trouble and worry they had gone through.

Nanny had been so happy since she left the hospital and had been living
with Diamond's family that she did not think the country would make her
any happier. Besides she would have to leave cripple Jim behind and
maybe never see him again. She had known cripple Jim much longer than
she had known Diamond and he had no one else to care about him.

Diamond had taken a great deal of time and trouble to find Jim. For Jim
had moved his home and had not heard of Nanny's illness till long after
she was taken to the hospital. He was much too shy to go and inquire
about her there. But when at length she went to live with Diamond's
family, Jim was willing enough to go and see her. It was after one of
his visits during which he and Nanny had talked things over that Diamond
found out that Nanny thought it would not be so very pleasant to go to
the country. The sun and the moon and the trees and the flowers did not
seem much to Nanny without Jim.

Diamond thought it over and that same night he went to see Mr. Raymond.
He wanted to tell him about Jim and Nanny and ask him what they could do
about it. "Jim can shine shoes very well indeed, sir," said Diamond. "If
you could take Jim into the country too, to clean your shoes and do
other odd jobs, then Nanny would like it better. She is so fond of Jim."

Mr. Raymond thought it all over and finally decided that there would be
something for Jim to do.

So on a certain day, Diamond's father took his mother and Diamond
himself and his little brother and sister and Nanny and Jim down by
train to a place called "The Mound," where Mr. Raymond was to live. He
went back to London that same night. The next day, he drove Ruby and
Diamond down with the carriage behind them, and Mr. Raymond and a lady
in the carriage. For Mr. Raymond was now married. And the moment Nanny
saw Mrs. Raymond, she recognized her as the lady who had let her wear
the beautiful ruby ring when she was ill in the hospital.

The weather was very hot at first, and the woods very shadowy, and the
wild flowers mainly gone. But there were plenty of the loveliest grass
and daisies about the house. Diamond's chief pleasure seemed to be to
lie among them and breathe the pure air. As he lay there, he dreamed
often of the country at the back of the north wind and tried to remember
the songs the river used to sing. For this was more like being at the
back of the north wind than anything he had known since he left it. But
though he did lie happily in the grass and dream of her, of North Wind
herself, he neither saw nor heard anything for some months.

Mr. Raymond's house was called "The Mound" because it stood upon a steep
little knoll that had been made on purpose. It was built for Queen
Elizabeth as a hunting tower--a place, that is, from the top of which
you could see the country for miles on all sides. From a window the
Queen was able to follow with her eyes the flying deer, and the hunters
in the chase. The mound had been cast up so as to give the house an
outlook over the neighboring heights and woods.

Diamond's father and mother lived in a little cottage a short distance
from the house. It was a real cottage with a roof of thick thatch which,
in June and July, the wind sprinkled with the red and white petals of
the rose tree climbing up the walls. But Mr. and Mrs. Raymond wanted
Diamond to be a page in their own house. So he was dressed in the little
blue suit of a page and lived at "The Mound" itself.

"Would you be afraid to sleep alone, Diamond?" asked his mistress.
"There is a little room at the top of the house--all alone. Perhaps you
would not mind sleeping there."

"I can sleep anywhere," said Diamond. "And I like best to be high up.
Should I be able to see out?"

"I will show you the place," she answered, and taking him by the hand,
she led him up and up the oval winding stair into one of the two towers
that were on the house. Near the top, they entered a tiny room with two
windows from which you could see all over the country. Diamond clapped
his hands with delight!

"You would like this room, then, Diamond?" asked his mistress.

"It is the grandest room in the house!" he answered. "I shall be near
the stars and yet not far from the tops of the trees. That is just what
I like!"

I daresay he thought also that it would be a nice place for North Wind
to call at, in passing. Below him spread a lake of green leaves with
glimpses of grass here and there at the bottom. As he looked down, he
saw a squirrel appear suddenly and as suddenly vanish among the top-most
branches.

"Aha! Mr. Squirrel!" he cried. "My nest is built higher than yours!"

"I will have a bell hung at your door which I can ring when I want you,"
said his mistress. And so Diamond became a little page in the house.

But after all, his master and mistress seemed to want to keep him out of
doors as much as possible. And his father and mother sometimes looked at
him very anxiously. Diamond thought that no one seemed to ask him to do
much. Often they gave him a story book and sent him out to sit in the
sweet air and sunshine at the foot of a big beech tree.

He did not see much of Nanny and Jim. Somehow they liked to slip off
together when their work was over. They did not understand the many
fancies that Diamond talked about, but they could understand each other
very well. They were never unkind to him but they liked better to go off
by themselves. Diamond did not mind much. He was never lonely. And then
he had a beautiful place where he went and where he saw lovely things
that no one else saw.

He called this place his nest. He went to it by going up a little rope
ladder that hung from a branch of the big beech tree. When he reached
the limb the rope hung from, he went on climbing higher and higher. Up
among the leafy branches and away at the top, out of sight, he found a
safe and comfortable seat which he called his nest.

"What do you see up there, Diamond," some one asked him once.

"I can see the first star peeping out of the sky. I don't see anything
more except a few leaves and the big sky over me. It goes swinging
about. The earth is all behind my back. There comes another star! The
wind with its kisses makes me feel as if I were in North Wind's arms."

He thought he would be quite happy if only he could remember some of the
songs the river sang to him when he was in the country at the back of
the north wind. They seemed to be murmuring in his ear most of the time.
Yet somehow they were just far enough off so that he could not catch the
words.

His little brother and baby sister often played about on the grass with
him and often he made up songs to sing to the baby. But these never
seemed to be just like the river's songs after all. One of them was
about his nest up in the beech tree and it ran like this:

          What would you see if I took you up
          To my little nest in the air?
          You would see the sky like a clean blue cup
          Turned upside downwards there.

          What would you do if I took you there,
          To my little nest in the tree?
          My child with cries would trouble the air
          To get what she could but see.

          What would you get in the top of the tree,
          For all your crying and grief?
          Not a star would you clutch of all you see--
          You could only gather a leaf.

          But when you had lost your greedy grief
          Content to see from afar,
          You would find in your hand a withering leaf,
          In your heart a shining star!




CHAPTER XI

ANOTHER VISIT FROM NORTH WIND


One night when he reached his own room, he opened both his windows, one
of which looked to the north and the other to the east, to find how the
wind blew. It blew right in at the north window. Diamond was glad for he
thought perhaps North Wind herself would come now. But as she always
came of herself and never when he was looking for her, and, indeed,
almost never when he was thinking of her, he shut the east window and
went to bed.

He awoke in the dim blue night. The moon had vanished from that side of
the house. He thought he heard a knocking at his door.

"Somebody wants me!" he said, and jumping out of bed ran to open the
door.

But there was no one there. He closed it again, and the noise still
going on, found that another door in the room was rattling. It belonged
to a closet he thought, but he had never been able to open it. The wind
blowing in at the window must be shaking it. He would go and see if that
was it.

The door now opened quite easily. To his surprise, instead of a closet
he found a long narrow room. The moon, which was sinking in the west,
shone in at an open window at the other end. This room had a low ceiling
and spread the whole length of the house close under the roof. It was
quite empty. The yellow light of the half moon streamed over the dark
floor.

He was so delighted to find this strange moonlit place close to his own
snug little room that he began to dance and skip about the floor. The
wind came in through the door he had left open. It blew about him as he
danced and he kept turning toward it that it might blow in his face.

He kept picturing to himself the many places, lovely and desolate, the
hill sides and farm yards and tree-tops and meadows, over which it had
blown on its way to "The Mound." As he danced he grew more and more
delighted with the motion and the wind. His feet grew stronger and his
body lighter. At length, it seemed as if he were borne up on the air and
could almost fly.

So strong did this feeling become that at last he began to doubt whether
he was not in one of those precious dreams he so often had, in which he
floated about on the wind at will. Then something made him look up. To
his unspeakable delight, he found his uplifted hands lying in those of
North Wind! Yes, North Wind was dancing with him round and round the
long bare room, her hair now falling to the floor, now floating to the
ceiling. The sweetest of smiles was playing about her beautiful mouth.
She did not stoop in order to dance with him but held his hands high in
hers.

When he saw her, he gave one spring and his arms were about her neck and
her arms holding him to her breast. The same moment, she swept with him
out of the open window through which the moon was shining. Making a wide
and sweeping circuit, she settled with him in his own little nest at the
top of the big beech tree. Diamond was so entirely happy that he did not
care to speak a word. But presently, he felt as if he were going to
sleep and that would be to lose so much that he was not willing to do
it.

"Please, dear North Wind," said he, "I am so happy that I am afraid it
is a dream. How am I to know that it is not a dream?"

"What does it matter?" returned North Wind. "The dream--if it _is_ a
dream--is a pleasant one, is it not?"

"That is just why I want it to be true! It is not for the dream
itself--I mean it is not for the pleasure of it," answered Diamond, "for
I have that whether it is a dream or not. It is for _you_, North Wind! I
cannot bear to find it a dream because then I should lose _you_! You
would be nobody then and I could not bear that. You are not just a
dream, dear North Wind, are you? Do say _no_, for I shall not dare dream
of you again if you are nobody at all."

"Either I am not a dream, or there is something better which is not a
dream, Diamond," said North Wind in a rather sorrowful tone.

"But it is not something better, it is _you_ I want, North Wind," he
persisted.

She made no answer but rose with him in her arms and sailed away over
the tree-tops till they came to a meadow where a flock of sheep was
feeding.

"Do you remember the song you made up here in this meadow to sing to the
baby?" asked North Wind, "about Bo-peep's sheep that ran away from her
to follow after the sun? And when she went after them, she could not
find the old sheep at all--only some lambs--twice as many new lambs?"

"Oh, yes," said Diamond. "But I do not like that song. It seems to say
that one is just as good as another--or that two new ones are better
than the one old one you had before. But somehow when once you have
looked into anybody's eyes--deep down into them, I mean--no one else
will do for you any more. Nobody ever so beautiful or so good will make
up to you for that one going out of sight. So you see, North Wind, I
cannot help being frightened to think that perhaps I am only dreaming
and that you are nowhere at all! Do tell me that you are my own real
beautiful North Wind!"

Again she rose and shot high up into the air. Diamond lay quiet in her
arms waiting for her to speak. He tried to see up into her face, for he
was dreadfully afraid she did not answer him because she could not tell
him she was not a dream. But her hair fell all over her face so that he
could not see it. This frightened him still more.

"Do speak, North Wind!" he said at last.

"I am thinking what I can say," said North Wind slowly. "And say it so
that a little boy like you can understand."

As she spoke, she was settling quietly down on a grassy hill side in the
midst of a wild, furzy common. There was a rabbit warren underneath.
Some of the rabbits came out of their holes in the moonlight. They
looked very sober and wise, like patriarchs standing in their tent doors
and looking about them before going to bed. When they saw North Wind,
instead of turning around and vanishing again with a thump of their
heels, they cantered slowly up to her. They snuffed all about her with
their long upper lips which moved every way at once. That was their way
of kissing her. Every now and then, she stroked down their long furry
backs or lifted and played with their long ears.

"I think," she said to Diamond after they had been sitting silent for a
long time, "that if I were only a dream, you would not have been able to
love me so. You love me when you are not with me, don't you?"

"Indeed I do!" answered Diamond stroking her hand. "I see! I see! How
could I be able to love you as I do if you were not there at all, you
know? Besides I would not be able to dream anything half so beautiful
all out of my own head. Or if I did, I could not love a fancy of my own
like that, could I?"

"I think not. Besides, would you not have forgotten me wholly when you
