"Yes, I am afraid so," returned Dimple, despondently, watching the smoke
rising from a distant chimney. Then more cheerfully, "See Florence, I
don't believe it will rain, for that smoke is going straight up. You
know that is a sign it is going to clear. Maybe it is only misty and not
cloudy."

This it proved to be, for, as the day advanced, the sun came out and it
was as beautiful an afternoon as one could wish to see. Therefore very
gaily they started forth to meet the rest of the party down at the
river's brink.

"Oh, there's Mr. Atkinson," cried Dimple, catching sight of this
gentleman's pleasant face, "I am so glad he could come. I wonder if he
sees us. I hope we can go in his boat, don't you, Florence?"

"Yes, indeed, I do. He sees us. He is waving his hat."

The two little girls ran forward and to their satisfaction were helped
into Mr. Atkinson's boat with Mr. and Mrs. Dallas and Bubbles as
fellow-passengers, Bubbles grinning from ear to ear and looking very
spick and span in a clean pink calico frock and a white apron. A string
of blue beads adorned her neck; she had added it as a finishing touch to
her toilet.

The boats pushed off and, after an hour's rowing, the party of
picnickers landed at a pretty little island in the river. It was covered
with trees and underbrush, but not so densely as to prevent their
finding a space big enough for a camping ground where they could build a
fire and spread their supper.

Most of the party preferred to go out on the river to fish, for some
fine black bass could be caught here. Dimple, however, preferred to stay
behind with Mrs. Dallas and one or two of the other ladies, even though
Mr. Atkinson said he would bait her hook for her, and would lend her his
finest line and reel.

"I feel so sorry for the poor little earth worms, first, and for the
fish afterward, that I don't believe I should enjoy it," Dimple said,
seriously.

"But you can eat a piece of bass after it is cooked, can't you?" Mr.
Atkinson returned, smiling.

"Yes, if I don't see him caught."

"Your little girl reminds me of those very tender-hearted children, who,
when they saw the picture of the Christian martyrs, were overcome with
pity, not for the martyrs, no indeed, but because there was one poor
dear lion that hadn't any martyr to eat," Mr. Atkinson said to Mr.
Dallas.

"That was a little extreme, I admit," returned Mr. Dallas, laughing,
"but we do try to cultivate a humane spirit in our little daughter, and
you may be sure she will never wear a stuffed bird in her hat when she
grows older."

Mr. Atkinson nodded in approval. "I'm glad of that," he returned, "and I
must say I think useless sport is wicked, but when one wants fish for
food, I think he may be excused the catching. And so, Dimple, it
resolves itself into your going without the fish or the fishing, does
it?"

Dimple nodded. She didn't exactly understand, but she supposed he meant
that if she wanted the fish for supper, she'd better remain where she
could not see them caught.

Florence, however, had less compunction, and consented to go out in the
boat, though she wasn't sure whether or not she should want to catch any
fish. But Rock, like most boys, was very eager for the sport, and hoped
he would be able to catch the first fish, and also wanted it to be the
biggest caught.

"May Bubbles and I go anywhere on the island that we want?" Dimple asked
her mother, after they had watched the boats start off.

Mrs. Dallas, with Mrs. Hardy's help, was putting up a hammock between
two of the big trees. "I think it will be perfectly safe," she replied,
after a moment's thought. "The island isn't very big, and you will not
go too near the water's edge, will you? I can see you from here--I
suppose in whatever direction you go."

"I will keep away from the water, mamma, although I should dearly like
to paddle about."

"You can take off your shoes and stockings and paddle right here on this
bit of shore when you come back from your exploring trip. I can watch
you then, and shall feel perfectly easy about you."

"Where are the lunch baskets, mamma?"

"Over there behind that tree."

"What is that covered up with that grey blanket?"

"Something Mr. Atkinson brought."

"I didn't see it in our boat. May I peep at it?"

"No, dear, I think I wouldn't. It isn't just the thing to indulge one's
curiosity about such matters. Mr. Atkinson had it sent up here, and as
he meant it as a sort of a little secret for you children, it wouldn't
be polite to try to find it out."

So Dimple with her little maid, walked away, not, however, without
several backward looks at the grey blanket.

There was not very much to see on the island, after all, for it was a
small place, and the most interesting discovery they made was a pile of
big rocks at the upper end of the narrow strip of land. Here they
established themselves to watch the boats and the fishers.

"I think Rock has caught a fish," exclaimed Dimple, when she had been
watching for some time. "See, Bubbles, he is hauling in his line as fast
as he can. There goes the reel again. Oh, I hope if he must catch them,
that he will catch big ones. See that lovely red flower growing down
there between the rocks. I wish you would get it for me, Bubbles, and
then we will go back to where mamma is. I am as hungry as I don't know
what, and I want to ask mamma for a turnover or a biscuit or something.
Get me the flower, Bubbles, and I'll watch to see if Rock really did
catch a fish."

Bubbles promptly obeyed, but she had just stooped to pick the flower
when she heard a piercing shriek from Dimple. Mrs. Dallas heard it, too,
and came running in the greatest alarm, to find, when she reached the
spot, Dimple almost paralyzed with fright, continuing her screams, while
Bubbles, dancing about, getting more and more excited every minute, was
valiantly hurling pieces of rock at a large black snake.

"Hyar come anudder," she cried, as a stone went flying through the air.
"Take dat. Hit yuh, didn't it? Skeer Miss Dimple outen her senses, will
yuh? Yuh gre't, ugly black crittur!" and rock after rock came with such
force and precision that the unfortunate snake, in a few minutes, was
"daid as a do' nail," as Bubbles expressed it.

Dimple clung to her mother, trembling with fright, even after the snake
was killed.

"Is it dead, really dead? Oh, Bubbles!" she quavered. "What would I have
done if you hadn't been so brave?"

Bubbles laughed. "Dat wan't no snake to pison yuh," she said. "It
couldn't hurt yuh. All it could do was to race yuh."

"Don't talk about it," said Dimple, shuddering. "Do let us leave it, and
go back."

But Bubbles was too proud of her performance to allow it to be set
aside; so she picked up the snake, and started to carry it back on a
forked stick.

On the way, however, she too fell into a fright at sight of an innocent
little land terrapin traveling along with his house on his back. "Don't
tech it, don't, Miss Dimple," she cried in terror. "Dey has de evilest
eyes. I wouldn't tech one fer nothin'."

"But you aren't afraid of snakes," replied Dimple, "and these little
terrapins are much more harmless." Nevertheless Bubbles had in some way
acquired a superstition about "Bre'r Tarrapin," from Sylvy, who, like
most colored people, stood in terror of the innocent creatures.

But when the boats returned, the big snake, hanging over the limb of a
tree, was triumphantly displayed and attested to Bubbles' courage; so
that she was made very proud by the praise she received for having
killed it, Dimple generously refraining from saying anything about the
terrapin.

Although Rock did not catch the first fish, he caught the biggest one,
and was quite proud of it.

There was a fire built, and the fish, nicely cleaned, were cooked over
the coals. Florence thought all this delightful. She had never enjoyed
such an experience, and watched the proceedings with the greatest
pleasure. Every one was ready to enjoy the supper when it was prepared,
saying that fish never tasted so good, and that the coffee, made in a
very ordinary tin coffee-pot, could not be improved.

Dimple whispered to Florence that there was a secret under the grey
blanket; and that she half suspected what it was, but she didn't intend
to look. Even a delighted giggle from Bubbles did not cause her to turn
her head, but when that small hand-maiden, who was bustling about
waiting on every one, offered her a saucer of ice cream, Dimple
exclaimed, "I guessed it! I guessed it to myself."

"Guessed what?" said Mr. Atkinson, at her side.

"Guessed that it was an ice cream freezer under the blanket," returned
Dimple.

"Oho! so you've been trying to find out, have you?"

"No. I didn't try. I only hoped," replied Dimple, gravely. At which Mr.
Atkinson laughed heartily; just why, Dimple was puzzled to discover.

When the supper was over and the baskets repacked, they played all
manner of games till the great round moon rose over the river, and then
they rowed home, singing as they floated along in the silvery moonlight.

Florence and Dimple sat side by side, in a sort of waking dream; and
Bubbles dreamed too, as was very evident when the boat landed, for she
was sound asleep, and had to be called and shaken before she knew where
she was. Then she blundered along behind the others, still so sleepy
that she forgot to take off her precious blue beads when she went to
bed, and in the night the string broke; consequently when she awoke in
the morning she found the beads straggling over the floor and strewing
the sheets.

"Didn't we have a good time?" said Florence, looking out on the
moonlight, as she stood at the window in Dimple's room.

"Yes," was Dimple's reply, "all but the snake. I don't like snakes."

But the next evening it was evident that Bubbles still bore the subject
of snakes in her mind. Mr. and Mrs. Dallas had gone out. Dimple,
Florence and Bubbles were sitting on the floor by one of the front
windows.

The air was full of the scent of the honeysuckle, and the katydids were
contradicting each other in the trees.

"What quarrelsome things they are," said Florence. "Do you suppose they
will ever find out whether katy did or not? I'd like to know what she
did, anyhow."

"Or what she didn't," said Dimple. "Bubbles, are you asleep?" giving her
a shake.

"Thinkin'," said Bubbles, sitting up straight and rubbing her eyes.

"Then what are you rubbing your eyes for?"

"'Cause it's dark. I can't see good," returned Bubbles.

"I declare," Dimple said, "I never know what to do with myself when
mamma goes out; it seems to me she is very intimate with Mrs. Hardy.
Florence, suppose you tell a story."

"Oh, I can't," replied Florence. "I never could. I never know what to
tell about. You tell."

"I don't know any except Cinderella and the Seven Swans, and those.
Bubbles will have to do it. Go on Bubbles, you've got to tell us a
story."

"Laws! Miss Dimple," giggled Bubbles.

"You needn't 'laws,' you know you can, for you've often told them to me;
now begin, right away; it will keep you awake if it doesn't do anything
else."

"Well," said Bubbles, smoothing down her apron, "oncet they was a
bummelybee, and a snake, and a bird."

"What kind of a bird?" interrupted Florence.

"Erra--erra--bluebird," said Bubbles.

"All right, go on."

"The snake wanted fur to git the bluebird, and the bummelybee was
a-flyin, and a-buzzin' so, it made such a 'straction the snake couldn't
git fixed fur to chawm the bird nohow.

"'Jess yuh quit yo' foolin',' said the snake.

"'I no foolin',' said the bummelybee, 'what's got yuh anyhow?'

"'I ain't had no brekfuss,' said the snake.

"'Well go 'long 'n git it; I'm not a hinderin'.'

"'Yes, yuh is,' said the snake, 'I can't do nothin' fur yo' buzzin'.'

"Then the bummelybee flown off, but he didn't go very fur, he wanted to
see what the snake was up to. He kinder suspicioned it wasn't up to no
good, so he jess watched the snake, and bimeby he seen the bluebird come
up as peart as anythin', and he set down on the limb of a tree."

Here Bubbles stopped to take breath, and then went on,

"Well, he seen the snake a-crawlin' along the grass, a-crawlin',
a-crawlin', as crafty till it got right in front of the bluebird, and
the bluebird he jess set and looked, and didn't move, or say nothin'.

"'Hm! hm!' says Mr. Bummelybee, 'hit's time I was a movin',' so he made
fur the snake and giv' him one sting on the haid, and he jess rolled up
he eyes, and quirled up ontil the grass; and the bluebird said, 'I'm
much debliged of you, Mr. Bummelybee. I'm glad to perform yo'
acquaintance. I was jess about as nigh chawmed as a bird could be.'

"'Don't say no more about it,' said Mr. Bummelybee, and off he flown."

"I didn't know bumblebees could sting," said Florence.

"Law now don't they?" said Bubbles, "mebbe they doesn't, hit might a
been a wass, wasses sting I know. Come to think of it, hit was a wass."

"Is that all of it?" asked Dimple. "I don't think it is a very long
story."

"Laws, Miss Dimple, you didn't reckon that was all," said Bubbles,
loftily. "I laid out to tell more, soon ez my tongue got rested."

"Rest it then, and go on," said Dimple, settling back against a chair,
with her hands behind her head.

"Well," said Bubbles, going on with her story, "the wass he flown off,
and the bluebird he flown off, and after a while the bluebird he met a
squirl. 'Howdy?' says he. 'Howdy,' says the squirl. 'How's all to yo'
house?'

"'Tollable, thank you,' says the bluebird. 'Ef yuh see a wass come
along--' Laws, Miss Dimple, I can't get along without'n hit's being a
bummely," said she, stopping short.

"Well, have it a bummely then," said Dimple. "You don't care, do you,
Florence?"

"No," said Florence, "have it a bummely if you want to, Bubbles."

"'Well,' says the bluebird, 'ef you see a bummelybee, don't you let
nobody take his honey from him, fur he's a pertickeler fren' of mine.'
He was sorter shamed to let on to the squirl how nigh chawmed he was.

"'I promise, cross my heart,' says the squirl, and Mr. Bluebird flown
off.

"Aftern awhile, up flown Mr. Bummely, and smack behind him comes a
little boy layin' out to git his honey.

"Mr. Bummely he flown along and went to hide hissef in a big flower.
That's jess what the boy wanted. 'Now I've got yuh,' says he, but he was
too forward, fur the squirl clim' down the tree and popped onto the
boy's haid jess ez he was gwine to take off his hat to ketch Mr.
Bummely, and Mr. Bummely he flown off, and Mr. Squirl he laugh, and Mr.
Boy he got mad, and made tracks fur home, and that's all."

The girls laughed, and hearing Sylvy call her, Bubbles went out.

"Isn't she funny?" said Florence. "I never could have made up a story
like that, could you, Dimple?"

"No," said Dimple, "she tells me the funniest ones sometimes, so mixed
up, and I laugh till I can scarcely speak, and she sings the most
absurd songs; she gets the words all twisted, she has no idea what they
mean. Oh! Florence, I do believe there is a bat in the hall. I hope to
goodness it won't come in here."

Florence screamed and hid her head under the piano, while Dimple took
refuge in the same place, and called loudly for Bubbles, who came
running in with Sylvy after her.

"What's de matter? Where are yuh?" they cried.

"Oh, a bat! a bat!" shrieked Florence, as the creature came swooping in
from the hall, beating its wings against the wall.

Sylvy, armed with a broom, and Bubbles, with a duster, soon put an end
to the poor bat, and the girls came out from their hiding-place.

"I suppose it is silly to be afraid of them, but they nearly frighten me
to death," said Dimple.

"So they do me," Florence said, "and spiders too. Ugh! it makes cold
chills run down my back to think of one; let's go to bed, Dimple. We can
undress anyhow, and sit in our nightgowns and talk, if we want to."

This Dimple agreed to, and they went upstairs to their rooms to find on
the bureau two little white paper packages addressed to "Miss Florence
Graham," and "Miss Eleanor Dallas."

"Papa did it," said Dimple, "it is just like him; let's see what is
inside. No, we'll guess. I say chocolates."

"I say burnt almonds: no, marshmallows," said Florence, giving her
package a little squeeze. "Marshmallows and chocolates," exclaimed
Florence, as she untied the little pink string and peeped in.

"So are mine," said Dimple. "I don't think we had better eat them all
to-night, do you? Suppose we count them and take out some for to-morrow.
One, two, three, twelve chocolates, and sixteen marshmallows. How many
have you?"

"Thirteen chocolates and fifteen marshmallows," announced Florence.

"Well, let's eat six of them, and put the rest away."

So they were carefully counted out, and the packages retied.

"Now we will undress and sit here in our nightgowns, till we've eaten
our candy," said Florence.

"Dear me," said Dimple, as the last one disappeared, "I wish we had said
seven of them."

"Suppose we do say seven."

"Well, suppose we do," and the packages were again untied and again put
up. They had hardly finished when Mrs. Dallas came in with a telegram in
her hand.

"Not in bed yet?" said she.

"No, mamma, we have been eating candy. Did you see papa put it on the
bureau?" said Dimple.

"Yes, and I have a piece of news for you. Your Uncle Heath will be here
to-morrow."

"Uncle Heath! I am so glad. Is the telegram from him?"

"Yes, it just came, and he will be here to breakfast."

"How long will he stop?"

"Not very long. Now jump into bed and be ready to get up before he
reaches here."

"Is your Uncle Heath your papa's brother?" asked Florence, when they
were in bed.

"Yes. Oh! Florence, he is so nice."

"Is he young or old?"

"Not so very old, about forty, I think; he is two years older than
papa, but he looks older; he has grey hair, a little bit grey, not very,
and he looks like papa, only he has blue eyes.

"I wonder why he is coming," mused Dimple. "Now I think of it. I heard
papa say yesterday, 'I am so glad for dear old Heath.' I wonder why.
Don't grown folks know lots of things, Florence? And we have to just
guess and wonder till they choose to tell us.

"Never mind, I am going to sleep, and I shall ask him myself to-morrow.
Just think, Florence, he is in the cars now, and they are steaming
along, coming nearer and nearer, while we lie still here and sleep.
Good-night," and she turned over and was soon fast asleep.




CHAPTER XI

An Uncle and a Wedding


Dimple was up betimes the next morning. Creeping quietly out of bed, she
left Florence sound asleep.

"Mamma," she whispered, softly, as she opened her mamma's door, "what
time is it? Has Uncle Heath come?"

"It is half-past six," said her mamma, "and Uncle Heath will be here in
half an hour."

"May I put on my blue frock?"

"Yes."

Dimple slipped back, and was not long in dressing. Florence sleepily
opened her eyes as Dimple was ready to leave the room.

"Oh Dimple, are you dressed?" she said, sitting up in bed. "Has the bell
rung?"

"No," said Dimple, "but Uncle Heath is coming, you know, and I want to
meet him. Come down when you are ready."

Florence being wide awake by this time, concluded to get up, and Dimple
ran downstairs, patting the baluster with one hand as she went.

When she reached the lowest step she was caught up by a pair of arms,
and found her face close to her Uncle Heath's whiskers.

"Oh! Uncle Heath," she cried, "do let me hug you. I am so glad to see
you. I'm gladder than anybody."

"I hope not," said her father from the doorway.

"Yes, I am," said Dimple, as her uncle carried her into the parlor, and
held her on his knee. "Uncle Heath, are you very happy?"

"Indeed, I am," said he, laughing, as did Dimple's papa and mamma.

"Quite a home thrust," said her papa.

"The reason I asked," she went on, playing with her uncle's watch chain,
"is, that I heard papa say the other day, 'I am so glad for dear old
Heath.'"

"He has reason to be," responded her uncle. "Dimple, how should you like
a new aunt and cousin?"

"Oh, uncle! Is it Rock?"

"Well, not Rock altogether," laughed he. "Rock's mother, as well."

"Please tell me, Uncle Heath."

"So I will, little girl. Rock's mother is going to be your grey-headed
uncle's wife. That makes Rock your cousin, doesn't it?"

"Yes," said Dimple, cuddling up to him, "but you are not grey-headed,
Uncle Heath, only grey-templed," she said, softly patting each side of
his face.

"She seems perfectly satisfied," said he, looking at his brother.

"Perfectly," he answered. "You could not have pleased her better."

"But, Uncle Heath," said Dimple, "I didn't know you knew Mrs. Hardy."

"I knew her long ago, when she wasn't Mrs. Hardy, but Dora West. Long
ago," he repeated, gently stroking her hair.

"Why didn't you marry her then?"

"I wanted to," said he, simply, "but I couldn't. Do you want to be
bridesmaid, Dimple?"

"Oh, uncle! Could I?"

"Yes, indeed; and Rock groomsman. We are such a young, frivolous couple,
we couldn't think of having a grown-up young lady for bridesmaid."

Dimple laughed, and sat in supreme content on her uncle's knee till the
breakfast bell rang.

"Florence, I know all about it," she cried, as Florence came in, "and I
am going to be bridesmaid, and I know why Uncle Heath is happy, and why
Rock can be my cousin. Isn't it lovely?"

Florence looked puzzled, but after a clearer explanation agreed with
Dimple that it was "perfectly lovely."

Rock came over after breakfast, with a message for Mrs. Dallas, and
Dimple ran out to meet him, crying, "Oh, Rock! your papa is here, and
you are going to be my cousin, really and truly. Did you know it?"

"Yes, I knew," said he, "and I'm real glad. Where is Mr. Dallas?"

"My Uncle Heath, or papa?"

"Your Uncle Heath."

"He has gone to see your mamma, I think. And oh, Rock! we are going to
be bridesmaids, you and I. No, I mean I am going to be bridesmaid, and
you groomsman."

"Yes, and something else I know, too," said Rock. "While mamma goes on
her wedding trip I am to come here to stay."

"Oh! Rock," exclaimed Dimple, clapping her hands, "that will be lovely,
too. How long?"

"Three days, I think."

"Won't we have good times?" laughed Dimple, dancing up and down. "Do
come sit down and talk about it. Are you glad you are going to have my
Uncle Heath for your papa?"

"Yes, indeed," said Rock.

"And are you going to live here?"

"No, in Baltimore."

"Oh, dear, that is all that spoils it."

"Never mind," said Rock. "I shouldn't wonder if we were to come here
summers, and I'll tell you, Dimple, maybe your mother will let you come
visit us next winter, and I will take you sleighing."

That comforted Dimple somewhat.

"Where is the wedding to be? I never thought to ask," said she.

"At church, at half-past nine Thursday morning. Then we come back to
your house to breakfast, and mamma and Mr. Dallas go away on the twelve
o'clock train."

"When you say Mr. Dallas I think you mean my papa," said Dimple. "I wish
you would call Uncle Heath papa."

"But he isn't my papa yet."

"Well, three days doesn't make much difference, and you need only say it
to me."

"Well! papa and mamma," said Rock, laughing, "will be back Sunday
evening, and Monday we all go away."
