go. But there was no sound and the wandering little Night Breezes told
him nothing. Lightfoot followed the dainty footprints up the bank.
There they disappeared, for the ground was hard. Lightfoot paused,
undecided which way to go.




CHAPTER XXXII

LIGHTFOOT SEES THE STRANGER


Lightfoot the Deer was unhappy. It was a strange unhappiness, an
unhappiness such as he had never known before. You see, he had
discovered that there was a stranger in the Green Forest, a stranger of
his own kind, another Deer. He knew it by dainty footprints in the mud
along the Laughing Brook and on the edge of the pond of Paddy the
Beaver. He knew it by other signs which he ran across every now and
then. But search as he would, he was unable to find that newcomer. He
had searched everywhere but always he was just too late. The stranger
had been and gone.

Now there was no anger in Lightfoot's desire to find that stranger.
Instead, there was a great longing. For the first time in his life
Lightfoot felt lonely. So he hunted and hunted and was unhappy. He lost
his appetite. He slept little. He roamed about uneasily, looking,
listening, testing every Merry Little Breeze, but all in vain.

Then, one never-to-be-forgotten night, as he drank at the Laughing
Brook, a strange feeling swept over him. It was the feeling of being
watched. Lightfoot lifted his beautiful head and a slight movement
caught his quick eye and drew it to a thicket not far away. The silvery
light of gentle Mistress Moon fell full on that thicket, and thrust out
from it was the most beautiful head in all the Great World. At least,
that is the way it seemed to Lightfoot, though to tell the truth it was
not as beautiful as his own, for it was uncrowned by antlers. For a long
minute Lightfoot stood gazing. A pair of wonderful, great, soft eyes
gazed back at him. Then that beautiful head disappeared.

With a mighty bound, Lightfoot cleared the Laughing Brook and rushed
over to the thicket in which that beautiful head had disappeared. He
plunged in, but there was no one there. Frantically he searched, but
that thicket was empty. Then he stood still and listened. Not a sound
reached him. It was as still as if there were no other living things in
all the Green Forest. The beautiful stranger had slipped away as
silently as a shadow.

All the rest of that night Lightfoot searched through the Green Forest
but his search was in vain. The longing to find that beautiful stranger
had become so great that he fairly ached with it. It seemed to him that
until he found her he could know no happiness.




CHAPTER XXXIII

A DIFFERENT GAME OF HIDE AND SEEK


Once more Lightfoot the Deer was playing hide and seek in the Green
Forest. But it was a very different game from the one he had played just
a short time before. You remember that then it had been for his life
that he had played, and he was the one who had done all the hiding. Now,
he was "it", and some one else was doing the hiding. Instead of the
dreadful fear which had filled him in that other game, he was now filled
with longing,--longing to find and make friends with the beautiful
stranger of whom he had just once caught a glimpse, but of whom every
day he found tracks.

At times Lightfoot would lose his temper. Yes, Sir, Lightfoot would lose
his temper. That was a foolish thing to do, but it seemed to him that he
just couldn't help it. He would stamp his feet angrily and thrash the
bushes with his great spreading antlers as if they were an enemy with
whom he was fighting. More than once when he did this a pair of great,
soft, gentle eyes were watching him, though he didn't know it. If he
could have seen them and the look of admiration in them, he would have
been more eager than ever to find that beautiful stranger.

At other times Lightfoot would steal about through the Green Forest as
noiselessly as a shadow. He would peer into thickets and behind tangles
of fallen trees and brush piles, hoping to surprise the one he sought.
He would be very, very patient. Perhaps he would come to the thicket
which he knew from the signs the stranger had left only a few moments
before. Then his patience would vanish in impatience, and he would dash
ahead, eager to catch up with the shy stranger. But always it was in
vain. He had thought himself very clever but this stranger was proving
herself more clever.

Of course it wasn't long before all the little people in the Green
Forest knew what was going on. They knew all about that game of hide and
seek just as they had known all about that other game of hide and seek
with the hunters. But now, instead of trying to help Lightfoot as they
did then, they gave him no help at all. The fact is, they were enjoying
that game. Mischievous Sammy Jay even went so far as to warn the
stranger several times when Lightfoot was approaching. Of course
Lightfoot knew when Sammy did this, and each time he lost his temper.
For the time being, he quite forgot all that Sammy had done for him when
he was the one that was being hunted.

Once Lightfoot almost ran smack into Buster Bear and was so provoked by
his own carelessness that instead of bounding away he actually
threatened to fight Buster. But when Buster grinned good-naturedly at
him, Lightfoot thought better of it and bounded away to continue his
search.

Then there were times when Lightfoot would sulk and would declare over
and over to himself, "I don't care anything about that stranger. I won't
spend another minute looking for her," And then within five minutes he
would be watching, listening and seeking some sign that she was still in
the Green Forest.




CHAPTER XXXIV

A STARTLING NEW FOOTPRINT


The game of hide and seek between Lightfoot the Deer and the beautiful
stranger whose dainty footprints had first started Lightfoot to seeking
her had been going on for several days and nights when Lightfoot found
something which gave him a shock. He had stolen very softly down to the
Laughing Brook, hoping to surprise the beautiful stranger drinking
there. She wasn't to be seen. Lightfoot wondered if she had been there,
so looked in the mud at the edge of the Laughing Brook to see if there
were any fresh prints of those dainty feet. Almost at once he discovered
fresh footprints. They were not the prints he was looking for. No, Sir,
they were not the dainty prints he had learned to know so well. They
were prints very near the size of his own big ones, and they had been
made only a short time before.

The finding of those prints was a dreadful shock to Lightfoot. He
understood instantly what they meant. They meant that a second stranger
had come into the Green Forest, one who had antlers like his own.
Jealousy took possession of Lightfoot the Deer; jealousy that filled
his heart with rage.

"He has come here to seek that beautiful stranger I have been hunting
for," thought Lightfoot. "He has come here to try to steal her away from
me. He has no right here in my Green Forest. He belongs back up on the
Great Mountain from which he must have come, for there is no other place
he could have come from. That is where that beautiful stranger must have
come from, too. I want her to stay, but I must drive this fellow out.
I'll make him fight. That's what I'll do; I'll make him fight! I'm not
afraid of him, but I'll make him fear me."

Lightfoot stamped his feet and with his great antlers thrashed the
bushes as if he felt that they were the enemy he sought. Could you have
looked into his great eyes then, you would have found nothing soft and
beautiful about them. They became almost red with anger. Lightfoot
quivered all over with rage. The hair on the back of his neck stood up.
Lightfoot the Deer looked anything but gentle.

After he had vented his spite for a few minutes on the harmless,
helpless bushes, he threw his head high in the air and whistled angrily.
Then he leaped over the Laughing Brook and once more began to search
through the Green Forest. But this time it was not for the beautiful
stranger with the dainty feet. He had no time to think of her now. He
must first find this newcomer and he meant to waste no time in doing
it.




CHAPTER XXXV

LIGHTFOOT IS RECKLESS


In his search for the new stranger who had come to the Green Forest,
Lightfoot the Deer was wholly reckless. He no longer stole like a gray
shadow from thicket to thicket as he had done when searching for the
beautiful stranger with the dainty feet. He bounded along, careless of
how much noise he made. From time to time he would stop to whistle a
challenge and to clash his horns against the trees and stamp the ground
with his feet.

After such exhibitions of anger he would pause to listen, hoping to
hear some sound which would tell him where the stranger was. Now and
then he found the stranger's tracks, and from them he knew that this
stranger was doing just what he had been doing, seeking to find the
beautiful newcomer with the dainty feet. Each time he found these signs
Lightfoot's rage increased.

Of course it didn't take Sammy Jay long to discover what was going on.
There is little that escapes those sharp eyes of Sammy Jay. As you know,
he had early discovered the game of hide and seek Lightfoot had been
playing with the beautiful young visitor who had come down to the Green
Forest from the Great Mountain. Then, by chance, Sammy had visited the
Laughing Brook just as the big stranger had come down there to drink.
For once Sammy had kept his tongue still. "There is going to be
excitement here when Lightfoot discovers this fellow," thought Sammy.
"If they ever meet, and I have a feeling that they will, there is going
to be a fight worth seeing. I must pass the word around."

So Sammy Jay hunted up his cousin, Blacky the Crow, and told him what he
had discovered. Then he hunted up Bobby Coon and told him. He saw Unc'
Billy Possum sitting in the doorway of his hollow tree and told him. He
discovered Jumper the Hare sitting under a little hemlock-tree and told
him. Then he flew over to the dear Old Briar-patch to tell Peter Rabbit.
Of course he told Drummer the Woodpecker, Tommy Tit the Chickadee, and
Yank Yank the Nuthatch, who were over in the Old Orchard, and they at
once hurried to the Green Forest, for they couldn't think of missing
anything so exciting as would be the meeting between Lightfoot and the
big stranger from the Great Mountain.

Sammy didn't forget to tell Paddy the Beaver, but it was no news to
Paddy. Paddy had seen the big stranger on the edge of his pond early the
night before.

Of course, Lightfoot knew nothing about all this. His one thought was
to find that big stranger and drive him from the Green Forest, and so he
continued his search tirelessly.




CHAPTER XXXVI

SAMMY JAY TAKES A HAND


Sammy Jay was bubbling over with excitement as he flew about through the
Green Forest, following Lightfoot the Deer. He was so excited he wanted
to scream. But he didn't. He kept his tongue still. You see, he didn't
want Lightfoot to know that he was being followed. Under that pointed
cap of Sammy Jay's are quick wits. It didn't take him long to discover
that the big stranger whom Lightfoot was seeking was doing his best to
keep out of Lightfoot's way and that he was having no difficulty in
doing so because of the reckless way in which Lightfoot was searching
for him. Lightfoot made so much noise that it was quite easy to know
just where he was and to keep out of his sight.

"That stranger is nearly as big as Lightfoot, but it is very plain that
he doesn't want to fight," thought Sammy. "He must be a coward."

Now the truth is, the stranger was not a coward. He was ready and
willing to fight if he had to, but if he could avoid fighting he meant
to. You see, big as he was, he wasn't quite so big as Lightfoot, and he
knew it. He had seen Lightfoot's big footprints, and from their size he
knew that Lightfoot must be bigger and heavier than he. Then, too, he
knew that he really had no right to be there in the Green Forest. That
was Lightfoot's home and so he was an intruder. He knew that Lightfoot
would feel this way about it and that this would make him fight all the
harder. So the big stranger wanted to avoid a fight if possible. But he
wanted still more to find that beautiful young visitor with the dainty
feet for whom Lightfoot had been looking. He wanted to find her just as
Lightfoot wanted to find her, and he hoped that if he did find her, he
could take her away with him back to the Great Mountain. If he had to,
he would fight for her, but until he had to he would keep out of the
fight. So he dodged Lightfoot and at the same time looked for the
beautiful stranger.

All this Sammy Jay guessed, and after a while he grew tired of following
Lightfoot for nothing. "I'll have to take a hand in this thing myself,"
muttered Sammy. "At this rate, Lightfoot never will find that big
stranger!"

So Sammy stopped following Lightfoot and began to search through the
Green Forest for the big stranger. It didn't take very long to find him.
He was over near the pond of Paddy the Beaver. As soon as he saw him,
Sammy began to scream at the top of his lungs. At once he heard the
sound of snapping twigs at the top of a little ridge back of Paddy's
pond and knew that Lightfoot had heard and understood.




CHAPTER XXXVII

THE GREAT FIGHT


Down from the top of the ridge back of the pond of Paddy the Beaver
plunged Lightfoot the Deer, his eyes blazing with rage. He had
understood the screaming of Sammy Jay. He knew that somewhere down there
was the big stranger he had been looking for.

The big stranger had understood Sammy's screaming quite as well as
Lightfoot. He knew that to run away now would be to prove himself a
coward and forever disgrace himself in the eyes of Miss Daintyfoot, for
that was the name of the beautiful stranger he had been seeking. He
_must_ fight. There was no way out of it, he _must_ fight. The hair on
the back of his neck stood up with anger just as did the hair on the
