strength of the Confederates, while the latter were perfectly informed
of every detail connected with the intentions of the invaders.

The next morning Ashley's troop took up their share of the work at the
front. They were broken up into parties of ten, each of which was
stationed at a village near the river, five men being on duty night and
day. As it happened that none of the other men in his squad had a
servant at the front, Vincent was able without difficulty to have Dan
assigned to his party. A house in the village was placed at their
disposal, and here the five off duty slept and took their meals while
the others were in the saddle. Dan was quite in his element, and turned
out an excellent cook, and was soon a general favorite among the mess.




CHAPTER VI.

BULL RUN.


The next fortnight passed by without adventure. Hard as the work was,
Vincent enjoyed it thoroughly. When on duty by day he was constantly on
the move, riding through the forest, following country lanes,
questioning everyone he came across; and as the men always worked in
pairs, there was no feeling of loneliness. Sometimes Ashley would draw
together a score of troopers, and crossing the river in a ferry-boat,
would ride twenty miles north, and dashing into quiet villages, astonish
the inhabitants by the sight of the Confederate uniform. Then the
villagers would be questioned as to the news that had reached them of
the movements of the troops; the post-office would be seized and the
letters broken open; any useful information contained in them being
noted. But in general questions were readily answered; for a
considerable portion of the people of Maryland were strongly in favor of
the South, and were only prevented from joining it by the strong force
that held possession of Baltimore, and by the constant movement of
Federal armies through the State. Vincent was often employed in carrying
dispatches from Major Ashley to Stuart, being selected for that duty as
being the best mounted man in the troop. The direction was always a
vague one. "Take this letter to Colonel Stuart, wherever he may be," and
however early he started, Vincent thought himself fortunate if he
carried out his mission before sunset; for Stuart's front covered over
fifty miles of ground, and there was no saying where he might be.
Sometimes, after riding thirty or forty miles, and getting occasional
news that Stuart had passed through ahead of him, he would learn from
some outpost that the colonel had been there but ten minutes before, and
had ridden off before he came, and then Vincent had to turn his horse
and gallop back again, seldom succeeding in overtaking his active
commander until the latter had halted for his supper at one or other of
the villages where his men were stationed. Sometimes by good luck he
came upon him earlier, and then, after reading the dispatch, Stuart
would, if he were riding in the direction where Ashley's command lay,
bid him ride on with him, and would chat with him on terms of friendly
intimacy about people they both knew at Richmond, or as to the details
of his work, and sometimes they would sit down together under the shade
of some trees, take out the contents of their haversacks, and share
their dinners.

"This is the second time I have had the best of this," the colonel
laughed one day; "my beef is as hard as leather, and this cold chicken
of yours is as plump and tender as one could wish to eat."

"I have my own boy, colonel, who looks after the ten of us stationed at
Elmside, and I fancy that in the matter of cold rations he gives me an
undue preference. He always hands me my haversack when I mount with a
grin, and I quite understand that it is better I should ask no questions
as to its contents."

"You are a lucky fellow," Stuart said. "My own servant is a good man,
and would do anything for me; but my irregular hours are too much for
him. He never knows when to expect me; and as he often finds that when I
do return I have made a meal an hour before at one of the outposts, and
do not want the food he has for hours been carefully keeping hot for me,
it drives him almost to despair, and I have sometimes been obliged to
eat rather than disappoint him. But he certainly has not a genius for
cooking, and were it not that this riding gives one the appetite of a
hunter, I should often have a good deal of difficulty in devouring the
meal he puts into my haversack."

But the enemy were now really advancing, and on the 12th of June a
trooper rode in from the extreme left, and handed Vincent a dispatch
from Colonel Stuart.

"My orders were," he said, "that, if you were here, you were to carry
this on at all speed to General Johnston. If not, someone else was to
take it on."

"Any news?" Vincent asked, as, aided by Dan, he rapidly saddled
Wildfire.

"Yes," the soldier said; "2000 of the enemy have advanced up the western
side, and have occupied Romney, and they say all Patterson's force is on
the move."

"So much the better," Vincent replied, as he jumped into the saddle. "We
have been doing nothing long enough, and the sooner it comes the
better."

It was a fifty-mile ride; but it was done in five hours, and at the end
of that time Vincent dismounted in front of General Johnston's quarters.

"Is the general in?" he asked the sentry at the door.

"No, he is not in; but here he comes," the soldier replied, and two
minutes later the general, accompanied by three or four officers, rode
up.

Vincent saluted, and handed him the dispatch. The general opened it and
glanced at the contents.

"The storm is going to burst at last, gentlemen," he said to the
officers. "Stuart writes me that 2000 men, supposed to be the advance of
McClellan's army, are at Romney, and that he hears Patterson is also
advancing from Chambersburg on Williamsport. His dispatch is dated this
morning at nine o'clock. He writes from near Cumberland. No time has
been lost, for that is eighty miles away, and it is but five o'clock
now. How far have you brought this dispatch, sir?"

"I have brought it from Elmside, general; twenty miles on the other side
of Bath. A trooper brought it in just at midday, with orders for me to
carry it on at once."

"That is good work," the general said. "You have ridden over fifty miles
in five hours. You must be well mounted, sir."

"I do not think there is a better horse in the State," Vincent said,
patting Wildfire's neck.

The general called an orderly.

"Let this man picket his horse with those of the staff," he said, "and
see that it has forage at once. Take the man to the orderlies' quarters,
and see that he is well cared for."

Vincent saluted, and, leading Wildfire, followed the orderly. When he
had had a meal, he strolled out to see what was going on. Evidently some
movement was in contemplation. Officers were riding up or dashing off
from the general's headquarters. Two or three regiments were seen
marching down from the plateau on which they were encamped into the
town. Bells rang and drums beat, and presently long trains of railway
wagons, heavily laden, began to make their way across the bridge. Until
next morning the movement continued unceasingly; by that time all the
military stores and public property, together with as much private
property, belonging to inhabitants who had decided to forsake their
homes for a time rather than to remain there when the town was occupied
by the enemy, as could be carried on in the available wagons, had been
taken across the bridge. A party of engineers, who had been all night
hard at work, then set fire both to the railway bridge across the river
and the public buildings in the town. The main body of troops had moved
across in the evening. The rearguard passed when all was in readiness
for the destruction of the bridge.

General Johnston had been preparing for the movement for some time; he
had foreseen that the position must be evacuated as soon as the enemy
began to advance upon either of his flanks, and a considerable portion
of his baggage and military stores had some time previously been sent
into the interior of Virginia. The troops, formed up on the high grounds
south of the river, looked in silence at the dense volumes of smoke
rising. This was the reality of war. Hitherto their military work had
been no more than that to which many of them were accustomed when called
out with the militia of their State; but the scene of destruction on
which they now gazed brought home to them that the struggle was a
serious one--that it was war in its stern reality which had now begun.

The troops at once set off on their march, and at night bivouacked in
the woods around Charleston. The next day they pushed across the country
and took up a position covering Winchester; and then the enemy, finding
that Johnston's army was in front of them, ready to dispute their
advance, recrossed the river, and Johnston concentrated his force round
Winchester.

Vincent joined his corps on the same afternoon that the infantry marched
out from Harper's Ferry, the general sending him forward with dispatches
as soon as the troops had got into motion.

"You will find Colonel Stuart in front of the enemy; but more than that
I cannot tell you."

This was quite enough for Vincent, who found the cavalry scouting close
to Patterson's force, prepared to attack the enemy's cavalry, should it
advance to reconnoiter the country, and to blow up bridges across
streams, fell trees, and take every possible measure to delay the
advance of Patterson's army, in its attempt to push on toward Winchester
before the arrival of General Johnston's force upon the scene.

"I am glad to see you back, Wingfield," Major Ashley said, as he rode
up. "The colonel tells me that in the dispatch he got last night from
Johnston the general said that Stuart's information reached him in a
remarkably short time, having been carried with great speed by the
orderly in charge of the duty. We have scarcely been out of our saddles
since you left. However, I think we have been of use, for we have been
busy all round the enemy since we arrived here in the afternoon, and I
fancy he must think us a good deal stronger than we are. At any rate, he
has not pushed his cavalry forward at all; and, as you say Johnston will
be up to-morrow afternoon, Winchester is safe anyhow."

After the Federals had recrossed the river, and Johnston had taken up
his position round Winchester, the cavalry returned to their old work of
scouting along the Potomac.

On the 20th of June movements of considerable bodies of the enemy were
noticed; and Johnston at once dispatched Jackson with his brigade to
Martinsburg, with orders to send as much of the rolling-stock of the
railroad as could be removed to Winchester, to destroy the rest, and to
support Stuart's cavalry when they advanced. A number of locomotives
were sent to Winchester along the highroad, drawn by teams of horses.
Forty engines and three hundred cars were burned or destroyed, and
Jackson then advanced and took up his position on the road to
Williamsport, the cavalry camp being a little in advance of him. This
was pleasant for Vincent, as, when off duty, he spent his time with his
friends and schoolfellows in Jackson's brigade.

On the 2d of July the scouts rode into camp with the news that a strong
force was advancing from Williamsport. Jackson at once advanced with the
5th Virginia Infantry, numbering 380 men and one gun, while Stuart, with
100 cavalry, started to make a circuitous route, and harassed the flank
and rear of the enemy. There was no intention on the part of Jackson of
fighting a battle, his orders being merely to feel the enemy, whose
strength was far too great to be withstood, even had he brought his
whole brigade into action, for they numbered three brigades of infantry,
500 cavalry, and some artillery.

For some hours the little Confederate force skirmished so boldly that
they checked the advance of the enemy, whose general naturally supposed
that he had before him the advanced guard of a strong force, and
therefore moved forward with great caution. Then the Confederates, being
threatened on both flanks by the masses of the Federals, fell back in
good order. The loss was very trifling on either side, but the fact that
so small a force had for hours checked the advance of an army greatly
raised the spirits and confidence of the Confederates. Stuart's small
cavalry force, coming down upon the enemy's rear, captured a good many
prisoners--Colonel Stuart himself capturing forty-four infantry. Riding
some distance ahead of his troop to find out the position of the enemy,
he came upon a company of Federal infantry sitting down in a field,
having no idea whatever that any Confederate force was in the
neighborhood. Stuart did not hesitate a moment, but riding up to them
shouted the order, "Throw down your arms, or you are all dead men!"
Believing themselves surrounded, the Federals threw down their arms, and
when the Confederate cavalry came up were marched off as prisoners.

Jackson, on reaching his camp, struck his tents and sent them to the
rear, and formed up his whole brigade in order of battle. The Federals,
however, instead of attacking, continued their flank movement, and
Jackson fell back through Martinsburg and halted for the night a mile
beyond the town.

Next day he again retired, and was joined six miles further on by
Johnston's whole force. For four days the little army held its position,
prepared to give battle if the enemy advanced; but the Federals, though
greatly superior in numbers, remained immovable at Martinsburg, and
Johnston, to the great disgust of his troops, retired to Winchester. The
soldiers were longing to meet the invaders in battle, but their general
had to bear in mind that the force under his command might at any moment
be urgently required to join the main Confederate army and aid in
opposing the Northern advance upon Richmond.

Stuart's cavalry kept him constantly informed of the strength of the
enemy gathering in his front. Making circuits round Martinsburg, they
learned from the farmers what number of troops each day came along; and
while the Federals knew nothing of the force opposed to them, and
believed that it far outnumbered their own, General Johnston knew that
Patterson's force numbered about 22,000 men, while he himself had been
joined only by some 3000 men since he arrived at Winchester.

On the 18th of July a telegram from the government at Richmond announced
that the Federal grand army had driven in General Beauregard's pickets
at Manassas, and had begun to advance, and Johnston was directed, if
possible, to hasten to his assistance. A few earthworks had been thrown
up at Winchester, and some guns mounted upon them, and the town was left
under the protection of the local militia. Stuart's cavalry was posted
in a long line across the country to prevent any news of the movement
reaching the enemy. As soon as this was done the infantry, 8300 strong,
marched off. The troops were in high spirits now, for they knew that
their long period of inactivity was over, and that, although ignorant
when and where, they were on their march to meet the enemy.

They had no wagons or rations; the need for speed was too urgent even to
permit of food being cooked. Without a halt they pressed forward
steadily, and after two days' march, exhausted and half famished, they
reached the Manassas Gap Railroad. Here they were put into trains as
fast as these could be prepared, and by noon on the 20th joined
Beauregard at Manassas. The cavalry had performed their duty of
preventing the news of the movement from reaching the enemy until the
infantry were nearly a day's march away, and then Stuart reassembled his
men and followed Johnston. Thus the Confederate plans had been
completely successful. Over 30,000 of the enemy, instead of being in
line of battle with the main army, were detained before Winchester,
while the little Confederate force which had been facing them had
reached Beauregard in time to take part in the approaching struggle.

In the North no doubt as to the power of the grand army to make its way
to Richmond was entertained. The troops were armed with the best weapons
obtainable, the artillery was numerous and excellent, the army was well
fed, and so confident were the men of success that they regarded the
whole affair in the light of a great picnic. The grand army numbered
55,000 men, with nine regiments of cavalry and forty-nine rifle-guns. To
oppose these, the Confederate force, after the arrival of Johnston's
army, numbered 27,833 infantry, thirty-five smooth-bore guns, and 500
cavalry. Many of the infantry were armed only with shot-guns and old
fowling-pieces, and the guns were small and ill-supplied with
ammunition. There had been some sharp fighting on the 18th, and the
Federal advance across the river of Bull Run had been sharply repulsed,
therefore their generals determined, instead of making a direct attack
on the 31st against the Confederate position, to take a wide sweep
round, cross the river higher up, and falling upon the Confederate left
flank, to crumple it up.

All night the Federal troops had marched, and at daybreak on the 21st
nearly 40,000 men were in position on the left flank of the
Confederates. The latter were not taken by surprise when Stuart's
cavalry brought in news of the Federal movement, and General Beauregard,
instead of moving his troops toward the threatened point, sent orders to
General Longstreet on the right to cross the river as soon as the battle
began, and to fall upon the Federal flank and rear.

Had this movement been carried out, the destruction of the Federal army
would probably have been complete; but by one of those unfortunate
accidents which so frequently occur in war and upset the best laid
plans, the order in some way never came to hand, and when late in the
day the error was discovered, it was too late to remedy it.

At eight o'clock in the morning two of the Federal divisions reached the
river, and while one of them engaged the Confederate force stationed at
the bridge, another crossed the river at a ford. Colonel Evans, who
commanded the Confederate forces, which numbered but fifteen companies,
left 200 men to continue to hold the bridge, while with 800 he hurried
to oppose General Hunter's division, which had crossed at the ford.

This consisted of 16,000 infantry, with cavalry and artillery, and
another division of equal force had crossed at the Red House Ford,
higher up. To check so great a force with this handful of men seemed all
but impossible; but Colonel Evans determined to hold his ground to the
last, to enable his general to bring up re-enforcements. His force
consisted of men of South Carolina and Louisiana, and they contested
every foot of the ground.

The regiment which formed the advance of the Federals charged, supported
by an artillery fire, but was repulsed. As the heavy Federal line
advanced, however, the Confederates were slowly but steadily pressed
back, until General Bee, with four regiments and a battery of artillery,
came up to their assistance. The newcomers threw themselves into the
fight with great gallantry, and maintained their ground until almost
annihilated by the fire of the enemy, who outnumbered them by five to
one. As, fighting desperately, they fell back before Hunter's division,
the Federals, who had crossed at Red House Ford, suddenly poured down
and took them in flank.

Swept by a terrible musketry fire, these troops could no longer resist,
and in spite of the efforts of their general, who rode among them
imploring them to stand firm until aid arrived, they began to fall back.
Neither entreaties nor commands were of avail; the troops had done all
that they could, and broken and disheartened they retreated in great
confusion. But at this moment, when all seemed lost, a line of
glittering bayonets was seen coming over the hill behind, and the
general, riding off in haste toward them, found Jackson advancing with
the first brigade.

Unmoved by the rush of the fugitives of the brigades of Bee and Evans,
Jackson moved steadily forward, and so firm and resolute was their
demeanor that Bee rode after his men, and pointing with his sword to the
first brigade, shouted, "Look, there is Jackson standing like a stone
wall!" The general's words were repeated, and henceforth the brigade was
known as the Stonewall Brigade, and their general by the nickname of
Stonewall Jackson, by which he was ever afterward known. The greater
part of the fugitives rallied, and took up their position on the right
of Jackson, and the Federal forces, who were hurrying forward assured of
victory, found themselves confronted suddenly by 2600 bayonets. After a
moment's pause they pressed forward again, the artillery preparing a way
for them by a tremendous fire.

Jackson ordered his men to lie down until the enemy arrived within fifty
yards, and then to charge with the bayonet. Just at this moment Generals
Johnston and Beauregard arrived on the spot, and at once seeing the
desperate nature of the situation, and the whole Federal army pressing
forward against a single brigade, they did their best to prepare to meet
the storm. First they galloped up and down the disordered lines of Bee,
exhorting the men to stand firm; and seizing the colors of the 4th
Alabama, Johnston led them forward and formed them up under fire.

Beauregard hurried up some re-enforcements and formed them on the left
of Jackson, and thus 6500 infantry and artillery, and Stuart's two
troops of cavalry, stood face to face with more than 20,000 infantry and
seven troops of regular cavalry, behind whom, at the lower fords, were
35,000 men in reserve. While his men were lying down awaiting the
attack, Jackson rode backward and forward in front of them as calm and
as unconcerned to all appearance as if on the parade ground, and his
quiet bravery greatly nerved and encouraged the young troops.

All at once the tremendous artillery fire of the enemy ceased, and their
infantry came on in massive lines. The four Confederate guns poured in
their fire and then withdrew behind the infantry. When the line came
within fifty yards of him, Jackson gave the word, his men sprang to
their feet, poured in a heavy volley, and then charged. A wild yell rose
from both ranks as they closed, and then they were mingled in a
desperate conflict. For a time all was in wild confusion, but the ardor
and courage of Jackson's men prevailed, and they burst through the
center of the Federal line.

Immediately Jackson had charged, Beauregard sent forward the rest of the
troops, and for a time a tremendous struggle took place along the whole
line. Generals Bee and Barlow fell mortally wounded at the head of
their troops. General Hampton was wounded, and many of the colonels
fell. So numerous were the Federals, that although Jackson had pierced
their center, their masses drove back his flanks and threatened to
surround him. With voice and example he cheered on his men to hold their
ground, and the officers closed up their ranks as they were thinned by
the enemy's fire, and for an hour the struggle continued without marked
advantage on either side.

Jackson's calmness was unshaken even in the excitement of the fight. At
one time an officer rode up to him from another portion of the field and
exclaimed, "General, I think the day is going against us!" To which
Jackson replied in his usual curt manner, "If you think so, sir, you had
better not say anything about it."

The resolute stand of the Confederates enabled General Beauregard to
bring up fresh troops, and he at last gave the word to advance.

Jackson's brigade rushed forward on receiving the order, burst through
the Federals with whom they were engaged, and, supported by the
reserves, drove the enemy from the plateau. Then the Federals, though
vastly superior in force, brought up the reserves, and prepared to renew
the attack; but 1700 fresh men of the Army of the Shenandoah came upon
the field of battle, Smith and Early brought up their divisions from the
river, and the whole Southern line advanced at the charge, and drove the
enemy down the slopes and on toward the ford.

A panic seized them, and their regiments broke up and took to headlong
flight, which soon became an utter rout. Many of them continued their
flight for hours, and for a time the Federal army ceased to exist; and
had the Confederates advanced, as Jackson desired that they should do,
Washington would have fallen into their hands without a blow being
struck in its defense.
