It was a Mrs. Perowne. She was sailing languidly down the other side of
the street, in a very large crinoline, and a very long dress of pale
silk, which floated after her along the dirty pavement, much, I
remember, to my admiration. Above this was some tight-fitting thing with
a good deal of lace about it, which was crowned by a fragile and flowery
bonnet, and such a tuft of white lace at the end of a white stick as
just sheltered her nose, which was aquiline, from the sunshine. She was
prettily dressed for an open carriage, a flower-show, or a wedding
breakfast; for walking through the streets of a small, dirty town, to
change her own books at the library, her costume was ludicrously out of
place, though at the time I thought it enviably grand. The way in which
a rich skirt that would not wash, and would undoubtedly be worn again,
trailed through dust and orange-peel, and greengrocers' refuse, and
general shop-sweepings, was offensive to cleanliness alone.

"Is she ill?" Eleanor asked.

"No," said Matilda; "I don't think so. Why?"

"She walks so slowly," said Eleanor, gazing anxiously at Mrs. Perowne
out of her dark eyes, "and she is so white in the face."

"Oh, my dear!" said Matilda, laughing, "that's puff--puff, and a white
veil. It's to make her look young. I heard Mrs. Minchin tell Mamma that
she knew she was thirty-seven at least. But she dresses splendidly. If
you stay over Sunday, you'll see her close, for she sits in front of us
in church. And she has such a splendid big scent-bottle, with gold tops,
and such a lovely, tiny little prayer-book, bound in blue velvet, and a
watch no bigger than a shilling, with a monogram on the back. She took
it out several times in the sermon last Sunday, so I saw it. But isn't
her hair funny?"

"It's a beautiful colour," said Eleanor, "only it looks different in
front. But I suppose that's the veil."

"No, it isn't," said Matilda; "that's the new colour for hair, you know.
It's done by stuff you put on; but Miss Perry said the worst was, it
didn't always come out the same all over. Lots of ladies use it."

"How horrid!" said Eleanor. "But what makes her walk so slow?"

"Well, I don't know," said Matilda. "Why should she walk quick?"

Eleanor seemed struck by this reply, and after a few minutes' pause,
said very gently, with a slight blush on her cheeks, "I'm afraid I have
been walking too fast for you. I'm used to walking with boys."

We earnestly assured her that this was not the case, and that it was
much better fun to walk with her than with Miss Perry, who used to
dawdle so that we were often thoroughly chilled.

In the afternoon we took her to the Esplanade, when Matilda, from her
knowledge of the people, took the lead in the conversation. I was proud
to walk on the other side of our new friend, with my best doll in my
arms. Aunt Theresa came with us, but she soon sat down to chat to a
friend, and we three strolled up and down together. I remember a pretty
bit of trimming on Eleanor's hat being blown by the wind against her
face, on which she quietly seized it, and stuffed it securely into the
band.

"Oh, my dear!" said Matilda, in the emphatic tone in which Aunt
Theresa's lady visitors were wont to exclaim about nothing in
particular--"don't do that. It looks so pretty; and you're crushing it
_dreadfully_."

"It got in my eyes," said Eleanor briefly. "I hate tags."

We went home before Aunt Theresa, but as we stood near the door, Eleanor
lingered and looked wistfully up the road, which ran over a slight hill
towards the open country.

"Would you like to stay out a little longer?" we politely asked.

"I should rather like to go to the top of the hill," said Eleanor.
"Don't you think flat ground tires one? Shall we race up?" she added.

We willingly agreed. I had a few yards start of Eleanor, and Matilda
rather less, and away we went. But we were little used to running, and
hoops and thin boots were not in our favour. Eleanor beat us, of course.
She seemed in no way struck by the view from the top. Indeed it was not
particularly pretty.

"It's very flat about here," she said. "There are no big hills you can
get to the top of, I suppose?"

We confessed that there were not, and, there being nothing more to do,
we ran down again, and went indoors.

Eleanor dressed for the evening in her usual peripatetic way, and,
armed with a homely-looking piece of grey knitting, followed us
down-stairs.

Her superabundant energy did not seem to find vent in conversation. We
were confidential enough now to tell each other of our homes, and she
had sat so long demurely silent, that Matilda ventured upon the
inquiry--

"Don't you talk much at your home?"

"Oh yes," said Eleanor--"at least, when we've anything to say;" and I am
sure no irony was intended in the reply.

"What are you knitting, my dear?" said Aunt Theresa.

"A pair of socks for my brother Jack," was the answer.

"I'm sure you're dreadfully industrious," said Mrs. Buller.

A little later she begged Eleanor to put it away.

"You'll tire your eyes, my dear, I'm sure; pray rest a little and chat
to us."

"I don't look at my knitting," said Eleanor; but she put it away, and
then sat looking rather red in the face, and somewhat encumbered with
her empty hands, which were red too.

I think Uncle Buller noticed this; for he told us to get the big
scrap-book and show it to Miss Arkwright.

Eleanor got cool again over the book; but she said little till, pausing
before a small, black-looking print in a sheet full of rather coarse
coloured caricatures, cuttings from illustrated papers and old-fashioned
books, second-rate lithographs, and third-rate original sketches, fitted
into a close patchwork, she gave a sort of half-repressed cry.

"My dear! What is it?" cried Matilda effusively.

"I think," said Eleanor, looking for information to Aunt Theresa, "I
think it's a real Rembrandt, isn't it?"

"A real what, my dear?" said Mrs. Buller.

"One of Rembrandt's etchings," said Eleanor; "and of course I don't
know, but I think it must be an original; it's so beautifully done, and
my mother has a copy of this one. We know ours is a copy, and I think
this must be an original, because all the things are turned the other
way; and it's very old, and it's beautifully done," Eleanor repeated,
with her face over the little black print.

Major Buller came across the room, and sat down by her.

"You are fond of drawing?" he said.

"Very," said Eleanor, and she threw a good deal of eloquence into the
one word.

The Major and she forthwith plunged into a discussion of drawing,
etching, line-engraving, &c., &c. It appeared that Mrs. Arkwright
etched on copper, and had a good collection of old etchings, with which
Eleanor was familiar. It also transpired that she was a naturalist,
which led by easy stages to a promise from the Major to show Eleanor his
insects.

They talked till bedtime, and when Aunt Theresa bade us good-night, she
said:

"I'm glad you've found your voice, my dear;" and she added, laughing,
"But whenever Papa talks to anybody, it always ends in the collection."




CHAPTER XII.

POOR MATILDA--THE AWKWARD AGE--MRS. BULLER TAKES COUNSEL WITH HER
FRIENDS--THE "MILLINER AND MANTUAMAKER"--MEDICAL ADVICE--THE MAJOR
DECIDES.


It was not because Major Buller's high opinion of Miss Airlie was in any
way lowered that he decided to send us to school. In fact it was only
under long and heavy pressure, from circumstances as well as from Aunt
Theresa, that he gave his consent to a plan which never quite met with
his approval.

Several things at this time seemed to conspire to effect it. The St.
Quentins were going on long leave, and Miss Airlie would go with them.
This was a heavy blow. Then we heard of this school after Miss Airlie
had left Riflebury, a fact so opportune as to be (so Aunt Theresa said)
"quite providential." If we were to go to school, sending us to this one
would save the trouble of making personal inquiries, and perhaps a less
wise selection, for Major Buller had confidence in Mr. Arkwright's good
judgment. The ladies to whose care his daughter was confided were
probably fit to teach us.

"It would save a great deal of trouble," my guardian confessed, and it
must also be confessed that Major Buller was glad to avoid trouble when
he could conscientiously do so.

I think it was his warm approval of Eleanor which finally clinched the
question. He thought that she would be a good companion for poor
Matilda.

Why I speak of her as "poor Matilda" demands some explanation.

Before I attempt to give it I must say that there is one respect in
which our biographies must always be less satisfactory than a story that
one might invent. When you are putting down true things about yourself
and your friends, you cannot divide people neatly into the good and the
bad, the injurers and the injured, as you can if you are writing a tale
out of your head. The story seems more complete when you are able
either to lay the blame of the melancholy events on the shoulders of
some unworthy character, or to show that they were the natural
punishment of the sufferer's own misconduct. But in thinking of Matilda
and Aunt Theresa and Major Buller, or even of the Doctor and Mrs.
Buller's lady friends, this is not possible.

The morbid condition--of body and mind--into which Matilda fell for some
time was no light misfortune either as regards her sufferings or the
discomfort it produced in the household, and I am afraid she was both
mismanaged and in fault herself.

It is safe, at any rate, to take the blame for one's own share, and I
have often thought, with bitterness of spirit, that, child as I was, I
might have been both forbearing and helpful to Matilda at a time when
her temper was very much tried by ill-health and untoward circumstances.
We had a good many squabbles about this period. I piqued myself upon
generally being in the right, and I did not think then, as I do now,
that it is possible to be most in the right in a quarrel, and at the
same time not least to blame for it.

Matilda certainly did by degrees become very irritable, moody, and
perverse, and her perversity developed itself in ways which puzzled poor
Aunt Theresa.

She became silent and unsociable. She displayed a particular dislike to
the privileges of being in the drawing-room with grown-up "company," and
of accompanying Aunt Theresa when she paid her afternoon calls. She
looked very ill, and stoutly denied that she was so. She highly resented
solicitude on the subject of her health, fought obstinately over every
bottle of medicine, and was positively rude to the doctors.

For her unsociability, I think, Miss Perry's evil influence was partly
to blame. Poor Matilda clung to her belief in our late governess when
she was no more to us than a text upon which Aunt Theresa and her
friends preached to each other against governesses in general, and the
governesses each had suffered from in particular. Our lessons with Major
Buller, and the influence of Miss Airlie's good breeding and
straightforward kindness, gave a healthier turn to our tastes; but when
Miss Airlie went away and Major Buller proclaimed a three weeks' holiday
from the Latin grammar, and we were left to ourselves, Matilda felt the
want of the flattery, the patronage, and the small excitements and
mysteries about nothing, to which Miss Perry had accustomed her. I blush
to think that my companionship was less comfort to her than it ought to
have been. As to Aunt Theresa, she was always too busy to give full
attention to anything; and this does not invite confidence.

Another reason, I am sure, for Matilda's dislike to appearing in company
was a painful sense of her personal appearance; and as she had heard
Aunt Theresa and her friends discuss, approve, and condemn their friends
by the standard of appearances alone, ever since she was old enough to
overhear company conversation, I hardly think she was much to blame on
this point.

Matilda was emphatically at what is called "an awkward age"; an age more
awkward with some girls than with others. I wish grown-up ladies, who
mean to be kind to their friends' daughters, would try to remember the
awkwardness of it, and not increase a naturally uncomfortable
self-consciousness by personal remarks which might disturb the composure
of older, prettier, and better-dressed people. It is bad enough to be
quite well aware that the size of one's hands and feet prematurely
foreshadow the future growth of one's figure; that these are the more
prominent because the simple dresses of the unintroduced young lady seem
to be perpetually receding from one's bony-wrists above, and shrinking
towards the calves of one's legs below, from those thin ankles on which
one is impelled to stand by turns (like a sleeping stork) through some
mysterious instinct of relieving the weak and overgrown spine.

This, I say, is mortifying enough, and if modesty and good breeding
carry us cheerfully through a not unfelt contrast with the assured
manners and flowing draperies of Mamma's lady friends in the
drawing-room, they might spare us the announcement of what it hardly
needs gold eyeglasses to discover--that we really grow every day.
Blushes come heavily enough to hands and cheeks when to the shyness of
youth are added the glows and chills of imperfect circulation: it does
not need the stare of strangers, nor the apologies of Mamma, to stain
our doubtful complexions with a deeper red.

All girls are not awkward at the awkward age. I speak most
disinterestedly on Matilda's behalf, for I never went through this phase
myself. It is perhaps because I am small that I can never remember my
hands, or any other part of me, feeling in my way; and my clothes--of
whatever length, breadth, or fashion--always had a happy knack of
becoming one with me in such wise that I could comfortably forget them.

The St. Quentin girls were nearer to Matilda's age than I, but they too
were very happy and looked very nice in the hobble-de-hoy stage of
girlhood. I am sure that they much preferred the company of their young
brothers to the company of the drawing-room; but they did what they were
told to do, and seemed happy in doing it. They had, however, several
advantages over Matilda. By judicious care (for they were not naturally
robust) they were kept in good health. They kept a great many pets, and
they always seemed to have plenty to do, which perhaps kept them from
worrying about themselves. Adelaide, for instance, did all the flowers
for the drawing-room and dinner-table. Mrs. St. Quentin said she could
not do them so well herself. They had a very small garden to pick from,
but Adelaide used lots of wild-flowers and grass and ferns. She often
let me help her to fill the china jars, and she was the only person who
ever seemed to like hearing about Grandpapa's paintings. They all did
something in the house. But I believe that their greatest advantage over
poor Matilda was that they had not been accustomed to hear dress and
appearance talked about as matters of the first importance, so that
whatever defects they felt conscious of in either did not weigh too
heavily on their minds.

On poor Matilda's they weighed heavily indeed. And she was not only
troubled by that consciousness of being plain, by which I think quite as
many girls are affected as by the vanity of being pretty (and which has
received far less attention from moralists); she was also tormented by
certain purely nervous fancies of her face being swollen, her eyes
squinting, and her throat choking, when people looked at her, which were
due to ill-health.

Unhappily, the ill-health which was a good excuse for Matilda's
unwillingness to "play pretty" in the drawing-room was the subject on
which she was more perverse than any other. It was a great pity that she
was not frank and confiding with her mother. The detestable trick of
small concealments which Miss Perry had taught us was partly answerable
for this; but the fault was not entirely Matilda's.

Aunt Theresa had not time to attend to her. What attention she did give,
however, made her so anxious on the subject that she took counsel with
every lady of her acquaintance, and the more she talked about poor
Matilda's condition the less leisure she had to think about it.

"It may be more mind than body, I'm afraid," said Aunt Theresa one
afternoon, on our return from some visiting in which Matilda had refused
to share. "Mrs. Minchin says she knew a girl who went out of her senses
when she was only two years older than Matilda, and it began with her
refusing to go anywhere or see any one."

Major Buller turned round on his chair with an anxious face, and a
beetle transfixed by a needle in his hand.

"It was a very shocking thing," continued Aunt Theresa, taking off her
bonnet; "for she had a great-uncle in Hanwell, and her grandfather cut
his throat. I suppose it was in the family."

Major Buller turned back again, and pinned the beetle by its proper
label.

"I suppose it was," said he dryly; "but as there is no insanity in my
family or in yours that I'm aware of, Mrs. Minchin's case is not much to
the point."

"Mrs. O'Connor won't believe she's ill," sighed Aunt Theresa; "_she_
thinks it's all temper. She says her own temper was unbearable till she
had it knocked out of her at school."

"Matilda's temper was good enough till lately," growled the Major.

"She says Dr. O'Connor's brother, who is the medical officer of a
lunatic asylum somewhere in Tipperary," continued Aunt Theresa,
"declares all mad women go out of their minds through ill-temper. He's
written a book about it."

"Heaven defend me, mind and body, from the theories of that astute
practitioner!" said Uncle Buller piously.

"It's all very well making fun of it, but everybody tells one that girls
are more trouble than any number of boys. I'm sure I don't remember
giving my mother any particular trouble when I was Matilda's age, but
the stories I've heard to-day are enough to make one's hair stand on
end. Mrs. Minchin knew another girl, who lost all her appetite just like
Matilda, and she had a very sulky temper too, and at last they found out
she used to eat black-beetles. She was a Creole, or something of that
sort, I believe, but they couldn't stop her. The Minchins knew her when
they were in the West Indies, when he was in the 209th; or, at least, it
was there they heard about her. The houses swarmed with black-beetles."

"A most useful young lady," said Uncle Buller. "Does Matilda dine on our
native beetles, my dear? She hasn't touched my humble collection."

"Oh, if you make fun of everything----" Aunt Theresa began; but at this
moment Mrs. St. John was announced.

After the customary civilities, Aunt Theresa soon began to talk of poor
Matilda, and Mrs. St. John entered warmly into the subject.

To do the ladies of the regiment justice, they sympathized freely with
each other's domestic troubles; and indeed it was not for lack of taking
