
"Exactly so; in this book you had better open a book account first. If
you wish, I will show you how."

"Thank you, sir; I should be very glad to have you;" and Bobby opened
the memorandum book, and seated himself at the desk.

"Write 'Book Account,' at the top of the pages, one word on each. Very
well. Now write 'To fifty copies of "Wayfarer," at sixty-seven cents,
$33.50,' on the left-hand page, or debit side of the account."

"I am not much of a writer," said Bobby, apologetically.

"You will improve. Now, each day you will credit the amount of sales
on the right hand page, or credit side of the account; so, when you
have sold out, the balance due your debit side will be the profit on
the lot. Do you understand it?"

Bobby thought a moment before he could see through it; but his brain
was active, and he soon managed the idea.

"Now you want a personal account;" and Mr. Bayard explained to him how
to make this out.

He then instructed him to enter on the debit side all he spent for
travel, board, freight, and other charges. The next was the "profit
and loss" account, which was to show him the net profit of the
business.

Our hero, who had a decided taste for accounts, was very much pleased
with this employment; and when the accounts were all opened, he
regarded them with a great deal of satisfaction. He longed to commence
his operations, if it were only for the pleasure of making the entries
in this book.

"One thing I forgot," said he, as he seized the pen, and under the
cash account entered, "To Cash from mother, $1.00." "Now I am all
right, I believe."

"I think you are. Now, the cars leave at seven in the morning. Can you
be ready for a start as early as that?" asked Mr. Bayard.

"O, yes, sir, I hope so. I get up at half past four at home."

"Very well; my small valise is at the house; but I believe everything
else is ready. Now, I have some business to attend to; and if you will
amuse yourself for an hour or two, we will go home then."

"I shall want a lodging place when I am in the city; perhaps some of
your folks can direct me to one where they won't charge too much."

"As to that, Bobby, you must go to my house whenever you are in the
city."

"Law, sir! you live so grand, I couldn't think of going to your
house. I am only a poor boy from the country, and I don't know how to
behave myself among such nice folks."

"You will do very well, Bobby. Ellen would never forgive me if I let
you go anywhere else. So that is settled; you will go to my house.
Now, you may sit here, or walk out and see the sights."

"If you please, sir, if Mr. Timmins will let me look at some of the
books, I shouldn't wish for anything better. I should like to look at
'The Wayfarer,' so that I shall know how to recommend it."

"Mr. Timmins _will_ let you," replied Mr. Bayard, as he touched
the spring of a bell on his desk.

The dapper clerk came running into the counting room to attend the
summons of his employer.

"Mr. Timmins," continued Mr. Bayard, with a mischievous smile, "bring
Mr. Bright a copy of 'The Wayfarer.'"

Mr. Timmins was astonished to hear "Country" called "Mister,"
astonished to hear his employer call him "Mister," and Bobby was
astonished to hear himself called "Mister." Nevertheless, our hero
enjoyed the joke.

The clerk brought the book; and Bobby proceeded to give it a thorough,
critical examination. He read the preface, the table of contents, and
several chapters of the work, before Mr. Bayard was ready to go home.

"How do you like it, Bobby?" asked the bookseller.

"First rate."

"You may take that copy in your hand; you will want to finish it."

"Thank you, sir; I will be careful of it."

"You may keep it. Let that be the beginning of your own private
library."

His own private library! Bobby had not got far enough to dream of such
a thing yet; but he thanked Mr. Bayard, and put the book under his
arm.

After tea, Ellen proposed to her father that they should all go to the
Museum. Mr. Bayard acceded, and our hero was duly amazed at the
drolleries perpetrated there. He had a good time; but it was so late
when he went to bed, that he was a little fearful lest he should
over-sleep himself in the morning.

He did not, however, and was down in the parlor before any of the rest
of the family were stirring. An early breakfast was prepared for him,
at which Mr. Bayard, who intended to see him off, joined
him. Depositing his little bundle and the copy of "The Wayfarer" in
the valise provided for him, they walked to the store. The porter
wheeled the trunk down to the railroad station, though Bobby insisted
upon doing it himself.

The bookseller saw him and his baggage safely aboard of the cars, gave
him a ticket, and then bade him an affectionate adieu. In a little
while Bobby was flying over the rail, and at about eight o'clock
reached B----.

The station master kindly permitted him to deposit his trunk in the
baggage room, and to leave it there for the remainder of the week.

Taking a dozen of the books from the trunk, and placing them in his
valise, he sallied out upon his mission. It must be confessed that his
heart was filled with a tumult of emotions. The battle of life was
before him. He was on the field, sword in hand, ready to plunge into
the contest. It was victory or defeat.

  "March on, brave youth! the field of strife
    With peril fraught before thee lies;
  March on! the battle plain of life
    Shall yield thee yet a glorious prize."

It was of no use to shrink then, even if he had felt disposed to do
so. He was prepared to be rebuffed, to be insulted, to be turned away
from the doors at which he should seek admission; but he was
determined to conquer.

He had reached a house at which he proposed to offer "The Wayfarer"
for sale. His heart went pit pat, pit pat, and he paused before the
door.

"Now or never!" exclaimed he, as he swung open the garden gate, and
made his way up to the door.

He felt some misgivings. It was so new and strange to him that he
could hardly muster sufficient resolution to proceed farther. But his
irresolution was of only a moment's duration.

"Now or never!" and he gave a vigorous knock at the door.

It was opened by an elderly lady, whose physiognomy did not promise
much.

"Good morning, ma'am. Can I sell you a copy of 'The Wayfarer' to-day?
a new book, just published."

"No; I don't want none of your books. There's more pedlers round the
country now than you could shake a stick at in a month," replied the
old lady, petulantly.

"It is a very interesting book, ma'am; has an excellent moral." Bobby
had read the preface, as I before remarked. "It will suit you, ma'am;
for you look just like a lady who wants to read something with a
moral."

Bravo, Bobby! The lady concluded that her face had a moral expression,
and she was pleased with the idea.

"Let me see it;" and she asked Bobby to walk in and be seated, while
she went for her spectacles.

As she was looking over the book, our hero went into a more elaborate
recommendation of its merits. He was sure it would interest the young
and the old; it taught a good lesson; it had elegant engravings; the
type was large, which would suit her eyes; it was well printed and
bound; and finally, it was cheap at one dollar.

"I'll take it," said the old lady.

"Thank you, ma'am."

Bobby's first victory was achieved.

"Have you got a dollar?" asked the lady, as she handed him a
two-dollar bill.

"Yes, ma'am;" and he gave her his only dollar and put the two in its
place, prouder than a king who has conquered an empire. "Thank you
ma'am."

Bidding the lady a polite good morning, he left the house, encouraged
by his success to go forward in his mission with undiminished hope.




CHAPTER X

IN WHICH BOBBY IS A LITTLE TOO SMART


The clouds were rolled back, and Bobby no longer had a doubt as to the
success of his undertaking. It requires but a little sunshine to
gladden the heart, and the influence of his first success scattered
all the misgivings he had cherished.

Two New England shillings is undoubtedly a very small sum of money;
but Bobby had made two shillings, and he would not have considered
himself more fortunate if some unknown relative had left him a
fortune. It gave him confidence in his powers, and as he walked away
from the house, he reviewed the circumstances of his first sale.

The old lady had told him at first she did not wish to buy a book,
and, moreover, had spoken rather contemptuously of the craft to which
he had now the honor to belong. He gave himself the credit of having
conquered the old lady's prejudices. He had sold her a book in spite
of her evident intention not to purchase. In short, he had, as we
have before said, won a glorious victory, and he congratulated himself
accordingly.

But it was of no use to waste time in useless self-glorification, and
Bobby turned from the past to the future. There were forty-nine more
books to be sold; so that the future was forty-nine times as big as
the past.

He saw a shoemaker's shop ahead of him, and he was debating with
himself whether he should enter and offer his books for sale. It would
do no harm, though he had but slight expectations of doing anything.

There were three men at work in the shop--one of them a middle-aged
man, the other two young men. They looked like persons of
intelligence, and as soon as Bobby saw them his hopes grew stronger.

"Can I sell you any books to-day?" asked the little merchant, as he
crossed the threshold.

"Well, I don't know; that depends upon how smart you are," replied the
eldest of the men. "It takes a pretty smart fellow to sell anything
in this shop."

"Then I hope to sell each of you a book," added Bobby, laughing at the
badinage of the shoemaker.

Opening his valise he took out three copies of his book, and politely
handed one to each of the men.

"It isn't every book pedler that comes along who offers you such a
work as that. 'The Wayfarer' is decidedly _the_ book of the
season."

"You don't say so!" said the oldest shoemaker, with a laugh. "Every
pedler that comes along uses those words, precisely."

"Do they? They steal my thunder then."

"You are an old one."

"Only thirteen. I was born where they don't fasten the door with a
boiled carrot."

"What do they fasten them with?"

"They don't fasten them at all."

"There are no book pedlers round there, then;" and all the shoemakers
laughed heartily at this smart sally.

"No; they are all shoemakers in our town."

"You can take my hat, boy."

"You will want it to put your head in; but I will take one dollar for
that book instead."

The man laughed, took out his wallet, and handed Bobby the dollar,
probably quite as much because he had a high appreciation of his
smartness, as from any desire to possess the book.

"Won't you take one?" asked Bobby, appealing to another of the men,
who was apparently not more than twenty-four years of age.

"No; I can't read," replied he roguishly.

"Let your wife read it to you, then."

"My wife?"

"Certainly; she knows how to read, I will warrant."

"How do you know I have got a wife?"

"O, well, a fellow as good looking and good natured as you are could
not have resisted till this time."

"Has you, Tom," added the oldest shoemaker.

"I cave in;" and he handed over the dollar, and laid the book upon his
bench.

Bobby looked at the third man with some interest. He had said nothing,
and scarcely heeded the fun which was passing between the little
merchant and his companions. He was apparently absorbed in his
examination of the book. He was a different kind of person from the
others, and Bobby's instinctive knowledge of human nature assured him
that he was not to be gained by flattery or by smart sayings; so he
placed himself in front of him, and patiently waited in silence for
him to complete his examination.

"You will find that he is a hard one," put in one of the others.

Bobby made no reply, and the two men who had bought books resumed
their work. For five minutes our hero stood waiting for the man to
finish his investigation into the merits of "The Wayfarer." Something
told him not to say anything to this person; and he had some doubts
about his purchasing.

"I will take one," said the last shoemaker, as he handed Bobby the
dollar.

"I am much obliged to you, gentlemen," said Bobby, as he closed his
valise. "When I come this way again I shall certainly call."

"Do; you have done what no other pedler ever did in this shop."

"I shall take no credit to myself. The fact is, you are men of
intelligence, and you want good books."

Bobby picked up his valise and left the shop, satisfied with those who
occupied it, and satisfied with himself.

"Eight shillings!" exclaimed he, when he got into the road. "Pretty
good hour's work, I should say."

Bobby trudged along till he came to a very large, elegant house,
evidently dwelt in by one of the nabobs of B----. Inspired by past
successes, he walked boldly up to the front door, and rang the bell.

"Is Mr. Whiting in?" asked Bobby, who had read the name on the door
plate.

"Colonel Whiting _is_ in," replied the servant, who had opened
the door.

"I should like to see him for a moment, if he isn't busy."

"Walk in;" and for some reason or other the servant chuckled a great
deal as she admitted him.

She conducted him to a large, elegantly furnished parlor, where Bobby
proceeded to take out his books for the inspection of the nabob, whom
the servant promised to send to the parlor.

