
Mrs. Staunton did not see Dorothy, who stood motionless near the door.

"They got so tired," she began in a monotonous sort of voice--"so
dreadfully tired, that there was nothing for them to do but to try and
get into the White Garden."

"A _White Garden_!" repeated Phil. "Was it pretty?"

"Lovely!"

"Why was it called a White Garden?" asked Marjory.

"Because of the flowers. They were all white--white roses, white lilies,
snowdrops, chrysanthemums--all the flowers that are pure white without
any color. The air is sweet with their perfume--the people who come to
live in the White Garden wear white flowers on their white dresses--it
is a beautiful sight."

"It must be," said Marjory, who had a great deal of imagination. "Are
the people happy?"

"Perfectly happy--rested, you know, Marjory. They are peaceful as you
are when you are tucked up in your little bed."

"I like best to play and romp," said Marjory in a meditative voice; "but
then, you see, I am never tired."

"Dorothy is standing at the door," exclaimed Phil. "Come in, Dorothy,
and listen to mother's beautiful story."

"Do you want me?" asked Mrs. Staunton, standing up. She began to
tremble--the children looked at her anxiously.

Dorothy went straight up and took her hand. "Dr. Staunton wishes to see
you," she said. "Will you come with me?" She looked anxiously toward the
door.

Mrs. Staunton put up her hand to her head. "Good-bye, my darlings," she
said, looking at the little pair, who were gazing up at her with puzzled
faces. "Go and play in the garden, and don't forget the White Garden
about which we have been speaking." She stooped down and deliberately
kissed both children, then she held out her hand to Dorothy. "I am quite
ready," she said.

At that moment George entered the room. He put his arms round his
mother. He was a big fellow--his arms were strong. The muscles in his
neck seemed to start out, his eyes looked straight into his mother's.

"You have got _me_, mother; I am George," he said. "Come, let us go to
my father together."

Mrs. Staunton tottered upstairs. She was not in the least surprised at
seeing George, but she leaned very firmly on him. They went into the
sickroom, and when George knelt down by his father's bedside, Mrs.
Staunton knelt by him.

The doctor was going deeper and deeper into the valley from which there
is no return. Earthly sounds were growing dim to his ears--earthly
voices were losing their meaning--earthly sights were fading before his
failing eyes. The dew of death was on his forehead.

Mrs. Staunton, whose face was nearly as white, bent down lower and lower
until her lips touched his hand. The touch of her lips made him open his
eyes. He saw his wife; the look on her face seemed to bring him back to
earth again--it was like a sort of return wave, landing him high on the
shores of time.

His impulse was to say, "Come with me--let us enter into the rest of the
Lord together;" but then he saw George. George had thrown his arm round
his mother's waist.

"Let me keep her, father," said the young man. "Don't take her yet, let
me keep her."

"Yes, stay with the lad, Mary," said the doctor.

It was a final act of self-renunciation. His eyelids drooped over his
dying eyes--he never spoke again.




CHAPTER X.


George stayed at Whittington for a week; he followed his father to the
grave. Mrs. Staunton clung to him with a sort of feverish tenacity;
whenever he came into the room, her eyes followed him. A sort of
wistful, contented expression came into them when he sat down beside
her. During all the time George was in the house she never broke down.
At last, however, the time came when he must leave her.

"I must go back to my work," he said; "but you are coming to London
soon, then I'll be with you every evening. You know my father has given
you to me to take care of. It will be all right when we are in London
together."

"Yes, my boy," she replied, "it will be all right then. I don't
complain," she added; "I don't attempt to murmur. I shall go to him, but
he cannot return to me; and I have got you, George, and he gave me to
you. I am willing to stay with you just as long as you want me."

It was late that night when George left his mother's room. Effie was
standing in the passage--the brother and sister looked at each other.
Effie had come home the day after Dr. Staunton's death.

"Come out with me for a bit, Effie," said her brother. They went into
the garden, and she linked her hand through his arm.

Dorothy Fraser had now returned to her duties in London; the Stauntons
were to go up to town as soon as ever the cottage could be sold. It had
belonged to the doctor. George was to live with them when they were in
town, and perhaps Effie would be able to follow the great wish of her
mind. There was just a possibility that she might be able to be trained
as a hospital nurse. She looked up at George now.

"You have been such a comfort to us," she said. "Dorothy told me
everything; and I know that if you had not come just at the opportune
moment, we should have lost our mother as well as our father. I'll do
all in my power to hurry matters, so that we can come to London before
the winter."

"Yes," said George. He was a finely built young fellow, with a handsome
face. He was not the least like Effie, who was dark and rather small,
like her mother. George had the doctor's physique; he had great square
shoulders, his eyes were frank and blue like his father's, but his mouth
wanted his father's firmness.

"Effie," he said. "I don't know how I am to bring myself to confide in
you."

"Confide in me?" she said, with a little start. "We always did tell our
secrets to one another, but all this terrible trouble seems to have put
childish things away. Have you really a secret, George, to tell me?"

"I don't know how I can tell it to you," he replied; his lips
quivered--he looked down. Effie clasped his arm affectionately.

"You know I would do anything for you," she said.

"Yes; I know you are the best of girls, and you're awfully pretty, too.
I know Fred Lawson will think so when he sees you."

"Who is he?"

"A friend of mine--a right good fellow--he is a medical student at St.
Joseph's Hospital. I have often met him, and he has talked to me about
his own sisters, and one day I showed him your photograph, and he said
what a pretty girl you were. Somehow, Effie, I never thought of you as
pretty until Fred said so. I suppose fellows don't think how their
sisters look, although they love them very dearly; but when Fred said
it, it opened my eyes. Dear, dear, why am I talking like this, when time
is so precious, and I--Effie, when I came down that day to see my
father, I was in trouble--great trouble; the shock of seeing him seemed
to banish it from my mind, but it cannot be banished--it cannot be
banished, Effie, and I have no one to confide in now but you."

"You must tell me of course," said Effie; she felt herself turning pale.
She could not imagine what George's trouble was. The night was dusk; she
raised her eyes to her brother's face--he avoided meeting them. He had a
stick in his hand, and he began to poke holes in the gravel.

"How much money have we got to live on?" he asked abruptly.

"How much money have we to live on?" repeated Effie. "I believe, when
all is collected, that there will be something like a hundred a year for
mother and Agnes and Katie and the two little children. Of course I am
going to support myself _somehow_, and you are naturally off our hands."

"It's awful," said George; "it's awful to be so starvingly poor as that.
Why, I get a hundred a year now; fancy five people living on a sum on
which I never can make both ends meet!"

"What is the matter with you, George? How queerly you speak! You knew we
should be awfully poor when father died. You are going to pay for your
board, are you not, when you come to us, and that will be a great help."

"Yes, of course; I vow and declare that I'll give mother at least half
of what I earn."

"Well, that will be fifty pounds--a great help. My idea for myself
is--but----" Effie stopped abruptly. She saw that George was making an
impatient movement. "I'll tell you another time," she said in a gentle
voice. "You have something now to tell me, have you not?"

"I have--God knows I have. I want to get two hundred and fifty pounds
somewhere."

"Two hundred and fifty pounds!" exclaimed Effie. George might just as
well have asked her for the moon.

"I don't understand," she said, after a pause.

"No, and I never want you to, Effie," replied the young man. "I can't
tell you what I want the money for, but it's a matter of life and death.
I thought I had made up my mind"--a husky sound came into his throat--"I
made up my mind to tell everything to my father when I came down that
night--I could have told him. It was not a sort of thing to talk to you
about, but I thought I could tell him; he died, and he gave me mother.
He left mother with me. You know perfectly well, Effie, that our
mother's life hangs on a thread. You know she must not have a shock,
and yet--Effie, Effie, if I don't get that L250, she will have such a
shock, such a terrible shock, that it will send her to her grave!"

"I must think," said Effie. "I cannot answer you in a moment."

"Is there no earthly way you can help me? I must be helped," said George
in a frantic voice. "I have got six weeks longer--I must get that L250
in six weeks, or--no, I can't tell you."

"Yes, you must try--I won't help you unless you try."

"Well, then--here goes. If I don't get it, I shall have to go
to--_prison_." George's voice sank to a hoarse whisper.

Effie could not suppress a cry.




CHAPTER XI.


"Then you have done something wrong," said Effie, loosening her hold of
her brother's arm and backing to a little distance. He could scarcely
see her face in the ever increasing darkness, but he noticed the change
in her voice. There was an indignant note of pained and astonished youth
in it. Effie had never come face to face with the graver sins of life;
the word "prison" stunned her, she forgot pity for a moment in
indignation.

"George," she said, with a sort of gasp, "father left mother to you,--in
a sort of way he gave her up to you,--and you have done wrong; you have
sinned."

"You talk just like a girl," said George; "you jump at conclusions. You,
an innocent girl living in the shelter of home, know as little about the
temptations which we young fellows have to meet out in the world, as
you know of the heavens above you. My God! Effie, it is a hard world--it
is hard, _hard_ to keep straight in it. Yes, I have done wrong--I know
it--and father gave mother to me. If you turn away from me, Effie, I
shall go to the bad--I shall go to the worst of all; there will not be a
chance for me if you turn from me."

The tone of despair in his voice changed Effie's frame of mind in a
moment. She ran up to him and put her arms round his neck.

"I won't turn from you, poor George," she said. "It did shock me for a
moment--it frightened me rather more than I can express; but perhaps I
did not hear you aright, perhaps you did not say the word 'prison.' You
don't mean to say that unless you get that impossible sum of money you
will have to go to prison, George?"

"Before God, it is true," said George. "I cannot, I won't tell you why,
but it is as true as I stand here."

"Then you will kill our mother," said Effie.

"I know that."

"And father left her to you. George, it cannot be. I must think of
something--my head is giddy--we have not any money to spare. It will be
the hardest fight in the world to keep the children from starvation on
that hundred pounds a year, but something must be done. I'll go and
speak to the trustees."

"Who are the trustees?" asked George. He rose again to his feet. There
was a dull sort of patience in his words.

"Mr. Watson is one,--you know the Watsons, father has always been so
good to them,--and our clergyman, Mr. Jellet, is the other. Yes, I must
go and speak to them; but what am I to say?"

"You must not betray me," said George. "If you mention that I want the
money, all will be up with me. In any case, there may be suspicion. Men
of the world like Mr. Watson and Mr. Jellet would immediately guess
there was something wrong if a lad required such a large sum of money.
You must not tell them that _I_ want it."

"How can I help it? Oh, everything is swimming round before my eyes; I
feel as if my head would burst."

"Think of me," said George--"think of the load I have got to bear."

Effie glanced up at him. His attitude and his words puzzled and almost
revolted her. After a time she said coldly:

"What hour are you leaving in the morning?"

"I want to catch the six-o'clock train to town. This is good-by, Effie;
I shan't see you before I go. Remember, there are six weeks before
anything can happen. If anyone can save me, you can. It is worth a
sacrifice to keep our mother from dying."

"Yes, it would kill her," said Effie. "Good-night now, George. I cannot
think nor counsel you at present; I feel too stunned. The blow you have
given me has come so unexpectedly, and it--it is so awful. But I'll get
up to see you off in the morning. Some thought may occur to me during
the night."

"Very well," said George. He walked slowly down the garden, and,
entering the house, went up to his own room. Effie did not go in for a
long time. She was alone now, all alone with the stars. She was standing
in the middle of the path. Often and often her father's steps had
trodden this path. He used to pace here when he was troubled about a
sick patient, when his anxiety about her mother arose to a feverish
pitch. Now his daughter stood on the same spot, while a whirl of
troubled thoughts passed through her brain. It had been her one
comfort, since that awful moment when Dorothy had told her that her
father was gone, to feel that George, in a measure at least, took that
father's place.

George had always been her favorite brother; they were very nearly the
same age--Effie was only two years younger than George; long ago George
had been good to the little sister--they had never quarreled, they had
grown up always the best and warmest of friends. Their love had been
true--as true as anything in all the world.

George had gone to London, and the first tiny spark of discontent had
visited Effie's heart. She would be so lonely without her brother. It
was so fine for him to go out into life, her own horizon seemed so
narrow. Then Dorothy came, and they had made friends, and Dorothy told
her what some women did with their lives.

Effie had been fired with a sudden desire to follow in Dorothy's steps;
then had followed the dark cloud which seemed to swallow up her wishes,
and all that was best out of her life. George, at least, remained. Dear,
brave, manly George! The brother who had passed out of childhood, and
entered man's estate.

Her father's last message had been to George--he had given her precious
mother into George's care.

It seemed to Effie to-night, standing out under the stars, as if George,
too, were dead. The old George was really dead, and a stranger had taken
his place. This stranger wore the outward guise of her brother--he had
his eyes, his figure; his voice had the same tone, he could look at you
just in George's way, but he could utter terrible words which George had
never known anything about. He could talk of _sin_ and _prison_. He
could propose that Effie should rescue him at the risk of her mother's
livelihood. Oh, what did it mean? How was she to bear it?--how could she
bear it? She clasped her hands, tears filled her eyes, but she was too
oppressed, too pained, too stunned to weep long. Presently she went into
the house, and lay down on her bed without undressing.

During the whole of that terrible night Effie scarcely slept. It was the
worst night in all her life. Toward morning she dozed a little, but
sprang up with a start, fearing that George had gone to London without
seeing her. For her mother's sake she must see him. Whatever happened,
her mother must never know of this calamity. Effie got up, washed her
hands and face, smoothed out her hair, and went downstairs. George was
already up, he was standing in the little parlor. He turned round when
he heard his sister's footsteps, and looked anxiously at her.
