able to serve his country. This certainly is the test of merit; and the
first foundation for deserving good-will is, having it yourself. The
adversary of this orator at that time was AEschines, a man of wily arts
and skill in the world, who could, as occasion served, fall in with a
national start of passion, or sullenness of humor, which a whole nation
is sometimes taken with as well as a private man; and by that means
divert them from their common sense, into an aversion for receiving
anything in its true light. But when Demosthenes had awakened his
audience with that one hint of judging by the general tenor of his life
towards them, his services bore down his opponent before him, who fled
to the covert of his mean arts, until some more favorable opportunity
should offer against the superior merit of Demosthenes.

It were to be wished, that love of their country were the first
principle of action in men of business, even for their own sakes; for
when the world begins to examine into their conduct, the generality, who
have no share in, or hopes of any part in power or riches, but what is
the effect of their own labor or prosperity, will judge of them by no
other method, than that of how profitable their administration has been
to the whole. They who are out of the influence of men's fortune or
favor, will let them stand or fall by this one only rule; and men who
can bear being tried by it, are always popular in their fall. Those, who
cannot suffer such a scrutiny, are contemptible in their advancement.

But I am here running into shreds of maxims from reading Tacitus this
morning, which has driven me from my recommendation of public spirit,
which was the intended purpose of this lucubration. There is not a more
glorious instance of it, than in the character of Regulus. This same
Regulus was taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, and was sent by them to
Rome, in order to demand some Punic noblemen, who were prisoners, in
exchange for himself; and was bound by an oath that he would return to
Carthage, if he failed in his commission. He proposes this to the
senate, who were in suspense upon it, which Regulus observing, without
having the least notion of putting the care of his own life in
competition with the public good, desired them to consider that he was
old, and almost useless; that those demanded in exchange were men of
daring tempers, and great merit in military affairs; and wondered they
would make any doubt of permitting him to go back to the short tortures
prepared for him at Carthage, where he should have the advantage of
ending a long life both gloriously and usefully. This generous advice
was consented to; and he took his leave of his country and his weeping
friends, to go to certain death, with that cheerful composure, as a man,
after the fatigue of business in a court or a city, retires to the next
village for the air.

       *       *       *       *       *


    _When the heart is right there is true patriotism_.

        BISHOP BERKELEY.--1684-1753.




XV. THE GOLDEN SCALES.

JOSEPH ADDISON.--1672-1719.

_From_ THE SPECTATOR, August 21, 1712.


I was lately entertaining myself with comparing Homer's balance, in
which Jupiter is represented as weighing the fates of Hector and
Achilles, with a passage of Virgil, wherein that deity is introduced as
weighing the fates of Turnus and AEneas. I then considered how the same
way of thinking prevailed in the eastern parts of the world, as in those
noble passages of Scripture, where we are told, that the great king of
Babylon, the day before his death, had been weighed in the balance, and
been found wanting. In other places of the holy writings the Almighty is
described as weighing the mountains in scales, making the weight for the
winds, knowing the balancings of the clouds; and, in others, as weighing
the actions of men, and laying their calamities together in a balance.
Milton, as I have observed in a former paper, had an eye to several of
these foregoing instances, in that beautiful description wherein he
represents the archangel and the evil spirit as addressing themselves
for the combat, but parted by the balance which appeared in the heavens,
and weighed the consequences of such a battle.

    The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray,
    Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen
    Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign,
    Wherein all things created first he weigh'd,
    The pendulous round earth with balanced air
    In counterpoise; now ponder; all events,
    Battles and realms: in these he puts two weights,
    The sequel each of parting and of fight:
    The latter quick up flew, and kick'd the beam;
    Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the fiend.

    "Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know'st mine,
    Neither our own, but given; what folly then
    To boast what arms can do! since thine no more
    Than Heaven permits; nor mine, though doubled now
    To trample thee as mire: for proof look up,
    And read thy lot in yon celestial sign,
    Where thou art weigh'd, and shewn how light, how weak,
    If thou resist." The fiend look'd up and knew
    His mounted scale aloft; nor more: but fled
    Murm'ring, and with him fled the shades of night.

These several amusing thoughts having taken possession of my mind some
time before I went to sleep, and mingling themselves with my ordinary
ideas, raised in my imagination a very odd kind of vision. I was,
methought, replaced in my study, and seated in my elbow-chair, where I
had indulged the foregoing speculations, with my lamp burning by me, as
usual. Whilst I was here meditating on several subjects of morality, and
considering the nature of many virtues and vices, as materials for those
discourses with which I daily entertain the public; I saw, methought, a
pair of golden scales hanging by a chain in the same metal over the
table that stood before me; when, on a sudden, there were great heaps of
weights thrown down on each side of them. I found upon examining these
weights, they showed the value of everything that is in esteem among
men. I made an essay of them, by putting the weight of wisdom in one
scale, and that of riches in another, upon which the latter, to show its
comparative lightness, immediately "flew up and kicked the beam."

But, before I proceed, I must inform my reader, that these weights did
not exert their natural gravity, till they were laid in the golden
balance, insomuch that I could not guess which was light or heavy,
whilst I held them in my hand. This I found by several instances, for
upon my laying a weight in one of the scales, which was inscribed by the
word Eternity; though I threw in that of time, prosperity, affliction,
wealth, poverty, interest, success, with many other weights, which in my
hand seemed very ponderous, they were not able to stir the opposite
balance, nor could they have prevailed, though assisted with the weight
of the sun, the stars, and the earth.

Upon emptying the scales, I laid several titles and honors, with pomps,
triumphs, and many weights of the like nature, in one of them, and
seeing a little glittering weight lie by me, I threw it accidentally
into the other scale, when, to my great surprise, it proved so exact a
counterpoise, that it kept the balance in an equilibrium. This little
glittering weight was inscribed upon the edges of it with the word
Vanity. I found there were several other weights which were equally
heavy, and exact counterpoises to one another; a few of them I tried, as
avarice and poverty, riches and content, with some others.

There were likewise several weights that were of the same figure, and
seemed to correspond with each other, but were entirely different when
thrown into the scales, as religion and hypocrisy, pedantry and
learning, wit and vivacity, superstition and devotion, gravity and
wisdom, with many others.

I observed one particular weight lettered on both sides, and upon
applying myself to the reading of it, I found on one side written "_In
the dialect of men_," and underneath it, "CALAMITIES;" on the other side
was written, "_In the language of the gods_," and underneath,
"BLESSINGS." I found the intrinsic value of this weight to be much
greater than I imagined, for it overpowered health, wealth,
good-fortune, and many other weights, which were much more ponderous in
my hand than the other.

There is a saying among the Scotch, that "an ounce of mother is worth a
pound of clergy;" I was sensible of the truth of this saying, when I saw
the difference between the weight of natural parts and that of learning.
The observation which I made upon these two weights opened to me a new
field of discoveries, for notwithstanding the weight of natural parts
was much heavier than that of learning, I observed that it weighed an
hundred times heavier than it did before, when I put learning into the
same scale with it. I made the same observation upon faith and morality;
for notwithstanding the latter outweighed the former separately, it
received a thousand times more additional weight from its conjunction
with the former, than what it had by itself. This odd phenomenon showed
itself in other particulars, as in wit and judgment, philosophy and
religion, justice and humanity, zeal and charity, depth of sense and
perspicuity of style, with innumerable other particulars, too long to be
mentioned in this paper.

As a dream seldom fails of dashing seriousness with impertinence, mirth
with gravity, methought I made several other experiments of a more
ludicrous nature, by one of which I found that an English octavo was
very often heavier than a French folio; and by another, that an old
Greek or Latin author weighed down a whole library of moderns. Seeing
one of my _Spectators_ lying by me, I laid it into one of the scales,
and flung a twopenny piece in the other. The reader will not inquire
into the event, if he remembers the first trial which I have recorded in
this paper. I afterwards threw both the sexes into the balance; but as
it is not for my interest to disoblige either of them, I shall desire to
be excused from telling the result of this experiment. Having an
opportunity of this nature in my hands, I could not forbear throwing
into one scale the principles of a Tory, and in the other those of a
Whig; but as I have all along declared this to be a neutral paper, I
shall likewise desire to be silent under this head also, though upon
examining one of the weights, I saw the word TEKEL engraven on it in
capital letters.

I made many other experiments, and though I have not room for them all
in this day's speculation, I may perhaps reserve them for another. I
shall only add, that upon my awaking I was sorry to find my golden
scales vanished, but resolved for the future to learn this lesson from
them, not to despise or value any things for their appearances, but to
regulate my esteem and passions towards them according to their real and
intrinsic value.

       *       *       *       *       *


    _It must be so--Plato, thou reasonest well!--
    Else whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
    This longing after immortality?
    Or whence this secret dread, and inward horror,
    Of falling into nought? Why shrinks the soul
    Back on herself, and startles at destruction?
    'Tis the divinity that stirs within us;
    'Tis heaven itself that points out an hereafter,
    And intimates eternity to man._

        _From Cato._--ADDISON.




XVI. MISJUDGED HOSPITALITY.

JONATHAN SWIFT.--1667-1745.

_From_ THE TATLER, March 6, 1711.

_Ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes
Emollit mores._

OVID.


Those inferior duties of life which the French call _les petites
morales_, or the smaller morals, are with us distinguished by the name
of good manners or breeding. This I look upon, in the general notion of
it, to be a sort of artificial good sense, adapted to the meanest
capacities, and introduced to make mankind easy in their commerce with
each other. Low and little understandings, without some rules of this
kind, would be perpetually wandering into a thousand indecencies and
irregularities in behavior; and in their ordinary conversation, fall
into the same boisterous familiarities that one observeth amongst them
when a debauch hath quite taken away the use of their reason. In other
instances, it is odd to consider, that for want of common discretion,
the very end of good breeding is wholly perverted; and civility,
intended to make us easy, is employed in laying chains and fetters upon
us, in debarring us of our wishes, and in crossing our most reasonable
desires and inclinations. This abuse reigneth chiefly in the country, as
I found to my vexation, when I was last there, in a visit I made to a
neighbor about two miles from my cousin. As soon as I entered the
parlor, they put me into the great chair that stood close by a huge
fire, and kept me there by force, until I was almost stifled. Then a boy
came in great hurry to pull off my boots, which I in vain opposed,
urging that I must return soon after dinner. In the meantime, the good
lady whispered her eldest daughter, and slipped a key into her hand. The
girl returned instantly with a beer-glass half full of _aqua mirabilis_
and syrup of gillyflowers. I took as much as I had a mind for; but madam
avowed I should drink it off--for she was sure it would do me good,
after coming out of the cold air--and I was forced to obey; which
absolutely took away my stomach. When dinner came in, I had a mind to
sit at a distance from the fire; but they told me it was as much as my
life was worth, and set me with my back just against it. Although my
appetite was quite gone, I resolved to force down as much as I could;
and desired the leg of a pullet. "Indeed, Mr. Bickerstaff," says the
lady, "you must eat a wing, to oblige me;" and so put a couple upon my
plate. I was persecuted at this rate during the whole meal. As often as
I called for small-beer, the master tipped the wink, and the servant
brought me a brimmer of October. Some time after dinner, I ordered my
cousin's man, who came with me, to get ready the horses; but it was
resolved I should not stir that night; and when I seemed pretty much
bent upon going, they ordered the stable door to be locked; and the
children hid my cloak and boots. The next question was, what I would
have for supper. I said I never ate anything at night; but was at last,
in my own defence, obliged to name the first thing that came into my
head. After three hours spent chiefly in apologies for my entertainment,
insinuating to me, "that this was the worst time of the year for
provisions; that they were at a great distance from any market; that
they were afraid I should be starved; and that they knew they kept me to
my loss," the lady went, and left me to her husband--for they took
special care I should never be alone. As soon as her back was turned,
the little misses ran backward and forward every moment; and constantly
as they came in, or went out, made a courtesy directly at me, which, in
good manners, I was forced to return with a bow, and, "Your humble
servant, pretty miss." Exactly at eight the mother came up, and
discovered by the redness of her face that supper was not far off. It
was twice as large as the dinner, and my persecution doubled in
proportion. I desired, at my usual hour, to go to my repose, and was
conducted to my chamber by the gentleman, his lady, and the whole train
of children. They importuned me to drink something before I went to bed;
and upon my refusing, at last left a bottle of _stingo_, as they called
it, for fear I should wake and be thirsty in the night. I was forced in
the morning to rise and dress myself in the dark, because they would not
suffer my kinsman's servant to disturb me at the hour I desired to be
called. I was now resolved to break through all measures to get away;
and after sitting down to a monstrous breakfast of cold beef, mutton,
neats' tongues, venison-pasty, and stale-beer, took leave of the family.
But the gentleman would needs see me part of my way, and carry me a
short-cut through his own grounds, which he told me would save half a
mile's riding. This last piece of civility had like to have cost me
dear, being once or twice in danger of my neck, by leaping over his
ditches, and at last forced to alight in the dirt; when my horse, having
slipped his bridle, ran away, and took us up more than an hour to
recover him again. It is evident that none of the absurdities I met with
in this visit proceeded from an ill intention, but from a wrong judgment
of complaisance, and a misapplication in the rules of it.




XVII. FROM THE "ESSAY ON MAN."[B]

ALEXANDER POPE.--1688-1744.


    Heaven from all creatures hides the book of fate,
    All but the page prescrib'd, their present state;
    From brutes what men, from men what spirits know;
    Or who could suffer being here below?
    The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day,
    Had he thy reason, would he skip and play?
    Pleas'd to the last, he crops the flowery food,
    And licks the hand just rais'd to shed his blood.
    O blindness to the future! kindly given,
    That each may fill the circle mark'd by heaven;
    Who sees with equal eye, as God of all,
    A hero perish, or a sparrow fall,
    Atoms or systems into ruin hurl'd,
    And now a bubble burst, and now a world.
      Hope humbly then; with trembling pinions soar;
    Wait the great teacher Death; and God adore.
    What future bliss he gives not thee to know,
    But gives that hope to be thy blessing now.
    Hope springs eternal in the human breast:
    Man never is, but always to be, blest.
    The soul, uneasy and confin'd from home,
    Rests and expatiates in a life to come.
      Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutor'd mind
    Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
    His soul proud science never taught to stray
    Far as the solar walk, or milky way;
    Yet simple nature to his hope has given,
    Behind the cloud-topt hill, an humbler heaven;
    Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
    Some happier island in the watery waste,
    Where slaves once more their native land behold,
    No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold.
    To be, contents his natural desire;
    He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire;
    But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
    His faithful dog shall bear him company.

      What if the foot, ordain'd the dust to tread,
    Or hand, to toil, aspir'd to be the head?
    What if the head, the eye, or ear repin'd
    To serve mere engines to the ruling mind?
    Just as absurd for any part to claim
    To be another, in this general frame;
    Just as absurd to mourn the tasks or pains
    The great directing Mind of All ordains.
      All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
    Whose body Nature is, and God the soul;
    That changed through all, and yet in all the same,
    Great in the earth, as in the ethereal frame,
    Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
    Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees;
    Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
    Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
    Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
    As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart;
    As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
    As the rapt seraph that adores and burns:
    To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
    He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.

      All nature is but art unknown to thee;
    All chance, direction, which thou canst not see;
    All discord, harmony not understood;
    All partial evil, universal good:
    And spite of pride, in erring reason's spite,
    One truth is clear, _Whatever is, is right_.

      Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
    As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;
    Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,
    We first endure, then pity, then embrace.

      Virtuous and vicious every man must be,
    Few in the extreme, but all in the degree:
    The rogue and fool by fits is fair and wise;
    And even the best by fits what they despise.

      Behold the child, by Nature's kindly law,
    Pleas'd with a rattle, tickled with a straw:
    Some livelier plaything gives his youth delight,
    A little louder, but as empty quite:
    Scarfs, garters, gold, amuse his riper stage,
    And beads and prayer-books are the toys of age:
    Pleas'd with this bauble still, as that before,
    Till tired he sleeps, and life's poor play is o'er.

      Has God, thou fool! work'd solely for thy good
    Thy joy, thy pastime, thy attire, thy food?
    Who for thy table feeds the wanton fawn,
    For him as kindly spreads the flowery lawn.
    Is it for thee the lark ascends and sings?
    Joy tunes his voice, joy elevates his wings.
    Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat?
    Loves of his own and raptures swell the note.
    The bounding steed you pompously bestride
    Shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride.
    Is thine alone the seed that strews the plain?
    The birds of heaven shall vindicate their grain.
    Thine the full harvest of the golden year?
    Part pays, and justly, the deserving steer.
    The hog, that ploughs not, nor obeys thy call,
    Lives on the labors of this lord of all.
      Know, Nature's children all divide her care;
    The fur that warms a monarch warm'd a bear.
    While man exclaims, "See all things for my use!"
    "See man for mine!" replies a pamper'd goose:
    And just as short of reason he must fall,
    Who thinks all made for one, not one for all.

      For forms of government let fools contest;
    Whate'er is best administer'd is best:
    For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight;
    His can't be wrong whose life is in the right.
    In faith and hope the world will disagree,
    But all mankind's concern is charity:
    All must be false that thwart this one great end,
    And all of God that bless mankind or mend.

      Honor and shame from no condition rise;
    Act well your part, there all the honor lies.
    Fortune in men has some small difference made,
    One flaunts in rags, one flutters in brocade;
    The cobbler apron'd, and the parson gown'd,
    The friar hooded, and the monarch crown'd.
    "What differ more (you cry) than crown and cowl?"
    I'll tell you, friend, a wise man and a fool.
    You'll find, if once the monarch acts the monk,
    Or, cobbler-like, the parson will be drunk,
    Worth makes the man, and want of it, the fellow;
    The rest is all but leather or prunello.

      Go! if your ancient but ignoble blood
    Has crept through scoundrels ever since the flood,
    Go! and pretend your family is young,
    Nor own your fathers have been fools so long.
    What can ennoble sots, or slaves, or cowards?
    Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards.

      Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
    Is but the more a fool, the more a knave.
    Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
    Or failing, smiles in exile or in chains,
    Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed
    Like Socrates,--that man is great indeed.

    An honest man's the noblest work of God.

    Know then this truth (enough for man to know),
    "Virtue alone is happiness below."

    ... Never elated while one man's oppress'd;
    Never dejected while another's bless'd....[C]

    See the sole bliss heaven could on all bestow!
    Which who but feels can taste, but thinks can know:
    Yet poor with fortune, and with learning blind,
    The bad must miss, the good untaught will find:
    Slave to no sect, who takes no private road,
    But looks through nature up to nature's God;
    Pursues that chain which links the immense design,
    Joins heaven and earth, and mortal and divine:
    Sees that no being any bliss can know,
    But touches some above and some below;
    Learns from this union of the rising whole,
    The first, last purpose of the human soul;
    And knows where faith, law, morals, all began,
    All end, in love of God and love of man.

FOOTNOTES:

[B] If the _Essay on Man_ were shivered into fragments, it would not
lose its value: for it is precisely its details which constitute its
moral as well as literary beauties.--A. W. WARD, _quoted by_ MARK
PATTISON.


[C] In these two lines, which, so far as I know, are the most
complete, the most concise, and the most lofty expressions of moral
temper existing in English words, Pope sums the law of noble life.

RUSKIN, _Lectures on Art_.




XVIII. RULE, BRITANNIA.

JAMES THOMSON.--1700-1748.


    When Britain first, at Heaven's command,
      Arose from out the azure main,
    This was the charter of the land,
      And guardian angels sang this strain:
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!

    The nations not so blest as thee,
      Must, in their turns, to tyrants fall,
    Whilst thou shalt flourish, great and free,
      The dread and envy of them all.
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!

    Still more majestic shalt thou rise,
      More dreadful from each foreign stroke;
    As the loud blast that tears the skies,
      Serves but to root thy native oak.
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!

    Thee haughty tyrants ne'er shall tame;
      All their attempts to bend thee down
    Will but arouse thy generous flame,
      But work their woe and thy renown.
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!

    To thee belongs the rural reign;
      Thy cities shall with commerce shine;
    All thine shall be the subject main,
      And every shore it circles thine.
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!

    The Muses, still with freedom found,
      Shall to thy happy coast repair;
    Blest isle! with matchless beauty crown'd,
      And manly hearts to guard the fair.
          Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
          Britons never will be slaves!




XIX. THE FIRST CRUSADE.

DAVID HUME.--1711-1776.

_From_ HISTORY OF ENGLAND.


After Mahomet had, by means of his pretended revelations, united the
dispersed Arabians under one head, they issued forth from their deserts
in great multitudes; and being animated with zeal for their new
religion, and supported by the vigor of their new government, they made
deep impression on the eastern empire, which was far in the decline,
with regard both to military discipline and to civil policy. Jerusalem,
