was, of course, aware of the other's existence, but each society kept
its own secrets. The Camellia Buds did not even know the name of their
rival, though they could guess at its list of members. Peachy, recovered
from her cold, came downstairs bubbling over with plans for a due
celebration of the festival. She submitted them gleefully to the
assembled girls, after French class. Much to her surprise about half of
the form demurred.

"We're going to do something of our own," announced Bertha airily. "We
don't want your stunt."

"Of our own? What d'you mean?" asked Peachy, her gray eyes snapping.

"I mean what I say. Some of us have arranged a little private
performance--we're going to keep it to ourselves."

"And leave out the rest of us?"

"You can have one of your own."

"Well, I like that!" flamed Peachy. "You're dividing the form into two
stunts. We've never done that before. Besides, who sent up a message
asking me to think of something fresh and original? I certainly
understood it was from _all_ of you."

Peachy, in huge indignation, glared into several conscious and guilty
faces, while her allies backed up her arguments by cries of "Shame!"
Bertha turned rather red but bluffed the matter out.

"We changed our minds. We can't always do everything all in a lump. As I
said before, we've got our own stunt, and you Camellia Buds can have
yours."

Camellia Buds! If Bertha had dropped a bomb in the classroom she could
not have caused greater consternation among the opposition. So the rival
society knew the name of their sorority. A suppressed "O-o-h!" arose
here and there. Evidently much enjoying their confusion Bertha and her
confederates retired, leaving the poor Camellia Buds to hold an
indignation meeting. Everybody talked at once.

"How did they find out?"

"Has anybody sneaked?"

"It's the absolute limit!"

"I couldn't have believed it!"

"It gives me spasms!"

"Of all mean things!"

"It makes me tingle!"

Then Jess, who was practical, made a suggestion.

"I vote we take an oath of every member that she hasn't betrayed us."

"'O wise young judge!'" quoted Agnes. "That's the best thing anybody's
said yet. Let's stand round in a row and swear 'Honest Injun.'"

If the Camellia Buds sustained doubts of one another's integrity these
were absolutely dispelled by the fervency with which each pleaded her
innocence.

"Somebody must have been eavesdropping at one of our meetings, I
suppose," sighed Agnes gloomily. "It's horrid to think they know our
secrets and we don't know theirs. I'd give worlds to get even."

"Where do they meet?" asked Delia. "I've never been able to find out."

"They're very clever in hiding themselves."

"Yes, I expect they keep watch, and scoot whenever they see one of us."

"That's it, of course," said Irene. "Well, what we've got to do is to
catch them off their guard. I vote we get the kids to help us. They
detest Bertha and Mabel. They'd just adore to track them for us. We
needn't exactly tell them why."

"Good for you, Renie Beverley. Those kids will do a turn for their
fairy godmothers. We'll call another candy party and put them on the
scout. I've a box of peppermint creams that will just go round. One
apiece ought to be enough for them to-day."

The juniors were fond of peppermints, and even a limited candy party was
in their opinion better than none at all. They had never received sweets
of any description from Bertha or Mabel; indeed they regarded them as
arch-enemies. The idea of keeping a watch over their movements appealed
to them.

"We'll shadow them, you bet!" grinned little Jean Hammond. "There isn't
much going on in the school that we don't know."

"I'm afraid there isn't. You're rather imps. But you'll be doing a good
deed if you find this out for us. The first who brings news shall have
two chocolates."

The Camellia Buds felt no more compunction in employing the juniors on
this quest than a government that organizes a secret service department.
The enemy had betrayed them shamelessly and deserved reprisals. It was
Desiree after all who won the chocolates. She haunted house and garden
with the persistency of a small ghost, and at last proudly made the
announcement:

"They've called a meeting by the big Greek jar to-day at five. I heard
Ruth tell Callie. What are you going to do about it?"

That was exactly the question which puzzled the Camellia Buds. It was
one thing to obtain information and quite another to act upon it. If
they went and interrupted the rival meeting they would have the
satisfaction of routing the enemy but would be none the wiser. It was
Peachy's diplomacy that pointed out a way.

"The Greek vase!" she said meditatively. "Yes, it's enormously big and I
think I can manage it. Now, my dearies, don't you want to be real
philanthropic this afternoon and give up your turns at the tennis courts
to other folks? Why? Because I've a little scheme on hand. I want to
keep those girls well away from the lemon pergola until it's time for
their precious meeting. Then they'll run up all unsuspecting, poor
innocents, and find----"

"What will they find?"

"'A chiel amang them takin' notes!'" chuckled Peachy. "In other words
yours truly will be hiding inside the big jar."

"Peachy! You can't!"

"Can't I? Great Scott! Do you think I'm going to let this beat me? You
can just bet your last nickel I shall. Renie and Jess shall help to hide
me, and the rest of you must watch the coast's clear till I'm safely
inside. I tell you I'm crazy to try it. It'll be the frolic of my life."

There was certainly no plan too madcap for Peachy to undertake. She
revelled in anything venturesome or bizarre. The Camellia Buds did as
she decreed, and resigned the courts that afternoon to Bertha, Mabel,
Elsie, Ruth, Rosamonde, Winnie, Monica, and Callie, who fell readily
into the trap prepared for them. Leaving this double set busy at tennis
they fled to the opposite end of the garden.

The lemon pergola was a sheltered walk that led down a flight of marble
steps to a small fountain. There was a shady nook here with bushes of
bamboo, and a tree with a sweet flower like honeysuckle, and little red
roses, and a border of Parma violets, and a seat made of bright green
tiles--altogether a very retired and pleasant and suitable spot in which
to hold a committee meeting. Exactly behind the seat stood an enormous
jar of terra-cotta, colored red, and decorated with Greek figures in
black silhouette, rather blurred and rubbed off, but still
distinguishable. No doubt its original use had been to store water,
wine, or olive-oil, but nowadays it was merely an ornament to the
garden. A plant pot full of scarlet geraniums rested on its head, and an
arbutula twined up the sides.

Peachy climbed up the bank behind, and with the help of Jess removed
the pot of scarlet geraniums; then very cautiously and carefully she let
herself down inside the jar. It was just big enough to contain her, and
she lay concealed like one of the forty thieves in the story of _Ali
Baba_. She had one advantage, however, over the famous brigands. There
was a little round hole broken in the front of the jar, and by putting
her eye to this she had an excellent view of her surroundings.

"Are you all right?" asked Irene anxiously.

"Fixed splendidly, thanks. Stick that flower-pot back on the top and
nobody'll ever guess I'm inside. Now scoot, quick, for it won't do for
them to see you haunting round. The place must look absolutely innocent
when they arrive."

"We won't go too far. Shout for us if you get so you can't bear it any
longer," said Jess, putting the geraniums on like a stopper, and
dragging Irene away.

Peachy's position was certainly not one of comfort, squatting at the
bottom of the great jar, and she was relieved that she had not long to
wait before the rival sorority arrived to hold its meeting. The girls
came scurrying, flushed after their games of tennis, and flung
themselves down, some on the marble steps and some on the tiled seat.
Bertha, as the Camellia Buds had suspected, was evidently the high
priestess, and opened the ceremony without delay.

"Members of the Starry Circle," she began hurriedly, "repeat your oath."

"We vow to be loyal to one another and to our President, and never to
reveal the secrets of our society," recited seven voices in reply.

("Aha!" chuckled Peachy to herself, in the depths of the gigantic jar.
"Got the name of your precious sorority slap-bang off!")

"We've met together this afternoon," continued Bertha, "to settle
finally what parts we're going to take at the carnival. Ruth, just look
round, please, and be _sure_ none of those wretched Camellia Buds is
anywhere about."

Bertha paused, while Ruth made a tour among the bushes, and seemed
slightly puzzled when the latter reported:

"Coast clear."

"It's a funny thing," commented the President, "but I declare I can
smell that particular strong lily-of-the-valley scent that Peachy is so
fond of. I suppose it's only fancy?"

"I can smell it too," confirmed Elsie, sniffing the air.

"Are there any lilies-of-the-valley out anywhere near?" asked Mabel.

"No, it's too early for them."

"Then somebody else must have the same scent, or have picked up Peachy's
_mouchoir_ by mistake."

A general examination of handkerchiefs followed, but each girl
disclaimed all responsibility for the delicate odor.

"Queer! I can't understand it. However, let's get to business. Our
waxworks are absolutely going to take the shine out of their stupid old
toy-shop. The only trouble is how we're going to get hold of the right
costumes. There's Queen Elizabeth now--I can manage her skirt, but I
want something for her farthingale. What can we raise?"

"Peachy has a lovely flowered silk dressing-gown," remarked Mabel. "It
would be just the thing."

"Suppose she uses it herself though."

"I won't give her a chance. I'll take it out of her cubicle the night
before and hide it."

"O-o-h! You will! Will you?" exploded a voice from the interior of the
Greek jar. "We'll just see about that."

The fact was that Peachy's crouching position had grown intolerable. She
was bound to move and reveal herself, and her indignation at Mabel's
cool suggestion flamed forth through the peep-hole.

The Circle sprang up in much alarm, and some of them squealed as the pot
of geraniums fell with a crash from the top of the big jar, and Peachy's
pink face and fluffy hair appeared instead. Her flashing gray eyes
certainly held no love light in them.

"You mean things!" raged Peachy. "Call yourselves stars, do you? I can't
see anything very star-like about you. Have your old waxworks if you
like, but I can tell you beforehand you won't take the shine out of
_us_. You've copied my idea shamelessly, and if you're going to steal
our properties too--yes, you may well scoot. Don't ever dare to show
your faces to me again."

For the members of the Starry Circle had broken up their meeting, and
were running away down the lemon pergola in the direction of the house,
immensely upset to find there had been a secret listener in their midst.
Once they were out of sight Peachy cooeed for Jess and Irene, who
appeared bursting with laughter and demanding details, having witnessed
the rout of the enemy from a distance.

"I'll tell you presently if you'll help me climb out of this wretched
thing," said Peachy, who found it a far more difficult matter to
extricate herself from the jar than it had been to drop into it. "How'm
I going to manage? Oh, don't pull my arms so, you hurt!"

It was indeed somewhat of a problem, and Peachy was beginning to feel
seriously alarmed, when, fortunately, one of the gardeners came to the
rescue, and tilted the jar over so as to allow her to crawl out.

"I feel like a released Slave of the Lamp, or a freed dryad, or
something fairy-taley or mythological," she declared. "It was worth it,
though, to see those girls' faces. Thank you, Giovanni! I'm ever so much
obliged. Sorry if I've spoilt your bed of violets. Is that Delia calling
us? Coming, dearie. Where are the rest of the Camellia Buds? I may as
well tell my story to the whole bunch of you together. Then you'll see
the sort of thing we're up against. They've taken our idea, and they're
trying to beat us on our own ground. That's what it's all about."




CHAPTER X

The School Carnival


The Camellia Buds considered that they possessed a real grievance. The
difference between an animated toy-shop and waxworks was so slight as to
be immaterial. In both the figures would require to be wound up, after
which they would perform various antics. The idea had certainly
originated with Peachy, and the Starry Circle had merely copied it.
Their stunt was in fact a shameless plagiarism.

"Why couldn't they have joined with us and we'd have done the toy-shop
all together?" demanded Agnes crossly.

"Oh, I don't know. It's just their perversity. It'll look so stupid to
have two separate shows. Whichever comes last will seem so stale after
the other."

"Why, of course, ours will come first! It _must_!"

"There'll be a fight for it."

"We can't squabble at the carnival with Miss Rodgers and Miss Morley
looking on. We'd better have our battle beforehand and get it over."

"Tell the Stars we mean to have first innings?"

"They'll never agree!"

"Look here, it's no use coming to open war with them. I vote we try
diplomacy. Has anybody thought of the programs yet?"

"I heard the seniors groaning over having to paint covers for them."

"Well, let's go to them privately and volunteer to help. Then we shall
have the opportunity of telling them that the Transition stunt is to be
in two divisions, and that Part I will be taken by ourselves."

"Quite a brain-throb!"

"Renie, I'm beginning to admire you!"

"Peachy can paint beautifully!"

"So can Joan and Esther. Shall I go and say we offer to do six programs?
Right-o! Come with me, Peachy. You're our champion wheedler."

The two delegates started at once on their diplomatic mission. They
felt indeed that there was no time to be lost. They found several of the
prefects collected in Rachel's bedroom, where possibly they were having
a little private candy party, for there were sounds of a rustling of
paper and a shutting of drawers before they were granted permission to
enter the precincts. The Transition girls always envied the seniors'
rooms. These were on the seaward side of the house, and their balcony
had glorious views over the bay and the surrounding coast. The
decorations were very tasteful. The walls were gray, with a stenciled
frieze of hydrangeas, and there were soft-shaded Indian rugs on the
polished wood floor. Rachel and her roommates had provided their own
luxuries in the way of pretty cushions, table-covers, pictures, and
flower-vases, and the general effect was of harmonious comfort.

"Well? What can I do for you?" inquired the head girl briefly, as Stella
admitted the diplomats.

It was not a very encouraging reception. Possibly the prefects were
annoyed at being disturbed in the midst of what they were doing.

Peachy, however, ignored Rachel's tone, and putting on her most winning
smile inquired:

"We wonder if you're painting any program covers for the carnival?"

Rachel lolled back in her chair and retied the bow that terminated her
long dark pigtail.

"Perhaps we are and perhaps we aren't," was her somewhat cryptic reply.

"The matter's in our hands entirely, of course," cooed Sybil, rocking to
and fro on a cane _sedia_.

"I know," put in Irene, trying to be tactful. "We only thought that
perhaps you might care to have a little help. Some of us would be ready
to paint a few if you like."

This put a different complexion on the case. The seniors, always
bristling for their privileges, resented idle curiosity--on the part of
the Transition. But an offer of help was another matter.

"There certainly is a great number to be done," said Erica, with a
beseeching look at Rachel.

The head girl thawed a little.

"Well, we shouldn't mind your taking a few off our hands," she conceded.
"Half a dozen? Sybil, will you get those programs out of my drawer? Put
anything you like on them--flowers, birds, figures, or landscapes. I'll
lend you this to copy the printing from. Let me have them by Thursday if
you can."

Rachel glanced meaningly at the door, as if she considered the interview
might now with decency come to an end. Neither Peachy nor Irene took the
hint, however. The main object of their mission had not yet been
broached.

"You've not written the program inside yet," commented Peachy, opening
one of the covers.

"We'll do that later."

"Shall we copy some for you?"

"Oh, no, thanks!"

Then Irene, growing desperate, blurted out what they had really come to
say.

"The Transition stunt is to be in two parts this time. Bertha and Mabel
are arranging one, and Peachy is getting up another. Do you mind putting
ours down to come first?"

"Sorry, but I'm afraid it can't be done," yawned Rachel. "Bertha has
been up and bagged first innings. I wrote it down, didn't I, Stella?
Where's that list? Yes, here we are. The juniors are to come first,
because Miss Morgan has trained them and she thinks they'll get the
fidgets if they wait, and it's better to have their performance over.
Then, of course, comes our stunt, and then the Transition."

"Could we possibly have our half of the Transition stunt before yours?
It would make more variety."

"Most certainly not!"

Rachel's brow was puckered in a frown, and Sybil, from the depths of the
rocking-chair, murmured, "Cheek!"

"We've got the program all fixed up, and we're not going to change it
for anybody," chirped Erica.

"Any one who isn't satisfied needn't act," endorsed Rachel, with such a
very decided glance at the door that the two delegates could no longer
obtrude their presence, and were obliged to beat an unwilling retreat.

They walked along the passage very dissatisfied with the result of their
mission.

"We've got all the fag of painting these wretched programs, and gained
nothing at all," groused Irene.

"They might have told us first about Bertha. Isn't she an absolute
Jacob--supplanting us like this?"

"Those seniors are _most_ unsympathetic. I want to go back and tell
Rachel what I think of her."

"She'd only say, 'How foreign' if you got excited. And it wouldn't be an
atom of use either."

"They've taken the best place in the program for their stunt."

"Trust the prefects to do that."

"What's to be done about it?"

"It will need some thinking over."

Peachy's agile brains were rarely to be beaten. She slept upon the
problem, and informed her friends afterwards that inspiration came to
her at exactly 3 a.m.

