Jack's reply was quite cheerful:

"Not so bad as that, thanks, Lucy. We're going to be friends all
together, the whole boiling of us, before we've done!"

"Think so?" said Hughes, and shrugged his shoulders. "Not much chance of
that yet, I'm afraid. I spoke to Hallett just now, and he wouldn't even
answer me."

Jack seemed out of luck's way this week, for the next morning he had an
accident with the ink, was fined sixpence for breaking one of the pots,
and ordered upstairs to change his bespattered garments.

Just outside his bedroom, in the passage, he came upon one of the
housemaids, in front of whom, on the ground, lay a pillow and a heavy
overcoat.

"Hullo, Hannah! Having a pillow-fight with an overcoat, for fault of a
live enemy, eh? I've caught you in the act! Now, I want you to do
something for me. I've been taking an ink shower-bath, you see, and I go
home to-day, and I must wear this jacket. Could you--"

But there Jack stopped short, for Hannah had broken into his sentence
with a jerky little sniff which he felt pretty sure was a stifled sob.

"Why, my good Hannah, what's up? I'm most awfully sorry if there is
anything wrong. Do tell us what it is!"

"Oh, well, Master Brady, I'm sure it isn't your doing, but it's one of
the young gentlemen, and I don't mind which, but I do think it's very
ill-mannered and unkind, and I've always tried to do my duty by you
all, and more than that sometimes; and it's turned my thumb-nail back
and broken it, and the big buttons banged in my face, and dragged my
hair down; and it's no pleasure to do it, but I shall 'ave to carry the
tale to the master--"

"A booby-trap, I suppose," interposed Jack, looking thoughtful.

"Well, sir, a trap--that's certain, for I walked in through the door as
innocent as a child; but I don't see on that account that I'm to be set
down for a booby."

"No, no; it's only the name for the trick," Jack hastened to explain,
for Hannah was looking more hurt than ever. "You balance the pillow on
the door, you know--and it needs some care, because it might fall the
wrong way, don't you see, and never hit you at all; and adding the
overcoat must have made it more difficult."

There was an unconscious tinge of admiration in Jack's voice, and Hannah
did not seem entirely consoled. As he handed her his stained jacket,
however, he added: "You know, it wasn't meant for you, Hannah. You got
it by mistake. It was put up for Frere; I'm sure of that. On these
mornings he always comes to this room first thing to practise his
violin. Whoever set the trap never thought about you, that's certain."

"That don't matter, sir, it hurt me just as much," persisted the maid.
"And they've no business, 'aven't the young gentlemen, to play pranks
like this. You never know what you'll be let in for next. I shall be in
a heverlasting flutter now. It's worse than living in a monkey-house."

"Have you ever tried that, Hannah? I shouldn't have thought this was
actually worse; but of course when one's tried both--"

"Master Brady, you're teasing me, and you know my meaning quite well."
Hannah's voice was positively tearful, and Jack grew alarmed.

"Nonsense! I wouldn't tease you for the world. But look here, I want you
to think better of what you said--about carrying the tale to Mr. West.
There's an awful lot done by passing things over; you don't know! Let's
return these articles--see, it's Cadbury's pillow and Trevelyan's coat,
so neither of them set the trap--and let's agree to forgive and forget
for once. Won't you?"

Jack could be very gentle and persuasive, and Hannah's heart was not
proof against his pleading.

"Well, sir, just this once, since you put it like that, and hask so
particular."

"There's an angel! I knew you would. You come to me, Hannah, when you're
in any fix, and see if I don't repay you for this. Hullo! here's Frere
and his fiddle. I'd better scuttle."

"Yes, Brady, I think you had better," observed Frere. "I heard Mr. West
asking for you."

"Ugh! I never like being asked for," remarked Jack, and straightway
vanished.

"So peace isn't signed yet," he said to himself. "The campaign has only
changed its character, for secret and irregular warfare. I don't seem to
have accomplished much so far."

Jack went home that Saturday feeling rather discouraged. He little knew
what his accidental interview with Hannah, the housemaid, would result
in.

He was flinging his own and Trevelyan's muddy boots into the big basket
which stood in the scullery, on Monday evening, when a low voice close
at hand startled him.

"Please, Master Brady, if you have a minute to spare, I should like to
speak to you."

Jack turned round in surprise, to face his friend of Saturday, the
housemaid.

"Why, certainly. Fire away! I'm all attention."

"I hope you won't think me foolish, sir, but you--you do seem
sympithetic like, though you can't help me, I know; and yet you told me
to come to you, and it's a relief to out with one's trouble; and Emma,
she don't understand, because she's going to be married, and she don't
think of nothin' else; and Cook, she says she's never 'ad nothin' to do
with plants, not excep' the eatin' sorts, like cabbages and turnips--"

"But, Hannah, you haven't given me a chance yet. Plants?" said Jack.

"Yes, sir; I'll tell you all about it if I may. You see, my 'ome's at
Brickland--that's a matter of four miles from Elmridge,--and my father,
he's steadily wastin', and doctor says there's no chance for him, not
unless he gets to one of the hopen-air 'ospitals, and he's not to doddle
about the green-'ouse any more."

"That's a bad business," said Jack, looking grave. "Then your father has
been a gardener?"

"Yes, and a salesman in a small way, sir. But now he's to give up, and
sell all the plants. Doctor says he'll never again be fit for that work.
It's goin' in and out of the cold and the heat and the damp that's so
tryin'. He's been holdin' on as long as he could, but now he's ready
enough to part with 'em, and if only he could get a good price it'd
maybe take 'im to the hopen-air, and help to keep the 'ome together till
he's well."

"That sounds the wisest plan," observed Jack thoughtfully.

"Yes, sir, but the point is the sellin' of 'em. They ought to go into a
good big sale, where there'll be plenty of biddin'; they aren't enough
in themselves to draw buyers. And Mother says in her letter this mornin'
they've heard of one that's bein' held in Elmridge on Saturday, a big
one, in the Rookwood grounds. They call it a 'Nurserymen's Combine';
there's a many of them joining, and they're willin' to take in Father's
little lot."

[Illustration]

"Surely the very thing!" said Jack.

"It seems so, doesn't it, sir? Father he sent round at once to make
arrangements. But what do you think? he can't get the carting of 'em
done under three-and-six a load; and, as he says, he hasn't got half a
guinea to lay out that way. Why, it'd pay his train to the hopen-air! So
'e'll have to let it slide, and not get such a chance again in a hurry."

"I'm sure I'm awfully sorry about it," responded Jack feelingly.
"But--but--but keep up your spirits, and who knows what may turn up?"

And with this consoling advice, he turned on his heel.




CHAPTER VIII

JACK'S MAIDEN SPEECH


"You really wish me to understand, Brady, that not you alone, but all
the elder boys--day-pupils and boarders alike--desire of your own
free-will to devote your next Saturday's half-holiday to conveying this
poor man's plants from his house at Brickland to the Rookwood sale?"

"Yes, sir, that's what we want to do."

"H'm! Well, the proposal does you credit, and you certainly might employ
your time much worse than in carrying it out. I don't think it would be
right for me to refuse your request. Mr. Anderson, I feel sure, will be
ready to help and advise you, if necessary, but as the idea is your own
I should like you, as far as possible, to carry it out by yourselves."

"Thank you, sir!" said Jack, and withdrew.

It was evening when this dialogue took place. The day-boys had departed
in an irritable frame of mind, on account of various annoyances of which
they had been the victims during the past two days. Bacon had been
tripped up twice by a piece of string, Hughes had found his coat-sleeves
tightly sewn up with packing-thread, and Simmons's pockets had been
crammed with moist, wriggling earthworms.

Knowing this, it may be wondered that they were prevailed on to agree to
Jack's scheme for the coming Saturday. But our hero was wily, and he
worded his suggestion so carefully that they did not for a moment
imagine that their enemies the boarders were at all connected with the
plan, which seemed to offer scope for fun and adventure of a new
description. Was not Saturday Jack's regular day of release? Of course
this was to be an "out-of-school" affair altogether. So they imagined.

"Now then, you fellows!" cried Jack, bursting into the school-room like
a frolicsome whirlwind, "who said I wouldn't get leave? West and I have
settled it all most comfortably, patted each other on the head, and so
forth. Let you go? Why, he'd like nothing better than to let you go for
good and all!"

"So you've let the whole lot of us in for it, young man?" said
Trevelyan, looking amused.

"Why, nobody asked to be left out," returned Jack.

This was quite true, and there was no more to be said. Hallett had taken
kindly to the idea to begin with, and set the fashion by doing so. One
or two lazy lads would not have been sorry in their hearts if Mr. West
had vetoed the scheme, but they had not the courage to refuse to join in
it.

"Now to business!" Jack continued. "We must send Mr. Thompson himself
word of our intentions; let's write a proper, tradesman-like letter!
Vickers, you're the fluent, flowery one. Bottle up your metaphors and
give us a page of business-like fluency! Here's some paper."

After a good deal of discussion the following letter was composed:--

     _To Mr J. Thompson Nurseryman._

     _Dr Sir/_

     _Having heard of yr intention to dispose of yr stock-in-hand
     (Plants) we have pleasure in proposing to undertake transport of
     same (carriage free) on Saty next ensuing between 2 and 4 p.m. from
     yr house to Rookwood Elmridge Middleshire for sale advd to be held
     there at 6 p.m. Safety of goods guarantd. Unless we hear to contry
     we shall presume this meets yr views and take action accordly._

     _Yrs etc._

         _(Signed) T. Vickers_
                  _N. Hallett_
                  _J. Brady &c._
     _pro) Students of Brincliffe Elmridge._

"If that isn't business-like, I don't know what is!" exclaimed Cadbury,
when it was read through. "If ink was a shilling a drop, you couldn't
have been more chary of it. There's not an 'a', 'an', or 'the'
throughout, nor a comma, nor an adjective, and the contractions are
masterly. We're all born commercial clerks, that's what we are!"

"Ethel and Lucy have undertaken the necessary barrow-borrowing,"
remarked Jack, casually. "We sha'n't want more than six or eight
wheel-barrows, and that pair can get anything if it goes together. Lucy
represents the dauntless cheek, and Ethel the irresistible charm. What
more is required?"

"What do you mean, Brady? We won't have the day-boys sticking their
fingers into this pie!" cried Escombe Trevelyan.

"We couldn't do the job alone," said Jack quietly. "It would take us
twice as long."

A loud murmur of disapprobation ran through the room.

Jack turned rather pale, and pinched the edge of the table nervously.
His eyes wandered from face to face. All were vexed, all displeased.
Then, with a sudden impulse he sprang to his feet, and spoke his
mind--rapidly, earnestly.

"Look here, I can't understand it! What makes you all so beastly
to the day-boys--to my pals? You began it, not they! They came to
Brincliffe without the least idea of any unfriendly feeling, and you
hated them before you'd seen them or heard their names. Is that
fair--straight--English? If it were, I'd wish to be French or German.
Where's the fun in this constant worrying of each other? As boarders,
it's your place to put out a hand first, and I think I can promise that
the day-boys will shake it. Bah! I know I can never talk you round; it's
no good attempting to. I'm not in a comic mood, and can't make you
laugh, like Cadbury, and I haven't Vickers's gift of the gab. But wasn't
last Friday's lesson enough? Wasn't the sight of that knife--"

[Illustration]

"Hush!" came from many mouths.

"Oh, we want to forget it! Yes, we don't want to talk about it, I know.
But I've got to this once. If there had been an accident--to
Armitage--it wouldn't have been wholly the March Hare's fault. It was
those who first started the quarrel between boarders and day-boys, those
who put the notion of ill-feeling into his silly little head. I see
you're thinking of the swimming-baths, and Toppin's dive. Now I happen
to know, and Toppin can bear me out, that the kid asked to be pushed,
and that Armitage would have saved him next moment if the March Hare
hadn't jumped in and hindered things. And everyone of you who have
listened and nodded to the March Hare's tale have added coal to the fire
you might have quenched in a moment. And--and--and--and--" poor Jack was
shaking and stammering with excitement, "what--what if it had--ended
in--"

But there he sat down, leaving his sentence unfinished.

Cadbury was the first to reply, and that was not at once. Slowly he
ruled a long, thick, black line in his exercise-book, then, pushing his
chair away from the table, tilted it back, and spoke:

"Well, I don't know what anyone else thinks, but I'll tell you what I
do. Brady's last sentence was certainly not fluent, and I shouldn't
care to have to analyse it. As for the jokes in it, they were about as
plentiful as wasps in January. All that's true enough. Still,
nevertheless, speaking for my humble self, he thrust home. You did,
Jack, you beggar! You'd no business to, but you actually had the
impudence to make me feel ashamed of myself. And, of course, I don't
know what you others will say, but I vote we bury the hatchet in old
Thompson's biggest flower-pot. Who's with me?"

"I am!"

"I am!"

"And I!"

