hands over her eyes to keep out the awful sight.

"Look to the boat, I am going after him!" cried our hero suddenly, and
leaping to the bow, he dove into the bay after the sinking young man.

  [Illustration: LEAPING TO THE BOW, HE DOVE INTO THE BAY AFTER THE
  SINKING YOUNG MAN.--_Page 92._]

He had been afraid of bringing the craft closer and hitting St. John.
Now he struck out boldly, and then made a second dive, coming up close
to the spendthrift's side.

St. John wished to cry out, but the words would not come. Espying Jack,
he grabbed for the lad and clutched him around the throat.

"Don't hold on so tight!" cried Jack in alarm. "I will save you. Take
hold of my shoulder."

But St. John was too excited to be reasoned with, and instead of letting
up, he clung closer than ever, so that soon both were in peril of going
down.

"Let up, I say!" repeated Jack, and then, drawing up one knee, he
literally forced the young man from him. Then, as St. John turned partly
around, he caught him under the arms and began to tread water.

By this time Marion was at the oars, her temporary fear vanishing with
the thought that not only St. John, but also Jack, was in peril. With
caution she brought the rowboat closer.

"Catch hold there," said Jack, and seeing the boat, St. John made a wild
clutch for the gunwale, nearly upsetting the craft.

"Don't--you'll have me in the water next!" screamed Marion. Then Jack
steadied the boat, and St. John scrambled in over the stern, to fall on
the bottom all but exhausted, and so frightened that he could not utter
a word. Jack followed on board.

"Oh, St. John, what a narrow escape!" gasped Marion, after Jack was
safe. "I thought you would surely be drowned!"

For the moment St. John did not speak. He sat up, panting heavily.

"The race is off," said Jack. "Shall I go after your boat, St. John?"

"I don't care," growled the spendthrift, at last. "Where is she?"

"Caught between the rocks."

"Let Old Ben get the boat," put in Marion. "Both of you had better get
home with your wet clothing."

"I'm all right," answered the spendthrift coolly.

"St. John, Jack saved your life."

"Oh, I would have been all right--although, to be sure, my boat was
wrecked."

"Why, what would you have done?" asked Marion, in astonishment.

"I would have swam to shore, or else crawled on the rocks and signaled
Old Ben to come out after me," answered St. John.

He never thought to thank Jack, and this made Marion very indignant.

"Jack did a great deal for you, St. John," she exclaimed. "And he won
the race, too," she added, and would say no more.

Without loss of time Jack rowed the boat back to the landing and St.
John leaped out. He wished to assist his cousin, but she gave her hand
to Jack. Then the three walked toward the plantation in almost utter
silence.




CHAPTER XIII.

DR. MACKEY TELLS HIS STORY.


Left to herself, Mrs. Ruthven grew restless and began to walk around the
garden, examining the flower beds and the shrubbery.

She did not like what St. John had had to say concerning Marion. While
she did not exactly fear the young man, yet she had heard several
reports which were not to his credit.

"They say he gambles on horse races," she thought. "And I have heard
that the plantation is heavily mortgaged. Perhaps he wishes to marry
Marion only for the money she may bring him. And then it is not right
for him to remain around here when other men are at the front, serving
their country's flag."

She remained in the garden for some time, and was on the point of moving
for the house when she saw Old Ben approaching with Dr. Mackey.

"A stranger--and dressed in the uniform of a Confederate," she said,
half aloud. "What can he wish here?"

"Good-afternoon, missus," said Old Ben, removing his hat. "Here am a
gen'man as wishes to see yo'," and he bowed low.

"To see me?" said Mrs. Ruthven.

"Yes, madam," replied the doctor. "Permit me to introduce myself. I am
Dr. Mackey, a surgeon attached to the Fifth Virginia regiment," and he
bowed gravely.

"I am happy to make the acquaintance of an officer in our army, sir,"
replied Mrs. Ruthven, and held out her hand.

"I understand the late Colonel Ruthven was also of our army, and died at
a gallant charge on the field of Gettysburg," continued the doctor, as
he shook hands.

"You have been correctly informed, doctor."

"De doctor brings most important information, missus," put in old Ben,
who was almost exploding to tell what he knew.

"Is that so?" cried Mrs. Ruthven. "What is it?"

"I came to speak to you about yonder wreck on Hemlock Bluff rocks," said
the surgeon. "The sight of that wreck has taken me back to the affairs
of about eleven years ago."

"So you were--you knew of it at that time, sir?"

"Yes, I was one of the passengers on the ship, madam."

"A passenger! I thought all of the passengers were drowned,--I mean all
but those who came ashore here."

"I was not drowned. I was swept overboard before our ship came into the
bay, and clung to a spar for hours, until the storm abated. Then a ship
bound for Cuba came along and took me on board and carried me to Havana.
The shock and the exposure were too much for me, and when I recovered
physically the authorities at the hospital adjudged me insane, and I was
placed in an asylum for years. Slowly my reason returned to me, and at
last I left the island of Cuba and came to the Southern States. This was
shortly after the war had broken out, and, knowing nothing else to do, I
offered my services to General Lee, and was accepted and placed in the
hospital corps."

"But why did you not come here before?"

"I could not tell exactly where the ship had stranded, and did not hear
of the wreck on Hemlock Bluff rocks until about three weeks ago. Then I
determined to make an investigation. I have now visited the wreck and
have learned positively that it is that of the ship upon which myself,
my wife, and our little son took passage."

"Yourself, your wife, and your little son," repeated Mrs. Ruthven, and
then of a sudden her breast began to heave. "Your wife and son were with
you?"

"Yes, madam."

"Wha--what was your little son's name?" she faltered, hardly able to go
on.

"Jack."

"By golly, he must be our Jack's fadder!" burst out Old Ben. "Now don't
dat beat de nation!"

"Jack! No! no! You--you cannot be our Jack's father!" cried Mrs.
Ruthven.

"I understand you are very much attached to the boy," went on Dr. Mackey
smoothly. "It is a pity. Yes, he is truly my son."

The tears came into Mrs. Ruthven's eyes, but she hastily brushed them
away. "Jack does not look much like you," she declared.

"That is true, but he bears a strong resemblance to my dead brother
Walter, and that is what made me certain he is my son. I saw him in town
a day or two ago, although he did not see me."

"This is very strange." The lady hardly knew how to go on. The thought
that she might have to give up Jack was a bitter one. "Have you spoken
to Jack yet?"

"No. Isn't he here?"

"No, he went for a boat race, against his cousin, St. John Ruthven--I
mean my nephew," she stammered.

"Do you expect him back soon?"

"I do not believe he will be gone more than an hour or so."

"Then I will wait."

"Of course, Dr. Mackey. Will you come into the house?"

The surgeon was willing, and the lady led the way. But presently she
turned back to beckon to Old Ben.

"Go after Jack at once," she said. "Tell him it is important, but do not
say anything more to anybody." Ben nodded, and without further delay
strode off.

"I have heard something of how the wreck struck here and how my poor
wife was cast ashore with Jack in her arms," said the doctor, as he
threw himself into an easy-chair. "I should be very much gratified to
receive the particulars from your lips. Did my wife have anything to
say?"

"Nothing much, sir. She was delirious up to the moment of her death."

"Poor, dear Julia!" murmured the surgeon, and bringing out his
handkerchief, he wiped his eyes with much affectation.

"Was her name Julia?" asked Mrs. Ruthven curiously.

"Yes, madam." The doctor looked up suddenly. "What makes you ask?"

"It ran in my mind that before your wife died she murmured something
about her name being Laura."

"Poor dear! she was truly out of her mind," replied the surgeon. "But it
is not to be wondered at--considering what happened to me." And he
proceeded to make use of his handkerchief again.

Mrs. Ruthven sank into a chair and gave herself up to bitter reflection.
What if this man should take Jack from her? The plantation would seem
very lonely without him.

Voices were now heard in the garden, and looking out of the window the
lady of the house saw Jack approaching, accompanied by Marion and Old
Ben. St. John had taken himself off, in order to get home and exchange
his wet clothing for dry garments.

"Oh, Jack! what does this mean?" cried Mrs. Ruthven when she saw that
our hero was dripping wet.

"He saved St. John's life, mamma," exclaimed Marion.

"Saved St. John's life?"

"Yes. St. John's boat struck on the rocks, and he went overboard. The
current was strong, and he would have been swept away only Jack leaped
overboard and went to his assistance."

"You noble boy!" murmured Mrs. Ruthven, and as he came in, by way of one
of the long veranda windows, she caught him by both hands.

"Old Ben said you wished to see me," replied Jack, and then he caught
sight of Dr. Mackey and his face fell. "The man I had the row with," he
thought.

"Jack, this is Dr. Mackey," said Mrs. Ruthven, in strained tones.
"He--he came here to see you." She could get no further.

"To see me? What for?"

"My boy, I am pleased to meet you," said the doctor, rising and
extending his hand. And he then added in a lower voice, "How like
Walter! How very like Walter!"

"I--I don't understand you," stammered Jack. "What do you want of me?"

"My boy, you are thinking of that encounter we had on the bridge. Let us
both forget it. I came here on a most important mission. Jack, I am your
father!"

"My father?" And our hero leaped back in astonishment.

"Yes, my son, I am your father." Dr. Mackey caught our hero by the hand.
"No doubt the news seems strange to you. Nevertheless, it is true."

Jack hardly heard the latter words, for his head was in a swim. This
crafty-looking, overbearing individual his parent? The shock was an
awful one. He turned to his foster mother.

"Mother, is this true--is this man my real father?" he cried
beseechingly.

"So he claims," returned Mrs. Ruthven.

"My dear, dear son, I trust you do not disbelieve me," said the doctor,
in an apparently hurt tone of voice.

"I--I don't know what to say," faltered Jack. "This is so strange--so
unexpected. Why didn't you come here before?"

"I have just been telling Mrs. Ruthven my story," and the surgeon
repeated what he had said, with several added details. As the man went
on our hero's face grew very pale, and he moved slowly towards Mrs.
Ruthven and clutched her by the shoulder.

"Mother, I don't want to leave you!" he whispered hoarsely. "I don't
like this man, even if he is my father!"

"I do not want you to leave me, Jack," she answered, embracing him in
spite of the fact that he was dripping wet. "But if this man is really
your father----"

"Make him prove it!"

"You will not take his word?"

"No! no! I do not like his looks. He is the man who met me on the bridge
and treated me like a slave."

Marion had listened to the conversation with a look of horror slowly
rising on her face. Now she rushed toward Jack.

"Jack, can this be true, and must I give you up?" she sobbed.

"No, I'm not going to give you up, Marion. We have always been brother
and sister, and so we shall remain--if you are willing."

"Yes, dear Jack; stay by all means."

By this time Dr. Mackey had arisen to his feet, and now he came up to
Jack with a darkening face.

"Did I understand you to say that you wished me to prove I was your
father?" he demanded harshly.

"Yes, I do wish you to prove it," answered Jack, with a boldness born of
desperation. "And until you prove it I shall remain here--if Mrs.
Ruthven will let me."

"By golly, dat's de talk!" came from Old Ben, who was hanging around on
the veranda.

"Shut up, you worthless nigger!" cried the doctor, at which Ben
disappeared like magic.

"This is a very--ahem--a very strange way to treat a newly found father,
Jack."

"I don't acknowledge you as my father."

"Ha! you won't believe me?"

"I will not, sir, and until you prove your claim in court I shall remain
with the lady who has been a real mother to me," answered our hero
pointedly and firmly.




CHAPTER XIV.

JACK SPEAKS HIS MIND.


A dead silence followed our hero's declaration to remain with Mrs.
Ruthven until Dr. Mackey had proved his claim to Jack in a court of law.

"This is a fine way to talk!" ejaculated the surgeon at last. "A fine
way, truly!"

"I mean what I say!" declared Jack. "Mother, am I right or wrong?" And
he turned pleadingly to Mrs. Ruthven.

"Dr. Mackey will certainly have to establish his claim to you before I
give you up, Jack," replied the lady of the plantation quickly. "You
see, I have adopted him legally, and he has been as dear to me as though
he were my own flesh and blood."

"Well--er--of course, in one way, your decision does you credit, madam,"
answered the surgeon lamely. "You have done a great deal for the lad,
and for that I must be as thankful as he is. When I have proved my claim
I will pay you back all the money you have spent upon him."

"I shall not wish a cent, sir."

"Yet I shall insist, madam."

"Are you wealthy?" asked Marion curiously.

"Yes, Miss Ruthven--or I will be as soon as I have proven my identity.
As yet I have been able to do but little. Let me add, Mackey is not my
real name."

"What is your real name?" questioned Mrs. Ruthven.

"I will reveal that later, when I have taken the proper steps in law to
obtain the vast property which is rightfully coming to me. You see, when
I disappeared, so to speak, nearly eleven years ago, my property went
into the hands of distant relatives, and they hate to give it up, and
are just as anxious to prove me an impostor as you seem to be."

"I am not anxious to prove you an impostor, Dr. Mackey; my heart is
wrapped up in Jack, that is all. If he is your son, I will rejoice that
he will be well off."

"I don't want to be rich; I would rather stay with you," put in our hero
quickly, and he meant what he said.

"Your affection for your foster mother does you credit, Jack," said the
doctor smoothly.

"She has been the best of mothers to me; so why shouldn't I love her?"

"True, my son, true. But it is strange that you have no warm feeling for
me--such as I have for you."

"You are a stranger to me."

"I trust your feeling towards me changes, for I want my only son to love
me."

At this Jack was silent, and instead of looking at the man he looked at
Mrs. Ruthven and at Marion. Then, unable to control his feelings, he
rushed from the room, mounted the stairs, and burst into his own
apartment, where he threw himself on the bed, wet as he was, to give
