determined upon the seizure of the person of the Inca.  The example of
Cortes with Montezuma was before them.  I have no doubt that his
amazing exploits in Mexico had been talked over frequently by every
camp-fire in the New and the Old World, and many bold spirits had
longed for an opportunity to emulate his doings.  The Spaniards in Peru
had already learned enough of the local conditions to realize that with
the person of the Inca they could control the government.  To seize him
was black treachery, of course; but being there, it was the only thing
to do, from their point of view.  The night was an anxious one and the
morning found them engaged in preparations.  De Candia was posted with
two small falconets and three arquebusiers on the roof of the fortress.
His guns pointed toward the Inca's camp, though he had instructions to
turn them on the square as soon as the Peruvians arrived.  De Soto and
Hernando Pizarro divided the horse {80} between them and occupied the
houses on the other side of the square with them.  The infantry were
distributed at various points of vantage.  Pizarro reserved twenty of
the trustiest blades for his own escort.  The arms of the men were
carefully looked to, and nothing that the skill or experience of the
captains could suggest was left undone to promote the success of their
hazardous and bold undertaking.

Mass was said with great solemnity by the priest of the expedition, Fra
Vincente de Valverde, an iron-souled, fierce-hearted Dominican, meet
ecclesiastic for such a band.  Refreshments were then provided
liberally for the soldiers--it is not so stated, but it may be presumed
that some of them were in liquid shape--and then the whole party
settled down to await developments.  Nothing seemed to be going on in
the Peruvian camp during the morning.  The Inca moved toward the city
in the afternoon, but stopped just outside the walls, to the great
annoyance of the Spaniards, who had found the long wait a trying
experience indeed.  Late in the afternoon, Pizarro received a message
that Atahualpa had changed his mind and would not visit him until the
following day.  This did not suit his plans at all.  He instantly
returned an answer to the Inca, begging him not to defer his visit,
saying that he had provided everything for his entertainment--which was
quite true although in a very different sense from that conveyed by the
words of his messenger--and requesting Atahualpa to arrange to sup with
him without fail that night.  Pizarro had previously assured the Inca
that he would receive him as a "friend and brother"!  What reasons
actuated the Inca we have no means of ascertaining.  Suffice it to say
that he changed his mind and came.

{81}

A short time after sunset, therefore, the Inca, attended by a numerous
retinue, entered the square.  Atahualpa was borne aloft on a throne
made of massive gold, supported on the shoulders of his attendants.  He
was dressed with barbaric magnificence in robes of exquisite texture,
heavily embroidered and ornamented with gold and silver.  Around his
neck blazed a necklace of emeralds of wonderful size and great
brilliancy.  His forehead was hidden by a thick vivid scarlet fringe
depending from a diadem almost to the eyebrows.  This tassel (or
_borla_, as the Spaniards called it; _llauta_, according to the
Peruvians) was the supreme mark of the imperial dignity in that no one
but the Inca could wear it.  The Inca was surrounded by a gorgeously
attired body of retainers who were preceded by hundreds of menials who
cleared the streets of every obstacle which might impede the progress
of their master, the Son of the Sun.  The processions divided at the
square, and the monarch was carried forward in the open.  Not a
Spaniard save the watchful sentries pacing the fort above, was to be
seen.

"Where," asked Atahualpa, looking about in surprise, "are the
strangers?"

At this moment, at the request of Pizarro, Father Valverde came forward
in his canonicals, crucifix in one hand, breviary or Bible in the
other.[7]  He was attended by one of the Peruvians whom Pizarro had
taken back to Spain, who was to act as interpreter.  This precocious
little rascal, named Felippo, was the best interpreter that could be
found, which is saying little, for his Spanish was bad and mainly
picked up in the camps from the rude soldiery, and his Peruvian {82}
was only an uncouth dialect of the highly inflected and most flexible
and expressive Quichua, the language of the educated, indeed of the
most of the people.  Approaching the litter of the Inca, Valverde
delivered an extraordinary address.  He briefly explained the doctrines
of the Christian religion to the astonished Peruvian, requiring him to
conform to this religion and acknowledge the spiritual supremacy of the
Pope, and at the same time to submit to the sway of his Imperial
Majesty Charles V.  It was a pretty heavy demand to spring upon a great
monarch in the midst of his people, and it was not to be wondered at
that Atahualpa rejected these requests with contempt.

The Inca answered the friar not without shrewdness.  He had gathered
the idea from Felippo's vile mistranslation that the Christians
worshipped four Gods, i. e. the Trinity and the Pope.  He declared that
he himself worshipped one, and there was its sign and symbol--pointing
to the declining sun; that he believed one God was better than four.
He rejected indignantly the idea that he, "The Lord of the Four
Quarters of the Earth," owed allegiance to any Charles V. or any other
earthly monarch, of whom he had never heard and who had assuredly never
heard of him either.

Valverde had referred to the book in his hand as he had spoken and
Atahualpa now asked to see it.  The volume was a clasped one and he
found it difficult to open.  Valverde, probably thinking he could show
him to unclasp the volume, stepped nearer to him.  The Inca repulsed
him with disdain.  Wrenching open the covers he glanced rapidly at the
book, and perhaps suddenly realizing the full sense of the insult which
had been offered to him in the demands {83} of the dogmatic and
domineering Dominican, he threw the sacred volume to the ground in a
violent rage.

"Tell your companions," he said, "that they shall give me an account of
their doings in my land.  I will not go hence until they have made me
full satisfaction for all the wrongs they have committed!"

Then he turned and spoke to his people--the last word he was ever to
address them as a free monarch from his throne.  There was a loud
murmur from the crowd.

Thereupon, according to some accounts, Valverde picked up the book
through which Atahualpa had offered such a deadly insult to his
religion and rushed back to Pizarro, exclaiming, "Do you not see that
while we stand here wasting our breath in talking with this dog, full
of pride as he is, the fields are filling with Indians?  Set on at
once!  I absolve you for whatever you do!"  I would fain do no man an
injustice.  Therefore, I also set down what other authorities say,
namely, that Valverde simply told Pizarro what had occurred.

There is no dispute, however, as to what happened immediately.  Pizarro
stepped out from the doorway, and drawing a white scarf from his
shoulders, threw it into the air.  Instantly a shot roared from the
fort above his head.  The famous war-cry of the Spaniards, "St. Jago,
and at them!" rang over every quarter of the square into which, with
bared swords, couched lances and drawn bows, poured the mail-clad
soldiery horse and foot.

They burst upon the astonished ranks of the unarmed Indians with the
suddenness and swiftness of a tornado.  From the roof above, the
gunners discharged their bullets into the swaying, seething mass.  With
{84} their wands of office, with their naked hands, with whatever they
could seize, the Peruvians defended themselves.  They rallied around
the person of the Inca, freely offering their breasts to the Spanish
blades with the vain attempt to protect their monarch.

Atahualpa sat upon his reeling throne gazing upon the bloody scene in a
daze of surprise.  Pizarro and the twenty chosen cut their way to the
litter and, striking down the helpless bearers thereof, precipitated
the Inca to the ground.  The Spaniards were mad with carnage now, and
were striking indiscriminately at any Indian.  Then could be heard
Pizarro's stern voice ringing above the melee, "Let no man who values
his life strike at the Inca!"  Such was the fierceness of his soldiery,
however, that in his frenzied attempt to protect the monarch, Pizarro
was wounded in one of his hands by his own men.  As the Inca fell, he
had been caught by Pizarro and supported, although a soldier named
Estete snatched the imperial _llauta_ from his head as he fell.

With the capture of the Inca, what little futile resistance the unarmed
host had been able to make ceased.  The Indians, relentlessly pursued
by their bloody conquerors, fled in every direction, and, to anticipate
events, the army deprived of its monarch and its generals, dispersed
the next day without striking a blow.  Indeed the army was helpless for
offence while the Spaniards held the Inca as a hostage.

The estimates of the numbers slain in one half-hour's fighting in the
square of Caxamarca vary from two to ten thousand.  Whatever the
number, it was great and horrible enough.  An unparalleled act of
treachery had been consummated, and Peru, in the space of thirty
minutes had been conquered and Pizarro held {85} it in the hollow of
his hand.  Not a Spaniard had been wounded except Pizarro himself, and
his wound had been received from his own men while he tried to protect
Atahualpa from the Spaniards' fury.


V. The Ransom and Murder of the Inca

Pizarro treated the Inca well enough, although he held him in rigorous
captivity.  Nobody else in Peru seemed to know what to do under the
circumstances, and the Spaniards soon lost all apprehension of
resistance.  Quiz-Quiz and Chalcuchima still held Huascar a captive at
Xuaca, a fortress between Caxamarca and Cuzco.  Atahualpa, realizing
how important such a man would be to the Spaniards, sent orders that he
be put to death and the unfortunate deposed Inca was therefore executed
by the two generals.  Although he was captive, Atahualpa's orders were
as implicitly obeyed as if he had been free.  He was still the Inca, if
only by the right of sword, and the forces of his generals were
sufficiently great to render it impossible for the son of Huascar,
named Manco Capac, who had escaped the massacre of his kinfolk and who
was the legitimate heir to the throne, to claim the crown.

Pizarro, with a fine show of rectitude, affected to be horrified by
this evidence of brutal cruelty, and although Atahualpa claimed no
connection with the assassination of Huascar, it was impossible to
acquit him of it.  Greatly desiring his freedom, Atahualpa, who had
observed the Spanish greed for gold, made an extraordinary proposition
to Pizarro.  They were together in a room twenty-two feet long by
seventeen feet broad.  Standing on his tiptoes and reaching as high as
he could, probably about eight feet, for he was a tall man, {86}
Atahualpa offered to fill the room with gold to the height he had
touched, if, when he had completed his undertaking, Pizarro would
release him.

Pizarro jumped at the offer, and well he might for no such proposition
had ever before been offered in the history of the world.  The cubic
contents enclosed by the figures mentioned are three thousand three
hundred and sixty-six feet, or in round numbers, one hundred and
twenty-five cubic yards.  Such a treasure was even beyond the most
delirious dreams of the conquerors.[8]

As soon as these astonishing terms had been formally accepted in
writing by Pizarro, the Inca sent orders to all parts of his dominion
for the people to bring in their treasures.  He also directed the royal
palaces and temples to be stripped, and his orders were obeyed.  He had
stipulated that he be allowed two months in which to raise the ransom
and day after day a stream of Indians poured into the city loaded with
treasure which dazzled the eyes of the astonished and delighted
conquerors.  Atahualpa had stipulated also that the gold was not to be
smelted--that is, he would not be required to fill the spaces solidly
with ingots, but that it should be put into the room just as it was
brought in and allowed to take up as much space as was required, even
though it might be in the shape of a manufactured article.

[Illustration: "They Burst Upon the Ranks of the Unarmed Indians."]

{87}

Some of the gold was in the shape of ingenious plants and animals, one
especially beautiful object being the corn plant with blades of gold
and tassels of silver.  Pizarro, to his credit, ordered that some of
these specimens of exquisite workmanship should be preserved intact.
Much of the treasure was in the shape of plates or tiles, from the
interior of the temples or palaces which did not take up much space.
The great temple of the Sun at Cuzco had a heavy outside cornice, or
moulding, of pure gold.  It was stripped of this dazzling ornament to
satisfy the rapacity of the conquerors.  There was also a vast quantity
of silver which was stored in other chambers.  Silver hardly counted in
view of the deluge of the more precious metal.

[Illustration: "The Three Pizarros . . . Sallied Out to Meet Them"]

Atahualpa did not quite succeed in filling the space, but he came so
near it that Pizarro, in a formal agreement executed before a notary,
declared that the Inca had paid his ransom and that he was released
from any further obligation concerning it.  That is the only release,
however, which the unfortunate Inca ever got.  Obviously, it was
dangerous to turn loose such a man.  Therefore, in spite of his legal
quittance, he still was held in captivity.  The Spaniards concluded
finally that the only safe course was to get rid of him.

The ransom amounted in our money to over seventeen million dollars,
according to Prescott; to nearly eighteen million dollars, according to
Markham.  Pizarro's personal share was seven hundred thousand dollars;
Hernando received three hundred and fifty thousand dollars; De Soto two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  Each horse soldier received nearly
one hundred thousand; the principal foot soldiers, fifty thousand, and
the others smaller sums in accordance {88} with their rank and service.
The precious metals were so plentiful that for the time being they lost
their value, for men cheerfully paid thousands of dollars for a horse.
Indeed so bulky and unwieldly was the treasure with which the soldiers
were loaded, that it is solemnly averred that creditors avoided their
debtors fearing lest the latter should pay them what they owed in
further heaps of the bulky treasure; and it is certainly a fact that
even the animals shared in the opulence of the conquest, for the horses
were shod with silver.  Silver was cheaper and easier to get than iron.

While they were revelling in the treasure, dividing the spoils and
deliberating what was to be done with Atahualpa, Almagro arrived with
his reenforcements.  Naturally he and his men demanded a share of the
booty.  Great was their disgust and furious their anger when Pizarro
and the other conquerors refused to give it up.  Finally, the quarrels
that ensued were composed by presenting Almagro and his followers
certain sums, large in themselves though trifling in comparison with
what Pizarro's men had received.  Almagro's men were also given to
understand that they could move on to the southwest at some convenient
season and conquer another empire and take all they could for
themselves.  Unfortunately for them, there were no more empires like
Peru on this or any other side of the world left them to conquer.

Hernando Pizarro was then dispatched to Spain to deliver the royal
fifth to Charles, to give an account of the fortunes of the conquerors
and to secure what further rewards and privileges he could for them.
Atahualpa saw him leave with the greatest regret.  He was a man of
fierce, stern, implacable disposition, {89} not a lovely character,
according to any of the chroniclers, but he seems to have been fairer,
and in his own way he had treated the unfortunate monarch better, than
any of the others, unless it was De Soto.  Possibly Hernando might have
restrained his brother from the last infamy he was about to perpetrate
if he had been there.  Certainly De Soto would have sought to dissuade
him.  Pizarro realized this and got rid of De Soto by sending him away
to investigate as to the truth of rumors that Atahualpa was conspiring
to obtain his freedom.  I have no doubt that he was so conspiring.  I
hope so, for if he was, it was about the only manly thing that he did.
While De Soto was away, at the instigation of the soldiers, Pizarro
with seeming reluctance, allowed Atahualpa to be brought to trial.  I
have no doubt that Pizarro instigated the soldiers himself.  He was
adroit enough to do it, and he would have no scruples whatever to deter
him.

The Inca was tried on twelve charges, among which were included
accusations that he had usurped the crown, and given its prerogatives
to his friends (instead of to the Spaniards!).  He was charged with
being an idolator, an adulterer and a polygamist, and finally it was
urged that he had endeavored to incite an insurrection against the
Spaniards.  Such accusations came with a peculiarly bad grace from the
conquerors.  The whole thing, charges and all, would have been a farce
had it not been for the certain grim and terrible outcome.

Felippo, the Infamous, was the only interpreter.  He had made love to
one of the Inca's wives, whom the Spaniards had allowed to share his
captivity.  Atahualpa, furiously affronted, desired to have him {90}
put to death, but Felippo was too important to the Spaniards, and he
was spared.  How Atahualpa's defense suffered from Felippo's
interpretations under such circumstances may easily be imagined.  In
spite of the courageous opposition of a few of the self-appointed
judges, the Inca was convicted and sentenced to death, Father Valverde
concurring, in writing, with the sentence.

When the verdict of the court was communicated to Atahualpa, he did not
receive it with any remarkable degree of fortitude.  He is a pitiful
rather than a heroic figure.

"What have I done," he cried, weeping, "what have my children done,
that I should meet with such a fate?"  Turning to Pizarro, he added,
"And from your hands, too, who have met with friendship and kindness
from my people, to whom I have given my treasure, who have received
nothing but benefit from my hands!"

He besought the conqueror to spare his life, promising anything, even
to double the enormous ransom he had already paid, and offering to
guarantee in any appointed way the safety of every Spaniard in the
army.  Pedro Pizarro, a cousin of the conqueror, who has left an
account of the interview, says that Pizarro was greatly affected by the
touching appeal of the unfortunate monarch, and that he wept in turn
also.  However that may be, he refused to interfere.  A man may weep
and weep, to paraphrase Shakespeare, "and be a villain!"  There was no
help for it; Atahualpa had to die.

It was on the 29th of August, 1533.  The trial and deliberations had
occupied the whole day.  It was two hours after sunset before they were
ready to execute him in the great square of Caxamarca.  {91} The
Spanish soldiers, fully armed, arranged themselves about a huge stake
which had been planted in the square.  Back of them were groups of
terrified, awe-struck Peruvians, helplessly weeping and lamenting the
fate of their monarch which they were powerless to prevent.  Flickering
torches held by the troops cast an uncertain light over the tragic
scene.  Atahualpa was led forth in fetters and chained to the stake.
He showed little of the firmness and fortitude of a proud monarch or a
brave man.  How feebly he appears when contrasted with the great Aztec
