"Oh, Phil, old man, are you hurt?  What was it?  We're so awfully sorry.
Is your hand blown off?"

"No," said Philpot, continuing to wring his injured hand, but otherwise
considerably recovered, "it was your fault jumping off the table.  The
beastly stuff goes off almost if you look at it.  It's lucky it wasn't
all dry, or I might have had my eyes out!"

It was a great relief to find matters were no worse, and that in a very
few minutes Philpot's hand had recovered from the smart of the
explosion.  This accident, however, decided the young enthusiasts that
for the present they had perhaps had enough chemistry for one lesson.

In a few days, however, they had all sufficiently got over the shock of
the last afternoon's experiments to decide on a fresh venture, and these
lessons continued, on and off, during the rest of the term.  It can
hardly be said that by the end of the term Pilbury or Cusack knew any
more about chemistry than they had known this first day.  They
persistently refused to listen to any of Philpot's "jaw," as they rudely
termed his attempts at explanation, and confined themselves to the
experiments.  However, though in many respects they wasted their time
over their new pursuit, these volatile youths might have been a good
deal worse employed.

In fact, if every Welcher had been no worse employed that house would
not have brought all the discredit on Willoughby which it did.  As it
was, everybody there seemed to follow his own sweet will without a
single thought for the good of the school or the welfare of his fellows.
The heads of the house, Tucker and Silk, did not even attempt to set a
good example, and that being so, it was hardly to be expected those
below them would be much interested to supply the deficiencies.

On the very afternoon when Pilbury and Cusack had been sitting at the
feet of the learned Philpot in the laboratory, Silk, a monitor, had,
along with Gilks, of the schoolhouse, a monitor too, gone down to
Shellport, against all rules, taking Wyndham junior, one of their
special _proteges_, with them.

They appeared to be pretty familiar with the ins and outs of the big
town, and though on this occasion they occupied their time in no more
disgraceful a way than waiting on the harbour pier to see the mail
steamer come in, they yet felt, all three of them, as if they would by
no means like to be seen by any one who knew them.

And it appeared as if they were going to be spared this embarrassment,
for they encountered no one they knew till they were actually on their
way home.

Then, just as they were passing the station door, they met, to their
horror, a boy in a college cap just coming out with a parcel under his
arm.  To their astonishment, it proved to be no other than Riddell
himself.

Riddell, who had come down by a special "permit" from the doctor to get
a parcel--containing, by the way, his new boating flannels--at first
looked as astonished and uncomfortable as the three truants themselves.
He would sooner have had anything happen to him than such a meeting.
However, as usual, his sense of duty came to his rescue.

He advanced to the group in a nervous manner, and, addressing Wyndham,
said, hurriedly, "Please come to my room this evening, Wyndham," and
then, without waiting for a reply, or staying to notice the ominous
looks of the two monitors, he departed, and proceeded as fast as he
could back to Willoughby.



CHAPTER TEN.

WYNDHAM JUNIOR AND HIS FRIENDS.

Wyndham, the old captain, just before leaving Willoughby, had done his
best to interest Riddell in the welfare of his young brother, a Limpet
in the Fourth.

"I wish you'd look after him now and then, Riddell," he said; "he's not
a bad fellow, I fancy, but he's not got quite enough ballast on board,
and unless there's some one to look after him he's very likely to get
into bad hands."

Riddell promised he would do his best, and the elder brother was most
grateful.

"I shall be ever so much easier _now_," he said, "and it's awfully good
of you, Riddell.  I wouldn't care for the young 'un to go wrong, you
know.  Thanks very much, old man."

And so it came to pass that among the legacies which the old captain
left behind him at Willoughby, the one which fell to Riddell was a young
brother, slightly rickety in character and short of ballast.

A parting request like Wyndham's would have been very hard for any
friend to refuse; but to Riddell the promise "to look after young
Wyndham" meant a great deal more than it would have done to many other
fellows.  It was not enough for him to make occasional inquiries as to
his young _protege_, or even to try to shield him when he fell into
scrapes.  Riddell's idea of looking after a rickety youngster included a
good deal more than this, and from the moment the old captain had left,
amid all his _own_ tribulations and adversities, the thought of young
Wyndham had saddled itself on Riddell's conscience with an uncomfortable
weight.

This was the reason why he made the boy free of his study, and gave up a
good deal of his own time in helping him with his work.  And it was the
same reason which prompted him on the afternoon spoken of in the last
chapter, much against his inclination, to accost the three truants in
Shellport, and request Wyndham to come to his study.

"You're in for a nice sermon, my boy," said Gilks, as the three walked
home.

"I wish he hadn't seen us," said Wyndham, feeling uncomfortable.

"Why, you don't suppose he'll lick you?" said Silk, laughing.

"No, but he'll be awfully vexed."

"Vexed!" cried Gilks.  "Poor fellow!  How I'd like to comfort him!  Take
my advice and forget all about going to his study.  He'll not be sorry,
I can tell you."

"Oh, I must go," said Wyndham.  "I don't want to offend him."

"Kind of you," said Silk, laughing.  "Funny thing how considerate a
fellow can be to another fellow who does his lessons for him."

Wyndham blushed, but said nothing.  He knew these two companions were
not the sort of boys his brother would have cared to have him associate
with, nor did he particularly like them himself.  But when two senior
boys take the trouble to patronise a junior and make fun of his
"peculiarities," as they called his scruples, it is hardly surprising
that the youngster comes out a good way to meet his patrons.

Wyndham, by the way, was rather more than a youngster.  He was a Limpet,
and looked back on the days of fagging as a long-closed chapter of his
history.  Had he been a junior like Telson or Pilbury, it would have
been less likely either that Game and Silk would take such trouble to
cultivate his acquaintance, or that he would submit himself so easily to
their patronage.  As it was, he was his own master.  Nobody had a right
to demand his services, neither had he yet attained to the
responsibilities of a monitor.  He could please himself, and therefore
yielded himself unquestioningly to the somewhat flattering attentions of
the two seniors.

No, not quite unquestioningly.  Short as was the time since his brother
had left, it had been long enough for Riddell to let the boy see that he
wished to be his friend.  He had never told him so in words, but Wyndham
could guess what all the kind interest which the new captain evinced in
him meant.  And it was the thought of this that kept alive the one or
two scruples he still retained in joining himself to the society of
Gilks and Silk.

And so he declined the invitation of these two friends to defy the
captain's summons.

"Well," said Gilks, "if you must put your head into the lion's mouth,
you must, mustn't he, Silk?  But I say, as you _are_ to get pulled up, I
don't see why you shouldn't have all the fun you can for your money.
What do you say to a game of skittles at Beamish's?"

"_What_ a nice boy you are!" said Silk, laughing; "the young 'un doesn't
know Beamish's."

"Not know Beamish's!--at the Aquarium!" said Gilks.

"No.  What is he?" inquired Wyndham.

"He's the Aquarium!" said Gilks, laughing.

"And do they play skittles in the Aquarium?" asked the boy.

"Rather!" said Silk; "it amuses the fishes, you know."  Beamish's was,
as Gilks had said, another name for the Shellport Aquarium--a
disreputable place of resort, whose only title to the name of Aquarium
was that it had in it, in an obscure corner which nobody ever explored,
a small tank, which might have contained fishes if there had been any
put into it.  As it was, the last thing any one went to Beamish's for
was to study fishes, the other attractions of the place--the skittles,
bowls, and refreshment bars--being far more popular.  These things in
themselves, of course, were not enough to make Beamish's a bad place.
That character was supplied by the company that were mostly in the habit
of frequenting it, of which it is enough to say it was the very reverse
of select.

At this time of day, however, the place was almost empty, and when,
after a good deal of chaff and persuasion, Wyndham was induced to take a
little turn round the place, he was surprised to find it so quiet and
unobjectionable.  The boys had a short game at skittles and a short game
at bowls, and bought a few buns and an ice at the refreshment stall, and
then departed schoolwards.

They reached Willoughby in good time for call-over, no one except
Riddell being aware of their pleasant expedition.  Still Wyndham, when
it was all _over_, did not feel altogether comfortable.  Not that he
thought what he had done was very bad, or that he had sinned in
deceiving the masters and breaking the rules of the school.  What
troubled him was that he knew Riddell would be vexed.

He repaired to the captain's study with his books as usual after evening
chapel and found him busy over his work.

But as soon as the boy entered, Riddell pushed the papers away rather
nervously.

"Well, Wyndham," said he, "I'm glad you've come."

Wyndham deposited his books and looked rather uncomfortable.

Riddell had rather hoped the boy would refer to the subject first, but
he did not.  Riddell therefore said, "I was sorry to see you down in
Shellport this afternoon, Wyndham.  You hadn't a permit, had you?"

"No," said Wyndham.

"It's hardly the thing, is it?" said the captain, quietly, after a
pause.

His voice, devoid of all anger or self-importance, made Wyndham still
more uncomfortable.

"I'm awfully sorry," said he.  "I suppose I oughtn't to have gone.  I
beg your pardon, Riddell."

"Oh!" said Riddell, "don't do that, please."

"You know," said Wyndham, "as those two took me, it didn't seem to be
much harm.  We only went to see the steamer come in."

"The thing is," said Riddell, "it was against the rules."

"But Gilks and Silk are both monitors, aren't they?"

"They are," said the captain, with a touch of bitterness in his tone.

There was another pause, this time a long one.  Neither boy seemed
inclined to return to the subject.  Wyndham opened his books and made a
pretence of beginning his work, and Riddell fidgeted with the papers
before him.  In the mind of the latter a hurried debate was going on.

"What had I better do?  I might send him up to the doctor and perhaps
get him expelled.  It might be the best thing for him too, for if those
two have got hold of him he's sure to go wrong.  I can't do anything to
keep him from them.  And yet, I promised old Wynd--I must try; I might
help to keep him straight.  God help me!"

Is the reader astonished that the captain of a great public school
should so far forget himself as to utter a secret prayer in his own
study about such a matter as the correction of a young scapegrace?  It
_was_ an unusual thing to do, certainly; and probably if Wyndham had
known what was passing in the captain's mind he would have thought more
poorly of his brother's friend than he did.  But I am not quite sure,
reader, whether Riddell was committing such an absurdity as some persons
might think; or whether you or I, or any other fellow in a similar
position, would be any the worse for forgetting ourselves in the same
way.  What do you think?  It is worth thinking over, when you have time.

"God help me," said Riddell to himself, and he felt his mind wonderfully
cleared already as he said it.

Clearer, that is, as to what he ought to do, but still rather
embarrassed as to how to do it.  But he meant to try.

"I say, Wyndham," he said, in his quiet way.  "I want to ask your
advice."

"What about?" asked Wyndham, looking up in surprise.  "About those
fellows?"

"Not exactly.  It's more about myself," said the captain.

"What about you?" asked Wyndham.

"Why, there's a fellow in the school I'm awfully anxious to do some good
to," began Riddell.

"Rather a common failing of yours," said Wyndham.

"Wanting to do it is more common than doing it," said Riddell; "but I
don't know how to tackle this fellow, Wyndham."

"Who is he?  Do I know him?" asked the boy.

"I'm not sure that you know him particularly well," said the captain.
"He's not a bad fellow; in fact he has a lot of good in him."

"Is he a Limpet?" asked Wyndham.

"But," continued Riddell, not noticing the question, "he's got a horrid
fault.  He won't stand up for himself, Wyndham."

"Oh," observed Wyndham, "there's a lot of them like that--regular
cowards they are."

"Exactly, this fellow's one of them.  He's always funking it."

Wyndham laughed.

"I know who you mean--Tedbury, isn't it?"

"No, that's not his name," said Riddell.  "He's a nicer sort of fellow
than Tedbury.  There are one or two fellows that are always down on him,
too.  They see he's no pluck, and so they think they can do what they
like with him."

"Meekins gets a good deal mauled about by some of the others," said
Wyndham.

"This fellow gets a good deal more damaged than Meekins," said the
captain.  "In fact he gets so mauled his friends will soon hardly be
able to recognise him."

Wyndham looked sharply at the speaker.  Riddell was quite grave and
serious, and proceeded quietly, "The worst of it is, this fellow's quite
well able to stick up for himself if he likes, and could easily hold his
own.  Only he's lazy, or else he likes getting damaged."

"Are you making all this up?" demanded Wyndham colouring.

Riddell took no notice of the inquiry, but continued rather more
earnestly, "Now I'd like your advice, Wyndham, old fellow.  I want to do
this fellow a good turn.  Which do you suppose would be the best turn to
do him; to pitch into the fellows that are always doing him harm? or to
try to persuade him to stick up for himself and not let them do just
what they like with him, eh?"

Wyndham had seen it all before the question was ended, and hung down his
head in silence.

Riddell did not disturb him, but waited quietly, and, if truth be told,
anxiously, till he should reply.

Presently the boy looked up with a troubled face, and said, "I know I'm
an awful fool, Riddell."

"But you're not obliged to be," said the captain, cheerily.

"I'll try not to be, I really will," said Wyndham.  "Only--"

"Only what?" asked Riddell, after a pause.

"Only somehow I never think of it at the time."

"I know," said Riddell, kindly.

"Why only this afternoon," said Wyndham, drawn out by the sympathy of
his companion, "I tried to object to going down to the town, and they
made up some excuse, so that I would have seemed like a regular prig to
hold out, and so I went.  I'm awfully sorry now.  I know I'm a coward,
Riddell; I ought to have stuck out."

"I think you ought," said Riddell; "they would probably have laughed at
you, and possibly tried to bully you a bit.  But you can take care of
yourself, I fancy, when it comes to that, eh?"

"I can about the bullying," said Wyndham.

"And so," said Riddell, "you really advise me to say to this fellow I
was telling you about, to stand up for himself and not let himself be
led about by any one?"

"Except you, Riddell," said the boy.

"No," said Riddell, "not even me.  _I_ can't profess to tell you all you
ought to do."

"I should like to know who can, if you can't?" said Wyndham.

"I think we both know," said Riddell, gravely.

The conversation ended here.  For an hour and a half after that each boy
was busy over his work, and neither spoke a word.  Their thoughts may
not all have been in the books before them; in fact it may safely be
said they were not.  But they were thoughts that did not require words.
Only when Wyndham rose to go, and wished his friend good-night, Riddell
indirectly referred to the subject of their talk.

"By the way, Wyndham, Isaacs has given up the school librarianship; I
suppose you know.  How would you like to take it?"

"What has a fellow got to do?" asked Wyndham.

"You have to issue the new books every Monday and collect the old ones
every Saturday.  There are about one hundred boys subscribe, and they
order the new book when they give up the old, so it's simple enough."

"Takes a lot of time, doesn't it?" said Wyndham.

"No, not very much, I believe.  Isaacs shirked it a good deal, and you'd
have to keep the lists rather better than he did.  But I fancy you'd
enjoy it rather; and," he added, "it will be an excuse for seeing less
of some not very nice friends."

Wyndham said he would take the post, and went off happier in his own
mind than he had been for a long time, and leaving Riddell happier too,
despite all his failures and vexations elsewhere, than he had been since
he became captain of Willoughby.

But, though happy, he could hardly be elated.  His effort that evening
had certainly been a success, but how long would its effects last?

Riddell was not fool enough to imagine that his promise to old Wyndham
was now discharged by that one evening's talk.  He knew the boy well
enough to be sure that the task was only just begun.  And his
thankfulness at having made a beginning was tempered with many anxieties
for the future.  And he might well be anxious!

For a day or two Wyndham was an altered boy.  He surprised his masters
by his attention in class, and his schoolfellows--all except Riddell--by
the steadiness of his behaviour.  He avoided his former companions, and
devoted himself with enthusiasm to his new duties as librarian, to which
the doctor, at Riddell's suggestion, had appointed him.

This alteration, approved of as it was in many quarters, was by no means
appreciated by two boys at Willoughby.  It was not that they cared
twopence about the society of their young Limpet, or that they had any
moral objection to good behaviour and steady work.  What irritated Gilks
and Silk over the business was that they saw in it the hand of an enemy,
and felt that the present change in their _protege_ was due to Riddell's
influence in opposition to their own.  The two monitors felt hurt at
this; it was like a direct snub aimed at them, and, considering the
quarter from which it came, they did not like it at all.

"This sort of thing won't do," said Gilks to his friend one day, shortly
after Riddell's talk with Wyndham.  "The young 'un's cut our
acquaintance."

"Hope we shall recover in time," said Silk, sneering.  "Yes; he's gone
decidedly `pi.' the last week."

"It's all that reverend prig's doing!" growled Gilks.  "I mean to spoil
his little game for him, though," added he.  "How'll you do it?" asked
Silk.  "That's just it!  I wish I knew," said Gilks.

"Oh! leave it to me, I'll get at him somehow.  I don't suppose he's too
far gone yet."

Accordingly Silk took an early opportunity of meeting his young friend.

"Ah!  Wyndham," said he, casually; "don't see much of you now."

"No," said Wyndham, shortly; "I'm busy with the library."

"Oh!  I'm afraid, though, you're rather glad of an excuse to cut Silks
and me after the row we got you into last week."

"You didn't get me into any row," said Wyndham.  "What! didn't he lick
you for it?  Ah!  I see how it is.  He's afraid you'd let out on him for
being down too.  Rather a good dodge too.  Gilks and I half thought of
reporting him, but we didn't."

"He had a permit, hadn't he?"

"Oh, yes--rather!  I don't doubt that.  Just like Brown's, the town
boy's excuses.  Writes them himself."

"I'm certain Riddell wouldn't do such a thing," said Wyndham, warming.

"I never said he would," replied Silk, seeing he was going a little too
far.  "You see, captains don't want permits.  There's no one to pull
them up.  But I say, I'm awfully sorry about last week."

"Oh! it doesn't matter," said Wyndham, who could not help being rather
gratified to hear a monitor making apologies to him; "only I don't mean
to go down again."

"No, of course not; and if Gilks suggests it I'll back you up.  By the
way," he added, in tones of feigned alarm, "I suppose you didn't tell
him about going to Beamish's, did you?"

"No," said Wyndham, whose conscience had already reproached him several
times for not having confessed the fact.

"I'm awfully glad of that," said Silk, apparently much relieved.
"Whatever you do, keep that quiet."

"Why?" said Wyndham, rather concerned.

"My dear fellow, if that got out--well, I don't know what would happen."

"Why, is it a bad place, then?"

"Oh, no, not at all," laughed Silk with a mysterious wink.  "All serene
for follows like Gilks; but if it was known we'd taken _you_ there, we'd
be done for."

Wyndham began to feel he had had a narrow escape of "doing" for his two
patrons without knowing it.

"Promise you won't tell anybody," said Silk.

"Of course I won't," said Wyndham, rather scornful at the idea of
telling tales of a schoolfellow.

"Thanks; and I'll take care and say nothing about you, and Gilks won't
either, I know.  So it'll be all right.  I don't know what possessed the
fellow to suggest going in there."

All this was somewhat perplexing to Wyndham.  He had never imagined
Beamish's was such a terrible place, or that the penalty of being found
there was so severe.  He felt that he had had a fortunate escape, and
was glad Silk had put him up to it before he had let it out.

He became more friendly with his ally after this.  There is always a
bond of attraction where a common danger threatens, and Wyndham felt
that, however determined he was not to be led away any more by these
friends of his, it was just as well to be civil to them.

So he even accepted an invitation to come and have tea in Silk's room
that evening, to look at a volume of "Punch" the latter had got from
home, and to talk over the coming boat-race.

Had he overheard a hurried conversation which took place between Silk
and Gilks shortly afterwards in the Sixth Form room he would have looked
forward to that evening with anything but eagerness.

"Well?" asked Gilks.

"Hooked him, I fancy," said Silk.  "He's coming to tea this evening."

"Good man.  How did you manage it?"

"Oh, and by the way," said Silk, "that going to Beamish's last week was
no end of a crime.  If it's found out it's expulsion, remember.  He
believes it all.  I've told him we won't let out on him, and he's
promised not to say a word about it.  Fancy we've rather a pull on him
there."

"You're a jolly clever fellow, Silk," said Gilks, admiringly.

"May be, but I'm not such a nice boy as you are, Gilks."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE SCHOOLHOUSE BOAT AT WORK.

Giles and his ally knew their business well enough to see that they must
go to work "gingerly" to recover their lost Limpet.  Consequently when
Wyndham, according to promise, turned up to tea in Silk's study, nothing
was said or done in any way likely to offend his lately awakened
scruples.

The tea was a good one, the volume of "Punch" was amusing, and the talk
