
As Clayley said this, he burst into a loud yell of laughter.

It was with difficulty I could restrain myself; for, looking in the
direction indicated by the lieutenant, I saw a bright object, which I at
once recognised as the major's face.

He had drawn aside the broad plantain-leaves, and was peering cautiously
through, with a look of the most ludicrous terror.  His face only was
visible, round and luminous, like the full moon; and, like her, too,
variegated with light and shade, for fear had produced spots of white
and purple over the surface of his capacious cheeks.

As soon as the major saw how the "land lay", he came blowing and
blustering through the bushes like an elephant; and it now became
apparent that he carried his long sabre drawn and nourishing.

"Bad luck, after all!" said he as he marched round the pond with a bold
stride.  "That's all--is it?" he continued, pointing to the dead cayman.
"Bah!  I was in hopes we'd have a brush with the yellow-skins."

"No, Major," said I, trying to look serious, "we are not so fortunate."

"I have no doubt, however," said Clayley with a malicious wink, "but
that we'll have them here in a squirrel's jump.  They must have heard
the report of our guns."

A complete change became visible in the major's bearing.  The point of
his sabre dropped slowly to the ground, and the blue and white spots
began to array themselves afresh on his great red cheeks.

"Don't you think, Captain," said he, "we've gone far enough into the
cursed country?  There's no mules in it--I can certify there's not--not
a single mule.  Had we not better return to camp?"

Before I could reply, an object appeared that drew our attention, and
heightened the mosaic upon the major's cheeks.

A man, strangely attired, was seen running down the slope towards the
spot where we were standing.

"Guerillas, by Jove!" exclaimed Clayley, in a voice of feigned terror;
and he pointed to the scarlet sash which was twisted around the man's
waist.

The major looked round for some object where he might shelter himself in
case of a skirmish.  He was sidling behind a high point of the parapet,
when the stranger rushed forward, and, throwing both arms about his
neck, poured forth a perfect cataract of Spanish, in which the word
_gracias_ (thanks) was of frequent occurrence.

"What does the man mean with his _grashes_?" exclaimed the major,
struggling to free himself from the Mexican.

But the latter did not hear him, for his eyes at that moment rested upon
my dripping habiliments; and dropping the major, he transferred his
embrace and _gracias_ to me.

"Senor Capitan," he said, still speaking in Spanish, and hugging me like
a bear, "accept my thanks.  Ah, sir! you have saved my children; how can
I show you my gratitude?"

Here followed a multitude of those complimentary expressions peculiar to
the language of Cervantes, which ended by his offering me his house and
all it contained.

I bowed in acknowledgment of his courtesy, apologising for being so ill
prepared to receive his "hug", as I observed that my saturated vestments
had wet the old fellow to the skin.

I had now time to examine the stranger, who was a tall, thin, sallow old
gentleman, with a face at once Spanish and intelligent.  His hair was
white and short, while a moustache, somewhat grizzled, shaded his lips.
Jet-black brows projected over a pair of keen and sparkling eyes.  His
dress was a roundabout of the finest white linen, with waistcoat and
pantaloons of the same material--the latter fastened round the waist by
a scarf of bright red silk.  Shoes of green morocco covered his small
feet, while a broad Guayaquil hat shaded his face from the sun.

Though his costume was transatlantic--speaking in reference to Old
Spain--there was that in his air and manner that bespoke him a true
hidalgo.

After a moment's observation I proceeded, in my best Spanish, to express
my regret for the fright which the young ladies--his daughters, I
presumed--had suffered.

The Mexican looked at me with a slight appearance of surprise.

"Why, Senor Capitan," said he, "your accent!--you are a foreigner?"

"A foreigner!  To Mexico, did you mean?"

"Yes, Senor.  Is it not so?"

"Oh! of course," answered I, smiling, and somewhat puzzled in turn.

"And how long have you been in the army, Senor Capitan?"

"But a short time."

"How do you like Mexico, Senor?"

"I have seen but little of it as yet."

"Why, how long have you been in the country, then?"

"Three days," answered I; "we landed on the 9th."

"_Por Dios_! three days, and in our army already!" muttered the
Spaniard, throwing up his eyes in unaffected surprise.

I began to think I was interrogated by a lunatic.

"May I ask what countryman you are?" continued the old gentleman.

"What countryman?  An American, of course!"

"An American?"

"_Un Americano_," repeated I, for we were conversing in Spanish.

"_Y son esos Americanos_?"  (And are these Americans?) quickly demanded
my new acquaintance.

"_Si, Senor_," replied I.

"_Carrambo_!" shouted the Spaniard, with a sudden leap, his eyes almost
starting from their sockets.

"I should say, not exactly Americans," I added.  "Many of them are
Irish, and French, and Germans, and Swedes, and Swiss; yet they are all
Americans now."

But the Mexican did not stay to hear my explanation.  After recovering
from the first shock of surprise, he had bounded through the grove; and
with a wave of his hand, and the ejaculation "_Esperate_!"  (wait!)
disappeared among the plantains.  The men, who had gathered around the
lower end of the basin, burst out into a roar of laughter, which I did
not attempt to repress.  The look of terrified astonishment of the old
Don had been too much for my own gravity, and I could not help being
amused at the conversation that ensued among the soldiers.  They were at
some distance, yet I could overhear their remarks.

"That Mexikin's an unhospitable cuss!" muttered Lincoln, with an
expression of contempt.

"He might av axed the captain to dhrink, after savin' such a pair of
illigant craythers," said Chane.

"Sorra dhrap's in the house, Murt; the place looks dry," remarked
another son of the Green Isle.

"Och! an' it's a beautiful cage, anyhow," returned Chane; "and beautiful
birds in it, too.  It puts me in mind of ould Dimmerary; but there we
had the liquor, the raal rum--oshins of it, alanna!"

"That 'ere chap's a greelye, I strongly 'spect," whispered one, a
regular down-east Yankee.

"A what?" asked his companion.

"Why, a greelye--one o' them 'ere Mexikin robbers."

"Arrah, now! did yez see the rid sash?" inquired an Irishman.

"Thim's captin's," suggested the Yankee.  "He's a captin or a kurnel;
I'll bet high on that."

"What did he say, Nath, as he was running off?"

"I don't know 'zactly--somethin' that sounded mighty like 'spearin' on
us."

"He's a lanzeer then, by jingo!"

"He had better try on his spearin'," said another; "there's shootin'
before spearin'--mighty good ground, too, behind this hyur painted
wall."

"The old fellow was mighty frindly at first; what got into him, anyhow?"

"Raoul says he offered to give the captain his house and all the
furnishin's."

"Och, mother o' Moses! and thim illigant girls, too!"

"Ov coorse."

"By my sowl! an' if I was the captain, I'd take him at his word, and
lave off fightin' intirely."

"It _is_ delf," said a soldier, referring to the material of which the
parapet was constructed.

"No, it ain't."

"It's chaney, then."

"No, nor chaney either."

"Well, what is it?"

"It's only a stone wall painted, you greenhorn!"

"Stone-thunder! it's solid delf, I say."

"Try it with your bayonet, Jim."

_Crick_--_crick_--_crick_--_crinell_! reached my ears.  Turning round, I
saw that one of the men had commenced breaking off the japanned work of
the parapet with his bayonet.

"Stop that!"  I shouted to the man.

The remark of Chane that followed, although uttered _sotto voce_, I
could distinctly hear.  It was sufficiently amusing.

"The captain don't want yez to destroy what'll be his own some day, when
he marries one of thim young Dons.  Here comes the owld one, and, by the
powers! he's got a big paper; he's goin' to make over the property!"

Laughing, I looked round, and saw that the Don was returning, sure
enough.  He hurried up, holding out a large sheet of parchment.

"Well, Senor, what's this?"  I inquired.

"_No soy Mexicano--soy Espanol_!"  (I am no Mexican--I am a Spaniard),
said he, with the expression of a true hidalgo.

Casting my eye carelessly over the document, I perceived that it was a
_safeguard_ from the Spanish consul at Vera Cruz, certifying that the
bearer, Don Cosme Rosales, was a native of Spain.

"Senor Rosales," said I, returning the paper, "this was not necessary.
The interesting circumstances under which we have met should have
secured you good treatment, even were you a Mexican and we the
barbarians we have been represented.  We have come to make war, not with
peaceful citizens, but with a rabble soldiery."

"_Es verdad_ (Indeed).  You are wet, Senor? you are hungry?"

I could not deny that I was both the one and the other.

"You need refreshment, gentlemen; will you come to my house?"

"Permit me, Senor, to introduce you to Major Blossom--Lieutenant
Clayley--Lieutenant Oakes: Don Cosme Rosales, gentlemen."

My friends and the Don bowed to each other.  The major had now recovered
his complacency.

"_Vamonos, caballeros_!"  (Come on, gentlemen), said the Don, starting
towards the house.

"But your soldiers, Capitan?" added he, stopping suddenly.

"They will remain here," I rejoined.

"Permit me to send them some dinner."

"Oh! certainly," replied I; "use your own pleasure, Don Cosme, but do
not put your household to any inconvenience."

In a few minutes we found our way to the house, which was neither more
nor less than the cage-looking structure already described.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A MEXICAN DINNER.

"_Pasan adentro, Senores_," said Don Cosme, drawing aside the curtain of
the rancho, and beckoning us to enter.

"Ha!" exclaimed the major, struck with the _coup-d'oeil_ of the
interior.

"Be seated, gentlemen.  _Ya vuelvo_."  (I will return in an instant.)

So saying, Don Cosme disappeared into a little porch in the back,
partially screened from observation by a close network of woven cane.

"Very pretty, by Jove!" said Clayley, in a low voice.

"Pretty indeed!" echoed the major, with one of his customary
asseverations.

"Stylish, one ought rather to say, to do it justice."

"Stylish!" again chimed in the major, repeating his formula.

"Rosewood chairs and tables," continued Clayley; "a harp, guitar, piano,
sofas, ottomans, carpets knee-deep--whew!"

Not thinking of the furniture, I looked around the room strangely
bewildered.

"Ha!  Ha! what perplexes you, Captain?" asked Clayley.

"Nothing."

"Ah! the girls you spoke of--the nymphs of the pond; but where the deuce
are they?"

"Ay, where?"  I asked, with a strange sense of uneasiness.

"Girls! what girls?" inquired the major, who had not yet learned the
exact nature of our aquatic adventure.

Here the voice of Don Cosme was heard calling out--

"Pepe!  Ramon!  Francisco! bring dinner.  _Anda! anda_!"  (Be quick!)

"Who on earth is the old fellow calling?" asked the major, with some
concern in his manner.  "I see no one."

Nor could we; so we all rose up together, and approached that side of
the building that looked rearward.

The house, to all appearance, had but one apartment--the room in which
we then were.  The only point of this screened from observation was the
little veranda into which Don Cosme had entered; but this was not large
enough to contain the number of persons who might be represented by the
names he had called out.

Two smaller buildings stood under the olive-trees in the rear; but
these, like the house, were _transparent_, and not a human figure
appeared within them.  We could see through the trunks of the olives a
clear distance of a hundred yards.  Beyond this, the mezquite and the
scarlet leaves of the wild maguey marked the boundary of the forest.

It was equally puzzling to us whither the girls had gone, or whence
"Pepe, Ramon, and Francisco" were to come.

The tinkling of a little bell startled us from our conjectures, and the
voice of Don Cosme was heard inquiring:

"Have you any favourite dish, gentlemen?"

Someone answered, "No."

"Curse me!" exclaimed the major, "I believe he can get anything we may
call for--raise it out of the ground by stamping his foot or ringing a
bell.  Didn't I tell you?"

This exclamation was uttered in consequence of the appearance of a train
of well-dressed servants, five or six in number, bringing waiters with
dishes and decanters.  They entered from the porch; but how did they get
into it?  Certainly not from the woods without, else we should have seen
them as they approached the cage.

The major uttered a terrible invocation, adding in a hoarse whisper,
"This must be the Mexican Aladdin!"

I confess I was not less puzzled than he.  Meantime the servants came
and went, going empty, and returning loaded.  In less than half an hour
the table fairly creaked under the weight of a sumptuous dinner.  This
is no figure of speech.  There were dishes of massive silver, with huge
flagons of the same metal, and even cups of gold!

"_Senores, vamos a comer_" (Come, let us eat, gentlemen), said Don
Cosme, politely motioning us to be seated.  "I fear that you will not be
pleased with my _cuisine_--it is purely Mexican--_estilo del pais_."

To say that the dinner was not a good one would be to utter a falsehood,
and contradict the statement of Major George Blossom, of the U.S.
quarter-master's department, who afterwards declared that it was the
best dinner he had ever eaten in his life.

Turtle-soup first.

"Perhaps you would prefer _julienne_ or _vermicelli_, gentlemen?"
inquired the Don.

"Thank you; your turtle is very fine," replied I, necessarily the
interpreter of the party.

"Try some of the _aguacate_--it will improve the flavour of your soup."

One of the waiters handed round a dark, olive-coloured fruit of an
oblong shape, about the size of a large pear.

"Ask him how it is used, Captain," said the major to me.

"Oh, I beg your pardon, gentlemen.  I had forgotten that some of our
edibles may be strange to you.  Simply pare off the rind, and slice it
thus."

We tried the experiment, but could not discover any peculiar improvement
in the flavour of the soup.  The pulp of the aguacate seemed singularly
insipid to our northern palates.

