afraid of these animals.  On the contrary, they rather rejoice at seeing
them numerous in their district, as they are then provided with hunters
able to _furnish_ them with food!



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE TRAVELLERS BENIGHTED.

Our travellers would have talked much more about lions, but for the
condition of their horses.  This made them feel uneasy.  With the
exception of a few hours grazing, the poor brutes had been without food
since the appearance of the locusts.  Horses do not travel well upon
soft grass, and of course they were now suffering severely.

It would be far in the night before the horsemen could reach the camp--
although they were pushing on as fast as the horses could travel.

It was quite dark, when they arrived at the spot where they had halted
the previous evening.  In fact, it was very dark.  Neither moon nor
stars were to be seen in the sky; and thick black clouds covered the
whole canopy of the heavens.  It looked as though a rain-storm might be
expected--still no rain had as yet fallen.

It was the intention of the travellers to halt at this place, and let
their horses graze a while.  With this view they all dismounted; but,
after trying one or two places, they could find no grass!

This appeared strange, as they had certainly observed grass at that very
spot the day before.  Now there was none!

The horses put their noses to the ground, but raised them up again,
snorting as they did so, and evidently disappointed.  They were hungry
enough to have eaten grass had there been any, for they eagerly snatched
at the leaves of the bushes as they passed along!

Had the locusts been there also?  No.  The mimosa-bushes still retained
their delicate foliage, which would not have been the case had the
locusts visited the spot.

Our travellers were astonished that there was no grass.  Surely there
was some the day before?  Had they got upon a new track?

The darkness prevented them from having a view of the ground; yet Von
Bloom could not be mistaken about the route--having travelled it four
times already.  Though he could not see the surface, every now and again
he caught a glimpse of some tree or bush, which he had marked in his
former journeys, and these assured him they were still upon the right
track.

Surprised at the absence of grass where they had so lately observed it,
they would have examined the surface more carefully; but they were
anxious to push on to the spring, and at length gave up the idea of
halting.  The water in their gourds had been used up long before this;
and both they and their horses were once more suffering from thirst.

Besides, Von Bloom was not without some anxiety about the children at
the wagon.  He had been separated from them now a full day and a half,
and many a change might take place--many a danger might arise in that
time.  In fact, he began to blame himself for having left them alone.
It would have been better to have let his cattle perish.  So thought he
now.  A presentiment that all was not right was gradually forming in his
mind; and he grew more anxious to proceed as he reflected.

They rode on in silence.  It was only on Hendrik expressing a doubt
about the way, that the conversation recommenced.  Swartboy also thought
they were taking a wrong course.

At first Von Bloom assured them they were right: but after going a
little farther, he admitted that he was in doubt; and then, after
another half-mile's travelling, he declared that he had lost the track.
He could no longer recognise any one of the marks or bearings he had
taken.

The proper thing to be done under these circumstances was to leave the
horses to themselves; and this all three well knew.  But the animals
were suffering the pangs of hunger, and when left to themselves, would
not journey forward, but rushed up to the mimosa-bushes, and eagerly
commenced devouring their leaves.

The consequence was, that their riders were obliged to keep them going
with whip and spur; and in that way there was no certainty of the horses
taking the right direction.

After several hours' advancing, all the while in a state of suspense,
and as yet no appearance of either wagon or camp-fire, the travellers
resolved upon coming to a halt.  It was of no use going forward.  They
believed they could not be far from the camp; but they were now as
likely to be riding _from_ as _towards_ it; and they concluded at
length, that it would be wiser to remain where they were until the day
broke.

They all dismounted therefore, and fastened their horses to the bushes--
so that the animals could browse upon the leaves till morning--which
could not now be very far off.  They rolled themselves up in their
karosses, and lay down upon the earth.

Hendrik and Swartboy were soon asleep.  Von Bloom would have slept too,
for he was tired enough; but the heart of the father was too full of
anxiety to allow repose to his eyes, and he lay awake watching for the
dawn.

It came at length, and at the first light his eyes swept the surface of
the surrounding country.  The party had by chance halted on an eminence
that commanded a good view for miles on each side, but the field-cornet
had not glanced half around the circle, when an object came before his
eyes that brought gladness to his heart.  It was the white tent of the
wagon!

The joyful exclamation he uttered awoke the sleepers, who immediately
sprang to their feet; and all three stood gazing at the welcome sight.

As they continued to gaze, their joy gradually gave place to feelings of
surprise.  Was it _their_ wagon, after all?

It certainly looked like theirs; but it was a full half-mile off, and at
such a distance one wagon would look just like another.  But what led
them to doubt its being theirs?  It was the _appearance of the place in
which they saw it_.  Surely it was not the same place in which they had
outspanned!

Theirs had been left in an oblong valley between two gentle ridges--in
such a valley was this one standing.  Near a small pool formed by a
spring--here, too, was the same, for they could perceive the water
shining.  But in all other respects the situation was different.  The
surface of the valley in which their wagon had been left was covered,
both sides and bottom, with a verdant carpet of grass; whereas the one
now before their eyes was brown and bare! not a blade of grass was to be
seen--the trees seeming to be the only things that had any verdure.
Even the low bushes appeared to be destitute of leaves!  The scene had
no resemblance whatever to that where they had outspanned.  It must be
the camp of some other travellers, thought they.

They had fully arrived at this conclusion, when Swartboy, whose eyes had
been rolling about everywhere, now rested upon the ground at his feet.
After a moment's observation--which the increasing light now enabled him
to make--he turned suddenly to the others, and directed their attention
to the surface of the plain.  This they saw was covered with tracks, as
if a thousand hoofs had passed over it.  In fact, it presented the
appearance of a vast sheep-pen; so vast, that as far as their sight
extended, they beheld the same tracked and trampled appearance!

What could this mean?  Hendrik did not know.  Von Bloom was in doubt.
Swartboy could tell at the first glance.  It was no new sight to him.

"All right, baas," he said, looking up in his master's face.  "Da's da
ole wagon!--da same spring an' vley--da same place--dar hab been um
_trek-boken_!"

"A trek-boken!" cried Von Bloom and Hendrik, in a breath.

"Ya, baas--a mighty big one too; das de spoor of dem antelope--See!"

Von Bloom now comprehended all.  The bareness of the country, the
absence of the leaves on the lower bushes, the millions of small
hoof-tracks, all were now explained.  A migration of the springbok
antelope, a "trek-boken," had swept over the spot.  That it was that had
caused such a mighty change.  The wagon they saw was theirs, after all.

They lost no time, but, catching their horses, bridled them, and rode
rapidly down the hill.

Though somewhat relieved at seeing the wagon, Von Bloom was still
apprehensive.

As they approached, they perceived the two horses standing beside it,
and tied to the wheels, the cow also was there--but neither goats nor
sheep were in the neighbourhood.

There was a fire burning in the rear of the hind-wheels, and a dark mass
underneath the wagon, but no human form could be observed.

The hearts of the horsemen beat loudly as they advanced.  Their eyes
were bent earnestly upon the wagon.  They felt keen anxiety.

They had got within three hundred yards, and still no one stirred--no
human form made its appearance.  Von Bloom and Hendrik now suffered
intensely.

At this moment the two horses by the wagon neighed loudly; the dark mass
under the wagon moved, rolled outward, rose up, and stood erect.  Totty
was recognised!

And now the "after-clap" of the wagon was hurriedly drawn aside, and
three young faces were seen peeping forth.

A shout of joy burst from the horsemen, and the next moment little Jan
and Truey leaped out from the cap-tent into the arms of their father--
while the mutual congratulations of Hans and Hendrik, Swartboy and
Totty, produced for some moments a scene of joyful confusion quite
indescribable.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE "TREK-BOKEN."

Those who remained by the camp had had their adventures too; and their
tale was by no means a merry one, for it disclosed the unpleasant fact,
that the sheep and goats were all lost.  The flock had been carried off,
in a most singular manner; and there was but little hope of their ever
being seen again.

Hans began his tale:--

"Nothing unusual occurred on the day you left us.  I was busy all the
afternoon in cutting `wait-a-bit' thorns for a kraal.  Totty helped me
to drag them up, while Jan and Truey looked after the flock.  The
animals did not stray out of the valley here, as the grass was good, and
they had had enough of trotting lately.

"Well--Totty and I got the kraal, as you see, all ready.  So, when night
came, we drove the flock in; and, after milking the cow and getting our
supper, we all went to bed.  We were precious tired, and all of us slept
soundly throughout the night without being disturbed.  Both jackals and
hyenas came around, but we knew they would not break into that kraal."

Hans pointed to the circular enclosure of thorn-bushes, that had been
well constructed.

He then proceeded with his narration:--

"In the morning we found everything right.  Totty again milked the cow;
and we had breakfast.  The flock was let out upon the grass, and so were
the cow and the two horses.

"Just about midday I began to think what we were to have for dinner, for
the breakfast had cleared up everything.  I did not like to kill another
sheep, if it could be helped.  So bidding Jan and Truey stay close by
the wagon, and leaving Totty to look after the flock, I took my gun and
started off in search of game.  I took no horse, for I thought I saw
springboks out on the plain; and I would stalk them better afoot.

"Sure enough, there _were_ springboks.  When I got out of the valley
here, and had a better view, I saw what astonished me, I can assure you.

"I could scarce credit my eyes.  The whole plain, towards the west,
appeared to be one vast crowd of animals; and by their bright yellow
sides, and the snow-white hair on their rumps, I knew they were
springboks.  They were all in motion, some browsing along, while
hundreds of them were constantly bounding up into the air full ten feet
high, and leaping a-top of each other.  I assure you all it was tone of
the strangest sights I ever beheld, and one of the pleasantest too; for
I knew that the creatures that covered the plain, instead of being
fierce wild beasts, were nothing but graceful and beautiful little
gazelles.

"My first thought was to get near them, and have a shot; and I was about
to start off over the plain, when I perceived that the antelopes were
coming towards me.  I saw that they were approaching with considerable
rapidity; and if I only remained where I was, they would save me the
trouble of stalking in upon them.  I lay down behind a bush and waited.

"I had not very long to wait.  In less than a quarter of an hour the
foremost of the herd drew near, and in five minutes more a score of them
were within shot.

"I did not fire for some time.  I knew they would come still nearer; and
I lay watching the motions of those pretty creatures.  I took notice of
their light handsome forms, their smooth slender limbs, their
cinnamon-coloured backs, and white bellies, with the band of chestnut
along each side.  I looked at the lyre-shaped horns of the bucks, and
above all, at the singular flaps on their croup, that unfolded each time
that they leaped up, displaying a profusion of long silky hair, as white
as snow itself.

"All these points I noticed, and at length, tired of admiring them, I
singled out a fine-looking doe--for I was thinking of my dinner, and
knew that doe-venison was the most palatable.

"After aiming carefully, I fired.  The doe fell, but, to my
astonishment, the others did not run off.  A few of the foremost only
galloped back a bit, or bounded up into the air; but they again set to
browsing quite unconcerned, and the main body advanced as before!

"I loaded as quickly as I could, and brought down another,--this time a
buck--but as before without frightening the rest!

"I proceeded to load for the third time; but before I had finished, the
front ranks had passed on both sides of me, and I found myself in the
midst of the herd!

"I saw no need for covering myself any longer behind the bush, but rose
to my knees, and, firing at the nearest, brought it down also.  Its
comrades did not pause, but ran over its body in thousands!

"I loaded again, and stood right up on my feet.

"Now for the first time it occurred to me to reflect on the strange
conduct of the springboks; for, instead of making off at my appearance,
they only bounded a little to one side, and then kept on their course.
They seemed possessed by a species of infatuation.  I remembered hearing
that such was their way when upon one of their migrations, or
`trek-bokens.'  This, then, thought I, must be a `trek-boken.'

"I was soon convinced of this, for the herd every moment grew thicker
and thicker around me, until at length they became so crowded, that I
began to feel very singularly situated.  Not that I was afraid of the
creatures, as they made no demonstration of using their horns upon me.
On the contrary, they did all they could to get out of my way.  But the
nearest only were alarmed; and, as my presence in no way terrified those
that were an hundred yards off, the latter made no attempt to give
ground.  Of course the nearest ones could only get a few paces from me,
by pushing the others closer, or springing up over their backs--so that
with the ones thus constantly bounding up into the air there was all the
time a ring around me two deep!

"I cannot describe the strange feelings I had in this unusual situation,
or how long I might have kept my place.  Perhaps I might have loaded and
fired away for some time, but just at the moment the sheep came into my
mind.

"They'll be carried away, thought I.  I had heard that such a thing was
common enough.

"I saw that the antelopes were heading towards the valley--the foremost
were already into it, and would soon be on the spot, where I had just
seen our little flock feeding!

"In hopes of yet heading the springboks, and driving the sheep into the
kraal, before the former crowded on them, I started towards the valley.
But, to my chagrin, I could get no faster than the herd was going!

"As I approached the creatures, to make my way through their mass, they
leaped about and sprang over one another, but could not for their lives
open a way for me as fast as I wanted one.  I was so near some of them
that I could have knocked them down with my gun!

"I commenced hallooing, and, brandishing the gun about, I was making a
