Wrench shot out from somewhere like a Jack from its box.

"Aren't caught it very bad, gentlemen, have you?" he cried eagerly.

"Oh no, Wrench," said Glyn, smiling.

"Thought not, sir, for the Doctor had got a twinkle in his eye when he'd
done with the wild-beast man.  It would have been hard if you'd caught
it after what you did.  Pst!  There's the study-bell."  And the man
hurried away, leaving the culprits to stroll out together into the
playground, where they found fully half the boys waiting to hear the
result of their interview with the Doctor, Slegge and his courtiers
hurrying up first.

"Well, beast-tamers," he cried sneeringly, "how many lines of Latin have
you got to do?"  And he grinned offensively at them both.

"When?" said Glyn coolly.

"When?  Why, now, at once."

"We haven't got any lines of Latin to do," said Singh quietly.  "To-day
is a holiday."

"For us," cried Slegge; "but I know the Doctor.  You have both got a
pretty stiff dose to do, my fine fellows, and I wish you joy."

"Thank you," said Glyn; "but you are all in the wrong."

"Wrong?  Then what did the Doctor say to you?"

"Oh," said Glyn, in a most imperturbable manner, fighting hard the
while, though, to keep his countenance as he realised the strength of
the shot he was about to send at his malicious persecutor, "he asked
Singh and me to come and meet the masters and dine with him to-night."



CHAPTER NINE.

THE NEW PROFESSOR.

"Let 'em go," snarled Slegge to his courtiers.  "It's only another way
of getting a hard lesson.  I know what the Doctor's dinner-parties are.
Let the stuck-up young brutes go.  But if I wasn't about to leave the
blessed old school I would jolly soon let the Doctor know that this sort
of thing won't do.  The old humbug told me once that fairplay was a
jewel.  I don't call it fairplay to be currying favour with a new boy
because he's an Indian prince.  Indian prince, indeed!  Indian bear--
cub; that's what I call him, with his leader, currying favour like that!
Ha, ha!  Ho, ho!  Haw, haw!"

This was a melodramatic laugh of the most sarcastic description,
prefatory to the letting off of a very ponderous joke.  "Currying!
Indian curry!  That's what he was brought up on.  Curry and rice instead
of pap.  Look at the colour of his skin.  But only wait a bit,"
continued Slegge darkly.  "Just wait till the right time comes, and I'll
let you all see."

But the Doctor's dinner-party was not quite so ponderous and learned as
usual, for the incidents of the day formed the main topic of
conversation.  The Doctor was in high good-humour, and naturally felt
rather proud of his pupils.  They had distinguished themselves, and in
so doing had distinguished him and his school, and the consequence was
that the masters readily took up the subject and were most warm and
friendly to the two lads, the other guest in particular, Professor
Barclay, as Morris took care that he should be called, much to the
annoyance of the classical master, who looked at the new-comer, Morris's
friend, rather suspiciously, regarding him as one likely to poach upon
his preserves.

During the dinner, the Professor had much to say about Sanskrit,
military colleges, and India, and was very attentive to Singh and Glyn,
but found the boys quiet and retiring in the extreme.

All, however, seemed to be enjoying themselves but Mr Rampson, who grew
more uneasy and suspicious over the coffee, pricking up his ears as he
bent over his cup and kept on stirring it, but without drinking, while
the Doctor and the Professor were talking together as if discussing some
subject in a low tone.

The fact must be recorded against the classical teacher that he was
eavesdropping, ungentlemanly as it may sound; but the only thing that
reached his ears was the conclusion of the conversation, when the Doctor
said, raising his voice slightly, "Certainly, Mr Barclay, I shall give
every attention to your testimonials; but my staff of preceptors is
complete, and I have always considered Greek and Latin sufficient for my
pupils, of course with the modern languages thrown in."

The Professor thanked the Doctor effusively, and in the course of the
evening contrived to fix himself like a burr upon Singh, while Mr
Rampson made an effort and secured Glyn to himself, jealously taking
care that the stranger guest and friend, it seemed, of Morris should not
monopolise both the boys.

"It's all a plot," said Rampson to himself--"all a scheme to oust me,
and I'll never forgive Morris so long as I live.--I say," he said aloud,
"that Mr Barclay seems to have a deal to say to your friend the Prince.
Do you know what they are talking about?"

"India, and Sanskrit, and catching elephants," replied Glyn.  "Has he
been out in India?"

"Oh, don't ask me," said Rampson with asperity; then correcting himself
quickly, and with a rather ghastly smile, "I say, you two did
distinguish yourselves to-day."

"Oh, did we, sir?" said Glyn, who looked rather tired and bored.
"Please don't say more about it."

"Oh no, of course not, if you don't want to hear it.  But your friend
doesn't seem to mind.  Why, the Professor's taking him out into the
garden, and the Prince is talking to him as hard as ever he can.  Yes,
he doesn't seem to mind."

"No," replied Glyn, as he saw Singh, in obedience to a gesture from his
new acquaintance, sit down upon one of the garden-seats, and for the
next quarter of an hour the boy was talking in quite an animated way,
and evidently answering questions put to him by the Professor.

The evening soon glided away, and the boys gladly thanked their host and
retired to their own room, utterly wearied out by the events of the day.

As a rule, they lay for some time carrying on conversation and
discussing the next day's work; but that night very little was said, and
the only thing worth recording was a few sentences that were spoken and
responded to by Singh in the midst of yawns.

"Talking about India and Sanskrit?" said Glyn.

"Oh yes; he asked me all sorts of questions about Dour, and he asked me
if I had ever seen Sanskrit letters."

"Well?"

"And I told him I had, and he shook his head and asked me where I had
seen them."

"Well, what did you say?"

"That I had got some precious stones in my box with some Sanskrit
letters cut in."

"Why, you never were so stupid as to tell him about that belt?"

"I don't know that there's anything stupid in it," replied Singh
sleepily.  "I didn't want him to think I was so ignorant as not to know
about a language that your father can read as easily as English, and has
talked to us about scores of times.  Why, of course, I did."

"Well, of all the old _Dummkopfs_ I ever knew, you are the stupidest.
Didn't I tell you that--" _Snore_.

"Why, if he isn't asleep!"

Almost the next moment Glyn was in the same state.



CHAPTER TEN.

"ENGLISH GENTLEMEN DON'T FIGHT LIKE THAT."

The next morning the men sent by Ramball, the proprietor of the
world-famed menagerie, were busy at work first thing repairing hedge and
fence; and everything was so well done, and such prompt payment made for
the estimated damages to the neighbouring orchard, that when a
petition-like appeal for patronage was made by Ramball, the owner of the
orchard attended with wife, family, and friends; and the Doctor gave
permission to the whole school to be present, being moved also, as he
told the lads in a brief address, to go himself with the masters and
support a very worthy enterprise for the diffusion of natural history
throughout the country.  The visits were paid to the great yellow-walled
prison, and Ramball, in his best blue coat, the one with the basket-work
treble-gilt buttons, attended on the Doctor himself to explain the
peculiarities of the beasts and give their history in his own fashion.

This was peculiar, and did not in any way resemble a zoological lecture.
Still, it was an improvement upon the wild-beast showman of the
old-fashioned fairs, and he did not inform his listeners that the tiger
was eight feet six inches long from the tip of his nose to the end of
his tail, and exactly eight feet four inches long from the tip of his
tail to the end of his nose.  Neither did he impart knowledge, like
another of his craft, and tell people that the boa-constrictor was
so-called because he constructed such pleasing images with his
serpentine form.  But he did inform them that the monstrous reptile he
possessed--one which, by the way, was only nine feet long--was always
furnished in the cold weather with sawdust into which he could burrow,
on account of the peculiarity always practised by creatures of its kind
of swallowing its own blankets; and he did deliver an eulogy on his big
black bear, and encourage the young gentlemen to furnish it with buns;
but he did not confess to the fact that it was his most profitable
animal, from the circumstance of his letting it out on hire for so many
months in the year to a hairdresser in Bloomsbury, who used, according
to his advertisements, to kill it regularly once a week and exhibit it
in butcherly fashion hung up and spread open outside his shop, so that
passers-by might see its tremendous state of fatness: "Another fat bear
killed this morning."

It was in the days when the British public were intense believers in
bear's grease as the producer of hair, and no one troubled himself or
herself to investigate the precise configuration of the exhibited animal
and compare it when hung up, decapitated, and shorn of its feet, with
the ordinary well-fatted domestic pig, albeit the illusion was kept up
by its being possible to see through the gratings outside the
shop-window Ramball's black bear still "all alive-o," parading and
snuffling up and down in the area.

Glyn and Singh were there, of course, and responded to Ramball's almost
obsequious advances with good-humoured tolerance; but while he was with
the Doctor the boys took notes together, laughing with a good deal of
contempt at the poor miserable specimens--the tiger and two leopards--
compared with those they had seen in their native beauty and grace of
outline in the forests of Dour.

They met one friend there, though, chained by a leg to the massive iron
peg, as he stood swinging his great head from side to side, and
stretching out his enormous trunk for the contributions supplied by the
boys.

They were welcomed most effusively by the great beast, which recognised
them at once, and it was only by its attention being taken up by its
keeper, the man who had driven the bottomless van, that the boys got
away without being followed by their new friend, which had manifested a
disposition to drag the peg out of the ground and follow them like a
dog.

It was while the Doctor was delivering an impromptu disquisition upon
the peculiarities of the one-horned rhinoceros and the slight
resemblance given by the folds of its monstrous hide to the shell of a
turtle, that Ramball followed the two boys and made signs to them to
come to the other end of the great van-walled booth, when he asked them
if they had considered his proposition.

"I never made such an offer before in my life, young gents.  It's a good
'un.  Don't you let it slide."

But the boys were saved the pain of telling the man that it was quite
out of the question by the coming up of the guest at the Doctor's
dinner, Professor Barclay, who was effusively civil to Glyn, and
fastened himself upon Singh to talk of Indian matters and language till
the visit came to an end.

Just before leaving, Ramball came up to them again, but he had to speak
in the presence of the Doctor.

"I only wanted to ask the young gents, sir," he said, "if they had made
their choice of the two little somethings to keep in remembrance of what
they did over the elephant."

"Two little somethings?" said the Doctor loftily.  "I am quite sure,
sir, that my pupils do not wish to take any two little somethings as a
gift from you."

"No, no, sir, not what you call gifts; but just a couple of little
trifles as I asked them to pick out."

"Oh, no, no," cried the Doctor.  "It is not necessary, my man, and we
have no room for such things in my establishment."

"Ah, excuse me, sir," said the man eagerly; "you are thinking I mean
something big and awkward; but a nice little monkey, sir, or a bird?"

"Monkeys don't want monkeys," said Slegge, in a whisper to Burney, just
loud enough for Glyn to hear, and making him turn sharply upon the
speaker.

"Have a baboon, Severn," said Slegge maliciously, for he met the boy's
flashing eyes.

"What for?" said Glyn coolly.

"Oh, I don't know," continued Slegge, after a glance at the boys around,
who burst into a low series of titters.  "I would if I were you.
There's a nice brotherly look about that one in the cage, and he hasn't
got a tail."

"Mr Severn," said the Doctor, "come here.  I want you to tell Mr
Ramball that you do not need any recompense for the services you have
performed.  Mr Singh has already spoken."

"Yes, sir, I'll come," replied the boy quickly, and he did as requested,
fully conscious the while that Slegge was saying something disparaging
to the nearest boys, and that the Professor had moved up behind Singh
and was talking to him again.

"Do you like this Professor Barclay?" said Glyn as they were walking
back towards the school side by side.

"Oh, I don't know.  He's very pleasant to talk to, of course, for he
knows so much about Indian things."

"Oh," said Glyn thoughtfully, for his companion's words sounded
reasonable.

"But what was that fellow saying to you?" asked Singh.  "He was grinning
at you about something.  Oh, I should like to do something to him.  That
nasty look of his always makes me feel hot."

"He wants to get up a quarrel," replied Glyn.

"Well, let him, and the sooner the better.  He's always insulting me."

"Then let's insult him," said Glyn.

"Yes," cried Singh eagerly.  "What shall we do?  Tell him we won't
accept a baboon because one's enough in the school?"

"No; treat him with contempt," said Glyn coldly.  "We are not going to
be dragged into a fight so as to give him a chance to play the bully and
knock us about."

"But let's knock him about," cried Singh, "and show him that we can
bully too."

"Won't do," said Glyn slowly.  "He's too big and strong."

"Yes, he's big and strong; but we shall be two to one."

"Ah, you have a lot to learn, Singhy.  English gentlemen don't fight
like that."



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE CUTTING OF THE COCK'S COMB.

There was a smart brush at the school a few days later, which resulted
in the cutting of Slegge's comb.  The Doctor was seated at his
study-table, with the open French window letting in the fresh morning
breeze and giving him a view, when he raised his eyes from his book,
right across the cricket-field to the clump of elms, when there was a
tap at the door, responded to by the customary "Come in!" and Mr
Rampson entered.

"Ah, good-morning, Mr Rampson," said the Doctor suavely.

"Good-morning, sir.  Could you give me a few minutes?"

"Certainly, Mr Rampson," replied the Doctor, sitting back.  "Have you
something to report?"

"Well, no, sir, not exactly, but--er, but er--I er--thought I should
like to ask you if I had given you satisfaction in connection with my
pupils."

"Yes, Mr Rampson," said the Doctor, raising his eyebrows; "but why--oh,
I see, you want to speak to me and tell me that you have had a more
lucrative offer."

"Oh no, sir; I am quite satisfied here, where I have been so long,
but--"

"Well, Mr Rampson, what is it?  You wish me to increase your stipend?"

"No, sir, I do not; but I don't want to suddenly find myself supplanted
by another master through the machinations of a brother-teacher."

"Don't speak angrily, Mr Rampson.  Pray, who has been trying to
supplant you?"

"Well, sir, I am a blunt man, and I have come to speak out.  I am afraid
that Morris--why, I know not--has been introducing this Professor
Barclay to you to try to get him in my post."

"Indeed, Mr Rampson!" said the Doctor, with a smile.  "Well, then, let
me set you at your ease at once.  Morris did not introduce this
gentleman, for he came to me with an introduction from one of the
