
"What! are you going to make the kite nine feet high!" exclaimed Ernest.
"That will be big, indeed."

"Yes; nine feet high, and eight from wing to wing," said Ellis.

"Why, what a whacking big fellow it will be!" exclaimed Ernest.  "And I
say, what a lot of paper it will take to make it!"

"Not a particle," answered Ellis.  "It is all made of silk, which is
lighter and stronger than any other material.  Come with me to the
carpenter's and get the laths, and we'll have it made by the evening, so
as to fly it, if there is a breeze, to-morrow."

"I'll go with pleasure to the carpenter's; but if you are pretty certain
that your kite will do well, do not let us fly it till the day of trial.
It will astonish every one so much to see you come out with a great big
kite, which, I doubt not, will beat all the others."

"Oh, no!  I'm afraid that it won't do that.  It will scarcely be equal
to Monsieur Malin's, and probably Blackall will get something very grand
down from London," answered Ellis, always diffident about anything
connected with himself.

"We'll see," said Ernest quietly.  "And now, as we have so grand a kite,
let us go and see old Hobson about the carriage which we must make it
drag.  Any shape and any plan is allowable, remember, provided it can
carry two.  Now I have a design in my head which I think will answer
capitally.  You see old gentlemen and ladies steering themselves, with a
person pushing behind, in an arm-chair.  I propose having a sort of a
skeleton of a chair, with two big wheels and one small one in front,
with a very long front part,--one seat behind for the person who manages
the kite, and one in front for the steerer.  There must be a bar in
front with a block to it, through which the line must pass, and then I
would have a light pole with a hook at one end, while the butt-end
should be secured to the centre of the carriage.  Suppose you were to
sit in front and steer; I would sit behind and have a reel to haul in or
let out the line, and with the pole and hook I could bring the kite on
one side of the carriage or the other, as might be required to assist
you to guide it.  It is my opinion that we can make the carriage go on a
wind, as yachtsmen say.  That is to say, if the wind is from the north
or south, we may make the carriage go east or west.  Now, if other
fellows have not thought of that, and the wind should change a few
points, we may be able to go on in our proper course while they may be
obliged to stop, and so we shall win the prize."

"Capital!" repeated Ellis, clapping his hands and hugging himself in his
delight in a peculiarly grotesque way which always made his friend
smile, though he determined some day quietly to tell him of the habit,
and to advise him to get over it.  "Capital!" repeated Ellis.  "I've
heard of something of the sort in Canada, where, on the lakes and
rivers, what are called ice-boats are used.  They are, however, placed
on great skates or iron runners, and have sails just like any other
boats, only the sails are stretched quite flat, like boards.  They have
a long pole out astern with an iron at the end of it, which cuts into
the ice and serves as a rudder.  They sail very fast, and go, I
understand, close on a wind."

"What fun to sail in them!" cried Ernest.  "I've often thought I should
like to go to Canada, and that would be another reason.  But, I say,
Ellis, I fancy from the way you talk you know something about yachting.
I'm very fond of it; you and I will have some sailing together one of
these days."

Ellis said that he had frequently yachted with some of his relations,
and that he should be delighted to take a cruise with Ernest when they
could afford to have a boat.  They talked away till they got to the shop
of old Hobson the carpenter.  He was a clever workman, with a natural
mechanical turn, so he comprehended the sort of carriage they wanted,
and willingly undertook to make it.



CHAPTER FIVE.

OUR KITE-RACE.

Towards the end of April, the rising sun ushered in a fine breezy
morning, with every promise of a strong wind during the day.  It was a
half-holiday; but on grand occasions of the sort--for it was the day
fixed for the kite-race--the boys were allowed to get up and begin
lessons an hour earlier than usual.  The Doctor always encouraged early
rising, and he was, besides, anxious to show us that he took an interest
in our amusements, by making such regulations as might facilitate them.

Ernest and Ellis had constantly been to old Hobson's to see how their
carriage was getting on.  "Never you mind, young gen'men, it's all
right," was his answer for some days.  "I won't disappoint you; but you
see several has come here who wants such fine painted affairs, that I
must get on with them.  There's Mr Blackall, now, who has been and
ordered a carriage which I tells him will take six horses to drag; but
he says that he has got a kite coming which will pull one along ten
miles an hour, twice as big as this, so of course I've nothing more to
say."

A large flat case arrived in the morning of the race day for Blackall,
just as we were going in to lessons after breakfast; so he had no time
to open it.  It was not as large as he expected, but still he was very
confident that all was right.

Lessons over, we went in to dinner--and that meal got through, with more
speed than usual, we all assembled to see the kites and the carriages
which had been prepared.

The carpenters were in attendance with the vehicles they had got ready
according to orders received.  They were of all shapes and plans.
Several, among whom was Blackall's, were very finely painted, but the
greater number were mere boxes on wheels, put together at very little
expense--which few boys were able to afford, even when clubbing
together.

First appeared Monsieur Malin's kite; it represented a wonderful Green
Dragon, twisting and turning about in the most extraordinary way--the
tail of the kite being merely the small end of the tail of the dragon.
It had great big red eyes, glowing with tinsel, and wings glittering all
over, and a tongue which looked capable of doing a large amount of
mischief.  Loud shouts of applause welcomed the green dragon, as
Monsieur Malin held it up like a shield before him, and moved about the
playground, hissing, and howling, and making all sorts of dreadful
noises.

Tommy Bouldon had joined a club, which produced a magnificent Owl, with
a large head, and huge goggling eyes; and never did owl hiss more loudly
than did their owl as it met Monsieur Malin's terrific dragon.  They at
last rushed at each other with such fury, that Tommy's head very nearly
went through the owl's body, which would effectually have prevented it
from flying at the match.

Lemon and Buttar had fraternised, and in front of them marched a
Military Officer, magnificent in a red coat, vast gold epaulets, and no
end of gold braiding and trimming, which glittered finely in the sun,
while his richly ornamented cocked hat, set across his head, had on the
top of it a waving plume of feathers, and a drawn sword in his hand
shone in the sunbeams.  He looked very fiercely at the dragon and the
owl, as he did at everybody, for his eyes were large, and round, and
dark.

The Dragon roared, and the Owl hissed at him, when he growled out, "I'll
eat you," which produced loud shouts of laughter from both of them,
while they quietly replied, "You can't."

After the General had shown himself, Ellis walked in, bearing a long
thin pole, wrapped round, it appeared, by a flag.  Ernest accompanied
him, carrying a reel of fine but very strong twine.  Some boys stared,
and others laughed derisively, and asked if he thought that thing was
going to fly.  "You'll see--you'll see," he answered very quietly.

"Fly!--Dat it will--higher dan any of ours, I tell you, boys," observed
Monsieur Malin, who had eyed it attentively.

Ernest and Ellis marched across the playground, into the field beyond,
out of sight, and in less than two minutes returned, bearing aloft a
magnificent Knight in silver armour, with a glittering shield on his
arm, a plume on his helmet, and a spear in his hand.  His visor was up,
and his countenance, with a fine black beard and moustache, looked forth
fiercely beneath it, while a band of roses, which was thrown over his
shoulder, hung down and formed a very magnificent tail, glittering with
jewels.  No sooner did the gallant knight make his appearance than the
derisive laughter and sneers were changed into shouts of applause.  All
were agreed that never had a more beautiful kite appeared.

"All very well," cried Dawson, who was expecting Blackall's kite to come
forth, "but it is a question with me whether such a gimcrack-looking
affair will fly."

Blackall had meantime been busily employed in unpacking his kite, which
was to create so much astonishment, and do such mighty things.  He undid
the strings and brown paper, and laths, which surrounded it, with eager
haste.  A number of boys were looking on, all curious to see what was to
be produced.  Dawson was among the most sanguine, expecting that
something very fine was to appear.  At last Blackall was seen to scratch
his head, and to look somewhat annoyed.

"Come, come, Blackall," exclaimed Sandford, one of the biggest fellows,
and certainly no friend of his; "let us see this precious kite of yours.
Out with it, man."

"Mind your own business, Sandford," answered the bully, sulkily.  "I'll
show the kite when I feel inclined."

"Ho, ho, ho!" replied Sandford, laughing; and knowing perfectly well
that Blackall dared not retaliate, stooping down, he lifted the kite,
and held it up to the view of the whole school.  There was a picture of
a big ugly boy daubed in the commonest ochre, and bearing evident marks
of its toy-shop origin, though Tommy Bouldon and others declared that
they recognised in it a strong likeness to Blackall himself.  Blackall
seemed to think that some trick had been played him, though it was very
clear that the likeness was accidental.

"It's pretty plain who's got the ugliest and most stupid looking kite,"
said Buttar, as he passed by.  "Very like himself.  I wonder if it will
fly."

"Yes, if it can find a small kite up in the sky to thrash," observed
Bouldon.  "But, I say, let us give three cheers for Blackall's toy-shop
kite.  I wonder if he will take it as a compliment."

A boisterous, if not a hearty, cheer was quickly raised, which barely
served to cover a chorus of hisses and groans uttered by a number of
little fellows, who had been in the habit of receiving gratuitous kicks
and cuffs from their amicable companion.

There were several ordinary kites, remarkable chiefly for their size,
being made of newspapers; but there were others contributing an
ingenious variety of devices--bats, and frogs, and fish of curious
shapes.  The flying-fish especially looked very natural as they
glittered in the sunbeams, only people could not help inquiring how they
came to be up so high in the air.

At last all were ready to set forth; some pushed the carriages, and
others carried the kites.  Ernest and Ellis rolled up theirs, and
carried it along very easily.  The Doctor led the way, accompanied by
two or three of the biggest fellows; but he would every now and then
stop, and call up some of the smaller ones to have a talk with them.

The ground chosen for the trial of the kites was a high, downy
table-land, with a fine flat surface.  It was a very pretty sight to see
all the boys, with their carriages and gaily-coloured kites, assembled
together.  There were nearly fifty kites, for many brought small kites,
with which they had no intention to contend for a prize.  All the
masters, and several friends of the Doctor's and some of the boys,
attended to act as umpires.  At last everything was arranged.

The kite-flyers formed one long line, with the wind in their backs.  The
first point to be decided was the beauty of the kites.  Lemon had his
horn, which was to be used as a signal.  He blew three shrill blasts.
At the sound of the third, up they all flew, some starting rapidly
upwards; others wavering about before ascending; a few refusing to mount
altogether beyond a few yards off the ground.  However, the greater
number mounted rapidly, their brilliant colours flashing in the
sunbeams.  The spectators clapped their hands loudly, as a mark of their
approbation, and then set to work to make notes, that they might decide
when called on to declare on whom the prizes ought to be bestowed.

Monsieur Malin's Green Dragon came in for a large share of praise, so
did the General Officer; but Ellis's Knight of the Silver Shield was
decided to be the most elegant and beautiful of all the kites, and the
owner was called forth to receive his meed of applause.

Many were surprised when they saw Ellis, with his awkward gait,
shuffling out from among the crowd; and, more especially, when he
announced himself, in a hesitating tone, not only as the maker, but as
the designer of the Knight of the Silver Shield.

One kite went up some way, just sufficient to exhibit its ugliness, but
wavered and rolled about in the most extraordinary manner, evidently
showing that it was lop-sided.  It received shouts, but they were not of
applause, and they were accompanied by hisses, which the Doctor,
however, repressed.  The kite received in this unflattering way was
Blackall's boasted toy-shop production.  He was highly indignant, and
walked about stamping with rage.

Buttar and Bouldon were much amused, and expressed a hope that he would
expend his fury on his kite, and cut it to pieces.  He drew out his
knife, evidently with that intention, but he had not the heart to attack
it.

"I'll tell you what it is, Bobby," said he to Dawson, who was standing
by not a little disgusted, "it pulls terrifically hard, and in my
opinion, if it is altered a little, and has a heavier wing put on the
right side, it will yet do magnificently, and make all those howling
monkeys change their tone.  That dolt Ellis, and that conceited chap
Bracebridge, will soon find that their finely-bedizened machine is cut
out.  My carriage is, I know, such a first-rate one, that it will go
along with anything."

Dawson was in great hopes that Blackall was right, for he had staked his
reputation, as he said, on the success of his patron and his imported
kite, and he had no fancy to find himself laughed at.  In what Master
Bobby Dawson's reputation consisted he did not stop to inquire, and
certainly anybody else would have been very puzzled to say.

The rest of the kite-flyers troubled themselves very little about
Blackall and his ill success.  They were all intent on making their own
kites perform their best.  After the kites had flown for some time, the
Doctor advanced from the group of spectators and umpires, and summoned
Ellis and Monsieur Malin, and, with an appropriate address, bestowed on
them the two first prizes, complimenting them on their design, and the
beauty of the execution.

And now the time arrived to try which kites could fly the highest.  All
were hauled in, and the boys stood as before in a row.  The signal was
given by Lemon, and up they went, soaring far away into the blue sky.
This time Ernest had a kite as well as Ellis.  It was a good large kite,
with remarkably strong string.  The device was that of a man-at-arms,
with a gleaming battle-axe over his shoulder, or, as Ernest called it,
the Squire.

"Why, Bracebridge! what do you expect that kite to do, eh?" exclaimed
Lemon.  "It is too heavy-looking to fly, and not large enough to drag a
carriage."

"I hope that at all events he will do his duty, and prove a faithful
Squire," answered Bracebridge.

"I wonder what he means?" said several boys who overheard him.

Away soared the kites; some of them appeared as if they would never come
down again.  The Green Dragon rose very high, and must have astonished
the birds and beasts of the field, if it did not the human beings in the
valley below.  The Silver Knight also played his part well up in the
skies, so did the General, and many others.  Up, up went the Green
Dragon, and high soared the Silver Knight; Excelsior was his motto; but
high as he went, the Green Dragon went higher.

"Hilloa, Bracebridge, you and your friend should have chosen a different
motto for your knight, for the Green Dragon is beating him, and the old
Owl is not far behind," exclaimed Lemon, who, while manoeuvring his
kite, found himself not far from Ernest.

"Stay a bit," answered Ernest, in a good-natured tone; "perhaps our
knight may yet prove that his motto was not ill-chosen.  We have not yet
got to the end of our line."

Monsieur Malin kept easing out his line, and his monster went slowly
upward, but it was evident that the weight of string it had already to
bear was almost too much for it, and that it would not carry much more.
It was a brave dragon, however, and in the French master's skilful
hands, it is extraordinary how high it got up.  At last it was evident
that it was stationary, and required a great deal of manoeuvring to be
kept at the height it had attained.

