gored one of the dogs; his head got entangled in the harness, and he
went off at a gallop, carrying the dog on his horns, the other suspended
by the traces, and the sled and child whirling behind him.  The enraged
creature ran thus for full half a mile before ridding himself of the
encumbrance, and many shots were fired at him without effect.  Both dogs
were killed, but, strange to say, the child was unhurt.

The supply of meat procured at this time, although very acceptable, did
not last long, and the group with which Winklemann was connected was
soon again reduced to sore straits.  It was much the same with the
scattered parties elsewhere, though they succeeded by hard work in
securing enough of meat to keep themselves alive.

In these winter wanderings after the buffalo, the half-breeds and their
families had travelled from 150 to 200 miles from the colony, but in the
midst of their privations they kept up heart, always hoping that the
sudden discovery of larger herds would ere long convert the present
scarcity into the more usual superabundance.  But it was otherwise
ordained.  On the 20th of December there was a fearful snowstorm, such
as had not been witnessed for years.  It lasted several days, drove the
buffalo hopelessly beyond the reach of the hunters, and killed most of
their horses.  What greatly aggravated the evil was the suddenness of
the disaster.  According to the account of one who was in Red River at
the time, and an eye-witness, the animals disappeared almost
instantaneously, and no one was prepared for the inevitable famine that
followed.  The hunters were at the same time so scattered that they
could render each other no assistance.  Indeed, the various groups did
not know whereabouts the others were.  Some were never found.  Here and
there whole families, despairing of life, weakened by want, and
perishing with cold, huddled themselves together for warmth.  At first
the heat of their bodies melted the snow and soaked their garments.
These soon froze and completed the work of destruction.  They died where
they lay.  Some groups were afterwards discovered thus frozen together
in a mass of solid ice.

While the very young and the feeble succumbed at once, the more robust
made a brave struggle for life, and, as always happens in cases of
extreme suffering, the good or evil qualities of men and women came out
prominently to view.  The selfish, caring only for themselves, forsook
their suffering comrades, seized what they could or dared, and thus
prolonged awhile their wretched lives.  The unselfish and noble-hearted
cared for others, sacrificed themselves, and in many cases were the
means of saving life.

Among these last were Baptiste Warder and Winklemann.

"I vill valk to de settlement," said the latter, one morning towards the
middle of January, as he rose from his lair and began to prepare
breakfast.

"I'll go with you," said Warder.  "It's madness to stop here.  Death
will be at our elbow anyhow, but he'll be sure to strike us all if we
remain where we are.  The meat we were lucky enough to get yesterday
will keep our party on short allowance for some time, and the men will
surely find something or other to eke it out while we push on and bring
relief."

"Goot," returned the German; "ve vill start after breakfast.  My lecks
are yet pretty strong."

Accordingly, putting on their snow-shoes, the two friends set out on a
journey such as few men would venture to undertake, and fewer could
accomplish, in the circumstances.

On the way they had terrible demonstration of the extent of suffering
that prevailed among their friends.

They had not walked twenty miles when they came on tracks which led them
to a group--a father, mother, and two sons--who were sitting on the snow
frozen to death.  In solemn silence the hunters stood for a few minutes
and looked at the sad sight, then turned and passed on.  The case was
too urgent to permit of delay.  Many lives hung on their speedy
conveyance of news to the settlement.  They bent forward, and with long
swinging strides sped over the dreary plains until darkness--not
exhaustion--compelled them to halt.  They carried with them a small
amount of pemmican, about half rations, trusting to meet with something
to shoot on the way.  Before daylight the moon rose.  They rose with it
and pushed on.  Suddenly they were arrested by an appalling yell.  Next
moment a man rushed from a clump of trees brandishing a gun.  He stopped
when within fifty yards, uttered another demoniacal yell, and took aim
at Warder.

Quick as thought the ex-captain brought his own piece to his shoulder.
He would have been too late if the gun of his opponent had not missed
fire.

"Stop! 'tis Pierre Vincent!" cried Winklemann, just in time to arrest
Warder's hand.

Vincent was a well-known comrade, but his face was so disfigured by dirt
and blood that they barely recognised him.  He flung away his gun when
it snapped, and ran wildly towards them.

"Come! come!  I have food, food! ha! ha! much food yonder in the bush!
My wife and child eat it! they are eating eating now! ha! ha!"

With another fierce yell the poor maniac--for such he had become--turned
off at a tangent, and ran far away over the plains.

They made no attempt to follow him; it would have been useless.  In the
bush they found his wife and child stone-dead.  Frequently during that
terrible walk they came on single tracks, which invariably showed that
the traveller had fallen several times, and at length taken to creeping.
Then they looked ahead, for they knew that the corpse of a man or woman
was not far in advance of them.

One such track led them to a woman with an infant on her back.  She was
still pretty strong, and trudged bravely over the snow on her
snow-shoes, while the little one on her back appeared to be quite
content with its lot, although pinched-looking in the face.

The men could not afford to help her on.  It would have delayed
themselves.  The words "life and death" seemed to be ringing constantly
in their ears.  But they spoke kindly to the poor woman, and gave her
nearly all their remaining stock of provisions, reserving just enough
for two days.

"I've travelled before now on short allowance," said Warder, with a
pitiful smile.  "We're sure to come across something before long.  If
not, we can travel empty for a bit."

"Goot; it vill make us lighter," said Winklemann, with a grave nod.

They parted from the woman, and soon left her out of sight behind.  She
never reached the settlement.  She and the child were afterwards found
dead within a quarter of a mile of Pembina.  From the report of the
party she had left, this poor creature must have travelled upwards of a
hundred miles in three days and nights before sinking in that terrible
struggle for life.

Warder and his companion did not require to diverge in order to follow
these tracks.  They all ran one way, straight for Red River--for home!
But there were _many_, very many, who never saw that home again.

One exception they overtook on their fourth day.  She was a middle-aged
woman, but her visage was so wrinkled by wigwam smoke, and she had such
a stoop, that she seemed very old indeed.

"Why, I know that figure," exclaimed Warder, on sighting her; "it's old
Liz, Michel Rollin's Scotch mother!"

So it turned out.  She was an eccentric creature, full of life, fire,
and fun, excessively short and plain, but remarkably strong.  She had
been forsaken by her nephew, she said.  Michel, dear Michel, would not
have left her in the lurch if he had been there.  But she would be at
home to receive Michel on his return.  That she would!  And she was
right.  She reached the settlement alive, though terribly exhausted.

Warder and Winklemann did not "come across" anything except one raven,
but they shot that and devoured it, bones and all.  Then they travelled
a day without food and without halt.  Next day they might reach the
settlement if strength did not fail, but when they lay down that night
Warder said he felt like going to die, and Winklemann said that his
"lecks" were now useless, and his "lunks" were entirely gone!



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

TO THE RESCUE.

Elsie and Cora Ravenshaw were seated at a table in Willow Creek, with
their mother and Miss Trim, repairing garments, one night in that same
inclement January of which we have been writing.

Mr Ravenshaw was enjoying his pipe by the stove, and Louis Lambert was
making himself agreeable.  The old man was a little careworn.  No news
had yet been received of Tony or of Victor.  In regard to the latter he
felt easy; Victor could take care of himself, and was in good company,
but his heart sank when he thought of his beloved Tony.  What would he
not have given to have had him smashing his pipe or operating on his
scalp at that moment.

"It is an awful winter," observed Elsie, as a gust of wind seemed to
nearly blow in the windows.

"I pity the hunters in the plains," said Cora.  "They say a rumour has
come that they are starving."

"I heard of that, but hope it is not true," observed Lambert.

"Oh! they always talk of starving," said old Ravenshaw.  "No fear of
'em."

At that moment there was a sound of shuffling in the porch, the door was
thrown open, and a gaunt, haggard man, with torn, snow-sprinkled
garments, pale face, and bloodshot eyes, stood pictured on the
background of the dark porch.

"Baptiste Warder!" exclaimed Lambert, starting up.

"Ay, what's left o' me; and here's the remains o' Winklemann," said
Warder, pointing to the cadaverous face of the starving German, who
followed him.

Need we say that the hunters received a kindly welcome by the Ravenshaw
family, as they sank exhausted into chairs.  The story of starvation,
suffering, and death was soon told--at least in outline.

"You are hungry.  When did you eat last?" asked Mr Ravenshaw,
interrupting them.

"Two days ago," replied Warder, with a weary smile.

"It seems like two veeks," observed the German, with a sigh.

"Hallo!  Elsie, Cora, victuals!" cried the sympathetic old man, turning
quickly round.

But Elsie, whose perceptions were quick, had already placed bread and
beer on the table.

"Here, have a drink of beer first," said the host, pouring out a foaming
glass.

Warder shook his head.  Winklemann remarked that, "beer vas goot, ver
goot, but they had been used to vatter of late."

"Ah!" he added, after devouring half a slice of bread while waiting for
Cora to prepare another; "blessed brod an' booter!  Nobody can know vat
it is till he have starve for two veek--a--I mean two days; all de same
ting in my feel--"

The entrance of a huge bite put a sudden and full stop to the sentence.

"Why did you not stop at some of the houses higher up the river to
feed?" asked Lambert.

Warder explained that they meant to have done so, but they had missed
their way.  They had grown stupid, he thought, from weakness.  When they
lost the way they made straight for the river, guided by the pole-star,
and the first house they came in sight of was that of Willow Creek.

"How can the pole-star guide one?" asked Cora, in some surprise.

"Don't you know?" said Lambert, going round to where Cora sat, and
sitting down beside her.  "I will explain."

"If I did know I wouldn't ask," replied Cora coquettishly; "besides, I
did not put the question to _you_."

"Nay, but you don't object to my answering it, do you?"

"Not if you are quite sure you can do so correctly."

"I think I can, but the doubts which you and your sister so often throw
on my understanding make me almost doubt myself," retorted Lambert, with
a laughing glance at Elsie.  "You must know, then, that there is a
constellation named the Great Bear.  It bears about as much resemblance
to a bear as it does to a rattlesnake, but that's what astronomers have
called it.  Part of it is much more in the shape of a plough, and one of
the stars in that plough is the pole-star.  You can easily distinguish
it when once you know how, because two of the other stars are nearly in
line with it, and so are called `pointers.'  When you stand looking at
the pole-star you are facing the north, and of course, when you know
where the north is, you can tell all the other points of the compass."

It must not be supposed that the rest of the party listened to this
astronomical lecture.  The gallant Louis had sought to interest Elsie as
well as Cora, but Elsie was too much engrossed with the way-worn hunters
and their sad tale to think of anything else.  When they had eaten
enough to check the fierce cravings of hunger they related more
particulars.

"And now," said Warder, sitting erect and stretching his long arms in
the air as if the more to enjoy the delightful sensation of returning
strength, "we have pushed on at the risk of our lives to save time.
This news must be carried at once to the Governor.  The Company can help
us best in a fix like this."

"Of course, of course; I shall send word to him at once," said his host.

"All right, Baptiste," said Lambert, coming forward, "I expected you'd
want a messenger.  Here I am.  Black Dick's in the stable.  He'll be in
the cariole in ten minutes.  What shall I say to the Governor?"

"I'll go with you," answered Warder.

"So vill I," said Winklemann.

"You'll do nothing of the sort," retorted Ravenshaw.  "You both need
rest.  A sound sleep will fit you to do your work more actively in the
morning.  I myself will go to the fort."

"Only _one_ can go, at least in my cariole," remarked Lambert, "for it
only holds two, and no one can drive Black Dick but myself."

Baptiste Warder was immoveable; it ended in his going off in the cariole
with Lambert to inform the governor of the colony, who was also chief of
the Hudson's Bay Company in Red River, and to rouse the settlement.
They had to pass the cottage of Angus Macdonald on the way.

"Oh! wow!" cried that excitable old settler when he heard the news.
"Can it pe possible?  So many tead an' tying.  Oh! wow!--Here, Martha!
Martha! where iss that wuman?  It iss always out of the way she iss when
she's wantit.  Ay, Peegwish, you will do equally well.  Go to the
staple, man, an' tell the poy to put the mare in the cariole.  Make him
pe quick; it's slow he iss at the best, whatever."

Lambert did not wait to hear the remarks of Angus, but drove off at
once.  Angus put on his leather coat, fut cap, and mittens, and
otherwise prepared himself for a drive over the snow-clad plains to Fort
Garry, where the Governor dwelt, intending to hear what was going to be
done, and offer his services.

With similarly benevolent end in view, old Ravenshaw harnessed his horse
and made for the same goal, regardless alike of rheumatism, age, and
inclement weather.  At a certain point, not far from the creek, the old
trader's private track and that which led to the house of Angus
Macdonald united, and thereafter joined the main road, which road, by
the way, was itself a mere track beaten in the snow, with barely room
for two carioles to pass.  Now, it so happened that the neighbours came
up to the point of junction at the same moment.  Both were driving hard,
being eager and sympathetic about the sufferings of the plain-hunters.
To have continued at the same pace would have been to insure a meeting
and a crash.  One _must_ give way to the other!  Since the affair of the
knoll these two men had studiously cut each other.  They met every
Sabbath day in the same church, and felt this to be incongruous as well
as wrong.  The son of the one was stolen by savages.  The son of the
other was doing his utmost to rescue the child.  Each regretted having
quarrelled with the other, but pride was a powerful influence in both.
What was to be done?  Time for thought was short, for two fiery steeds
were approaching each other at the rate of ten miles an hour.  Who was
to give in?

"I'll see both carioles smashed to atoms first!" thought Ravenshaw,
grinding his teeth.

"She'll tie first," thought Angus, pursing his lips.

The instinct of self-preservation caused both to come to a dead and
violent halt when within six yards of the meeting-point.  A happy
thought burst upon Angus at that instant.

"Efter you, sir," he said, with a palpable sneer, at the same time
backing his horse slightly.

It was an expression of mock humility, and would become an evidence of
superior courtesy if Ravenshaw should go insolently on.  If, on the
other hand, he should take it well, a friendly reference to the roads or
the weather would convert the sneer into a mere nasal tone.

"Ah, thanks, thanks," cried Mr Ravenshaw heartily, as he drove past;
"bad news that about the plain-hunters.  I suppose you've heard it."

"Ay, it iss pad news--ferry pad news inteed, Mister Ruvnshaw.  It will
pe goin' to the fort ye are?"

"Yes; the poor people will need all the help we can give them."

"They wull that; oo ay."

Discourse being difficult in the circumstances, they drove the remainder
of the way in silence, but each knew that the breach between them was
healed, and felt relieved.  Angus did not, however, imagine that he was
any nearer to his desires regarding the knoll.  Full well did he
understand and appreciate the unalterable nature of Sam Ravenshaw's
resolutions, but he was pleased again to be at peace, for, to say truth,
he was not fond of war, though ready to fight on the smallest
provocation.

Baptiste Warder was right in expecting that the Company would lend their
powerful aid to the rescue.

The moment the Governor heard of the disaster, he took immediate and
active steps for sending relief to the plains.  Clothing and provisions
were packed up as fast as possible, and party after party was sent out
with these.  But in the nature of things the relief was slow.  We have
said that some of the hunters and their families had followed the
Indians and buffalo to a distance of between 150 and 200 miles.  The
snow was now so deep that the only means of transport was by
dog-sledges.  Dogs, being light and short-limbed, can travel where
horses cannot, but even dogs require a track, and the only way of making
one on the trackless prairie, or in the forest, is by means of a man on
snow-shoes, who walks ahead of the dogs and thus "beats the track."  The
men employed, however, were splendid and persevering walkers, and their
hearts were in the work.

Both Samuel Ravenshaw and Angus Macdonald gave liberally to the cause;
and each obtaining a team of dogs, accompanied one of the relief parties
in a dog-cariole.  If the reader were to harness four dogs to a
slipper-bath, he would have a fair idea of a dog-cariole and team.
Louis Lambert beat the track for old Ravenshaw.  He was a recognised
suitor at Willow Creek by that time.  The old gentleman was well
accustomed to the dog-cariole, but to Angus it was new--at least in
experience.

"It iss like as if she was goin' to pathe," he remarked, with a grim
smile, on stepping into the machine and sitting down, or rather
reclining luxuriously among the buffalo robes.

The dogs attempted to run away with him, and succeeded for a hundred
yards or so.  Then they got off the track, and discovered that Angus was
heavy.  Then they stopped, put out their tongues, and looked humbly back
for the driver to beat the track for them.

A stout young half-breed was the driver.  He came up and led the way
until they reached the open plains, where a recent gale had swept away
the soft snow, and left a long stretch that was hard enough for the dogs
to walk on without sinking.  The team was fresh and lively.

"She'd petter hold on to the tail," suggested Angus.

The driver assented.  He had already left the front, and allowed the
cariole to pass him, in order to lay hold of the tail-line and check the
pace, but the dogs were too sharp for him.  They bolted again, ran more
than a mile, overturned the cariole, and threw its occupant on the snow,
after which they were brought up suddenly by a bush.

On the way the travellers passed several others of the wealthy settlers
who were going personally to the rescue.  Sympathy for the plain-hunters
was universal.  Every one lent a willing hand.  The result was that the
lives of hundreds were saved, though many were lost.  Their sufferings
were so great that some died on their road to the colony, after being
relieved at Pembina.  Those found alive had devoured their horses, dogs,
raw hides, leather, and their very moccasins.  Mr Ravenshaw and his
neighbour passed many corpses on the way, two of which were scarcely
