and getting water.

"Well, I will tell you," the boy said. "I don't like to tell,
because I don't think there's anyone here knows it, but me. I found
it out, and I never said a word about it, because I was able to
slip away when I liked; and no one knows anything about it. But it
doesn't make much difference, now, because the Romans are going to
kill us all. So I will tell you.

"At the end of the rock, you have to climb down about fifty feet.
It's very steep there, and it's as much as you can do to get down;
but when you have got down that far, you get to the head of a sort
of dried-up water course, and it ain't very difficult to go down
there and, that way, you can get right down to the stream. It don't
look, from below, as if you could do it; and the Romans haven't put
any guards on the stream, just there. I know, because I go down
every morning, as soon as it gets light. I never tried to get
through the Roman sentries; but I expect one could, if one tried.

"But I don't see how you are to bring water up here, if that's what
you want. I tell you, it is as much as you can do to get up and
down, and you want both your hands and your feet; but I could go
down and bring up a little water for you, in a skin hanging round
my neck, if you like."

"I am afraid that wouldn't be much good, Jonas," John said; "but it
might be very useful to send messages out, that way."

"Yes," the boy said; "but you see I have always intended, when the
Romans took the place, to make off that way. If other people go,
it's pretty sure to be found out, before long; and then the Romans
will keep watch. But it don't much matter. I know another place
where you and I could lie hidden, any time, if we had got enough to
eat and drink. I will show you but, mind, you must promise not to
tell anyone else. There's no room for more than two; and I don't
mean to tell you, unless you promise."

"I will promise, Jonas. I promise you, faithfully, not to tell
anyone."

"Well, the way down ain't far from the other one. I will show it
you, one of these days. I went down there, once, to get a hawk I
had taken from the nest, and tamed. I went down, first, with a rope
tied round me; but I found I could have done it without that--but I
didn't tell any of the others, as I wanted to keep the place to
myself.

"You climb down about fifty feet, and then you get on a sort of
ledge, about three feet wide and six or seven feet long. You can't
see it from above, because it's a hollow, as if a bit of rock had
fallen out. Of course, if you stood up you might be seen by someone
below, or on the hill opposite; but it's so high it is not likely
anyone would notice you. Anyhow, if you lie down there, no one
would see you. I have been down there, often and often, since. When
she gets too bad to bear, I go down there and take a sleep; or lie
there and laugh, when I think how she is hunting about for me to
carry down the pails to the stream, for water."

"I will say nothing about it, Jonas, you may be quite sure. That
place may save both our lives. But the other path I will tell
Josephus about. He may find it of great use."

Josephus was indeed greatly pleased, when he heard that a way
existed by which he could send out messages. Two or three active
men were chosen for the work; but they would not venture to descend
the steep precipice, by which Jonas made his way down to the top of
the water course, but were lowered by ropes to that point. Before
starting they were sewn up in skins so that, if a Roman sentry
caught sight of them making their way down the water course, on
their hands and feet, he would take them for dogs, or some other
animals. Once at the bottom, they lay still till night, and then
crawled through the line of sentries.

In this way Josephus was able to send out dispatches to his friends
outside, and to Jerusalem; imploring them to send an army, at once,
to harass the rear of the Romans, and to afford an opportunity for
the garrison of Jotapata to cut their way out. Messages came back
by return and, for three weeks, communications were thus kept up;
until one of the messengers slipped while descending the ravine
and, as he rolled down, attracted the attention of the Romans who,
after that, placed a strong guard at the foot of the water course.

Until this discovery was made, Jonas had gone down regularly, every
morning, and drank his fill; and had brought up a small skin of
water to John, who had divided it among the children whom he saw
most in want of it--for the pressure of thirst was now heavy. The
Romans, from rising ground at a distance, had noticed the women
going daily with jugs to the cistern, whence the water was doled
out; and the besiegers directed their missiles to that point, and
many were killed, daily, while fetching water.

A dull despair now seized the Jews. So long as they were fighting,
they had had little time to think of their situation; but now that
the enemy no longer attacked, and there was nothing to do but to
sit down and suffer, the hopelessness of their position stared them
in the face. But there was no thought of surrender. They knew too
well the fate that awaited them, at the hands of the Romans.

They were therefore seized with rage, and indignation, when they
heard that Josephus and some of the principal men were thinking of
making an endeavor to escape. John, who had hitherto regarded his
leader with a passionate devotion--although he thought that he had
been wrong in taking to the fortified towns, instead of fighting
among the mountains--shared in the general indignation at the
proposed desertion.

"It is he who has brought us all here," he said to Jonas--who had
attached himself to him with dog-like fidelity--"and now he
proposes to go away, and leave everyone here to be massacred! I
cannot believe it."

The news was, however, well founded for, when the inhabitants
crowded down to the house--the women weeping and wailing, the men
sullen and fierce--to beg Josephus to abandon his intention, the
governor attempted to argue that it was for the public good that he
should leave them. He might, he said, hurry to Jerusalem, and bring
an army to the rescue. The people, however, were in no way
convinced.

"If you go," they said, "the Romans will speedily capture the city.
We are ready to die, all together--to share one common fate--but do
not leave us."

As Josephus saw that, if he did not accede to the prayers of the
women, the men would interfere by force to prevent his carrying out
his intentions, he told them he would remain with them; and
tranquillity was at once restored. The men, however, came again and
again to him, asking to be led out to attack the Romans.

"Let us die fighting," was the cry. "Let us die among our foes, and
not with the agonies of thirst."

"We must make them come up to attack us, again," Josephus said. "We
shall fight to far greater advantage, so, than if we sallied out to
attack them in their own intrenchments--when we should be shot down
by their archers and slingers, before ever we should reach them."

"But how are we to make them attack us? We want nothing better."

"I will think it over," Josephus said, "and tell you in the
morning."

In the morning, to the surprise of the men, they were ordered to
dip large numbers of garments into the precious supply of water,
and to hang them on the walls. Loud were the outcries of the women,
as they saw the scanty store of water, upon which their lives
depended, so wasted; but the orders were obeyed, and the Romans
were astonished at seeing the long line of dripping garments on the
wall.

The stratagem had its effect. Vespasian thought that the news he
had received, that the place was ill supplied with water, must be
erroneous; and ordered the troops again to take their station on
the walls, and renew the attack. Great was the exultation among the
Jews, when they saw the movement among the troops; and Josephus,
ordering the fighting men together, said that now was their
opportunity. There was no hope of safety, in passive resistance;
therefore they had best sally out and, if they must die, leave at
least a glorious example to posterity.

The proposal was joyfully received, and he placed himself at their
head. The gates were suddenly opened, and they poured out to the
attack. So furious was their onslaught that the Romans were driven
from the embankment. The Jews pursued them, crossed the lines of
circumvallation, and attacked the Romans in their camp; tearing up
the hides and penthouses behind which the Romans defended
themselves, and setting fire to the lines in many places.

The fight raged all day. The Jews then retired to the city, only to
sally out again, the following morning. For three days the attacks
were continued; the Jews driving in the Romans, each day, and
retiring when Vespasian brought up heavy columns--who were unable,
from the weight of their armor, to follow their lightly-armed
assailants. Vespasian then ordered the regular troops to remain in
camp, the assaults being repelled by the archers and slingers.

Finding that the courage of the Jews was unabated, and that his
troops were losing heavily in this irregular fighting, he
determined to renew the siege, at all hazards, and bring the matter
to a close. The heavy-armed troops were ordered to be in readiness,
and to advance against the walls with the battering ram. This was
pushed forward by a great number of men; being covered, as it
advanced, with a great shield constructed of wattles and hides. As
it was brought forward, the archers and slingers covered its
advance by a shower of missiles against the defenders of the wall;
while all the war machines poured in their terrible shower.

The Jews, unable to show themselves above the battlements, or to
oppose the advance of the terrible machine, crouched in shelter
until the battering ram was placed in position.

Then the ropes by which it swung from the framework overhead were
seized, by a number of soldiers, and the first blow was delivered
at the wall. It quivered beneath the terrible shock, and a cry of
dismay arose from the defenders. Again and again the heavy ram
struck, in the same place. The wall tottered beneath the blows; and
would soon have fallen, had not Josephus ordered a number of sacks
to be filled with straw, and let down by ropes from the walls, so
as to deaden the blows of the ram.

For a time the Romans ceased work; and then, fastening scythes to
the ends of long poles, cut the ropes. The Jews were unable to show
themselves above the walls, or to interfere with the men at work.
In a few minutes the sacks were cut down, and the ram recommenced
its work of destruction.



Chapter 6: The Fall Of The City.


The Roman soldiers--seeing the wall of Jotapata tremble beneath the
blows of the battering ram, whose iron head pounded to powder the
stones against which it struck--redoubled their efforts when,
suddenly, from three sally ports which they had prepared, the Jews
burst out; carrying their weapons in their right hands, and blazing
torches in their left. As on previous occasions, their onslaught
was irresistible. They swept the Romans before them; and set fire
to the engines, the wattles, and the palisades, and even to the
woodwork of the embankment. The timber had by this time dried and,
as bitumen and pitch had been used as cement in the construction of
the works, the flames spread with great rapidity; and the work of
many days was destroyed, in an hour. All the engines and
breastworks of the Fifth and Tenth Legions were entirely consumed.

Just as the attack began, Eleazar--the son of Sameas, a
Galilean--with an immense stone from the wall, struck the iron head
of the battering ram, and knocked it off. He then leaped down from
the wall, seized the iron head, and carried it back into the city.
He was pierced by five arrows. Still, he pressed on and regained
the walls; and held up the iron head in the sight of all, and then
fell down dead.

Such was the spirit with which the Jews were animated; and the
Roman soldiers, trained as they were to conflict among many
peoples, were yet astounded by the valor displayed by the race that
they had considered as unwarlike peasants. But the Romans were not
discouraged. Heavy masses of troops were brought up, the Jews were
driven within their walls and, towards evening, the ram was again
in position.

While Vespasian was directing the attack, he was struck by a
javelin in the heel. The Romans ceased from the attack and crowded
round their general but, as soon as they ascertained that his wound
was not serious, they returned to the attack with redoubled fury.

All that night, the contest raged unceasingly. The Roman engines
swept the walls with missiles. The towers came crashing down, under
the blows of the huge stones; while the javelins, arrows, and the
stones from the slings created terrible havoc among the defenders
of the wall. But, as fast as these fell, fresh combatants took
their places; and they continued hurling down stones, and blazing
brands, upon the freshly-erected wattles round the battering ram.
The Romans had the advantage in this strife for, while the fires on
the walls--at which the Jews lighted their brands, and boiled the
pitch and sulphur in which these were dipped--enabled them to aim
accurately, they themselves worked in deep shadow, at the foot of
the wall.

The night was a terrible one. The bolts, stones, and arrows which
passed over the wall spread ruin and death over the town. The din
was unceasing. The thundering noise of the great stones; the dull,
deep sound as the ram struck the wall; the fierce shouts of the
combatants, as they fought hand to hand--for the corpses were, in
places, piled so thick that the assailants could mount upon them to
the top of the walls--the shrieks of the women, and the screams of
the children, combined in one terrible and confused noise; which
was echoed back, and multiplied, by the surrounding mountains.

Morning was just breaking when the shaken wall gave way, and fell,
with a crash. Vespasian called off his weary troops, and allowed
them a short time for refreshment; then he prepared to storm the
breach. He brought up, first, a number of his bravest horsemen;
dismounted, and clad in complete armor. They were provided with long
pikes, and were to charge forward, the instant the machines for
mounting the breach were fixed. Behind these were the best of his
infantry, while in their rear were the archers and slingers. Other
parties, with scaling ladders, were to attack the uninjured part of
the wall, and to draw off the attention of the besiegers. The rest
of the horse extended all over the hills round the town, so that
none might make their escape.

Josephus prepared to receive the attack. He placed the old, infirm,
and wounded to repel the attack on the uninjured parts of the wall.
He then chose the five strongest and bravest men and, with them,
took his place to form the front line of the defenders of the
breach. He told them to kneel down and cover their heads with their
bucklers, until the enemy's archers had emptied their quivers and,
when the Romans had fixed the machines for mounting, they were to
leap down among the enemy and fight to the last; remembering that
there was now no hope of safety, naught but to revenge the fate
which was impending over them, their wives and children.

As the Romans mounted to the assault, a terrible cry broke out from
the women. They saw the Romans still manning the lines which cut
off all escape, and they believed that the end was now at hand.
Josephus, fearing that their cries would dispirit the men, ordered
them all to be locked up in their houses, and then calmly awaited
the assault.

The trumpet of the legion sounded, and the whole Roman host set up
a terrible shout while, at the same moment, the air was darkened by
the arrows of their bowmen. Kneeling beneath their bucklers, the
Jews remained calm and immovable; and then, before the Romans had
time to set foot upon the breach, with a yell of fury they rushed
upon them, and threw themselves into the midst of their assailants.
For a time, the Romans could make no way against the desperate
courage of the Jews but, as fast as the leading files fell, fresh
troops took their places; while the Jews, who were vastly reduced
by their losses, had no fresh men to take the place of those who
died.

At last, the solid phalanx of the Romans drove back the defenders,
and entered the breach. But as they did so, from the walls above
and from the breach in front, vessels filled with boiling oil were
hurled down upon them. The Roman ranks were broken; and the men, in
agony, rolled on the ground, unable to escape the burning fluid
which penetrated through the joints of their armor. Those who turned
to fly were pierced by the javelins of the Jews; for the Romans
carried no defensive armor on their backs, which were never
supposed to be turned towards an enemy.

Fresh troops poured up the breach, to take the place of their
agonized comrades; but the Jews threw down, upon the planks,
vessels filled with a sort of vegetable slime. Unable to retain
their footing upon the slippery surface, the Romans fell upon each
other, in heaps. Those rolling down carried others with them, and a
terrible confusion ensued, the Jews never ceasing to pour their
missiles upon them.

When evening came, Vespasian called off his men. He saw that, to
overcome the desperate resistance of the defenders, fresh steps
must be taken before the assault was repeated; and he accordingly
gave orders that the embankment should be raised, much higher than
before; and that upon it three towers, each fifty feet high and
strongly girded with iron, should be built.

This great work was carried out, in spite of the efforts of the
besieged. In the towers, Vespasian placed his javelin men, archers,
and light machines and, as these now looked down upon the wall,
they were enabled to keep up such a fire upon it that the Jews
could no longer maintain their footing; but contented themselves
with lying behind it, and making desperate sallies whenever they
saw any parties of Romans approaching the breach.

In the meantime, a terrible calamity had befallen the neighboring
town of Japha. Emboldened by the vigorous defense of Jotapata, it
had closed its gates to the Romans. Vespasian sent Trajan, with two
thousand foot and a thousand horse, against it.

The city was strongly situated, and surrounded by a double wall.
Instead of waiting to be attacked, the people sallied out and fell
upon the Romans. They were, however, beaten back; and the Romans,
pressing on their heels, entered with them through the gates of the
outside walls. The defenders of the gates through the inner walls,
fearing that these, too, would be carried by the mob, closed them;
and all those who had sallied out were butchered by the Romans.

Trajan, seeing that the garrison must now be weak, sent to
Vespasian, and asked him to send his son to complete the victory.
Titus soon arrived, with a thousand foot and five hundred horse
and, at once, assaulted the inner walls. The defense was feeble.
The Romans effected their entry but, inside the town, a desperate
conflict took place; the inhabitants defending every street, with
the energy of despair, while the women aided their efforts by
hurling down stones, and missiles, from the roofs. The battle
lasted six hours, when all who could bear arms were slain. The rest
of the male population were put to death, the women taken as
slaves. In all, fifteen thousand were killed, two thousand one
hundred and thirty taken prisoners.

In another direction, a heavy blow had also been struck by the
Romans. The Samaritans had not openly joined the revolt, but had
gathered in great force on Mount Gerizim. Cerealis was sent by
Vespasian, with three thousand infantry and six hundred horse,
against them. He surrounded the foot of the mountain, and abstained
from an assault until the Samaritans were weakened by thirst--many
dying from want of water. Cerealis then mounted the hill, and sent
to them to throw down their arms. On their refusal, he charged them
from all sides, and put every soul--in number, eleven thousand six
hundred--to the sword.

The situation of the defenders of Jotapata was now pitiable,
indeed. Scarce a man but had received wounds, more or less severe,
in the desperate combats. All were utterly worn out with fatigue;
for they were under arms, day and night, in readiness to repel the
expected attack. Numbers of the women and children had died of
thirst, and terror. Save the armed men lying in groups near the
foot of the wall, in readiness to repel an assault, scarce a soul
was to be seen in the lately-crowded streets.

The houses were now ample to contain the vastly diminished number.
Here the women and children crouched, in utter prostration. The
power of suffering was almost gone. Few cared how soon the end
came.

The siege had now continued for forty-seven days; and the Roman
army, strong in numbers, in discipline, and in arms, and commanded
by one of its best generals, had yet failed to capture the little
town--which they had expected to take within a few hours of their
appearance before it--and so fierce was the valor of the besieged,
that Vespasian did not venture to order his legions forward to
renew the assault. But now, a deserter informed him that the
garrison was greatly exhausted, that the men on guard could not
keep awake; and that the breach could be carried, at night, by a
sudden assault.

Vespasian prepared for the assault, which was to take place at
daybreak. A thick mist enveloped the town, and the sleeping
sentries were not aroused by the silent steps of the approaching
Romans. Titus was the first to enter the breach, followed by a
small number of troops. These killed the sleeping guards, and the
main body of the Romans then poured in. Before the Jews were
conscious of their danger, the whole of the Roman army was upon
them.

Then the slaughter commenced. Many of the Jews killed each other,
rather than fall into the hands of the Romans. Many threw
themselves over the precipices, numbers took refuge in the deep
caverns under the city. That day, all in the streets or houses were
killed; the next, the Romans searched the caverns and underground
passages, slaughtering all the men and boys, and sparing none but
infants and women. During the siege and capture, forty thousand men
fell. Only twelve hundred women and children were spared. So
complete was the surprise, and so unresistingly did the Jews submit
to slaughter, that only one Roman was killed.

This was Antoninus, a centurion. He came upon a Jew in a deep
cavern, and told him he would spare his life, if he would
surrender. The Jew asked him to give him his hand, as a pledge of
his faith, and to help him out of the cave. Antoninus did so, and
the Jew at once ran him through with a spear.

John was asleep when the Romans entered. He was aroused by Jonas
rushing into the room. The boy was at all times restless, and
suffered less than most of those within the walls; for there was an
abundance of grain up to the end of the siege and, until the Romans
had discovered the way down to the water, he had not suffered in
any way from thirst. He was considered too young to take part in
the actual fighting; but had labored with the rest in repairing the
defenses, carrying food to men on the walls, and carrying away the
dead and wounded.

"Get up, John!" he exclaimed. "In the mist I have just run upon a
mass of Roman soldiers, ranged in order. The town is taken. Quick,
