hundred house-carles.  He used to give his thralls a certain day's work;
but after it was done he gave them leave and leisure to work in the
twilight and at night for themselves.  He gave them arable land to sow
corn in, and let them apply their crops to their own use.  He fixed a
certain quantity of work, by the doing of which his slaves might work
themselves free; and this put so much heart into them that many of them
worked themselves free in one year, and all who had any luck or pluck
could work themselves free in three years.  Ulf did this too, but he was
not so wise nor yet so kind in his way of doing it.  With the money thus
procured Haldor bought other slaves.  Some of his freed people he taught
to work in the herring fishery; to others he taught some handicraft; in
short, he helped all of them to prosperity; so that many of the best of
them remained fast by their old master, although free to take service
where they chose.  Thus it was that his men were better than those of
his neighbour.

Ulf's men were, nevertheless, good stout fellows, and they fought
valiantly; but it so happened that the wing of the enemy to which they
were opposed was commanded by Skarpedin, of whom it was said that he was
equal to any six men.  In spite, therefore, of the courage and the
strength of Ulf and Glumm, the Northmen in that part of the field began
slowly to give back.  Ulf and Glumm were so maddened at this that they
called their men cowards, and resolved to go forward till they should
fall.  Uttering their war-cry, they made a desperate charge, hewing down
men like stalks of corn; but although this caused the Danes to give way
a little, they could not advance, not being well backed, but stood
fighting, and merely kept their ground.

Now it had chanced shortly before this, that Haldor stayed his hand and
drew back with Erling.  They went out from the front of the fight, and
observed the left wing giving way.

"Come, let us aid them," cried Haldor.

Saying this he ran to the left wing, with Erling by his side.  They two
uttered a war-cry that rose high above the din of battle like a roar of
thunder, and, rushing to the front, fell upon the foe.  Their gilt
helmets rose above the crowd, and their ponderous axes went swinging
round their heads, continually crashing down on the skulls of the Danes.
With four such men as Haldor, Erling, Ulf and Glumm in front, the left
wing soon regained its lost ground and drove back the Danes.  Nothing
could withstand the shock.  Skarpedin saw what had occurred, and
immediately hastened to the spot where Haldor stood, sweeping down all
who stood in his way.

"I have been searching for thee, Erling," he cried, going up to Haldor,
and launching a javelin.

Haldor caught it on his shield, which it pierced through, but did him no
hurt.

"Mistaken thou art, but thou hast found me now," cried Erling, thrusting
his father aside and leaping upon the Dane.

Skarpedin changed his bill to his left hand, drew his sword, and made
such a blow at his adversary, that the point cut right through his
shield.  With a quick turn of the shield, Erling broke the sword short
off at the hilt.  Skarpedin seized his bill and thrust so fiercely that
it also went through the shield and stuck fast.  Erling forced the lower
end or point of his shield down into the earth, and so held it fast,
dropped his axe, drew his sword, and made it flash so quick round his
head that no one could see the blade.  It fell upon Skarpedin's neck and
gave him a grievous wound, cutting right through his armour and deep
into his shoulder blade.

A great cry arose at this.  The Danes made a rush towards their chief,
and succeeded in dragging him out of the fight.  They put him on his
shield and bore him off to his ship, which was launched immediately.
This was the turning-point in the day.  Everywhere the Danes fled to
their ships pursued by the victors.  Some managed to launch their
vessels, others were not so fortunate, and many fell fighting, while a
few were taken prisoners.

Foreseeing that this would be the result, Haldor and Erling called off
their men, hastened on board their ships, and gave chase, while the rest
of the force looked after the prisoners and the booty, and dressed their
own and their comrades' wounds.

"A bloody day this," said Ulf to Guttorm, as the latter came up, wiping
the blade of his sword.

"I have seen worse," observed the old warrior, carefully returning his
weapon to its scabbard.

"The Danes will long remember it," observed Glumm.  "The ravens will
have a good feast to-night."

"And Odin's halls a few more tenants," said Guttorm:

  "The Danes came here all filled with greed,
  And left their flesh the crows to feed.

"But what is to be done with these?" he added, pointing to the
prisoners, about twenty of whom were seated on a log with their feet
tied together by a long rope, while their hands were loose.

"Kill them, I suppose," said Ulf.

There were thirty men seated there, and although they heard the words,
they did not show by a single glance that they feared to meet their
doom.

Just then Swart of the Springs came up.  He had a great axe in his
hands, and was very furious.

"Thou hast killed and burned my wife, children, and homestede," he said
fiercely, addressing the prisoner who sat at the end of the log, "but
thou shalt never return to Denmark to tell it."

He cut at him with the axe as he spoke, and the man fell dead.  One
after another Swart killed them.  There was one who looked up and said--

"I will stick this fish bone that I have in my hand into the earth, if
it be so that I know anything after my head is cut off."

His head was immediately cut off, but the fish bone fell from his hand.

Beside him there sat a very handsome young man with long hair, who
twisted his hair over his head, stretched out his neck, and said, "Don't
make my hair bloody."

A man took the hair in his hands and held it fast.  Then Swart hewed
with his axe, but the Dane twitched his head back so strongly, that he
who was holding his hair fell forward; the axe cut off both his hands,
and stuck fast in the earth.

"Who is that handsome man?" asked Ulf.

The man replied with look of scorn, "I am Einar, the son of King Thorkel
of Denmark; and know thou for a certainty that many shall fall to avenge
my death."

Ulf said, "Art thou certainly Thorkel's son?  Wilt thou now take thy
life and peace?"

"That depends," replied the Dane, "upon who it is that offers it."

"He offers who has the power to give it--Ulf of Romsdal."

"I will take it," says he, "from Ulf's hands."

Upon that the rope was loosed from his feet, but Swart, whose vengeance
was still unsatisfied, exclaimed--

"Although thou shouldst give all these men life and peace, King Ulf, yet
will I not suffer Einar to depart from this place with life."

So saying he ran at him with uplifted axe, but one of the viking
prisoners threw himself before Swart's feet, so that he tumbled over
him, and the axe fell at the feet of a viking named Gills.  Gills caught
the axe and gave Swart his death-wound.

Then said Ulf, "Gills, wilt thou accept life?"

"That will I," said he, "if thou wilt give it to all of us."

"Loose them from the rope," said Ulf.

This was done, and the men were set free.

Eighteen of the Danish vikings were killed, and twelve got their lives
upon that occasion.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

TELLS OF DISCUSSIONS AND EXCITING DEEDS AT ULFSTEDE.

While the fight at the Springs which we have just described was going
on, Christian the hermit sat in the hall at Ulfstede conversing with
Hilda and Dame Astrid, and some of the other women.  All the fighting
men of the place had been taken away--only one or two old men and Alric
were left behind--for Ulf, in his impetuosity, had forgotten to leave a
guard at home.

"I hope it will fare well with our men at the Springs," said Hilda,
looking up with an anxious expression from the mantle with which her
nimble fingers were busy.

"I hope so too," said Christian, "though I would rather that there had
been no occasion to fight."

"No occasion to fight!" exclaimed Alric, who was dressing the feathers
on an arrow which he had made to replace the one he lost in shooting at
the Dane,--and the losing of which, by the way, he was particularly
careful to bring to remembrance as often as opportunity offered--
sometimes whether opportunity offered or not.  "No occasion to fight!
What would be the use of weapons if there were no fighting!  Where
should we get our plunder if there were no fighting, and our slaves?
why, what would Northmen find to _do_ if there were no fighting?"

The hermit almost laughed at the impetuosity of the boy as he replied--

"It would take a wiser head than mine, lad, to answer all these
questions, more particularly to answer them to thy satisfaction.
Notwithstanding, it remains true that peace is better than war."

"That may be so," said Dame Astrid; "but it seems to me that war is
necessary, and what is necessary must be right."

"I agree with that," said Ada, with a toss of her pretty head--for it
would seem that that method of expressing contempt for an adversary's
opinion was known to womankind at least a thousand years ago, if not
longer.  "But _thou_ dost not fight, Christian: what has war done to
thee that thou shouldst object to it so?"

"What has war done for me?" exclaimed the old man, springing up with
sudden excitement, and clasping his lean hands tight together; "has it
not done all that it could do?  Woman, it has robbed me of all that
makes life sweet, and left me only what I did not want.  It has robbed
me of wife and children, and left a burdened life.  Yet no--I sin in
speaking thus.  Life was left because there was something worth living
for; something still to be done: the truth of God to be proclaimed; the
good of man to be compassed.  But sometimes I forget this when the past
flashes upon me, and I forget that it is my duty as well as my joy to
say, `The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name
of the Lord.'"

The old man sat down again, and leaned his brow on his hand.  The women,
although sympathetic, were puzzled by some of his remarks, and therefore
sat in silence for a little, but presently the volatile Ada looked up
and said--

"What thinkest thou, Hilda, in regard to war?"

"I know not what to think," replied Hilda.

"Nay, then, thy spirit must be flying from thee, for thou wert not wont
to be without an opinion on most things.  Why, even Erling's sister,
Ingeborg, has made up her mind about war I doubt not, though she is too
modest to express it."

Now this was a sly hit at Ingeborg, who was sitting by, for she was well
known to have a shrewish temper, and to be self-willed and opinionated,
in so much that most men kept out of her way.  She was very unlike
Erling, or her father and mother, or her little sisters, in this
respect.

"I can express my opinion well enough when I have a mind," said Ingeborg
sharply; "and as to war, it stands to reason that a Sea-king's daughter
must approve of a Sea-king's business.  Why, the beautiful cloths, and
gold and jewels, that are so plentiful in the dale, would never have
delighted our eyes if our men had not gone on viking cruise, and fallen
in with those rich traders from the far south lands.  Besides, war makes
our men brisk and handsome."

"Aye," exclaimed Alric, laughing, "especially when they get their noses
cut off and their cheeks gashed!"

"Sometimes it takes them from us altogether," observed a poor woman of
the household, the widow of a man who had been slain on a viking cruise,
after having had his eyes put out, and being otherwise cruelly treated.

"That is the other side of the question," said Astrid.  "Of course
everything has two sides.  We cannot change the plans of the gods.
Sunshine and rain, heat and cold, come as they are sent.  We must accept
them as they are sent."

"That is true," said Christian, "and thou sayest wisely that we must
accept things as they are sent; but can it be said that war is sent to
us when we rush into it of our own accord?  Defensive warfare, truly, is
right--else would this world be left in the sole possession of the
wicked; but aggressive warfare is not right.  To go on viking cruise and
take by force that which is not our own is sinful.  There is a good way
to prove the truth of these things.  Let me ask the question, Astrid,--
How would thy husband like to have thee and all his property taken from
him, and Ulfstede burned about his ears?"

"Methinks he would like it ill."

"Then why should he do that to others which he would not like done to
himself?"

"These are strange words," said Astrid in surprise; "I know not that I
have ever heard the like before."

"Truly no," said Christian, "because the Word of God has not yet been
sounded in the dale.  Thou saidst just now that we cannot change the
plans of the gods; that would be true if ye had said `the plans of God,'
for there is but one God, and His ways are unchangeable.  But what if
God had revealed some of His plans to man, and told him that this
revelation was sufficient to guide him in his walk through this life,
and to prepare him for the next?"

"Then would I think it man's wisdom to follow that guide carefully,"
replied Astrid.

"Such plans do exist, such a revelation has been made," said the hermit,
"and the name that stands on the forefront of it is Jesus Christ."

As he spoke the hermit drew from his bosom a scroll of parchment, which
he unrolled slowly.  This, he said, was a copy, made by himself, of part
of the Gospel.  He had meant, he said, to have copied the whole of it,
but war had put an end to his labours at the same time that it deprived
him of his earthly joys, and drove him from his native land to be a
wanderer on the earth.

"But if," he continued, "the Lord permits me to preach His gospel of
truth and love and peace in Norway, I shall count the sufferings of this
present time as nothing compared with the glory yet to be revealed."

"Christian," said Astrid, who appeared to have been struck by some
reminiscence, "methinks I have heard Ulf talk of a religion which the
men of the south profess.  He saw something of it when he went on viking
cruise to the great fiord that runs far into the land, [the
Mediterranean] and if my memory is faithful he said that they called
themselves by a name that sounds marvellously like thine own."

"I suppose Ulf must have met with Christians, after whom I call myself,
seeing that my own name is of consequence to no one," said the hermit.
"What said he about them?"

"That they were a bad set," replied Astrid,--"men who professed love to
their fellows, but were guilty of great cruelty to all who did not
believe their faith."

"All who call themselves Christians deserve not the name, Astrid; some
are hypocrites and deceivers, others are foolish and easily deceived."

"They all make the same profession, I am told," said Dame Astrid.

"The men of Norway are warriors," returned the hermit, "and all profess
courage,--nay, when they stand in the ranks and go forth to war, they
all show the same stern face and front, so that one could not know but
that all were brave; yet are they not all courageous, as thou knowest
full well.  Some, it may be very few, but some are cowards at heart, and
it only requires the test of the fight to prove them.  So is it with
professing Christians.  I would gladly tell the story of Jesus if ye
will hear me, Dame Astrid."

The matron's curiosity was excited, so she expressed her willingness to
listen; and the hermit, reading passages from his manuscript copy of the
New Testament, and commenting thereon, unfolded the "old old story" of
God's wonderful love to man in Jesus Christ.

While he was yet in the midst of his discourse the door of the hall was
burst violently open, and one of the serving-girls, rushing in,
exclaimed that the Danes were approaching from the fiord!

The Danes referred to composed a small party who had been sent off in a
cutter by Skarpedin Redbeard to survey the coast beyond Horlingdal
fiord, as he had intended, after herrying that district, to plunder
still farther north.  This party in returning had witnessed, unseen, the
departure of the fleet of Northmen.  Thinking it probable that the place
might have been left with few protectors, they waited until they deemed
it safe to send out scouts, and, on their report being favourable, they
landed to make an attack on the nearest village or farm.

On hearing the news all was uproar in Ulfstede.  The women rushed about
in a distracted state, imploring the few helpless old men about the
place to arm and defend them.  To do these veteran warriors justice they
did their best.  They put the armour that was brought to them on their
palsied limbs, but shook their heads sadly, for they felt that although
they might die in defence of the household, they could not save it.

Meanwhile Christian and Alric proved themselves equal to the occasion.
The former, although advanced in years, retained much of his strength
and energy; and the latter, still inflated with the remembrance of the
fact that he had actually drawn blood from a full-grown bearded Dane,
and deeply impressed with the idea that he was the only able-bodied
warrior in Ulfstede at this crisis, resolved to seize the opportunity
and prove to the whole world that his boasting was at all events not
"empty!"
