gleaming out of the darkness.  On drawing nearer, this was discovered to
be a miner, whose candle was at some little distance, and only shone on
him partially.

"Well, Jack, what's doing?" asked the captain.

The man cast a disconsolate look on a large mass of rock which lay in
the middle of the path at his feet.  He had been only too successful in
his last blasting, and had detached a mass so large that he could not
move it.

"It's too hard for to break, Captain Dan."

"Better get it into the truck," said the captain.

"Can't lift it, sur," said the man, who grudged to go through the
tedious process of boring it for a second blast.

"You must get it out o' that, Jack, at all events.  It won't do to let
it lie there," said the captain, passing on, and leaving the miner to
get out of his difficulty as best he might.

A few minutes more and they came on a "pare" of men (in other words, a
band of two or more men working together) who were "stopeing-in the back
of the level," as they termed the process of cutting upwards into the
roof.

"There's a fellow in a curious place!" said Oliver, peering up through
an irregular hole, in which a man was seen at work standing on a plank
supported by a ladder.  He was chiselling with great vigour at the rock
over his head, and immediately beyond him another man stood on a plank
supported by a beam of timber, and busily engaged in a similar
occupation.  Both men were stripped to the waist, and panted at their
toil.  The little chamber or cavern in which they worked was brilliantly
illuminated by their two candles, and their athletic figures stood out,
dark and picturesque, against the light glistering walls.

"A curious place, and a singular man!" observed the captain; "that
fellow's family is not a small one.--Hallo!  James Martin."

"Hallo!  Captain Dan," replied the miner, looking down.

"How many children have you had?"

"How many child'n say 'ee?"

"Ay, how many?"

"I've had nineteen, sur, an' there's eight of 'em alive.  Seven of 'em
came in three year an six months, sur--three doubles an' a single, but
them uns are all gone dead, sur."

"How old are you, Jim?"

"Forty-seven, sur."

"Your brother Tom is at work here, isn't he?"

"Iss, in the south level, drivin' the end."

"How many children has Tom had, Jim?"

"Seventeen, sur, an' seven of 'em's alive; but Tom's only thirty-eight
years old, sur."  [See note 1.]

"Good-morning, Jim."

"Good-morning, Captain Dan," replied the sturdy miner, resuming his
work.

"Good specimens of men these," said the captain, with a quiet smile, to
Oliver.  "Of course I don't mean to say that all the miners hereabouts
are possessed of such large families--nevertheless there are, as I dare
say you have observed, a good many children in and about St. Just!"

Proceeding onward they diverged into a branch level, where a number of
men were working overhead; boring holes into the roof and burrowing
upwards.  They all drove onwards through flinty rock by the same slow
and toilsome process that has already been described--namely, by
chipping with the pick, driving holes with the borer, and blasting with
gunpowder.

As the Captain and Oliver traversed this part of the mine they had
occasionally to squeeze past small iron trucks which stood below holes
in the sides of the level, down which ever and anon masses of ore and
debris came from the workings above with a hard crashing noise.  The ore
was rich with tin, but the metal was invisible to any but trained eyes.
To Oliver Trembath the whole stuff appeared like wet rubbish.

Suddenly a low muffled report echoed through the cavernous place.  It
was followed by five or six similar reports in succession.

"They are blasting," said Captain Dan.

As he spoke, the thick muddy shoes and brick-dust legs of a man appeared
coming down the hole that had previously discharged ore.  The man
himself followed his legs, and, alighting thereon, saluted Captain Dan
with a free-and-easy "Good-morning."  Another man followed him; from a
different part of the surrounding darkness a third made his appearance,
and others came trooping in, until upwards of a dozen of them were
collected in the narrow tunnel, each with his tallow candle in his hand
or hat, so that the place was lighted brilliantly.  They were all clad
in loose, patched, and ragged clothes.  All were of a uniform rusty-red
colour, each with his broad bosom bared, and perspiration trickling down
his besmeared countenance.

Here, however, the uniformity of their appearance ended, for they were
of all sizes and characters.  Some were robust and muscular; some were
lean and wiry; some were just entering on manhood, with the ruddy hue of
health shining through the slime on their smooth faces; some were in the
prime of life, pale from long working underground, but strong, and
almost as hard as the iron with which they chiselled the rocks.  Others
were growing old, and an occasional cough told that the "miners'
complaint" had begun its fatal undermining of the long-enduring,
too-long-tried human body.  There were one or two whose iron
constitutions had resisted the evil influences of wet garments, bad air,
and chills, and who, with much of the strength of manhood, and some of
the colour of youth, were still plying their hammers in old age.  But
these were rare specimens of vigour and longevity; not many such are to
be found in Botallack mine.  The miner's working life is a short one,
and comparatively few of those who begin it live to a healthy old age.
Little boys were there, too, diminutive but sturdy urchins, miniature
copies of their seniors, though somewhat dirtier; proud as peacocks
because of being permitted at so early an age to accompany their fathers
or brothers underground, and their bosoms swelling with that stern
Cornish spirit of determination to face and overcome great difficulties,
which has doubtless much to do with the excessive development of chest
and shoulder for which Cornish miners, especially those of St. Just, are
celebrated.  [See note 2.]

It turned out that the men had all arranged to fire their holes at the
same hour, and assemble in a lower level to take lunch, or, as they term
it, "kroust," while the smoke should clear away.  This rendered it
impossible for the captain to take his young companion further into the
workings at that part of the mine, so they contented themselves with a
chat with the men.  These sat down in a row, and, each man unrolling a
parcel containing a pasty or a thick lump of cake with currants in it,
commenced the demolition thereof with as much zeal as had previously
been displayed in the demolition of the rock.  This frugal fare was
washed down with water drawn from little flat barrels or canteens, while
they commented lightly, grumblingly, or laughingly, according to
temperament, on the poor condition of the lode at which they wrought.
We have already said that in mining, as in other things, fortune
fluctuates, and it was "hard times" with the men of Botallack at that
period.

Before they had proceeded far with their meal, one of the pale-faced men
began to cough.

"Smoke's a-coming down," he said.

"We shall 'ave to move, then," observed another.

The pouring in of gunpowder smoke here set two or three more a-coughing,
and obliged them all to rise and seek for purer--perhaps it were better
to say less impure--air in another part of the level, where the draught
kept the smoke away.  Here, squatting down on heaps of wet rubbish, and
sticking their candles against the damp walls, they continued their
meal, and here the captain and Oliver left them, retraced their steps to
the foot of the shaft, and began the ascent to the surface, or, in
mining parlance, began to "return to grass."

Up, up, up--the process now was reversed, and the labour increased
tenfold.  Up they went on these nearly perpendicular and interminable
ladders, slowly, for they had a long journey before them; cautiously,
for Oliver had a tendency to butt his head against beams, and knock his
candle out of shape; carefully, for the rounds of the ladders were wet
and slimy and a slip of foot or hand might in a moment have precipitated
them into the black gulf below; and pantingly, for strength of limb and
lung could not altogether defy the influence of such a prolonged and
upright climb.

If Oliver Trembath felt, while descending, as though he should _never_
reach the bottom, he felt far more powerfully as if reaching the top
were an event of the distant future--all the more that the muscles of
his arms and legs, unused to the peculiar process, were beginning to
feel rather stiff.  This feeling, however, soon passed away, and when he
began to grow warm to the work, his strength seemed to return and to
increase with each step--a species of revival of vigour in the midst of
hard toil with which probably all strong men are acquainted.

Up they went, ladder after ladder, squeezing through narrow places,
rubbing against wet rocks and beams, scraping against the boarding of
the kibble-shaft, and being scraped by the pump-rods until both of them
were as wet and red and dirty as any miner below.

As he advanced, Oliver began to take note of the places he had passed on
the way down, and so much had he seen and thought during his sojourn
underground, that, when he reached the level where he first came upon
the noisy kibbles, and made acquaintance with the labouring pump-rod, he
almost hailed the spot as an old familiar landmark of other days!

A circumstance occurred just then which surprised him not a little, and
tended to fix this locality still more deeply on his memory.  While he
was standing in the level, waiting until the captain should relight and
trim his much and oft bruised candle, the kibbles began their noisy
motion.  This was nothing new now, but at the same time the shout of
distant voices was heard, as if the gnomes held revelry in their dreary
vaults.  They drew gradually nearer, and Oliver could distinguish
laughter mingled with the sound of rapidly approaching footsteps.

"Foolish lads!" ejaculated Captain Dan with a smile, and an expression
that proved he took some interest in the folly, whatever it might be.

"What is it?" inquired Oliver.

"They are racing to the kibble.  Look and you shall see," replied the
other.

Just then a man who had outrun his comrades appeared at the place where
the level joined the shaft, just opposite.  Almost at the same moment
the kibble appeared flying upwards.  The miner leaped upon it, caught
and clung to the chain as it passed, and shouted a defiant adieu to his
less fortunate comrades, who arrived just in time to witness him
disappear upwards in this rapid manner "to grass."

"That's the way the young ones risk their lives," said the captain,
shaking his head remonstratively; "if that young fellow had missed the
kibble he would have been dashed to pieces at the bottom of the shaft."

Again Captain Dan said "Foolish lads," and shook his head so gravely
that Oliver could not help regarding him with the respect due to a
sedate, fatherly sort of man; but Oliver was young and unsophisticated,
and did not know at the time that the captain had himself been noted in
his youth as an extremely reckless and daring fellow, and that a
considerable spice of the daring remained in him still!

Diverging to the right at this point Captain Dan led Oliver to an old
part of the mine, where there were a couple of men opening up and
extending one of the old levels.  Their progress here was very different
from what it had been.  Evidently the former miners had not thought it
worth their while to open up a wide passage for themselves, and Oliver
found it necessary to twist his broad shoulders into all sorts of
positions to get them through.

The first level they came to in this part was not more than three feet
high at the entrance.

"A man can't hold his head very high here, sir," said his guide.

"Truly no, it is scarce high enough for my legs to walk in without any
body above them," said Oliver.  "However, lead the way, and I will
follow."

The captain stooped and made his way through a winding passage where the
roof was so low in many places that they were obliged to bend quite
double, and the back and neck of the young doctor began to feel the
strain very severely.  There were, however, a few spots where the roof
rose a little, affording temporary relief.  Presently they came to the
place where the men were at work.  The ground was very soft here; the
men were cutting through _soft_ granite!--a condition of the stone which
Oliver confessed he had never expected to see.  Here the lights burned
very badly.

"What can be the matter with it?" said Oliver, stopping for the third
time to trim the wick of his candle.

Captain Dan smiled as he said, "You asked me, last night, to take you
into one of the levels where the air was bad--now here you are, with the
air so bad that the candle will hardly burn.  It will be worse before
night."

"But I feel no disagreeable sensation," said Oliver.  "Possibly not,
because you are not quite so sensitive as the flame of a candle, but if
you remain here a few hours it will tell upon you.  Here are the men--
you can ask them."

The two men were resting when they approached.  One was old, the other
middle-aged.  Both were hearty fellows, and communicative.  The old one,
especially, was ruddy in complexion and pretty strong.

"You look well for an old miner," said Oliver; "what may be your age?"

"About sixty, sur."

"Indeed! you are a notable exception to the rule.  How comes it that you
look so fresh?"

"Can't say, sur," replied the old man with a peculiar smile; "few miners
live to my time of life, much less do they go underground.  P'raps it's
because I neither drink nor smoke.  Tom there, now," he added, pointing
to his comrade with his thumb, "he ain't forty yit, but he's so pale as
a ghost; though he is strong 'nuff."

"And do you neither drink nor smoke, Tom?" inquired Oliver.

"Well, sur, I both smokes and drinks, but I do take 'em in moderation,"
said Tom.

"Are you married?" asked Oliver, turning again to the old man.

"Iss, got a wife at hum, an' had six child'n."

"Don't you find this bad air tell on your health?" he continued.

"Iss, sur.  After six or seven hours I do feel my head like to split,
an' my stummik as if it wor on fire; but what can us do? we must live,
you knaw."

Bidding these men goodbye, the captain and Oliver went down to another
level, and then along a series of low galleries, in some of which they
had to advance on their hands and knees, and in one of them,
particularly, the accumulation of rubbish was so great, and the roof so
low, that they could only force a passage through by wriggling along at
full length like snakes.  Beyond this they found a miner and a little
boy at work; and here Captain Dan pointed out to his companion that the
lodes of copper and tin were rich.  Glittering particles on the walls
and drops of water hanging from points and crevices, with the green,
purple, and yellow colours around, combined to give the place a
brilliant metallic aspect.

"You'd better break off a piece of ore here," said Captain Dan.

Oliver took a chisel and hammer from the miner, and applying them to the
rock, spent five minutes in belabouring it with scarcely any result.

"If it were not that I fear to miss the chisel and hit my knuckles," he
said, "I think I could work more effectively."

As he spoke he struck with all his force, and brought down a large
piece, a chip of which he carried away as a memorial of his underground
ramble.

"The man is going to fire the hole," said Captain Dan; "you'd better
wait and see it."

The hole was sunk nearly two feet deep diagonally behind a large mass of
rock that projected from the side of the level.  It was charged with
gunpowder, and filled up with "tamping" or pounded granite, Then the
miner lighted the fuse and hastened away, giving the usual signal,
"Fire!"  The others followed him to a safe distance, and awaited the
result.  In a few minutes there was a loud report, a bright blinding
flash, and a concussion of the air which extinguished two of the
candles.  Immediately a crash followed, as the heavy mass of rock was
torn from its bed and hurled to the ground.

"That's the way we raise tin and copper," said Captain Dan; "now,
doctor, we had better return, if you would not be left in darkness, for
our candles are getting low."

"Did you ever travel underground in the dark?" inquired Oliver.

"Not often, but I have done it occasionally.  Once, in particular, I
went down the main shaft in the dark, and gave a miner an awful fright.
I had to go down in haste at the time, and, not having a candle at hand,
besides being well acquainted with the way, I hurried down in the dark.
It so chanced that a man named Sampy had got his light put out when
about to ascend the shaft, and, as he also was well acquainted with the
