The force of the squall was already broken, and the men were busy
setting close-reefed topsails, but the rain that followed the squall bid
fair to "blot them out," as Glynn said, altogether.  It came down, not
in drops, but in masses, which were caught up by the fierce gale and
mingled with the spray, and hurled about and on with such violent
confusion, that it seemed as though the whole creation were converted
into wind and water, and had engaged in a war of extermination, the
central turmoil of which was the _Red Eric_.

But the good ship held on nobly.  Although not a fast sailer she was an
excellent sea-boat, and danced on the billows like a sea-mew.  The
squall, however, was not over.  Before the topsails had been set many
minutes it burst on them again with redoubled fury, and the main-topsail
was instantly blown into ribbons.  Glynn and his comrades were once more
ordered aloft to furl the remaining sails, but before this could be done
the foretopmast was carried away, and in falling it tore away the
jib-boom also.  At the same moment a tremendous sea came rolling on
astern; in the uncertain light it looked like a dark moving mountain
that was about to fall on them.

"Luff, luff a little--steady!" roared the captain, who saw the summit of
the wave toppling over the stern, and who fully appreciated the danger
of being "pooped," which means having a wave launched upon the
quarterdeck.

"Steady it is," replied the steersman.

"Look out!" shouted the captain and several of the men, simultaneously.

Every one seized hold of whatever firm object chanced to be within
reach; next moment the black billow fell like an avalanche on the poop,
and rushing along the decks, swept the waist-boat and all the loose
spars into the sea.  The ship staggered under the shock, and it seemed
to every one on deck that she must inevitably founder; but in a few
seconds she recovered, the water gushed from the scuppers and sides in
cataracts, and once more they drove swiftly before the gale.

In about twenty minutes the wind moderated, and while some of the men
went aloft to clear away the wreck of the topsails and make all snug,
others went below to put on dry garments.

"That was a narrow escape, Mr Millons," remarked the captain, as he
stood by the starboard-rails.

"It was, sir," replied the mate.  "It's a good job too, sir, that none
o' the 'ands were washed overboard."

"It is, indeed, Mr Millons; we've reason to be thankful for that; but
I'm sorry to see that we've lost our waist-boat."

"We've lost our spare sticks, sir," said the mate, with a lugubrious
face, while he wrung the brine out of his hair; "and I fear we've
nothink left fit to make a noo foretopmast or a jib-boom."

"True, Mr Millons; we shall have to run to the nearest port on the
African coast to refit; luckily we are not very far from it.  Meanwhile,
tell Mr Markham to try the well; it is possible that we may have sprung
a leak in all this straining, and see that the wreck of the foretopmast
is cleared away.  I shall go below and consult the chart; if any change
in the weather takes place, call me at once."

"Yes, sir," answered the mate, as he placed his hand to windward of his
mouth, in order to give full force to the terrific tones in which he
proceeded to issue his captain's commands.

Captain Dunning went below, and looking into Ailie's berth, nodded his
wet head several times, and smiled with his damp visage benignly--which
acts, however well meant and kindly they might be, were, under the
circumstances, quite unnecessary, seeing that the child was sound
asleep.  The captain then dried his head and face with a towel about as
rough as the mainsail of a seventy-four, and with a violence that would
have rubbed the paint off the figurehead of the _Red Eric_.  Then he sat
down to his chart, and having pondered over it for some minutes, he went
to the foot of the companion-ladder and roared up--"Lay the course
nor'-nor'-east-and-by-nor'-half-nor', Mr Millons."

To which Mr Millons replied in an ordinary tone, "Ay, ay, sir," and
then roared--"Lay her head nor'-nor'-east-and-by-nor'-half-nor'," in an
unnecessarily loud and terribly fierce tone of voice to the steersman,
as if that individual were in the habit of neglecting to obey orders,
and required to be perpetually threatened in what may be called a tone
of implication.

The steersman answered in what, to a landsman, would have
sounded as a rather amiable and forgiving tone of
voice--"Nor'-nor'-east-and-by-nor'-half-nor' it is, sir;" and thereupon
the direction of the ship's head was changed, and the _Red Eric_,
according to Tim Rokens, "bowled along" with a stiff breeze on the
quarter, at the rate of ten knots, for the west coast of Africa.



CHAPTER NINE.

RAMBLES ON SHORE, AND STRANGE THINGS AND CEREMONIES WITNESSED THERE.

Variety is charming.  No one laying claim to the smallest amount of that
very uncommon attribute, common-sense, will venture to question the
truth of that statement.  Variety is so charming that men and women,
boys and girls, are always, all of them, hunting after it.  To speak
still more emphatically on this subject, we venture to affirm that it is
an absolute necessity of animal nature.  Were any positive and
short-sighted individual to deny this position, and sit down during the
remainder of his life in a chair and look straight before him, in order
to prove that he could live without variety, he would seek it in change
of position.  If he did not do that, he would seek it in change of
thought.  If he did not do _that_, he would die!

Fully appreciating this great principle of our nature, and desiring to
be charmed with a little variety, Tim Rokens and Phil Briant presented
themselves before Captain Dunning one morning about a week after the
storm, and asked leave to go ashore.  The reader may at first think the
men were mad, but he will change his opinion when we tell him that four
days after the storm in question the _Red Eric_ had anchored in the
harbour formed by the mouth of one of the rivers on the African coast,
where white men trade with the natives for bar-wood and ivory, and where
they also carry on that horrible traffic in negroes, the existence of
which is a foul disgrace to humanity.

"Go ashore!" echoed Captain Dunning.  "Why, if you all go on at this
rate, we'll never get ready for sea.  However, you may go, but don't
wander too far into the interior, and look out for elephants and wild
men o' the woods, boys--keep about the settlements."

"Ay, ay, sir, and thank'ee," replied the two men, touching their caps as
they retired.

"Please, sir, I want to go too," said Glynn Proctor, approaching the
captain.

"What! more wanting to go ashore?"

"Yes, and so do I," cried Ailie, running forward and clasping her
father's rough hand; "I did enjoy myself _so_ much yesterday, that I
must go on shore again to-day, and I must go with Glynn.  He'll take
such famous care of me; now _won't_ you let me go, papa?"

"Upon my word, this looks like preconcerted mutiny.  However, I don't
mind if I do let you go, but have a care, Glynn, that you don't lose
sight of her for a moment, and keep to the shore and the settlements.
I've no notion of allowing her to be swallowed by an alligator, or
trampled on by an elephant, or run away with by a gorilla."

"Never fear, sir.  You may trust me; I'll take good care of her."

With a shout of delight the child ran down to the cabin to put on her
bonnet, and quickly reappeared, carrying in her hand a basket which she
purposed to fill with a valuable collection of plants, minerals and
insects.  These she meant to preserve and carry home as a surprise to
aunts Martha and Jane, both of whom were passionately fond of
mineralogy, delighted in botany, luxuriated in entomology, doted on
conchology, and raved about geology--all of which sciences they studied
superficially, and specimens of which they collected and labelled
beautifully, and stowed away carefully in a little cabinet, which they
termed (not jocularly, but seriously) their "Bureau of Omnology."

It was a magnificent tropical morning when the boat left the side of the
_Red Eric_ and landed Glynn and Ailie, Tim Rokens and Phil Briant on the
wharf that ran out from the yellow beach of the harbour in which their
vessel lay.  The sun had just risen.  The air was cool (comparatively)
and motionless, so that the ocean lay spread out like a pure mirror, and
revealed its treasures and mysteries to a depth of many fathoms.  The
sky was intensely blue and the sun intensely bright, while the
atmosphere was laden with the delightful perfume of the woods--a perfume
that is sweet and pleasant to those long used to it, how much more
enchanting to nostrils rendered delicately sensitive by long exposure to
the scentless gales of ocean?

One of the sailors who had shown symptoms of weakness in the chest
during the voyage, had begged to be discharged and left ashore at this
place.  He could ill be spared, but as he was fit for nothing, the
captain agreed to his request, and resolved to procure a negro to act as
cook's assistant in the place of Phil Briant, who was too useful a man
to remain in so subordinate a capacity.  The sick man was therefore sent
on shore in charge of Tim Rokens.

On landing they were met by a Portuguese slave-dealer, an American
trader, a dozen or two partially-clothed negroes, and a large concourse
of utterly naked little negro children, who proved to demonstration that
they were of the same nature and spirit with white children, despite the
colour of their skins, by taking intense delight in all the amusements
practised by the fair-skinned juveniles of more northern lands--namely
scampering after each other, running and yelling, indulging in mischief,
spluttering in the waters, rolling on the sand, staring at the
strangers, making impudent remarks, and punching each other's heads.

If the youth of America ever wish to prove that they are of a distinct
race from the sable sons of Africa, their only chance is to become
paragons of perfection, and give up _all_ their wicked ways.

"Oh!" exclaimed Ailie, half amused, half frightened, as Glynn lifted her
out of the boat; "oh! how funny!  Don't they look so _very_ like as if
they were all painted black?"

"Good-day to you, gentlemen," cried the trader, as he approached the
landing.  "Got your foretop damaged, I see.  Plenty of sticks here to
mend it.  Be glad to assist you in any way I can.  Was away in the woods
when you arrived, else I'd have come to offer sooner."

The trader, who was a tall, sallow man in a blue cotton shirt, sailor's
trousers, and a broad-brimmed straw hat, addressed himself to Glynn,
whose gentlemanly manner led him to believe he was in command of the
party.

"Thank you," replied Glynn, "we've got a little damage--lost a good
boat, too; but we'll soon repair the mast.  We have come ashore just
now, however, mainly for a stroll."

"Ay," put in Phil Briant, who was amusing the black children--and
greatly delighting himself by nodding and smiling ferociously at them,
with a view to making a favourable impression on the natives of this new
country.  "Ay, sir, an' sure we've comed to land a sick shipmate who
wants to see the doctor uncommon.  Have ye sich an article in these
parts?"

"No, not exactly," replied the trader, "but I do a little in that way
myself; perhaps I may manage to cure him if he comes up to my house."

"We wants a nigger too," said Rokens, who, while the others were
talking, was extremely busy filling his pipe.

At this remark the trader looked knowing.

"Oh!" he said, "that's your game, is it?  There's your man there; I've
nothing to do with such wares."

He pointed to the Portuguese slave-dealer as he spoke.

Seeing himself thus referred to, the slave-dealer came forward, hat in
hand, and made a polite bow.  He was a man of extremely forbidding
aspect.  A long dark visage, which terminated in a black peaked beard,
and was surmounted by a tall-crowned broad-brimmed straw hat, stood on
the top of a long, raw-boned, thin, sinewy, shrivelled, but powerful
frame, that had battled with and defeated all the fevers and other
diseases peculiar to the equatorial regions of Africa.  He wore a short
light-coloured cotton jacket and pantaloons--the latter much too short
for his limbs, but the deficiency was more than made up by a pair of
Wellington boots.  His natural look was a scowl.  His assumed smile of
politeness was so unnatural, that Tim Rokens thought, as he gazed at
him, he would have preferred greatly to have been frowned at by him.
Even Ailie, who did not naturally think ill of any one, shrank back as
he approached and grasped Glynn's hand more firmly than usual.

"Goot morning, gentl'm'n.  You was vish for git nigger, I suppose."

"Well, we wos," replied Tim, with a faint touch of sarcasm in his tone.
"Can _you_ get un for us?"

"Yees, sare, as many you please," replied the slave-dealer, with a wink
that an ogre might have envied.  "Have great many ob 'em stay vid me
always."

"Ah! then, they must be fond o' bad company," remarked Briant, in an
undertone, "to live along wid such a alligator."

"Well, then," said Tim Rokens, who had completed the filling of his
pipe, and was now in the full enjoyment of it; "let's see the feller,
an' I'll strike a bargain with him, if he seems a likely chap."

"You will have strike de bargin vid _me_," said the dealer.  "I vill
charge you ver' leetle, suppose you take full cargo."

The whole party, who were ignorant of the man's profession, started at
this remark, and looked at the dealer in surprise.

"Wot!" exclaimed Tim Rokens, withdrawing his pipe from his lips; "do you
_sell_ niggers?"

"Yees, to be surely," replied the man, with a peculiarly saturnine
smile.

"A slave-dealer?" exclaimed Briant, clenching his fists.

"Even so, sare."

At this Briant uttered a shout, and throwing forward his clenched fists
in a defiant attitude, exclaimed between his set teeth--

"Arrah! come on!"

Most men have peculiarities.  Phil Briant had many; but his most
striking peculiarity, and that which led him frequently into extremely
awkward positions, was a firm belief that his special calling--in an
amateur point of view--was the redressing of wrongs--not wrongs of a
particular class, or wrongs of an excessively glaring and offensive
nature, but _all_ wrongs whatsoever.  It mattered not to Phil whether
the wrong had to be righted by force of argument or force of arms.  He
considered himself an accomplished practitioner in both lines of
business--and in regard to the latter his estimate of his powers was not
very much too high, for he was a broad-shouldered, deep-chested,
long-armed fellow, and had acquired a scientific knowledge of boxing
under a celebrated bruiser at the expense of a few hard-earned
shillings, an occasional bottle of poteen, and many a severe thrashing.

Justice to Phil's amiability of character requires, however, that we
should state that he never sought to terminate an argument with his
fists unless he was invited to do so, and even then he invariably gave
his rash challenger fair warning, and offered to let him retreat if so
disposed.  But when injustice met his eye, or when he happened to see
cruelty practised by the strong against the weak, his blood fired at
once, and he only deigned the short emphatic remark--"Come on,"
sometimes preceded by "Arrah!" sometimes not.  Generally speaking, he
accepted his own challenge, and _went_ on forthwith.

Of all the iniquities that draw forth the groans of humanity on this sad
earth, slavery, in the opinion of Phil Briant, was the worst.  He had
never come in contact with it, not having been in the Southern States of
America.  He knew from hearsay that the coast of Africa was its
fountain, but he had forgotten the fact, and in the novelty of the scene
before him, it did not at first occur to him that he was actually face
to face with a "live slave-dealer."

"Let me go!" roared the Irishman, as he struggled in the iron grip of
Tim Rokens; and the not less powerful grasp of Glynn Proctor.  "Och! let
me go!  _Doo_, darlints.  I'll only give him wan--jist _wan_!  Let me
go, will ye?"

"Not if I can help it," said Glynn, tightening his grasp.

"Wot a cross helephant it is," muttered Rokens, as he thrust his hand
into his comrade's neckcloth and quietly began to choke him as he
dragged him away towards the residence of the trader, who was an amused
as well as surprised spectator of this unexpected ebullition of passion.

At length Phil Briant allowed himself to be forced away from the beach
where the slave-dealer stood with his arms crossed on his breast, and a
sarcastic smile playing on his thin lips.  Had that Portuguese
trafficker in human flesh known how quickly Briant could have doubled
the size of his long nose and shut up both his eyes, he would probably
have modified the expression of his countenance; but he didn't know it,
so he looked after the party until they had entered the dwelling of the
trader, and then sauntered up towards the woods, which in this place
came down to within a few yards of the beach.

The settlement was a mere collection of rudely-constructed native huts,
built of bamboos and roofed with a thatch of palm-leaves.  In the midst
of it stood a pretty white-painted cottage with green-edged windows and
doors, and a verandah in front.  This was the dwelling of the trader;
and alongside of it, under the same roof, was the store, in which were
kept the guns, beads, powder and shot, etcetera, etcetera, which he
exchanged with the natives of the interior for elephants' tusks and
bar-wood, from which latter a beautiful dye is obtained; also ebony,
indiarubber, and other products of the country.

Here the trader entertained Tim Rokens and Phil Briant with stories of
the slave-trade; and here we shall leave them while we follow Glynn and
Ailie, who went off together to ramble along the shore of the calm sea.

They had not gone far when specimens of the strange creatures that dwell
in these lands presented themselves to their astonished gaze.  There
were birds innumerable on the shore, on the surface of the ocean, and in
the woods.  The air was alive with them; many being similar to the birds
they had been familiar with from infancy, while others were new and
strange.

To her immense delight Ailie saw many living specimens of the
bird-of-paradise, the graceful plumes of which she had frequently beheld
on very high and important festal occasions, nodding on the heads of
Aunt Martha and Aunt Jane.  But the prettiest of all the birds she saw
there was a small creature with a breast so red and bright, that it
seemed, as it flew about, like a little ball of fire.  There were many
of them flying about near a steep bank, in holes of which they built
their nests.  She observed that they fed upon flies which they caught
while skimming through the air, and afterwards learned that they were
called bee-eaters.

"Oh! look!" exclaimed Ailie in that tone of voice which indicated that a
surprising discovery had been made.  Ailie was impulsive, and the
_tones_ in which she exclaimed "Oh!" were so varied, emphatic, and
distinct, that those who knew her well could tell exactly the state of
her mind on hearing the exclamation.  At present, her "Oh!" indicated
