Presently the bell rang again.  This was the signal for the men to
muster, the boats being ready alongside.  The whole crew at once rushed
on deck, some of them thrusting biscuits into their pockets as they
passed the steward's quarters.  Not a man was absent on the roll being
called.  Even the smith crawled on deck, and had spirit enough left to
advise Ruby not to forget the bellows; to which Ruby replied by
recommending his comrade not to forget the matches.

Then the operation of embarking began.

The sea at the time was running pretty high, with little white flecks of
foam tipping the crests of the deep blue waves.  The eastern sky was
dark and threatening.  The black ridges of the Bell Rock were visible
only at times in the midst of the sea of foam that surrounded them.
Anyone ignorant of their nature would have deemed a landing absolutely
impossible.

The _Pharos_, as we have said, was rolling violently from side to side,
insomuch that those who were in the boats had the greatest difficulty in
preventing them from being stove in; and getting into these boats had
much the appearance of an exceedingly difficult and dangerous feat,
which active and reckless men might undertake for a wager.

But custom reconciles one to almost anything.  Most of the men had had
sufficient experience by that time to embark with comparative ease.
Nevertheless, there were a few whose physical conformation was such that
they could do nothing neatly.

Poor Forsyth was one of these.  Each man had to stand on the edge of the
lightship, outside the bulwarks, holding on to a rope, ready to let go
and drop into the boat when it rose up and met the vessel's roll.  In
order to facilitate the operation a boat went to either side of the
ship, so that two men were always in the act of watching for an
opportunity to spring.  The active men usually got in at the first or
second attempt, but others missed frequently, and were of course
"chaffed" by their more fortunate comrades.

The embarking of "Long Forsyth" was always a scene in rough weather, and
many a narrow escape had he of a ducking.  On the present occasion,
being very sick, he was more awkward than usual.

"Now, Longlegs," cried the men who held the boat on the starboard side,
as Forsyth got over the side and stood ready to spring, "let's see how
good you'll be to-day."

He was observed by Joe Dumsby, who had just succeeded in getting into
the boat on the port side of the ship, and who always took a lively
interest in his tall comrade's proceedings.

"Hallo! is that the spider?" he cried, as the ship rolled towards him,
and the said spider appeared towering high on the opposite bulwark,
sharply depicted against the grey sky.

It was unfortunate for Joe that he chanced to be on the opposite side
from his friend, for at each roll the vessel necessarily intervened and
hid him for a few seconds from view.

Next roll, Forsyth did not dare to leap, although the gunwale of the
boat came within a foot of him.  He hesitated, the moment was lost, the
boat sank into the hollow of the sea, and the man was swung high into
the air, where he was again caught sight of by Dumsby.

"What! are you there yet?" he cried.  "You must be fond of a swing--"

Before he could say more the ship rolled over to the other side, and
Forsyth was hid from view.

"Now, lad, now! now!" shouted the boat's crew, as the unhappy man once
more neared the gunwale.

Forsyth hesitated.  Suddenly he became desperate and sprang, but the
hesitation gave him a much higher fall than he would otherwise have had;
it caused him also to leap wildly in a sprawling manner, so that he came
down on the shoulders of his comrades "all of a lump".  Fortunately they
were prepared for something of the sort, so that no damage was done.

When the boats were at last filled they pushed off and rowed towards the
rock.  On approaching it the men were cautioned to pull steadily by Mr
Stevenson, who steered the leading boat.

It was a standing order in the landing department that every man should
use his greatest exertions in giving to the boats sufficient velocity to
preserve their steerage way in entering the respective creeks at the
rock, that the contending seas might not overpower them at places where
the free use of the oars could not be had on account of the surrounding
rocks or the masses of seaweed with which the water was everywhere
encumbered at low tide.  This order had been thoroughly impressed upon
the men, as carelessness or inattention to it might have proved fatal to
all on board.

As the leading boat entered the fairway, its steersman saw that more
than ordinary caution would be necessary; for the great green billows
that thundered to windward of the rock came sweeping down on either side
of it, and met on the lee-side, where they swept onward with
considerable, though much abated force.

"Mind your oars, lads; pull steady," said Mr Stevenson, as they began
to get amongst the seaweed.

The caution was unnecessary as far as the old hands were concerned; but
two of the men happened to be new hands, who had come off with Ruby, and
did not fully appreciate the necessity of strict obedience.  One of
these, sitting at the bow-oar, looked over his shoulder, and saw a heavy
sea rolling towards the boat, and inadvertently expressed some fear.
The other man, on hearing this, glanced round, and in doing so missed a
stroke of his oar.  Such a preponderance was thus given to the rowers on
the opposite side, that when the wave struck the boat, it caught her on
the side instead of the bow, and hurled her upon a ledge of shelving
rocks, where the water left her.  Having been _canted_ to seaward, the
next billow completely filled her, and, of course, drenched the crew.

Instantly Ruby Brand and one or two of the most active men leaped out,
and, putting forth all their strength, turned the boat round so as to
meet the succeeding sea with its bow first.  Then, after making
considerable efforts, they pushed her off into deep water, and finally
made the landing-place.  The other boat could render no assistance; but,
indeed, the whole thing was the work of a few minutes.

As the boats could not conveniently leave the rock till flood-tide, all
hands set to work with unwonted energy in order to keep themselves warm,
not, however, before they ate heartily of their favourite dulse--the
blacksmith being conspicuous for the voracious manner in which he
devoured it.

Soon the bellows were set up; the fire was kindled, and the ring of the
anvil heard; but poor Dove and Ruby had little pleasure in their work
that day; for the wind blew the smoke and sparks about their faces, and
occasionally a higher wave than ordinary sent the spray flying round
them, to the detriment of their fire.  Nevertheless they plied the
hammer and bellows unceasingly.

The other men went about their work with similar disregard of the fury
of the elements and the wet condition of their garments.



CHAPTER TEN.

THE RISING OF THE TIDE--A NARROW ESCAPE.

The portion of the work that Mr Stevenson was now most anxious to get
advanced was the beacon.

The necessity of having an erection of this kind was very obvious, for,
in the event of anything happening to the boats, there would be no
refuge for the men to fly to; and the tide would probably sweep them all
away before their danger could be known, or assistance sent from the
attendant vessels.  Every man felt that his personal safety might depend
on the beacon during some period of the work.  The energies of all,
therefore, were turned to the preliminary arrangements for its erection.

As the beacon would require to withstand the utmost fury of the elements
during all seasons of the year, it was necessary that it should be
possessed of immense strength.

In order to do this, six cuttings were made in the rock for the
reception of the ends of the six great beams of the beacon.  Each beam
was to be fixed to the solid rock by two strong and massive bats, or
stanchions, of iron.  These bats, for the fixing of the principal and
diagonal beams and bracing-chains, required fifty-four holes, each
measuring a foot and a half deep, and two inches wide.  The operation of
boring such holes into the solid rock, was not an easy or a quick one,
but by admirable arrangements on the part of the engineer, and steady
perseverance on the part of the men, they progressed faster than had
been anticipated.

Three men were attached to each jumper, or boring chisel; one placed
himself in a sitting posture, to guide the instrument, and give it a
turn at each blow of the hammer; he also sponged and cleaned out the
hole, and supplied it occasionally with a little water, while the other
two, with hammers of sixteen pounds weight, struck the jumper
alternately, generally bringing the hammer with a swing round the
shoulder, after the manner of blacksmith work.

Ruby, we may remark in passing, occupied himself at this work as often
as he could get away from his duties at the forge, being particularly
fond of it, as it enabled him to get rid of some of his superabundant
energy, and afforded him a suitable exercise for his gigantic strength.
It also tended to relieve his feelings when he happened to think of
Minnie being so near, and he so utterly and hopelessly cut off from all
communication with her.

But to return to the bat-holes.  The three men relieved each other in
the operations of wielding the hammers and guiding the jumpers, so that
the work never flagged for a moment, and it was found that when the
tools were of a very good temper, these holes could be sunk at the rate
of one inch per minute, including stoppages.  But the tools were not
always of good temper; and severely was poor Dove's temper tried by the
frequency of the scolds which he received from the men, some of whom
were clumsy enough, Dove said, to spoil the best tempered tool in the
world.

But the most tedious part of the operation did not lie in the boring of
these holes.  In order that they should be of the required shape, two
holes had to be bored a few inches apart from each other, and the rock
cut away from between them.  It was this latter part of the work that
took up most time.

Those of the men who were not employed about the beacon were working at
the foundation-pit.

While the party were thus busily occupied on the Bell Rock, an event
occurred which rendered the importance of the beacon, if possible, more
obvious than ever, and which well-nigh put an end to the career of all
those who were engaged on the rock at that time.

The _Pharos_ floating light lay at a distance of above two miles from
the Bell Rock; but one of the smaller vessels, the sloop _Smeaton_, lay
much closer to it, and some of the artificers were berthed aboard of
her, instead of the floating light.

Some time after the landing of the two boats from the _Pharos_, the
_Smeaton's_ boat put off and landed eight men on the rock; soon after
which the crew of the boat pushed off and returned to the _Smeaton_ to
examine her riding-ropes, and see that they were in good order, for the
wind was beginning to increase, and the sea to rise.

The boat had no sooner reached the vessel than the latter began to
drift, carrying the boat along with her.  Instantly those on board
endeavoured to hoist the mainsail of the _Smeaton_, with the view of
working her up to the buoy from which she had parted; but it blew so
hard, that by the time she was got round to make a tack towards the
rock, she had drifted at least three miles to leeward.

The circumstance of the _Smeaton_ and her boat having drifted was
observed first by Mr Stevenson, who prudently refrained from drawing
attention to the fact, and walked slowly to the farther point of the
rock to watch her.  He was quickly followed by the landing-master, who
touched him on the shoulder, and in perfect silence, but with a look of
intense anxiety, pointed to the vessel.

"I see it, Wilson.  God help us if she fails to make the rock within a
very short time," said Mr Stevenson.

"She will _never_ reach us in time," said Wilson, in a tone that
convinced his companion he entertained no hope.

"Perhaps she may," he said hurriedly; "she is a good sailer."

"Good sailing," replied the other, "cannot avail against wind and tide
together.  No human power can bring that vessel to our aid until long
after the tide has covered the Bell Rock."

Both remained silent for some time, watching with intense anxiety the
ineffectual efforts of the little vessel to beat up to windward.

In a few minutes the engineer turned to his companion and said, "They
cannot save us, Wilson.  The two boats that are left--can they hold us
all?"

The landing-master shook his head.  "The two boats," said he, "will be
completely filled by their own crews.  For ordinary rough weather they
would be quite full enough.  In a sea like that," he said, pointing to
the angry waves that were being gradually lashed into foam by the
increasing wind, "they will be overloaded."

"Come, I don't know that, Wilson; we may devise something," said Mr
Stevenson, with a forced air of confidence, as he moved slowly towards
the place where the men were still working, busy as bees and all
unconscious of the perilous circumstances in which they were placed.

As the engineer pondered the prospect of deliverance, his thoughts led
him rather to despair than to hope.  There were thirty-two persons in
all upon the rock that day, with only two boats, which, even in good
weather, could not unitedly accommodate more than twenty-four sitters.
But to row to the floating light with so much wind and in so heavy a
sea, a complement of eight men for each boat was as much as could with
propriety be attempted, so that about half of their number was thus
unprovided for.  Under these circumstances he felt that to despatch one
of the boats in expectation of either working the _Smeaton_ sooner up to
the rock, or in hopes of getting her boat brought to their assistance
would, besides being useless, at once alarm the workmen, each of whom
would probably insist upon taking to his own boat, and leaving the eight
men of the _Smeaton_ to their chance.  A scuffle might ensue, and he
knew well that when men are contending for life the results may be very
disastrous.

For a considerable time the men remained in ignorance of the terrible
conflict that was going on in their commander's breast.  As they wrought
chiefly in sitting or kneeling postures, excavating the rock or boring
with jumpers, their attention was naturally diverted from everything
else around them.  The dense volumes of smoke, too, that rose from the
forge fire, so enveloped them as to render distant objects dim or
altogether invisible.

While this lasted,--while the numerous hammers were going and the anvil
continued to sound, the situation of things did not appear so awful to
the only two who were aware of what had occurred.  But ere long the tide
began to rise upon those who were at work on the lower parts of the
beacon and lighthouse.  From the run of the sea upon the rock, the forge
fire was extinguished sooner than usual; the volumes of smoke cleared
away, and objects became visible in every direction.

After having had about three hours' work, the men began pretty generally
to make towards their respective boats for their jackets and socks.

Then it was that they made the discovery that one boat was absent.

Only a few exclamations were uttered.  A glance at the two boats and a
hurried gaze to seaward were sufficient to acquaint them with their
awful position.  Not a word was spoken by anyone.  All appeared to be
silently calculating their numbers, and looking at each other with
evident marks of perplexity depicted in their countenances.  The
landing-master, conceiving that blame might attach to him for having
allowed the boat to leave the rock, kept a little apart from the men.

All eyes were turned, as if by instinct, to Mr Stevenson.  The men
seemed to feel that the issue lay with him.

The engineer was standing on an elevated part of the rock named Smith's
Ledge, gazing in deep anxiety at the distant _Smeaton_, in the hope that
he might observe some effort being made, at least, to pull the boat to
their rescue.

Slowly but surely the tide rose, overwhelming the lower parts of the
rock; sending each successive wave nearer and nearer to the feet of
those who were now crowded on the last ledge that could afford them
standing-room.

The deep silence that prevailed was awful!  It proved that each mind saw
clearly the impossibility of anything being devised, and that a deadly
struggle for precedence was inevitable.

Mr Stevenson had all along been rapidly turning over in his mind
various schemes which might be put in practice for the general safety,
provided the men could be kept under command.  He accordingly turned to
address them on the perilous nature of their circumstances; intending to
propose that all hands should strip off their upper clothing when the
higher parts of the rock should be laid under water; that the seamen
should remove every unnecessary weight and encumbrance from the boats;
that a specified number of men should go into each boat; and that the
remainder should hang by the gunwales, while the boats were to be rowed
gently towards the _Smeaton_, as the course to the floating light lay
rather to windward of the rock.

But when he attempted to give utterance to his thoughts the words
refused to come.  So powerful an effect had the awful nature of their
position upon him, that his parched tongue could not articulate.  He
learned, from terrible experience, that saliva is as necessary to speech
as the tongue itself.

Stooping hastily, he dipped his hand into a pool of salt water and
moistened his mouth.  This produced immediate relief and he was about to
speak, when Ruby Brand, who had stood at his elbow all the time with
compressed lips and a stern frown on his brow, suddenly took off his
cap, and waving it above his head, shouted "A boat! a boat!" with all
the power of his lungs.

All eyes were at once turned in the direction to which he pointed, and
there, sure enough, a large boat was seen through the haze, making
towards the rock.

Doubtless many a heart there swelled with gratitude to God, who had thus
opportunely and most unexpectedly sent them relief at the eleventh hour;
