"Ah! pity there's not more of 'em on the coast," said Gaff.

"True," rejoined Haco, "many a poor feller's saved every year by them
blessed boats, as would otherwise have gone to the bottom, an' left
widder and childer to weep for him, an' be a burden, more or less, on
the country."

The waiter appeared at this point in the conversation with the soup, so
Haco devoted himself to dinner, while Gaff ordered a plate of bread and
cheese extra in order to keep him company.  For some minutes they all
ate in silence.  Then Haco, during the interval between the courses,
informed Gaff that he expected to return to the port of London in a day
or two; whereupon Gaff said that he just happened to be lookin' out for
a ship goin' there, as he had business to do in the great city, and
offered to work his way.  The skipper readily promised to ship him as an
extra hand, if the owner chose to send the `Coffin' to sea without
repairs, "which," observed Haco, "is not unlikely, for he's a
close-fisted customer."

"Who is he?" inquired Gaff.

"Stuart of Seaside Villa," said Haco.

"Ha! he _is_ a tough un," observed Gaff, with a significant grin.  "I
knows him well.  He don't much care riskin' fellers' lives, though I
never heard of him riskin' his own."

"He'd very near to answer for mine this voyage," said Haco, as well as
he could through a mouthful of steak and potato.

"How was that?"

"This is how it was," answered the skipper, bolting the mouthful, "you
see the `Coffin's' not in a fit state for sea; she's leaky all over, an'
there's a plank under the starboard quarter, just abaft the cabin
skylight, that has fairly struck work, caulk it and pitch it how you
please, it won't keep out the sea no longer, so when we was about to
take in cargo, I wrote to Mr Stuart tellin' him of it, an' advisin'
repairs, but he wrote back, sayin' it was very awk'ard at this time to
delay that cargo, an' askin' if I couldn't work the pumps as I had used
to do, besides hintin' that he thought I must be gettin' timid as I grew
old!  You may be sure I didn't think twice.  Got the cargo aboard; up
sail an' away.

"Well, it was blowin' a stiff nor'-wester when we got away, an' we
couldn't have beat into port again if our lives depended on it.  So I
calls the crew aft, an' told 'em how the matter stood.  `Now, lads,'
says I, `to speak plain English, the sloop is sinkin' so you had as well
turn to an' pump for yer lives, an' I'll show ye how.'  With that I off
coat an' set to work, an' took my turn the whole voyage.  But it was
touch an' go with us.  We nigh sank in the harbour here, an' I had to
run her ashore to perwent her goin' down in deep water.  They're
patchin' up the rotten plank at this minute, an' if old Stuart won't go
in for a general overhaul, we'll be ready for sea in a day or two, and
you'll have the pleasure o' navigatin' a lot o' wrecked Roosians to
London.  Now, waiter, ahoy!--"

"Yessir."

"Fetch me a pannikin o' tea, for it's dry work tellin' a anikdot.  You
see, Gaff, I'm a reg'lar teetotaller--never go the length o' coffee even
without a doctor's surtificate.  Another cup, Susan?"

"No thank 'ee, father, I couldn't."

"Werry good.  Now, Gaff, what's the 'ticklers o' _your_ case.  Time
about's fair play, you know."

Gaff, feeling a gush of confidence come over him, and having ascertained
that, in regard to secrecy, Susan was as "safe as the bank," related the
circumstances of the wreck, and his having left Emmie at her
grandfather's villa; the relation of all which caused Haco Barepoles to
give vent to a series of low grunts and whistles, expressive of great
surprise.

"Now," said Gaff in conclusion, "there's a land-shark, (by which I means
a lawyer), in London what writes to me that there's somethin' I'll hear
of to my advantage if I calls on him."

"Don't go," said Haco, stoutly, as he struck the table with his fist,
causing the crockery to rattle again; "take the advice of an old friend,
an' _don't go_.  If you do, he'll _do_ you."

"Thank'ee, an' I'd foller yer advice, but I happens to know this
land-shark.  He's an old acquaintance, an' I can trust him."

"Oh, that alters the case--well?"

"Well, but before I go," continued Gaff, "I wants to write a letter to
old Stuart to warn him to look arter Emmie; a very partikler letter."

"Ay, how much partikler a one?" inquired Haco.

"A hambigoo-ous one," replied his friend.

"A ham--what?" said Haco interrogatively.

"A ham-big-oo-ous one."

"What sort of a one may that be, mate?"

"Well," said Gaff, knitting his heavy brows, and assuming altogether a
learned aspect, "it's a one that you can't make head nor tail of nohow;
one as'll read a'rnost as well back'ard as for'ard, an' yet has got a
smack o' somethin' mysterious in it, w'ich shows, so to speak, to what
pint o' the compass your steerin' for--d'ye see?"

"H'm--rather hazy ahead," answered the skipper with a deeply sagacious
look; "a difficult letter to write in my opinion.  How d'ye mean to do
it?"

"Don't mean to do it at all.  Couldn't do it to save my life; but I'll
get a clerk to do it for me, a smart young clerk too; _you_ know who I
mean."

"Ay, who'll it be?  I'll never guess; never guessed a guess in my life."

"You know my darter Tottie?"

"What, blue-eyed Tottie? oh, yer jokin'!"

"Not a bit.  That child's a parfec' cooriosity of intelligence.  She can
write and read most wonderful for her age."

"But she'll never be able to do the ham--what d'ye call it?" suggested
Haco.

"Of course not; she's too young for that, but the wife'll do that.
You've no notion how powerful hambigoo-ous she is now an' again.  We'll
manage it amongst us.  Tottie can write like a parson, my wife can read,
though she can't write, an'll see that it's all c'rect, specially the
spellin' an' the makin' of it hambigoo-ous; an' I'll supply the idees,
the notions like, an' superintend, so to speak, an' we'll make little
Billy stand by wi' the blottin'-paper, just to keep him out o'
mischief."

Haco regarded his friend with deepening admiration.  The idea of
producing a "hambigoo-ous" letter by such an elaborate family
combination, in which each should supply his co-labourer's deficiency,
was quite new and exceedingly interesting to him.  Suddenly his
countenance became grave, as it occurred to him that there was no call
for such a letter at all, seeing that Kenneth Stuart was sure to do his
best to induce his father to take care of the child.  On observing this
to his friend, the latter shook his head.

"I'm not quite sure o' Mister Kenneth," said he, "it's likely that he'll
do the right thing by her, but `like father, like son' is an old
proverb.  He may be a chip o' the old block."

"That he is not," interrupted Haco warmly.  "I know the lad well.  He
takes after his poor mother, and I'm sartin sure ye may trust him."

"Well, I _must_ trust him," said Gaff, "but I've had no experience of
him; so I mean to `make assurance doubly sure,' as the prophet says, if
it wasn't the poet--an' that's why I'll write this letter.  If it don't
do no good, it won't do no harm."

"I'm not so sure o' that," said Haco, shaking his head as they rose to
depart, "hows'ever, you know best.  Now mind, Susan, not a word o' this
to any one."

Susan promised, and in the course of the evening related the whole
affair to Daniel Horsey "_in confidence_;" her conscience being
apparently relieved by the idea that having told it only in strict
confidence she had not broken her word!

Dan made her promise solemnly that she would tell the tale to no one
else on earth, either in confidence or otherwise, and thus he checked
the stream of gossip as close to its fountain-head as possible.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE WRITING OF THE "HAMBIGOO-OUS" LETTER.

When Stephen Gaff approached his own cottage, he beheld his wife
belabouring the Bu'ster with both hands and tongue unmercifully.  What
special piece of mischief Billy had been doing is not of much
consequence.  It is enough to state that he suddenly planted the heel of
his naked foot somewhat effectively on his mother's little toe, which
chanced to be resting on a sharp stone at the moment, burst from her
grasp, and rushed down the steep bank to the beach cheering, weeping,
and laughing all at once, in a sort of hysterical triumph.

Mrs Gaff shouted at the top of her voice to the cherub to come back and
get mauled; but the cherub declined the invitation until he heard his
father's voice, when he returned joyously, and took shelter under his
wing.  Mrs Gaff, who could change at a moment's notice from the extreme
of anger to perfect quiescence, contented herself with shaking her fist
at the Bu'ster, and then relapsed from the condition of a fury into a
quiet, good-looking dame.

This appears to be the normal condition of fisher-folk, who would seem
to require to make use of an excessive amount of moral and physical
suasion in order suitably to impress their offspring.

"Now, Jess," said Gaff, leading his son by the hand; "let's set to work
at once wi' that there letter."

"What's all the hurry, Stephen?"

"I've just seed my old shipmate, Haco Barepoles, an' it's not unlikely
he'll be ready for sea day arter to-morrow; so the sooner we turn this
little job out o' hands the better.  Come, Tottie, you're a good _girl_;
I see you've purvided the paper and ink.  Get the table cleaned, lass,
and you, Billy, come here."

The Bu'ster, who had suddenly willed to have a shy at the household cat
with a small crab which he had captured, and which was just then
endeavouring vainly to ascend the leg of a chair, for a wonder did not
carry out his will, but went at once to his sire.

"Whether would ye like to go play on the beach, lad, or stop here and
hold the blottin'-paper while we write a letter?"

Billy elected to hold the blotting-paper and watch proceedings, being
curious to know what the letter was to be about.

When all was ready--the table cleared of everything except what
pertained to the literary work then in hand--Stephen Gaff sat down at
one end of the table; his wife drew her chair to the other end; Tottie,
feeling very proud and rather nervous, sat between them, with a new
quill in her hand, and a spotless sheet of foolscap before her.  The
Bu'ster stood by with the blot-sheet, looking eager, as if he rather
wished for blots, and was prepared to swab them up without delay.

"Are ye ready, Tot?" asked Gaff.

"Yes, quite," answered the child.

"Then," said Gaff; with the air of a general officer who gives the word
for the commencement of a great fight, "begin, an' fire away."

"But what am I to say, daddy?"

"Ah, to be sure, you'd better begin, Tottie," said Gaff, evidently in
perplexity; "you'd better begin as they teach you to at the school,
where you've larnt to write so butiful."

Here Mrs Gaff advised, rather abruptly, that she had better write,
"this comes hoping you're well;" but her husband objected, on the ground
that the words were untrue, inasmuch as he did not care a straw whether
the person to be written to was well or ill.

"Is't to a man or a 'ooman we're a-writin', daddie?" inquired the
youthful scribe.

"It's a gentleman."

"Then we'd better begin `dear sir,' don't you think?"

"But he an't dear to me," said Gaff.

"No more is he to me," observed his wife.

"Make it `sir,' plain `sir' means nothin' in partickler, I b'lieve,"
said Gaff with animation, "so we'll begin it with plain `sir.'  Now,
then, fire away, Tottie."

"Very well," said Tottie, dipping her pen in the ink-bottle, which was a
stone one, and had been borrowed from a neighbour who was supposed to
have literary tendencies in consequence of his keeping such an article
in his cottage.  Squaring her elbows, and putting her head _very_ much
on one side, to the admiration of her parents, she prepared to write.

The Bu'ster clutched the blotting-paper, and looked on eagerly, not to
say hopefully.

"Oh!" exclaimed Tottie, "it's _red_ ink; see."

She held up the pen to view, and no one could deny the fact, not even
Billy, who, feeling that he had repressed his natural flow of spirits
rather longer than he was accustomed to, and regarding the incident as
in some degree destructive of his mother's peace of mind, hailed the
discovery with an exulting cheer.

Mrs Gaff's palm instantly exploded like a pistol-shot on Billy's ear,
and he measured his length--exactly three feet six--on the floor.

To rise yelling, and receive shot number two from his mother, which sent
him headlong into the arms of his father, who gave him the red
ink-bottle, and bade him cut away and get it changed as fast as he could
scuttle--to do all this, I say, was the work of a moment or two.

Presently Billy returned with the same bottle, and the information that
the literary neighbour had a black-ink-bottle, but as there was no ink
in it he didn't think it worth while to send it.  A kind offer was made
of a bottle of shoe-blacking if the red ink would not do.

"This is awk'ard," said Gaff, rubbing his nose.

"Try some tar in it," suggested Mrs Gaff.

Gaff shook his head; but the suggestion led him to try a little soot,
which was found to answer admirably, converting the red ink into a rich
dark brown, which might pass for black.

Supplied with this fluid, which having been made too thick required a
good deal of water to thin it, Tottie again squared her elbows on the
table; the parents sat down, and the Bu'ster re-mounted guard with the
blotting-paper, this time carefully out of earshot.

"Now, then, `dear sir,'" said Tottie, once more dipping her pen.

"No, no; didn't I say, plain `Sir,'" remonstrated her father.

"Oh, I forgot, well--there--it--is--now, `_Plane sur_,' but I've not
been taught that way at school yet."

"Never mind what you've bin taught at school," said Mrs Gaff somewhat
sharply, for her patience was gradually oozing out, "do you what you're
bid."

"Why, it looks uncommon like _two_ words, Tottie," observed her father,
eyeing the letters narrowly.  "I would ha' thought, now, that three
letters or four at most would have done it, an' some to spare."

"Three letters, daddie!" exclaimed the scribe with a laugh, "there's
eight of 'em no less."

"Eight!" exclaimed Gaff in amazement.  "Let's hear 'em, dear."

Tottie spelled them off quite glibly.  "P-l-a-n-e, that's plane; s-u-r,
that's sur."

"Oh, Tot," said Gaff with a mingled expression of annoyance and
amusement, "I didn't want ye to _write_ the word `plain.'  Well, well,"
he added, patting the child on the head, while she blushed up to the
roots of her hair and all down her neck and shoulders, "it's not much
matter, just you score it out; there, go over it again, once or twice,
an' scribble through it,--that's your sort.  Now, can ye read what it
was?"

"No, daddie."

"Are ye sure?"

"Quite sure, for I've scratched it into a hole right through the paper."

"Never mind, it's all the better."

"Humph!" interjected Mrs Gaff.  "He'll think we began `dear sir,' and
then changed our minds and scratched out the `dear!'"

To this Gaff replied that what was done couldn't be undone, and ordered
Tottie to "fire away once more."

"What next," asked the scribe, a good deal flurried and nervous by this
time, in consequence of which she dipped the pen much too deep, and
brought up a globule of ink, which fell on the paper just under the word
that had been written down with so much pains, making a blot as large as
a sixpence.

