conveyed to their work at a penny a mile, and monster-trains carry
thousands of excursionists to scenes of rural delight that our fathers
never dreamed of in their wildest flights of fancy.

One of the most remarkable and interesting facts in connexion with all
this is, that although mail-coaches have been beaten off the field,
there are actually more horses employed in this country now than there
were in 1837, while canals are doing more business than they ever did,
and are making higher profits too.  In 1865 the carriage of cattle by
railway amounted to between fourteen or fifteen million head of all
kinds.  The consumption of coal, in the same year, by our railways
amounted to four million tons, and the quantity of that and other
minerals carried by rail continually is enormous.

The benefit derived by the post-office also from our railways is
incalculable.  We cannot afford space to enter into details, but it may
be truly said that but for railways the Post-Office Savings Bank system
could not have existed; and of course, also, our frequent deliveries of
letters and rapid as well as cheap communication with all parts of the
kingdom would have been impossible.  The railway service of the
Post-Office is over 60,000 miles a day, and the gross sum paid by the
Post-Office to railways in one year was 570,500 pounds.

These are but a few of the amazing statistics connected with our railway
system, which, if fully enlarged upon, would fill a bulky volume.  If
our readers desire more there are several most interesting and
instructive works on the subject, which are well worthy of perusal.  See
note 2 at the end of the chapter.

Before closing this perhaps too statistical chapter, we shall say a few
words as to the construction of a railway.  No one who has not looked
pretty closely into the subject can form any adequate conception of the
difficulties that beset an engineer-in-chief in the formation of a line
of railway.  We will suppose that all the Parliamentary battles have
been fought, opposition overcome, the heavy expenses connected therewith
paid, and the work begun.

The engineer has walked again and again over the country through which
the railway is to be carried and selected the best route, his assistants
having meanwhile taken for him "flying levels" and "cross levels."  Too
frequently prejudice, ignorance, and selfishness interpose to prevent
the best route being taken, and immense sums that might have been saved
are spent in constructing the line on the next best route.  As soon as
the course of a line is fixed, accurate surveys are made by the
assistant engineers, copies of which are placed, according to Act of
Parliament, with the various clerks of the peace of the counties,
through which the line is to pass, with the Commissioners of Railways
and others, besides which there has to be prepared for each parish its
proportion, and for each landholder a section showing the greatest depth
of cutting or embankment in any of his fields.

As soon as all this has been done, and the Act of Parliament authorising
the line obtained, an accurate plan and section of the whole line is
made, from which the engineer ascertains and lays down its gradients, in
other words its ascents and descents, determines the number and size of
the bridges and viaducts to be made, calculates the quantity of
embankments required to fill up hollows, and the number of cuttings to
level obstructions, in which latter calculations he estimates that the
cutting down of elevations will be made subservient as far as may be, to
the elevation of depressions.  All this involves very nice and exact
calculation as to quantity of material, masonry, etcetera, and the
sinking of "trial shafts" to ascertain the nature of the various strata
to be excavated or tunnelled.  Then the cost of all the works has to be
estimated in detail, apportioned into lengths and advertised for
execution by contract.  To each section of the line thus apportioned--
forty or fifty miles--an experienced engineer is appointed, having under
him "sub-assistants," who superintend from ten to fifteen miles each,
and these again are assisted by "inspectors" of masonry, mining,
earth-work and permanent way, to each of whom a district is assigned.

These managing and guiding men having been appointed, the physical
workers are then called into action, in the form of bands of navvies.
As the steam and mechanism of the locomotive are useless except in
regulated combination, so brain and muscle can achieve nothing without
wise and harmonious union.  If boys and men would reflect more deeply on
this great truth, pride, boasting, and the false separation of classes
would be less rife.  We say _false_, because there is a separation of
classes which is natural and unavoidable.  No one ever complains of
_that_.  If ill-advised or angry navvies were to refuse to work, what
could directors and engineers do?  If, on the other hand, ill-advised or
angry directors and engineers refused to pay, what could navvies do?
Antagonism is an unhealthy condition of things.  There is far too much
of it between employers and employed in this world.  "Agree with thine
adversary quickly" is a command which applies to bodies of men quite as
much as to individuals, and the word is "agree," not coerce or force.
If we cannot agree, let us agree to differ; or, if that won't do in our
peculiar circumstances, then let us agree to separate.  Fighting, save
in self-defence, is only fit for fools.

But to return.  When bone and muscle have been for the time welded to
brain, then the work of construction goes on "full swing."  Difficulties
and obstructions are overcome in a way that appears to the unskilled eye
nothing less than miraculous.  But the work is often hindered and
rendered greatly more expensive by the sudden appearance of evils
against which no amount of human wisdom or foresight could have guarded.

The Kilsby tunnel of the London and North west Railway is a case in
point.  When that tunnel was proposed, it was arranged that it should be
about 3000 yards long, and 160 feet below the surface, with two great
ventilating shafts 60 feet in diameter.  It was a gigantic work.  The
engineer examined the ground in the usual way, with much care, and then
advertised for "tenders."  The various competing contractors also
examined the ground minutely, and the offer of one of them to work it
for 99,000 pounds was accepted.  Forthwith the contractor went to work,
and all went well and busily for some time, until it was suddenly
discovered that a hidden quicksand extended 400 yards into the tunnel,
which the trial shafts had just passed without touching.  This was a
more tremendous blow to the contractor than most readers may at first
thought suppose, for he believed that to solidify a quicksand was
impossible.  The effect on him was so great that he was mentally
prostrated, and although the company generously and justly relieved him
from his engagement, the reprieve came too late, for he died.  It then
came to be a question whether or not the tunnel should be abandoned.
Many advised that it should.  At this juncture Mr Robert Stephenson,
son of the great George, came forward and undertook the work.  He placed
his chief dependence on the steam-engine to keep the water down while
the work was in progress.  At first he was successful, but one day,
while the men were busy laying their bricks in cement one of them drove
into the roof, and a deluge of water burst in on them, and although they
tried to continue their work on a raft the water prevailed and at last
drove them out.  They escaped with difficulty up one of the air-shafts.
The water having put an effectual stop to the work, the directors felt
disposed to give it up, but Stephenson begged for a fortnight more.  It
was granted.  By means of thirteen steam-engines, the amazing quantity
of 1800 gallons of water per _minute_ was pumped out of the quicksand
night and day for eight months.  With the aid of 1250 men and 200 horses
the work was finally completed, having occupied altogether thirty months
from the laying of the first brick.

Two very singular accidents occurred during the course of the
construction of this tunnel.  On one occasion a man who had been working
in it was being hauled up one of the shafts, when his coat caught in an
angular crevice of the partition, that separated the pumps from the
passage for the men, and became so firmly jammed that he was compelled
to let go the rope, and was left there dangling in the air, about a
hundred feet from the bottom, until his horrified comrades went down and
rescued him by cutting away the piece of his coat.  This piece of cloth
was long preserved in the engineer's office as a memorial of the event!
On another occasion some men were at work on a platform, half-way down
the shaft, executing some repairs, when a huge navvy, named Jack
Pierson, fell from the surface, went right through the platform, as if
it had been made of paper, and fell to the bottom.  Fortunately there
was water to receive him there, else he had been killed on the spot.
The men, whom of course he had narrowly missed in his fall, began to
shout for a rope to those above, and they hallooed their advice down the
shaft in reply.  In the midst of the confusion Jack Pierson himself
calmly advised them to make less noise and pull him out, which they very
soon did, and the poor man was carried home and put to bed.  He lay
there for many weeks unable to move, but ultimately recovered.

What we have said of the Kilsby tunnel gives a slight glimpse of some of
the expenses, difficulties, and dangers that occasionally attend the
construction of a railway.

Of course these difficulties and expenses vary according to the nature
of the ground.  In some places the gradients are slight, bridges few,
and cuttings, etcetera, insignificant; but in other places the reverse
is emphatically the case, and costly laborious works have to be
undertaken.

One such work, which occurred at the very opening of our railway system
in 1828, was the bridging of the Chat Moss, on the Liverpool and
Manchester line.  George Stephenson, the constructer of the "Rocket,"
was also the hero of the Chat Moss.  This moss was a great swamp or bog,
four miles in extent, which was so soft that it could not be walked on
with safety, and in some places an iron rod laid on the surface would
sink by its own weight.  Like many other difficulties in this world, the
solidification of the Chat Moss was said to be impossible, but the great
engineer scarce admitted the propriety of allowing the word "impossible"
to cumber our dictionaries.  He began the work at once by forming an
embankment twenty feet high, which he carried some distance across the
treacherous soil, when the whole affair sank down one day and
disappeared!  Undismayed, Stephenson began again, and went on steadily
depositing thousands on thousands of tons of earth, which were greedily
swallowed up, until at last a solid foundation was obtained over the
greater part of the bog.  But there was a particularly soft part of it,
known by the name of the "flow moss," which was insatiable.  Over this
hurdles interwoven with heath were spread, and on these earth and gravel
were laid down.  When this road showed a tendency to sink below the
level, Stephenson loaded the moss beyond the track to balance it; when
water oozed through, he invented a new kind of drain-pipe formed of old
tallow casks, headed into each other, and ballasted to keep them down,
and at last the feat was accomplished--the railway was run over the wet
quaking moss on firm dry land.

It was in the formation of this, the true beginning of railways, that
the British "navvy" was called into being.  To perform the laborious
work, Stephenson employed the men called "inland navigators," in other
words, the canal excavators.  This body of strong "navigators" or
"navvies" formed the nucleus, which gathered recruits from all parts of
the kingdom.  As the work of railway making, which thenceforward grew
fast and furious, was unusually severe, only men who were unusually
powerful were suited for the navvy ranks, so that they became a distinct
class of gigantic men, whose capacity for bread and beef was in
accordance with their muscular development and power to toil.  Splendid
fellows they were, and are; somewhat rugged and untamed, no doubt, with
a tendency to fight occasionally, and a great deal of genuine kindness
and simplicity.  That they are capable of being imbued with refined
feeling, noble sentiment, and love to God, has been shown by the
publications of Miss Marsh, which detail that lady's interesting and
earnest labours to bring the unbelievers among these men to our Saviour.

Another celebrated piece of railway engineering is the _Britannia
Bridge_ over the Menai Straits, which separates Caernarvonshire from the
island of Anglesey.  This was the first bridge ever built on the tubular
principle.  The importance of crossing the strait was very great, as it
lay in the direct route to Holyhead and Ireland.  Telford, the engineer,
daringly resolved to span the strait with a suspension bridge 100 feet
above the water.  He began it in 1818, and on the last day of January
1826 the London mail coach passed over the estuary.  The bridge remains
to this day a vast and beautiful monument of engineering skill.  But
when railways began to play, something more ponderous and powerful
became necessary.  A bridge with arches was talked of, but this was
considered likely to be obstructive to the navigation of the strait,
therefore another plan was demanded.  At this juncture Robert Stephenson
came forward with a plan.  Pounding his opinion on the known fact that
hollow columns are stronger than solid ones; that hollow beams are
better than solid beams, he leaped to the bold conclusion that a hollow
iron beam, or tube, could be made large enough to allow a train to pass
through it!  As usual there sprang up a host of cold-waterers, but
thanks to British enterprise, which can dare anything, there were found
enough of men willing to promote the scheme.  It was no sooner resolved
on than begun.  Massive abutments of stone were raised on each shore to
the height of 100 feet above high-water.  The width of the strait
between these abutments is nearly 500 yards.  Midway across is the
Britannia Rock, just visible at half tide.  The engineer resolved to
found one of his towers on that rock.  It was done; but the distance
being too great for a single span of tube, two other towers were added.
The centre towel rises 35 feet higher than the abutments, thus giving to
the tube a very slight arch, which, however, is barely perceptible.

The tubes were rectangular, with double top and bottom made of plates of
wrought-iron, from three-eighths to three-quarters of an inch thick, and
varying in length according to their position--the whole when put
together forming a single tube about 500 yards long.  The two centre
ones were the largest and most difficult to manage, each having to be
built on shore, floated off on barges, and lifted by hydraulic power a
height of about 100 feet.  Some idea of what this implied may be
gathered from the following fact.  Each tube weighed 1800 tons--the
weight of a goodly-sized ocean steamer!  A perfect army of men worked at
the building of the tubes; cutting, punching, fitting, riveting,
etcetera, and as the place became the temporary abode of so many
artificers and labourers, with their wives and children, a village
sprang up around them, with shops, a school, and a surgery.  Two
fire-engines and large tanks of water were kept in constant readiness in
case of fire, and for many months rivet-making machines, punching
machines, shearing machines, etcetera, were in full work.  There were
two million rivets used altogether, and the quantity of
three-quarter-inch iron rod used in making them measured 126 miles.  The
total weight of iron used was nearly 12,000 tons.  The bridge was
strengthened by eighty-three miles of angle iron.  For many months the
outlay in wages alone was 6000 pounds a week, and the cost for the whole
of the works more than 600,000 pounds.  A curious fact connected with
this enormous mass of iron is, that arrangements had to be made to
permit of shrinkage and expansion.  The tubes were placed on a series of
rollers and iron balls, and it was afterwards found that in the hottest
part of summer they were twelve inches longer than in winter--a
difference which, if not provided for, would have caused the destruction
of the towers by a constant and irresistible pull and thrust!  The Menai
Bridge was begun in 1846 and opened for traffic in March 1850.

Space would fail us were we to attempt even a slight sketch of the great
engineering works that railways have called into being.  We can merely
point to such achievements as the high-level bridges at
Newcastle-on-Tyne, Berwick-on-Tweed, and at Saltash, over the Tamar.
There are viaducts of great height, length, and beauty in all parts of
the kingdom; there are terminal stations so vast and magnificent as to
remind one of the structures of Eastern splendour described in the
_Arabian Nights Entertainments_; and there are hundreds of miles of
tunnelling at the present time in the United Kingdom.

The Metropolitan Railway is the most important and singular of these
tunnels--for it is entitled to be regarded as a gigantic tunnel--which
burrows under the streets of London.

This stupendous work was undertaken in order to relieve the traffic in
the streets of London.  The frequent blocks that used to occur not many
years ago in the main thoroughfares of the Metropolis, had rendered
relief absolutely necessary.  When the increase of railways began to
pour human beings and goods from all parts of the kingdom into London in
a continuous and ever-increasing stream, it became obvious that some new
mode of conveyance must be opened up.  After much deliberation as to the
best method, it was finally resolved that an underground railway should
be made, encircling the Metropolis, so that travellers arriving from all
points of the compass might find a ready and sufficient means of
conveyance into the central parts of the city.  There was opposition to
the scheme, of course; but, through the persevering energy of the
solicitor to the undertaking and others, the work was at length begun,
and the line opened for traffic in January 1863.  Its extraordinary
success soon proved the wisdom of its promoters.

At first it was thought that the chief revenues would be derived from
the conveyance of goods from the west to the eastern districts of
London, but its enormous passenger traffic eventually became the chief
cause of its great prosperity.  In the very first year of its opening
the number of passengers who travelled by it between Farringdon Street
and Bishop's Road, Paddington, amounted to nearly nine and a half
millions of individuals, which is more than three times the entire
population of London--also, let us add, more than three times the entire
population of Scotland!

The number of trains which are constantly following each other in quick
succession (at times every two or three minutes) on this magnificent
railway has rendered a most perfect system of signalling necessary, as
well as a working staff of superior intelligence and activity.  The
drivers are all picked men, and indeed it is obvious to every one who
travels by it that the porters, and guards, and all employed on the line
are unusually smart men.  The engineering difficulties connected with
the Metropolitan railway were very great as may easily be believed,
seeing that it had to be formed under streets whose foundations were
unavoidably shaken, and amongst an infinite ramification of gas and
water-pipes and sewers whose separate action had to be maintained intact
while the process of construction was going on.  Some of the stations
are most ingeniously lighted from the streets above by bright reflecting
tile-work, while others, too deep for such a method, or too much
overtopped with buildings to admit of it, are lit perpetually with gas.
The whole of the works are a singular instance of engineering skill,
reflecting great credit on Mr Fowler, the engineer-in-chief.  Despite
its great length of tunnelling the line is perfectly dry throughout.

At first fears were entertained that human beings could not with safety
travel through such tunnels as were here formed, but experience has
proved those fears, like many others, to have been groundless, and a
very thorough analysis of the atmosphere of the line in all
circumstances, and by the most competent men of the day, has
demonstrated that the air of the Metropolitan railway is not injurious
to health.  The excellent general health of the employes also affords
additional and conclusive testimony to this fact even although it is
unquestionably true that there is at times a somewhat sulphurous smell
there.
