resemble the latter.  In running it does not use its fore legs, but
bounds like the kangaroo.

Never having engaged in night-sporting--save in dreams--I agreed to
accompany two Salem Nimrods on a hunt after spring-hares.

We went into the fields.  That is all I can vouch for.  It happened to
be so dark that we might as well have been groping about in a coal-pit.
My companions, however, knew the ground, which was fortunate, for
walking over a rugged surface in the dark is not only confusing, but
trying to the nerves, to say nothing of the temper.  I followed
faithfully and "close to heel," like a well-trained dog.

"This way, Sir; mind the ditch."

"Where? ah! all ri-ight!"

The last syllable was shot out of me like a bullet as I plunged into the
ditch.

The Nimrod who carried the lantern opened the slide for a moment,
revealed the rugged nature of the ground, and closed it when I had
risen.

"It's better farther on," he said, encouragingly.

"Is it?  Ah, that's well."

We came to a piece of ground which my feet and legs told me was covered
with long rough grass and occasional bushes.  Over this we stumbled, and
here the rays of the lantern were directed far in advance of us, so as
to sweep slowly round, bringing bushes, and grassy tufts, and stumps,
and clods, into spectral view for a moment as the focus of light moved
on.

"We never see their bodies," said the lantern-bearer, slowly, as he
peered earnestly in front, "we only see the sparkle of one eye when the
light falls on it, and--then--we--fire--at--there, that's one!  Look,
don't you see his eye?  Fire, Sir, fire!"

I raised my gun, and looked eagerly with all my eyes, but saw nothing.
Never having been in the habit of firing at _nothing_, I hesitated.

"Ah, he's gone!  Never mind, we'll soon see another."

We stumbled on again.  The surrounding gloom depressed me, but I revived
under the influence of one or two false alarms, and a severe plunge into
a deepish hole.

"There he is again, quite near," whispered my light-bearer.

"Aim for the eye," whispered the other.

The whispering, and intense silence that followed, coupled with the
gloom, made me feel guilty.  I saw nothing, but tried so hard to do so
that I persuaded myself that I did, and attempted to aim.

"The sights of the gun are invisible," I whispered somewhat testily.

Without a word the lantern was raised until the light glittered on the
barrels.  Then I saw nothing whatever except the gun!  In sheer
desperation I pulled the trigger.  The tremendous appearance in the dark
of the sheet of flame that belched forth, and the crash of the report in
the silent night, gave me quite new ideas as to firearms.

"You've missed," said the light-bearer.

As I had fired at _nothing_ I felt inclined to reply that I had not--but
refrained.

Again we stumbled on, and I began to grow melancholy, when another
"there he goes" brought me to the "ready," with eager eyes.

I saw it clearly enough this time.  A diamond was sparkling in the
blackness before me.  I aimed and fired.  There was a squeal and a rush.
Instantly my friends dashed off in wild pursuit and I stood listening,
not daring to move for fear of ditches.  The sounds of leaping,
stumbling, and crashing came to me on the night air for a few minutes;
then my friends returned with the light, and with a poor little
spring-hare's lifeless and long-hind-legged body.

With this trophy I returned home, resolved never more to go hunting at
night.



LETTER ELEVEN.

ALGOA BAY--KAFIRS ON THE COAST--DIFFICULTIES REGARDING SERVANTS.

Standing on the shores of Algoa Bay, with the "Liverpool of South
Africa"--Port Elizabeth--at my back, I attempted to realise what must
have been the scene, in the memorable "1820," when the flourishing city
was yet unborn, when the whole land was a veritable wilderness, and the
sands on which the port now stands were covered with the tents of the
"settlers."

Some of the surroundings, thought I, are pretty much as they were in
those days.  The shipping at anchor in the offing must resemble the
shipping that conveyed the emigrants across the sea--except, of course,
these two giant steamers of the "Donald Currie" and the "Union" lines.
The bright blue sky, too, and the fiery sun are the same, and so are
those magnificent "rollers," which, rising, one scarce can tell when or
where, out of a dead-calm sea, stand up for a few seconds like liquid
walls, and then rush up the beach with a magnificent roar.

As I gazed, the scene was rendered still more real by the approach from
seaward of a great surf-boat, similar to the surf-boats that brought the
settlers from their respective ships to the shore.  Such boats are still
used at the port to land goods--and also passengers, when the breakers
are too high to admit of their being landed in small boats at the wooden
pier.  The surf-boats are bulky, broad, and flat, strongly built to
stand severe hammering on the sand, and comparatively shallow at the
stern, to admit of their being backed towards the beach, or hauled off
to sea through the surf by means of a rope over the bow.

As the surf-boat neared the shore, I heard voices behind me, and,
turning round, beheld a sight which sent me completely back into the
1820 days.  It was a band of gentlemen in black--black from the crowns
of their heads to the soles of their feet, with the exception of their
lips and teeth and eyes.  Here was the Simon Pure in very truth.  They
were so-called Red Kafirs, because of their habit of painting their
bodies and blankets with red ochre.  At this time the paint had been
washed off, and the blankets laid aside.  They were quite naked, fresh
from the lands of their nativity, and apparently fit for anything.

Shade of Othello!--to say nothing of Apollo--what magnificent forms the
fellows had, and what indescribably hideous faces!  They were tall,
muscular, broad-shouldered, small waisted and ankled, round-muscled,
black-polished--in a word, elegantly powerful.  Many of them might have
stood as models for Hercules.  Like superfine cloth, they were of
various shades; some were brown-black, some almost blue-black, and many
coal-black.

They were coming down to unload the surf-boat, and seemed full of fun,
and sly childlike humour, as they walked, tripped, skipped and sidled
into the water.  At first I was greatly puzzled to account for the fact
that all their heads and throats were wrapped up, or swathed, in dirty
cloth.  It seemed as if every man of them was under treatment for a bad
cold.  This I soon found was meant to serve as a protection to their
naked skins from the sharp and rugged edges and corners of the casks and
cases they had to carry.

The labour is rather severe, but is well paid, so that hundreds of
Kafirs annually come down from their homes in the wilderness to work for
a short time.  They do not, I believe, make a profession of it.  Fresh
relays come every year.  Each young fellow's object is to make enough
money to purchase a gun and cattle, and a wife--or wives.  As these
articles cost little in Africa, a comparatively short attention to
business, during one season, enables a man who left home a beggar to
return with his fortune made!  He marries, sets his wives to hoe the
mealies and milk the cows, and thereafter takes life easy, except when
he takes a fancy to hunt elephants, or to go to war for pastime.  Ever
after he is a drone in the world's beehive.  Having no necessity he need
not work, and possessing no principle he will not.

As the boat came surging in on the foam, these manly children waded out
to meet her, throwing water at each other, and skylarking as they went.
They treated the whole business in fact as a rather good jest, and
although they toiled like heroes, they accompanied their work with such
jovial looks, and hummed such lilting, free-and-easy airs the while,
that it was difficult to associate their doings with anything like
_labour_.

Soon the boat grounded, and the Kafirs crowded round her, up to their
waists sometimes in the water, and sometimes up to the arm-pits, when a
bigger wave than usual came roaring in.  The boat itself was so large
that, as they stood beside it, their heads barely rose to a level with
the gunwale.  The boatmen at once began to heave and roll the goods over
the side.  The Kafirs received them on their heads or shoulders,
according to the shape or size of each package--and they refused
nothing.  If a bale or a box chanced to be too heavy for one man, a
comrade lent assistance; if it proved still too heavy, a third added his
head or shoulder, and the box or bale was borne off.

One fellow, like a black Hercules, put his wrapper on his head, and his
head under a bale, which I thought would crush him down into the surf,
but he walked ashore with an easy springing motion, that showed he
possessed more than sufficient power.  Another man, hitting Hercules a
sounding smack as he went by, received a mighty cask on his head that
should have cracked it--but it didn't.  Then I observed the boatmen
place on the gunwale an enormous flat box, which seemed to me about ten
feet square.  It was corrugated iron, they told me, of, I forget, how
many hundredweight.  A crowd of Kafirs got under it, and carried it
ashore as easily as if it had been a butterfly.  But this was nothing to
a box which next made its appearance from the bowels of that capacious
boat.  It was in the form of a cube, and must have measured nine or ten
feet in all directions.  Its contents I never ascertained, but the
difficulty with which the boatmen got it rested on the side of the boat
proved its weight to be worthy of its size.  To get it on the shoulders
of the Kafirs was the next difficulty.  It was done by degrees.  As the
huge case was pushed over the edge, Kafir after Kafir put his head or
shoulder to it, until there were, I think, from fifteen to twenty men
beneath the weight;--then, slowly, it left the boat, and began to move
towards the shore.

Assuredly, if four or five of these men had stumbled at the same moment,
the others would have been crushed to death, but not a man stumbled.
They came ashore with a slow, regular, almost dancing gait, humming a
low monotonous chant, as if to enable them to step in time, and making
serio-comic motions with arms and hands, until they deposited safely in
a cart a weight that might have tested Atlas himself!

It seemed obvious that these wild men, (for such they truly were), had
been gifted with all the powers that most white men lay claim to,--
vigour, muscle, energy, pluck, fun, humour, resolution.  Only principle
is wanted to make them a respectable and useful portion of the human
family.  Like all the rest of us they are keenly alive to the influence
of kindness and affection.  Of course if your kindness, forbearance, or
affection, take the form of action which leads them to think that you
are afraid of them, they will merely esteem you cunning, and treat you
accordingly; but if you convince a Kafir, or any other savage, that you
have a disinterested regard for him, you are sure to find him grateful,
more or less.

One family with which I dined gave me to understand that this was the
result of their own experience.  At that very time they had a Kafir girl
in training as a housemaid.  Servants, let me remark in passing, are a
Cape difficulty.  The demand is in excess of the supply, and the supply
is not altogether what it should be, besides being dear and
uncomfortably independent.  I suppose it was because of this difficulty
that the family I dined with had procured a half-wild Kafir girl, and
undertaken her training.

Her clothes hung upon her in a manner that suggested novelty.  She was
young, very tall, black, lithe as an eel, strong as a horse.  She was
obviously new to the work, and went about it with the air of one who
engages in a frolic.  But the free air of the wilderness had taught her
a freedom of action and stride, and a fling of body that it was not easy
to restrain within the confined precincts of a dining--room.  She moved
round the table like a sable panther--ready to spring when wanted.  She
had an open-mouthed smile of amused good-will, and an open-eyed
"what-next--only-say-quick--and-I'll-do-it" expression that was
impressive.  She seized the plates and dishes and bore them off with a
giraffe-like, high-stepping action that was quite alarming, but she
broke or spilt nothing.  To say that she flung about, would be mild.  It
would not have been strange, I thought--only a little extra dash in her
jubilant method of proceeding--if she had gone head-foremost through the
dining-room window for the sake of bearing the mutton round by a shorter
route to the kitchen.

The family expected that this girl would be reduced to moderation, and
rendered faithful--as she certainly was intelligent--by force of
kindness in a short time.

Of course in a country thus circumstanced, there are bad servants.  The
independence of the Totties is most amusing--to those who do not suffer
from it.  I was told that servants out there have turned the tables on
their employers, and instead of bringing "characters" with them, require
to know the characters of master and mistress before they will engage.
It is no uncommon thing for a domestic to come to you and say that she
is tired and wants a rest, and is going off to see her mother.  Indeed
it is something to her credit if she takes the trouble to tell you.
Sometimes she goes off without warning, leaving you to shift for
yourself, returning perhaps after some days.  If you find fault with her
too severely on her return, she will probably leave you altogether.

This naturally tries the temper of high-spirited mistresses--as does
also the incorrigible carelessness of some servants.

A gentle lady said to me quietly, one day, "I never keep a servant after
slapping her!"

"Is it your habit to slap them?"  I asked with a smile.

"No," she replied with an answering smile, "but occasionally I am driven
to it.  When a careless girl, who has been frequently cautioned, singes
one's linen and destroys one's best dress, and melts one's tea-pot by
putting it on the red-hot stove, what _can_ flesh and blood do?"

I admitted that the supposed circumstances were trying.

"The last one I sent off," continued the lady, "had done all that.  When
she filled up her cup of iniquity by melting the tea-pot, I just gave
her a good hearty slap on the face.  I couldn't help it.  Of course she
left me after that."

I did not doubt it, for the lady was not only gentle in her manner, and
pretty to boot, but was tall and stout, and her fair arm was strong, and
must have been heavy.



LETTER TWELVE.

PORT ELIZABETH--ALGOA BAY--DIAMONDS--KAFIR NOBILITY.

Port Elizabeth may be described as the first-born city of the Eastern
Province of the Cape of Good Hope.  It came into being in 1820.  It is
now a flourishing seaport, full of energetic, busy, money-making men.
It is the principal seaport of the Eastern Province, and the nearest
point on the coast to the Diamond-fields--420 miles from De Beer's New
Rush, a distance which was traversed in about six days by coaches.

Among its more useful enterprises it has the honour of having sent out
one pioneer of future commercial prosperity in the Eastern Province, for
Port Elizabeth is the starting-point of one branch of that great railway
system which is to revolutionise Africa.  I do not say _South_ Africa,
but advisedly use the title of wider scope.

It is not every day that one can boast of having handled a tumbler full
of diamonds.  Being anxious to see a mass of those precious gems in an
uncut condition, I appealed to a friend who had come out with me in the
"Windsor Castle."

He introduced me to a broker, who took me into a back office, opened a
strong-box, took out a small packet, and, untying it, poured out a
tumblerful of diamonds!  They ranged from the size of a pin-head to that
of a bean, and were varied in shade, from pure crystal to straw-colour.
The broker then opened one or two separate parcels, each of which
contained a specially large or fine diamond, varying in size from a pea
to a hazelnut.

"That one," he said, "may be worth four hundred pounds, and this,
perhaps about five or six hundred."

Looking at them, it was difficult to believe that they were other than
paltry pebbles; yet these were the things for which men left home and
kindred, pushed into the wilds of a savage land, toiled and moiled in
the Great Pit at Kimberley, and too often sacrificed health, happiness,
and life itself.  Judging them from their looks, I would not have given
sixpence for the entire lot--so true is it that we do wrong in judging
uncut gems, as well as unknown men, by the "outward appearance."

A very striking, and rather unfortunate instance of this false style of
judgment occurred not many days afterwards in reference to some Kafir
princes and chiefs: it was on the occasion of my quitting Port Elizabeth
for Capetown.

We were to have started on a Saturday afternoon, but a gale said "no,"
and we left on Sunday morning.  Even then, although the gale had abated,
a surf so magnificent was rolling into Algoa Bay that no ship's boat
could approach the jetty.  This obliged the passengers to go off to the
steamer in a surf-boat.  Of course the boat could not approach nearer
the dry sand than fifty yards or so.  There she heaved about in oceans
of boiling foam, while Kafirs carried us on board one by one.  The
Kafirs bore the women in their strong arms as children are carried, and
put them over the gunwale tenderly, but the men were made to sit on
their shoulders, as one sits on horseback, and were treated with less
ceremony.  A giant in ebony carried me off, and trotted as he went, to
the delight of some of his comrades; but I was accustomed to riding, and
patted his black head approvingly.

While standing on a commanding point in the stern, a fellow-passenger
directed attention to a group of Kafirs who tried to keep apart from the
others, and looked dignified.  These, he told me, were a party of native
princes, chiefs, and councillors, who had been brought fresh from their
wilderness home--with their own consent, of course--and were being taken
to Capetown for the purpose of being impressed with the wealth, power,
grandeur, and vast resources of the white man.  The other Kafirs, of
whom there was a large gang, were common fellows, who chanced to be
going by the same steamer as navvies to work on the Western railways.
The difference between the navvies and their nobility was not great.
Personally there was scarcely any, and the somewhat superior cloth of
the robes worn by the latter made no great show.

The big boat was hauled off by a rope through the surf, the sail set,
and we were soon alongside the ocean steamer whose iron sides rose above
us like a city wall.  There was nothing but an iron ladder, flat against
this wall, by which to ascend.  The heaving of the surf-boat was great.
It approached the ladder and retreated from it in the most irregularly
spasmodic manner.  Only active men, accustomed to such feats, could get
upon it.  Kafirs, although active as kittens, are not accustomed to the
sea, or to the motion of ships and boats.  For them to ascend was a
matter of great difficulty; for the women and children it was
impossible.

But the difficulty had been provided for.  Presently we saw a great cask
like an overgrown hogs-head swing over the side and descend into the
boat.  It was caught by our sailors and placed on the stern-sheets.
Several tars from the steamer descended to assist.  The cask was large
enough to hold three or four women besides a child or two.  Amid much
giggling and persuading it was filled, a signal given, steam applied,
and the party was whirled aloft with a scream, and lowered on the
vessel's deck in safety.

The cask was again sent down.  Meanwhile some of us had scrambled up the
ladder, and a few of the Kafir navvies followed our example, but the
most of them required a good deal of encouragement, and some strong
persuasion, while others refused flatly to attempt it.  All this time
the black aristocrats looked on in grave silence.  If I remember rightly
there were a young prince, an old councillor, and two or three chiefs.

When those navvies that could be persuaded, or kicked up the ladder, had
been disposed of, the sailors turned upon the timid ones and bundled
them into the cask, neck and crop, four and five at a time.  There was
necessity for speed, and sailors are not wont to be delicate when this
is the case.  At last the aristocracy were approached.  Whether the
sailors knew who they were I cannot tell; it is probable that they did
not, but judged by the "outward appearance."  They were "niggers," that
was enough for Jack.

"Come along, old boy," said one, grasping the old councillor; but the
councillor held back; Jack therefore gave him a powerful shove and he
went into the cask head-foremost.  Another man had seized the young
prince at the same moment.  That potentate--who in his own land
possessed the power of life and death--turned round with dignity, and in
doing so afforded an unlooked for opportunity to the sailor, who pushed
him gently till he tripped against the cask and went in backwards,
squeezing the old councillor almost flat.

"That's your sort, Bill, fetch another!" cried Jack, as he packed the
prince down.

One chief was quick-witted enough to submit and stepped in of his own
accord.  Another half-stepped and was half-thrust in.

"Hoist away!" shouted Bill.

At that moment a forgotten navvy caught Bill's eye, he seized him by the
neck; Jack helped; the man was thrown on the top of all, and went up
next moment like a spread-eagle cover to the cask.

When this "lot" was lowered four or five of the Jack-tars on deck, who
greatly enjoyed the fun, turned it suddenly over, and thus it was
emptied of its human contents.

Even at that moment of humiliation the savage chiefs were true to
themselves.  They rose from the deck in dignified silence, the prince
merely saying, sternly, to the gentleman who had charge of the party,
"Was _this_ what you brought me here for?"

It is but just to add that the gentleman in charge of these noble
visitors did his best to prevent the outrage, but it had occurred
suddenly, in the exuberance of "Jack's" spirits, was over in a few
seconds, and could not be undone.

These Kafir chiefs were afterwards feasted and feted by the governor and
gentry of Capetown, but I have my doubts whether they will ever forget
or forgive the treatment received on that occasion in Algoa Bay.

To correct the false is more difficult than to imbibe the true.  Did you
ever think of that before?  All my life have I been under the false
impression that the Cape of Good Hope was the most southerly point of
Africa.  It is nothing of the sort.  Cape Agulhas, not far distant, is
the real extremity of South Africa.  We doubled it on the 3rd of April.

Oh!  Bartholomew Diaz and Vasco da Gama, what would you say if you knew
that we "doubled the Cape"--the "Cape of Storms"--the "Cape of
Torments"--in calm and sunshine, at the rate of thirteen knots or
thereabouts, without a stitch of canvas, with ladies and gentlemen in
every attitude of lazy ease upon our deck, and troops of children
romping round them?  How vast the difference between the "doublings" of
the 15th and the 19th centuries!  Then--the ships were small wooden
tubs; now they are huge iron kettles.  Then,--a few bold and sometimes
turbulent spirits faced the dangers of unknown seas under the leadership
