"I'll never marry him!" cried poor Molinda, kneeling at the throne,
where her streaming eyes and hair made a pretty and touching picture.
"Never! I despise him!"

[Illustration: Page 84]

"I was about to say, sir," the prince went on, "that I cannot possibly
have the pleasure of wedding my cousin."

"The family gibbet, I presume, is in good working order?" asked the king
of the family executioner, a tall gaunt man in black and scarlet, who
was only employed in the case of members of the blood royal.

"Never better, sire," said the man, bowing with more courtliness than
his profession indicated.

"Very well," said the king; "Prince Prigio, you have your choice.
_There_ is the gallows, _here_ is Lady Molinda. My duty is painful, but
clear. A king's word cannot be broken. Molly, or the gibbet!"

The prince bowed respectfully to Lady Molinda:

"Madam, my cousin," said he, "your clemency will excuse my answer, and
you will not misinterpret the apparent discourtesy of my conduct. I am
compelled, most unwillingly, to slight your charms, and to select the
Extreme Rigour of the Law. Executioner, lead on! Do your duty; for
me, _Prigio est pret_;"--for this was his motto, and meant that he was
ready.

[Illustration: Page 85]

Poor Lady Molinda could not but be hurt by the prince's preference for
death over marriage to her, little as she liked him.

"Is life, then, so worthless? and is Molinda so terrible a person
that you prefer _those_ arms," and she pointed to the gibbet, "to
_these?_"--here she held out her own, which were very white, round and
pretty; for Molinda was a good-hearted girl, she could not bear to see
Prigio put to death; and then, perhaps, she reflected that there are
worse positions than the queenship of Pantouflia. For Alphonso was
gone--crying would not bring him back.

"Ah, Madam!" said the prince, "you are forgiving--"

"For _you_ are brave!" said Molinda, feeling: quite a respect for him.

"But neither your heart nor mine is ours to give. Since mine was
another's, I understand too well the feeling of _yours!_ Do not let us
buy life at the price of happiness and honour."

Then, turning to the king the prince said:

"Sir, is there no way but by death or marriage? You say you cannot keep
half only of your promise; and that, if I accept the reward, I must also
unite myself with my unwilling cousin. Cannot the whole proclamation
be annulled, and will you consider the bargain void if I tear up this
flimsy scroll?"

And here the prince fluttered the cheque for L1,000,000 in the air.

For a moment the king was tempted; but then he said to himself:

"Never mind, it's only an extra penny on the income-tax." Then, "Keep
your dross," he shouted, meaning the million; "but let _me_ keep my
promise. To chapel at once, or--" and he pointed to the executioner.
"The word of a king of Pantouflia is sacred."

"And so is that of a crown prince," answered Prigio; "and _mine_ is
pledged to a lady."

"She shall be a mourning bride," cried the king savagely, "unless"--here
he paused for a moment--"unless you bring me back Alphohso and Enrico,
safe and well!"

The prince thought for the space of a flash of lightning.

"I accept the alternative," he said, "if your majesty will grant me my
conditions."

"Name them!" said the king.

"Let me be transported to Gluckstein, left there unguarded, and if, in
three days, I do not return with my brothers safe and well, your majesty
shall be spared a cruel duty. Prigio of Pantouflia will perish by his
own hand."

The king, whose mind did not work very quickly, took some minutes to
think over it. Then he saw that by granting the prince's conditions,
he would either recover his dear sons, or, at least, get rid of Prigio,
without the unpleasantness of having him executed. For, though some
kings have put their eldest sons to death, and most have wished to do
so, they have never been better loved by the people for their Roman
virtue.

"Honour bright?" said the king at last.

"Honour bright!" answered the prince, and for the first time in many
months, the royal father and son shook hands.

"For you, madam," said Prigio in a stately way to Lady Molinda, "in less
than a week I trust we shall be taking our vows at the same altar, and
that the close of the ceremony which finds us cousins will leave us
brother and sister."

Poor Molinda merely stared; for she could not imagine what he meant. In
a moment he was gone; and having taken, by the king's permission, the
flying carpet, he was back at the ambassador's house in Gluckstein.

[Illustration: Chapter Seventeen]




CHAPTER XVII.--_The Black Cat and the brethren_

WHO was glad to see the prince, if it was not Lady Rosalind? The white
roses of her cheeks turned to red roses in a moment, and then back to
white again, they were so alarmed at the change. So the two went into
the gardens together, and talked about a number of things; but at last
the prince told her that, before three days were over, all would be
well, or all would be over with him. For either he would have brought
his brothers back, sound and well, to Falkenstein, or he would not
survive his dishonour.

"It is no more than right," he said; "for had I gone first, neither of
them would have been sent to meet the monster after I had fallen. And I
_should_ have fallen, dear Rosalind, if I had faced the Firedrake before
I knew _you._"

Then when she asked him why, and what good she had done him, he told
her all the story; and how, before he fell in love with her, he didn't
believe in fairies, or Firedrakes, or caps of darkness, or anything nice
and impossible, but only in horrid useless facts, and chemistry, and
geology, and arithmetic, and mathematics, and even political economy.
And the Firedrake would have made a mouthful of him, then.

So she was delighted when she heard this, almost as much delighted as
she was afraid that he might fail in the most difficult adventure.
For it was one thing to egg on a Remora to kill a Firedrake, and quite
another to find the princes if they were alive, and restore them if they
were dead!

But the prince said he had his plan, and he stayed that night at the
ambassador's. Next morning he rose very early, before anyone else was
up, that he might not have to say "Good-bye" to Lady Rosalind. Then he
flew in a moment to the old lonely castle, where nobody went for fear of
ghosts, ever since the Court retired to Falkenstein.

How still it was, how deserted; not a sign of life, and yet the prince
was looking everywhere _for some living thing_. He hunted the castle
through in vain, and then went out to the stable-yard; but all the dogs,
of course, had been taken away, and the farmers had offered homes to the
poultry. At last, stretched at full length in a sunny place, the prince
found a very old, half-blind, miserable cat. The poor creature was lean,
and its fur had fallen off in patches; it could no longer catch birds,
nor even mice, and there was nobody to give it milk. But cats do
not look far into the future; and this old black cat--Frank was his
name--had got a breakfast somehow, and was happy in the sun. The prince
stood and looked at him pityingly, and he thought that even a sick old
cat was, in some ways, happier than most men.

[Illustration: Page 91]

"Well," said the prince at last, "he could not live long anyway, and it
must be done. He will feel nothing."

Then he drew the sword of sharpness, and with one turn of his wrist cut
the cat's head clean off.

It did not at once change into a beautiful young lady, as perhaps you
expect; no, that was improbable, and, as the prince was in love already,
would have been vastly inconvenient. The dead cat lay there, like any
common cat.

Then the prince built up a heap of straw, with wood on it; and there he
laid poor puss, and set fire to the pile. Very soon there was nothing of
old black Frank left but ashes!

Then the prince ran upstairs to the fairy cupboard, his heart beating
loudly with excitement, The sun was shining through the arrow-shot
window; all the yellow motes were dancing in its rays. The light fell
on the strange heaps of fairy things--talismans and spells. The prince
hunted about here and there, and at last he discovered six ancient
water-vessels of black leather, each with a silver plate on it, and on
the plate letters engraved. This was what was written on the plates:

_AQVA. DE. FONTE. LEONVM._*

     * Water from the Fountain of Lions.

"Thank heaven!" said the prince. "I thought they were sure to have
brought it!"

Then he took one of the old black-leather bottles, and ran downstairs
again to the place where he had burned the body of the poor old sick
cat.

[Illustration: Page 93]

He opened the bottle, and poured a few drops of the water on the ashes
and the dying embers.

Up there sprang a tall, white flame of fire, waving like a tongue of
light; and forth from the heap jumped the most beautiful, strong, funny,
black cat that ever was seen!

It was Frank as he had been in the vigour of his youth; and he knew the
prince at once, and rubbed himself against him and purred.

The prince lifted up Frank and kissed his nose for joy; and a bright
tear rolled down on Frank's face, and made him rub his nose with his paw
in the most comical manner.

Then the prince set him down, and he ran round and round after his tail;
and, lastly, cocked his tail up, and marched proudly after the prince
into the castle.

"Oh, Frank!" said Prince Prigio, "no cat since the time of Puss in Boots
was ever so well taken care of as you shall be. For if the fairy water
from the Fountain of Lions can bring _you_ back to life--why, there is a
chance for Alphonso and Enrico!"

Then Prigio bustled about, got ready some cold luncheon from the
store-room, took all his fairy things that he was likely to need, sat
down with them on the flying carpet, and wished himself at the mountain
of the Firedrake.

"I have the king now," he said; "for if I can't find the ashes of my
brothers, by Jove! I'll!--"

Do you know what he meant to do, if he could not find his brothers? Let
every child-guess.

Off he flew; and there he was in a second, just beside poor Alphonso's
garden-engine. Then Prigio, seeing a little heap of grey ashes beside
the engine, watered them with the fairy water; and up jumped Alphonso,
as jolly as ever, his sword in his hand.

"Hullo, Prigio!" cried he; "are you come after the monster too? I've
been asleep, and I had a kind of dream that he beat me. But the pair of
us will tackle him. How is Molinda?"

"Prettier than ever," said Prigio; "but anxious about you. However,
the Firedrake's dead and done for; so never mind him. But I left Enrico
somewhere about. Just you sit down and wait a minute, till I fetch him."

The prince said this, because he did not wish Alphonso to know that
he and Enrico had not had quite the best of it in the affair with the
monster.

"All right, old fellow," says Alphonso; "but have you any luncheon with
you? Never was so hungry in my life!"

Prince Prigio had thought of this, and he brought out some cold sausage
(to which Alphonso was partial) and some bread, with which the younger
prince expressed himself satisfied. Then Prigio went up the hill some
