Hans had no further suggestion to offer.

"I suppose we could live in the forest for some time," Will said.
"I read a book called Robinson Crusoe, and a sailor there lived on
a desert island for years; but then he had a gun, and all sorts of
things. There are plenty of birds but, even if we could make bows
and arrows, I suppose we should be months before we could shoot
straight enough to hit them."

Several days passed. The lads found plenty of fruit; but the season
was advancing, and Will said one day to Hans:

"What on earth are we to do, when the fruit and biscuits are all
finished?"

Wandering in the woods, they found the bodies of the whole of their
companions. All were headless, the Malays having carried off these
coveted trophies. They did not attempt to bury the bodies for, in
such a climate, decomposition sets in rapidly, and swarms of
insects complete the work. In the grass near the hut they found one
treasure--the mate's ax--which had evidently fallen from his belt,
in his flight, and had been overlooked by the Malays.

"I tell you what, Hans," Will said, one day, "fruit is getting
scarcer and scarcer, and there are not more than five or six pounds
of biscuits left. I vote that we make through the forest into the
interior of the island. There must be some villages scattered
about. If we enter one boldly, they may not kill us. I don't know
whether they have any respect for the laws of hospitality, as some
savages have but, even if they did kill us, it's better than being
starved to death, here. It's a chance, anyhow.

"What do you say, Hans?"

"I don't zay noding," Hans answered. "I don't have no obinion, at
all. If you dink zat is ze best plan, let us do it."

So saying, Hans collected the biscuit, tied it up in his
handkerchief, and was ready to start at once.

"There is no hurry, Hans," Will said, laughing; "still, if we are
to make a start, we may as well go at once."

Turning their backs upon the sea, they struck into the wood. They
had never before gone farther than a mile from the shore. After an
hour's walking, they found that the character of the forest was
changing: the ground rose rapidly, the thick, tangled undergrowth
disappeared, and they were able to walk briskly forward, under the
shade of the large trees. The hill became steeper and steeper, as
they advanced; and Will knew that they were ascending the hill that
they had seen from the ship, when she was coming towards the shore.

Three hours after leaving the coast, they were upon its top. The
ground was rocky here and, in some places, bare of trees. Inland,
they saw hill rising behind hill, and knew that the island must be
a large one.

Illustration: Will and Hans in Search of a Shelter.

"Look, Hans, there is smoke curling up at the foot of that hill,
over there. Don't you see it? It is very faint, but it is certainly
smoke. There must be a house there and, most likely, a village.

"Come on, we shall get there before the sun sets. I don't think it
can be more than a mile and a half away."

Hans, as usual, assented and, in about half an hour, they arrived
at a Malay village. The aspect was curious, each hut being built in
a tree. At the point where the lower branches started, a platform
was made. The tree above this was cut down, and on the platform the
hut was erected--access being obtained to it by a ladder. Several
of the inhabitants were walking about. These, upon seeing the lads,
uttered cries of warning and, instantly flying to the ladders,
which were constructed of light bamboo, climbed to the huts and
raised the ladders after them. Then, at every door, men appeared
with bent bows and pointed arrows, threatening the invaders.

Will had cut a green bough, and this he waved as a token of peace;
while Hans threw up his hands, to show that he was unarmed. Then
they bowed several times, almost to the ground; held out their arms
with outstretched hands and, finally, sat down upon the ground.

The Malays apparently understood that their visitors came in peace.
They held a long conversation among themselves and, at last, the
ladder of one of the huts--which appeared larger and better
finished than the others--was lowered, and four men descended. One
of these carried a kriss in his hand. His bow was slung behind his
back. The others kept their bows bent in readiness for instant
action.

The chief was a tall and well-built man, of about forty years of
age. He, like his followers, was dressed only in a loincloth; he
had copper bracelets round his wrists. As he approached, the lads
rose and bowed deeply; then Will held out to him the ax and,
placing it in his hand, motioned to him that it was a present.

The chief looked pleased at the gift, placed his hands on Will's
shoulder and nodded, and performed the same gesture to Hans. Then
he led them towards his hut, and motioned to them to sit down at
the foot of the tree.

Curious faces were watching from every hut and, as soon as it was
seen that peace was established, the ladders were lowered and a
swarm of men, women, and children soon surrounded the visitors. At
the chief's order a woman approached them, bringing a dish of food.
This was composed, the boys found, principally of birds; cut up and
stewed, with some sort of vegetable. The dish was by no means bad
and, after living for nearly a fortnight upon biscuit and fruit,
they much enjoyed it.

Presently, women brought bundles of dried fern and spread them at
the foot of the tree and, soon after it was dark, the boys lay down
upon them. It was long, however, before they went to sleep; for the
din and chatter in the village continued, until far into the night.
The lads guessed that the reason and manner of their coming was
warmly debated; and judged by their reception that the prevailing
opinions were favorable, and that the visit from the two white men
was considered to be a fortunate omen.

The next day they were again amply supplied with food, and were
constantly surrounded by a little group of women and children, to
whom their white skins appeared a source of constant wonder. Their
movements were entirely unchecked, and they were evidently
considered in the light of guests rather than prisoners.

The next night the village retired to rest early. The boys sat
talking together, for a long time, and then lay down to sleep.
Presently, Will thought that he heard a noise and, looking up, saw
in the moonlight a number of savages, stealthily approaching. They
carried with them ladders; and intended, he had no doubt, to
surprise the sleeping villagers. They were already close at hand.

Will shook Hans--who had already gone off to sleep--and pointed out
to him the advancing foes. These were already in the village and,
separating, fixed a ladder against each of the huts. So far the
boys, who lay in the shadow of the hut, had not been noticed. The
Malays--who belonged to a hostile village--began to climb the
ladders; when the lads, grasping the heavy sticks which they always
carried, and springing to their feet with loud shouts, ran to the
ladders, before the Malays could recover from their astonishment at
the approach of the white-faced men, rushing upon them.

Half a dozen of the ladders were upset, the men who had mounted
them coming heavily to the ground. Some of these, as they rose, at
once took to their heels; others, drawing their krisses, rushed at
their assailants. But the lads were no longer alone. At the first
shout, the doors of the huts had opened; and the inhabitants rushed
out, with their arms. The remaining ladders were instantly
overthrown, and a shower of arrows poured upon their assailants.

Will and Hans knocked down the foremost of their assailants; and
the whole body, foiled in their attempted surprise, discomfited at
the appearance of the strange white-faced men, and exposed to the
arrows of the defenders, at once darted away--several of their
number having already fallen, under the shafts from above. With
exulting shouts, the warriors of the village poured down their
ladders from the huts, and took up the pursuit; and soon no one
remained in the village, save the white lads and the women and
children.

Towards morning the warriors returned, several of them bringing
with them gory heads, showing that their pursuit had not been in
vain. The village was now the scene of great rejoicings. Huge fires
were lighted, and a feast held in honor of the victory. The chief
solemnly placed the white men, one on each side of him, and made
them a speech; in which, by his bowing and placing his hand on
their heads, they judged he was thanking them for having preserved
their village from massacre. Indeed, it was clear, from the
respectful manner of all towards them, that they were regarded in
the light of genii, who had come specially to protect the village
from the assaults of its enemies.

After the feast was over the chief, after a consultation with the
rest, pointed to a tree close to that in which his own hut was
situated. The whole village set to work, ladders were fixed against
it; and the men, ascending, hacked away with krisses and stone
hatchets at the trunk. Hans--seeing their object--made signs to the
chief to lend him his ax and, ascending to the tree, set to work
with it; doing, in five minutes, more work than the whole of the
natives employed could have accomplished in an hour. After working
for some time, he handed the ax to one of the natives, who
continued the work. The tree was not a large one--the trunk, at
this point, being about 18 inches in diameter. Half an hour's work
sufficed to cut it through; and the upper part of the tree fell,
with a crash.

In the meantime the women had brought in, from the forest, a
quantity of bamboos and, with these, the men set to work and
speedily formed a platform. Upon this a hut was erected, the roof
and sides being covered with palm leaves laid closely together,
forming a roof impervious to rain. Two large bundles of fern, for
beds, were then taken up; and the chief, ascending, solemnly
invited the boys to come up and take possession.

A woman was told off to prepare food for them, and attend to their
wants and, by nightfall, the lads found themselves in a comfortable
abode of their own. Pulling up the ladder, after the manner of the
natives, they sat down to chat over their altered prospects. They
were now clearly regarded as adopted into the village community,
and need have no further fear as to their personal security, or
means of living.

"For the time we are safe," Will said; "but--as I don't want to
turn Malay, and live all my life with no other amusement than
keeping my own head on, and hunting for those of the enemies of the
village--we must think of making our escape, somehow; though at
present, I own I don't see how."



Chapter 6: The Attack On The Village.


A day or two later a Malay ran at full speed into the village, and
said a few words which caused a perfect hubbub of excitement. The
men shouted. The women screamed and, running up the ladders to
their tree abodes, began gathering together the various articles of
value, in their eyes. The chief came up to the boys and, by signs,
intimated that a large number of hostile natives, belonging to
several villages, were advancing to attack them; and that they must
fly into the interior.

This was very unwelcome news for the lads. Once removed farther
from the sea the tribe might, not improbably, take up their abode
there, as they would fear to return to the neighborhood of their
enemies. This would be fatal to any chance of the lads being taken
off by a passing ship. After a few words together, they determined
to oppose the movement. Will, in a loud voice and with threatening
gestures, intimated that he disapproved of the plan, and that he
and his companion would assist them in defending their village.

The Malays paused in their preparations. Their faith in their white
visitors was very great and, after a few minutes' talk among
themselves, they intimated to the boys that they would obey their
orders. Will at once signed to a few men to stand as guards round
the village, to warn them of the approaching enemy; and then set
the whole of the rest of the population to work cutting
sharp-pointed poles, boughs, and thorny bushes. With these a circle
was made around the trees upon which the village was built.
Fortunately the hostile Malays had halted in the forest, two or
three miles away, intending to make their attack by night and, as
the news of their coming had arrived at noon, the villagers had,
before they ceased work late in the evening, erected a formidable
hedge round the village.

Some of the women had been set to work manufacturing a number of
torches, similar to those used by them for lighting their
dwellings, but much larger. They were formed of the stringy bark of
a tree, dipped in the resinous juice obtained from another. Will
had one of these fastened to each of the trees nearest to the
hedge. They were fixed to the trunks on the outside, so that their
flame would throw a light on the whole circle beyond the hedge
while, within, all would be shadow and darkness.

It was very late before all preparations were completed. Will then
placed a few men as outposts, some hundred yards in the forest, in
the direction from which the enemy were likely to approach. They
were ordered to give the alarm, the moment they heard a noise; and
were then to run in and enter the circle by a small gap, which had
been left in the abbatis for the purpose. Many of the men then took
their posts, with their bows and arrows, in the trees near the
hedge. The others remained on the ground, ready to rush to any
point assailed.

For several hours no sound save the calls of the night birds, and
the occasional distant howls of beasts of prey, were heard in the
forest; and it was not until within an hour of morning--the hour
generally selected by Malays for an attack, as men sleep at that
time the heaviest--that a loud yell, at one of the outposts, told
that the enemy were close at hand.

Two or three minutes later the scouts ran in, and the gap through
which they had entered was at once filled up with bushes, which had
been piled close at hand for the purpose. Aware that their approach
was discovered, the enemy abandoned all further concealment; and
advanced with wild yells, intending to strike terror into the
defenders of the village. As they advanced the torches were all
lighted and, as the assailants came within their circle of light, a
shower of arrows from the Malays on the ground, and in the trees
above, was poured into them.

Yells and screams told that the volley had been a successful one
but, discharging their arrows in turn, the Malays, with demoniac
yells, rushed against the village. The advance, however, was
arrested suddenly when they arrived at the abbatis. From behind its
shelter, so deadly a rain of arrows was poured in that they soon
shrank back, and bounded away beyond the circle of light, while
taunting shouts rose from its defenders.

For a time they contented themselves by distant shouting; and then,
with a wild yell, charged forward again. Several dropped from the
fire of arrows, from those in the trees and behind the abbatis but,
discharging their arrows in return, the assailants kept on until
they again reached the impediment. Here they strove furiously to
break through--hacking with their krisses, and endeavoring to pull
up the stakes with their hands--but the defenders, in the shade
behind, sent their arrows so fast and thick that the assailants
again shrank back, and darted away to shelter.

Throughout the night there was no renewal of the attack and, in the
morning, not a foe was visible. Two or three scouts went out to
reconnoiter; but no sooner did they enter the forest than one of
them was shot down, and the rest sent flying back.

"I believe the scoundrels are going to try to starve us out," Will
said. "Let us speak to the chief, and ask how much provisions they
have got."

After much pantomime, Will succeeded in conveying his meaning to
the chief; and the latter at once ordered all the inhabitants to
produce their stock of food. This was unexpectedly large, and Will
thought that there was sufficient for a fortnight's consumption. He
now made signs of drinking, but the reply to this was disheartening
in the extreme. A few gourds full of water were brought forward,
and two or three of the close-woven baskets in which water is often
carried, in this country. There was, in fact, scarce enough to last
the defenders for a day. The stream from which the village drew its
supply of water was about a couple of hundred yards away;
consequently the villagers fetched up their water as they needed
it, and no one thought of keeping a store.

Will looked in dismay at the smallness of the supply.

"If they really intend to starve us out, Hans, we are done for. No
doubt they reckon on our water falling short. They would know that
it was not likely that there would be a supply here."

The natives were not slow to recognize the weak point of their
defense One or two of the men, taking water baskets, were about to
go to the stream; but Will made signs to the chief that they must
not do this. The only hope was that the enemies would draw off; but
