own hustling, we'll all be mightily pleased as well as grateful."

"Oh, well, then," replied the good woman, "we'll simply consider that
the matter is postponed. I can't agree, as easily as this, to drop what
I have considered my privilege."

As soon as could be, Dick & Co. made their escape.

They met again for a little while in the evening. Nothing of any real
moment happened while they were together.

While Dave Darrin was on his way home, however, and going along a dark
part of the street, something whizzed by his head, striking the sidewalk
just ahead.

"Quit your fooling!" yelled Dave, wheeling about angrily.

No human being, however, was in sight. Dave ran back, some two hundred
feet in all, but could see no one on the little street, nor in any
hiding place near by.

Then Dave went back to inspect the missile. It was a stone, slightly
larger than his two fists together.

"Whew!" whistled Dave inwardly. "That thing wasn't meant for any joke,
either!"




CHAPTER IX

AN AWESOME RIVER DISCOVERY


"Want to come, fellows?" asked Greg, halting Dick and Dave on Main
Street Saturday morning.

"Where?" asked Dick.

"Jim Haynes told me I might take his big canoe this morning."

"So you're going canoeing?" queried Dave.

"Yep; and better'n that, too," glowed Greg. "You know Payson, the
farmer, up the river?"

"Of course."

"This being an apple year, Payson told me I could have a few barrels of
apples if I'd pick 'em and pay him twenty cents a barrel. His orchard is
right along the river bank. Isn't that a cinch?"

"I'd like to go," rejoined Dick wistfully. "But I can't, very well. You
see, I've got to work in the store this afternoon. Dad is going to be
away."

"Your mother'll let you go, if you tell her what a fine time you can
have."

"That wouldn't be quite fair," replied Dick, shaking his head. "Mother
would let me go, I know; but the trouble with her," he added, with a
smile, "is that she's always too easy. And I know there's more work to
do in the store this afternoon than she can handle alone."

"I'd go in a minute," Dave chipped in, "but you see I've agreed to go to
the express office this afternoon and help check up bundles. I'm to get
a quarter for it."

"Huh," returned Greg candidly. "I'm disappointed about you two. It takes
money to buy apples, even at twenty cents a barrel. You two generally
have some money."

"I've got five cents," laughed Dave. "Here it is."

"I've got a whole quarter, as it happens," added Dick, producing the
coin. "I'm not going to be mean, either."

"Whew, but I'll have a job pulling the canoe alone," muttered Greg
ruefully. "And it isn't much fun picking apples all alone. However, I'm
going. Maybe Harry Hazelton can go with me. Tom can't and Dan won't.
I'll see that you two get your shares of apples for the money you've
turned over to me."

"My share will be half a hat full," laughed Dave.

"And then some more, and still some more," added Greg readily. "I won't
forget that you two financed my expedition."

"I wish awfully that I could go with you, Greg," spoke Dick truthfully.
"But it wouldn't be fair for me to think of leaving everything at the
store for mother to do this afternoon."

"Oh, that's all right," nodded Greg.

"And you can bet that I wish I were going with you," supplemented
Darrin. "But I get a lot of snaps like this one at the express office,
and there are too many fellows hanging around there looking for my
chance. It isn't the easiest thing in the world for a fellow to pick up
silver quarters, Greg."

"Don't I know!" muttered Holmes.

So Greg went on his way.

"Say, wouldn't that be a great way to put in the afternoon?" sighed
Dave. "These fine September days get into a fellow's blood and make him
itch for the river and the fields."

"Don't tempt me," begged Dick Prescott plaintively. "I'm trying to do
the square thing by mother, and I do want to go with Greg!"

"Oh, well, a fellow can't always act on the square and have a good time,
too," philosophized Dave. "On the whole, I guess I'd rather have the
satisfaction of acting on the square."

Afternoon toil brought its rewards, however. Five members of Dick & Co.,
released from further responsibilities, met as usual on Main Street that
evening. They strolled about, met other fellows from the Central
Grammar, discussed football and talked over all the other topics dear to
the hearts of Grammar School boys.

"I wonder how Greg got along this afternoon?" suggested Dave. "Any of
you hear?"

The others shook their heads.

"We could go down to his house and ask him, only it would look as though
we were just hunting for apples," said Dick.

"Oh, Greg knows us better'n that," declared Tom Reade. "And Greg will
simply bring the apples to us, if we don't go to his house. What' say if
we take a trip down Greg's way? Maybe we'll meet him coming up to find
the crowd."

This counsel prevailing, the five set out on a direct walk to Greg's
home. A block away they met Mr. Holmes coming in their direction.

"You're just the ones I wanted to see, boys," was Mr. Holmes's greeting.
"Where's Greg?"

"We were going down to the house to find him, sir," Dick responded.

"I'm a good deal worried," confessed Mr. Holmes. "Greg went up river
this afternoon, after apples, and he hasn't been home yet."

"Not home yet?" gasped Dave Darrin.

Then he and Dick gazed at each other in an amazement that quickly turned
in both hearts to a sickening fear.

Dave recalled the stone flying past his head; Dick remembered the flying
hod of bricks. And Greg had been the third of their party who had
blocked Ab. Dexter's plans!

"Oh, Greg's all right," spoke up Tom Reade cheerily.

"Then why isn't he home?" demanded Mr. Holmes. "He has had time to
paddle down from Payson's three times since dark."

There was no gainsaying this statement. All five of the youngsters
plainly showed their uneasiness.

"Maybe Jim Haynes knows something about the canoe," suggested Dan
Dalzell.

"No; for Jim has just left our house," replied Mr. Holmes. "Jim came
over to see what luck my boy had had. I'm growing more worried every
minute. I think I'll go down to the river."

"We'll go with you, sir, if you don't mind," urged Dick.

"I'll be glad to have you, boys."

But the trip to the river did not lessen their worry. At the boathouse,
where Jim Haynes kept his canoe, Jim's craft was the only one absent.

"There won't be any sleep in our house to-night until Greg gets home,"
spoke Mr. Holmes plaintively. He saw by their faces that Greg's five
chums were equally uneasy. Yet all five dreaded equally to mention the
bare thought that Greg might have fallen in with violence at the hands
of cowardly Ab. Dexter.

"What in the wide world are we going to do?" whispered Dave aside to
Dick.

"Oh, dear, I don't really know. At any rate, we'll have to leave that to
Mr. Holmes."

"Boys," spoke that gentleman suddenly, "who owns that gasoline launch
yonder?"

"Mr. Edward Atwater," Dick answered.

"That looks like a powerful reflector light on the bow."

"Yes, it is, sir," Dave volunteered.

"Where does Mr. Atwater live?"

"On Benson Avenue," Tom Reade replied.

"Boys, I'm going over and see if I can induce Mr. Atwater to take us up
the river to-night."

"May we go, too, sir?" begged Dick anxiously.

"Yes; if you get your parents' permission. We may be up the river late
to-night."

Mr. Holmes turned on his heel, going away at a walk that was close to a
run.

The five members of Dick & Co. scurried homeward. Every one of them
secured permission to go with Mr. Holmes, and to be out as late as
necessary. Dan Dalzell, the last of the five to get back to the
boathouse, was there for some minutes ere Mr. Holmes turned up with Mr.
Atwater.

The owner of the roomy launch speedily had things in running order. The
"Napoleon," with the reflector light going brightly, turned out of the
berth and headed up the river.

"My notion, Mr. Holmes," called the owner, sitting over the steering
gear, "is that we had better go rather slowly. If you'll turn that light
from side to side we ought to be able to scan the whole river as we
move."

Mr. Holmes was already busy swinging the light on its pivot. Behind,
peering ahead in all directions, crouched Dick Prescott and his chums.

They had gone about a mile upstream when Dick suddenly called out:

"Turn the light to the right again, Mr. Holmes, please. Yes; there it
is. Don't you make out a canoe over close by the shore?"

"Turn over there, Mr. Atwater," called Mr. Holmes, his hands shaking as
he tried to hold the light steadily on the floating object that Dick's
keen vision had picked up.

"Is--is that Jim Haynes's canoe?" asked Mr. Holmes in a choking voice,
as the launch swung in close to the drifting craft.

"Yes, sir," spoke Dick huskily. "See, there's an 'H' in a circle on the
bow."

Mr. Atwater ran up so close that the boys reached over and held the
canoe by its rim. There could be no doubt that it was Haynes's canoe.
All of the boys recognized it.

"There are no apples in the canoe," murmured Tom Reade.

"You glutton!" muttered Dan Dalzell angrily.

"No; I wasn't thinking of that," Tom retorted indignantly. "But there
being no apples shows that Greg didn't get as far as getting any. If
anything happened, then it happened before he had time to load the canoe
with apples."

"And that must have been hours ago," spoke Mr. Holmes with a noise in
his throat that was curiously like a sob.

Silently Dick and Dave fished for the bowline of the canoe, then went
back and made it fast astern.

"What now?" queried Mr. Atwater, looking at Greg's father.

"I think, perhaps, we had better go on up to Mr. Payson's," suggested
Mr. Holmes. "It isn't too late to call on him, and he will be able to
tell us whether Greg showed up at his house at all."

The launch was soon alongside the little landing at Mr. Payson's place.
Taking a lantern from the boat, Dick and his friends explored the
orchard for signs of Greg until Mr. Holmes returned.

"Mr. Payson tells me that he didn't see my boy," stated Mr. Holmes.
"What can we do now, I wonder?"

"I should think, sir," Dick suggested, "that it's plain enough that Greg
didn't try to go home by the river. The canoe may have gotten adrift,
and he may have started toward home on foot. Some of us, I think, ought
to follow the road. We may find Greg somewhere along the road, injured
as a result of some accident."

"That's a good idea," nodded Mr. Holmes. "Yet I shall want Mr. Atwater
to keep on searching along the river, and some of you boys ought to be
with him, using your sharp eyes."

A conference was held at the landing. Tom Reade and Harry Hazelton
boarded the "Napoleon," after which Mr. Holmes and the other boys set
out for the road.

Truth to tell, neither those aboard the launch nor those who slowly
followed the road back to Gridley had much hope of encountering news of
the missing Greg.

"He has fallen in with Ab. Dexter or Driggs," whispered Dave to Dick
when they were so far from Mr. Holmes that the latter could not overhear
them.

"That's the way I feel about it," nodded young Prescott. "First, the
affair of the bricks for mine; then the big stone that whizzed by within
an inch of your head at night. And now Greg, the third of us to spoil
the abduction plan, is mysteriously missing."

"There's some scoundrelly plan back of all three affairs," replied Dave
Darrin with conviction. "Yet why should Dexter take all this trouble to
punish boys?"

"First of all, because we interfered with him, and spoiled his bold
stroke," guessed Dick Prescott. "Next, through hitting so mysteriously
at us all, he probably hopes to scare Mrs. Dexter out of her life. If
Dexter gets her thoroughly nervous and cowed probably she'll buy him off
with a lot of her inherited money. That fellow Dexter would do anything
on earth to escape the penalty of having to work for his living."

"The mean rascal!" was all Dave could mutter, and he said it with
pent-up savagery.

Wherever a light showed along the country road the seekers after Greg
knocked at doors. Invariably the answer was the same--no tidings.

It was after one o'clock Sunday morning when the Grammar School boys
returned to their several homes, discouraged and heartsick.

Of course the "Blade" got wind of the affair and had Len Spencer and
another reporter out working on the mystery.

The police, too, took a hand, though there was an absolute lack of clues
upon which to work.

Broad daylight came Sunday morning, and still no Greg Holmes accounted
for. Now, the police took a further hand by beginning to drag the river.

The mystery continued throughout that long, dreary day. The Grammar
School boys felt as though "there had been a death in the family." Len
Spencer was aware of the suspicions against Ab. Dexter, but, through
fear of the libel law, he was restrained from putting his suspicions
into print until there was some real proof against Dexter.




CHAPTER X

A PROBLEM IN FOOTPRINTS


Monday morning dawned bright and clear.

Yet, at 7.40, the fire alarm whistle blew "twenty-two," the signal for
"no school."

Some boys heard the whistle and wondered. Dick & Co., minus Greg, who
were gathered on Main Street at the time, did not wonder.

Two minutes later a series of long, loud blasts rang out, the signal to
call the populace to fire headquarters.

"Just what we thought," guessed Dick, as he, Dave, Dan, Tom and Harry
started on a run. "There's no school because there's to be a general
hunt for Greg."

The volunteer firemen of Gridley were among the first to reach fire
headquarters. The few regulars of the fire department could not leave
their posts. They must be on hand in case of fires starting.

But the police, the local militia officers and a few fire-department
officials were quickly gathered and ready to lead searching parties. As
swiftly as could be, the fire chief detailed the leaders for the parties
that were to go in the various directions.

The boys of Gridley were left to join which ever searching parties they
chose.

"Which crowd shall we go with?" asked Tom Reade.

"I think we'd better go with the crowd that's going up the river road,"
hinted Dick. "Have the rest of you any better plan?"

No member of Dick & Co. had a better suggestion to make, so Dick's plan
prevailed.

There were some twenty men in the party that went up along the river
road, and more than a dozen boys. Captain Hall, of the Gridley militia
company, commanded this expedition.

"Now, just as soon as we get out into the country," explained Captain
Hall, as they started, "we shall do well to spread out. We can cover a
wide range of ground, and yet keep within hearing of each other, so that
we can signal."

The first part of the road was covered rapidly. Out in the rural part
Captain Hall halted his searching party and disposed of the men and boys
under his command.

The line, when it moved forward again, extended into the fields for a
considerable distance on each side of the road. Everyone had a complete
description of Greg's clothing and hat when he had last left home. All
were instructed, also, to look for a gunny sack, or any fragments
thereof, for Greg had carried such a sack with him on his expedition up
the river, and this sack had not yet been found.

"Even a shred of that sack, if found, may form a most important clue,"
