  some advantage; _insomuch_ (51)     recommended him to notice: and at
  _that_, when the next season came   the next election he was chosen
  for the election of their           Governor.
  magistrates, he was chosen their
  governor: (30) (45) (43) in which   In his new post, his restless and
  place he had so ill fortune (26)    unquiet imagination found
  (his working and unquiet fancy      opportunity for creating and
  raising and infusing a thousand     diffusing a thousand conscientious
  scruples of conscience, which (5)   scruples that had not been brought
  _they_ had not brought over with    over, or ever even heard of, by the
  them, nor heard of before) (19)     colonists. His government proved a
  that he  unsatisfied with           failure: and, mutually
  them and they with him,             dissatisfied, (45) governed and
  he retransported himself            governor parted. Vane returned
  into England; (30) (43) (44)        to England, but not till he had
  having sowed such seed of           accomplished his mischievous task,
  dissension there, as grew up too    not till he had sown the seeds of
  prosperously, and miserably         those miserable dissensions which
  divided the poor colony into        afterwards grew only too
  several factions, and divisions     prosperously, till they split the
  and persecutions of each (15 _a_)   wretched colony into distinct,
  _other_, (30) (43) which still      hostile, and mutually persecuting
  continue _to the great_ (54)        factions. His handiwork still
  _prejudice of that plantation_:     remains, and it is owing to (15)
  insomuch as some of (5) _them_,     _him_ that some of the colonists,
  upon the ground of their first      on the pretext of liberty of
  expedition, liberty of conscience,  conscience, the original cause of
  have withdrawn themselves from (5)  their emigration, have withdrawn
  _their_ jurisdiction, and obtained  themselves from the old colonial
  other charters from the king, by    jurisdiction and have obtained
  which, (30) (43) in other forms of  fresh charters from the king.
  government, they have enlarged      These men have established new
  their plantations, within new       forms of government, unduly
  limits adjacent to (5) (15 _a_)     enlarged their boundaries, and set
  _the other_.their plantations,      up rival settlements on the
  within new limits adjacent to (5)   borders of the original colony.
  (15 _a_) _the other_.


FOOTNOTES:

[19] The original metaphor uses the crown as a prop, which seems a
confusion. Though the metaphor is so common as scarcely to be regarded
as a metaphor, it is better to avoid the appearance of confusion.

[20] We sometimes say, briefly but not perhaps idiomatically, "the
_then_ sovereign," "the _then_ temper," &c.

[21] The personality of the tempters and organizers of the conspiracy
is purposely kept in the background.

[22] The relative is retained in the first two cases, because it
conveys the _reason why_ Fiennes was educated at New College; and in
the third case, because the increased "antipathy" is regarded as the
natural _consequence_ of the residence in Calvinistic Geneva.

[23] Claiming.

[24] An insinuation of sedition seems intended.

[25] This sentence is a preliminary summary of what follows.

[26] If "which" is used here according to Rule (8), the meaning is,
(_a_) "and their differences;" if it is used for "that," the meaning
will be, (_b_) "all religions that were of a nature to dispose &c." I
believe (_a_) is the meaning; but I have found difference of opinion
on the question.

[27] The following words appear to be emphatic, bringing out the
difference between the _infancy_ and the development of schism.


                              BURNET.

The principal faults in Burnet's style are (_a_) the use of
heterogeneous sentences (see 43); (_b_) the want of suspense (see 30);
(_c_) the ambiguous use of pronouns (see 5); (_d_) the omission of
connecting adverbs and conjunctions, and an excessive use of _and_
(see 44); and (_e_) an abruptness in passing from one topic to another
(see 45). The correction of these faults necessarily lengthens the
altered version.

       ORIGINAL VERSION.                      PARALLEL VERSION.

  And his maintaining the honour of   He also gratified the English
  the nation in all foreign           feeling of self-respect by
  countries gratified the (1)         maintaining the honour of the
  _vanity which is very natural_      nation in all foreign countries.
  (50) _to Englishmen_; (30) (43) of  So jealous was he on this point
  which he was _so_ (15) (17 _a_)     that, though he was not a crowned
  _careful_ that, though he was not   head, he yet secured for his
  a crowned head, yet his (40 _a_)    ambassadors all the respect that
  ambassadors had all the respects    had been paid to the ambassadors
  paid them which our (15) _kings'_   of our kings. The king, he said,
  ambassadors ever had: he said (6    received respect simply as the
  _b_) the dignity of the crown       nation's representative head,
  was upon the account of the         and, since the nation was the
  nation, _of which the king was_     same, the same respect should
  (50) _only the representative       be paid to the[28] nation's
  head_; so, the nation being the     ministers.
  same, he would have the same
  regards paid to (41) his
  ministers.

  Another[29] instance of (5) _this_  The following instance of jealousy
  pleased _him_ much. Blake with the  for the national honour pleased
  fleet _happened_ (50) _to be_ at    him much. When Blake was at Malaga
  Malaga before he made war upon      with his fleet, before his war
  Spain: (44) _and_ some of his       with Spain, it happened that some
  seamen went ashore, _and_ met the   of his sailors going ashore and
  Host carried about; (44) _and_ not  meeting the procession of the
  only paid no respect to it, but     Host, not only paid no respect to
  laughed at those who did; (43)      it, but even laughed at those who
  (30) (51) so one of the priests     did. Incited by one of the priests
  put the people upon resenting this  to resent the indignity, the
  indignity; _and_ they fell upon     people fell on the scoffers and
  (5) _them and_ beat them severely.  beat them severely. On their
  When they returned to their ship    return to the ship the seamen
  (5) _they_ complained of (5)        complained of this ill-usage,
  _this_ usage; and upon that Blake   whereupon Blake sent a messenger
  sent a trumpet to the viceroy to    to the viceroy to demand the
  demand the priest who was the       priest who was the instigator of
  chief (1) _instrument_ in that      the outrage. The viceroy answered
  ill-usage. The viceroy answered     that he could not touch him, as he
  _he_ had no authority over the      had no authority over the priests.
  (15) _priests_, and so could not    To this Blake replied, that he did
  dispose of him. Blake upon that     not intend to inquire to whom the
  sent him word that _he_ would not   authority belonged, but, if the
  inquire who had the (1) power to    priest were not sent within three
  send the priest to him, but if      hours, he would burn the town. The
  _he_ were not sent within three     townspeople being in no condition
  hours, _he_ would burn their town;  to resist, the priest was at once
  (43) and (5) _they_, being in no    sent. On his arrival, he defended
  condition to resist _him_, sent     himself, alleging the insolence of
  the priest to _him_, (43) (44) who  the sailors. But the English (50)
  justified himself upon the           Admiral replied that a complaint
  petulant behaviour of the seamen.    should have been forwarded to him,
                                       and then he would have punished
  (44) Blake answered that, if (5)     them severely, for none of his
  _he_ had sent a complaint to (5)     sailors should be allowed to
  _him of_(5) _it_, (5) _he_ would     affront the established religion
  have punished them severely, since   of any place where they touched.
  (5) _he_ would not suffer _his_      "But," he added, "I take it ill
  men to affront the established       that you should set on your
  religion of any place at which (5)   countrymen to do my work; for I
  _he_ touched; but (5) (6) _he_       will have all the world know that
  took it ill, that _he_ set on the    an Englishman is only to be
  Spaniards to do (5) _it_; for _he_   punished, by an Englishman." Then,
  would have all the world to know     satisfied with having had the (50)
  that an Englishman was only to be    offender at his mercy, Blake
  punished by an Englishman; (43)      entertained him civilly and sent
  (44) and so he treated the priest    him back.
  civilly, and sent him back (30),
  being satisfied that he had him at
  his mercy.

  Cromwell was much delighted with    Cromwell was much delighted with
  (5) _this_, (43) and read the       Blake's conduct. Reading the
  letters in council with great       letters in council with great
  satisfaction; _and_ said he (6)     satisfaction, he said, "I hope I
  hoped he should make the name of    shall make the name of an
  an Englishman as great as ever      Englishman as much respected as
  that of a Roman (15 _a_) _had       ever was the name of Roman."
  been_. (44) The States of Holland   Among other countries the States
  were in such dread of (5) him that  of Holland were in such dread of
  they took care to give him no sort  Cromwell that they took care to
  of umbrage; (43) (44) _and_ when    give him no sort of umbrage.
  at any time the king or his         Accordingly, whenever the king or
  brothers came to see their sister   his brothers came to see the
  the Princess Royal, (23) within a   Princess Royal their sister, they
  day or two after, (5) _they_ used   were always warned in a day or two
  to send a deputation to let _them_  by a deputation that Cromwell had
  know that Cromwell had required of  required of the States to give
  the States that (5) _they_ should   them no harbourage.
  give _them_ no harbour.

    *     *     *     *     *           *     *     *     *     *

  Cromwell's favourite alliance was   The free kingdom of Sweden was
  Sweden.[30] (44) Carolus Gustavus   Cromwell's favourite ally; not
  and he lived in great conjunction   only under Charles Gustavus, with
  of counsels. (44) Even Algernon     whom he was on most confidential
  Sydney, (10 _a_) _who_ was not      terms, but also under Christina.
  inclined to think or speak well of  Both these sovereigns had just
  kings, commended _him_ (5) to me;   notions of public liberty; at
  and  said _he_ (5) had just         least, Algernon Sydney, a man
  notions of public liberty; (44)     certainly not prejudiced in favour
  (43) _and_ added, that Queen        of royalty, assured me this was
  Christina seemed to have _them_     true of Gustavus. He also held the
  likewise. But (44) she was          same opinion of Queen Christina;
  much changed from that, when        but, if so, she was much changed
  I waited on her at Rome; for        when I waited on her at Rome; for
  she complained of us as a factious  she then complained of the factious
  nation, _that did not readily       and unruly spirit of our nation.
  comply with the commands_ (47 _a_)
  _of our princes_. (44) All Italy    All Italy, no less than
  trembled at the name of Cromwell,   Holland,[31] trembled at the name
  and seemed under a (1) _panic_ as   of Cromwell, and dreaded him till
  long as he lived; (43) his fleet    he died. Nor durst the Turks
  scoured the Mediterranean; and the  offend the great (50) Protector
  Turks durst not offend him; but     whose fleet scoured the
  delivered up Hyde, who kept up the  Mediterranean; and they even gave
  character of an ambassador from     up Hyde, who, for keeping up in
  the king there (23) (43), and was   Turkey the character of ambassador
  brought over and executed for (5)   from the king, was brought to
  _it_.                               England and executed.

  (44) (11 _a_) The _putting_ the     In another instance of severity
  brother of the king of Portugal's   towards foreigners--the execution
  ambassador to death for murder,     of the brother of the Portuguese
  was (11 _a_) _carrying_ justice     ambassador for murder--Cromwell
  very far; (43) since, though in     carried justice very far. For,
  the strictness of the law of        though in strictness the law of
  nations, it is only the             nations exempts from foreign
  ambassador's own person that is     jurisdiction the ambassador alone,
  exempted from (4) _any authority_   yet in practice the exemption has
  (47 _a_) _but his master's that     extended to the whole of the
  sends him_, yet the practice has    ambassador's suite.
  gone in favour of _all that the
  ambassador owned_ (47 _a_) _to      Successful abroad, Cromwell was no
  belong to him_. (41) (44) Cromwell  less successful at home in
  showed his good (11)                selecting able and worthy men for
  _understanding_ in nothing more     public duties, especially for the
  than in seeking[32] out capable     courts of law. In nothing did he
  and worthy men for all employments, show more clearly his great
  but most particularly for the       natural insight, and nothing
  courts of law, (43) (30 _a_)        contributed more to his popularity.
  (10 _a_) which gave a general
  satisfaction.


FOOTNOTES:

[28] The meaning is "_his_, and therefore _the nation's_, ministers."
There is a kind of antithesis between "the nation" and "the nation's
ministers."

[29] No instance has yet been mentioned.

[30] The thought that is implied, and should be expressed, by the
words, is this: "Cromwell's favourite ally was a free country."

[31] The remarks about Christina are a digression, and Burnet is now
returning to the respect in which Cromwell was held by foreign
nations.

[32] He not only sought, but sought successfully. That "find" is not
necessarily implied by "seek out" seems proved by the use of the word
in the Authorized Version, 2 Tim. ii. 17: "He _sought_ me _out_ very
diligently, and _found_ me."


                              BISHOP BUTLER.

The principal faults in this style are (_a_) a vague use of pronouns
(5), and sometimes (_b_) the use of a phrase, where a word would be
enough (47 _a_).

       ORIGINAL VERSION.                       PARALLEL VERSION.

  Some persons, (15) _upon            Some persons avowedly reject all
  pretence[33] of the sufficiency of  revelation as[34]essentially
  the light of Nature_, avowedly      incredible and necessarily
  reject all revelation as, _in its_  fictitious, on the ground that the
  (47 _a_) _very notion_,             light of Nature is in itself
  incredible, _and what_ (47 _a_)     sufficient. And assuredly, had the
  _must be fictitious_. And indeed    light of Nature been sufficient in
  (32) it is certain that no          such a sense as to render
  revelation would have been given,   revelation needless or useless, no
  (32) had the light of Nature been   revelation would ever have been
  sufficient in such a sense as to    given. But let any man consider
  render (5) _one_ not[35] wanting,   the spiritual darkness that once
  or useless. But no (15 _b_) man in  (41) prevailed in the heathen
  seriousness and simplicity can      world before revelation, and that
  possibly think _it_ (5) _so_, who   (41) still prevails in those
  considers the state of religion in  regions that have not yet received
  the heathen world before            the light of revealed truth; above
  revelation, and _its_ (5) present   all, let him mark not merely the
  state in those (11) _places_ (8)    natural inattention and ignorance
  _which_ have borrowed no light      of the masses, but also the
  from (5) it; particularly (19) the  doubtful language held even by a
  doubtfulness of some of the (12)    Socrates on even so vital a
  greatest men concerning _things of  subject as[36] the immortality of
  the utmost_ (11) _importance_, as   the soul; and then can he in
  well as the (15 _a_) _natural       seriousness and sincerity maintain
  inattention and ignorance of        that the light of Nature is
  mankind in general_. It is (34)     sufficient?
  impossible to say (12) who would
  have been able to have reasoned     It is of course impossible to deny
  out that whole system which we      that some second[36] Aristotle
  call natural religion, (30) in its  might have reasoned out, in its
  genuine simplicity, clear of        genuine simplicity and without
  superstition; but there is          a touch of superstition, the
  certainly no ground to affirm       whole of that system which we
  that the generality could.          call natural religion. But there
  (44) If they could, there is        is certainly no ground for
  no sort of probability that         affirming that this complicated
  they would. (44) Admitting there    process would have been possible
  were, they would highly want a      for ordinary men. Even if they had
  standing admonition to remind them  had the power, there is no
  of (5) _it_, and inculcate it upon  probability that they would have
  them. And further still, were (5)   had the inclination; and, even if
  _they_ as much _disposed_ (47 _a_)  we admit the probable inclination,
  _to attend to_ religion as the      they would still need some
  better sort of men (15 _a_) _are_;  standing admonition, whereby
  yet, even upon this supposition,    natural religion might be
  there would be various occasions    suggested and inculcated. Still
  for supernatural instruction and    further, even if we suppose these
  assistance, _and the greatest       ordinary men to be as attentive to
  advantages_ (50) _might be          religion as men of a better sort,
  afforded_ (15 _a_) _by_ (5)         yet even then there would be
  _them_. So that, to say revelation  various occasions when
  is a thing superfluous, _what       supernatural instruction and
  there_ (47 _a_) _was no need of_,   assistance might be most
  and _what can be of_ (47 _a_) _no   beneficially bestowed.
  service_, is, I think, to talk
  wildly and at random. Nor would it  Therefore, to call revelation
  be more extravagant to affirm that  superfluous, needless, and
  (40 _a_) _mankind_ is so entirely   useless, is, in my opinion, to
  (40 _a_) _at ease_ in the present   talk wildly and at random. A man
  state, and (40 _a_) _life so_       might as reasonably assert that we
  completely (40 _a_) _happy_, that   are so entirely at ease and so
  (5) _it_ is a contradiction to      completely happy in this present
  suppose (40 _a_) our condition      life that our condition cannot
  capable of _being in any respect_   without contradiction be supposed
  (47 _a_) _better_.--(_Analogy of    capable of being in any way
  Religion_, part ii. chap. 1.)       improved.


FOOTNOTES:

[33] "To pretend" once meant "to put forward," "maintain."

[34] It has been suggested, however, that by "in its very notion
incredible," is meant "inconceivable."

[35] "Wanting" is used for modern "wanted."

[36] This use of the particular for the general would be out of place
in Butler's style, but it adds clearness.


BREVITY.

                         SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON.

The following extract exhibits examples of tautology and lengthiness.
The "implied statement" (50) can often be used as a remedy, but, more
often, the best remedy is omission.

       ORIGINAL VERSION.                        PARALLEL VERSION.

  The Russian empire is (50) _a       Russia, with her vast strength and
  state of_ (54) _such_ vast          boundless resources, is obviously
  strength and boundless              destined to exercise on the course
  resources, _that_ it is             of history a great and lasting
  obviously destined to make a        influence. The slowness of her
  great and lasting impression on     progress only renders her
  human affairs. Its (50) progress    durability more probable. The
  has been slow, but (5) _it_[37] is  Russian Empire has not, like the
  only on that account the more       empires of Alexander the Great and
  likely to be durable. (5) _It_ has  Napoleon, been raised to sudden
  not suddenly risen to greatness,    greatness by the genius of
  like the empire of Alexander in     individuals or the accidents of
  ancient (19) (31), or that of       fortune, but has been slowly
  Napoleon in modern, times, from     enlarged and firmly consolidated
  the force of individual genius, or  by well-guided ambition and
  the accidents of (54) casual        persevering energy,[38] during a
  fortune, but has slowly advanced,   long succession of ages.
  and (40 _a_) been firmly
  consolidated (15) _during a
  succession of ages_, from the
  combined influence of ambition
  skilfully directed and energy (15
  _a_) _perseveringly applied_.

    *     *     *     *     *           *     *     *     *     *

  The extent and fertility of the     The extent and fertility of her
  Russian territory are _such_ (54)   territory furnish unparalleled
  _as to_ furnish facilities of       facilities for the increase of her
  increase and elements of strength   population and power. European
  _which no nation_ (47 _a_) _in the  Russia, that is, Russia to the
  world enjoys_. European             west of the Ural Mountains,
  Russia--that is, Russia to the      contains one million two hundred
  westward of the Ural                thousand square geographical
  Mountains--contains a hundred and   miles, or ten times the surface of
  fifty thousand four hundred square  Great Britain and Ireland.
  marine leagues, or about one
  million two hundred thousand
  square geographical miles, being
  ten times the surface of the
  British Islands, which contain,
  including Ireland, one hundred and
  twenty-two thousand. Great part,    This vast territory is intersected
  no doubt, of this _immense_ (54,    by no mountain ranges, no arid
  see below) _territory is covered_   deserts; and though much of it is
  with forests, or (40 _a_) _lies_    rendered almost unproductive of
  so far to the north as to be        food either by the denseness of
  almost unproductive of food; but    forests, or by the severity of the
  no ranges of mountains or arid      northern winter, yet almost all,
  deserts intersect the _vast_ (54,   except that part which touches
  see above) _extent_, and almost     the Arctic snows, is capable of
  the whole, excepting that which     yielding something for the use
  touches the Arctic snows, is        of man.
  capable of yielding something for
  the use of man. The (3) (54)        The steppes of the south present
  _boundless_ steppes of the south    an inexhaustible pasturage to
  present (54) _inexhaustible_        those nomad tribes whose numerous
  fields of pasturage, and give       and incomparable horsemen form the
  birth to those nomad tribes, in     chief defence of the empire.
  whose numerous and incomparable
  horsemen the chief defence of the
  empire,[39] as of all Oriental
  states, (15 _a_) _is to be found_.
  The rich arable lands in the heart  The rich arable lands in the
  _of the_ (54) _empire_ produce an   interior produce grain enough to
  (2) _incalculable_ quantity of      support four times the present
  grain, capable not only of          population of the empire, and yet
  maintaining four times (5) _its_    leave a vast surplus to be
  present inhabitants, but affording  transported by the Dnieper, the
  a vast surplus for exportation by   Volga, and their tributaries, into
  the Dnieper, the Volga, and their   the Euxine or other seas.
  tributary streams, (30) which
  _form so many_ (54) _natural
  outlets_ into the Euxine or other
  seas; (44) while the cold and       Lastly, the cold bleak plains
  shivering plains which stretch      stretching towards Archangel and
  towards Archangel and the shores    towards the shores of the White
  of the White Sea are (48) covered   Sea, and covered with immense
  with immense forests of fir and     forests of oak and fir, furnish
  oak, furnishing at once (54)[40]    materials for shipbuilding and
  _inexhaustible_ materials for       supplies of fuel that will for
  shipbuilding and supplies of fuel.  many generations supersede the
  (54) _These ample stores_ for many  necessity of searching for coal.
  generations will supersede the
  necessity of searching in the (14
  _a_) _bowels_ of the earth for
  _the purposes of_ (54) _warmth or
  manufacture_.

  Formidable as the power of Russia   Much as we may dread Russia for
  is from the vast extent of its      the vastness of her territory and
  territory, and the great and        of her rapidly increasing numbers,
  rapidly increasing number _of       there is greater cause for fear
  its_ (54) _subjects_, (5) _it_ is   in the military spirit and the
  still more (5) _so_ from the        docility of her people.
  military spirit and docile
  disposition _by which they are_
  (54)[41] _distinguished_. The
  prevailing (54) _passion_ of the    A burning thirst for conquest is
  nation is the (54) _love of         as prevalent a passion in Russia
  conquest_, and this (54) _ardent_   as democratic ambition in the free
  (54) _desire_, which (54) _burns    states of Western Europe. This
  as_ (54) _fiercely_ in them as      passion is the unseen spring[2]
  democratic ambition does in the     which, while it retains the
  free states of Western Europe, is   Russians in the strictest
  the unseen spring[42] which both    discipline, unceasingly impels
  retains them _submissive_ (54)      their united forces against all
  _under the standard of their        adjoining states.
  chief_ and impels their
  accumulated forces in ceaseless     The national energy, which is as
  violence over all the adjoining     great as the national territory,
  states. The energies of the         rarely wastes itself in disputes
  people, great as[43] the territory  about domestic grievances. For all
  they inhabit, are rarely wasted in  internal evils, how great soever,
  internal disputes. Domestic         the Russians hope to find a
  grievances, how great soever, are   compensation, and more than a
  (54) overlooked in the thirst for   compensation, in the conquest of
  foreign aggrandizement. (15) In     the world.
  the conquest of the world the
  people hope to find a
  compensation, and more than a
  compensation, (15 _a_) _for all
  the evils of their interior
  administration_.


FOOTNOTES:

[37] Apparently "it" means, not "progress," but the "Russian empire."

[38] Not "energy," but "a long succession of ages," needs to be
emphasized.

[39] There is nothing in the context that requires the words, "as of
all Oriental states."

[40] If they were really "inexhaustible," the "necessity of searching
in the bowels of the earth" would be "superseded," not for "many," but
for all generations.

[41] The words can be implied, and besides they are expressed in the
following sentence.

