fishing in the rivers and ocean. They also eat the fruits that grow wild
in the forests. There are some cities in the Torrid Zone, but none of
them are very large. These towns have been built mostly by the civilized
white people. The streets are often shaded with beautiful palm trees.
The buildings are generally small, as the people live and work out of
doors as much as possible.


7

WHAT THE TEMPERATE AND TORRID ZONES DO FOR EACH OTHER

The people living in the Torrid Zone send to us Temperate Zone people
many useful things that do not grow here. These are some of them:

  Cocoanuts    Chocolate
  Bananas      Pepper
  Coffee       Palm leaves
  Rubber       Mahogany

In return the Temperate Zone people send to the Torrid Zone inhabitants
things that they do not have. In the Hot Zone there are no large
factories in which to manufacture goods, so we send there:

  Farm tools     Guns
  Woven goods    Knives
  Books          Clothing


8

THE COLD ZONES

[Illustration: AN ESKIMO FAMILY.]

At the most northern part of the earth and at the most southern part are
regions of intense cold. The earth is entirely covered with ice and snow
all of the year. The water is filled with masses of floating ice and
snow. Our coldest winter days are not nearly so cold as the climate of
the North and South Frigid Zones. It is even hard to tell which is land
and which is water.

Of course no trees, nor grass, nor plants, nor animals, nor people of
any kind can live in that intense cold. At the parts near the Temperate
Zones, where it is slightly warmer, there are some very small dwarfed
trees not more than a foot or two high, and perhaps a little moss. It is
here that the Eskimos live; but most of the North Frigid Zone and the
South Frigid Zone is a stretch of frozen whiteness on all sides, with no
living thing of any kind. During the summer the sun never sets, so that
there is twilight all night. In winter the sun never rises above the
horizon, so there are months of darkness.

[Illustration: ESKIMO BOY.]

These frozen lands are the regions through which so many brave explorers
have traveled trying to find the most northern part called the North
Pole, and the most southern part, the South Pole. Many of these
fearless men have never returned from the Frigid Zones. They have
starved or been frozen to death.

At last, after trying for twenty-seven years, Robert E. Peary, an
American, reached the North Pole on April 6, 1909. All Americans are
very proud of this brave, determined, fearless man, who would not stop
until he had done what he set out to do.

Roald Amundsen, a brave Norwegian, reached the South Pole on December
14, 1911, after suffering many hardships.


9

Peary has written a book in which he tells about his travels. Up in the
north he met the Eskimos, who belong to the Indian family. They live in
snow houses in the winter. In summer, which is also very cold, they live
in skin tents. These Eskimos dress in warm furs. They have no schools
nor churches, but they are a kind and peaceful people. They are very
good to the white explorers in the north.

The Eskimo travels mostly on foot, but carries loads on sledges drawn by
dogs. The Eskimo's dogs are his best friends. Without them he could not
manage to carry home the animals he kills for food and clothing. He also
uses boats which he makes of skins.

Many of the Frigid Zone animals are covered with heavy fur. Why?

SOME FRIGID ZONE ANIMALS

  Dog         Polar Bear    Seal
  Reindeer    Whale         Penguin


10

WHAT THE FRIGID AND TEMPERATE ZONES DO FOR EACH OTHER

Men go to the Frigid Zones and catch seals and other animals and bring
back the skins for the Temperate Zone people.

The whale, which lives in the ocean of the Frigid Zone, is also very
useful. From it we get the whalebone, oil and also a fertilizer to help
our farm crops to grow. Great quantities of whale meat are eaten by some
people of the Temperate Zones.

The Eskimos of the Frigid Zone are glad to have from the Temperate Zones
manufactured articles like pans, knives and guns.


11

1. What different kinds of people have you ever seen?

2. Why are the Temperate Zone people more civilized than the Frigid Zone
people?

3. Name some animals of each zone.

4. In which zones is it best to live? Why?

5. As you sit at your desk point toward the North Pole, toward the South
Frigid Zone, the North Frigid Zone, the South Temperate Zone, the
Equator, the South Pole, the Torrid Zone.




CHAPTER IV

NORTH AMERICA


1

Find where we live on the map of North America. Locate our home on all
of our maps and globes.

North America is a very large portion of land. You could sail along its
shores for thousands of miles. At its widest part you could not cross it
in a fast express train in less than five days and nights. There are
thousands of cities in this great grand division, for there are millions
of people here. Most of them are white or Caucasian. There are also many
Indians, negroes, Eskimos and Mongolians.

Much of the land is dense forest, and much is fertile farm land. A small
part has so few rivers and such a scarcity of rainfall that the land is
dry and arid. Little grows upon it but coarse grass and cactus. This
region is called a _desert_.


2

North America stretches far up north into the North Frigid Zone and far
south into the Torrid Zone, but most of it lies in the North Temperate
Zone. What plants and animals live in North America? It is separated
from Asia by a narrow strip of water called Behring Strait. How did
North America used to be connected with South America? Why is the
separation called a canal and not an isthmus?


3

[Illustration: BARNEGAT LIGHTHOUSE.]

Three great oceans wash the shores of North America. Name them. The
coast line is very irregular. Notice on the map that at places part of
the ocean extends far into the land, forming _gulfs_ and _bays_. Hudson
Bay, Gulf of Mexico and Gulf of St. Lawrence are all parts of which
ocean? The waves are not so high in the bays and gulfs as in the open
ocean. The land keeps off some of the wind. Vessels that are waiting to
be laden with cargo lie in these sheltered gulfs and bays. Why?

At many places along the shore the land juts out into the ocean in
_capes_. Many of these points of land have special names. Look on the
map for them. There are light houses built on most of these capes to
warn the ships in the dark and in the storms to keep away from the
dangerous rocks and shore. A cape is often a pleasant place for a summer
home. There is so much water around it that the sea breezes sweep across
it and make it delightfully cool.


4

Do you remember how we spoke of the river with its many boats and
steamers? There are hundreds of rivers in North America flowing for
miles until at last they reach the ocean.


5

There are many high hills, some so very high as to be called
_mountains_. There is a chain of these mountains called the Eastern
Highlands along the eastern part of North America. They extend for many
miles north and south. The scenery in this region is very beautiful. The
mountains are covered mostly with forests of pine, spruce, oak, maple,
chestnut and other trees. These are cut down for lumber. In the wilder
parts of these forests live squirrels, rabbits, bears and snakes. At
places the trees have been cut down to make room for fields of grain.

[Illustration: SURFACE MAP OF NORTH AMERICA.]

The mountains are full of useful minerals. Great quantities of coal and
iron are mined in the Eastern Highlands.


6

The highest mountains in North America are the Western Highlands in the
western part. One great chain or range extends the entire length of
North America from the Arctic Ocean down into South America. Great
forests grow on these mountains. In many places are huge masses of rock
on which nothing grows, so this range has been called the Rocky
Mountains. It is always bitter cold at the top of some of these
mountains because they reach so high. Even in summer they are capped
with snow. Nowhere in the world can more magnificent scenery be found.

West of the Rocky Mountains is the Pacific Mountain System.

Gold and silver are mined in the Western Highlands. In the wild parts of
the forests, where no people live, deer, wolves and bears may be found.


7

The low land between the mountains we call _plains_ or _valleys_. There
is a Great Central Plain which reaches from the Eastern Highlands to the
Western Highlands. There are many rivers in this valley. The Mississippi
and the Missouri Rivers are the largest.


8

You remember how rivers make rainfall and fertile soil. The Great
Central Plain has some of the best farm land in the world. In the
northern cold part hardly anything grows, but in the central part great
quantities of corn, grain, fruits and vegetables are raised. In the
south the plantations or farms raise sugar cane, cotton, tobacco, rice
and coffee.

[Illustration: SHEEP ON THE PLAINS.]

On the western plains great herds of thousands of sheep and cattle are
raised.

In the Great Central Plain are hundreds of cities where the farm
products are sold. Here, too, the farmers buy the farm tools and
machinery which they need. In the city mills the wheat is ground into
flour and the logs from the forests are sawed into planks or made into
furniture. The cattle and sheep are killed and the meat prepared for our
use.


9

East of the central part of the Great Central Plain are five of the
largest lakes in the world. When you are in a boat in the middle of any
one of them you cannot see the land on any side. They are called the
Great Lakes. Their names are Superior, Michigan, Huron, Erie and
Ontario. They are all joined together, and from the last a large river
runs into the Gulf of St. Lawrence. It has the same name as the gulf.

There are many other smaller lakes in North America where the land is
low and the water from the rivers and streams fills up the hollows.
Nearly all have fresh water like the rivers. A very few, like Great Salt
Lake, contain salt water.




CHAPTER V

COUNTRIES OF NORTH AMERICA


1

North America contains several different countries. Each is under a
separate government. These countries are United States, British America,
Danish America, Mexico and Central America. Each country has its own
ruler and its own laws. Each has a special flag and its own kind of
money and postage stamps.


2

THE UNITED STATES

We live in the best one of these countries, for we have the best ways of
obtaining our food, our clothing and our shelter. Our climate is good,
for we are in the North Temperate Zone. Our soil is very fertile. The
Great Central Plain of North America passes through the central part of
the United States. We raise fruits, vegetables, corn, wheat, rice and
sugar for food. We have immense ranches for raising cows and sheep too.
Our clothing is supplied by the thousands of sheep we raise and from the
