
The man on horseback was Squire Lorrimer himself.

He had promised to join the children in time for dinner, but had not
turned up. It was not his custom, however, on any occasion to disappoint
his young people, and although late in the day he was now hastening to
the scene of revelry.

Kitty's frantic speed in his direction by no means surprised him.

"Well, little woman," he said, pulling up the mare as he spoke. "Shall I
give you a mount on Black Bessy's back? and where are all the others? I
expected quite a swarm of you to rush forth. Where is Molly, and where
is Nora, and where is the beautiful Annie Forest, whom everybody seems
to rave about, and mother and Jane Macalister? Are they all hiding and
ready to rush out upon me with wild whoops?"

Kitty panted visibly before she replied.

"No, father, it isn't that," she said. "I and Nora are alone, I--get
down please, father, won't you?"

"Why, what's the matter with you child?" The Squire hastily dismounted.
"Are you hurt, Kit? What a red, excited face."

"No, 'tisn't me, it's Nora. She fell; I think she'll die. It was my
fault. The beech tree had a rotten bough, and I crept out on it, as I
didn't wish to be caught; and Nora followed me, and the bough broke, and
she's lying on her back now and she can't move, and I think she'll die,
and they're all away--I don't know where--somewhere else in the wood,
and I think she's going to die, and it's my fault."

"There, Kitty, keep your pecker up," said the Squire. "I'm glad I came
round this way; it was a lucky chance. Wait a minute until I tie Black
Bess to this tree. Where is Nora?"

"Over there, lying on that knoll of grass. I think she'll die."

"Tut, tut, monkey, what do you know about people dying? Give me your
hand, and bring me to her."

Oh, the comfort to Kitty of that firm, cool, strong hand of
father's--oh, the support of looking into his face. A burden as of black
night was lifted from her. She ran in eager accompaniment to his great
strides. He was bending over Nora in a minute.

"Now, my poor little maid, what is this?" he asked, dropping on one knee
and trying to put his hand under her head as he spoke.

Nora opened her pretty, dark eyes.

"Oh, father, is it you? I'm glad," she said in a faint voice. "I've been
naughty, father; I--I'm sorry."

"Well, you can't be more than sorry, can you, Nonie? Don't bother about
anything now, but just tell me where you are hurt."

"Oh, it's my back. Oh, don't touch me; it's dreadful!"

Squire Lorrimer's face looked very grave.

"Where did she fall from, Kitty?" he asked.

Kitty pointed to the gash made in the beech-tree by the broken bough.

"Over twenty feet," murmured the Squire to himself. "God help my poor
little girl!"

"Look here, Kitty," he said aloud, "Nora is in a good deal of pain; but
I hope we'll soon have her easier. We must try and get her home somehow,
and it would be a good thing if your mother were here; you had better
fetch her. Don't frighten her, Kit, for Nora may not be badly hurt after
all; but bring her here as quickly as you can, and Guy, too, and Molly;
they are both strong, and have their wits about them. We must contrive a
litter of some sort. Now, be quick and find the folks."

"Yes," replied Kitty, who was almost happy again under the influence of
her father's encouraging words.

She was soon out of sight, and in less than half an hour Mrs. Lorrimer,
Jane Macalister, and every other member of the picnic party, were
gathered round the prostrate figure of little Nora.

She was more conscious now, and looked eagerly for one face, the solace
of all sick children.

"Let Mummie hold my hand," she said.

Mrs. Lorrimer took it, bent down, and kissed her; Nora smiled as if a
load had been lifted from her heart.

A rough litter was presently constructed, and with great difficulty the
poor child was lifted into it. The pain of even this slight move,
however, caused her to faint completely away.

It was at this juncture that Hester Thornton came forward with a
suggestion.

"The Grange is nearly three miles nearer than the Towers," she said;
"had not we better bring her there? And had not Guy better ride off at
once to Nortonbury for the doctor?"

"That is a good idea," said Mr. Lorrimer. "Guy, mount on Black Bess's
back and off with you. Bring Dr. Jervis back with you to the Grange if
you can."

The merry little picnic party looked dismal enough as they slowly, and
almost in funereal fashion, left the scene of festivity. The strongest
of the party had to take turns to carry poor Nora's litter, for she
could not endure any less easy movement.

Nan came up to Hester and took her hand.

"I don't know what the meaning of all this is," she said; "but, somehow
or other, I think Annie must be at the bottom of it."

"Where is Annie?" queried Hester. "How completely she seems to have lost
herself. Oh, how miserable poor little Kitty looks. Come here, Kitty,
dear, and tell me all about the accident."

"I cannot," said Kitty. "Don't ask me; it's part of the secret."

"I knew Annie Forest was at the bottom of it," murmured Nan. "Oh, what a
horrid, horrid, dreadful ending to the first of my holidays!"




CHAPTER IX.

"I BROKE MY WORD," SAID ANNIE.


In utter ignorance of the tragic events which were happening in Friar's
Wood, Annie Forest and her two little companions were having a gay time
at the Towers. Annie's old passion for children had not deserted her.
She was often heard to say that she was happier with a frank, original
child than she was with most grown people. Boris was certainly frank;
Nell was certainly original. Annie's beauty and brightness had won
Boris's heart from the moment of her arrival; Nell's affections went out
to her also, but for a different reason. Nell lived in a world of
romance, and Annie's conduct in giving up her own pleasure had seemed to
Nell to fit in with her fairy tales and other story-books. The three
were, therefore, supremely happy during that long afternoon. The picnic
behind the laurustinus hedge being quite a thing of the past, they
proceeded to explore the tower, the old ruined chapel, where services
used to be held morning and night more than three hundred years ago, the
dungeon under the chapel, and all the other places of historic interest.
Then the children's gardens were visited; and, finally, Annie was
persuaded to seat herself in the swing and be sent up into space as high
as Boris's and Nell's united efforts could accomplish. In their turn
they were swung by Annie; and then followed tea in the play-room, where
Nell presided, sitting solemnly in front of the dolls' tea-service and
helping Annie and Boris and herself to unlimited weak tea, with heaps of
cream.

The heat of the day was over at last, a perfect summer's evening had set
in.

"When are they all likely to be back?" asked Annie.

"Not until night, dark night," said Boris with a little sigh.

"What are you sighing for?" asked Annie. "You look quite sad, and I
don't like you sad; I like you with your eyes smiling and your face
puckered up with laughter. Nell looks pale and sad, too. What is it
Nell? what is it Boris?"

"I'd like to be at the picnic now," said Boris, "I didn't mind it in the
daytime when it was so hot; but now they're lighting another bonfire
and they're going to have tea, and after tea Guy will tell stories."

"All about bogies," struck up Nell; "yes, I wish I were there."

Annie looked at them both reflectively. She never cared to be with
children unless she could succeed in making them almost boisterously
happy.

"But it doesn't matter a bit," said Nell, seeing the shadow cross her
face; "I shouldn't be very happy in any case to-night."

"Why?" said Annie.

"I'd rather not say, please. You have been good to us; you have helped
us to have a beautiful day; we are grateful to you, aren't we, Boris?"

"We love her," said Boris.

"You are two darlings," said Annie. "Well, now, suppose we have a bit of
fun on our own account. How far is it from here to the Grange?"

"By the road, three miles," said Boris; "but across the fields, only a
mile and a half."

"We'll go to the Grange across the fields," said Annie. "I heard Hester
say this morning that she was going to try and induce you all to come
back to the Grange to supper, so we three will join the rest of the
party at supper, and if we start at once well be ready to welcome them
when they arrive."

"What a spiffin' plan," said Boris; "do let's start at once."

Nell clapped her hands.

"Now I've made you happy again, that's all right," said Annie. She took
a hand of each child, and they started on their pleasant walk. Boris was
very messy and untidy, his face was stained with fruit and his hands
were dirty. Nell's blue cotton frock was also considerably out at the
gathers round the waist, but the children did not give a thought to
their clothes or personal appearance in the sudden rapture with which
they hailed Annie's suggestion.

The walk across the fields in the sweet freshness of the summer's
evening was all that was delightful, and in an incredibly short space of
time, the three found themselves at the other side of the turnstile
which led into the grounds of the Grange.

"We'll be there long before the others," said Boris. "Suppose we light a
great bonfire on the lawn to welcome them." But even wild Annie did not
see the propriety of this suggestion.

"No, we won't do that," she said. "If the Grange were our own place we
would. We'll just go and sit on the terrace and watch for them."

"Won't Kitty jump when she sees us?" said Boris, a look of satisfaction
radiating all over his face. "She'll see that we have had our lark as
well as the rest of them; oh, I call it real spiffin' fine."

They were walking rapidly through the shrubbery now, and as Boris
finished his speech they came out on the broad sweep in front of the
house.

Just before the entrance a brougham was standing, and instead of
solitude they found themselves surrounded by familiar figures.

Kitty was the first to observe them. She gave a stifled sort of scream,
and pushing aside Boris, who was prepared to rush into her arms, came up
to Annie, took one of her hands, and looked into her face.

"I kept the secret true as true," she said; "but it almost killed me,
and it has nearly quite killed Nora." Her poor little voice broke with
these last words, and she burst into the frantic sobs which she had
bravely kept back until now.

"What in the world is the matter?" said Annie, kneeling down and putting
her arm round the excited child.

"Why, that's Dr. Jervis's carriage," shouted Boris. "What can be up?"

"Why are you back so early from the picnic?" asked Nell.

But Kitty sobbed on unable to reply.

She felt the comfort of Annie's arms round her, and presently she laid
her hot, flushed, little face on Annie's neck and wetted her frill with
her plentiful tears, but no information could be got at present from
poor Kitty's lips.

"There's Molly, and there's Hester," exclaimed Boris, "they'll tell us;
oh, and there's Nan, too. Hullo Nan, come here and tell us what the
rumpus is about."

Nan rushed up excitedly.

"Nora is nearly killed," she said; "she fell from a tree over twenty
feet from the ground, and her back is hurt awfully, and Hester said
she'd better come here, and she's lying in the library and Dr. Jervis is
there. I haven't the faintest idea how it happened," continued Nan;
"only it seems to be your fault, Annie; it seems to have something to do
with you and a secret, only Kitty won't tell."

Kitty ceased to cry; she raised her face and looked at Annie. Annie
struggled to her feet.

She was about to reply to Nan when Hester came up and spoke to her.

"Oh, Annie," she said, "where have you been all day? We have been
dreadfully anxious about you; and poor Nora has been hurt, and Kitty
seems in trouble of some sort, and says that she won't tell her secret.
What can it all mean?"

"Well, really!" said Annie. She paused a minute; the rich colour mantled
her cheeks; her bright eyes seemed to flash fire.

"I'm awfully sorry about Nora," she said; "but I fail to see how I am to
blame. From your manner, Nan, and yours, Hester, I seem to be accused of
something. What is it, pray?"

"Oh, it's nothing, indeed," said Molly, who had come up now and joined
Hester. "What does it matter, Hetty, when we are all so awfully
wretched? Poor Annie did not mean anything. Do let her alone!"

"I did not mean anything?" echoed Annie. "I'm afraid I can't allow
myself to be let alone. I must find out what I'm accused of. Kitty, you
say you kept my secret safely. Speak now and tell everybody."

"I can't stay to listen," said Molly, turning away; "it's too--too
trivial!"

Hester and Nan, however, still stood facing Annie, and the boys, Guy and
Harry, also came and joined the group.

"Speak, Kitty," said Annie.

"You were kind," said Kitty; "it's wicked to say you weren't kind. You
found out that Boris hadn't come to the picnic, and you said you'd go
back for him; you'd walk back all in the heat, and you didn't mind the
bull, nor the bull-dog, nor--nor--anything; and you said I wasn't to
tell, and 'twould be a surprise when you came back with Boris and,
perhaps, Nell, too--and I promised. Then we had dinner, and you weren't
there, and everybody asked for you and everybody wondered where you
could be; but Hester said you were a sort of 'centric girl, and that you
was grown up and we needn't fret; and Nan said you was nothing if you
wasn't unexpected; so nobody fretted, and I kept my secret locked up
tight. But Nora wanted you more than the others, and she saw my lips
shut tight and my eyes watching for you through the trees, and she
guessed I had a secret; and I said I had, but I wouldn't tell; and she
said she'd take me to mother, and that mother would make me tell, and so
I climbed up into the beech-tree to get away from her; and I was naughty
and cross, and she was naughty and cross, too, and she followed me up
into the beech-tree, and I got out upon a rotten bough, where I thought
she'd be sure not to come; but she did come, cause I was real naughty
and I taunted her; and the bough broke and she fell, but I didn't fall
'cause I caught on to a bough higher up. It's been dreadful ever since,"
continued Kitty, pressing her hands tightly together. "Worse than when I
forgot to give water to Harry's canary and it died, and worse than when
I pulled up all Guy's canariensis in mistake for weeds; its been awful,
but I did keep the secret."

