evening to a convenient distance and roar in imitation of a tiger,
merely to relieve his feelings without betraying his presence.  He
added, that the canoe was about five minutes' walk from where they sat,
and somewhat mollified the indignation of his comrades by saying that he
would watch during the remainder of the night while they slept.

Next morning at daybreak the party re-embarked in the canoe and
continued their journey.  Soon the character of the country changed.
After a few days the thick forests had disappeared, and richly
cultivated small farms took their place.  Everywhere they were most
hospitably entertained by the inhabitants, who styled Will "Physico,"
because Bunco made a point of introducing him as a doctor.  One evening
they arrived at a little town with a small and rapid stream of water
passing through it.  There was a square in the centre of the town,
surrounded by orange, lemon, and other trees, which formed an agreeable
shade and filled the air with fragrance.  Not only was there no doctor
here, but one was seldom or never seen.  Immediately, therefore, our
Physico was besieged for advice, and his lancet, in particular, was in
great request, for the community appeared to imagine that bloodletting
was a cure for all the ills that flesh is heir to!  Will of course did
his best for them, and was surprised as well as pleased by the number of
doubloons, with which the grateful people fed him.  After passing some
days very pleasantly here, Will made preparations to continue his
journey, when an express arrived bringing intelligence from several of
the surrounding towns to the effect that a sort of revolution had broken
out.  It was fomented by a certain colonel in the employment of the
State, who, finding that his services and those of his followers were
not paid with sufficient regularity, took the simple method of
recruiting his finances by a levy on the various towns in his
neighbourhood.  He was, in fact, a bandit.  Some towns submitted, others
remonstrated, and a few resisted.  When it was ascertained that the
colonel and his men were on their way to the town, in which our
travellers sojourned, preparations were at once made for defence, and of
course Will Osten and his comrades could do no less than volunteer their
services.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

IN WHICH TERRIBLE THINGS ARE TREATED OF--THE ANDES ARE CROSSED, THE
ORINOCO DESCENDED AND THE BOOK ENDED.

At the time of which we write it was not an uncommon thing, in the
provinces on the western coast of South America, for dissatisfied
military officers, with a number of malcontents, to get up miniature
revolutions, which were generally put down after much plundering and
bloodshed.  These bands of armed men went about like regular banditti,
disturbing the peace of the whole country.  They were not much heard of
in Europe, because intercommunication and telegraphy did not exist then
as they do now, and insignificant affairs of the kind were not taken
much notice of.

One effect of the threatened attack on the town about which we write
was, that the people became desperately excited and tremendously
vigorous in their preparations.  Arms were sought out and distributed;
chests were opened, and gold and silver--in quantities that amazed Will
and his friends--taken out and buried in the woods.  Pistols, guns, and
swords were produced in abundance, with plenty of ammunition, and the
manner in which the men handled these proved that they meant to make a
determined stand.  Trees were felled, and the roads leading to the town
barricaded.  As the express came along he spread the news around, and
farmers came in from all quarters driving their cattle before them.  All
the arrangements for defence were made under the direction of Don Pedro,
a retired officer, who proved to be quite equal to the occasion, posted
his men judiciously, and sent out scouts on horseback.  Will Osten,
Larry, and Bunco were left to do as they pleased, so they armed
themselves, procured horses, kept close together, and rode about the
town observing the arrangements.  The night passed without alarm, but
early in the morning a horseman arrived with the news that the rebels
were advancing.  A few hours afterwards they appeared in full view.
Some were mounted, but the majority were on foot, and a more villainous
set of rascals could not well be imagined.  They advanced irregularly,
evidently not expecting opposition from so insignificant a town, but
those who first approached the barricades were received with such a
galling fire that several were killed, many wounded, and the rest driven
back.

Their leader, a tall dark man on a powerful charger, rode to the front
in a towering passion, and endeavoured to rally the men.  At that moment
a bold idea flashed upon Will Osten.  He suddenly put spurs to his
horse, galloped round to the lowest part of the barricade, leaped over
it, and, drawing his sword, charged the leader of the rebels like a
thunderbolt.  The man faced him, and raised his sword, to defend
himself, but Will's first cut was so powerful that it broke down his
guard, cleft his helmet, and tumbled him out of the saddle.

The contending parties had scarce time to realise what was being done
when the deed was completed, and a wild cheer burst from the
townspeople, high above which there sounded a terrific "hooroo!" and
next instant, Larry O'Hale, followed by Bunco, shot from the barricades,
and charged the foe!  The consternation caused by the suddenness and the
unexpected nature of this onset made the banditti waver, and, when they
beheld the townsmen pouring out from their defences and rushing at them
with an evident determination to conquer or die, they turned and fled!
The rout was complete, and for some time the people of the town
continued to chase and slay the enemy, until the pursuit was suddenly
stopped by an event as terrible as it was unexpected.

For some weeks previous to the day when the town was assaulted, the
neighbourhood, and, indeed, the whole of the surrounding provinces, had
been visited by a series of slight earthquakes.  So common are these
tremblings and heavings of the earth in South America, that unless very
severe, not much notice is taken of them.  At the time of which we
write, the slight shocks had been so frequent that the people were
comparatively indifferent to them.  On the very day of the assault there
had been several smarter shocks than usual, and some of the more
thoughtful among the inhabitants remembered that it was on an unusually
dry summer, similar to the one that was then passing, that a terrible
earthquake had visited the province of Venezuela and entirely demolished
the city of Caraccas.  But the sudden attack of the rebels had for the
time banished all thought of earthquakes.

It was while the people of the town were pursuing their enemies that
another shock of the earthquake occurred, and it was so violent that
many of the pursuers paused, while others turned at once and ran back to
the town.  Here they found the women and children in a state of
consternation, for they had more thoroughly realised the force of the
shock; and the dreadful scenes that had taken place in Caraccas, when
upwards of ten thousand of the inhabitants perished, were still fresh in
their memory.  Another shock occurred just as Don Pedro, Will Osten, and
his friends galloped into the principal square of the town.  Here there
were hundreds of cattle which had been driven there for safety, and
crowds of people hurrying to and fro.  The horsemen rode towards the
principal church of the town, which had been made a place of temporary
retreat for the women and children.  They had got within a few hundred
yards of it when there came a shock so terrible that it seemed as if the
binding forces of nature were being dissolved.  Hollow thunderings were
heard deep in the bowels of the earth, which heaved and undulated almost
as if it had been in a semi-liquid state, while great rents and fissures
occurred here and there.  Will Osten's horse stumbled into one of these
and threw him, but he leaped up unhurt.  Don Pedro and the others pulled
up and dismounted hastily.  Before they could make up their minds which
way to turn or what to do, another shock occurred; the houses on either
side of them began to sway to and fro, and one not far distant fell.
Just then a terrible crash was heard, and Will Osten turned round in
time to see the large church in the act of falling.  Women and children
were rushing out of it frantically, but those within were doomed.  One
wild and awful shriek mingled with the roar of the tumbling edifice, and
five hundred souls were instantaneously buried in a common grave.

Terrible though this event was, much of the impression it was fitted to
make on those who witnessed it was lost because of the danger that
surrounded themselves.  The shock or series of shocks continued for
several minutes, during which time the houses were falling into ruins in
all directions, and there was so much danger in remaining in any of the
streets that most of the inhabitants who had escaped flocked, as with
one consent, into the great square--many of them, however, being killed
by falling masonry on their way thither.  Others nearer the outskirts of
the town fled into the woods.

When this shock ceased, the earthquake appeared to have terminated for
that time, but even if it had continued, further damage could scarcely
have been done, for the little town was reduced to a heap of ruins.  The
desolation was complete.  Scarcely a house was left uninjured, and the
greater part of the buildings were completely demolished.  But the
sights that met the eye were not more terrible than the sounds which
filled the ear.  Death and destruction reigned on every side.  Groans of
agony and frantic cries for deliverance were heard issuing from beneath
the ruins, while men, women, and children were seen rushing about with
dishevelled hair and bloodshot eyes, wildly searching for, and shouting
the names of, their lost relatives and friends, or crying to God for
mercy.  It was a sickening and terrible sight--a sight in regard to
which those who dwell in the more favoured parts of our sin-smitten
world can form but a very faint conception.

At first all was disorder, but by degrees the spirits of the survivors
began to calm down a little, and then systematic efforts were made to
rescue those who had not been killed outright.  It need scarcely be said
that in this work our hero and his companions were conspicuously
energetic.  Will and Don Pedro organised the men into gangs and wherever
cries or groans were heard, they tore up and removed the ruins so
vigorously that the poor sufferers were speedily released; but in
performing this work they uncovered the torn, crushed, and mangled
bodies of hundreds of the dead.

"Come here, Larry," said Will, in a low, sad tone, as he stood on a pile
of rubbish digging towards a spot where he had heard a faint cry as if
from a female.  The Irishman leaped to his side and saw a small hand
sticking out of the rubbish.  It quivered convulsively, showing that
life still remained.  With desperate eagerness, yet tender care, the two
men disentombed the poor creature, who proved to be a women with a child
clasped tightly in her broken and lacerated right arm.  The woman was
alive, but the poor child was dead, the skull having been completely
smashed and its brains scattered on its mother's bosom.  As they carried
them away, the woman also expired.

In the course of a few hours great numbers of wounded persons, young and
old, were laid under the lemon-trees by the banks of the little stream
that traversed the town.  Some were slightly hurt, but by far the
greater number were terribly crushed and lacerated--many of them past
all hope of recovery.  To these sufferers Will Osten now gave his
undivided attention, washing and bandaging wounds, amputating limbs, and
endeavouring by every means to relieve them, and save their lives, while
to the dying he tried, in the little Spanish he knew, to convey words of
spiritual comfort, sometimes finding it impossible to do more than
whisper the name of Jesus in a dying ear, while hurriedly passing from
one to another.  If earnest heart-expressive glances from eyes that were
slowly fading conveyed any evidence of good having been done, Will's
labour of love was not spent in vain.

Reader, a volume would not suffice to detail a tithe of the sights and
scenes of thrilling and dreadful interest that occurred in that small
South American town on the occasion of the earthquake.  Yet, awful
though these were, they were as nothing compared with the more
stupendous calamities that have been caused by earthquakes in that land
of instability, not only in times long past, but in times so very recent
that the moss cannot yet have begun to cover, nor the weather to stain,
the tombstones and monuments of those who perished.

For many weeks Will Osten remained there tending the sick and dying.
Then he bade his kind unfortunate friends farewell, and, once more
turning his face towards the Cordillera of the Andes, resumed his
homeward journey with his faithful attendants.

There are times in the career of a man--especially of one who leads a
wandering and adventurous life--when it seems as though the events of a
lifetime were compressed into the period of a few months, or weeks, or
even days.  Such, at least, was the experience of our hero while he
travelled in the equatorial regions of South America.  Events succeeded
each other with such rapidity, and accumulated on each other to such an
extent, that when he looked back it appeared utterly incredible that he
and his companions had landed on the coast of Peru only a few months
before.  It was natural, indeed, that in such a region, where the
phenomena and the forces of nature are so wild and vast, one incident or
adventure should follow quickly on the heels of another, but it did not
seem to be altogether natural that each incident should be more singular
or tremendous than its predecessor.  In short, there seemed to be
neither rhyme nor reason, as Larry said, in the fact that they should be
continually getting out of the frying-pan into the fire.  Yet so it was,
and, now that they had left the low country and plunged into the
magnificent recesses of the great Andes, the metaphor was still
applicable, though not, perhaps, equally appropriate, for, whereas the
valleys they had quitted were sweltering in tropical heat, the mountains
they had now ascended were clothed in wintry snow.

Far down in the valleys Will Osten and his friends had left their canoe,
and hired mules with an _arriero_ or mule-driver to guide them over the
difficult and somewhat dangerous passes of the Andes.  They had reached
the higher altitudes of the mountains when we again introduce them to
the reader, and were urging their mules forward, in order to reach a
somewhat noted pass, before the breaking out of a storm which the
arriero knew, from certain indications in the sky, was rapidly
approaching.  The party consisted of four--Will, Larry, Bunco, and the
arriero--with three baggage-mules.

On reaching an elevated position at a turn in the road whence they could
see far in advance, they halted.

"Why, I had supposed _this_ was the pass," said Will Osten, turning to
Bunco; "ask the arriero how far off it is now."

"Troth, it's my belaif that there's no pass at all," said Larry,
somewhat doggedly, as he shifted about uneasily in the saddle; "haven't
we bin comin' up to places all day that we thought was the pass,--but
they wasn't; I don't think Mister Arryhairo knows it hisself, and this
baist of a mule has blistered my hands an' a'most broke my arms with
baitin' of it--not to mintion other parts o' me body.  Och, but it's a
grand place, afther all--very nigh as purty as the Lakes of Killarney,
only a bit bigger."

The country was indeed a little bigger!  From the dizzy ledge on which
they stood a scene of the wildest sublimity met their gaze, and, for a
few minutes, the travellers regarded it in profound silence.  Mountains,
crags, gorges, snowy peaks, dark ravines, surrounded them, spread out
below them, rose up above them everywhere in the utmost confusion.  It
was the perfection of desolation--the realisation of chaos.  At their
feet, far down in the gorge below, lay a lake so dark that it might have
been ink; but it was clear and so very still that every rock in the
cliffs around it was faithfully portrayed.  High overhead rose one of
the more elevated peaks of the Andes, which, being clothed in pure snow,
looked airy--almost unreal--against the blue sky.  The highest peak of
the Andes (Chimborazo) is more than 21,000 feet above the sea.  The one
before them was probably a few hundred feet lower.  Of living creatures,
besides themselves, only one species was to be seen--the gigantic
"condor"--the royal eagle of the Andes, which soars higher, it is said,
than any other bird of its kind.  Hundreds of condors were seen hovering
above them, watching for their prey,--the worn-out and forsaken mules or
cattle, which, while being driven over the pass, perished from
exhaustion.

"The ugly brutes!  Is it a goat they've got howld of there?" said Larry,
pointing to a place where several of these monstrous eagles were
apparently disputing about some prize.

On reaching the place, the object in question was found to be the
skeleton of a mule, from which every morsel of flesh had been carefully
picked.

"Hold my mule, Larry," whispered Will, throwing the reins to his
comrade, and grasping a rifle with which one of his grateful patients
who survived the earthquake had presented him.  A condor had seated
himself, in fancied security, on a cliff about two hundred yards off,
but a well-aimed bullet brought him tumbling down.  He was only winged,
and when Will came up and saw his tremendous talons and beak, he paused
to consider how he should lay hold of him.

"Och, what claws!" exclaimed Larry.

"Ah!" said Bunco, smiling, "more teribuble for scratch than yoos
grandmoder, eh?"

Before they could decide how to proceed, the arriero came up, threw the
noose of his lasso over the head of the magnificent bird, and secured it
easily.  He measured eight feet seven inches from tip to tip of the
expanded wings.

Will Osten was anxious to skin this bird, and carry it away with him as
a trophy, but the guide protested.  He said that the pass was now really
within a short distance of them, but that the thunder-storm would soon
come on, and if it caught them in the pass they ran a chance of all
being lost.  Will, therefore, contented himself with cutting off the
head and talons of the condor, and then resumed his toilsome upward
journey.
