
Ben stood against the wall, and his friend climbed on his shoulders, but
so high was the window, that he could not reach to within a foot of it.
They overcame this difficulty, however, by dragging the bench to the
wall, and standing upon it.

"I see nothin'," said Bill, "but the sky an' the sea, an' the
prison-yard, which appears to me to be fifty or sixty feet below us."

"That's not comfortin'," observed Ben, as he replaced the bench in its
corner.

"What's your advice now?" asked Bill.

"That we remain on our good behaviour a bit," replied Ben, "an' see wot
they means to do with us, an' whether a chance o' some sort won't turn
up."

"Well, that's a good plan--anyhow, it's an easy one to begin with--so
we'll try it for a day or two."

In accordance with this resolve, the two sailors called into play all
the patience, prudence, and philosophy of which they were possessed, and
during the three days that followed their incarceration, presented such
a meek, gentle, resigned aspect; that the stoniest heart of the most
iron-moulded turnkey ought to have been melted; but the particular
turnkey of that prison was made of something more or less than mortal
mould, for he declined to answer questions,--declined even to open his
lips, or look as if he heard the voices of his prisoners, and took no
notice of them farther than to fetch their food at regular intervals and
take away the empty plates.  He, however, removed their manacles; but
whether of his own good-will or by order they did not know.

"Now, Ben," said Bill on the evening of the third day, as they sat
beside each other twirling their thumbs, "this here sort o' thing will
never do.  I mean for to make a dash when the turnkey comes in the
mornin'; will you help me?"

"I'm yer man," said Ben; "but how d'ye mean to set about it?"

"Well, somewhat in this fashion:--W'enever he opens the door I'll clap
my hand on his mouth to stop his pipe, and you'll slip behind him, throw
yer arms about him, and hold on till I tie a handkerchief over his
mouth.  Arter that we'll tie his hands and feet with whatever we can git
hold of--his own necktie, mayhap--take the keys from him, and git out
the best way we can."

"H'm; but wot if we don't know the right turnin's to take, an' run
straight into the jaws of other turnkeys, p'r'aps, or find other doors
an' gates that his bunch o' keys won't open?"

"Why, then, we'll just fail, that's all; an' if they should scrag us for
it, no matter."

"It's a bad look-out, but I'll try," said Ben.

Next morning this plan was put in execution.  When the turnkey entered
the cell, Bill seized him and clapped his hand on his mouth.  The man
struggled powerfully, but Ben held him in a grasp so tight that he was
as helpless as an infant.

"Keep yer mind easy, Mounseer, we won't hurt 'e," said Ben, while his
comrade was busy gagging him.

"Now, then, lift him into the corner," whispered Bill.

Ben and he carried the turnkey, whom they had tied hand and foot with
handkerchiefs and neckties, into the interior of the cell, left him
there, locked the door on him, and immediately ran along the passage,
turned a corner, and came in sight of an iron grating, on the other side
of which sat a man in a dress similar to that of the turnkey they had
left behind them.  They at once drew back and tried to conceal
themselves, but the man had caught sight of them, and gave the alarm.

Seeing that their case was desperate, Bill rushed at the grating with
all his force and threw himself heavily against it.  The whole building
appeared to quiver with the shock; but the caged tiger has a better
chance of smashing his iron bars than poor Bill Bowls had.  Twice he
flung his whole weight against the barrier, and the second time Ben
helped him; but their efforts were in vain.  A moment later and a party
of soldiers marched up to the grating on the outside.  At the same time
a noise was heard at the other end of the passage.  Turning round, the
sailors observed that another gate had been opened, and a party of armed
men admitted, who advanced with levelled muskets.

Seeing this, Bill burst into a bitter laugh, and flung down the keys
with a force that caused the long passage to echo again, as he
exclaimed--

"It's all up with us, Ben.  We may as well give in at once."

"That's so," said Ben sadly, as he suffered himself to be handcuffed,
after which he and his companion in misfortune were conducted back to
their cell.



CHAPTER NINE.

BILL AND BEN SET THEIR BRAINS TO STEEP WITH UNCONQUERABLE PERSEVERANCE.

In its slow but steady revolution, the wheel of fortune had now
apparently brought Bill Bowls and Ben Bolter to the lowest possible
point; and the former of these worthies consoled himself with the
reflection that, as things could scarcely get worse with them, it was
probable they would get better.  His friend disputed this point.

"It's all very well," said Ben, crossing his legs and clasping his hands
over his knees, as he swayed himself to and fro, "to talk about havin'
come to the wust; but we've not got to that p'int by a long way.  Why,
suppose that, instead o' bein' here, sound in wind and limb, though
summat unfort'nate in regard to the matter o' liberty,--suppose, I say,
that we wos lyin' in hospital with our right legs an' mayhap our left
arms took off with a round shot."

"Oh, if you go for to _supposin'_," said Bill, "you may suppose
anything.  Why not suppose at once that we was lyin' in hospital with
both legs and arms took off by round shot, an' both eyes put out with
canister, an' our heads an' trunks carried away by grape-shot?"

"I didn't suppose that," said Ben quietly, "because that would be the
best instead o' the wust state we could come to, seein' that we'd know
an' care nothin' about it.  Hows'ever, here we are, low enough, an'
havin' made an assault on the turnkey, it's not likely we'll get much
favour at the hands of the Mounseers; so it comes to this, that we must
set our brains to steep, an' see if we can't hit upon some dodge or
other to escape."

"That's what we must do," assented Bill Bowls, knitting his brows, and
gazing abstractedly at the blank wall opposite.  "To git out o' this
here stone jug is what I've set my heart on, so the sooner we set about
it the better."

"Just so," said Ben.  "Well, then, let's begin.  Wot d'ye propose fust?"

To this Bill replied that he must think over it.  Accordingly, he did
think over it, and his comrade assisted him, for the space of three
calendar months, without any satisfactory result.  But the curious thing
about it was that, while these men revolved in their minds every
conceivable plan with unflagging eagerness, and were compelled to give
up each, after brooding over it for a considerable time, finding that it
was unworkable, they were not dispirited, but rather became more intense
in their meditations, and ingenious as well as hopeful in their
devisings.

"If we could only git hold of a file to cut a bar o' the winder with,
an' a rope to let ourselves down with, I think we could manage to git
over the walls somehow."

"If we was to tear our jackets, trousers, vests, and shirts into strips,
an' make a rope of 'em, it might be long enough," suggested Bill.

"That's so, boy, but as we would be stark naked before we got it
finished, I fear the turnkey would suspec' there wos somethin' wrong
somehow."

Ben Bolter sighed deeply as he spoke, because at that moment a ray of
sunshine shot through the little window, and brought the free fresh air
and the broad blue sea vividly to his remembrance.  For the first time
he experienced a deep sinking of the heart, and he looked at his comrade
with an expression of something like despair.

"Cheer up," said Bill, observing and thoroughly understanding the look.
"Never say die, as long as there's a--shot--in--"

He was too much depressed and listless to finish the sentence.

"I wonder," resumed Ben, "if the Mounseers treat all their prisoners of
war as bad as they treat us."

"Don't think they do," replied Bill.  "I've no doubt it's 'cause we
sarved 'em as we did when they first put us in quod."

"Oh, if they would only give us summat to do!" exclaimed Ben, with
sudden vehemence.

It seemed as if the poor fellow's prayer were directly answered, for at
that moment the door opened, and the governor, or some other official of
the prison, entered the cell.

"You must vork," he said, going up to Bill.

"We'll be only too glad to work, yer honour, if you'll give us work to
do."

"Ver' good; fat can you vork?"

"We can turn handy to a'most anything, yer honour," said Ben eagerly.

It turned out, however, after a considerable amount of talk, that,
beyond steering a ship, reefing topsails, splicing ropes, tying every
species of complex knot, and other nautical matters, the two seamen
could not claim to be professionally acquainted with any sort of
handicraft.  Somewhat discomfited, Ben at last said with a perplexed
air--

"Well, yer honour, we'll try anything ye choose to put us at.  I had a
brother once who was a sort of tinker to trade, an' great at mendin'
pots, pans, old umbrellas, and the like.  I wos used to help him when a
boy.  P'r'aps if yer honour, now, has got a old umbrella as wants
refittin', I might try my hand on that."

The governor smiled.  "Vell, I do tink I have von old omberilla.  You
sall try for to mend him."

Next day saw Bill and Ben surrounded by tools, scraps of wood and
whalebone, bits of brass and tin, etcetera, busy as bees, and as happy
as any two children who have invented a new game.

Ben mended the umbrella admirably.  At the same time, Bill fashioned and
carved two or three paper-knives of wood with great neatness.  But when
it was discovered that they could sew sail-cloth expeditiously and well,
a quantity of that material was given to them, and they were ordered to
make sacks.  They set to work accordingly, and made sack after sack
until they grew so wearied of the monotonous work that Ben said it made
him wish to sit down in sackcloth and ashes; whereupon Bill remarked
that if the Mounseers would only give them the sack altogether, it would
be very much to their credit.

Soon the imprisoned mariners began again to plot and plan their escape.
Of course they thought of making ropes of the sail-cloth and twine with
which they wrought, but as the turnkey took the material away every
night, and brought it back every morning, they gave up this idea, as
they had given up many other ideas before.

At last, one afternoon, Bill looked up from his work, hit his thigh a
slap which produced a pistol-shot crack that echoed up into the high
ceiling of the cell, as he exclaimed, "I've got it!"

"I hope you'll give us a bit of it, then," said Ben, "if it's worth
havin'."

"I'll give you the benefit of it, anyhow," said Bill, throwing down his
tools and eagerly beginning to expound the new plan which had struck him
and caused him to strike his thigh.  It was to this effect:--

That they should beg the turnkey to let them have another old umbrella
to work at by way of recreation, as the sack-making was rather
monotonous; that, if they should be successful in prevailing on him to
grant their request, they should work at the umbrella very slowly, so as
to give them time to carry out their plan, which was to form a sort of
parachute by adding sail-cloth round the margin of the umbrella so as to
extend it to twice its circumference.  After it should be finished they
were to seize a fitting opportunity, cut the bars of their window, and,
with the machine, leap down into the yard below.

"Wot!" exclaimed Ben, "jump together!"

"Ay, why not, Ben?  Sink or swim, together, boy."

"Very true, but I've got my doubts about flyin' together.  Better do it
one at a time, and send the umbrella up by means of a piece of twine."

"Well, we might do it in that way," said Bill; "but what d'ye think o'
the plan?"

"Fuss rate," said Ben, "we'll try it at once."

In accordance with this resolution, Ben made his petition that night,
very humbly, to the turnkey, who at first turned a deaf ear to him, but
was finally prevailed on to fetch them one of his own umbrellas to be
repaired.  It happened to be a very large one of the good old stout and
bulgy make, and in this respect was the better suited to their purpose.
All the tools necessary for the work of repair were supplied except a
file.  This, however, was brought to them, when Ben pointed out, with
much earnestness, that if he had such an implement he could clean up and
beautify the ivory handle to such an extent that its owner would not
recognise it.

This device of improving the ivory handle turned out to be a happy hit,
for it enabled Ben to keep the umbrella much longer by him than would
otherwise have been possible, for the purpose of covering it with
elaborate and really beautiful carving, the progress of which was
watched by the turnkey with much interest from day to day.

Having gained their end the sailors wrought with indefatigable zeal, and
resolutely overcame the difficulties that met them from time to time.
Each day they dragged the bench under the window.  Ben got upon it, and
Bill climbed on his shoulders, by which means he could just reach the
iron grating of the window, and there, for half-an-hour at a time, he
cautiously used the file.  They thought this enough of time to bestow on
the work, because the bars could be easily filed through before the
parachute was ready.

In the preparation of the umbrella, the first difficulty that met them
was how they were to conceal their private work when the turnkey came in
the evenings to take away their materials for sack-making.  After some
examination they discovered a plank in the floor, in the corner where
they were wont to sleep, which was loose and easily forced up with one
of Bill's unfinished paper-knives, which he made very strong for this
special purpose!  Beneath there was sufficient room to stow away the
cloth with which they fashioned the additional breadth to the umbrella.
To have cabbaged at one time all the sail-cloth that was required would
have risked discovery; they therefore appropriated small scraps each
day, and sewed these neatly together until they had enough.  Soon they
had a ring of canvas formed, into the centre of which the umbrella
fitted exactly, and this ring was so cut and sewn in gores that it
formed a continuation of the umbrella, which was thus made to spread out
and cover a space of about nine or ten feet in diameter.  All round the
extremity or margin of the ring, cords of twisted twine were fixed, at
intervals of about six inches.  There were about sixty of these cords or
stays, all of which met and were fastened at the end of the handle.  A
stout line, made of four-ply twine, was fastened at the top of the
umbrella, and passing through a small hole in it was tied round the
whalebones inside, and twisted down the stick to the handle, to which it
was firmly secured.  By this means the whole machine was, as it were,
bound together.

All these additionals and fixings had, however, to be so constructed
that they could be removed, or affixed with some rapidity, for there was
always before the sailors the chance that the turnkey might look in to
observe how their work was progressing.

Indeed one afternoon they were almost discovered at work on the
parachute.  The turnkey was heard coming along the passage when Ben was
in the act of fitting on the new appendages, and the key was actually in
the door before the last shred of them was thrust into the hole in the
floor, and the loose plank shut down!  Ben immediately flung several of
the sacks over the place, and then turning suddenly round on his comrade
began to pommel him soundly by way of accounting for the flushed
condition of his countenance.

Thus taken by surprise, Bill returned the blows with interest, and the
combatants were separated by the turnkey when in a rather breathless
condition!

"If you do so more agin, you sall go separate," said the turnkey.

The mere thought of separation at such a moment struck like a chill to
the hearts of the sailors, who forthwith shook hands, and vowed
earnestly that they would "never do it again."  In order to conciliate
