recovered; "no time is to be lost."

"Ay, time is precious, who will go?" cried Henry, who, begrimed with
fire and smoke, and panting vehemently from recent exertion, had just at
that moment come towards the group.

"Take me!  Oh! take me, Henry!" cried Corrie, in a beseeching tone, as
he sprang promptly to his friend's side.

At any other time, Henry would have smiled at the enthusiastic offer of
such a small arm to fight the savages; but fierce anger was in his
breast at that moment;--he turned from the poor boy and looked round
with a frown, as he observed that, although the natives crowded round
him at once, neither Gascoyne, nor Thorwald, nor Captain Montague shewed
any symptom of an intention to accompany him.

"Nay, be not angry, lad," said Gascoyne, observing the frown; "your
blood is young and hot, as it should be; but it behoves us to have a
council of war before we set out on this expedition, which, believe me,
will be no trifling one, if I know anything of savage ways and doings."

"Mr Gascoyne is right," said Montague, turning to the missionary, who
stood regarding the party with anxious looks, quite unable to offer
advice on such an occasion, and clasping the little shoe firmly in both
hands; "it seems to me that those who know the customs of savage warfare
should give their advice first.  You may depend on all the aid that it
is in my power to give."

"Ole Thorwald is our leader when we are compelled to fight in
self-defence," said Mr Mason; "would God that it were less frequently
we were obliged to demand his services.  He knows what is best to be
done."

"I know what is best to do," said Thorwald, "when I have to lead men
into action, or to shew them how to fight.  But, to say truth, I don't
plume myself on possessing more than an average share of the qualities
of the terrier dog.  When niggers are to be hunted out of holes in the
mountains like rabbits, I will do what in me lies to aid in the work;
but I would rather be led than lead if you can find a better man."

Thorwald said this with a rueful countenance, for he had hoped to have
settled this war in a pitched battle; and there were few things the
worthy man seemed to enjoy more than a stand-up fight on level ground.
A fair field and no favour was his delight, but climbing the hills was
his mortal aversion.  He was somewhat too corpulent and short of wind
for that.

"Come, Gascoyne," said Henry, "you know more about the savages than
anybody here, and if I remember rightly, you have told me that you are
acquainted with most of the mountain passes."

"With all of them, lad," interposed Gascoyne; "I know every pass and
cavern on the island."

"What, then, would you advise?" asked Montague.

"If a British officer can put himself under a simple trading skipper,"
said Gascoyne, "I may perhaps shew what ought to be done in this
emergency."

"I can co-operate with any one who proves himself worthy of confidence,"
retorted Montague, sharply.

"Well, then," continued the other, "it is in vain to think of doing any
good by a disorderly chase into mountains like these.  I would advise
that our forces be divided into three.  One band under Mr Thorwald
should go round by the Goat's Pass, to which I will guide him, and cut
off the retreat of the savages there.  Another party under my friend
Henry Stuart should give chase in the direction in which little Alice
seems to have been taken, and a third party, consisting of his Majesty's
vessel the _Talisman_, and crew, should proceed round to the north side
of the island and bombard the native village."

"The Goat's Pass," growled Thorwald, "sounds unpleasantly rugged and
steep in the ears of a man of my weight and years, Mister Gascoyne.  But
if there's no easier style of work to be done, I fancy I must be content
with what falls to my lot?"

"And, truly," added Montague, "methinks you might have assigned me a
more useful, as well as more congenial occupation than the bombardment
of a mud village full of women and children--for I doubt not that every
able-bodied man has left it, to go on this expedition."

"You will not find the Goat's Pass so bad as you think, good Thorwald,"
returned Gascoyne, "for I propose that the _Talisman_ or her boats
should convey you and your men to the foot of it, after which your
course will be indeed rugged, but it will be short;--merely to scale the
face of a precipice that would frighten a goat to think of and then a
plain descent into the valley where, I doubt not, these villains will be
found in force; and where, certainly, they will not look for the
appearance of a stout generalissimo of half savage troops.  As for the
bombarding of a mud village, Mr Montague, I should have expected a
well-trained British officer ready to do his duty whether that duty were
agreeable or otherwise."

"My _duty_, certainly," interrupted the young captain, hotly, "but I
have yet to learn that _your_ orders constitute _my_ duty."

The bland smile with which Gascoyne listened to this tended rather to
irritate than to soothe Montague's feelings; but he curbed the passion
which stirred his breast, while the other went on--

"No doubt the bombarding of a defenceless village is not pleasant work,
but the result will be important, for it will cause the whole army of
savages to rush to the protection of their women and children; thereby
disconcerting their plans--supposing them to have any--and enabling us
to attack them while assembled in force.  It is the nature of savages to
scatter, and so to puzzle trained forces,--and no doubt those of his
Majesty are well trained.  But `one touch of nature makes the whole
world kin,' says a great authority; and it is wonderful how useful a
knowledge of the various touches of nature is in the art of war.  It may
not have occurred to Mr Montague that savages have a tendency to love
and protect their wives and children as well as civilised men, and
that--"

"Pray, cease your irrelevant remarks; they are ill-timed," said
Montague, impatiently.  "Let us hear the remainder of your suggestions.
I shall judge of their value and act accordingly.  You have not yet told
us what part you yourself intend to play in this game."

"I mean to accompany Captain Montague, if he will permit me."

"How! go with me in the _Talisman_," said Montague, surprised at the
man's coolness, and puzzled by his impudence.

"Even so," said Gascoyne.

"Well, I have no objection, of course; but it seems to me that you would
be more useful at the head of a party of your own men."

"Perhaps I might," replied Gascoyne; "but the coral reefs are dangerous
on the north side of the island, and it is important that one well
acquainted with them should guide your vessel.  Besides, I have a trusty
mate, and if you will permit me to send my old shipmate, John Bumpus,
across the hills, he will convey all needful instructions to the
_Foam_."

This was said in so quiet and straightforward a tone that Montague's
wrath vanished.  He felt ashamed of having shewn so much petulance at a
time when affairs of so great importance ought to have been calmly
discussed, so he at once agreed to allow Bumpus to go.  Meanwhile Henry
Stuart, who had been fretting with impatience at this conversation,
suddenly exclaimed--

"It seems to me, sirs, that you are wasting precious time just now.  I,
at least, am quite satisfied with the duty assigned to me, so I'm off--
ho! who will join me?"

"I'm your man," cried Corrie, starting up and flourishing the broken
sabre above his head.  At the same moment about a hundred natives ranged
themselves round the youth, thus indicating that they, too, were his
men.

"Well, lad, away you go," said Gascoyne, smiling, "but Master Corrie
must remain with me."

"I'll do nothing of the sort," said Corrie, stoutly.

"Oh! yes, you will, my boy.  I want you to guide my man Bumpus over the
mountains.  You know the passes, and he don't.  It's all for the good of
the cause, you know,--the saving of little Alice."

Corrie wavered.  The idea of being appointed, as it were, to a separate
command, and of going with his new friend, was a strong temptation, and
the assurance that he would in some way or other be advancing the
business in hand settled the matter.  He consented to become obedient.

In about half an hour all Gascoyne's plans were in course of being
carried out.  Ole Thorwald and his party proceeded on board the
_Talisman_, which weighed anchor, and sailed, with a light breeze,
towards the north end of the island--guided through the dangerous reefs
by Gascoyne.  Henry and his followers were toiling nimbly up the hills
in the direction indicated by the little footprints of Alice; and John
Bumpus, proceeding into the mountains in another direction, pushed,
under the guidance of Corrie, towards the bay where the _Foam_ still lay
quietly at anchor.

It was evening when these different parties set out on their various
expeditions.  The sun was descending to the horizon in a blaze of lurid
light.  The slight breeze, which wafted his Britannic Majesty's ship
slowly along the verdant shore, was scarcely strong enough to ruffle the
surface of the sea.  Huge banks of dark clouds were gathering in the
sky, and a hot unnatural closeness seemed to pervade the atmosphere, as
if a storm were about to burst upon the scene.  Everything, above and
below, seemed to presage war--alike elemental and human--and the various
leaders of the several expeditions felt that the approaching night would
tax their powers and resources to the uttermost.

It was, then, natural that in such circumstances the bereaved father
should be distracted with anxiety as to which party he should join, and
it was also natural that one whose life had been so long devoted to the
special service of his God should, before deciding on the point, ask, on
his knees, his heavenly Father's guidance.

He finally resolved to accompany the party under command of Henry
Stuart.



CHAPTER TEN.

THE PURSUIT--POOPY, LED ON BY LOVE AND HATE, RUSHES TO THE RESCUE.

The shades of night had begun to descend upon the island when Master
Corrie reached the summit of the mountain ridge that divided the bay in
which the _Foam_ was anchored from the settlement of Sandy Cove.

Close on his heels followed the indomitable Jo Bumpus, who panted
vehemently and perspired profusely from his unwonted exertions.

"Wot an object you are," exclaimed Corrie, gazing at the hot giant with
a look of mingled surprise and glee--for the boy's spirit was of that
nature which cannot repress a dash of fun even in the midst of anxiety
and sorrow.  We would not have it understood that the boy ever
deliberately mingled the two things--joy and sorrow--at one and the same
time, but he was so irresistibly alive to the ludicrous, that a touch of
it was sufficient at any time to cause him to forget, for a brief apace,
his anxieties, whatever these might be.

Jo Bumpus smiled benignantly, and said that he "was glad to hear it."
For Jo had conceived for the boy that species of fondness which large
dogs are frequently known to entertain for small ones--permitting them
to take outrageous liberties with their persons which they would resent
furiously were they attempted by other dogs.

Presently the warm visage of Bumpus elongated, and his eyes opened
uncommonly wide as he stared at a particular spot in the ground;
insomuch that Corrie burst into an uncontrollable fit of laughter.

"O Grampus, you'll kill me if you go on like that," said he; "I can't
stand it.  Indeed I can't.  Sich a face!  D'ye know what it's like?"

Jo expressed no desire to become enlightened on this point, but
continued to gaze so earnestly that Corrie started up and
exclaimed--"What is it, Jo?"

"A fut!" replied Jo.

"A footprint, I declare!" shouted the boy, springing forward and
examining the print, which was pretty clearly defined in a little patch
of soft sand that lay on the bare rock.  "Why, Jo, it's Poopy's.  I'd
know it anywhere by the bigness of the little toe.  How _can_ she have
come up here?"

"I say, lad, hist!" said Bumpus, in a hoarse whisper, "here's another
fut that don't belong to--what's her name--Puppy, did ye say?"

"Why, it's Alice's," whispered the boy, his face becoming instantly
grave, while an unwonted expression of anxiety crossed it, "and here's
that of a savage beside it.  He must have changed his intention, or,
perhaps, he came this way to throw the people who were chasing them off
the scent."

Corrie was right.  Finding that he was hotly pursued, Keona had taken
advantage of the first rocky ground he reached to diverge abruptly from
the route he had hitherto followed in his flight; and, the farther to
confuse his pursuers, he had taken the almost exhausted child up in his
arms and carried her a considerable distance, so that if his enemies
should fall again on his track the absence of the little footprints
might induce them to fancy they were following up a wrong scent.

In this he was so far successful, for the native settlers, as we have
seen, soon gave up the chase, and returned with one of the child's
shoes, which had fallen off unobserved by the savage.

But there was one of the pursuers who was far ahead of the others, and
who was urged to continue the chase by the strongest of all motives--
love.  Poor Kekupoopi had no sooner heard of the abduction of her young
mistress, than she had set off at the top of her speed to a well-known
height in the mountains, whence, from a great distance, she could
observe all that went on below.  On the wings of affection she had
flown, rather than walked, to this point of observation, and, to her
delight, saw not only the pursuers but the fugitives in the valley
below.  She kept her glowing eyes fixed on them, hastening from rock to
rock and ridge to ridge, as intervening obstacles hid them from view,
until she saw the stratagem, just referred to, practised by Keona.
Then, feeling that she had no power of voice to let the pursuers know
what had occurred, and seeing that they would certainly turn back on
being baffled, she resolved to keep up the chase herself--trusting to
accident to afford her an opportunity of rendering aid to Alice; or,
rather, trusting to God to help her in her great difficulty, for the
poor child had been well trained in the missionary's house, and love had
been the teacher.

Taking a short cut down into the valley,--for she was well acquainted
with all the wild and rugged paths of the mountains in the immediate
neighbourhood of the settlement,--she was so fortunate as to reach a
narrow pass, through which Keona and Alice must needs go.  Arriving
there a short time before they did, she was able to take a few minutes
rest before resuming the chase.

Little did the wily savage think that a pair of eyes as dark and bright,
though not so fierce as his own, were gazing at him from behind the
bushes as he sped up that narrow gorge.

Poor Alice was running and stumbling by his side; for the monster held
her by the hand and dragged her along, although she was scarcely able to
stand.  The heart of the black girl well-nigh burst with anger when she
observed that both her shoes and stockings had been torn off in the
hasty flight, and that her tender feet were cut and bleeding.

Just as they reached the spot near which Poopy was concealed, the child,
sank with a low wail to the ground, unable to advance another step.
Keona seized her in his arms, and, uttering a growl of anger as he threw
her rudely over his shoulder, bore her swiftly away.

But, quick though his step was, it could not outrun that of the poor
little dark maiden who followed him like his shadow, carefully keeping
out of view, however, while her mind was was busy with plans for the
deliverance of her young mistress.  The more she thought, the more she
felt how utterly hopeless would be any attempt that she could make,
either by force or stratagem, to pluck her from the grasp of one so
strong and subtle as Keona.  At length she resolved to give up thinking
of plans altogether and take to prayer instead.

On reaching the highest ridge of the mountains, Keona suddenly stopped,
placed Alice on a flat rock and went to the top of a peak not more than
fifty yards off.  Here he lay down and gazed long and earnestly over the
country through which they had just passed, evidently for the purpose of
discovering, if possible, the position and motions of his enemies.

Poopy, whose wits were sharpened by love, at once took advantage of her
opportunity.  She crept on all fours towards the rock on which Alice
lay, in such a manner that it came between her person and the savage.

"Missy Alice!  Oh! missy Alice! quick, look up, it's me--Poopy," said
the girl, raising her head cautiously above the edge of the rock.

Alice started up on one elbow, and was about to utter a scream of
delight and surprise, when her sable friend laid her black paw suddenly
on the child's pretty mouth and effectually shut it up.

"Hush!  Alice; no cry.  Savage hear and come back--kill Poopy bery much
quick.  Listen.  Me all alone.  You bery clibber.  Dry up eyes, no cry
any more.  Look happy.  God will save you.  Poopy nebber leave you as
long as got her body in her soul."

Just at this point, Keona rose from his recumbent position, and the
girl, who had not suffered her eyes to move from him for a single
instant, at once sunk behind the rock and crept so silently away that
Alice could scarcely persuade herself that she had not been dreaming.

The savage returned, took the child's hand, led her over the brow of the
mountain, and began to descend by a steep rugged path to the valleys
lying on the other side of the island.  But before going a hundred yards
down the dark gorge--which was rendered all the darker by the approach
of night--he turned abruptly aside; entered the mouth of a cavern and
disappeared.

Poopy was horrified at this unexpected and sudden change in the state of
things.  For a long time she lay closely hid among the rocks within
twenty yards of the cave's mouth, expecting every moment to see the
fugitives issue from its dark recesses.  But they did not reappear.  All
at once it occurred to the girl that there might possibly be an exit
from the cavern at the other end of it, and that, while she was idly
waiting there, her little mistress and her savage captor might be
hastening down the mountain far beyond her reach.

Rendered desperate by this idea, she quitted her place of concealment,
and ran recklessly into the cavern.  But the place was dark as Erebus,
and the ground was so rugged that she tripped and fell before she had
advanced into it more than fifty yards.

Bruised by the fall, and overawed by the gloom of her situation, the
poor girl lay still for some time where she had fallen, with bated
breath, and listening intently; but no sound struck her ear save the
beating of her own heart, which appeared to her unnaturally loud.  Under
an impulse of terror, she rose and ran back into the open air.

Here it occurred to her that she might perhaps find the other outlet to
the cave--supposing that one really existed--by going round the hill and
carefully examining the ground on the other side.  This, however, was a
matter requiring considerable time, and it was not until a full hour had
expired that she returned to the mouth of the cave, and sat down to rest
and consider what should be done next.

To enter the dark recesses of the place without a light she knew would
be impossible as well as useless, and she had no means of procuring a
light.  Besides, even if she had, what good could come of her
exploration?  The next impulse was to hasten back to the settlement at
full speed and guide a party to the place; but, was it likely that the
savage would remain long in the cave?  This question suggested her
