along, quicker, Shames," cried Junkie, adopting the name that the
skipper used; for the boy's love of pleasantry not infrequently betrayed
him into impudence.

With a short laugh, Mabberly turned to Ivor, and asked if Shames was the
Gaelic for James.

"No, sir" replied the keeper; "but James is the English for Shames."

"Ha! you are quoting now--or rather, misquoting--from the lips of some
Irishman."

"Weel, sir, I never heard it said that quota-ashun wass a sin," retorted
Ivor; then, turning to the stupendous cliff that frowned above them,
"Hev ye heard of the prophecy, sir, aboot this cliff?"

"No.  What is it?"

"It's said that the cliff is to be the scene of a ghost story, a love
story, and a murder all at the same time."

"Is that all, Ivor?  Did the prophet give no indication how the stories
were to end, or who the murderer is to be, or the murdered one?"

"Never a word, sir; only they wass all to be aboot the same time.
Indeed, the prophet, whether man or wuman, is not known.  Noo, we better
shump up."

In a few minutes the waggonette was rattling down the slopes that led to
Cove, and soon afterwards they were exchanging greetings with old Ian
Anderson, the fisherman.

"Iss it to fush, ye'll be wantin'?" asked Ian, as he ushered the party
into his cottage, where Mrs Anderson was baking oat-cakes, and Aggy was
busy knitting socks with her thin fingers as deftly and rapidly as if
she had been in robust health.

"Yes, that is our object to-day," said Mabberly.  "Good-day, Mrs
Anderson; good-day, Aggy.  I'm glad to see you looking so much better,
though I can't see very well for your cottage is none of the lightest,"
he said, glancing at the small window, where a ragged head, with a
flattened white nose, accounted for the obscurity.

"There might be _more_ light," said Ian, seizing a thick thorn stick,
and making a sudden demonstration towards the door, the instant effect
of which action was an improvement in the light.  It did not last long,
however, for "Tonal'," after watching at the corner of the cottage long
enough to make sure that the demonstration was a mere feint, returned to
his post of observation.

"Yes, sir," remarked Mrs Anderson; "Aggy is much better.  The fresh air
is doin' her cood already, an' the peels that the shentleman--your
friend--gave her is workin' wonders."

"They usually do, of one sort or another," returned Mabberly, with a
peculiar smile.  "I'm glad they happen to be wonders of the right sort
in Aggy's case.  My friend has been out in India, and his prescriptions
have been conceived in a warm climate, you see, which may account for
their wonder-working qualities.  Can we have your boat to-day, Mr
Anderson?"

"Oo, ay; ye can hev that, sir," said Ian, summoning Donald to his
presence with a motion of his finger.  "Tonal'," he said, when ragged
head stood at the open door, "hev we ony pait?"

"Ay, plenty."

"Co doon, then, an' git the poat ready."

The boy disappeared without reply--a willing messenger.  A few minutes
more, and Ivor and Ian were rowing the boat towards a part of the sea
which was deemed good fishing ground, while the rest of the party busied
themselves arranging the lines.

Strong brown lines they were, wound on little square wooden frames, each
with a heavy leaden sinker and a couple of strong coarse hooks of
whitened metal attached to the lines by stout whipcord; for the denizens
of those western waters were not the poddlies, coddlings, and shrimps
that one is apt to associate with summer resorts by the sea.  They were
those veritable inhabitants of the deep that figure on the slabs of
Billingsgate and similar markets--plaice and skate of the largest
dimensions, congers that might suggest the great sea serpent, and even
sharks of considerable size.

The surroundings were cognate.  Curlews and sandpipers whistled on the
shore, complaining sea-mews sailed overhead, and the low-lying skerries
outside were swarming with "skarts" and other frequenters of the wild
north.

"Oh, _what_ a funny face!" exclaimed Junkie, as a great seal rose head
and shoulders out of the sea, not fifty yards off, to look at them.  Its
observations induced it to sink promptly.

"Let co the anchor, Tonal'," said Ian; "the pottom should be cood here."

"Hand me the pait, Junkie," said McGregor.

"Shie a bit this way," shouted Eddie.

"There--I've broke it!" exclaimed Junkie, almost whimpering, as he held
up the handle of his knife in one hand, and in the other a mussel with a
broken blade sticking in it.

"Never mind, Junkie.  You can have mine, and keep it," said Mabberly,
handing to the delighted boy a large buck-horn-handled knife, which
bristled with appliances.

"An' don't try it on again," said Ian.  "Here iss pait for you, my poy."

A few minutes more, and the lines were down, and expectation was
breathlessly rampant.

"Hi!" burst from Eddie, at the same moment that "Ho!" slipped from
McGregor; but both ceased to haul in on finding that the "tugs" were not
repeated.

"Hallo!" yelled "Tonal'," who fished beside Junkie, on feeling a tug
worthy of a whale; and, "Hee! hee!" burst from Junkie, whose mischievous
hand had caused the tug when ragged head was not looking.

In the midst of these false alarms Ivor drew up his line, and no one was
aware of his success until a fish of full ten pounds' weight was
floundering in the boat.  The boys were yet commenting on it noisily,
when Ian put a large cod beside it.

"_What_ a tug!" cried Eddie, beginning to haul up in violent haste.

"Hev a care, or the line will pairt," said McGregor.

At the same moment "Shames" himself gave a jerk, as if he had received
an electric shock, and in a few seconds a large plaice and a small crab
were added to the "pile!"

"I've got _something_ at last," said Mabberly, doing his best to repress
excitement as he hauled in his line deliberately.

The something turned out to be an eel about four feet long, which went
about the boat as if it were in its native element, and cost an amazing
amount of exertion, whacking, and shouting, to subdue.

But this was nothing to the fish with which Junkie began to struggle
immediately after, and which proved to be a real shark, five feet long.
After the united efforts of Ian and Donald had drawn it to the surface,
Junkie was allowed to strike the gaff into it, and a loud cheer greeted
the monster of the deep as it was hurled into the bottom of the boat.

Thus, in expectation, excitation, and animation, they spent the
remainder of that memorable day.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

AMAZING DEEDS AND MISDEEDS AT A DEER-DRIVE.

To some casts of mind there is no aspect of nature so enchanting or
romantic as that which is presented, on a fine summer day from the
vantage ground of a ridge or shoulder high up on the mountains of one of
our western isles.

It may be that the union of the familiar and beautiful with the
unfamiliar and wild is that which arouses our enthusiastic admiration.
As we stand in the calm genial atmosphere of a summer day, surveying the
land and sea-scape from a commanding height that seems to have raised us
above the petty cares of life, the eye and mind pass like the
lightning-flash from the contemplation of the purple heather and purple
plants around--and from the home-feelings thereby engendered--to the
grand, apparently illimitable ocean, and the imagination is set free to
revel in the unfamiliar and romantic regions "beyond seas."

Some such thoughts were passing in the mind of Giles Jackman, as he
stood alone, rifle in hand, on such a height one splendid forenoon, and
contemplated the magnificent panorama.

Far down below--so far that the lowing of the red and black specks,
which were cattle, and the bleating of the white specks, which were
sheep, failed to reach him--a few tiny cottages could be seen, each in
the midst of a green patch that indicated cultivation.  Farther on, a
snow-white line told where the wavelets kissed the rugged shore, but no
sound of the kiss reached the hunter's ear.  Beyond, as if floating on
the calm water, numerous rocky islets formed the playground of
innumerable gulls, skarts, seals, loons, and other inhabitants of the
wild north; but only to the sense of vision were their varied activities
perceptible.  Among these islets were a few blacker spots, which it
required a steady look to enable one to recognise as the boats of
fishermen; but beyond them no ship or sign of man was visible on the
great lone sea, over, and reflected in which, hung a few soft and
towering masses of cloudland.

  "If thus thy meaner works are fair,
  And beautiful beyond compare;
  How glorious must the mansions be
  Where Thy redeemed shall dwell with Thee!"

Jackman murmured rather than spoke the words, for no human ear was there
to hear.  Nevertheless there were human ears and tongues also, not far
distant, engaged in earnest debate.  It was on one of the ledges of the
Eagle Cliff that our hunter stood.  At another part of the same cliff,
close to the pass where Milly Moss met with her accident, Allan Gordon
stood with nearly all his visitors and several of his retainers around
him.

"Higher up the pass you'll have a much better chance, Mr Barret.  Is it
not so, Ivor?"

The keeper, who, in kilt, hose, and bonnet, was as fine a specimen of a
tall athletic Highlander as one could wish to see, replied that that was
true.

"Nae doot," he said, "I hev put Mr Jackman in the best place of all,
for, whativer way the deer come, they'll hev to pass close, either above
or below him--an' that's maybe as weel for him wi' his queer
new-fashioned rifle; but at the heed o' the pass is the next best place.
The only thing is that ye'll hev to tak' sure aim, for there's more
room for them to stray, an' ye may chance to git only a lang shot."

"Well, then, it is not the place for me, for I am a poor shot," said
Barret; "besides, I have a fancy to stay here, where I am.  You say it
is a very good spot, Ivor, I understand?"

"Weel, it's no' that bad as a spote," answered the keeper, with a grim
smile, for he had not much opinion of Barret's spirit as a sportsman;
"but it's ackward as the lawnd lies."

"Never mind.  I'll stay here, and you know, laird, that I have some
pleasant associations with it in connection with your niece."

"That is more than Milly has," returned the old gentleman, laughing.
"However, have your way.  Now, gentlemen, we must place ourselves
quickly, for the beaters will soon be entering the wood.  I will take
you, Mr Mabberly, to a spot beyond the pass where you will be pretty
sure of a shot.  And MacRummle--where shall we place him?"

"He can do nothing wi' the gun at a', sir," muttered the keeper, in a
low voice, so that he might not be overheard.  "I wad putt him doon at
the white rock.  He'll git a lang shot at them there.  Of course he'll
miss, but that'll do weel enough for him--for he's easy pleased; ony
way, if he tak's shootin' as he tak's fishin', a mere sight o' the deer,
like the rise o' a salmon, 'll send him home happy."

"Very well, Ivor, arrange as you think best.  And how about Captain
McPherson and McGregor?"

"I'll tak' care o' them mysel', sir."

"Ye need na' fash yer heed aboot us, laird," said the skipper.  "Bein'
more used to the sea than the mountains, we will be content to look on.
Iss that not so, Shames?"

"That iss so--what-e-ver," returned the seaman.

"Well, come along then; the beaters must be at work now.  How many did
you get, Ivor?"

"I'm not exactly sure, sir," returned the keeper; "there's Ian Anderson
an' Tonal' from Cove, an' Mister Archie an' Eddie, an' Roderick--that's
five.  Oo, ay, I forgot, there's that queer English loon, Robin Tips--
he's no' o' much use, but he can mak' a noise--besides three o' Mr
Grant's men."

"That's plenty--now then--"

"Please, father," said Junkie, who had listened with open eyes and
mouth, as well as ears, for this was his first deer-stalk, "may I stop
with Mr Barret?"

"Certainly, my boy, if Mr Barret does not object."

Of course Mr Barret did not object, though he was rather surprised at
this mark of preference.

"I say, me boy," whispered Pat Quin, "ask av I may stop wid ye."

Junkie looked at the Irishman doubtfully for a moment, then said--

"Father, Quin says he wants to stop with me."

"You mayn't do that, Quin," returned the laird with a smile; "but you
may go and stay with your master.  I heard him say that he would like
you to be with him to keep you out of mischief."

"Thankee, sor.  I was used to attend on 'im in the jungles to carry his
spare guns, for it's ellyphints, no less, that we was used to bag out
there; but I make no question he can amuse himsilf wid deer an' things
like that where there's nothin' better.  He was always aisy to plaze,
like Mr MacRummle."

"Just so, Quin; and as MacRummle knows the hill, and has to pass the
place where Mr Jackman has been left, you had better follow him."

This arranged, the different parties took up their positions to await
the result of the beating of a strip of dwarf forest, several miles in
extent, which clothed part of the mountain slopes below the Eagle Cliff.

On reaching the spot where Jackman was stationed, old MacRummle
explained to him the various arrangements that had just been made for
the comfort of all.

"I am sorry they gave me the best place," said Jackman.  "I suppose it
is because the laird thinks my experience in India entitles me to it;
but I would much rather that Mabberly or Barret had got the chance, for
I'm used to this sort of thing, and, after bagging elephants, I can
afford to lay on my oars and see my friends go in and win."

"An' sure, aren't thim the very words I said, sor?" put in Quin.

"Have they given you a good place?" asked Jackman of MacRummle, taking
no notice of his man's remarks.

"They've given me the worst," said the old man, simply; "and I cannot
blame them, for, as the keeper truly remarked, I can do nothing with the
gun,"--still less with the rifle, he might have added!  "At the same
time, I confess it would have added somewhat to the zest of the day if
Ivor had allowed me some degree of hope.  He thought I didn't overhear
him, but I did; for they give me credit for greater deafness than I
deserve."

There was something so pitiful, yet half amusing, in the way in which
this was said, that Jackman suddenly grasped the old gentleman's hand.

"Mr MacRummle," he said firmly, "will you do me a favour?"

"Certainly, with pleasure--if I can."

"You can--and you shall.  It is this: change places and rifles with me."

"My dear, kind sir, you don't know what you ask.  My rifle is an old
double-barrel muzzle loader, and at the white rock you wouldn't have the
ghost of a chance.  I know the place well, having often passed it in
fishing excursions up the burns.  Besides, I never used a repeating
rifle in my life.  I couldn't manage it, even if I were to try."

"Mr MacRummle, are you not a Highlander?"

"I believe I am!" replied the old man, drawing himself up with a smile.

"And is not that equivalent to saying that you are a man of your word?"

"Well--I suppose it is so--at least it should be so."

"But you will prove that it is not so, if you fail to do me a favour
that lies in your power, after promising to do it.  Come now, we have no
time to lose.  I will show you how to use the repeater.  See; it is
empty just now.  All you have to do is to take aim as you would with any
ordinary rifle, and pull the trigger.  When the shot is off, you load
again by simply doing _this_ to the trigger-guard--so.  D'you
understand?"

"Yes, perfectly; but is that all? no putting in of cartridges anywhere?"

"No, nothing more.  Simply do _that_ (open--and the cartridge flies
out), and _that_ (shut--and you are loaded and ready to fire)!  Now, try
it.  That's it!  Capital!  Couldn't be better.  Why, you were born to be
a sportsman!"

"Yes, with fish," remarked the gratified old man, as he went through the
motions of loading and firing to perfection.

"Now, then, I will load it thus.  Watch me."

As he spoke, he filled the chamber under the barrel with cartridge after
cartridge to the amazement of MacRummle and the amusement of Quin, who
looked on.

"How many shots will it fire without reloading?" asked the old man at
length.

"Sixteen," replied Jackman.

"What! sixteen?  But--but how will I ever know how many I've let off?"

"You don't require to know.  Just blaze away till it refuses to fire!
Now, I must be off.  Where is this white rock that I have to go to?"

"There it is--look.  A good bit down the hill, on the open ground near
the forest.  If you have good eyes, you can see it from here.  Look,
just behind the ridge.  D'you see?"

"I see.  Great luck to you.  Do good work, and teach that rascal Ivor to
respect your powers with the rifle.  Come along, Quin."

"But really, my young friend, it is too good, too self-denying of you
to--"

He stopped, for Jackman and Quin were already striding down the mountain
on their way to the white rock.

MacRummle had been somewhat excited by the enthusiasm of his young
friend and the novelty of his situation.  To say truth, he would much
rather have been pottering along the banks of one of his loved Highland
streams, rod in hand, than crouching in the best pass of the Eagle Cliff
in expectation of red-deer; but being an amiable and sympathetic man, he
had been fired by the enthusiasm of the household that morning, and,
seeing that all were going to the drive, including the laird, he made up
his mind to brace himself up to the effort, and float with the current.
His enthusiasm had not cooled when he reached the Eagle Cliff, and
Jackman's kindness, coupled with hope and the repeating rifle, increased
it even to white heat.  In which condition he sat down on a rock,
removed his hat, and wiped his bald, perspiring head, while a benignant
smile illuminated his glowing features.

About the same time, Barret and Junkie having selected a convenient mass
of rock as their outlook, so that they could command the pass for some
distance in both directions without exposing themselves to view, rested
the rifle against the cliff and began to talk.  Soon the young man
discovered that the little boy, like many other mischievous boys, was of
an exceedingly inquiring disposition.  Among other things, he not only
began an intelligent inquiry about the locks of a rifle, but a practical
inquiry with his fingers, which called for remonstrance.

"Do you know, Junkie, that this is the very spot where your Cousin Milly
fell?" said Barret, by way of directing the urchin's thoughts into a
safer channel.

"Is it?  Oh, dear, _what_ a thump she must have come down!"

"Yes, indeed, a dreadful thump--poor thing.  She was trying to get
flowers at the time.  Do you know that she is exceedingly fond of
flowers?"

"Oh, don't I?  She's got books full of them--all pasted in with names
printed under them.  I often wonder what she sees in flowers to be so
fond of them.  I don't care a button for them myself, unless they smell
nice.  But I often scramble after them for her."

"There is a good deal to like in flowers besides the smell," said
Barret, assuming an instructive tone, which Junkie resented on the spot.

"Oh, yes, I don't want to know; you needn't try to teach me," he said,
