
This he said with his heart full of guile, for he knew full well that
poached eggs are deadly poison to Dragons.

The Dragon looked puzzled, and the Toad said, "Have you?"

The Dragon shook his head. "Well," said the Toad, "it is the most
delicious thing in the woods; now you wait and see."

He went hoppity-hop, to a sand-bank where he had seen a Turtle lay its
eggs that morning. He dug out one. He rolled it upon a stone, and split
it open with the sharp spur on his heel. As soon as it was stiffened by
the sun heat, he said, "Here now, Dragon, swallow it down, while I get
another for myself."

The poor innocent little Dragon did not know any better. He tried to
swallow the poached egg. The moment he did, it stuck in his throat, and
poisoned him. At once his toes sank into the ground. He turned green all
over, and his head was changed into a strange new flower. There it is to
this day, standing silently where it can hear the brook a-prattling. Its
body is green all over, and its head is yellow and its jaws are wide
open with a poached egg stuck in its throat. And that is how it all came
about. Some call it Toad Flax, and some call it Butter and Eggs, but we
who know how it happened call it the Dragon and the Poached Egg.

Poor dear little Yellow Dragon!


TALE 32

The Fairy Bird or the Humming-bird Moth

When I was a schoolboy, a number of my companions brought the news that
the strangest bird in the world had come that day to our garden and
hovered over the flowers. It was no bigger than a bumble-bee. "No! It
was not a humming-bird," they said, "it was smaller by far, much more
beautiful, and it came and went so fast that no one could see it go."

[Illustration: The Fairy Bird (1-1/2 life size)]

Every guess that I made seemed not to fit the wonderful bird, or help to
give it a name that would lead us to its history in the books. The
summer went by, several schoolmates saw the Wonderbird, and added
stories of its marvellous smallness and mysterious habits. Its body,
they said, was of green velvet with a satin-white throat; it had a
long beak--at least an inch long--a fan-tail of many feathers, two long
plumes from its head, "the littlest feet you ever have seen," and large
lustrous eyes that seemed filled with human intelligence. "It jest
looked right at you, and seemed like a fairy looking at you."

The wonder grew. I made a sketch embodying all the points that my
companions noted about the Fairy Bird. The first drawing shows what it
looked like, and also gives the exact size they said it was.

It seemed a cruel wrong that let so many of them see the thing that was
of chief interest to me, yet left me out. It clearly promised a real
fairy, an elfin bird, a wonderful messenger from the land I hungered to
believe in.

But at last my turn came. One afternoon two of the boys ran toward me,
shouting: "Here it is, the little Fairy Bird, right in the garden over
the honeysuckle. C'mon, quick!"

I rushed to the place, more excited than I can tell. Yes, there it was,
hovering over the open flowers--tiny, wonderful, humming as it swung on
misty wings. I made a quick sweep of my insect net and, marvellous to
relate, scooped up the Fairy Bird. I was trembling with excitement now,
not without a sense of wickedness that I should dare to net a
fairy--practically an angel. But I had done it, and I gloated over my
captive, in the meshes. Yes, the velvet body and snowy throat were
there, the fan-tail, the plumes and the big dark eyes, but the creature
was _not a bird_; it was an insect! Dimly now I remembered, and in a few
hours, learned, as I had feared, that I had not captured a young angel
or even a fairy--it was nothing but a Humming-bird Moth, a beautiful
insect--common in some regions, scarce in some, such as mine--but
perfectly well known to men of science and never afterward forgotten by
any of that eager schoolboy group.


TALE 33

Ribgrass or Whiteman's-Foot

If you live in the country or in a small town, you will not have to go
many steps, in summer time, before you find the little plant known as
Ribgrass, Plantain, or Whiteman's-foot. If you live in a big city, you
may find it in any grassy place, but will surely see it, as soon as you
reach the suburbs. It grows on the ground, wherever it can see the sun,
and is easily known by the strong ribs, each with a string in it when
you pull the leaf apart. The Indians call it Whiteman's-foot, not
because it is broad and flat, but because it came from Europe with the
white man; it springs up wherever he sets his foot, and it has spread
over all America. Gardeners think it a troublesome weed; but the birds
love its seed; canary birds delight in it; and each plant of the
Ribgrass may grow many thousands of seeds in a summer.

How many? Let us see! Take a seed-stalk of the Plantain and you will
find it thickly set with little cups, as in the drawing. Open one of
these cups, and you find in it five seeds. Count the cups; there are two
hundred on this stalk, each with about five seeds, that is, one thousand
seeds; but the plant has five or more seed-stalks, some have more (one
before me now has seventeen), but suppose it has only ten; then there
are 10,000 seeds each summer from one little plant. Each seed can grow
up into a new plant; and, if each plant were as far from the next as you
can step, the little ones in a row the following summer would reach for
nearly six miles; that is, from the City Hall to the end of Central
Park, New York.[B]

[Illustration: The Ribgrass]

[Illustration: Jack-in-the-Pulpit]

On the third year if all had the full number of seed, and all the seed
grew into plants, there would be enough to go more than twice round the
world. No wonder it has spread all over the country.


TALE 34

Jack-in-the-Pulpit

Once upon a time there was a missionary named the Rev. John T. Arum, who
set out to preach to the Indians. He had a good heart but a bitter,
biting tongue. He had no respect for the laws of the Indians, so they
killed him, and buried him in the woods. But out of his grave came a new
and wonderful plant, shaped like a pulpit, and right in the middle of
it, as usual, was the Reverend Jack hard at it, preaching away.

If you dig down under the pulpit you will find the preacher's body, or
his heart, in the form of a round root. Taste it and you will believe
that the preacher had a terribly biting tongue, but treat it properly,
that is boil it, and you will find out that after all he had a good
little heart inside. Even the Indians have discovered his good qualities
and have become very fond of him.


TALE 35

How the Indian Pipe Came

[Illustration: How the Indian Pipe Came]

In the last tale you learned the fate of the Rev. John T. Arum, and the
origin of Jack-in-the-Pulpit. But you must not suppose for a moment that
the Indians decided in a hurry to kill the missionary. No, they had too
much sense of fair play for that. They held a great many councils first
to find some way of curbing his tongue, and making him mind his own
business. In fact, they got into the habit of holding a council every
few minutes to discuss the question, no matter where they were or what
else they were doing. So that pretty nearly every part of the woods was
in time used for a council ring to discuss the fate of the Rev. John T.
Arum.

Of course, you know that no Indian can hold a council without smoking
the Peace Pipe, and when the council is over, he empties out the ashes
of the pipe. So that when all those councils were over, when the matter
was settled, when the missionary was buried, and when the warrior had
gone to the ghost land, there came solemnly poking its white bowl and
stem from under the leaves an Indian pipe, at the very spot where the
Councillors had emptied the ashes. It is a beautifully shaped pipe, with
a curved and feathered stem, but it has none of the bright colours of
the old Peace Pipe. It cannot have them for this is only a ghost Pipe to
show where the council used to be; and one pipe there is for each
council held on that spot, so you see how many, many councils the
Indians had, before they killed the troublesome preacher. And sometimes
you can find a pipe that has the bowl still filled with ghost tobacco or
even a little red ghost fire, showing that the warriors had to hurry
away before that council was finished. Whenever you find the ghost pipe
in the woods, you are sure to see close by either a log, a bank or a
rock on which the Councillors sat to talk it over.


TALE 36

The Cucumber Under the Brownie's Umbrella

The Indians had Brownies, only they called them Pukwudjies, and I am
going to tell you a story of an Indian Brownie.

[Illustration: The Cucumber Under the Brownie's Umbrella]

Whenever the Indians got together for a council, the Brownies did the
same thing, in the woods near by. It was a kind of Brownie Fair, and
some of the little people used to have stands and sell refreshments.
Berries were scarce in the springtime, but the Brownies were very fond
of cucumber. So there were always one or two Cucumber Brownies, who set
up their little umbrellas, and sold slices of Cucumber to the others.

When it was time to go home, or when the sun got so hot that the
cucumbers were likely to spoil, they would bury them in the ground, but
leave the umbrella to mark the place. And there they are yet; many a
time have I found the umbrella, and dug under it to find the cucumber.
It is delicious eating; everything that Brownies like is. You can find
it, and try it. It is one of the things that Monapini taught Ruth
Pilgrim to eat. (Tale 18).

Of course, the Brownies do not like you to dig up their treasure or
good-to-eats, but there are plenty more, far more than they ever need.
"Yet what about it," you say, "if the Brownie happens to be there?"

He may be sitting right under the umbrella, but remember the little
people are invisible to our eyes. You will not see him; at least I never
did.


TALE 37

The Hickory Horn-devil

Hush, whisper! Did you ever meet a Hickory Horn-devil? No! Well I did,
and I tell you he is a terror. Look at this picture of him. It is true,
only he is not quite so big as that, though he looks as if he might be.
And I was not quite so small as that, only I felt as if I were! And
everything about him looked horribly strong, poisonous and ugly. He was
a real devil.

[Illustration: The Hickory Horn-devil (1/2 life size)]

I did not know his history then; I did not learn it for a long time
after, but I can tell it to you now.

Once upon a time there was a little, greenish, blackish worm. He loved
pretty things, and he hated to be ugly, as he was. No one wanted him,
and he was left all alone, a miserable little outcast. He complained
bitterly to Mother Carey, and asked if she would not bless him with some
grace, to help him in his troubles.

Mother Carey said: "Little ugly worm; you are having a hard time,
because in your other life, before you came into this shape, you had an
ugly, hateful spirit. You must go through this one as you are, until the
Great Sleep comes; after that, you will be exactly what you have made of
yourself."

Then the little ugly worm said: "Oh Mother Carey, I am as miserable as I
can be; let me be twice as ugly, if, in the end, I may be twice as
beautiful."

Mother Carey said gravely, "Do you think you could stand it, little
worm? We shall see."

From that time the worm got bigger and uglier, no creature would even
talk to him. The birds seemed to fear him, and the Squirrels puffed out
little horror-snorts, when they saw him coming, even the other worms
kept away from him.

So he went on his lonely life, uglier and more hated than ever. He lived
chiefly on a big hickory tree, so men called him the Hickory Horn-devil.

One day as he was crawling on a fence, a hen with chickens came running
after him, to eat him. But when she saw how ugly he was she cried: "Oh,
Lawk, lawk! Come away, children, at once!"

At another time he saw a Chipmunk teaching its little ones to play tag.
They looked so bright and happy, he longed, not to join them because he
could only crawl, but to have the happiness of looking on. But when he
came slowly forward, and the old Chipmunk saw him waving his horns and
looking like a green poisonous reptile, she screamed, "Run, my
children!" and all darted into their hole while Mother Chipmunk stuffed
up the doorway with earth.

But the most thrilling thing of all that he saw was one day as the sun
went down, a winged being of dazzling beauty alighted for a moment on
his hickory tree. Never had the Horn-devil seen such a dream of
loveliness. Her slender body was clad in rose velvet, and her wings were
shining with gold. The very sight of her made him hate himself, yet he
could not resist the impulse to crawl nearer, to gaze at her beauty.

But her eyes rested a moment on his horrible shape, and she fled in
fear, while a voice near by said: "The Spangled Queen does not love
poisonous reptiles." Then the poor little Horn-devil wished he were
dead. He hid away from sight for three days. Hunger however forced him
out, and as he was crawling across a pathway, a man who came along was
going to crush him underfoot, but Mother Carey whispered, "No, don't do
it." So the man let him live, but roughly kicked the worm aside, and
bruised him fearfully.

Then came Mother Carey and said: "Well, little ugly worm! Is your spirit
strong, or angry?"

The worm said bravely, though feebly: "Mother, Mother Carey, I am trying
to be strong. I want to win."

The breezes were losing their gentle warmth when Mother Carey came to
him one day, and said: "Little one, your trial has been long, but it is
nearly over.

"Prepare to sleep now, my little horny one, you have fought a brave
fight; your reward is coming. Because your soul has been made beautiful
by your suffering, I will give you a body blazing with such beauty as
shall make all stand in adoration when you pass." Then Mother Earth
said, "Our little one shall have extra care because he has had extra
trials." So the tired little Horn-devil did not even have to make
himself a hammock, for Mother Earth received him and he snuggled into
her bosom. As Mother Carey waved her wand, he dropped off asleep. And he
slept for two hundred days.

Then came the great Awakening Day, the resurrection day of the woods.
Many new birds arrived. Many new flowers appeared. Sleepers woke from
underground, as Mother Carey's silent trumpeters went bugling ahead of
her, and her winged horse, the Warm Wind, came sweeping across the
meadows, with the white world greening as he came.

The bundle-baby of the Horn-devil woke up. He was cramped and sleepy,
but soon awake. Then he knew that he was a prisoner, bound up in silken
cords of strength. But new powers were his now, he was able to break the
cords and crawl out of his hole. He put up his feelers to find those
horrible horns, but they were gone, and his devil form fell off him like
a mask. He had wings, jewelled wings! on his back now. Out he came to
fluff the newfound wings awhile, and when they were spread and supple he
flew into the joyful night, one of the noblest of all the things that
fly, gorgeous in gold and velvet, body and wings; filled with the joy of
life and flight, he went careering through the soft splendour of the
coming night. And as he flew, he glimpsed a radiant form ahead, a being
like himself, with wings of velvet and gold. At first he thought it was
the Princess of the Hickory Tree, but now his eyes were perfect, and he
could see that this was a younger and more beautiful Spangled Princess
than the one of his bygone life, and all his heart was filled with the
blazing fire of love. Fearlessly now he flew to overtake her; for was
she not of his own kind? She sped away, very fast at first, but maybe
