
Will sprang up, burning with anger, and turning sharply round, observed
the parrot gazing at him in mute surprise.

"Walk in--old rascal," repeated the bird.

Will laughed, but there was a touch of bitterness in his tone as he
turned again to Flora, who had risen from the couch.

"This is an awkward interruption, Flo--Miss Westwood, but necessity
constrains me.  I must, I _will_ speak now, if--bear with me, dear girl,
I did not mean to be rude, but--"

A footstep was heard in the passage.

"Supper will be cooling, I fear," said the hollow voice of Mr Cupples.
"Oh!  I beg pardon.  I did not know--I--"

Will turned, and rushed at his friend with savage intentions.  At the
same moment the figure of a man darkened the doorway.  Mr Cupples
vanished out of the house, Flora glided away, and Will Osten found
himself face to face with Mr Westwood!

It might have been expected that the scene which followed would have
been an embarrassing one, but such was not the case.  Our hero had
reached that point of nervous and mental turmoil and exasperation in
which extremes meet.  As the strong current of a river meets the rush of
the rising tide, and at a certain point produces dead calm, so the
conflicting currents in Will's bosom reached the flood, and he became
desperately serene, insomuch that he held out his hand to Mr Westwood,
and, with a smile of candour and a tone of deep earnestness, explained
"the situation," and made "a clean breast of it."  The result was, that
Mr and Mrs Westwood received his advances favourably, but, being
naturally cautious and solicitous about the happiness of their daughter,
they pointed out that it was impossible to come to any conclusion at
that time, because, in the first place, Will was, by his own showing, a
poor wanderer with only the prospect of an income at his mother's death,
and without professional practice; and, in the second place, as they
were to set sail for England on the morrow, there was no time left even
for consideration.  Mr Westwood, therefore, said that he could not
permit Will to see Flora again, except to bid her farewell, and advised
him to have patience until he should return to England, where, he said
frankly, he would be happy to see him.  Will thereupon left the cottage,
in a state of distraction, to lay his case before Captain Dall.

"So you see, captain," he added, after detailing all the circumstances,
"there is only one course open to me, and that I am resolved to pursue.
I shall sail for England in the--the what's the name of the ship the
Westwoods are to sail in?"

"Don't know," answered the captain.

"Of course not--no matter.  We shall find out.  She sails to-morrow at
all events, and I go with her.  You will go back with Mr Cupples to
Grizzly Bear Gulch, work the gold, make what you can out of it, pay
yourselves, and hold the estate for me.  I'll get that legally arranged
to-night.  You'll tell my comrades how sorry I am to leave them so
abruptly, but under the circumstances they will--"

"Softly," interrupted Captain Dall; "if all this is to be settled
to-night, we had better set about it at once, and not waste time with
words."

"Right, captain.  Let us off to search for the captain of the ship."

Leaving Mr Cupples to eat the supper alone, our hero and his friend
went out in hot haste, and soon found themselves in the presence of the
captain of the Roving Bess, which was to sail next day.

"By the way," whispered Will to his friend, as they were entering the
room in which the skipper sat, "do you happen to have any cash? for _I_
have only twenty pounds."

"Not a rap," whispered the captain.

"You are the captain of the Roving Bess, I am told?" said Will,
addressing a big rawboned man, who sat at a table solacing himself with
a glass of spirits and water and a cigar.

"Ya-a-s, Cap'n Bra-a-o-wn, at y'r sarvice."

Captain Brown drawled this out so slowly that one might have supposed he
did it on principle, as a sort of general protest against the
high-pressure speed and hurry that influenced every one around him.

"You have passengers going, I understand?"

"Ya-a-s.  Reverend genlm'n an' two ladies."

"Can you take another?"

"A dozen mo-a-r, if need be."

"Then put my name down.  How much is the passage fare?"

"Fo-a-g-sl two hundred, cabin three hundred pa-o-unds."

"What!" exclaimed Will.

Captain Brown smiled.  "You see," said he, "it c-a-unt be done for
less--ha--'Bliged to give fa-bu-lous wages to crew, and only too
thankful to get 'em at any price.  Provisions cost their weight, a-most,
in gold."

"Will you be here an hour hence?" asked our hero.

"Ya-a-s, two hours hence," drawled Captain Brown, lighting a fresh cigar
at the stump of the old one.

Will Osten linked his arm through that of Captain Dall, and hurried him
into the street.

"Now to the agent," he said.  "If _he_ fails me, all is lost--stay! no;
I can offer to work my passage.  That did not occur to me till now.  I
shall keep it in reserve."

A few minutes more and they stood in the presence of Mr Zulino.

"Is it possible," said Will, with an anxious expression of face, "to
sell the property in Grizzly Bear Gulch _immediately_?"

The dry visage of the agent wrinkled into a sarcastic smile as he
replied "Ha!  I see, you are like all the rest--wish to turn everything
into gold.  Well, it _is_ possible to sell it, I make no doubt, because
it is well situated and will increase in value; but what, do you mean by
_immediately_?"

"To-night," said Will.

"Impossible."

"What's to be done?" cried our hero, turning to Captain Dall with a look
of such perplexity and disappointment that even the hard heart of Mr
Zulino was touched.

"Why such haste?" he inquired.

"Because business of the most urgent kind requires that I should embark
for England in a vessel which sails to-morrow, and I have not money
enough to pay for my passage."

"I can lend you some on the property, at a high rate of interest," said
the agent.

"Then do so, my dear sir," said Will earnestly, "at any rate of interest
you choose, and I will sign any papers you may require.  My friend here,
Captain Dall, will see that you are regularly paid.  I assure you that I
shall _never_ forget the obligation."

"Follow me," said Mr Zulino, rising and putting on his hat.

He led them to the office of a man who appeared to be connected with the
law, and who drew up a paper which, being duly signed and witnessed, Mr
Zulino put in his pocket, at the same time handing Will Osten a cheque
for four hundred pounds.

"Now, captain," said Will, with a deep sigh of relief, as they, once
more issued into the street, "we'll go and enjoy our supper."

Next morning Will Osten, with a small portmanteau containing his little
all in his hand, and accompanied by Captain Dall and Mr Cupples, pushed
his way through the crowded streets to the quay, where a boat awaited
him.

"Once more, Captain Dall," he said, turning round and grasping his
friend's hand, "farewell!  I am sorry--more so than I can tell--to leave
you.  May God prosper you wherever you go.  Remember my messages to our
friends at the gulch.  Tell Larry and Bunco, and the trapper especially,
that I feel almost like a criminal for giving them the slip thus.  But
how can I help it?"

"Of course, of course," said Captain Dall, returning the hearty squeeze
of Will's hand, "how could you?  Love, like necessity, has no law--or,
rather, itself is a law which all must obey.  Good-bye, lad, and good
luck attend ee."

Silently shaking hands with Mr Cupples, whose lugubrious expression
seemed appropriate to the occasion, Will leaped into the boat and was
soon rowing over the bay to the spot where the Roving Bess lay with her
anchor tripped and her sails loose.  On approaching, he saw that Mr
Westwood and his wife were pacing the quarterdeck, but Flora was not
visible, the reason being that that busy little woman was down in her
father's berth putting it to rights--arranging and re-arranging
everything, and puzzling her brains with numerous little contrivances
which were all meant to add to the comfort and snugness of the place--
wonderfully ingenious contrivances, which could not have emanated from
the brain of any woman but one who possessed a warm heart, an earnest
soul, a sweet face, and a turned-up nose!  She was a good deal
dishevelled about the head, in consequence of her exertions, and rather
flushed, and her eyes were a little moist.  Perhaps she was sad at the
thought of leaving San Francisco--but no--she was leaving no friends
behind her there.  _That_ could not have been the cause!

The little round port-hole of the berth was open, and she stopped ever
and anon in the midst of her operations to look out and listen to the
variety of shouts and songs that came from the boats, vessels, and
barges in the bay.  Suddenly she stopped, turned her head the least bit
to one side, and listened intently.

"My dear," said Mr Westwood to his wife, standing on the deck and
leaning over the bulwarks, exactly above the open port near to which
Flora stood, "_can_ that be Mr Osten in yonder boat?"

Flora's bosom heaved, and her colour vanished.

"I think it is--stay--no--it looks like--yes, it _is_ he," said Mrs
Westwood.

Flora's face and neck became scarlet.

Presently the plash of oars were heard near the vessel, and next moment
a boat approached, but not from such a quarter as to be visible from the
port-hole.

"Mind your starboard oar," said a deep voice, which caused Flora's heart
to beat against her chest, as if that dear little receptacle of good
thoughts and warm feelings were too small to contain it, and it wanted
to get out.

"Good morning, Mr Osten," cried Mr Westwood, looking down.

"Good morning, sir,--good morning, Mrs Westwood," answered Will,
looking up.

"It is very kind of you to take the trouble to come off to bid us
good-bye," said Mr Westwood.

Flora trembled a little, and leaned upon the side of the berth.

"I have not come to say good-bye," said Will (Flora's eyes opened wide
with astonishment), "I am going--fend off, men, fend off, mind what you
are about--I am going," he said, looking up with a smile, "to sail with
you to England."

A peculiar gleam shot from Flora's eyes; the blood mantled again on her
brow, and, sinking into a chair, she pressed her hands to her face and
buried her head in her father's pillow!



CHAPTER SEVEN.

RAMBLING REMINISCENCES OF ABSENT FRIENDS, AND A HAPPY TERMINATION.

On the evening of a cold December day--the last day of the year--many
months after the occurrence of the events narrated in the last chapter,
old Mrs Osten sat in her drawing-room, toasting her toes before a
cheerful fire.  The widow looked very happy, and, to say truth, she had
good reason for being so, for her stalwart son had come home to her safe
and sound, and was at that moment sitting by her side talking in a most
amazing way about his Flora--referring to her as a sort of captive bird
which had now no chance of escaping, saying that he meant to take her to
Paris, and Switzerland, and Rome, and in summer to the English Lakes,
and Killarney, and the Scotch Highlands.

"In fact, mother," said Will, "after that little event comes off, which
is fixed to take place next week, I mean to act the part of Wandering
Will over again under entirely new and much more interesting
circumstances.  Ah! mother," he continued with enthusiasm, "how little
did I think, when I was travelling through the wild regions of the far
west, that I was being led to the spot where I should find _such_ a
wife!"

"Yes, dear, you were indeed _led_," said Mrs Osten, "for that wild
region was the very last place in the world to which you would have
thought of going to look for a good wife, had you been guided by your
own wisdom."

"True, mother, most true.  Gold is much more plentiful in that land than
wives, either good or bad.  I wonder how my old comrades are getting on
there now.  You remember Larry, mother, and Bunco.  How I wish I could
have had them all here at our wedding!  You would have delighted in old
Captain Dall, and Captain Blathers, too, he's not a bad fellow though
rather wild, but Big Ben would have pleased you most--by the way, this
is the last night of the year.  I doubt not they will be remembering me
to-night, and drinking my health in clear cold water from the crystal
springs of the Sierra Nevada.  Come, I will pledge them in the same
beverage," said Will, seizing a glass of water that stood at his elbow;
"may success, in the highest sense of the word, attend them through
life."

"Amen," murmured the widow, as Will drained the glass; "I hope they may
get plenty of gold without catching the gold-fever, which is just
another name for the love of gold, and that, you know, is the root of
all evil.  But go on telling me about your adventures, Will; I never
tire of hearing you relate them."

"Well, mother, I'll begin again, but if you _will_ be for ever
interrupting me with questions and remarks about Flora, I shall never
get to the end of them.  Now, then, listen."

Hereupon Will began to talk, and his mother to listen, with, we need
scarcely say, intense interest.

Thus was the last night of that year passed in the drawing-room.  Let us
see how it was spent in the kitchen.

"Yes, Jemimar," said Maryann, with her mouth full of buttered toast, "I
always said it, and I always thought it, and I always knowed it, that
Master Will would come 'ome, and marry a sweet beautiful young lady,
which 'as come true, if ever a profit spoke, since the day of
Jackariah--let me fill your cup, my dear, p'raps you'll 'and me the
kettle, Richards."

The worthy coachman rose with alacrity to obey, and Jemima accepted the
proffered cup of tea in the midst of a vain attempt to quiet the baby
Richards, which happened to be unusually restive that night.

"To think, too," continued Maryann with a laugh, "that I should 'ave
gone an' mistook the dear creetur at first for a cannibal!"

"Maryhann," said Jemima, solemnly, "I don't believe there's no such
things as cannibals."

"No more do I, Jemimar--did you speak, Mr Richards?" inquired Maryann,
with a sudden assumption of dignity.

The coachman, who was devotedly engaged with his fifth slice of buttered
toast, protested solemnly that he had not spoken, but admitted that he
had experienced a tendency to choke--owing to crumbs--just at the point
when Maryann happened to allude to the cannibals.  Maryann had a
suspicion that the tendency to choke was owing to other causes than
crumbs; but as she could not prove her point, and as the baby Richards
took it into his head at that moment to burst into an unaccountable and
vehement fit of laughter, she merely tossed her head, and resumed her
observations.

"No, Jemimar, nothing will ever convince me that there are any savages
so depravated as to prefer a slice of 'uman flesh to a good beefsteak,
an' it's my belief that that himperent Irishman, Larry O'Ale, inwented
