with his ivory staff, the man having stroked his beard, which it was
then the custom to wear of a great length. The barbarian in a rage
slew him, and all the others also were slain where they sat. The nobles
having thus perished, all others that were found in the city were
slaughtered in like manner, the houses were plundered, and being emptied
of their goods were set on fire.

[Illustration: The Gauls and the Senators 254]

For a while no small part of the city was spared, for the leaders of
the Gauls said, "It may be that the hearts of them that keep the Citadel
will be turned to surrender by the loss of their own homes." These
indeed were full of grief and anger, seeing the streets of the city full
of the enemy, and beholding new destructions every hour. Never indeed
were men besieged in such evil plight, for they were shut out from their
country, and saw all their possessions in the power of the enemy. For
all this their courage failed not for one hour, though all
 about them was laid even with the ground by fire and sword, but were
obstinate to keep the hill which was now the sole abiding-place of
freedom. As for their troubles they took no account of them, nor had any
hope save only in the swords which they carried in their hands.

The Gauls having spent their fury on the dwellings in the city,
seeing that the spirit of the Romans was in no wise subdued, but was
steadfastly set against surrender, resolved to make an assault on the
Citadel. Therefore, at dawn of day, after signal had been given, they
drew up their whole army in the marketplace; and then, setting up a
shout and locking shields over their heads in the fashion that is called
the "tortoise," they began to climb the hill. On the other hand the
Romans did nothing rashly or in a hurry; but strengthening the guards at
every point of attack, set their main body where the Gauls were coming;
and these they suffered to climb the slope, judging that the higher they
should have mounted the more easily would they be driven down. But when
they were come to the middle of the hill, then the Romans ran down
upon them, and made a great slaughter among them, driving them over the
steep, so that never again, either with a part of their force or with
the whole thereof, did they make trial of this manner of fighting. They
set themselves, therefore, to take the Citadel by blockade. But for this
they had made no preparation, having burned all the provision of food
that was in the houses of the city, while that which was in the field
had by this time been carried into Veii; wherefore, dividing their
forces, they set some to keep watch on the Citadel, and some they sent
to gather spoil in the country round about.

Now they that were sent to gather spoil came by chance to Ardea, in
which city Camillus dwelt, grieving for his country rather than for
himself, and marvelling what had befallen the men who with him had
conquered Veii and Falerii. And now, hearing that the Gauls were near
at hand, and that the men of Ardea, being in no small fear, were taking
counsel about the matter, he came forward in the assembly and spake
thus: "Men of Ardea, ye have now opportunity to repay the benefits which
ye have received from the Roman people, concerning which benefits, how
many and how great they be, there is no need that I remind you. And ye
have opportunity also to win for yourselves great renown. These
Gauls that are coming against you are great in stature rather than in
strength, and make a terrible show in battle, but yet are not hard to
withstand. For consider what has befallen Rome, They took the city when
all the gates lay open; but now the Citadel, though it is kept by a
small company, they are not able to take. Wearied already of besieging
it, they are scattering themselves over the face of the land to gather
spoil. Their manner is to gorge themselves with meat and great draughts
of wine, and at nightfall to throw themselves on the ground like beasts,
without defence or outposts or guards. And now by reason of their late
victory they are careless even beyond their wont. If then ye would keep
your city safe, and would not have this whole land become a part of
Gaul, take all of you your arms at the first watch of the night. Follow
me, and if I deliver them not in your hands, fast bound with sleep, to
be slaughtered as cattle, then banish me even as the Romans banished
me."

Now all that heard him knew that there was no man so great in war as he.
Therefore, when the assembly was dismissed, they refreshed themselves
and waited eagerly till he should give the signal. And when they heard
it, they hastened to the gate of the city to meet Camillus; nor had
they gone far from the city when they found the camp of Gauls was, as
Camillus foretold, altogether without guards; and setting up a shout
they fell upon it. No fighting was there, but only a great slaughter,
for the men were naked and overpowered with sleep. Some also that were
in the furthest part of the camp, being awakened by the uproar, and not
knowing what had happened, fell into the hands of the enemy; and many
going forth to plunder the lands of the men of Antium fell upon a
company of the townsfolk, and were surrounded and slain.

Meanwhile the Gauls watched the Citadel at Rome, that none should go
forth between the posts. And now there was done by a Roman youth a thing
which both friends and foes greatly admired. The house of the Fabii had
a yearly sacrifice on the Hill of Quirinus. A certain Quintus Fabius
Dorso, therefore, that he might duly perform this sacrifice, came down
from the Capitol, clad in the vestment that is used for such purpose,
and carrying the holy things in his hands, and so came to the Hill of
Quirinus, passing through the midst of the guards of the enemy, and
heeding not their speech or threatening. There he duly performed all the
ceremony, and, coming back by the same way, with look and step composed
as before, returned to his friends in the Capitol, having a good hope
that the gods, whose service he had not neglected for any extremity of
fear, looked upon him with favour. As for the Gauls, they did him no
harm, either for wonder at his boldness, or for religion's sake, for
which indeed this people had no small regard.

Meanwhile they that were at Veii gathered daily both courage and
strength, for not only did the Romans that had escaped from the battle
or fled from the city assemble themselves there, but volunteers also
from Latium flocked thither, hoping to share in the spoil of the enemy.
And now it seemed high time that they should deliver their country out
of the hand of the Gauls; only, though the body was strong, there yet
lacked a head. Then, because the place wherein they were reminded them
of Camillus, and because many of the soldiers had had him for their
captain in time past, they all agreed that he should be sent for from
Ardea. But first they would consult the Senate at Rome, so careful were
they of law, not forgetting for all their extremity of peril that which
was right to be done. Now there was no small danger in passing through
the posts of the enemy. This a certain Cominius, a young man and of
great activity, undertook to do; and he, supporting himself on corks,
was carried down the Tiber as far as the city. There, climbing the side
that was nearest to the river, where the rock was steep, and for that
cause left unguarded by the Gauls, he climbed into the Capitol; and
then, being brought before the magistrates, delivered to them the
message of the army. Then the Senate passed a decree that Camillus,
having been first in due form released from exile, should be Dictator,
so that the soldiers might have him for captain whom they desired. With
this decree the messenger returned to Veii by the same way by which he
came, and messengers went to fetch Camillus from Ardea.

While these things were being done at Veii, the Citadel of Rome had been
in great peril, for the Gauls either had seen the footmarks where the
messenger from Veii had climbed into the Capitol, or had observed for
themselves that there was an easy ascent by the rock of Carmentis. On
a moonlight night, therefore, having first sent a man unarmed to make
trial of the ascent, they set out. Their arms they handed one to the
other, and when there was any hindrance in the way they supported or
drew up each other, and so climbed to the top, and this so silently that
they did not even wake the dogs, though these animals are very watchful
for any noise that may take place in the night. But they escaped not
the notice of the geese, for there were geese in the Capitol, and these,
being sacred to Juno, they had not eaten, though being sorely in need of
food. And this regard for holy things was their salvation. For a certain
Marcus Manlius, being awoke by their cries and by the flapping of their
wings, hasted forth, catching up his arms, and calling all the rest
to do likewise. And they indeed were at first in great confusion, but
Manlius drave the boss of his shield against a Gaul, for one was now
standing on the very top of the hill. And the man fell and overthrew
them that stood close at hand; and when the others in great fear dropped
their arms and laid hold of the rocks, he fell upon them and slew
them. By this time others also had rallied to him, and these, throwing
javelins and stones upon the Gauls, beat them down, so that the whole
company were overthrown and fell headlong down the steep. The rest of
that night they slept, so far as they could for remembrance of the great
peril from which they had been delivered; and at dawn all the soldiers
were summoned to an assembly by sound of the bugle, it being needful to
give due recompense both to that which had been well and that which had
been ill done. First Manlius received both praises and gifts for his
valour, and this not only from the captains, but from the common consent
of the soldiers, every man carrying to his house, which was in the
Capitol, half a pound of corn and half a pint of wine, a gift which
seems indeed very small in the telling, but yet was a great proof of
affection, the great scarcity of all things which prevailed at the time
being considered, since all subtracted something from their necessary
food to give it to this one man. After this the guards that had been
set to watch the place by which the enemy had climbed up the hill were
summoned to the assembly. Of these, though Sulpicius, tribune of the
soldiers, had affirmed that he would deal with all of them according to
military custom, only one was punished, all agreeing to throw the chief
blame on him, and he, being beyond all doubt guilty in the matter, was
by common consent cast down from the rock. After this the watch was kept
more diligently on both sides, for the Gauls knew that messengers had
gone to and fro between Veii and Rome, and the Romans remembered from
how great a peril they had escaped.

Beyond all other evils of war famine troubled both armies. The Gauls
were vexed with pestilence also, having their camp in low ground that
lay among hills, and was scorched with the burning of the houses. If
there was anything of wind also, this brought with it not dust only
but ashes. All these things and the heat of the year the Gauls, who are
accustomed to wet and cold, were little able to endure, so that they
died, as it were, in herds; so that their fellows, wearied of burying
the dead one by one, made great heaps of their carcases and burned them
with fire. And now a truce was made with the Romans, and conferences
held. In this the Gauls spake much of the famine as being good cause of
surrender; whereupon, it is said, the Romans threw loaves of bread among
their posts, as if to show them that there was no scarcity among them.
Nevertheless their hunger was such that now it could neither be hidden
nor endured. Wherefore, while Camillus levied an army at Ardea, the
garrison of the Capitol, worn out with watching, and yet able to endure
all other ills save hunger only, seeing that the help they looked for
came not, and that when the guards went forth to their watch they could
scarce for weakness stand up under their arms, were resolute that they
should either surrender or ransom themselves on such terms as might be
had. And this they did the more readily because the Gauls had made it
plain that they might be persuaded by no great sum of money to give up
the siege. The Senate, therefore, was called together, and the matter
was entrusted to the tribunes of the soldiers. After this a conference
was held between Sulpicius and Brennus, king of the Gauls, by whom it
was agreed that a thousand pounds' weight of gold should be the ransom
of a people that was thereafter to rule the world; a shameful thing,
made yet more shameful by insult. For the Gauls bringing false weights
which the tribune refused, King Brennus threw his sword into the scale
that held the weights, saying at the same time words that no Roman could
endure: "Woe to the vanquished!"

But both gods and men forbad that Rome should be ransomed in this
fashion. For before the payment was made, the whole quantity of gold not
having been weighed by reason of this dispute, the Dictator coming up
commanded that the gold should be taken away, and bade the Gauls depart.
These indeed made opposition, affirming that the covenant had been made
and must be performed; to which Camillus made answer that it had been
made without his permission by a lower magistrate he being at the
time Dictator, and he warned the Gauls to make them ready forthwith
to battle. To his own men he gave command that they should throw their
baggage into a heap and gird on their arms. "Ransom your country,"
said he, "with steel rather than with gold, having before your eyes the
temples of the Gods, your wives, your children, and all which ye most
desire." After this he drew up in line of battle, as well as the place
permitted, being covered with the ruins of the city. The Gauls, troubled
by these things, which had happened beyond all their expectations, took
up their arms and ran upon the Romans with much rage but little skill.
And now (such change was there in fortune) they were put to flight no
less easily than they had put the Romans to flight at Allia. There was
yet another battle between the Gauls and the Romans; and this was fought
at the eighth milestone on the road to Gabii, for to this place they had
fled from Rome. Here there was slaughter without end. The camp of the
Gauls was taken, and all perished, so that not so much as one was left
to carry home the tidings. Then Camillus returned in triumph to Rome,
being greeted by the soldiers in their rude fashion as a second Romulus,
the true father and founder of his country.

Having now saved Rome by war, he saved it beyond all doubt in peace
also, for he forbade the people to depart from the city and take up
their dwelling at Veii, which counsel was urged more diligently by the
tribunes now that the city had been burned by fire, the commons being
not a little inclined thereto. But Camillus, that he might the more
effectually hinder it, resigned not his office of dictator, according to
custom, after his triumph, but still kept it till all these things were
brought to an end.

First, being always careful of things that concerned the gods, he
proposed that all the temples should be duly restored and purified; that
the people of Caere should be admitted to the friendship of the Roman
people, because they had given shelter to the priests and the virgins
and the sacred things, and that games should be held in honour of
Jupiter of the Capitol as having delivered the city from the enemy. The
gold that had been taken from the Gauls, with that which had been
taken from the temples, no one knowing to whom or to what place it
appertained, was to be laid beneath the throne of Jupiter. To the
matrons public thanks were given, with this honour, that they should
be praised with funeral orations in like manner with men. Then he spake
about the counsel of departing to Veii, showing them many causes why
they should refuse it, and this above all others, that it was not lawful
to worship the gods of their country in any other place but only in
Rome. But that which prevailed with them more than all the speech of
Camillus was a word spoken by chance. While the Senate debated the
matter in the Hall of Hostilius, certain cohorts that were returning
from keeping the guards passed through the market-place, whereupon a
centurion cried out, "Standard-bearer, set up thy standard. We shall
best remain in this place." And when the Senate heard these words they
exclaimed with one voice, "We accept the omen;" and the multitude of the
people that stood around approved.




CHAPTER XV. ~~ THE STORY OF MANLIUS OF THE TWISTED CHAIN.

There dwelt in Rome a certain Lucius Manlius, of the kindred of that
Manlius that thrust down the Gauls from the Capitol, and men gave him
the surname of Imperious by reason of the haughtiness of his temper.
This Manlius was made dictator for this one purpose, that he might drive
a nail into the wall of the temple of Jupiter. For it had been a custom
in old time that whoever was chief magistrate at Rome should drive a
nail in this place on the fifteenth day of the month September, to the
end that the number of the year might thus be marked, there being in
those days but small use of letters and figures; and this nail was
driven into the wall that looks towards the temple of Minerva, because
Minerva is the goddess of numbers. But in the days of Manlius this
custom had been long since forgotten; and when it chanced that a
pestilence came upon the city and nothing else availed to stay it (for
besides other things stage players were brought from Etruria to make
a show that might appease the anger of the gods), certain old men
remembered that in former years such plagues had been stayed by the
appointing of a dictator to drive in a nail. This Manlius then was thus
appointed; but when he had done his office he conceived the purpose of
carrying on war against the Hernici, and would have levied an army but
that the tribunes of the Commons hindered him.

In the beginning of the next year one of the tribunes, Pomponius by
name, brought Manlius to trial, bringing sundry accusations against him.
For in the levy that he sought to make he had dealt cruelly with them
that answered not to their names, causing some to be beaten with rods
and casting others into prison. His surname also was proof sufficient
that he was of such a temper as could not be endured in a free state.
"And this temper," said the tribune, "he had shown not to strangers
only, but even to those that are of his own blood. His own son, a young
man uncondemned of any crime, he has banished from the city and from
his home, forbidding him to have any converse with his fellows, and
compelling him to work after the fashion of a slave. And for what fault
in the young man, think ye, that he hath done this thing? Because he is
not eloquent or ready of speech. But should not a father, if there be
any natural kindness in him, seek to apply remedies to such defects
rather than to punish them? Even the brute beasts, if their offspring
chance to be ill-shaped, are the more careful to nourish and cherish it.
But this Manlius has rather increased the affliction of his son, and
made his wits yet slower than they were, extinguishing such natural
power as he may have by causing him to dwell among the beasts of the
field."

This accusation stirred great anger against the father in all men save
only in the son himself. For when the young man knew that an accusation
had been made against his father on his account he was much troubled.
And that both gods and men might know that he desired to give help to
his father rather than to the enemies of his father, he conceived a plan
which indeed ill became a citizen and one who would be obedient to the
laws, yet still was to be commended for its piety. Girding himself with
a knife he came, none knowing his purpose, early in the morning to the
city, and went straightway from the gate to the house of Pomponius the
tribune. Then he said to the porter, "I must needs speak forthwith with
your master. Tell him that Titus Manlius, son of Lucius Manlius, seeks
him." The tribune, thinking that the young man had come full of
anger against his father, to bring, it might be, some new accusation,
commanded that he should be brought into his chamber. When they had
greeted one another Manlius said, "I have somewhat to say to thee
which thou must hear alone." So the tribune bade all that were present
withdraw themselves. This being done Manlius drew his dagger, and
standing over the bed, threatened that he would run him through
therewith unless he should swear in words that he would himself dictate
that he would never hold a meeting of the Commons before which to bring
his father to judgment. The tribune, fearing the steel which glittered
before his eyes, and knowing that the young man was not only of
exceeding strength but also of a very fierce and savage temper, and
being himself without arms, sware as he was bidden, and afterwards told
what had taken place, showing that he had given up his purpose under
compulsion. The people took it ill that they could not sit in judgment
on a man of so cruel a temper; nevertheless they commended the son for
his piety; and all the more because the harshness of his father had not
extinguished in him his natural affection. The father indeed escaped
not, being brought to trial, and the son reaped from the matter this
reward, that in the following year, when the people for the first time,
for so it chanced to happen, chose their tribune in the army, he was so
chosen, having the second place among six; and this though he had
done nothing either at home or abroad which might commend him to their
favour.

In the year following there was a war with the Gauls, who had pitched
their camp three miles only from Rome on the other side of the river
Anio. A certain Quinctius Pennus, being made dictator, gathered a great
army and encamped on the near side of the river. Now between the two
armies there was a bridge, which neither the one nor the other would
break down, lest they should seem to fear the enemy. For this bridge
many battles were fought; and it could not be told, so equal was the
strength on either side, to whom it belonged. At a certain day there
came forth a Gaul of exceeding great stature and stood upon the bridge,
crying with a loud voice, "Hear now, ye men of Rome, let the bravest
man that ye have among you come forth, and let him fight with me; and
according as I shall prevail over him, or he prevail over me, so shall
we know whether Gauls or Romans are the better in war."

For a long time there was silence among the Roman people, for they were
ashamed to refuse the battle, yet were loath to take the very first
place in this great peril. Then Titus Manlius, the son of Lucius, came
forth, and said to the Dictator, "I would never fight out of my due
place in the host without thy bidding, not even though I should see
victory clearly assured. But now, if thou wilt suffer me, I would gladly
show to that brute beast that shows himself so confidently before the
standards of the enemy that I am of the name of Manlius and of the
kindred of him that drave down the Gauls from the Capitol." To him the
Dictator made answer, "Thou doest well, Manlius, with thy valour and thy
piety, both towards thy country and thy father. Go thou and show, the
Gods helping thee, that a Roman cannot be conquered." Then his comrades
armed the youth, giving him the long shield of a foot soldier and a
Spanish sword, which, for its shortness, was well suited for fighting in
close combat. Then they led him forward against the Gaul; and even noted
how, for scorn of his enemy, the barbarian thrust out his tongue. So the
two stood together between the armies, being ill matched, if one would
judge by the appearance. The Gaul, indeed, was of exceedingly great
stature, and was clad in a garment of many colours, and his arms were
painted and inlaid with gold. As for the Roman, he was of the middle
stature, such as is commonly to be seen among soldiers, his bearing
being without pride, and his arms fitted for use rather than for show.
He used no song of defiance, nor leaping from the ground, nor idle
shaking of his arms; but kept his courage and wrath silent within his
heart, nor showed his fierceness till the combat itself should need
it. So they stood, and the two armies regarded them with hope and fear.
First the Gaul, being like to some great mass that was ready to crush
everything under it, thrusting forward his shield on his left arm, dealt
a great blow on the armour of Manlius with his sword, striking with the
edge (for the swords of the Gauls had no points), but harming him not,
though the sound of it was great. But the Roman, first thrusting aside
the shield of the enemy with his own shield, ran in close upon him, so
that the man could not strike him--his sword being over long--and so
driving his sword pointwise from beneath, smote him twice in the belly
and in the groin, so that he fell his whole length upon the ground. And
as he lay, he stripped from his body, to which he did no other harm,
a chain of twisted gold that the man wore, and threw it, covered with
blood as it was, about his own neck. Meanwhile the Gauls stood still for
fear and wonder; but the Romans running forth with joy from their ranks
to meet their champion, so led him to the Dictator. From this deed Titus
Manlius was called "Manlius of the Twisted Chain;" and this name he
handed down to his descendants after him.

About twenty years after this deed there was a great war between the
Romans and the Latins (for the Latins demanded that one consul should
always be of their nation, and, this being denied to them, made war
against Rome) and this same Manlius was consul. Now it was needful that
there should be discipline of the strictest sort in the army; and also,
because the Latins spake the same tongue as did the Romans, and had
their arms and all other things that appertained to war the same, the
Consuls issued a decree that no man should fight with the enemy, save
only at his post in the army.

Now it chanced that Titus Manlius, son of the Consul, being captain of a
squadron of horsemen, rode so far with his squadron (the horsemen being
sent out in all directions to spy out the country) that he was scarce
the length of a spear's throw from the camp of the enemy, at a certain
part where the horsemen of Tusculum had their station. The leader of
these horsemen was Metius, a certain man of noble birth and renowned
among his countrymen for his valour. This Metius, seeing the Roman
horsemen, and Manlius the Consul's son riding in the front, and knowing
him who he was (for indeed all the men of note in the two armies were
known to each other), cried out, "Are ye minded, ye men of Rome, being
but one squadron, to do battle with the Latins and their allies? What
are the Consuls doing, and their two armies?" To this Manlius made
answer, "They will come in due time; aye, one that is mightier than
they, even Jupiter, will come also: Jupiter, who is witness to the
treaties which ye have broken. If at the Lake Regillus we fought with
you till ye were weary, so here also we will give you such entertainment
as ye shall little like." Then said Metius, "Art thou willing, then, in
the meanwhile, while the day on which ye will make so mighty a stir is
yet coming, to fight here with me, that from the issue of our meeting
all men may know by how much a Latin horseman is better than a horseman
of the Romans?" Thereupon anger, or shame that he should seem to shrink
from such combat, or, it may be, the will of fate, that none may escape,
stirred the young man's haughty spirit, so that, taking no account of
his father's commands or of the decree of the Consuls, he thrust himself
headlong into a combat in which it mattered but little whether he was
vanquished or no. The other horsemen removed themselves far off to look
at the combat, leaving a space of clear ground for the two, who,
driving their horses over the plain, met in the midst with their spears
levelled. The spear of Metius crossed the horse's neck of Manlius, and
the spear of Manlius passed above the head of the Latin. After this they
wheeled their horses about, and Manlius, rising first to deal a second
blow, smote the horse of the Latin between the ears; and when the horse
felt the wound he reared himself upon his hind legs and shook off his
rider; and when the man, sorely shaken by so grievous a fall, would have
raised himself by help of his shield and spear, the Roman smote him with
his spear in the throat, so that the point came out through his ribs,
making him fast to the earth. Then Manlius gathered the spoils from the
dead man, and rode back to the camp, his squadron following him with
great joy. Being come to the camp, he went to the general's tent,
knowing not what fate awaited him or whether he had earned praise or
punishment. Then he said to his father, "I desired that all men should
know that I am truly thy son; and therefore, having been challenged to
combat, I fought, and now bring back these spoils from the enemy whom I
slew." But the Consul, so soon as he heard these words, turning his
face from his son, commanded that the bugle should be sounded and the
soldiers called to an assembly. And when the men had come together in
great numbers, he said, "Titus Manlius, thou hast had no respect to
the authority of the Consuls or to the dignity of thy father, and,
disobeying our decree, hast fought with the enemy elsewhere than in
thy place, loosening thereby, so far as in thee lay, that military
discipline by which up to this time the commonwealth of Rome hath stood
and been established. And me thou hast brought into these straits, that
I must forget either the commonwealth or myself and my own kindred.
Rather, therefore, will we suffer ourselves for our own fault than
suffer the commonwealth to suffer for us at so great a loss to itself.
Truly we two shall be a warning, sad indeed yet wholesome, to our youth
in time to come. As for myself, I am truly troubled, not only by that
love for my children which is natural to all men, but also by the valour
which, led astray by a false appearance of glory, thou hast shown
this day. Nevertheless, seeing that the Consuls' power must either be
established for ever by thy death or abolished for ever by thy escape,
I judge that thou thyself also, if there is aught of my blood in thee,
wilt not refuse to die, and so establish again that military discipline
which thou hast weakened by thy misdoing. Go, lictor, bind him to the
stake."

All that were present in the assembly stood stricken with terror at
so cruel a command, and stood silent, but rather from fear than from
obedience, each seeming to see the axe made ready against himself. Thus
were they overwhelmed with astonishment, and stood holding their peace.
But when the young man's head was smitten off and the blood was seen
to pour forth, then, recovering themselves, they cried aloud and spared
neither lamentations nor curses. Afterwards for the young man they made
a soldiers funeral with all the zeal that they could show, covering his
body with the spoils of war and burning it on a pile in a place without
the rampart of the camp. From that day, when men would speak of some
savage command or exercising of power, they are wont to call it a
"Manlian rule." As for Titus Manlius the father, when he came back in
triumph to Rome (for the Romans were victorious in the war, as will be
told hereafter) the elders only went forth to meet him; the young men,
both then and ever afterwards, so long as he lived, turned from him with
hatred and curses.




CHAPTER XVI. ~~ STORIES OF CERTAIN GREAT ROMANS.

In the three hundred and ninety-third year after the building of the
city there was seen suddenly to open in the market-place a great gulf of
a deepness that no man could measure. And this gulf could not be filled
up though all the people brought earth and stones and the like to cast
into it. But at the last there was sent a message from the gods that
