elements, wid he eye peel fer bizness, en 't wa'n't long 'fo' he glance
lit on Brer Wolf, en he 'low ter hisse'f, sezee:--

"'I'll des sorter flop down,' sezee, 'en look inter dis, kaze ef Brer
Wolf hidin' he dinner dar wid de expeck'shun er findin' it dar w'en he
come back, den he done gone en put it in de wrong place,' sezee.

"Wid dat ole Brer Tukky Buzzud, he flop down en sail 'roun' nigher, en
he soon see dat Brer Wolf ain't hidin' no dinner. Den he flop down
furder, ole Brer Buzzud did, twel he lit on de top er de holler tree.
Brer Wolf, he done kotch a glimpse er ole Brer Buzzud shadder, but he
keep on puttin' chunks en rocks in de holler. Den, present'y, Brer
Buzzud, he open up:--

"'W'at you doin' dar, Brer Wolf?'

"'Makin' a toom-stone, Brer Buzzud.'

"Co'se Brer Buzzud sorter feel like he got intruss in marters like dis,
en he holler back:--

"'Who dead now, Brer Wolf?'

"'Wunner yo' 'quaintance, w'ich he name Brer Fox, Brer Buzzud.'

"'Wen he die, Brer Wolf?'

"'He ain't dead yit, but he won't las' long in yer, Brer Buzzud.'

"Brer Wolf, he keep on, he did, twel he done stop up de hole good, en
den he bresh de trash off'n his cloze, en put out fer home. Brer Tukky
Buzzud, he sot up dar, he did, en ontankle his tail fedders, en lissen
en lissen, but Brer Fox, he keep dark, en Brer Buzzud ain't year
nuthin'. Den Brer Buzzud, he flop he wings en sail away.

"Bimeby, nex' day, bright en early, yer he come back, en he sail all
'roun' en 'roun' de tree, but Brer Fox he lay low en keep dark, en Brer
Buzzud ain't year nuthin'. Atter w'ile, Brer Buzzud he sail 'roun'
ag'in, en dis time he sing, en de song w'at he sing is dish yer:--

    "'_Boo, boo, boo, my filler-mer-loo,
    Man out yer wid news fer you!_'

Den he sail all 'roun' en 'roun' n'er time en listen, en bimeby he year
Brer Fox sing back:--

    "'_Go 'way, go 'way, my little jug er beer,
    De news you bring, I yeard las' year._'"

"Beer, Uncle Remus? What kind of beer did they have then?" the little
boy inquired.

"Now, den, honey, youer gittin' me up in a close cornder," responded the
old man, in an unusually serious tone. "Beer is de way de tale runs, but
w'at kinder beer it moughter bin ain't come down ter me--en yit hit seem
lak I year talk some'rs dat dish yer beer wuz mos' prins'ply 'simmon
beer."

This seemed to satisfy the small but exacting audience, and Uncle Remus
continued:--

"So, den, w'en Brer Buzzud year Brer Fox sing back, he 'low he ain't
dead, en wid dat, Brer Buzzud, he sail off en 'ten' ter he yuther
business. Nex' day back he come, en Brer Fox, he sing back, he did, des
ez lively ez a cricket in de ashes, en it keep on dis way twel Brer Fox
stomach 'gun ter pinch him, en den he know dat he gotter study up some
kinder plans fer ter git out fum dar. N'er day pass, en Brer Fox, he
tuck'n lay low, en it keep on dat a-way twel hit look like ter Brer Fox,
pent up in dar, he mus' sholy pe'sh. Las', one day Brer Buzzud come
sailin' all 'roun' en 'roun' wid dat

    "'_Boo, boo, boo, my filler-mer-loo_,'

but Brer Fox, he keep dark en Brer Buzzud, he tuck'n spishun dat Brer
Fox wuz done dead. Brer Buzzud, he keep on singin', en Brer Fox he keep
on layin' low, twel bimeby Brer Buzzud lit en 'gun ter cle'r 'way de
trash en truck fum de holler. He hop up, he did, en tuck out one chunk,
en den he hop back en lissen, but Brer Fox stay still. Den Brer Buzzud
hop up en tuck out n'er chunk, en den hop back en lissen, en all dis
time Brer Fox mouf 'uz waterin' w'iles he lay back in dar en des
nat'ally honed atter Brer Buzzud. Hit went on dis a-way, twel des 'fo'
he got de hole unkivvud, Brer Fox, he break out he did, en grab Brer
Buzzud by de back er de neck. Dey wuz a kinder scuffle 'mongs' um, but
't wa'n't fer long, en dat wuz de las' er ole Brer Tukky Buzzud."




XIX

THE MOON IN THE MILL-POND


One night when the little boy made his usual visit to Uncle Remus, he
found the old man sitting up in his chair fast asleep. The child said
nothing. He was prepared to exercise a good deal of patience upon
occasion, and the occasion was when he wanted to hear a story. But, in
making himself comfortable, he aroused Uncle Remus from his nap.

"I let you know, honey," said the old man, adjusting his spectacles, and
laughing rather sheepishly,--"I let you know, honey, w'en I gits my
head r'ar'd back dat a-way, en my eyeleds shot, en my mouf open, en my
chin p'intin' at de rafters, den dey's some mighty quare gwines on in my
min'. Dey is dat, des ez sho' ez youer settin' dar. W'en I fus' year you
comin' down de paf," Uncle Remus continued, rubbing his beard
thoughtfully, "I 'uz sorter fear'd you mought 'spicion dat I done gone
off on my journeys fer ter see ole man Nod."

This was accompanied by a glance of inquiry, to which the little boy
thought it best to respond.

"Well, Uncle Remus," he said, "I did think I heard you snoring when I
came in."

"Now you see dat!" exclaimed Uncle Remus, in a tone of grieved
astonishment; "you see dat! Man can't lean hisse'f 'pun his 'membunce,
'ceppin' dey's some un fer ter come high-primin' 'roun' en 'lowin' dat
he done gone ter sleep. _Shoo!_ W'en you stept in dat do' dar I 'uz
right in 'mungs some mighty quare notions--mighty quare notions. Dey
ain't no two ways; ef I uz ter up en let on 'bout all de notions w'at I
gits in 'mungs, folks 'ud hatter come en kyar me off ter de place whar
dey puts 'stracted people.

"Atter I sop up my supper," Uncle Remus went on, "I tuck'n year some
flutterments up dar 'mungs de rafters, en I look up, en dar wuz a Bat
sailin' 'roun'. 'Roun' en 'roun', en 'roun' she go--und' de rafters,
'bove de rafters--en ez she sail she make noise lak she grittin' 'er
toofies. Now, w'at dat Bat atter, I be bless ef I kin tell you, but dar
she wuz; 'roun' en 'roun', over en under. I ax 'er w'at do she want up
dar, but she ain't got no time fer ter tell; 'roun' en 'roun', en over
en under. En bimeby, out she flip, en I boun' she grittin' 'er toofies
en gwine 'roun' en 'roun' out dar, en dodgin' en flippin' des lak de
elements wuz full er rafters en cobwebs.

"W'en she flip out I le'nt my head back, I did, en 't wa'n't no time
'fo' I git mix up wid my notions. Dat Bat wings so limber en 'er will
so good dat she done done 'er day's work dar 'fo' you could 'er run ter
de big house en back. De Bat put me in min' er folks," continued Uncle
Remus, settling himself back in his chair, "en folks put me in min' er
de creeturs."

Immediately the little boy was all attention.

"Dey wuz times," said the old man, with something like a sigh, "w'en de
creeturs 'ud segashuate tergedder des like dey ain't had no fallin' out.
Dem wuz de times w'en ole Brer Rabbit 'ud 'ten 'lak he gwine quit he
'havishness, en dey'd all go 'roun' des lak dey b'long ter de same
fambly connexion.

"One time atter dey bin gwine in cohoots dis a-way, Brer Rabbit 'gun ter
feel his fat, he did, en dis make 'im git projecky terreckly. De mo'
peace w'at dey had, de mo' wuss Brer Rabbit feel, twel bimeby he git
restless in de min'. W'en de sun shine he'd go en lay off in de grass en
kick at de gnats, en nibble at de mullen stalk en waller in de san'. One
night atter supper, w'iles he 'uz romancin' 'roun', he run up wid ole
Brer Tarrypin, en atter dey shuck han's dey sot down on de side er de
road en run on 'bout ole times. Dey talk en dey talk, dey did, en bimeby
Brer Rabbit say it done come ter dat pass whar he bleedz ter have some
fun, en Brer Tarrypin 'low dat Brer Rabbit des de ve'y man he bin
lookin' fer.

"'Well den,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'we'll des put Brer Fox, en Brer
Wolf, en Brer B'ar on notice, en termorrer night we'll meet down by de
mill-pon' en have a little fishin' frolic. I'll do de talkin',' sez Brer
Rabbit, sezee, 'en you kin set back en say _yea_,' sezee.

"Brer Tarrypin laugh.

"'Ef I ain't dar,' sezee, 'den you may know de grasshopper done fly 'way
wid me,' sezee.

"'En you neenter bring no fiddle, n'er,' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee, 'kaze
dey ain't gwineter be no dancin' dar,' sezee.

"Wid dat," continued Uncle Remus, "Brer Rabbit put out fer home, en
went ter bed, en Brer Tarrypin bruise 'roun' en make his way todes de
place so he kin be dar 'gin de 'p'inted time.

"Nex' day Brer Rabbit sont wud ter de yuther creeturs, en dey all make
great 'miration, kaze dey ain't think 'bout dis deyse'f. Brer Fox, he
'low, he did, dat he gwine atter Miss Meadows en Miss Motts, en de
yuther gals.

"Sho' nuff, w'en de time come dey wuz all dar. Brer B'ar, he fotch a
hook en line; Brer Wolf, he fotch a hook en line; Brer Fox, he fotch a
dip-net, en Brer Tarrypin, not ter be outdone, he fotch de bait."

"What did Miss Meadows and Miss Motts bring?" the little boy asked.

Uncle Remus dropped his head slightly to one side, and looked over his
spectacles at the little boy.

"Miss Meadows en Miss Motts," he continued, "dey tuck'n stan' way back
fum de aidge er de pon' en squeal eve'y time Brer Tarrypin shuck de box
er bait at um. Brer B'ar 'low he gwine ter fish fer mud-cats; Brer Wolf
'low he gwine ter fish fer horneyheads; Brer Fox 'low he gwine ter fish
fer peerch fer de ladies; Brer Tarrypin 'low he gwine ter fish fer
minners, en Brer Rabbit wink at Brer Tarrypin en 'low he gwine ter fish
fer suckers.

"Dey all git ready, dey did, en Brer Rabbit march up ter de pon' en make
fer ter th'ow he hook in de water, but des 'bout dat time hit seem lak
he see sump'n'. De t'er creeturs, dey stop en watch his motions. Brer
Rabbit, he drap he pole, he did, en he stan' dar scratchin' he head en
lookin' down in de water.

"De gals dey 'gun ter git oneasy w'en dey see dis, en Miss Meadows, she
up en holler out, she did:--

"'Law, Brer Rabbit, w'at de name er goodness de marter in dar?'

"Brer Rabbit scratch he head en look in de water. Miss Motts, she hilt
up 'er petticoats, she did, en 'low she monst'us fear'd er snakes. Brer
Rabbit keep on scratchin' en lookin'.

"Bimeby he fetch a long bref, he did, en he 'low:--

"'Ladies en gentermuns all, we des might ez well make tracks fum dish
yer place, kaze dey ain't no fishin' in dat pon' fer none er dish yer
crowd.'

"Wid dat, Brer Tarrypin, he scramble up ter de aidge en look over, en he
shake he head, en 'low:--

"'Tooby sho'--tooby sho'! Tut-tut-tut!' en den he crawl back, he did, en
do lak he wukkin' he min'.

"'Don't be skeert, ladies, kaze we er boun' ter take keer un you, let
come w'at will, let go w'at mus',' sez Brer Rabbit, sezee. 'Accidents
got ter happen unter we all, des same ez dey is unter yuther folks; en
dey ain't nuthin' much de marter, 'ceppin' dat de Moon done drap in de
water. Ef you don't b'leeve me you kin look fer yo'se'f,' sezee.

"Wid dat dey all went ter de bank en lookt in; en, sho' nuff, dar lay de
Moon, a-swingin' an' a-swayin' at de bottom er de pon'."

The little boy laughed. He had often seen the reflection of the sky in
shallow pools of water, and the startling depths that seemed to lie at
his feet had caused him to draw back with a shudder.

"Brer Fox, he look in, he did, en he 'low, 'Well, well, well!' Brer
Wolf, he look in, en he 'low, 'Mighty bad, mighty bad!' Brer B'ar, he
look in, en he 'low, 'Tum, tum, tum!' De ladies dey look in, en Miss
Meadows she squall out, 'Ain't dat too much?' Brer Rabbit, he look in
ag'in, en he up en 'low, he did:--

"'Ladies en gentermuns, you all kin hum en haw, but less'n we gits dat
Moon out er de pon', dey ain't no fish kin be ketch 'roun' yer dis
night; en ef you'll ax Brer Tarrypin, he'll tell you de same.'

"Den dey ax how kin dey git de Moon out er dar, den Brer Tarrypin 'low
dey better lef' dat wid Brer Rabbit. Brer Rabbit he shot he eyes, he
did, en make lak he wukkin' he min'. Bimeby, he up'n 'low:--

"'De nighes' way out'n dish yer diffikil is fer ter sen' 'roun' yer to
ole Mr. Mud-Turkle en borry his sane, en drag dat Moon up fum dar,'
sezee.

"'I 'clar' ter gracious I mighty glad you mention dat,' says Brer
Tarrypin, sezee. 'Mr. Mud-Turkle is setch clos't kin ter me dat I calls
'im Unk Muck, en I lay ef you sen' dar atter dat sane you won't fine Unk
Muck so mighty disaccomerdatin'.'

"Well," continued Uncle Remus, after one of his tantalizing pauses, "dey
sont atter de sane, en w'iles Brer Rabbit wuz gone, Brer Tarrypin, he
'low dat he done year tell time en time ag'in dat dem w'at fine de Moon
in de water en fetch 'im out, lakwise dey ull fetch out a pot er money.
Dis make Brer Fox, en Brer Wolf, en Brer B'ar feel mighty good, en dey
'low, dey did, dat long ez Brer Rabbit been so good ez ter run atter de
sane, dey ull do de sanein'.

"Time Brer Rabbit git back, he see how de lan' lay, en he make lak he
wanter go in atter de Moon. He pull off he coat, en he 'uz fixin' fer
ter shuck he wescut, but de yuther creeturs dey 'low dey wa'n't gwine
ter let dryfoot man lak Brer Rabbit go in de water. So Brer Fox, he tuck
holt er one staff er de sane, Brer Wolf he tuck holt er de yuther staff,
en Brer B'ar he wade 'long behime fer ter lif' de sane 'cross logs en
snags.

"Dey make one haul--no Moon; n'er haul--no Moon; n'er haul--no Moon. Den
bimeby dey git out furder fum de bank. Water run in Brer Fox year, he
shake he head; water run in Brer Wolf year, he shake he head; water run
in Brer B'ar year, he shake he head. En de fus' news you know, w'iles
dey wuz a-shakin', dey come to whar de bottom shelfed off. Brer Fox he
step off en duck hisse'f; den Brer Wolf duck hisse'f; en Brer B'ar he
make a splunge en duck hisse'f; en, bless gracious, dey kick en splatter
twel it look lak dey 'uz gwine ter slosh all de water outer de
mill-pon'.

"W'en dey come out, de gals 'uz all a-snickerin' en a-gigglin', en dey
well mought, 'kaze go whar you would, dey wa'n't no wuss lookin'
creeturs dan dem; en Brer Rabbit, he holler, sezee:--

"'I 'speck you all, gents, better go home en git some dry duds, en n'er
time we'll be in better luck,' sezee. 'I hear talk dat de Moon'll bite
at a hook ef you take fools fer baits, en I lay dat's de onliest way fer
ter ketch 'er,' sezee.

"Brer Fox en Brer Wolf en Brer B'ar went drippin' off, en Brer Rabbit en
Brer Tarrypin, dey went home wid de gals."




XX

BRER RABBIT TAKES SOME EXERCISE


One night while the little boy was sitting in Uncle Remus's cabin,
waiting for the old man to finish his hoe-cake, and refresh his memory
as to the further adventures of Brother Rabbit, his friends and his
enemies, something dropped upon the top of the house with a noise like
the crack of a pistol. The little boy jumped, but Uncle Remus looked up
and exclaimed, "Ah-yi!" in a tone of triumph.

"What was that, Uncle Remus?" the child asked, after waiting a moment to
see what else would happen.

"News fum Jack Fros', honey. W'en dat hick'y-nut tree out dar year 'im
comin' she 'gins ter drap w'at she got. I mighty glad," he continued,
scraping the burnt crust from his hoe-cake with an old case-knife, "I
mighty glad hick'y-nuts ain't big en heavy ez grinestones."

He waited a moment to see what effect this queer statement would have on
the child.

"Yasser, I mighty glad--dat I is. 'Kaze ef hick'y-nuts 'uz big ez
grinestones dish yer ole callyboose 'ud be a-leakin' long 'fo'
Chris'mus."

Just then another hickory-nut dropped upon the roof, and the little boy
jumped again. This seemed to amuse Uncle Remus, and he laughed until he
was near to choking himself with his smoking hoe-cake.

"You does des 'zackly lak ole Brer Rabbit done, I 'clar' to gracious ef
you don't!" the old man cried, as soon as he could get his breath; "dez
zackly fer de worl'."

The child was immensely flattered, and at once he wanted to know how
Brother Rabbit did. Uncle Remus was in such good humor that he needed no
coaxing. He pushed his spectacles back on his forehead, wiped his mouth
on his sleeve, and began:--

"Hit come 'bout dat soon one mawnin' todes de fall er de year, Brer
Rabbit wuz stirrin' 'roun' in de woods atter some bergamot fer ter make
'im some h'ar-grease. De win' blow so col' dat it make 'im feel right
frisky, en eve'y time he year de bushes rattle he make lak he skeerd. He
'uz gwine on dis a-way, hoppity-skippity, w'en bimeby he year Mr. Man
cuttin' on a tree way off in de woods. He fotch up, Brer Rabbit did, en
lissen fus' wid one year en den wid de yuther.

"Man, he cut en cut, en Brer Rabbit, he lissen en lissen. Bimeby, w'iles
all dis was gwine on, down come de tree--_kubber-lang-bang-blam!_ Brer
Rabbit, he tuck'n jump des lak you jump, en let 'lone dat, he make a
break, he did, en he lipt out fum dar lak de dogs wuz atter 'im."

"Was he scared, Uncle Remus?" asked the little boy.

"Skeerd! Who? _Him?_ Shoo! don't you fret yo'se'f 'bout Brer Rabbit,
honey. In dem days dey wa'n't nothin' gwine dat kin skeer Brer Rabbit.
Tooby sho', he tuck keer hisse'f, en ef you know de man w'at 'fuse ter
take keer hisse'f, I lak mighty well ef you p'int 'im out. Deed'n dat I
would!"

Uncle Remus seemed to boil over with argumentative indignation.

"Well, den," he continued, "Brer Rabbit run twel he git sorter het up
like, en des 'bout de time he makin' ready fer ter squot en ketch he
win', who should he meet but Brer Coon gwine home atter settin' up wid
ole Brer Bull-Frog. Brer Coon see 'im runnin', en he hail 'im.

"'Wat yo' hurry, Brer Rabbit?'

"'Ain't got time ter tarry.'

"'Folks sick?'

"'No, my Lord! Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"'Tryin' yo' soopleness?'

"'No, my Lord! Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"'Do pray, Brer Rabbit, tell me de news!'

"'Mighty big fuss back dar in de woods. Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"Dis make Brer Coon feel mighty skittish, 'kaze he fur ways fum home, en
he des lipt out, he did, en went a-b'ilin' thoo de woods. Brer Coon
ain't gone fur twel he meet Brer Fox.

"'Hey, Brer Coon, whar you gwine?'

"'Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"'Gwine at'-de doctor?'

"'No, my Lord! Ain't got time ter tarry.'

"'Do pray, Brer Coon, tell me de news.'

"'Mighty quare racket back dar in de woods! Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"Wid dat, Brer Fox lipt out, he did, en fa'rly split de win'. He ain't
gone fur twel he meet Brer Wolf.

"'Hey, Brer Fox! Stop en res' yo'se'f!'

"'Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"'Who bin want de doctor?'

"'No'ne, my Lord! Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"'Do pray, Brer Fox, good er bad, tell me de news.'

"'Mighty kuse fuss back dar in de woods! Ain't got time ter tarry!'

"Wid dat, Brer Wolf shuck hisse'f loose fum de face er de yeth, en he
ain't git fur twel he meet Brer B'ar. Brer B'ar he ax, en Brer Wolf
make ans'er, en bimeby Brer B'ar he fotch a snort en run'd off; en,
bless gracious! 't wa'n't long 'fo' de las' one er de creeturs wuz
a-skaddlin' thoo de woods lak de Ole Boy was atter um--en all 'kaze Brer
Rabbit year Mr. Man cut tree down.

"Dey run'd en dey run'd," Uncle Remus went on, "twel dey come ter Brer
Tarrypin house, en dey sorter slack up 'kaze dey done mighty nigh los'
der win'. Brer Tarrypin, he up'n ax um wharbouts dey gwine, en dey 'low
dey wuz a monst'us tarryfyin' racket back dar in de woods. Brer
Tarrypin, he ax w'at she soun' lak. One say he dunno, n'er say he dunno,
den dey all say dey dunno. Den Brer Tarrypin, he up'n ax who year dis
monst'us racket. One say he dunno, n'er say he dunno, den dey all say
dey dunno. Dis make ole Brer Tarrypin laff 'way down in he insides, en
he up'n say, sezee:--

"You all kin run 'long ef you feel skittish,' sezee. 'Atter I cook my
brekkus en wash up de dishes, ef I gits win' er any 'spicious racket may
be I mought take down my pairsol en foller long atter you,' sezee.

"Wen de creeturs come ter make inquirements 'mungs one er n'er 'bout who
start de news, hit went right spang back ter Brer Rabbit, but, lo en
beholes! Brer Rabbit ain't dar, en it tu'n out dat Brer Coon is de man
w'at seed 'im las'. Den dey got ter layin' de blame un it on one er
n'er, en little mo' en dey'd er fit dar scan'lous, but ole Brer
Tarrypin, he up'n 'low dat ef dey want ter git de straight un it, dey
better go see Brer Rabbit.
