"Then I will," said Alice.

"But, wife," answered the fisherman, "how can you be king? The fish
cannot make you a king."

"Husband," said she, "say no more about it, but go and try. I will be
king!"

So the man went away, quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want
to be king. The sea looked a dark grey color, and was covered with foam
as he cried out,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

"Well, what would she have now?" said the fish.

"Alas!" said the man, "my wife wants to be king."

"Go home," said the fish. "She is king already."

Then the fisherman went home; and as he came close to the palace, he saw
a troop of soldiers and heard the sound of drums and trumpets; and when
he entered in, he saw his wife sitting on a high throne of gold and
diamonds, with a golden crown upon her head; and on each side of her
stood six beautiful maidens, each a head taller than the other. "Well,
wife," said the fisherman, "are you king?"

"Yes," said she, "I am king."

And when he had looked at her for a long time, he said, "Ah, wife! what
a fine thing it is to be king! Now we shall never have anything more to
wish for."

"I don't know how that may be," said she; "never is a long time. I am
king, 'tis true, but I begin to be tired of it, and I think I should
like to be emperor."

"Alas, wife! why should you wish to be emperor?" said the fisherman.

"Husband," said she, "go to the fish; I say I will be emperor."

"Ah, wife!" replied the fisherman, "the fish cannot make an emperor, and
I should not like to ask for such a thing."

"I am king," said Alice, "and you are my slave, so go directly!"

So the fisherman was obliged to go; and he muttered as he went along,
"This will come to no good. It is too much to ask. The fish will be
tired at last, and then we shall repent of what we have done." He soon
arrived at the sea, and the water was quite black and muddy, and a
mighty whirlwind blew over it; but he went to the shore, and said,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

"What would she have now!" said the fish.

"Ah!" said the fisherman, "she wants to be emperor."

"Go home," said the fish. "She is emperor already."

So he went home again; and as he came near he saw his wife sitting on a
very lofty throne made of solid gold, with a great crown on her head
full two yards high, and on each side of her stood her guards and
attendants in a row, each one smaller than the other, from the tallest
giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger. And before her
stood princes, and dukes, and earls: and the fisherman went up to her
and said, "Wife, are you emperor?"

"Yes," said she, "I am emperor."

"Ah!" said the man as he gazed upon her, "what a fine thing it is to be
emperor!"

"Husband," said she, "why should we stay at being emperor; I will be
pope next."

"O wife, wife!" said he, "how can you be pope? There is but one pope at
a time in Christendom."

"Husband," said she, "I will be pope this very day."

"But," replied the husband, "the fish cannot make you pope."

"What nonsense!" said she, "if he can make an emperor, he can make a
pope. Go and try him."

So the fisherman went. But when he came to the shore the wind was
raging, and the sea was tossed up and down like boiling water, and the
ships were in the greatest distress and danced upon the waves most
fearfully. In the middle of the sky there was a little blue, but toward
the south it was all red as if a dreadful storm were rising. At this the
fisherman was terribly frightened, and trembled, so that his knees
knocked together: but he went to the shore and said,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

"What does she want now?" said the fish.

"Ah!" said the fisherman, "my wife wants to be pope."

"Go home," said the fish. "She is pope already."

Then the fisherman went home and found his wife sitting on a throne that
was two miles high; and she had three great crowns on her head, and
around stood all the pomp and power of the Church; and on each side were
two rows of burning lights of all sizes, the greatest as large as the
highest and biggest tower in the world, and the least no larger than a
small rushlight. "Wife," said the fisherman as he looked at all this
grandeur, "are you pope?"

"Yes," said she, "I am pope."

"Well, wife," replied he, "it is a grand thing to be pope; and now you
must be content, for you can be nothing greater."

"I will consider of that," said the wife. Then they went to bed: but
Dame Alice could not sleep all night for thinking what she should be
next. At last morning came, and the sun rose. "Ha!" thought she as she
looked at it through the window, "cannot I prevent the sun rising?" At
this she was very angry, and she wakened her husband and said, "Husband,
go to the fish and tell him I want to be lord of the sun and moon." The
fisherman was half asleep, but the thought frightened him so much that
he started and fell out of bed. "Alas, wife!" said he, "cannot you be
content to be pope?"

"No," said she, "I am very uneasy, and cannot bear to see the sun and
moon rise without my leave. Go to the fish directly."

Then the man went trembling for fear; and as he was going down to the
shore a dreadful storm arose, so that the trees and the rocks shook; and
the heavens became black, and the lightning played, and the thunder
rolled; and you might have seen in the sea great black waves like
mountains with a white crown of foam upon them; and the fisherman said,

          "O man of the sea!
          Come listen to me,
          For Alice my wife,
          The plague of my life,
        Hath sent me to beg a boon of thee!"

"What does she want now?" said the fish.

"Ah!" said he, "she wants to be lord of the sun and moon." "Go home,"
said the fish, "to your ditch again!" And there they live to this very
day.



177

        The Grimm version of "The Sleeping Beauty" is,
        by all odds, the finest one. Its perfect
        economy in the use of story materials has
        always been admired. Perrault's version drags
        in an unnecessary ogre and spoils a good story
        by not knowing when to stop. The Grimm title is
        "Dornroeschen," and the more literal
        translation, "Brier Rose," is the one generally
        used as the English title, rather than the one
        given by Taylor, whose translation follows.
        Tennyson has a very beautiful poetic rendering
        of this story in his "Day-Dream."

ROSE-BUD

Once upon a time there lived a king and queen who had no children; and
this they lamented very much. But one day as the queen was walking by
the side of the river, a little fish lifted its head out of the water
and said, "Your wish shall be fulfilled, and you shall soon have a
daughter."

What the little fish had foretold soon came to pass; and the queen had a
little girl that was so very beautiful that the king could not cease
looking on it for joy, and determined to hold a great feast. So he
invited not only his relations, friends, and neighbors, but also all the
fairies, that they might be kind and good to his little daughter.

Now there were thirteen fairies in his kingdom, and he had only twelve
golden dishes for them to eat out of, so he was obliged to leave one of
the fairies without an invitation. The rest came, and after the feast
was over they gave all their best gifts to the little princess: one gave
her virtue, another beauty, another riches, and so on till she had all
that was excellent in the world. When eleven had done blessing her, the
thirteenth, who had not been invited and was very angry on that account,
came in and determined to take her revenge. So she cried out, "The
king's daughter shall in her fifteenth year be wounded by a spindle, and
fall down dead."

Then the twelfth, who had not yet given her gift, came forward and said
that the bad wish must be fulfilled, but that she could soften it, and
that the king's daughter should not die, but fall asleep for a hundred
years.

But the king hoped to save his dear child from the threatened evil and
ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up and
destroyed. All the fairies' gifts were in the meantime fulfilled, for
the princess was so beautiful, and well-behaved, and amiable, and wise
that every one who knew her loved her. Now it happened that on the very
day she was fifteen years old the king and queen were not at home, and
she was left alone in the palace. So she roved about by herself and
looked at all the rooms and chambers till at last she came to an old
tower, to which there was a narrow staircase ending with a little door.
In the door there was a golden key, and when she turned it the door
sprang open, and there sat an old lady spinning away very busily. "Why,
how now, good mother," said the princess, "what are you doing there?"

"Spinning," said the old lady, and nodded her head.

"How prettily that little thing turns round!" said the princess, and
took the spindle and began to spin. But scarcely had she touched it
before the prophecy was fulfilled, and she fell down lifeless on the
ground.

However, she was not dead, but had only fallen into a deep sleep; and
the king and the queen, who just then came home, and all their court,
fell asleep too; and the horses slept in the stables, and the dogs in
the court, the pigeons on the house-top and the flies on the walls. Even
the fire on the hearth left off blazing and went to sleep; and the meat
that was roasting stood still; and the cook, who was at that moment
pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box on the ear for
something he had done amiss, let him go, and both fell asleep; and so
everything stood still, and slept soundly.

A large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace, and every year it
became higher and thicker till at last the whole palace was surrounded
and hid, so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen. But
there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping
Rose-Bud (for so was the king's daughter called); so that from time to
time several kings' sons came and tried to break through the thicket
into the palace. This they could never do, for the thorns and bushes
laid hold of them as it were with hands, and there they stuck fast and
died miserably.

After many many years there came a king's son into that land, and an old
man told him the story of the thicket of thorns, and how a beautiful
palace stood behind it, in which was a wondrous princess, called
Rose-Bud, asleep with all her court. He told, too, how he had heard from
his grandfather that many many princes had come, and had tried to break
through the thicket, but had stuck fast and died. Then the young prince
said, "All this shall not frighten me. I will go and see Rose-Bud." The
old man tried to dissuade him, but he persisted in going.

Now that very day were the hundred years completed; and as the prince
came to the thicket, he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs,
through which he passed with ease, and they closed after him as firm as
ever. Then he came at last to the palace, and there in the court lay the
dogs asleep, and the horses in the stables, and on the roof sat the
pigeons fast asleep with their heads under their wings; and when he came
into the palace, the flies slept on the walls, and the cook in the
kitchen was still holding up her hand as if she would beat the boy, and
the maid sat with a black fowl in her hand ready to be plucked.

Then he went on still further, and all was so still that he could hear
every breath he drew; till at last he came to the old tower and opened
the door of the little room in which Rose-Bud was, and there she lay
fast asleep, and looked so beautiful that he could not take his eyes
off, and he stooped down and gave her a kiss. But the moment he kissed
her she opened her eyes and awoke and smiled upon him. Then they went
out together, and presently the king and queen also awoke, and all the
court, and they gazed on one another with great wonder. And the horses
got up and shook themselves, and the dogs jumped about and barked; the
pigeons took their heads from under their wings and looked about and
flew into the fields; the flies on the walls buzzed away; the fire in
the kitchen blazed up and cooked the dinner, and the roast meat turned
round again; the cook gave the boy the box on his ear so that he cried
out, and the maid went on plucking the fowl. And then was the wedding of
the prince and Rose-Bud celebrated, and they lived happily together all
their lives long.



178

        The story of "Rumpelstiltskin" is taken from
        Margaret Hunt's translation of Grimm. It is the
        same story as "Tom Tit Tot" (No. 160), and is
        given in order that the teacher may compare the
        two. Grimm's is the most familiar of the many
        versions of this tale and is probably the best
        for use with children, although the "little
        man" lacks some of the fascinating power of
        "that" with its twirling tail.


RUMPELSTILTSKIN

Once there was a miller who was poor, but who had a beautiful daughter.
Now it happened that he had to go and speak to the King, and in order to
make himself appear important he said to him, "I have a daughter who can
spin straw into gold."

The King said to the miller, "That is an art which pleases me well. If
your daughter is as clever as you say, bring her tomorrow to my palace,
and I will try what she can do."

And when the girl was brought to him he took her into a room which was
quite full of straw, gave her a spinning-wheel and a reel, and said,
"Now set to work, and if by tomorrow morning early you have not spun
this straw into gold during the night, you must die." Thereupon he
himself locked up the room, and left her in it alone. So there sat the
poor miller's daughter, and for her life could not tell what to do. She
had no idea how straw could be spun into gold, and she grew more and
more miserable, until at last she began to weep.

But all at once the door opened, and in came a little man, and said,
"Good evening, Mistress Miller; why are you crying so?"

"Alas!" answered the girl, "I have to spin straw into gold, and I do not
know how to do it."

"What will you give me," said the manikin, "if I do it for you?"

"My necklace," said the girl. The little man took the necklace, seated
himself in front of the wheel, and "whir, whir, whir," three turns, and
the reel was full; then he put another on, and "whir, whir, whir," three
times round, and the second was full, too. And so it went on until the
morning, when all the straw was spun, and all the reels were full of
gold. By daybreak the King was already there, and when he saw the gold
he was astonished and delighted, but his heart became only more greedy.
He had the miller's daughter taken into another room full of straw,
which was much larger, and commanded her to spin that also in one night
if she valued her life. The girl knew not how to help herself, and was
crying, when the door again opened, and the little man appeared, and
said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw into gold for you?"

"The ring on my finger," answered the girl.

The little man took the ring, again began to turn the wheel, and by
morning had spun all the straw into glittering gold.

The King rejoiced beyond measure at the sight, but still he had not
gold enough; and he had the miller's daughter taken into a still larger
room full of straw, and said, "You must spin this, too, in the course of
this night; but if you succeed, you shall be my wife." "Even if she be a
miller's daughter," thought he, "I could not find a richer wife in the
whole world."

When the girl was alone the manikin came again for the third time, and
said, "What will you give me if I spin the straw for you this time
also?"

"I have nothing left that I could give," answered the girl.

"Then promise me, if you should become Queen, your first child."

"Who knows whether that will ever happen?" thought the miller's
daughter; and, not knowing how else to help herself in this strait, she
promised the manikin what he wanted, and for that he once more spun the
straw into gold.

And when the King came in the morning, and found all as he had wished,
he took her in marriage, and the pretty miller's daughter became a
Queen.

A year after, she had a beautiful child, and she never gave a thought to
the manikin. But suddenly he came into her room, and said, "Now give me
what you promised."

The Queen was horror-struck, and offered the manikin all the riches of
the kingdom if he would leave her the child. But the manikin said, "No,
something that is living is dearer to me than all the treasures in the
world."

Then the Queen began to weep and cry, so that the manikin pitied her. "I
will give you three days' time," said he; "if by that time you find out
my name, then shall you keep your child."

So the Queen thought the whole night of all the names that she had ever
heard, and she sent a messenger over the country to inquire, far and
wide, for any other names that there might be. When the manikin came the
next day, she began with Caspar, Melchior, Balthazar, and said all the
names she knew, one after another; but to every one the little man said,
"That is not my name." On the second day she had inquiries made in the
neighborhood as to the names of the people there, and she repeated to
the manikin the most uncommon and curious. "Perhaps your name is
Shortribs, or Sheepshanks, or Laceleg?" but he always answered, "That is
not my name."

On the third day the messenger came back again, and said, "I have not
been able to find a single new name, but as I came to a high mountain at
the end of the forest, where the fox and the hare bid each other
good-night, there I saw a little house, and before the house a fire was
burning, and round about the fire quite a ridiculous little man was
jumping; he hopped upon one leg, and shouted:

          "To-day I bake, to-morrow brew,
          The next I'll have the young Queen's child.
        Ha! glad am I that no one knew
          That Rumpelstiltskin I am styled.'"

You may think how glad the Queen was when she heard the name! And when
soon afterwards the little man came in, and asked, "Now, Mistress Queen,
what is my name?"

At first she said, "Is your name Conrad?"

"No."

"Is your name Harry?"

"No."

"Perhaps your name is Rumpelstiltskin?"

"The devil has told you that! the devil has told you that!" cried the
little man, and in his anger he plunged his right foot so deep into the
earth that his whole leg went in; and then in rage he pulled at his left
leg so hard with both hands that he tore himself in two.



179

        Margaret Hunt's translation of Grimm's
        "Snow-White and Rose-Red" follows. It has long
        been recognized as one of the most beautiful
        and appealing of folk tales. The scenic
        effects, the domestic life with its maternal
        and filial affection, the kindness to animals
        and helpfulness to each other and to those in
        distress, the adventures with dwarf and bear,
        the magic enchantment of goodness through the
        power of evil, and the happy conclusion
        following the removal of this enchantment--all
        these are blended into a perfect union that
        never fails to delight the listener of any age.

SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE-RED

There was once a poor widow who lived in a lonely cottage. In front of
the cottage was a garden wherein stood two rose-trees, one of which bore
white and the other red roses. She had two children who were like the
two rose-trees, and one was called Snow-white, and the other Rose-red.
They were as good and happy, as busy and cheerful as ever two children
in the world were, only Snow-white was more quiet and gentle than
Rose-red. Rose-red liked better to run about in the meadows and fields
seeking flowers and catching butterflies; but Snow-white sat at home
with her mother, and helped her with her housework, or read to her when
there was nothing to do.

The two children were so fond of each other that they always held each
other by the hand when they went out together, and when Snow-white said,
"We will not leave each other," Rose-red answered, "Never so long as we
live," and their mother would add, "What one has she must share with the
other."

They often ran about the forest alone and gathered red berries, and no
beasts did them any harm, but came close to them trustfully. The little
hare would eat a cabbage-leaf out of their hands, the roe grazed by
their side, the stag leaped merrily by them, and the birds sat still
upon the boughs and sang whatever they knew.

No mishap overtook them; if they had stayed too late in the forest, and
night came on, they laid themselves down near each other upon the moss
and slept until morning came, and their mother knew this and had no
distress on their account.

Once when they had spent the night in the wood and the dawn had roused
them, they saw a beautiful child in a shining white dress sitting near
their bed. He got up and looked quite kindly at them, but said nothing
and went away into the forest. And when they looked round they found
that they had been sleeping quite close to a precipice, and would
certainly have fallen into it in the darkness if they had gone only a
few paces farther. And their mother told them that it must have been the
angel who watches over good children.

Snow-white and Rose-red kept their mother's little cottage so neat that
it was a pleasure to look inside it. In the summer Rose-red took care of
the house, and every morning laid a wreath of flowers by her mother's
bed before she awoke, in which was a rose from each tree. In the winter
Snow-white lit the fire and hung the kettle on the crane. The kettle was
of copper and shone like gold, so brightly was it polished. In the
evening, when the snowflakes fell, the mother said, "Go, Snow-white, and
bolt the door," and then they sat round the hearth, and the mother took
her spectacles and read aloud out of a large book, and the two girls
listened as they sat and spun. And close by them lay a lamb upon the
floor, and behind them upon a perch sat a white dove with its head
hidden beneath its wings.

One evening, as they were thus sitting comfortably together, some one
knocked at the door as if he wished to be let in. The mother said,
"Quick, Rose-red, open the door, it must be a traveler who is seeking
shelter." Rose-red went and pushed back the bolt, thinking that it was a
poor man, but it was not; it was a bear that stretched his broad, black
head within the door.

Rose-red screamed and sprang back, the lamb bleated, the dove fluttered,
and Snow-white hid herself behind her mother's bed. But the bear began
to speak and said, "Do not be afraid, I will do you no harm! I am
half-frozen, and only want to warm myself a little beside you."

"Poor bear," said the mother, "lie down by the fire, only take care that
you do not burn your coat." Then she cried, "Snow-white, Rose-red, come
out; the bear will do you no harm; he means well." So they both came
out, and by-and-by the lamb and dove came nearer, and were not afraid of
him.

The bear said, "Here, children, knock the snow out of my coat a little";
so they brought the broom and swept the bear's hide clean; and he
stretched himself by the fire and growled contentedly and comfortably.
It was not long before they grew quite at home and played tricks with
their clumsy guest. They tugged his hair with their hands, put their
feet upon his back and rolled him about, or they took a hazel-switch and
beat him, and when he growled they laughed. But the bear took it all in
good part, only when they were too rough he called out, "Leave me alive,
children--

        "Snowy-white, Rosy-red,
        Will you beat your lover dead?"

When it was bed-time, and the others went to bed, the mother said to the
bear, "You can lie there by the hearth, and then you will be safe from
the cold and the bad weather." As soon as day dawned the two children
let him out, and he trotted across the snow into the forest.

Henceforth the bear came every evening at the same time, laid himself
down by the hearth, and let the children amuse themselves with him as
much as they liked; and they got so used to him that the doors were
never fastened until their black friend had arrived.

When spring had come and all outside was green, the bear said one
morning to Snow-white, "Now I must go away, and cannot come back for the
whole summer."

"Where are you going, then, dear bear?" asked Snow-white.

"I must go into the forest and guard my treasures from the wicked
dwarfs. In the winter, when the earth is frozen hard, they are obliged
to stay below and cannot work their way through; but now, when the sun
has thawed and warmed the earth, they break through it, and come out to
pry and steal; and what once gets into their hands, and in their caves,
does not easily see daylight again."

Snow-white was quite sorry for his going away, and as she unbolted the
door for him, and the bear was hurrying out, he caught against the bolt
and a piece of his hairy coat was torn off, and it seemed to Snow-white
as if she had seen gold shining through it, but she was not sure about
it. The bear ran away quickly, and was soon out of sight behind the
trees.

A short time afterwards the mother sent her children into the forest to
get fire-wood. There they found a big tree which lay felled on the
ground, and close by the trunk something was jumping backwards and
forwards in the grass, but they could not make out what it was. When
they came nearer they saw a dwarf with an old withered face and a
snow-white beard a yard long. The end of the beard was caught in a
crevice of the tree, and the little fellow was jumping backwards and
forwards like a dog tied to a rope, and did not know what to do.

He glared at the girls with his fiery red eyes and cried, "Why do you
stand there? Can you not come here and help me?"

"What are you about there, little man?" asked Rose-red.

"You stupid, prying goose!" answered the dwarf; "I was going to split
the tree to get a little wood for cooking. The little bit of food that
one of us wants gets burnt up directly with thick logs; we do not
swallow so much as you coarse, greedy folk. I had just driven the wedge
safely in, and everything was going as I wished; but the wretched wood
was too smooth and suddenly sprang asunder, and the tree closed so
quickly that I could not pull out my beautiful white beard; so now it is
tight in and I cannot get away, and you silly, sleek, milk-faced things
laugh! Ugh! how odious you are!"

The children tried very hard, but they could not pull the beard out, it
was caught too fast. "I will run and fetch some one," said Rose-red.

"You senseless goose!" snarled the dwarf; "why should you fetch some
one? You are already two too many for me; can you not think of something
better?"

"Don't be impatient," said Snow-white, "I will help you," and she pulled
her scissors out of her pocket, and cut off the end of the beard.

As soon as the dwarf felt himself free he laid hold of a bag which lay
amongst the roots of the tree, and which was full of gold, and lifted it
up, grumbling to himself, "Uncouth people, to cut off a piece of my fine
beard. Bad luck to you!" and then he swung the bag upon his back, and
went off without even once looking at the children.

Some time after that Snow-white and Rose-red went to catch a dish of
fish. As they came near the brook they saw something like a large
grasshopper jumping towards the water, as if it were going to leap in.
They ran to it and found it was the dwarf. "Where are you going?" said
Rose-red; "you surely don't want to go into the water?"

"I am not such a fool!" cried the dwarf; "don't you see that the
accursed fish wants to pull me in?"

The little man had been sitting there fishing, and unluckily the wind
had twisted his beard with the fishing line; just then a big fish bit,
and the feeble creature had not strength to pull it out; the fish kept
the upper hand and pulled the dwarf towards him. He held on to all the
reeds and rushes, but it was of little good, he was forced to follow the
movements of the fish, and was in urgent danger of being dragged into
the water.

The girls came just in time; they held him fast and tried to free his
beard from the line, but all in vain, beard and line were entangled fast
together. Nothing was left but to bring out the scissors and cut the
beard, whereby a small part of it was lost. When the dwarf saw that he
screamed out, "Is that civil, you toadstool, to disfigure one's face?
Was it not enough to clip off the end of my beard? Now you have cut off
the best part of it. I cannot let myself be seen by my people. I wish
you had been made to run the soles off your shoes!" Then he took out a
sack of pearls which lay in the rushes, and without saying a word more
he dragged it away and disappeared behind a stone.

It happened that soon afterwards the mother sent the two children to the
town to buy needles and thread, and laces and ribbons. The road led them
across a heath upon which huge pieces of rock lay strewn here and there.
Now they noticed a large bird hovering in the air, flying slowly round
and round above them; it sank lower and lower, and at last settled near
a rock not far off. Directly afterwards they heard a loud, piteous cry.
They ran up and saw with horror that the eagle had seized their old
acquaintance the dwarf, and was going to carry him off.

The children, full of pity, at once took tight hold of the little man,
and pulled against the eagle so long that at last he let his booty go.
As soon as the dwarf had recovered from his first fright he cried with
his shrill voice, "Could you not have done it more carefully? You
dragged at my brown coat so that it is all torn and full of holes, you
helpless, clumsy creatures!" Then he took up a sack full of precious
stones, and slipped away again under the rock into his hole. The girls,
who by this time were used to his thanklessness, went on their way and
did their business in the town.

As they crossed the heath again on their way home they surprised the
dwarf, who had emptied out his bag of precious stones in a clean spot,
and had not thought that any one would come there so late. The evening
sun shone upon the brilliant stones; they glittered and sparkled with
all colors so beautifully that the children stood still and looked at
them. "Why do you stand gaping there?" cried the dwarf, and his
ashen-gray face became copper-red with rage. He was going on with his
bad words when a loud growling was heard, and a black bear came trotting
towards them out of the forest. The dwarf sprang up in a fright, but he
could not get to his cave, for the bear was already close. Then in the
dread of his heart he cried, "Dear Mr. Bear, spare me, I will give you
all my treasures; look, the beautiful jewels lying there! Grant me my
life; what do you want with such a slender little fellow as I? You would
not feel me between your teeth. Come, take these two wicked girls, they
are tender morsels for you, fat as young quails; for mercy's sake eat
them!" The bear took no heed of his words, but gave the wicked creature
a single blow with his paw, and he did not move again.

The girls had run away, but the bear called to them, "Snow-white and
Rose-red, do not be afraid; wait, I will come with you." Then they knew
his voice and waited, and when he came up to them suddenly his bearskin
fell off, and he stood there a handsome man, clothed all in gold. "I am
a King's son," he said, "and I was bewitched by that wicked dwarf, who
had stolen my treasures. I have had to run about the forest as a savage
bear until I was freed by his death. Now he has got his well-deserved
punishment."

Snow-white was married to him, and Rose-red to his brother, and they
divided between them the great treasures which the dwarf had gathered
together in his cave. The old mother lived peacefully and happily with
her children for many years. She took the two rose-trees with her, and
they stood before her window, and every year bore the most beautiful
roses, white and red.



180

        Whether it is possible to trace all folk tales
        to India, as some scholars have contended, is a
        matter yet open to debate. But there can be no
        doubt that some of the most instructing and
        valuable of folk tales for use with children
        are found in the various collections of Indian
        stories made since the pioneer work of Mary
        Frere in her _Old Deccan Days_ (1868). A
        voluminous literature of collections and
        comment has grown up and is constantly
        increasing. Four stories that have won great
        favor with children are given immediately
        following as the ones probably best fitted for
        an introductory course. "The Lambikin" is one
        of the most popular of all. It is an
        accumulative droll in character and should be
        told early along with, say, "The Story of the
        Three Little Pigs." The children will be sure
        to notice that Lambikin trundling along in his
        drumikin has some similarity to the wise pig
        who traveled so fast down hill in his new
        churn. The story is taken from _Tales from the
        Punjab_, collected by Flora Annie Steel, with
        very valuable notes and analyses by Captain R.
        C. Temple.


THE LAMBIKIN

Once upon a time there was a wee wee Lambikin, who frolicked about on
his little tottery legs, and enjoyed himself amazingly. Now one day he
set off to visit his Granny, and was jumping with joy to think of all
the good things he should get from her, when whom should he meet but a
Jackal, who looked at the tender young morsel and said: "Lambikin!
Lambikin! I'll EAT YOU!"

But Lambikin only gave a little frisk and said:

        "To Granny's house I go,
        Where I shall fatter grow,
        Then you can eat me so."

The Jackal thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass.

By and by he met a Vulture, and the Vulture, looking hungrily at the
tender morsel before him, said: "Lambikin! Lambikin! I'll EAT YOU!"

But Lambikin only gave a little frisk, and said:

        "To Granny's house I go,
        Where I shall fatter grow,
        Then you can eat me so."

The Vulture thought this reasonable, and let Lambikin pass.

And by and by he met a Tiger, and then a Wolf, and a Dog, and an Eagle,
and all these, when they saw the tender little morsel, said: "Lambikin!
Lambikin! I'll EAT YOU!"

But to all of them Lambikin replied, with a little frisk:

        "To Granny's house I go,
        Where I shall fatter grow,
        Then you can eat me so."

At last he reached his Granny's house, and said, all in a great hurry,
"Granny, dear, I've promised to get very fat; so, as people ought to
keep their promises, please put me into the corn-bin _at once_."

So his Granny said he was a good boy, and put him into the corn-bin, and
there the greedy little Lambikin stayed for seven days, and ate, and
ate, and ate, until he could scarcely waddle, and his Granny said he was
fat enough for anything, and must go home. But cunning little Lambikin
said that would never do, for some animal would be sure to eat him on
the way back, he was so plump and tender.

"I'll tell you what you must do," said Master Lambikin, "you must make a
little drumikin out of the skin of my little brother who died, and then
I can sit inside and trundle along nicely, for I'm as tight as a drum
myself."

So his Granny made a nice little drumikin out of his brother's skin,
with the wool inside, and Lambikin curled himself up snug and warm in
the middle, and trundled away gayly. Soon he met with the Eagle, who
called out:

        "Drumikin! Drumikin!
        Have you seen Lambikin?"

And Mr. Lambikin, curled up in his soft warm nest, replied:

        "Lost in the forest, and so are you,
        On, little Drumikin! Tum-pa, tum-too!"

"How very annoying!" sighed the Eagle, thinking regretfully of the
tender morsel he had let slip.

Meanwhile Lambikin trundled along, laughing to himself, and singing:

        "Tum-pa, tum-too;
        Tum-pa, tum-too!"

Every animal and bird he met asked him the same question:

        "Drumikin! Drumikin!
        Have you seen Lambikin?"

And to each of them the little sly-boots replied:

        "Lost in the forest, and so are you,
        On, little Drumikin! Tum-pa, tum-too;
        Tum-pa, tum-too; tum-pa, tum-too!"

Then they all sighed to think of the tender little morsel they had let
slip.

At last the Jackal came limping along, for all his sorry looks as sharp
as a needle, and he too called out:

        "Drumikin! Drumikin!
        Have you seen Lambikin?"

And Lambikin, curled up in his snug little nest, replied gayly:

        "Lost in the forest, and so are you,
        On, little Drumikin! Tum-pa--"

But he never got any further, for the Jackal recognized his voice at
once, and cried: "Hullo! you've turned yourself inside out, have you?
Just you come out of that!"

Whereupon he tore open Drumikin and gobbled up Lambikin.



181

        The next story, dealing with the idea of
        "measure for measure," is from Mary Frere's
        _Old Deccan Days_. Miss Frere spent many years
        in India, where her father was a government
        official. She took down the tales as told by
        her _ayah_, or lady's maid, who in turn had
        heard them from her hundred-year-old
        grandmother. It may be said of this story that
        while retaliation is certainly not the highest
        law of conduct, yet the ungracious,
        inconsiderate action of the jackal makes it
        impossible to feel the least sympathy for him.


TIT FOR TAT

There once lived a Camel and a Jackal who were great friends. One day
the Jackal said to the Camel, "I know that there is a fine field of
sugar cane on the other side of the river. If you will take me across,
I'll show you the place. This plan will suit me as well as you. You will
enjoy eating the sugar cane, and I am sure to find many crabs, bones,
and bits of fish by the river side, on which to make a good dinner."

The Camel consented, and swam across the river, taking the Jackal, who
could not swim, on his back. When they reached the other side, the Camel
went to eat the sugar cane, and the Jackal ran up and down the river
bank, devouring all the crabs, bits of fish, and bones he could find.

But being so much smaller an animal, he had made an excellent meal
before the Camel had eaten more than two or three mouthfuls; and no
sooner had he finished his dinner than he ran round and round the
sugar-cane field, yelping and howling with all his might.

The villagers heard him, and thought, "There is a Jackal among the sugar
canes; he will be scratching holes in the ground and spoiling the roots
of the plants." And they went down to the place to drive him away. But
when they got there they found to their surprise not only a Jackal, but
a Camel who was eating the sugar canes! This made them very angry, and
they caught the poor Camel and drove him from the field and beat him
until he was nearly dead.

When the villagers had gone, the Jackal said to the Camel, "We had
better go home." And the Camel, said, "Very well; then jump upon my
back, as you did before."

So the Jackal jumped upon the Camel's back, and the Camel began to
recross the river. When they had got well into the water, the Camel
said, "This is a pretty way in which you have treated me, friend Jackal.
No sooner had you finished your own dinner than you must go yelping
about the place loud enough to arouse the whole village, and bring all
the villagers down to beat me black and blue, and turn me out of the
field before I had eaten two mouthfuls! What in the world did you make
such a noise for?"

"I don't know," said the Jackal. "It is a custom I have. I always like
to sing a little after dinner."

The Camel waded on through the river. The water reached up to his
knees--then above them--up, up, up, higher and higher, until at last he
was obliged to swim.

Then turning to the Jackal, he said, "I feel very anxious to roll."

"Oh, pray don't; why do you wish to do so?" asked the Jackal.

"I don't know," answered the Camel. "It is a custom I have. I always
like to have a little roll after dinner."

So saying, he rolled over in the water, shaking the Jackal off as he did
so. And the Jackal was drowned, but the Camel swam safely ashore.



182

        The fine story following is from Steel's _Tales
        of the Punjab_. Scholars have pointed out a
        hundred or more variants. Such trickery as
        that used by the jackal in trapping the tiger
        is the common thing to find in folk tales where
        oppressed weakness is matched against ruthless
        and tyrannic power. The tiger's ingratitude
        precludes any desire to "take his part." The
        attitude of the three judges is determined in
        each case by the fact that the experience of
        each has hardened him and rendered him
        completely hopeless and unsympathetic. "The
        work of the buffalo in the oil-press," says
        Captain Temple, "is the synonym all India
        over--and with good reason--for hard and
        thankless toil for another's benefit."

THE TIGER, THE BRAHMAN, AND THE JACKAL

Once upon a time a tiger was caught in a trap. He tried in vain to get
out through the bars, and rolled and bit with rage and grief when he
failed.

By chance a poor Brahman came by. "Let me out of this cage, O pious
one!" cried the tiger.

"Nay, my friend," replied the Brahman mildly; "you would probably eat me
if I did."

"Not at all!" swore the tiger with many oaths; "on the contrary, I
should be forever grateful, and serve you as a slave."

Now, when the tiger sobbed and sighed and wept and swore, the pious
Brahman's heart softened, and at last he consented to open the door of
the cage. Out popped the tiger, and, seizing the poor man, cried, "What
a fool you are! What is to prevent my eating you now, for after being
cooped up so long I am just terribly hungry?"

In vain the Brahman pleaded for his life; the most he could gain was a
promise to abide by the decision of the first three things he chose to
question as to the justice of the tiger's action.

So the Brahman first asked a _pipal_ tree what it thought of the matter,
but the _pipal_ tree replied coldly, "What have you to complain about?
Don't I give shade and shelter to every one who passes by, and don't
they in return tear down my branches to feed their cattle? Don't
whimper--be a man!"

Then the Brahman, sad at heart, went further afield till he saw a
buffalo turning a well-wheel; but he fared no better from it, for it
answered: "You are a fool to expect gratitude! Look at me! While I gave
milk they fed me on cotton-seed and oil-cake, but now I am dry they yoke
me here, and give me refuse as fodder!"

The Brahman, still more sad, asked the road to give him its opinion.

"My dear sir," said the road, "how foolish you are to expect anything
else! Here am I, useful to everybody, yet all, rich and poor, great and
small, trample on me as they go past, giving me nothing but the ashes of
their pipes and the husks of their grain!"

On this the Brahman turned back sorrowfully, and on the way he met a
jackal, who called out, "Why, what's the matter, Mr. Brahman? You look
as miserable as a fish out of water!"

The Brahman told him all that had occurred. "How very confusing!" said
the jackal, when the recital was ended; "would you mind telling me over
again, for everything seems so mixed up?"

The Brahman told it all over again, but the jackal shook his head in a
distracted sort of way, and still could not understand.

"It's very odd," said he sadly, "but it all seems to go in at one ear
and out at the other! I will go to the place where it all happened, and
then, perhaps, I shall be able to give a judgment."

So they returned to the cage, by which the tiger was waiting for the
Brahman, and sharpening his teeth and claws.

"You've been away a long time!" growled the savage beast, "but now let
us begin our dinner."

"_Our_ dinner!" thought the wretched Brahman, as his knees knocked
together with fright; "what a remarkably delicate way of putting it!"

"Give me five minutes, my lord!" he pleaded, "in order that I may
explain matters to the jackal here, who is somewhat slow in his wits."

The tiger consented, and the Brahman began the whole story over again,
not missing a single detail, and spinning as long a yarn as possible.

"Oh, my poor brain! oh, my poor brain!" cried the jackal, wringing its
paws. "Let me see! how did it all begin? You were in the cage, and the
tiger came walking by--"

"Pooh!" interrupted the tiger, "what a fool you are! _I_ was in the
cage."

"Of course!" cried the jackal, pretending to tremble with fright; "yes!
I was in the cage--no, I wasn't--dear! dear! where are my wits? Let me
see--the tiger was in the Brahman, and the cage came walking by--no,
that's not it, either! Well, don't mind me, but begin your dinner, for I
shall never understand!"

"Yes, you shall!" returned the tiger, in a rage at the jackal's
stupidity; "I'll _make_ you understand! Look here--I am the tiger--"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And that is the Brahman--"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And that is the cage--"

"Yes, my lord!"

"And I was in the cage--do you understand?"

"Yes--no----Please, my lord--"

"Well?" cried the tiger impatiently.

"Please, my lord! How did you get in?"

"How? Why in the usual way, of course!"

"Oh, dear me! my head is beginning to whirl again! Please don't be
angry, my lord, but what is the usual way?"

At this the tiger lost patience, and jumping into the cage, cried, "This
way! Now do you understand how it was?"

"Perfectly!" grinned the jackal, as he dexterously shut the door, "and
if you will permit me to say so, I think matters will remain as they
were!"



183

        The story that follows is from Mrs. Kingscote's
        _Tales of the Sun_, as reprinted in Joseph
        Jacobs' _Indian Fairy Tales_. Mr. Jacobs
        explains that he "changed the Indian mercantile
        numerals into those of English 'back-slang,'
        which make a very good parallel." As in other
        cases, the value of Jacobs' collection must be
        emphasized. If the teacher is limited to a
        single book for story material from the
        Hindoos, that book must be the one made by
        Joseph Jacobs. With well-chosen tales, with the
        slight changes here and there necessary for use
        with children, with just enough scholarship
        packed out of the way in the introduction and
        notes, the book has no rival.


PRIDE GOETH BEFORE A FALL

In a certain village there lived ten cloth merchants, who always went
about together. Once upon a time they had traveled far afield, and were
returning home with a great deal of money which they had obtained by
selling their wares. Now there happened to be a dense forest near their
village, and this they reached early one morning. In it there lived
three notorious robbers, of whose existence the traders had never heard,
and while they were still in the middle of it the robbers stood before
them, with swords and cudgels in their hands, and ordered them to lay
down all they had. The traders had no weapons with them, and so, though
they were many more in number, they had to submit themselves to the
robbers, who took away everything from them, even the very clothes they
wore, and gave to each only a small loin-cloth a span in breadth and a
cubit in length.

The idea that they had conquered ten men and plundered all their
property now took possession of the robbers' minds. They seated
themselves like three monarchs before the men they had plundered, and
ordered them to dance to them before returning home. The merchants now
mourned their fate. They had lost all they had, except their loin-cloth,
and still the robbers were not satisfied, but ordered them to dance.

There was among the ten merchants one who was very clever. He pondered
over the calamity that had come upon him and his friends, the dance they
would have to perform, and the magnificent manner in which the three
robbers had seated themselves on the grass. At the same time he observed
that these last had placed their weapons on the ground, in the assurance
of having thoroughly cowed the traders, who were now commencing to
dance; and, as a song is always sung by the leader on such occasions, to
which the rest keep time with hands and feet, he thus began to sing:

        "We are enty men,
        They are erith men:
        If each erith man,
        Surround eno men
        Eno man remains.

        _Ta, tai tom, tadingana._"

The robbers were all uneducated, and thought that the leader was merely
singing a song as usual. So it was in one sense; for the leader
commenced from a distance, and had sung the song over twice before he
and his companions commenced to approach the robbers. They had
understood his meaning, because they had been trained in trade.

When two traders discuss the price of an article in the presence of a
purchaser, they use a riddling sort of language.

"What is the price of this cloth?" one trader will ask.

"Enty rupees," another will reply, meaning "ten rupees."

Thus there is no possibility of the purchaser knowing what is meant
unless he be acquainted with trade language. By the rules of this secret
language erith means "three," enty means "ten," and eno means "one." So
the leader by his song meant to hint to his fellow-traders that they
were ten men, the robbers only three, that if three pounced upon each of
the robbers, nine of them could hold them down, while the remaining one
bound the robbers' hands and feet.

The three thieves, glorying in their victory, and little understanding
the meaning of the song and the intentions of the dancers, were proudly
seated chewing betel and tobacco. Meanwhile the song was sung a third
time. _Ta tai tom_ had left the lips of the singer; and, before
_tadingana_ was out of them, the traders separated into parties of
three, and each party pounced upon a thief. The remaining one--the
leader himself--tore up into long narrow strips a large piece of cloth,
six cubits long, and tied the hands and feet of the robbers. These were
entirely humbled now, and rolled on the ground like three bags of rice!

The ten traders now took back all their property, and armed themselves
with the swords and cudgels of their enemies; and when they reached
their village they often amused their friends and relatives by relating
their adventure.



184

        In recent years several Japanese stories have
        made their way into the list of those
        frequently used in the lower grades. Some of
        these are of unusual beauty and suggestiveness.
        The oriental point of view is so different from
        that of western children that these stories
        often cannot be used in their fully original
        form, although it would be a distinct loss if
        the available elements were therefore
        discarded. So, in this instance departing from
        the plan of giving only authentic copies of the
        tales here reprinted, the excellent retold
        versions of two Japanese stories are given as
        made by Teresa Peirce Williston in her
        _Japanese Fairy Tales_. (Copyrighted. Used by
        permission of the publishers, Rand McNally &
        Co.) In these simple versions the point to the
        story is made clear in natural fashion without
        undue moralizing.


THE MIRROR OF MATSUYAMA

VERSION BY TERESA PEIRCE WILLISTON

In Matsuyama there lived a man, his wife, and their little daughter.
They loved each other very much, and were very happy together. One day
the man came home very sad. He had received a message from the Emperor,
which said that he must take a journey to far-off Tokio.

They had no horses and in those days there were no railroads in Japan.
The man knew that he must walk the whole distance. It was not the long
walk that he minded, however. It was because it would take him many days
from home.

Still he must obey his Emperor, so he made ready to start. His wife was
very sorry that he must go, and yet a little proud, too, for no one else
in the village had ever taken so long a journey.

She and the baby walked with him down to the turn in the road. There
they stood and watched him through their tears, as he followed the path
up through the pines on the mountain side. At last, no larger than a
speck, he disappeared behind the hills. Then they went home to await his
return.

For three long weeks they waited. Each day they spoke of him, and
counted the days until they should see his dear face again. At last the
time came. They walked down to the turn in the road to wait for his
coming. Up on the mountain side some one was walking toward them. As he
came nearer they could see that it was the one for whom they waited.

The good wife could scarcely believe that her husband was indeed safe
home again. The baby girl laughed and clapped her hands to see the toys
he brought her.

There was a tiny image of Uzume, the laughter-loving goddess. Next came
a little red monkey of cotton, with a blue head. When she pressed the
spring he ran to the top of the rod. Oh, how wonderful was the third
gift! It was a _tombo_, or dragon fly. When she first looked at it she
saw only a piece of wood shaped like a T. The cross piece was painted
with different bright colors. But the queer thing, when her father
twirled it between his fingers, would rise in the air, dipping and
hovering like a real dragon fly.

Last, of course, there was a _ninghio_, or doll, with a sweet face,
slanting eyes, and such wonderful hair. Her name was O-Hina-San.

He told of the Feast of the Dead which he had seen in Tokio. He told of
the beautiful lanterns, the Lanterns of the Dead; and the pine torches
burning before each house. He told of the tiny boats made of barley
straw and filled with food that are set floating away on the river,
bearing two tiny lanterns to guide them to the Land of the Dead.

At last her husband handed the wife a small white box. "Tell me what you
see inside," he said. She opened it and took out something round and
bright.

On one side were buds and flowers of frosted silver. The other side at
first looked as clear and bright as a pool of water. When she moved it a
little she saw in it a most beautiful woman.

"Oh, what a beautiful picture!" she cried. "It is of a woman and she
seems to be smiling and talking just as I am. She has on a blue dress
just like mine, too! How strange!"

Then her husband laughed and said: "That is a mirror. It is yourself you
see reflected in it. All the women in Tokio have them."

The wife was delighted with her present, and looked at it very often.
She liked to see the smiling red lips, the laughing eyes, and beautiful
dark hair.

After a while she said to herself: "How foolish this is of me to sit and
gaze at myself in this mirror! I am not more beautiful than other women.
How much better for me to enjoy others' beauty, and forget my own face.
I shall only remember that it must always be happy and smiling or it
will make no one else happy. I do not wish any cross or angry look of
mine to make any one sad."

She put the mirror carefully away in its box. Only twice in a year she
looked at it. Then it was to see if her face was still such as would
make others happy.

The years passed by in their sweet and simple life until the baby had
grown to be a big girl. Her _ninghio_, her _tombo_, the image of Uzume,
even the cotton monkey, were put carefully away for her own children.

This girl was the very image of her mother. She was just as sweet and
loving, just as kind and helpful.

One day her mother became very ill. Although the girl and her father did
all they could for her, she grew worse and worse.

At last she knew that she must die, so she called her daughter to her
and said: "My child, I know that I must soon leave you, but I wish to
leave something with you in my place. Open this box and see what you
find in it."

The girl opened the box and looked for the first time in a mirror. "Oh,
mother dear!" she cried. "I see you here. Not thin and pale as you are
now, but happy and smiling, as you have always been."

Then her mother said: "When I am gone, will you look in this every
morning and every night? If anything troubles you, tell me about it.
Always try to do right, so that you will see only happiness here."

Every morning when the sun rose and the birds began to twitter and sing,
the girl rose and looked in her mirror. There she saw the bright, happy
face that she remembered as her mother's.

Every evening when the shadows fell and the birds were asleep, she
looked again. She told it all that had happened during the day. When it
had been a happy day the face smiled back at her. When she was sad the
face looked sad, too. She was very careful not to do anything unkind,
for she knew how sad the face would be then.

So each day she grew more kind and loving, and more like the mother
whose face she saw each day and loved.



185

        This favorite story of "The Tongue-Cut Sparrow"
        is from Mrs. Williston's _Japanese Fairy
        Tales_. (Copyrighted. Used by permission.)


THE TONGUE-CUT SPARROW

VERSION BY TERESA PEIRCE WILLISTON

In a little old house in a little old village in Japan lived a little
old man and his little old wife.

One morning when the old woman slid open the screens which form the
sides of all Japanese houses, she saw, on the doorstep, a poor little
sparrow. She took him up gently and fed him. Then she held him in the
bright morning sunshine until the cold dew was dried from his wings.
Afterward she let him go, so that he might fly home to his nest, but he
stayed to thank her with his songs.

Each morning, when the pink on the mountain tops told that the sun was
near, the sparrow perched on the roof of the house and sang out his joy.

The old man and woman thanked the sparrow for this, for they liked to be
up early and at work. But near them there lived a cross old woman who
did not like to be awakened so early. At last she became so angry that
she caught the sparrow and cut his tongue. Then the poor little sparrow
flew away to his home, but he could never sing again.

When the kind woman knew what had happened to her pet she was very sad.
She said to her husband, "Let us go and find our poor little sparrow."
So they started together, and asked of each bird by the wayside: "Do you
know where the Tongue-Cut Sparrow lives? Do you know where the
Tongue-Cut Sparrow went?"

In this way they followed until they came to a bridge. They did not know
which way to turn, and at first could see no one to ask.

At last they saw a Bat hanging head downward, taking his daytime nap.
"Oh, friend Bat, do you know where the Tongue-Cut Sparrow went?" they
asked.

"Yes. Over the bridge and up the mountain," said the Bat. Then he
blinked his sleepy eyes and was fast asleep again.

They went over the bridge and up the mountain, but again they found two
roads and did not know which one to take. A little Field Mouse peeped
through the leaves and grass, so they asked him, "Do you know where the
Tongue-Cut Sparrow went?"

"Yes. Down the mountain and through the woods," said the Field Mouse.

Down the mountain and through the woods they went, and at last came to
the home of their little friend.

When he saw them coming the poor little sparrow was very happy indeed.
He and his wife and children all came and bowed their heads down to the
ground to show their respect. Then the Sparrow rose and led the old man
and the old woman into his house, while his wife and children hastened
to bring them boiled rice, fish, cress, and sake.

After they had feasted, the Sparrow wished to please them still more, so
he danced for them what is called the "sparrow-dance."

When the sun began to sink, the old man and woman started for home. The
Sparrow brought out two baskets. "I would like to give you one of
these," he said. "Which will you take?" One basket was large and looked
very full, while the other one seemed very small and light. The old
people thought they would not take the large basket, for that might have
all the Sparrow's treasure in it, so they said, "The way is long and we
are very old, so please let us take the smaller one."

They took it and walked home over the mountain and across the bridge,
happy and contented.

When they reached their own home they decided to open the basket and see
what the Sparrow had given them. Within the basket they found many rolls
of silk and piles of gold, enough to make them rich, so they were more
grateful than ever to the Sparrow.

The cross old woman who had cut the Sparrow's tongue was peering in
through the screen when they opened their basket. She saw the rolls of
silk and the piles of gold, and planned how she might get some for
herself.

The next morning she went to the kind woman and said: "I am so sorry
that I cut the tongue of your Sparrow. Please tell me the way to his
home so that I may go to him and tell him I am sorry."

The kind woman told her the way and she set out. She went across the
bridge, over the mountain, and through the woods. At last she came to
the home of the little Sparrow.

He was not so glad to see this old woman, yet he was very kind to her
and did everything to make her feel welcome. They made a feast for her,
and when she started home the Sparrow brought out two baskets as before.
Of course the woman chose the large basket, for she thought that would
have even more wealth than the other one.

It was very heavy, and caught on the trees as she was going through the
wood. She could hardly pull it up the mountain with her, and she was all
out of breath when she reached the top. She did not get to the bridge
until it was dark. Then she was so afraid of dropping the basket into
the river that she scarcely dared to step.

When at last she reached home she was so tired that she was half dead,
but she pulled the screens close shut, so that no one could look in, and
opened her treasure.

Treasure indeed! A whole swarm of horrible creatures burst from the
basket the moment she opened it. They stung her and bit her, they pushed
her and pulled her, they scratched her and laughed at her screams.

At last she crawled to the edge of the room and slid aside the screen to
get away from the pests. The moment the door was opened they swooped
down upon her, picked her up, and flew away with her. Since then nothing
has ever been heard of the old woman.



186

        The tale of "The Straw Ox" as given in _Cossack
        Fairy Tales_, by R. Nesbit Bain, is one of the
        masterpieces among folk stories. It is of the
        accumulative type, winding up rapidly to the
        point where the old couple have secured,
        through the straw ox, all the raw material
        needed for comfortable clothing. Then comes the
        surprising release of the captured animals
        under promise to make contributions, each in
        his own way, to the welfare of the
        poverty-stricken couple. And then, the greatest
        surprise of all, the quick unwinding of the
        plot with the return of the grateful animals
        according to promise. "And the old man was
        glad, and the old woman was glad," and we are
        glad for their sake, and also for the sake of
        the bear and the wolf and the fox and the hare.


THE STRAW OX

There was once upon a time an old man and an old woman. The old man
worked in the fields as a pitch-burner, while the old woman sat at home
and spun flax. They were so poor that they could save nothing at all;
all their earnings went in bare food, and when that was gone there was
nothing left. At last the old woman had a good idea: "Look now,
husband," cried she, "make me a straw ox, and smear it all over with
tar."

"Why, you foolish woman!" said he, "what's the good of an ox of that
sort?"

"Never mind," said she, "you just make it. I know what I am about."

What was the poor man to do? He set to work and made the ox of straw,
and smeared it all over with tar.

The night passed away, and at early dawn the old woman took her distaff,
and drove the straw ox out into the steppe to graze, and she herself sat
down behind a hillock, and began spinning her flax, and cried: "Graze
away, little ox, while I spin my flax. Graze away, little ox, while I
spin my flax!"

And while she spun, her head drooped down and she began to doze, and
while she was dozing, from behind the dark wood and from the back of the
huge pines a bear came rushing out upon the ox and said: "Who are you?
Speak, and tell me!"

And the ox said: "A three-year-old heifer am I, made of straw and
smeared with tar."

"Oh!" said the bear, "stuffed with straw and trimmed with tar, are you?
Then give me your straw and tar, that I may patch up my ragged fur
again!"

"Take some," said the ox, and the bear fell upon him and began to tear
away at the tar.

He tore and tore, and buried his teeth in it till he found he couldn't
let go again. He tugged and he tugged but it was no good, and the ox
dragged him gradually off, goodness knows where.

Then the old woman awoke, and there was no ox to be seen. "Alas! old
fool that I am!" cried she, "perchance it has gone home." Then she
quickly caught up her distaff and spinning board, threw them over her
shoulders, and hastened off home, and she saw that the ox had dragged
the bear up to the fence, and in she went to her old man.

"Dad, dad," she cried, "look, look! The ox has brought us a bear. Come
out and kill it!" Then the old man jumped up, tore off the bear, tied
him up, and threw him in the cellar.

Next morning, between dark and dawn, the old woman took her distaff and
drove the ox into the steppe to graze. She herself sat down by a mound,
began spinning, and said: "Graze, graze away, little ox, while I spin
my flax! Graze, graze away, little ox, while I spin my flax!"

And while she spun, her head drooped down and she dozed. And lo! from
behind the dark wood, from the back of the huge pines, a gray wolf came
rushing out upon the ox and said: "Who are you? Come, tell me!"

"I am a three-year-old heifer, stuffed with straw and trimmed with tar,"
said the ox.

"Oh! trimmed with tar, are you? Then give me of your tar to tar my
sides, that the dogs and the sons of dogs tear me not!"

"Take some," said the ox. And with that the wolf fell upon him and tried
to tear the tar off. He tugged and tugged, and tore with his teeth, but
could get none off. Then he tried to let go, and couldn't; tug and worry
as he might, it was no good.

When the old woman woke, there was no heifer in sight. "Maybe my heifer
has gone home!" she cried. "I'll go home and see." When she got there
she was astonished for by the paling stood the ox with the wolf still
tugging at it. She ran and told her old man, and her old man came and
threw the wolf into the cellar also.

On the third day the old woman again drove her ox into the pastures to
graze, and sat down by a mound and dozed off. Then a fox came running
up. "Who are you?" it asked the ox.

"I'm a three-year-old heifer, stuffed with straw and daubed with tar."

"Then give me some of your tar to smear my sides with, when those dogs
and sons of dogs tear my hide!"

"Take some," said the ox. Then the fox fastened her teeth in him and
couldn't draw them out again. The old woman told her old man, and he
took and cast the fox into the cellar in the same way. And after that
they caught Pussy Swiftfoot likewise.

So when he had got them all safely the old man sat down on a bench
before the cellar and began sharpening a knife. And the bear said to
him: "Tell me, daddy, what are you sharpening your knife for?"

"To flay your skin off, that I may make a leather jacket for myself and
a pelisse for my old woman."

"Oh! Don't flay me, daddy dear! Rather let me go, and I'll bring you a
lot of honey."

"Very well, see you do it," and he unbound and let the bear go.

Then he sat down on the bench and again began sharpening his knife. And
the wolf asked him: "Daddy, what are you sharpening your knife for?"

"To flay off your skin, that I may make me a warm cap against the
winter."

"Oh! Don't flay me, daddy dear, and I'll bring you a whole herd of
little sheep."

"Well, see that you do it," and he let the wolf go.

Then he sat down, and began sharpening his knife again. The fox put out
her little snout, and asked him: "Be so kind, dear daddy, and tell me
why you are sharpening your knife!"

"Little foxes," said the old man, "have nice skins that do capitally for
collars and trimmings, and I want to skin you!"

"Oh! Don't take my skin away, daddy dear, and I will bring you hens and
geese."

"Very well, see that you do it," and he let the fox go.

The hare now alone remained, and the old man began sharpening his knife
on the hare's account.

"Why do you do that?" asked Puss. He replied: "Little hares have nice
little, soft, warm skins, which will make me nice gloves and mittens
against the winter!"

"Oh! daddy dear! Don't flay me, and I'll bring you kale and good
cauliflower, if only you let me go!"

Then he let the hare go also.

Then they went to bed; but very early in the morning, when it was
neither dusk nor dawn, there was a noise in the doorway like "Durrrrrr!"

"Daddy!" cried the old woman, "there's some one scratching at the door;
go and see who it is!"

The old man went out, and there was the bear carrying a whole hive full
of honey. The old man took the honey from the bear; but no sooner did he
lie down again than there was another "Durrrrr!" at the door. The old
man looked out and saw the wolf driving a whole flock of sheep into the
court-yard. Close on his heels came the fox, driving before him the
geese and hens, and all manner of fowls; and last of all came the hare,
bringing cabbage and kale, and all manner of good food.

And the old man was glad, and the old woman was glad. And the old man
sold the sheep and oxen, and got so rich that he needed nothing more.

As for the straw-stuffed ox, it stood in the sun till it fell to pieces.



187

        "The Adventures of Connla the Comely" is one of
        the romances in _The Book of the Dun Cow_, the
        oldest manuscript of miscellaneous Gaelic
        literature in existence. It was made about 1100
        A.D. and is now preserved in the Royal Irish
        Academy at Dublin. The contents were
        transcribed from older books, some of the
        stories being older by many centuries. The
        story of Connla is "one of the many tales that
        illustrate the ancient and widespread
        superstition that fairies sometimes take away
        mortals to their palaces in the fairy forts and
        pleasant green hills." This conception is often
        referred to as the Earthly Paradise or the Isle
        of Youth. It is represented in the King Arthur
        stories by the Vale of Avalon to which the
        weeping queens carried the king after his
        mortal wound in "that last weird battle in the
        west." Conn the Hundred-fighter reigned in the
        second century of the Christian era (123-157
        A.D.), and this story of his son must have
        sprung up soon after. According to Jacobs, it
        is the oldest fairy tale of modern Europe.

        The following version of the tale is from
        Joseph Jacobs' _Celtic Fairy Tales_, which with
        its companion volume, _More Celtic Fairy
        Tales_, forms a standard source book for the
        usable stories in that field. Mr. Jacobs, as
        always, keeps to the authoritative versions
        while reducing them to forms at once available
        for educational purposes.


CONNLA AND THE FAIRY MAIDEN

Connla of the Fiery Hair was son of Conn of the Hundred Fights. One day
as he stood by the side of his father on the height of Usna, he saw a
maiden clad in strange attire towards him coming.

"Whence comest thou, maiden?" said Connla.

"I come from the Plains of the Ever Living," she said, "there where is
neither death nor sin. There we keep holiday alway, nor need we help
from any in our joy. And in all our pleasure we have no strife. And
because we have our homes in the round green hills, men call us the Hill
Folk."

The king and all with him wondered much to hear a voice when they saw no
one. For save Connla alone, none saw the Fairy Maiden.

"To whom art thou talking, my son?" said Conn the king.

Then the maiden answered, "Connla speaks to a young, fair maid, whom
neither death nor old age awaits. I love Connla, and now I call him away
to the Plain of Pleasure, Moy Mell, where Boadag is king for aye, nor
has there been sorrow or complaint in that land since he held the
kingship. Oh, come with me, Connla of the Fiery Hair, ruddy as the dawn,
with thy tawny skin. A fairy crown awaits thee to grace thy comely face
and royal form. Come, and never shall thy comeliness fade, nor thy
youth, till the last awful day of judgment."

The king in fear at what the maiden said, which he heard though he could
not see her, called aloud to his Druid, Coran by name. "O Coran of the
many spells," he said, "and of the cunning magic, I call upon thy aid. A
task is upon me too great for all my skill and wit, greater than any
laid upon me since I seized the kingship. A maiden unseen has met us,
and by her power would take from me my dear, my comely son. If thou help
not, he will be taken from thy king by woman's wiles and witchery."

Then Coran the Druid stood forth and chanted his spells towards the spot
where the maiden's voice had been heard. And none heard her voice again,
nor could Connla see her longer. Only as she vanished before the Druid's
mighty spell, she threw an apple to Connla.

For a whole month from that day Connla would take nothing, either to eat
or to drink, save only from that apple.

But as he ate, it grew again and always kept whole. And all the while
there grew within him a mighty yearning and longing after the maiden he
had seen.

But when the last day of the month of waiting came, Connla stood by the
side of the king his father on the Plain of Arcomin, and again he saw
the maiden come towards him, and again she spoke to him. "'Tis a
glorious place, forsooth, that Connla holds among shortlived mortals
awaiting the day of death. But now the folk of life, the ever-living
ones, beg and bid thee come to Moy Mell, the Plain of Pleasure, for they
have learnt to know thee, seeing thee in thy home among thy dear ones."

When Conn the king heard the maiden's voice he called to his men aloud
and said: "Summon swift my Druid Coran, for I see she has again this day
the power of speech."

Then the maiden said: "O mighty Conn, Fighter of a Hundred Fights, the
Druid's power is little loved; it has little honor in the mighty land,
peopled with so many of the upright. When the Law comes, it will do away
with the Druid's magic spells that issue from the lips of the false
black demon."

Then Conn the king observed that since the coming of the maiden Connla
his son spoke to none that spake to him. So Conn of the Hundred Fights
said to him, "Is it to thy mind what the woman says, my son?"

"'Tis hard upon me," said Connla; "I love my own folk above all things;
but yet a longing seizes me for the maiden."

When the maiden heard this, she answered and said: "The ocean is not so
strong as the waves of thy longing. Come with me in my curragh, the
gleaming, straight-gliding crystal canoe. Soon can we reach Boadag's
realm. I see the bright sun sink, yet far as it is, we can reach it
