could send for Grace, and get her boarded near him. As soon as his wages
were raised, he determined to do this. While engaged in these pleasant
speculations, they reached the station.

"We get out here," said Mr. Graves.

"Is your store in this place?" asked Frank.

"No; it is in the next town."

Nathan Graves looked about him for a conveyance. He finally drove a
bargain with a man driving a shabby-looking vehicle, and the two took
their seats.

They were driven about six miles through a flat, unpicturesque country,
when they reached a branch road leading away from the main one.

It was a narrow road, and apparently not much frequented. Frank could
see no houses on either side.

"Is your store on this road?" he asked.

"Oh, no; but I am not going to the store yet. We will go to my house,
and leave your trunk."

At length the wagon stopped, by Graves' orders, in front of a gate
hanging loosely by one hinge.

"We'll get out here," said Graves.

Frank looked with some curiosity, and some disappointment, at his future
home. It was a square, unpainted house, discolored by time, and looked
far from attractive. There were no outward signs of occupation, and
everything about it appeared to have fallen into decay. Not far off was
a barn, looking even more dilapidated than the house.

At the front door, instead of knocking--there was no bell--Graves drew
a rusty key from his pocket and inserted it in the lock. They found
themselves in a small entry, uncarpeted and dingy.

"We'll go upstairs," said Graves.

Arrived on the landing, he threw open a door, and ushered in our hero.

"This will be your room," he said.

Frank looked around in dismay.

It was a large, square room, uncarpeted, and containing only a bed, two
chairs and a washstand, all of the cheapest and rudest manufacture.

"I hope you will soon feel at home here," said Graves. "I'll go down and
see if I can find something to eat."

He went out, locking the door behind him

"What does this mean?" thought Frank, with a strange sensation.



CHAPTER XVII

FRANK AND HIS JAILER


It was twenty minutes before Frank, waiting impatiently, heard the steps
of his late companion ascending the stairs.

But the door was not unlocked. Instead, a slide was revealed, about
eight inches square, through which his late traveling companion pushed a
plate of cold meat and bread.

"Here's something to eat," he said; "take it."

"Why do you lock me in?" demanded our hero.

"You can get along without knowing, I suppose," said the other, with a
sneer.

"I don't mean to," said Frank, firmly. "I demand an explanation. How
long do you intend to keep me here?"

"I am sorry I can't gratify your curiosity, but I don't know myself."

"Perhaps you think that I am rich, but I am not. I have no money. You
can't get anything out of me," said Frank.

"That may be so, but I shall keep you."

"I suppose that was all a lie about your keeping store?"

"It was a pretty little story, told for your amusement, my dear boy,"
said Graves. "I was afraid you wouldn't come without it."

"You are a villain!" said Frank.

"Look here, boy," said Graves, in a different tone, his face darkening,
"you had better not talk in that way. I advise you to eat your dinner
and be quiet. Some supper will be brought to you before night."

So saying, he abruptly closed the slide, and descended the stairs,
leaving Frank to his reflections, which it may be supposed, were not of
the pleasantest character.

Frank did not allow his unpleasant situation to take away his appetite,
and though he was fully determined to make the earliest possible attempt
to escape, he was sensible enough first to eat the food which his jailer
had brought him.

His lunch dispatched, he began at once to revolve plans of escape.

There were three windows in the room, two on the front of the house, the
other at the side.

He tried one after another, but the result was the same. All were so
fastened that it was quite impossible to raise them.

Feeling that he could probably escape through one of the windows when
he pleased, though at the cost of considerable trouble, Frank did not
trouble himself much, or allow himself to feel unhappy. He decided to
continue his explorations.

In the corner of the room was a door, probably admitting to a closet.

"I suppose it is locked," thought Frank, but on trying it, he found that
such was not the case. He looked curiously about him, but found little
to repay him. His attention was drawn, however to several dark-colored
masks lying upon a shelf.

He also discovered a small hole in the wall of the size of a marble.
Actuated by curiosity, he applied his eye to the opening, and peeped
into what was probably the adjoining room. It was furnished in very much
the same way as the one in which he was confined, but at present it was
untenanted. Having seen what little there was to be seen, Frank withdrew
from his post of observation and returned to his room.

It was several hours later when he again heard steps ascending the
stairs, and the slide in the door was moved.

He looked toward it, but the face that he saw was not that of Nathan
Graves.

It was the face of a woman.



CHAPTER XVIII


"OVER THE HILL TO THE POORHOUSE"


We are compelled for a time to leave our hero in the hands of his
enemies, and return to the town of Crawford, where an event has occurred
which influences seriously the happiness and position of his sister,
Grace.

Ever since Frank left the town, Grace had been a welcome member of Mr.
Pomeroy's family, receiving the kindest treatment from all, so that she
had come to feel very much at home.

So they lived happily together, till one disastrous night a fire broke
out, which consumed the house, and they were forced to snatch their
clothes and escape, saving nothing else.

Mr. Pomeroy's house was insured for two-thirds of its value, and he
proposed to rebuild immediately, but it would be three months at least
before the new house would be completed. In the interim, he succeeded in
hiring a couple of rooms for his family, but their narrow accommodations
would oblige them to dispense with their boarder. Sorry as Mr. and
Mrs. Pomeroy were to part with her, it was obvious that Grace must find
another home.

"We must let Frank know," said Mr. Pomeroy, and having occasion to go
up to the city at once to see about insurance, he went to the store of
Gilbert & Mack, and inquired for Prank.

"Fowler? What was he?" was asked.

"A cash-boy."

"Oh, he is no longer here. Mr. Gilbert discharged him."

"Do you know why he was discharged?" asked Mr. Pomeroy, pained and
startled.

"No; but there stands Mr. Gilbert. He can tell you."

Mr. Pomeroy introduced himself to the head of the firm and repeated his
inquiry.

"If you are a friend of the lad," said Mr. Gilbert, "you will be sorry
to learn that he was charged with dishonesty. It was a very respectable
lady who made the charge. It is only fair to say that the boy denied
it, and that, personally, we found him faithful and trusty. But as the
dullness of trade compelled us to discharge some of our cash-boys, we
naturally discharged him among the number, without, however, judging his
case."

"Then, sir, you have treated the boy very unfairly. On the strength of
a charge not proved, you have dismissed him, though personally you had
noticed nothing out of the way in him, and rendered it impossible for
him to obtain another place."

"There is something in what you say, I admit. Perhaps I was too hasty.
If you will send the boy to me, I will take him back on probation."

"Thank you, sir," said Mr. Pomeroy, gratefully "I will send him here."

But this Mr. Pomeroy was unable to do. He did not know of Frank's new
address, and though he was still in the city, he failed to find him.

He returned to Crawford and communicated the unsatisfactory
intelligence. He tried to obtain a new boarding place for Grace, but no
one was willing to take her at two dollars a week, especially when Mr.
Pomeroy was compelled to admit that Frank was now out of employment, and
it was doubtful if he would be able to keep up the payment.

Tom Pinkerton managed to learn that Grace was now without a home, and
mentioned it to his father.

"Won't she have to go to the poorhouse now, father?" he asked eagerly.

"Yes," said Deacon Pinkerton. "There is no other place for her that I
can see."

"Ah, I'm glad," said Tom, maliciously. "Won't that upstart's pride be
taken down? He was too proud to go to the poorhouse, where he belonged,
but he can't help his sister's going there. If he isn't a pauper
himself, he'll be the brother of a pauper, and that's the next thing to
it."

"That is true," said the deacon. "He was very impudent in return for my
kindness. Still, I am sorry for him."

I am afraid the deacon's sorrow was not very deep, for he certainly
looked unusually cheerful when he harnessed up his horse and drove
around to the temporary home of the Pomeroys.

"Good-morning, Mr. Pomeroy," he said, seeing the latter in the yard.
"You've met with a severe loss."

"Yes, deacon; it is a severe loss to a poor man like me."

"To be sure. Well, I've called around to relieve you of a part of your
cares. I am going to take Grace Fowler to the poorhouse."

"Couldn't you get her a place with a private family to help about the
house in return for her board, while she goes to school?"

"There's nobody wants a young girl like her," said the deacon.

"Her brother would pay part of her board--that is, when he has a place."

"Hasn't he got a place?" asked the deacon, pricking up his ears. "I
heard he was in a store in New York."

"He lost his place," said Mr. Pomeroy, reluctantly, "partly because of
the dullness of general trade."

"Then he can't maintain his sister. She will have to go to the
poorhouse. Will you ask her to get ready, and I'll take her right over
to the poorhouse."

There was no alternative. Mr. Pomeroy went into the house, and broke the
sad news to his wife and Grace.

"Never mind," she said, with attempted cheerfulness, though her lips
quivered, "I shan't have to stay there long. Frank will be sure to send
for me very shortly."

"It's too bad, Grace," said Sam, looking red about the eyes; "it's too
bad that you should have to go to the poorhouse."

"Come and see me, Sam," said Grace.

"Yes, I will, Grace. I'll come often, too. You shan't stay there long."

"Good-by," said Grace, faltering. "You have all been very kind to me."

"Good-by, my dear child," said Mrs. Pomeroy.

"Who knows but you can return to us when the new house is done?"

So poor Grace went out from her pleasant home to find the deacon,
grim-faced and stern, waiting for her.

"Jump in, little girl," he said. "You've kept me waiting for you a long
time, and my time is valuable."

The distance to the poorhouse was about a mile and a half. For the first
half mile Deacon Pinkerton kept silence. Then he began to speak, in a
tone of cold condescension, as if it were a favor for such a superior
being to address an insignificant child, about to become a pauper.

"Little girl, have you heard from your brother lately?"

"Not very lately, sir."

"What is he doing?"

"He is in a store."

"I apprehend you are mistaken. He has lost his place. He has been turned
away," said the deacon, with satisfaction.

"Frank turned away! Oh, sir, you must be mistaken."

"Mr. Pomeroy told me. He found out yesterday when he went to the city."

Poor Grace! she could not longer doubt now, and her brother's misfortune
saddened her even more than her own.

"Probably you will soon see your brother."

"Oh, do you think so, sir?" asked Grace, joyfully.

"Yes," answered the deacon, grimly. "He will find himself in danger of
starvation in the city, and he'll creep back, only too glad to obtain a
nice, comfortable home in the poorhouse."

But Grace knew her brother better than that. She knew his courage, his
self-reliance and his independent spirit, and she was sure the deacon
was mistaken.

The home for which Grace was expected to be so grateful was now in
sight. It was a dark, neglected looking house, situated in the midst
of barren fields, and had a lonely and desolate aspect. It was
superintended by Mr. and Mrs. Chase, distant relations of Deacon
Pinkerton.

Mr. Chase was an inoffensive man, but Mrs. Chase had a violent temper.
She was at work in the kitchen when Deacon Pinkerton drove up. Hearing
the sound of wheels, she came to the door.

"Mrs. Chase," said the deacon, "I've brought you a little girl, to be
placed under your care."

"What's her name?" inquired the lady.

"Grace Fowler."

"Grace, humph! Why didn't she have a decent name?"

"You can call her anything you like," said the deacon.

"Little girl, you must behave well," said Deacon Pinkerton, by way of
parting admonition. "The town expects it. I expect it. You must never
cease to be grateful for the good home which it provides you free of
expense."

Grace did not reply. Looking in the face of her future task-mistress was
scarcely calculated to awaken a very deep feeling of gratitude.

"Now," said Mrs. Chase, addressing her new boarder, "just take off your
things, Betsy, and make yourself useful."

"My name isn't Betsy, ma'am."

"It isn't, isn't it?"

"No; it is Grace."

"You don't say so! I'll tell you one thing, I shan't allow anybody to
contradict me here, and your name's got to be Betsy while you're in this
house. Now take off your things and hang them up on that peg. I'm going
to set you right to work."

"Yes, ma'am," said Grace, alarmed.

"There's some dishes I want washed, Betsy, and I won't have you
loitering over your work, neither."

"Very well, ma'am."

Such was the new home for which poor Grace was expected to be grateful.



CHAPTER XIX

WHAT FRANK HEARD THROUGH THE CREVICE


Frank looked with some surprise at the woman who was looking through
the slide of his door. He had expected to see Nathan Graves. She also
regarded him with interest.

"I have brought you some supper," she said.

Frank reached out and drew in a small waiter, containing a cup of tea
and a plate of toast.

"Thank you," he said. "Where is the man who brought me here?"

"He has gone out."

"Do you know why he keeps me here in confinement?"

"No," said the woman, hastily. "I know nothing. I see much, but I know
nothing."

"Are many prisoners brought here as I have been?" asked our hero, in
spite of the woman's refusal to speak.

"No."

"I can't understand what object they can have in detaining me. If I were
rich, I might guess, but I am poor. I am compelled to work for my daily
bread, and have been out of a place for two weeks."

"I don't understand," she said, in a low voice, rather to herself than
to him. "But I cannot wait. I must not stand here. I will come up in
fifteen minutes, and if you wish another cup of tea, or some toast, I
will bring them."

His confinement did not affect his appetite, for he enjoyed his tea and
toast; and when, as she had promised, the woman came up, he told her he
would like another cup of tea, and some more toast.

"Will you answer one question?" asked our hero.

"I don't know," answered the woman in a flurried tone.

"You look like a good woman. Why do you stay in such a house as this?"

"I will tell you, though I should do better to be silent. But you won't
betray me?"

"On no account."

"I was poor, starving, when I had an application to come here. The man
who engaged me told me that it was to be a housekeeper, and I had no
suspicion of the character of the house--that it was a den of--"

She stopped short, but Frank understood what she would have said.

"When I discovered the character of the house, I would have left but for
two reasons. First, I had no other home; next, I had become acquainted
with the secrets of the house, and they would have feared that I would
reveal them. I should incur great risk. So I stayed."

Here there was a sound below. The woman started.

"Some one has come," she said. "I must go down I will come up as soon as
I can with the rest of your supper."

"Thank you. You need not hurry."

Our hero was left to ponder over what he had heard. There was evidently
a mystery connected with this lonely house a mystery which he very much
desired to solve. But there was one chance. Through the aperture in the
closet he might both see and hear something, provided any should meet
there that evening.

The remainder of his supper was brought him by the same woman, but she
was in haste, and he obtained no opportunity of exchanging another word
with her.

Frank did not learn who it was that had arrived. Listening intently, he
thought he heard some sounds in the next room. Opening the closet door,
and applying his eye to the aperture, he saw two men seated in the room,
one of whom was the man who had brought him there.

He applied his ear to the opening, and heard the following conversation:

"I hear you've brought a boy here, Nathan," said the other, who was a
stout, low-browed man, with an evil look.

