long, they are 12 feet in height, with a tower at the end and one over
the gateway in the centre six feet high. There is a drawbridge defended
by an outwork of palisades six feet high. The moat will be a dry one,
seeing that we have no means of filling it with water, but it will be
supposed to be full, and must be crossed on planks or bridges. Two small
towers on wheels will be provided, which may be run up to the edge of
the moat, and will be as high as the top of the towers.

"Surely they cannot make all this before morning?" Walter said.

"They will do so," the marshal replied. "The castle has been put
together in the king's courtyard, and the pieces are all numbered.
Two hundred carpenters will labour all night at it, besides a party of
labourers for the digging of the moat. It will be a rare show, and will
delight both the citizens and the ladies of the court, for such a thing
has never before been attempted. But the king grudges not the expense
which it will cost him, seeing that spectacles of this kind do much to
arouse the warlike spirit of the people. Here is a list of the various
implements which will be provided, only it is understood that the
mangonels and arblasts will not be provided with missiles, seeing that
many would assuredly be killed by them. They will be employed, however,
to show the nature of the work, and parties of men-at-arms will be told
off to serve them. Crossbows and arrows will be used, but the weapons
will be blunted. You will see that there are ladders, planks for making
bridges, long hooks for hauling men down from the wall, beams for
battering down the gate, axes for cutting down the palisades, and all
other weapons. The ten who will serve under you as knights have already
been nominated, and the city will furnish them with full armour. For
the others, the apprentices of each ward will choose sufficient
representatives to make up the hundred, who will fight as men-at-arms;
these will wear steel caps and breastpieces, with leather jerkins,
and vizors to protect their faces, for even a blunted arrow or wooden
quarrel might well kill if it struck true."

On leaving the marshal Walter joined Giles Fletcher and Geoffrey Ward,
who warmly congratulated him upon his success. He informed them of the
spectacle which the king had prepared for the amusement of the citizens
on the morrow.

"In faith," Geoffrey said, "the idea is a good one, and promises rare
sport, but it will be rough, and we may expect many broken limbs, for it
be no joke to be thrown down with a ladder from a wall even twelve feet
high, and there will be the depth of the moat besides."

"That will only be two feet," Walter said, "for so it is marked on the
plan."

"And which do you mean to take, Walter, the attack or the defence?
Methinks the king has erred somewhat in making the forces equal, for
assuredly the besiegers should outnumber the besieged by fully three to
one to give them a fair chance of success."

"I shall take the assault," Walter answered; "there is more to be done
that way than in the defence. When we get home, Geoffrey, we will look
at the plans, and see what may be the best manner of assault."

Upon examining the plan that evening they found that the wall was
continued at an angle at either end for a distance of some twenty feet
back so as to give a postern gate behind each of the corner towers
through which a sortie might be made. Geoffrey and Walter talked
the matter over, and together contrived a plan of operation for the
following day.

"You will have one great advantage," Geoffrey said. "The apprentices are
all accustomed to the use of the bow, while the young nobles will
know but little of that weapon; therefore your shooting will be far
straighter and truer, and even a blunt-headed arrow drawn from the
shoulder will hit so smart a blow that those on the wall will have
difficulty in withstanding them."

After the talk was ended Walter again crossed London Bridge, and made
his way to Ludgate, where he found his late antagonist, whose head had
been plastered up, and was little the worse for the conflict.

"There is no ill-will between us, I hope," Walter said, holding out his
hand.

"None in the world," the young smith said frankly. He was a
good-tempered-looking young giant, with closely-cropped hair, light-blue
eyes, and a pleasant but somewhat heavy face.

"My faith but what a blow was that you gave me; why, one would think
that your muscles were made of steel. I thought that I could hit a good
downright blow, seeing that I have been hammering at the anvil for
the last seven years; but strike as I would I could not beat down your
guard, while mine went down, as if it had been a feather, before yours.
I knew, directly that I had struck the first blow, and felt how firm was
your defence, that it was all up with me, knowing that in point of skill
I had no chance whatever with you.

"I am glad to see that you bear no malice, Ralph," Walter said, "and
hope that we shall be great friends henceforth, that is, if you will
take me as such, seeing that you are just out of your apprenticeship,
while I am not yet half through mine. But I have come to talk to you
about tomorrow. Have you heard that there is to be a mimic siege?"

"I have heard about it," Ralph said. "The city is talking of nothing
else. The news was published at the end of the sports. It will be rare
fun, surely."

"It will be pretty rough fun," Walter replied; "and I should not be much
surprised if some lives are lost; but this is always so in a tournament;
and if knights and nobles are ready to be killed, we apprentices need
not fear to hazard our lives. But now as to tomorrow. I, as the winner
today, am to be the leader of the party, and you, as second, will of
course be captain under me. Now I want to explain to you exactly what
I propose to do, and to arrange with you as to your share in the
business."

The young smith listened attentively to Walter's explanation, and, when
he had done, exclaimed admiringly: "Why, Walter, you seem to be made for
a general. How did it all come to you, lad? I should never have thought
of such a scheme."

"I talked it over with my master," Walter said, "and the idea is his as
much as mine. I wonder if it will do."

"It is sure to do," the smith said enthusiastically. "The castle is as
good as taken."

The next day all London poured out to the scene of the sports, and the
greatest admiration and wonder were expressed at the castle, which had
risen, as if by magic, in the night. It was built at one end of the
lists, which had been purposely placed in a hollow, so that a great
number of people besides those in the pavilions could obtain a view
from the surrounding slopes. The castle was substantially built of heavy
timber painted gray, and looked at a little distance as if constructed
of stone. A flag floated from the central tower, and the building looked
so formidable that the general opinion was freely expressed that the
task of the assailants, whoever they might be--for at present this was
unknown--was quite impossible. At ten o'clock the king and his court
arrived. After they had taken their places the two bands, headed by
their leaders, advanced from the lower end of the lists, and drew up
in front of the royal pavilion. The leaders took their places in front.
Behind them stood ten chosen followers, all of whom, as well as their
chiefs, were encased in full armour. Behind, on one side, were 100
apprentices, on the other 100 esquires, all attired as men-at-arms. The
court party were led by Clarence Aylmer, son of the Earl of Pembroke.
His companions were all young men of noble family, aspirants for the
order of knighthood. They were, for the most part, somewhat older than
the apprentices, but as the latter consisted chiefly of young men nearly
out of their term the difference was not great. Walter's armour was a
suit which the armourer had constructed a year previously for a young
knight who had died before the armour could be delivered. Walter had
wondered more than once why Geoffrey did not endeavour to sell it
elsewhere, for, although not so decorated and inlaid as many of the
suits of Milan armour, it was constructed of the finest steel, and the
armourer had bestowed special care upon its manufacture, as the young
knight's father had long been one of his best customers. Early that
morning Geoffrey had brought it to his room and had told him to wear it
instead of that lent by the city.

"But I fear it will get injured," Walter had urged. "I shall not spare
myself, you know, Geoffrey, and the blows will be hard ones.

"The more need for good armour, Walter. These city suits are made for
show rather than use. You may be sure that young Pembroke and his band
will fight their hardest rather than suffer defeat at the hands of those
whom they consider a band of city varlets."

Before issuing from the tent where he and his companions had put on
their mail Walter carefully fastened in the front of his helmet a tiny
gold bracelet. Upon taking their places before the pavilion the king
ordered the two leaders to advance, and addressed them and the multitude
in the following words:

"Brave leaders, and you, my people, I have contrived the pastime today
that I may show you on a mimic scale the deeds which my brave soldiers
are called upon to perform in France. It is more specially suited for
the combatants of today, since one party have had but small opportunity
of acquiring skill on horseback. Moreover, I wish to teach the lesson
that fighting on foot is as honourable as fighting on horseback, for
it has now been proved, and sometimes to our cost, in Scotland, that
footmen can repulse even the bravest chivalry. Today each party will
fight his best. Remember that, even in the heat of conflict, matters
must not be carried to an extreme. Those cut off from their friends will
be accounted prisoners, as will those who, being overpowered, throw
down their arms. Any wounded on either side will not be accounted as
prisoners, but may retire with honour from the field. You," he said,
looking at Walter, "as the conqueror of yesterday, have the choice
of either the attack or defence; but I should advise you to take the
latter, seeing it is easier to defend a fortress than to assault it.
Many of your opponents have already gained credit in real warfare, while
you and your following are new to it. Therefore, in order to place the
defence on fair terms with the assault, I have ordered that both sides
shall be equal in numbers."

"If your liege will permit me," Walter said bowing, "I would fain take
the assault. Methinks that, with my following, I could do better thus
than in defence."

The king looked somewhat displeased.

"As you will," he said coldly; "but I fear this will somewhat mar the
effect of the spectacle seeing that you will have no chance whatever
against an equal force, more accustomed to war than your party, and
occupying so superior a position. However," he went on, seeing that
Walter made no sign of changing his mind, "as you have chosen, so be
it; and now it is for you to choose the lady who shall be queen of the
tourney and shall deliver the prizes to the victors. Look round you;
there are many fair faces, and it is for you to choose among them."

Smiles passed between many of the courtly dames and ladies at the choice
that was to be made among them by the apprentice lad; and they thought
that he would be sorely puzzled at such a duty. Walter, however, did
not hesitate an instant. He ran his eye over the crowd of ladies in the
royal gallery, and soon saw the object of his search.

"Since I have your majesty's permission," he said, "I choose, as queen
of the tournament, Mistress Edith Vernon."

There was a movement of surprise and a general smile. Perhaps to all
who thought that they had a chance of being chosen the selection was a
relief, as none could be jealous of the pretty child, who, at the king's
order, made her way forward to the front, and took her seat in a chair
placed between the king and queen. The girl coloured brightly; but she
had heard so much of tourneys and jousts that she knew what was her
duty. She had been sitting far back on the previous day, and the
apprentice, when brought up before the king, was too far below for her
to see his features. She now recognized him.

"Sir Knights," she said in a loud, clear, childish voice, "you will both
do your duty today and show yourselves worthy cavaliers. Methinks that,
as queen of the tourney, I should be neutral between you, but as one of
you carries my gage in his helm, my good wishes must needs go with him;
but bright eyes will be fixed on you both, and may well stir you to
deeds of valour."

So saying, she resumed her seat with a pretty air of dignity.

"Why, sweetheart," the king said, "how is it that this 'prentice lad
knows your name, and how is it that he wears your gage, for I know that
the young Pembroke wears the glove of the Earl of Surrey's daughter?"

"He saved my life, sir, mine and my mother's," the child said, "and I
told him he should be my true knight, and gave him my bracelet, which
you see he wears in his helm."

"I recall somewhat of the story," the king said, "and will question
my Lady Vernon further anon; but see, the combatants are filing off to
their places."

With flags flying and trumpets blowing young Pembroke led his forces
into the castle. Each of his ten knights was followed by an esquire
bearing his banner, and each had ten men-at-arms under his immediate
order. Two of them, with twenty men, remained in the outwork beyond the
drawbridge. The rest took their station on the walls, and towers,
where a platform had been erected, running along three feet below the
battlements. The real men-at-arms with the machines of war now advanced,
and for a time worked the machines, which made pretence at casting great
stones and missiles at the walls. The assailants then moved forward and,
unslinging their bows, opened a heavy fire of arrows at the defenders,
who, in turn, replied with arrows and cross-bows.

"The 'prentices shoot well," the king said; "by our lady, it would be
hot work for the defenders were the shafts but pointed! Even as it
is the knocks must be no child's play, for the arrows, although not
pointed, are all tipped with iron, without which, indeed, straight
shooting would be impossible."

The return fire from the walls was feeble, and the king said, laughing,
"So far your knight, fair mistress, has it all his own way. I did not
reckon sufficiently upon the superiority of shooting of the London lads,
and, indeed, I know not that I ought not in fairness to order some of
the defenders off the walls, seeing, that in warfare, their numbers
would be rapidly thinned. See, the assailants are moving up to the two
towers under shelter of the fire of the archers."

By this time Aylmer, seeing that his followers could make no effectual
reply to the arrow fire, had ordered all, save the leaders in full
armour, to lie down behind the parapet. The assailants now gathered
thickly round each tower, as if they intended to attempt to cross by the
bridges, which could be let down from an opening in the tower level with
the top of the wall, while archers upon the summit shot fast and thick
among the defenders who were gathering to oppose them.

"If the young Pembroke is wise," the king said, "he will make a strong
sally now and fall upon one or other of the parties."

As he spoke there was a sudden movement on the part of the assailants,
who, leaving the foot of the towers, made a rush at the outwork in the
centre. The instant they arrived they fell to work with axes upon
the palisades. Many were struck down by the blows dealt them by the
defenders, but others caught up the axes and in less than a minute
several of the palisades were cut down and the assailants poured in. The
defenders fought gallantly, but they were overpowered by numbers. Some
were struck down, others taken prisoners by main force, and the
rest driven across the drawbridge, just as the gates were opened and
Pembroke, at the head of the defenders, swarmed out to their assistance.

There was a desperate fight on the bridge, and it was well that the
armour was stout, and the arms that wielded the weapons had not yet
attained their full strength. Several were knocked off the bridge into
the moat, and these were, by the rules, obliged at once to retire and
take no further part in the contest. Walter and Ralph the smith, fought
in front of their men, and hard as Pembroke and his followers struggled,
they could not drive them back a foot. The court party were galled by
the heavy fire of arrows kept up by the apprentices along the side of
the moat, and finding all his efforts to regain the earth-work useless,
Pembroke withdrew his forces into the castle, and in spite of the
efforts of the besiegers managed to close the gates in their faces. The
assailants, however, succeeded in severing the chains of the drawbridge
before it could be raised.

From the tower above, the defenders now hurled over great stones,
which had been specially placed there for the purpose of destroying
the drawbridge should the earthwork be carried. The boards were soon
splintered, and the drawbridge was pronounced by the Earl of Talbot, who
was acting as judge, to be destroyed. The excitement of the spectators
was worked up to a great pitch while the conflict was going on, and the
citizens cheered lustily at the success of the apprentices.

"That was gallantly done," the king said to Queen Philippa, "and the
leader of the assailants is a lad of rare mettle. Not a captain of
my army, no, not Sir Walter Manny himself, could have done it more
cleverly. You see, by placing his forces at the ends of the wall he drew
all the garrison thither to withstand the assaults from them, and thus
by his sudden movement he was able to carry the outwork before they
could recover from their surprise, and come down to its aid. I am
curious to know what he will do next. What thinkst thou, Edward?" he
asked his son, who was standing by his side.

"He will win the day," the young prince said; "and in faith, although
the others are my comrades, I should be glad to see it. He will make a
gallant knight, sir, one of these days, and remember he is engaged to
follow my banner, so you must not steal him from me. See, my liege, they
are taking planks and ladders to the outwork."

"They are doing wrongly then," the king said, "for even should they
bridge the moat where the drawbridge is, they cannot scale the wall
there, since the tower defends it, and the ladders are but long enough
to reach the lower wall. No, their leader has changed his mind, they are
taking the planks along the edge of the moat towards the tower on the
