
But Granny was in no hurry. Not that she wasn't just as hungry for a fat
hen as was Reddy, but she was too wise and clever and altogether too sly
to run any risks.

"There is nothing gained by being in too much of a hurry, Reddy," said
she, "and often a great deal is lost in that way. A fat hen will taste
just as good a little later as it would now, and it will be foolish to
go up to Farmer Brown's until we are sure that everybody up there is
asleep. But to ease your mind, I'll tell you what we will do; we'll go
where we can see Farmer Brown's house and watch until the last light
winks out."

So they trotted to a point where they could see Farmer Brown's house,
and there they sat down to watch. It seemed to Reddy that those lights
never would wink out. But at last they did.

"Come on, Granny!" he cried, jumping to his feet.

"Not yet, Reddy. Not yet," replied Granny. "We've got to give folks time
to get sound asleep. If we should get into that henhouse, those hens
might make a racket, and if anything like that is going to happen, we
want to be sure that Farmer Brown and Farmer Brown's boy are asleep."

This was sound advice, and Reddy knew it. So with a groan he once more
threw himself down on the snow to wait. At last Granny arose, stretched,
and looked up at the twinkling stars. "Come on," said she and led the
way.

Up back of the barn and around it they stole like two shadows and quite
as noiselessly as shadows. They heard Bowser the Hound sighing in his
sleep in his snug little house, and grinned at each other. Silently they
stole over to the henyard. The gate was open, just as Granny had told
Reddy it would be. Across the henyard they trotted swiftly, straight to
where more than once in the daytime they had seen the hens come out of
the house through a little hole. It was closed. Reddy had expected it
would be. Still, he was dreadfully disappointed. He gave it merely a
glance.

"I knew it wouldn't be any use," said he with a half whine.

But Granny paid no attention to him. She went close to the hole and
pushed gently against the little door that closed it. It didn't move.
Then she noticed that at one edge there was a tiny crack. She tried to
push her nose through, but the crack was too narrow. Then she tried a
paw. A claw caught on the edge of the door, and it moved ever so little.
Then Granny knew that the little door wasn't fastened. Granny stretched
herself flat on the ground and went to work, first with one paw, then
with the other. By and by she caught her claws in it just right again,
and it moved a wee bit more. No, most certainly that door wasn't
fastened, and that crack was a little wider.

"What are you wasting your time there for?" demanded Reddy crossly.
"We'd better be off hunting if we would have anything to eat this
night."

Granny said nothing but kept on working. She had discovered that this
was a sliding door. Presently the crack was wide enough for her to get
her nose in. Then she pushed and twisted her head this way and that.
The little door slowly slid back, and when Reddy turned to speak to her
again, for he had had his back to her, she was nowhere to be seen. Reddy
just gaped and gaped foolishly. There was no Granny Fox, but there was
a black hole where she had been working, and from it came the most
delicious smell,--the smell of fat hens! It seemed to Reddy that his
stomach fairly flopped over with longing. He rubbed his eyes to be sure
that he was awake. Then in a twinkling he was inside that hole himself.

"Sh-h-h, be still!" whispered Old Granny Fox.



CHAPTER XXV: A Dinner For Two

   Dark deeds are done in the stilly night,
   And who shall say if they're wrong or right?
     --Old Granny Fox.

It all depends on how you look at things. Of course, Granny and Reddy
Fox had no business to be in Farmer Brown's henhouse in the middle of
the night, or at any other time, for that matter. That is, they had no
business to be there, as Farmer Brown would look at the matter. He would
have called them two red thieves. Perhaps that is just what they were.
But looking at the matter as they did, I am not so sure about it. To
Granny and Reddy Fox those hens were simply big, rather stupid birds,
splendid eating if they could be caught, and bound to be eaten by
somebody. The fact that they were in Farmer Brown's henhouse didn't make
them his any more than the fact that Mrs. Grouse was in a part of the
Green Forest owned by Farmer Brown made her his.

You see, among the little meadow and forest people there is no such
thing as property rights, excepting in the matter of storehouses, and
because these hens were alive, it didn't occur to Granny and Reddy that
the henhouse was a sort of storehouse. It would have made no difference
if it had. Among the little people it is considered quite right to help
yourself from another's storehouse if you are smart enough to find it
and really need the food.

Besides, Reddy and Granny knew that Fanner Brown and his boy would eat
some of those hens themselves, and they didn't begin to need them as
Reddy and Granny did. So as they looked at the matter, there was nothing
wrong in being in that henhouse in the middle of the night. They were
there simply because they needed food very, very much, and food was
there.

They stared up at the roosts where the biddies were huddled together,
fast asleep. They were too high up to be reached from the floor even
when Reddy and Granny stood on their hind legs and stretched as far as
they could.

"We've got to wake them up and scare them so that some of the silly
things will fly down where we can catch them," said Reddy, licking his
lips hungrily.

"That won't do at all!" snapped Granny. "They would make a great racket
and waken Bowser the Hound, and he would waken his master, and that is
just what we mustn't do if we hope to ever get in here again. I thought
you had more sense, Reddy."

Reddy looked a little shamefaced. "Well, if we don't do that, how are we
going to get them? We can't fly," he grumbled.

"You stay right here where you are," snapped Granny, "and take care that
you don't make a sound."

Then Granny jumped lightly to a little shelf that ran along in front of
the nesting boxes. From this she could reach the lower roost on which
four fat hens were asleep. Very gently she pushed her head in between
two of these and crowded them apart. Sleepily they protested and moved
along a little. Granny continued to crowd them. At last one of them
stretched out her head to see who was crowding so. Like a flash Granny
seized that head, and biddy never knew what had wakened her, nor did she
have a chance to waken the others.

Dropping this hen at Reddy's feet, Granny crowded another until she did
the same thing, and just the same thing happened once more. Then Granny
jumped lightly down, picked up one of the hens by the neck, slung the
body over her shoulder, and told Reddy to do the same with the other and
start for home.

"Aren't you going to get any more while we have the chance?" grumbled
Reddy.

"Enough is enough," retorted Granny. "We've got a dinner for two, and
so far no one is any the wiser. Perhaps these two won't be missed, and
we'll have a chance to get some more another night. Now come on."

This was plain common sense, and Reddy knew it, so without another word
he followed old Granny Fox out by the way they had entered, and then
home to the best dinner he had had for a long long time.



CHAPTER XXVI: Farmer Brown's Boy Sets A Trap

   The trouble is that troubles are,
   More frequently than not,
   Brought on by naught but carelessness;
   By some one who forgot.
     --Old Granny Fox.

Granny Fox had hoped that those two hens she and Reddy had stolen from
Farmer Brown's henhouse would not be missed, but they were. They were
missed the very first thing the next morning when Farmer Brown's boy
went to feed the biddies. He discovered right away that the little
sliding door which should have closed the opening through which the hens
went in and out of the house was open, and then he remembered that
he had left the henyard gate open the night before. Carefully Farmer
Brown's boy examined the hole with the sliding door.

"Ha!" said he presently, and held up two red hairs which he had found on
the edge of the door. "Ha! I thought as much. I was careless last night
and didn't fasten this door, and I left the gate open. Reddy Fox has
been here, and now I know what has become of those two hens. I suppose
it serves me right for my carelessness, and I suppose if the truth were
known, those hens were of more real good to him than they ever could
have been to me, because the poor fellow must be having pretty hard work
to get a living these hard winter days. Still, I can't have him stealing
any more. That would never do at all. If I shut them up every night and
am not careless, he can't get them. But accidents will happen, and I
might do just as I did last night--think I had locked up when I hadn't.
I don't like to set a trap for Reddy, but I must teach the rascal a
lesson. If I don't, he will get so bold that those chickens won't be
safe even in broad daylight."

Now at just that very time over in their home, Granny and Reddy Fox were
talking over plans for the future, and shrewd old Granny was pointing
out to Reddy how necessary it was that they should keep away from that
henyard for some time. "We've had a good dinner, a splendid dinner, and
if we are smart enough we may be able to get more good dinners where
this one came from," said she. "But we certainly won't if we are too
greedy."

"But I don't believe Farmer Brown's boy has missed those two chickens,
and I don't see any reason at all why we shouldn't go back there
to-night and get two more if he is stupid enough to leave that gate and
little door open," whined Reddy.

"Maybe he hasn't missed those two, but if we should take two more he
certainly would miss them, and he would guess what had become of them,
and that might get us into no end of trouble," snapped Granny. "We are
not starving now, and the best thing for us to do is to keep away from
that henhouse until we can't get anything to eat anywhere else, Now you
mind what I tell you, Reddy, and don't you dare go near there."

Reddy promised, and so it came about that Farmer Brown's boy hunted up
a trap all for nothing so far as Reddy and Granny were concerned. Very
carefully he bound strips of cloth around the jaws of the trap, for
he couldn't bear to think of those cruel jaws cutting into the leg
of Reddy, should he happen to get caught. You see, Farmer Brown's boy
didn't intend to kill Reddy if he should catch him, but to make him a
prisoner for a while and so keep him out of mischief. That night he hid
the trap very cunningly just inside the henhouse where any one creeping
through that little hole made for the hens to go in and out would be
sure to step in it. Then he purposely left the little sliding door open
part way as if it had been forgotten, and he also left the henyard gate
open just as he had done the night before.

"There now, Master Reddy," said he, talking to himself, "I rather think
that you are going to get into trouble before morning."

And doubtless Reddy would have done just that thing but for the wisdom
of sly old Granny.



CHAPTER XXVII: Prickly Porky Takes A Sun Bath

   Danger comes when least expected;
   'T is often near when not expected.
     --Old Granny Fox.

The long hard winter had passed, and Spring had come. Prickly Porky
the Porcupine came down from a tall poplar-tree and slowly stretched
himself. He was tired of eating. He was tired of swinging in the
tree-top.

"I believe I'll have a sun-bath," said Prickly Porky, and lazily walked
toward the edge of the Green Forest in search of a place where the sun
lay warm and bright.

Now Prickly Porky's stomach was very, very full. He was fat and
naturally lazy, so when he came to the doorstep of an old house just on
the edge of the Green Forest he sat down to rest. It was sunny and warm
there, and the longer he sat the less like moving he felt. He looked
about him with his dull eyes and grunted to himself.

"It's a deserted house. Nobody lives here, and I guess nobody'll care if
I take a nap right here on the doorstep," said Prickly Porky to himself.
"And I don't care if they do," he added, for Prickly Porky the Porcupine
was afraid of nobody and nothing.

So Prickly Porky made himself as comfortable as possible, yawned once or
twice, tried to wink at jolly, round, red Mr. Sun, who was winking and
smiling down at him and then fell fast asleep right on the doorstep of
the old house.

Now the old house had been deserted. No one had lived in it for a long,
long time, a very long time indeed. But it happened that, the night
before, old Granny Fox and Reddy Fox had had to move out of their nice
home on the edge of the Green Meadows because Farmer Brown's boy had
found it. Reddy was very stiff and sore, for he had been shot by a
hunter. He was so sore he could hardly walk, and could not go very far.
So old Granny Fox had led him to the old deserted house and put him to
bed in that.

"No one will think of looking for us here, for every one knows that no
one lives here," said old Granny Fox, as she made Reddy as comfortable
as possible.

As soon as it was daylight, Granny Fox slipped out to watch for Farmer
Brown's boy, for she felt sure that he would come back to the house they
had left, and sure enough he did. He brought a spade and dug the house
open, and all the time old Granny Fox was watching him from behind a
fence corner and laughing to think that she had been smart enough to
move in the night.

But Reddy Fox didn't know anything about this. He was so tired that he
slept and slept and slept. It was the middle of the morning when finally
he awoke. He yawned and stretched, and when he stretched he groaned
