we shall be delighted."

Miss Heath nodded to the pair and walked swiftly down the long hall to
the dons' special entrance, where she disappeared.

"Is not she charming?" whispered Maggie. "Did I not tell you you would
fall in love with Dorothea?"

"But I have not," said Priscilla, coloring. "And I don't know whether
she is charming or not."

Maggie checked a petulant exclamation which was rising to her lips.
She was conscious of a curious desire to win her queer young
companion's goodwill and sympathy.

"Never mind," she said, "the moment of victory is only delayed. You
will tell a very different story after you have had tea with Dorothea
this evening. Now, let us come and look at the notice-boards and see
what the day's program is. By the way, are you going to attend any
lectures this morning?"

"Yes, two," said Prissie-- "one on Middle History, from eleven to
twelve, and I have a French lecture afterward."

"Well, I am not doing anything this morning. I wish you were not. We
might have taken a long walk together. Don't you love long walks?"

"Oh, yes; but there is no time for anything of that sort here--
nor----" Priscilla hesitated. "I don't think there's space for a very
long walk here," she added. The color rushed into her cheeks as she
spoke and her eyes looked wistful.

Maggie laughed.

"What are your ideas in regard to space, Miss Peel? The whole of
Kingsdeneshire lies before us. We are untrammeled and can go where we
please. Is not that a sufficiently broad area for our roamings?"

"But there is no sea," said Priscilla. "We should never have time to
walk from here to the sea, and nothing-- nothing else seems worth
while."

"Oh, you have lived by the sea?"

"Yes, all my life. When I was a little girl, my home was near Whitby,
in Yorkshire, and lately I have lived close to Lyme-- two extreme
points of England, you will say; but no matter, the sea is the same.
To walk for miles on the top of the cliffs, that means exercise."

"Ah," said Maggie with a sigh, "I understand you-- I know what you
mean."

She spoke quickly, as she always did under the least touch of
excitement. "Such a walk means more than exercise; it means thought,
aspiration. Your brain seems to expand then and ideas come. Of course
you don't care for poor flat Kingsdeneshire."

Priscilla turned and stared at Miss Oliphant. Maggie laughed; she
raised her hand to her forehead.

"I must not talk any more," she said, turning pale and shrinking into
herself. "Forgive my rhapsodies. You'll understand what they are worth
when you know me better. Oh, by the way, will you come with me to
Kingsdene on Sunday? We can go to the three o'clock service at the
chapel and afterward have tea with some friends of mine-- the
Marshalls-- they'd be delighted to see you."

"What chapel is the service at?" inquired Priscilla.

"What chapel? Is there a second? Come with me, and you will never ask
that question again. Get under the shade of St. Hilda's-- see once
those fretted roofs and those painted windows. Listen but once to that
angel choir, and then dare to ask me what chapel I mean when I invite
you to come and taste of heaven beforehand."

"Thank you," said Priscilla, "I'll come. I cannot be expected to know
about things before I have heard of them, can I? But I am very much
obliged to you, and I shall be delighted to come."

  CHAPTER IX

 A NEW LIFE

THE vice-principal's room at Heath Hall was double the size of those
occupied by the students. Miss Heath had, of course, a separate
sleeping apartment. Her delightful sitting-room, therefore, had not
the curtained-off effect which took slightly from the charm of the
students' rooms. In summer Miss Heath's room was beautiful, for the
two deep bay windows-- one facing west, the other south-- looked out
upon smoothly kept lawns and flower-beds, upon tall elm trees and also
upon a distant peep of the river, for which Kingsdene was famous, and
some of the spires and towers of the old churches. In winter, too,
however-- and winter had almost come now-- the vice-principal's room
had a unique effect, and Priscilla never forgot the first time she saw
it. The young girl stepped across the threshold of a new life on this
first evening. She would always remember it.

It was getting dark, and curtains were drawn round the cozy bays, and
the firelight blazed cheerfully.

Prissie was a little before rather than behind her time, and there was
no one in the room to greet her when she entered. She felt so
overmastered by shyness, however, that this was almost a relief, and
she sank down into one of the many comfortable chairs with a feeling
of thankfulness and looked around her.

The next moment a servant entered with a lamp, covered with a gold
silk shade. She placed it on a table near the fire, and lit a few
candles, which stood on carved brackets round the walls. Then Prissie
saw what made her forget Miss Heath and her shyness and all else-- a
great bank of flowers, which stretched across one complete angle of
the room. There were some roses, some chrysanthemums, some geraniums.
They were cunningly arranged in pots, but had the effect at a little
distance of a gay, tropical garden. Prissie rushed to them, knelt down
by a tall, white Japanese chrysanthemum and buried her face in its
long, wavy petals.

Prissie had never seen such flowers, and she loved all flowers. Her
heart swelled with a kind of wonder; and when, the next moment, she
felt a light and very soft kiss on her forehead she was scarcely
surprised.

"My dear child," said Miss Heath, "I am so sorry I was not in the room
when you came in; but never mind, my flowers gave you welcome."

"Yes," said Prissie, standing up pale and with a luminous light in her
eyes.

"You love flowers?" said Miss Heath, giving her a keen glance.

"Oh, yes; but I did not know-- I could not guess-- that any flower
could be as beautiful as this," and she touched the great white
chrysanthemum with her finger.

"Yes, and there are some flowers even more wonderful. Have you ever
seen orchids?"

"No."

"Then you have something to live for. Orchids are ordinary flowers
spiritualized. They have a glamor over them. We have good orchid shows
sometimes at Kingsdene. I will take you to the next."

The servant brought in tea, and Miss Heath placed Prissie in a
comfortable chair, where she was neither oppressed by lamplight nor
firelight.

"A shy little soul like this will love the shade," she said to
herself. "For all her plainness this is no ordinary girl, and I mean
to draw her out presently. What a brow she has, and what a light came
into her eyes when she looked at my white chrysanthemum."

There came a tap at the door, and Maggie Oliphant entered, looking
fresh and bright. She gave Prissie an affectionate glance and nod and
then began to busy herself, helping Miss Heath with the tea. During
the meal a little pleasant murmur of conversation was kept up. Miss
Heath and Maggie exchanged ideas. They even entered upon one or two
delicate little skirmishes, each cleverly arguing a slight point on
which they appeared to differ. Maggie could make smart repartees, and
Miss Heath could parry her graceful young adversary's home thrusts
with excellent effect.

They talked of one or two books which were then under discussion; they
said a little about music and a word or two with regard to the
pictures which were just then causing talk among the art critics in
London. It was all new to Prissie, this "light, airy, nothing" kind of
talk. It was not study; could it be classed under the head of
recreation?

Prissie was accustomed to classify everything, but she did not know
under what head to put this pleasant conversation. She was bewildered,
puzzled. She listened without losing a word. She forgot herself
absolutely.

Miss Heath, however, who knew Maggie Oliphant, but did not know
Prissie, was observant of the silent young stranger through all the
delights of her pleasant talk. Almost imperceptibly she got Prissie to
say a word or two. She paused when she saw a question in Prissie's
eyes, and her timid and gentle words were listened to with deference.
By slow degrees Maggie was the silent one and Priscilla and Miss Heath
held the field between them.

"No, I have never been properly educated," Prissie was saying. "I have
never gone to a high school. I don't do things in the regular fashion.
I was so afraid I should not be able to pass the entrance examination
for St. Benet's. I was delighted when I found that I had done so."

"You passed the examination creditably," said Miss Heath. "I have
looked through your papers. Your answers were not stereotyped. They
were much better; they were thoughtful. Whoever has educated you, you
have been well taught. You can think."

"Oh, yes, my dear friend, Mr. Hayes, always said that was the first
thing."

"Ah, that accounts for it," replied Miss Heath. "You have had the
advantage of listening to a cultivated man's conversation. You ought
to do very well here. What do you mean to take up?"

"Oh, everything. I can't know too much."

Miss Heath laughed and looked at Maggie. Maggie was lying back in her
easy-chair, her head resting luxuriously against a dark velvet
cushion. She was tapping the floor slightly with her small foot; her
eyes were fixed on Prissie. When Miss Heath laughed Maggie echoed the
sound, but both laughs were in the sweetest sympathy.

"You must not overwork yourself, my dear," said Miss Heath. "That
would be a very false beginning. I think-- I am sure-- that you have
an earnest and ardent nature, but you must avoid an extreme which will
only end in disaster."

Prissie frowned.

"What do you mean?" she said. "I have come here to study. It has been
done with such, such difficulty. It would be cruel to waste a moment.
I mustn't; it wouldn't be right. You can't mean what you say."

Miss Heath was silent. She thought it kinder to look away from
Prissie. After a moment she said in a voice which she on purpose made
intensely quiet and matter of fact:

"Many girls come to St. Benet's, Miss Peel, who are, I fancy,
circumstanced like you. Their friends find it difficult to send them
here, but they make the sacrifice, sometimes in one way, sometimes in
another-- and the girls come. They know it is their duty to study;
they have an ulterior motive, which underlies everything else. They
know by and by they must pay back."

"Oh, yes," said Priscilla, starting forward and a flush coming into
her face. "I know that-- that is what it is for. To pay back
worthily-- to give back a thousandfold what you have received. Those
girls can't be idle, can they?" she added in a gentle, piteous sort of
way.

"My dear, there have been several such girls at St. Benet's, and none
of them has been idle; they have been best and first among our
students. Many of them have done more than well-- many of them have
brought fame to St. Benet's. They are in the world now and earning
honorable livelihoods as teachers or in other departments where
cultivated women can alone take the field. These girls are all paying
back a thousandfold those who have helped them."

"Yes," said Prissie.

"You would like to follow their example?"

"Oh, yes; please tell me about them."

"Some of them were like you and thought they would take up
everything-- everything I mean in the scholastic line. They filled
their days with lectures and studied into the short hours of the
night. Maggie, dear, please tell Miss Peel about Good-night and
Good-morning."

"They were such a funny pair," said Maggie. "They had rooms next to
each other in our corridor, Miss Peel. They were both studying for a
tripos, and during the term before the examination one went to bed at
four and one got up at four. Mary Joliffe used to go into Susan
Martin's room and say good morning to her. Susan used to raise such a
white face and say, 'Good night, my dear.' Well, poor things, neither
of them got a tripos; they worked too hard."

"The simple English of all this," said Miss Heath, "is that the
successful girl here is the girl who takes advantage of the whole life
mapped out for her, who divides her time between play and work, who
joins the clubs and enters heartily into the social life of the place.
Yes," she added, looking suddenly full at Priscilla, "these last words
of mine may seem strange to you, dear. Believe me, however, they are
true. But I know," she added with a sigh, "that it takes rather an old
person to believe in the education of play."

Priscilla looked unconvinced.

"I must do what you wish," she said, "for, of course, you ought to
know."

"What a lame kind of assent, my love! Maggie, you will have to gently
lure this young person into the paths of frivolity. I promise you, my
dear, that you shall be a very cultivated woman some day; but I only
promise this if you will take advantage of all sides of the pleasant
life here. Now tell me what are your particular tastes? What branch of
study do you like best?"

"I love Latin and Greek better than anything else in the world."

"Do you truly?" said Maggie, suddenly starting forward. "Then in one
thing we have a great sympathy. What have you read? Do tell me."

Miss Heath stepped directly into the background. The two girls
conversed for a long time together.

  CHAPTER X

 ST. HILDA'S CHAPEL

"HERE we are now," said Maggie Oliphant, touching her young companion;
"we are in good time; this is the outer chapel. Yes, I know all that
you are thinking, but you need not speak; I did not want to speak the
first time I came to St. Hilda's. Just follow me quickly. I know this
verger; he will put us into two stalls; then it will be perfect."

"Yes," answered Priscilla. She spoke in an awed kind of voice. The
cool effect of the dark oak, combined with the richness of the many
shafts of colored light coming from the magnificent windows, gave her
own face a curious expression. Was it caused by emotion or by the
strange lights in the chapel?

Maggie glanced at her, touched her hand for a moment and then hurried
forward to her seat.

The girls were accommodated with stalls just above the choir. They
could read out of the college prayer-books and had a fine view of the
