steel runners, curled beautifully at the ends.  For the Gnome King had
children of his own, who, living in the hollows under the earth, in
mines and caverns, needed something to amuse them.

In three days the steel runners were ready, and when Claus brought the
playthings to the Gnome King, his Majesty was so greatly pleased with
them that he presented Claus with a string of sweet-toned sleigh-bells,
in addition to the runners.

"These will please Glossie and Flossie," said Claus, as he jingled the
bells and listened to their merry sound.  "But I should have two
strings of bells, one for each deer."

"Bring me another trumpet and a toy cat," replied the King, "and you
shall have a second string of bells like the first."

"It is a bargain!" cried Claus, and he went home again for the toys.

The new sledge was carefully built, the Knooks bringing plenty of
strong but thin boards to use in its construction.  Claus made a high,
rounding dash-board to keep off the snow cast behind by the fleet hoofs
of the deer; and he made high sides to the platform so that many toys
could be carried, and finally he mounted the sledge upon the slender
steel runners made by the Gnome King.

It was certainly a handsome sledge, and big and roomy.  Claus painted
it in bright colors, although no one was likely to see it during his
midnight journeys, and when all was finished he sent for Glossie and
Flossie to come and look at it.

The deer admired the sledge, but gravely declared it was too big and
heavy for them to draw.

"We might pull it over the snow, to be sure," said Glossie; "but we
would not pull it fast enough to enable us to visit the far-away cities
and villages and return to the Forest by daybreak."

"Then I must add two more deer to my team," declared Claus, after a
moment's thought.

"The Knook Prince allowed you as many as ten.  Why not use them all?"
asked Flossie.  "Then we could speed like the lightning and leap to the
highest roofs with ease."

"A team of ten reindeer!" cried Claus, delightedly.  "That will be
splendid.  Please return to the Forest at once and select eight other
deer as like yourselves as possible.  And you must all eat of the casa
plant, to become strong, and of the grawle plant, to become fleet of
foot, and of the marbon plant, that you may live long to accompany me
on my journeys.  Likewise it will be well for you to bathe in the Pool
of Nares, which the lovely Queen Zurline declares will render you
rarely beautiful.  Should you perform these duties faithfully there is
no doubt that on next Christmas Eve my ten reindeer will be the most
powerful and beautiful steeds the world has ever seen!"

So Glossie and Flossie went to the Forest to choose their mates, and
Claus began to consider the question of a harness for them all.

In the end he called upon Peter Knook for assistance, for Peter's heart
is as kind as his body is crooked, and he is remarkably shrewd, as
well.  And Peter agreed to furnish strips of tough leather for the
harness.

This leather was cut from the skins of lions that had reached such an
advanced age that they died naturally, and on one side was tawny hair
while the other side was cured to the softness of velvet by the deft
Knooks.  When Claus received these strips of leather he sewed them
neatly into a harness for the ten reindeer, and it proved strong and
serviceable and lasted him for many years.

The harness and sledge were prepared at odd times, for Claus devoted
most of his days to the making of toys.  These were now much better
than the first ones had been, for the immortals often came to his house
to watch him work and to offer suggestions.  It was Necile's idea to
make some of the dolls say "papa" and "mama."  It was a thought of the
Knooks to put a squeak inside the lambs, so that when a child squeezed
them they would say "baa-a-a-a!"  And the Fairy Queen advised Claus to
put whistles in the birds, so they could be made to sing, and wheels on
the horses, so children could draw them around.  Many animals perished
in the Forest, from one cause or another, and their fur was brought to
Claus that he might cover with it the small images of beasts he made
for playthings.  A merry Ryl suggested that Claus make a donkey with a
nodding head, which he did, and afterward found that it amused the
little ones immensely.  And so the toys grew in beauty and
attractiveness every day, until they were the wonder of even the
immortals.

When another Christmas Eve drew near there was a monster load of
beautiful gifts for the children ready to be loaded upon the big
sledge.  Claus filled three sacks to the brim, and tucked every corner
of the sledge-box full of toys besides.

Then, at twilight, the ten reindeer appeared and Flossie introduced
them all to Claus.  They were Racer and Pacer, Reckless and Speckless,
Fearless and Peerless, and Ready and Steady, who, with Glossie and
Flossie, made up the ten who have traversed the world these hundreds of
years with their generous master.  They were all exceedingly beautiful,
with slender limbs, spreading antlers, velvety dark eyes and smooth
coats of fawn color spotted with white.

Claus loved them at once, and has loved them ever since, for they are
loyal friends and have rendered him priceless service.

The new harness fitted them nicely and soon they were all fastened to
the sledge by twos, with Glossie and Flossie in the lead.  These wore
the strings of sleigh-bells, and were so delighted with the music they
made that they kept prancing up and down to make the bells ring.

Claus now seated himself in the sledge, drew a warm robe over his knees
and his fur cap over his ears, and cracked his long whip as a signal to
start.

Instantly the ten leaped forward and were away like the wind, while
jolly Claus laughed gleefully to see them run and shouted a song in his
big, hearty voice:

      "With a ho, ho, ho!
      And a ha, ha, ha!
  And a ho, ho, ha, ha, hee!
      Now away we go
      O'er the frozen snow,
  As merry as we can be!

      There are many joys
      In our load of toys,
  As many a child will know;
      We'll scatter them wide
      On our wild night ride
  O'er the crisp and sparkling snow!"


Now it was on this same Christmas Eve that little Margot and her
brother Dick and her cousins Ned and Sara, who were visiting at
Margot's house, came in from making a snow man, with their clothes
damp, their mittens dripping and their shoes and stockings wet through
and through.  They were not scolded, for Margot's mother knew the snow
was melting, but they were sent early to bed that their clothes might
be hung over chairs to dry.  The shoes were placed on the red tiles of
the hearth, where the heat from the hot embers would strike them, and
the stockings were carefully hung in a row by the chimney, directly
over the fireplace.  That was the reason Santa Claus noticed them when
he came down the chimney that night and all the household were fast
asleep.  He was in a tremendous hurry and seeing the stockings all
belonged to children he quickly stuffed his toys into them and dashed
up the chimney again, appearing on the roof so suddenly that the
reindeer were astonished at his agility.

"I wish they would all hang up their stockings," he thought, as he
drove to the next chimney.  "It would save me a lot of time and I could
then visit more children before daybreak."

When Margot and Dick and Ned and Sara jumped out of bed next morning
and ran downstairs to get their stockings from the fireplace they were
filled with delight to find the toys from Santa Claus inside them.  In
face, I think they found more presents in their stockings than any
other children of that city had received, for Santa Claus was in a
hurry and did not stop to count the toys.

Of course they told all their little friends about it, and of course
every one of them decided to hang his own stockings by the fireplace
the next Christmas Eve.  Even Bessie Blithesome, who made a visit to
that city with her father, the great Lord of Lerd, heard the story from
the children and hung her own pretty stockings by the chimney when she
returned home at Christmas time.

On his next trip Santa Claus found so many stockings hung up in
anticipation of his visit that he could fill them in a jiffy and be
away again in half the time required to hunt the children up and place
the toys by their bedsides.

The custom grew year after year, and has always been a great help to
Santa Claus.  And, with so many children to visit, he surely needs all
the help we are able to give him.



12.  The First Christmas Tree

Claus had always kept his promise to the Knooks by returning to the
Laughing Valley by daybreak, but only the swiftness of his reindeer has
enabled him to do this, for he travels over all the world.

He loved his work and he loved the brisk night ride on his sledge and
the gay tinkle of the sleigh-bells.  On that first trip with the ten
reindeer only Glossie and Flossie wore bells; but each year thereafter
for eight years Claus carried presents to the children of the Gnome
King, and that good-natured monarch gave him in return a string of
bells at each visit, so that finally every one of the ten deer was
supplied, and you may imagine what a merry tune the bells played as the
sledge sped over the snow.

The children's stockings were so long that it required a great many
toys to fill them, and soon Claus found there were other things besides
toys that children love.  So he sent some of the Fairies, who were
always his good friends, into the Tropics, from whence they returned
with great bags full of oranges and bananas which they had plucked from
the trees.  And other Fairies flew to the wonderful Valley of
Phunnyland, where delicious candies and bonbons grow thickly on the
bushes, and returned laden with many boxes of sweetmeats for the little
ones.  These things Santa Claus, on each Christmas Eve, placed in the
long stockings, together with his toys, and the children were glad to
get them, you may be sure.

There are also warm countries where there is no snow in winter, but
Claus and his reindeer visited them as well as the colder climes, for
there were little wheels inside the runners of his sledge which
permitted it to run as smoothly over bare ground as on the snow.  And
the children who lived in the warm countries learned to know the name
of Santa Claus as well as those who lived nearer to the Laughing Valley.

Once, just as the reindeer were ready to start on their yearly trip, a
Fairy came to Claus and told him of three little children who lived
beneath a rude tent of skins on a broad plain where there were no trees
whatever.  These poor babies were miserable and unhappy, for their
parents were ignorant people who neglected them sadly.  Claus resolved
to visit these children before he returned home, and during his ride he
picked up the bushy top of a pine tree which the wind had broken off
and placed it in his sledge.

It was nearly morning when the deer stopped before the lonely tent of
skins where the poor children lay asleep.  Claus at once planted the
bit of pine tree in the sand and stuck many candles on the branches.
Then he hung some of his prettiest toys on the tree, as well as several
bags of candies.  It did not take long to do all this, for Santa Claus
works quickly, and when all was ready he lighted the candles and,
thrusting his head in at the opening of the tent, he shouted:

"Merry Christmas, little ones!"

With that he leaped into his sledge and was out of sight before the
children, rubbing the sleep from their eyes, could come out to see who
had called them.

You can imagine the wonder and joy of those little ones, who had never
in their lives known a real pleasure before, when they saw the tree,
sparkling with lights that shone brilliant in the gray dawn and hung
with toys enough to make them happy for years to come!  They joined
hands and danced around the tree, shouting and laughing, until they
were obliged to pause for breath.  And their parents, also, came out to
look and wonder, and thereafter had more respect and consideration for
their children, since Santa Claus had honored them with such beautiful
gifts.

The idea of the Christmas tree pleased Claus, and so the following year
he carried many of them in his sledge and set them up in the homes of
poor people who seldom saw trees, and placed candles and toys on the
branches.  Of course he could not carry enough trees in one load of all
who wanted them, but in some homes the fathers were able to get trees
and have them all ready for Santa Claus when he arrived; and these the
good Claus always decorated as prettily as possible and hung with toys
enough for all the children who came to see the tree lighted.

These novel ideas and the generous manner in which they were carried
out made the children long for that one night in the year when their
friend Santa Claus should visit them, and as such anticipation is very
pleasant and comforting the little ones gleaned much happiness by
wondering what would happen when Santa Claus next arrived.

Perhaps you remember that stern Baron Braun who once drove Claus from
his castle and forbade him to visit his children?  Well, many years
afterward, when the old Baron was dead and his son ruled in his place,
the new Baron Braun came to the house of Claus with his train of
knights and pages and henchmen and, dismounting from his charger, bared
his head humbly before the friend of children.

"My father did not know your goodness and worth," he said, "and
therefore threatened to hang you from the castle walls.  But I have
children of my own, who long for a visit from Santa Claus, and I have
come to beg that you will favor them hereafter as you do other
children."

Claus was pleased with this speech, for Castle Braun was the only place
he had never visited, and he gladly promised to bring presents to the
Baron's children the next Christmas Eve.

The Baron went away contented, and Claus kept his promise faithfully.

Thus did this man, through very goodness, conquer the hearts of all;
and it is no wonder he was ever merry and gay, for there was no home in
the wide world where he was not welcomed more royally than any king.




OLD AGE



1.  The Mantle of Immortality

And now we come to a turning-point in the career of Santa Claus, and it
is my duty to relate the most remarkable that has happened since the
world began or mankind was created.

We have followed the life of Claus from the time he was found a
helpless infant by the Wood-Nymph Necile and reared to manhood in the
great Forest of Burzee.  And we know how he began to make toys for
children and how, with the assistance and goodwill of the immortals, he
was able to distribute them to the little ones throughout the world.

For many years he carried on this noble work; for the simple,
hard-working life he led gave him perfect health and strength.  And
doubtless a man can live longer in the beautiful Laughing Valley, where
there are no cares and everything is peaceful and merry, than in any
other part of the world.

But when many years had rolled away Santa Claus grew old.  The long
beard of golden brown that once covered his cheeks and chin gradually
became gray, and finally turned to pure white.  His hair was white,
too, and there were wrinkles at the corners of his eyes, which showed
plainly when he laughed.  He had never been a very tall man, and now he
became fat, and waddled very much like a duck when he walked.  But in
spite of these things he remained as lively as ever, and was just as
jolly and gay, and his kind eyes sparkled as brightly as they did that
first day when he came to the Laughing Valley.

Yet a time is sure to come when every mortal who has grown old and
lived his life is required to leave this world for another; so it is no
wonder that, after Santa Claus had driven his reindeer on many and many
a Christmas Eve, those stanch friends finally whispered among
themselves that they had probably drawn his sledge for the last time.

Then all the Forest of Burzee became sad and all the Laughing Valley
was hushed; for every living thing that had known Claus had used to
love him and to brighten at the sound of his footsteps or the notes of
his merry whistle.

No doubt the old man's strength was at last exhausted, for he made no
more toys, but lay on his bed as in a dream.

The Nymph Necile, she who had reared him and been his foster-mother,
was still youthful and strong and beautiful, and it seemed to her but a
short time since this aged, gray-bearded man had lain in her arms and
smiled on her with his innocent, baby lips.

In this is shown the difference between mortals and immortals.

It was fortunate that the great Ak came to the Forest at this time.
Necile sought him with troubled eyes and told him of the fate that
threatened their friend Claus.

At once the Master became grave, and he leaned upon his ax and stroked
his grizzled beard thoughtfully for many minutes.  Then suddenly he
stood up straight, and poised his powerful head with firm resolve, and
stretched out his great right arm as if determined on doing some mighty
deed.  For a thought had come to him so grand in its conception that
all the world might well bow before the Master Woodsman and honor his
name forever!

It is well known that when the great Ak once undertakes to do a thing
he never hesitates an instant.  Now he summoned his fleetest
messengers, and sent them in a flash to many parts of the earth.  And
when they were gone he turned to the anxious Necile and comforted her,
saying:

"Be of good heart, my child; our friend still lives.  And now run to
your Queen and tell her that I have summoned a council of all the
immortals of the world to meet with me here in Burzee this night.  If
they obey, and harken unto my words, Claus will drive his reindeer for
countless ages yet to come."

At midnight there was a wondrous scene in the ancient Forest of Burzee,
where for the first time in many centuries the rulers of the immortals
who inhabit the earth were gathered together.

There was the Queen of the Water Sprites, whose beautiful form was as
clear as crystal but continually dripped water on the bank of moss
where she sat.  And beside her was the King of the Sleep Fays, who
carried a wand from the end of which a fine dust fell all around, so
that no mortal could keep awake long enough to see him, as mortal eyes
were sure to close in sleep as soon as the dust filled them.  And next
to him sat the Gnome King, whose people inhabit all that region under
the earth's surface, where they guard the precious metals and the jewel
stones that lie buried in rock and ore.  At his right hand stood the
King of the Sound Imps, who had wings on his feet, for his people are
swift to carry all sounds that are made.  When they are busy they carry
the sounds but short distances, for there are many of them; but
sometimes they speed with the sounds to places miles and miles away
from where they are made.  The King of the Sound Imps had an anxious
and careworn face, for most people have no consideration for his Imps
and, especially the boys and girls, make a great many unnecessary
sounds which the Imps are obliged to carry when they might be better
employed.

The next in the circle of immortals was the King of the Wind Demons,
slender of frame, restless and uneasy at being confined to one place
for even an hour.  Once in a while he would leave his place and circle
around the glade, and each time he did this the Fairy Queen was obliged
to untangle the flowing locks of her golden hair and tuck them back of
her pink ears.  But she did not complain, for it was not often that the
King of the Wind Demons came into the heart of the Forest.  After the
Fairy Queen, whose home you know was in old Burzee, came the King of
the Light Elves, with his two Princes, Flash and Twilight, at his back.
He never went anywhere without his Princes, for they were so
mischievous that he dared not let them wander alone.

Prince Flash bore a lightning-bolt in his right hand and a horn of
gunpowder in his left, and his bright eyes roved constantly around, as
