twice a year, for a stay of two weeks each time. He sold some patent
medicines, and had in his room several skulls and also a skeleton strung
on wires.

"That doctor is away," said our hero. "I wonder if we can't smuggle the
skulls and the skeleton into Mr. Chaster's room?"

"Just the cheese!" cried the bell boy, enthusiastically. "And let us rub
the bones with some of those matches that glow in the dark!"

The plan was talked over, and watching their chance the two transferred
the skeleton and the skulls to the apartment occupied by Wilberforce
Chaster. Then they rubbed phosphorus on the bones, and hung them upon
long strings, running over a doorway into the next room.

That evening Wilberforce Chaster remained in the hotel parlor until ten
o 'clock. Then he marched off to his room in his usual ill humor. The
gas was lit and he went to bed without delay.

As soon as the light went out and they heard the man retire, Joe and
the bell boy began to groan in an ominous manner. As they did so, they
worked the strings to which the skulls and the skeleton were attached,
causing them to dance up and down in the center of the old man's room.

Hearing the groans, Wilberforce Chaster sat up in bed and listened. Then
he peered around in the darkness.

"Ha! what is that?" he gasped, as he caught sight of the skulls. "Am I
dreaming--or is that--Oh!"

He started and began to shake from head to foot, for directly in front
of him was the skeleton, moving up and down in a jerky fashion and
glowing with a dull fire. His hair seemed to stand on end. He dove under
the coverings of the bed.

"The room is haunted!" he moaned. "Was ever such a thing seen before!
This is wretched! Whatever shall I do?"

The groans continued, and presently he gave another look from under the
bed clothes. The skeleton appeared to be coming nearer. He gave a loud
yell of anguish.

"Go away! Go away! Oh, I am haunted by a ghost! This is awful! I cannot
stand it!"

He fairly tumbled out of bed and caught up his clothing in a heap. Then,
wrapped in some comfortables, he burst out of the room and ran down the
hallway like a person possessed of the evil spirits.

"Come be quick, or we'll get caught!" whispered Joe, and ran into the
room, followed by the bell boy. In a trice they pulled loose the strings
that held the skulls and the skeleton, and restored the things to the
doctor's room from which they had been taken. Then they went below by a
back stairs.

The whole hotel was in an alarm, and soon Mr. Mallison came upon the
scene.

"What is the meaning of this?" he demanded, severely, of Wilberforce
Chaster.

"The meaning is, sir, that your hotel is haunted," was the answer, which
startled all who heard it.



CHAPTER XII.


THE PARTICULARS OF A SWINDLE.


"This hotel haunted?" gasped the proprietor. "Sir, you are mistaken.
Such a thing is impossible."

"It is true," insisted Mr. Wilberforce Chaster. "I shall not stay here
another night."

"What makes you think it is haunted?"

"There is a ghost in my room."

"Oh!" shrieked a maid who had come on the scene. "A ghost! I shall not
stay either!"

"What kind of a ghost?" demanded Andrew Mallison.

"A--er--a skeleton--and some skulls! I saw them with my own eyes," went
on the victim. "Come and see them for yourself."

"This is nonsense," said the hotel proprietor. "I will go and convince
you that you are mistaken."

He led the way and half a dozen followed, including Wilberforce Chaster,
who kept well to the rear. Just as the party reached the door of the
apartment Joe and the bell boy came up.

Without hesitation Andrew Mallison threw open the door of the room and
looked inside. Of course he saw nothing out of the ordinary.

"Where is your ghost?" he demanded. "I see nothing of it."

"Don't--don't you see--er--a skeleton?" demanded the man who had been
victimized.

"I do not."

Trembling in every limb Wilberforce Chaster came forward and peered into
the room.

"Well?" demanded the hotel proprietor, after a pause.

"I--I certainly saw them."

"Then where are they now?"

"I--I don't know."

By this time others were crowding into the apartment. All gazed around,
and into the clothes closet, but found nothing unusual.

"You must be the victim of some hallucination, sir," said the hotel
proprietor, severely.

He hated to have anything occur which might give his establishment a bad
reputation.

"No, sir, I saw the things with my own eyes."

The matter was talked over for several minutes longer and then the hired
help was ordered away.

"I shall not stay in this room," insisted Wilberforce Chaster.

"You need not remain in the hotel," answered Andrew Mallison, quickly.
"You can leave at once. You have alarmed the whole establishment
needlessly."

Some warm words followed, and the upshot of the matter was that the
fussy old boarder had to pack his things and seek another hotel that
very night.

"I am glad to get rid of him," said the hotel proprietor, after
Wilberforce Chaster had departed. "He was making trouble all the time."

"We fixed him, didn't we?" said the bell boy to Joe.

"I hope it teaches him a lesson to be more considerate in the future,"
answered our hero.

Several days passed and Joe had quite a few parties to take out on
the lake. The season was now drawing to a close, and our hero began to
wonder what he had best do when boating was over.

"I wonder if I couldn't strike something pretty good in Philadelphia?"
he asked himself. The idea of going to one of the big cities appealed to
him strongly.

One afternoon, on coming in from a trip across the lake, Joe found
Andrew Mallison in conversation with Mr. Maurice Vane, who had arrived
at the hotel scarcely an hour before. The city man was evidently both
excited and disappointed.

"Here is the boy now," said the hotel proprietor, and called Joe up.

"Well, young man, I guess you have hit the truth," were Maurice Vane's
first words.

"About those other fellows?" asked our hero, quickly.

"That's it."

"Did they swindle you?"

"They did."

"By selling you some worthless mining stocks?"

"Yes. If you will, I'd like you to tell me all you can about those two
men."

"I will," answered Joe, and told of the strange meeting at the old lodge
and of what had followed. Maurice Vane drew a long breath and shook his
head sadly.

"I was certainly a green one, to be taken in so slyly," said he.

"How did they happen to hear of you?" questioned Joe, curiously.

"I answered an advertisement in the daily paper," said Maurice Vane.
"Then this man, Caven, or whatever his right name may be, came to me and
said he had a certain plan for making a good deal of money. All I had to
do was to invest a certain amount and inside of a few days I could clear
fifteen or twenty thousand dollars."

"That was surely a nice proposition," said Joe, with a smile.

"I agreed to go into the scheme if it was all plain sailing and then
this Caven gave me some of the details. He said there was a demand for a
certain kind of mining shares. He knew an old miner who was sick and
who was willing to sell the shares he possessed for a reasonable sum
of money. The plan was to buy the shares and then sell them to another
party--a broker--at a big advance in price."

"That was simple enough," put in Andrew Mallison.

"Caven took me to see a man who called himself a broker. He had an
elegant office and looked prosperous. He told us he would be glad to buy
certain mining shares at a certain figure if he could get them in the
near future. He said a client was red-hot after the shares. I questioned
him closely and he appeared to be a truthful man. He said some folks
wanted to buy out the mine and consolidate it with another mine close
by."

"And then you came here and bought the stock of Malone?" queried Joe.

"Yes. Caven made me promise to give him half the profits and I agreed.
I came here, and as you know, Malone, or Ball, or whatever his name is,
pretended to be very sick and in need of money. He set his price, and I
came back with the cash and took the mining stock. I was to meet Caven,
alias Anderson, the next day and go to the broker with him, but Caven
did not appear. Then I grew suspicious and went to see the broker alone.
The man was gone and the office locked up. After that I asked some other
brokers about the stock, and they told me it was not worth five cents on
the dollar."

"Isn't there any such mine at all?" asked Joe.

"Oh, yes, there is such a mine, but it was abandoned two years ago,
after ten thousand dollars had been sunk in it. They said it paid so
little that it was not worth considering."

"That is certainly too bad for you," said Joe. "And you can't find any
trace of Caven or Malone?"

"No, both of the rascals have disappeared completely. I tried to trace
Caven and his broker friend in Philadelphia but it was of no use. More
than likely they have gone to some place thousands of miles away."

"Yes, and probably this Ball, or Malone, has joined them," put in Andrew
Mallison. "Mr. Vane, I am exceedingly sorry for you."

"I am sorry for myself, but I deserve my loss, for being such a fool,"
went on the victim.

"Have you notified the police?" asked Joe.

"Oh, yes, and I have hired a private detective to do what he can, too.
But I am afraid my money is gone for good."

"You might go and reopen the mine, Mr. Vane."

"Thank you, but I have lost enough already, without throwing good money
after bad, as the saying is."

"It may be that that detective will find the swindlers, sooner or
later."

"Such a thing is, of course, possible, but I am not over sanguine."

"I am afraid your money is gone for good," broke in Andrew Mallison. "I
wish I could help you, but I don't see how I can."

The matter was talked over for a good hour, and all three visited the
room Malone had occupied, which had been vacant ever since. But a hunt
around revealed nothing of value, and they returned to the office.

"I can do nothing more for you, Mr. Vane," said Andrew Mallison.

"I wish I could do something," said Joe. Something about Maurice Vane
was very attractive to him.

"If you ever hear of these rascals let me know," continued the hotel
proprietor.

"I will do so," was the reply.

With that the conversation on the subject closed. Maurice Vane remained
at the hotel overnight and left by the early train on the following
morning.



CHAPTER XIII.


OFF FOR THE CITY.


"Joe, our season ends next Saturday."

"I know it, Mr. Mallison."

"We are going to close the house on Tuesday. It won't pay to keep open
after our summer boarders leave."

"I know that, too."

"Have you any idea what you intend to do?" went on the hotel proprietor.
He was standing down by the dock watching Joe clean out one of the
boats.

"I'm thinking of going to Philadelphia."

"On a visit?"

"No, sir, to try my luck."

"Oh, I see. It's a big city, my lad."

"I know it, but, somehow, I feel I might do better there than in such a
town as this,--and I am getting tired of hanging around the lake."

"There is more money in Philadelphia than there is here, that is
certain, Joe. But you can't always get hold of it. The big cities are
crowded with people trying to obtain situations."

"I'm sure I can find something to do, Mr. Mallison. And, by the way,
when I leave, will you give me a written recommendation?"

"Certainly. You have done well since you came here. But you had better
think twice before going to Philadelphia."

"I've thought it over more than twice. I don't expect the earth, but I
feel that I can get something to do before my money runs out."

"How much money have you saved up?"

"I've got fifty-six dollars, and I'm going to sell my boat for four
dollars."

"Well, sixty dollars isn't such a bad capital. I have known men to start
out with a good deal less. When I left home I had but twenty dollars and
an extra suit of clothes."

"Did you come from a country place?"

"No, I came from New York. Times were hard and I couldn't get a single
thing to do. I went to Paterson, New Jersey, and got work in a silk
mill. From there I went to Camden, and then to Philadelphia. From
Philadelphia I came here and have been here ever since."

"You have been prosperous."

"Fairly so, although I don't make as much money as some of the hotel men
in the big cities. But then they take larger risks. A few years ago a
hotel friend of mine opened a big hotel in Atlantic City. He hoped to
make a small fortune, but he was not located in the right part of the
town and at the end of the season he found himself just fifteen thousand
dollars out of pocket. Now he has sold out and is running a country
hotel fifty miles west of here. He doesn't hope to make so much, but his
business is much safer."

"I'm afraid it will be a long time before I get money enough to run a
hotel," laughed our hero.

"Would you like to run one?"

"I don't know. I'd like to educate myself first."

"Don't you study some now? I have seen you with some arithmetics and
histories."

"Yes, sir, I study a little every day. You see, I never had much
schooling, and I don't want to grow up ignorant, if I can help it."

"That is the proper spirit, lad," answered Andrew Mallison, warmly.
"Learn all you possibly can. It will always be the means of doing you
good."

The conversation took place on Thursday and two days later the season at
the summer hotel came to an end and the last of the boarders took their
departure. Monday was spent in putting things in order, and by Tuesday
afternoon work around the place came to an end, and all the help was
paid off.
