"No."

"What shall I say?"

"That I don't remember the name, and decline to see him."

"Won't that increase his suspicions?"

"I can't help it."

"Very well."

Ben went below; but thought he might as well put off the interview.
It was not till afternoon that Mr. Campbell met him again.

"Did you deliver my card, boy?" he asked.

"My name is Benjamin," returned our hero, who did not fancy the
manner of address.

"Very well. Did you deliver my card, Benjamin?"

"Yes, sir."

"What did your cousin say?"

"That she knew no gentleman or family of your name."

"I did not expect she would remember; but I have reasons for asking
an interview."

"You mustn't be offended, sir; but she declines to meet a stranger."

Mr. Campbell was baffled.

"She mistakes my motive," he said, in a tone expressive of
annoyance. "How long do you stay here?"

"I can't say, sir," said Ben coldly.

Mr. Campbell bit his lip and walked away. He did not fancy being
foiled by a boy. It occurred to him, however, that by waiting
patiently he might see the young lady at dinner. He kept watch,
therefore, till he saw Ben entering the dining-room, and then,
entering himself, secured a seat near-by. But the young lady,
greatly to his chagrin, did not appear. Ben observed his vigilant
watch, and after dinner reported to Miss Sinclair.

The young lady smiled.

"I have thought of a way to deceive him and quiet his suspicions,"
she said.

Ben looked curious.

"If I remain away from the table he will feel sure that I am his
ward."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Listen to my plan, then. I have the New York Herald here, with half
a column of advertisements of seamtresses. I will give you a list of
three, and you shall engage one to be here early to-morrow morning.
Select one with a figure as much like mine as possible."

"All right!"

"I see you look puzzled," said Miss Sinclair, smiling.

"I am, a little; I don't know what good that will do."

"Then I will explain. I shall dress the seamstress in one of my own
dresses, and let her go to the table with you. Mr. Campbell will
naturally suppose that she is Miss Ida Sinclair, and will be
satisfied."

"I see! That is splendid!" exclaimed Ben, entering with hearty
enthusiasm into the conspiracy.

It happened, luckily, that the first seamstress on whom he called
was sufficiently like Miss Sinclair in figure to justify him in
engaging her. He directed her to call at the hotel at eight the next
morning without fail. The poor girl was glad to make this
engagement, having been without employment for two weeks previous.

When she arrived, Miss Sinclair, without confiding too much in her,
made known her desire, and the girl, who had had but a scanty
breakfast, was glad to embrace the opportunity of enjoying the
hospitality of a first-class hotel. Miss Sinclair had really work
enough to employ her during the day.

When Mr. Campbell caught sight of Ben approaching the dining-room in
company with a young lady, he advanced eagerly and peered into the
young lady's face. He turned away in disappointment.

"I have made a fool of myself. It is only a common country girl. I
must look elsewhere for my ward."

Directly after breakfast Ben had the satisfaction of seeing the
obnoxious guardian depart in a hack.

"Good-by, Mr. Vernon!" he said politely. "I see you are leaving the
hotel."

"Good-by!" muttered Campbell.

"I hope you'll excuse my cousin for not seeing you?"

"I don't think she's the one I supposed," said Campbell. "It's of no
consequence."

Ben hastened to inform Miss Sinclair of her guardian's departure.

"Now the field is clear," said Ida, breathing a sigh of relief.

"I say, Ida, you managed him tip-top," said Ben admiringly. "I never
should have thought of such a plan."

Miss Sinclair smiled faintly.

"I don't like to employ deceit," she said, "but it seems necessary
to fight such an enemy with his own weapons."

"He wanted to deceive you. He put a wrong name on his card."

"That is true, Ben. I must thank you for the manner in which you
have aided me in this matter. I should not have known how to act if
I had not had you to call upon."

Ben's face brightened.

"I am glad to hear you say that, Cousin Ida," he said. "You are
spending so much money for me that I shall be glad to feel that I
have earned some of it."

"Have no trouble on that score, Ben. I foresee that you will
continue to be of great service to me. I regard the money expended
for you as well invested."

Ben heard this with satisfaction. It naturally gave him a feeling of
heightened importance when he reflected that a wealthy heiress had
selected him as her escort and right-hand man, and that she was
satisfied with her choice.

On Saturday morning Miss Sinclair and Ben went on board the
California steamer, and when the tide served, they started on their
long voyage.




CHAPTER XII.

IN SAN FRANCISCO.


Ben was not seasick, and enjoyed the novel experiences vastly. Miss
Sinclair was less fortunate. For four days she was sick and confined
to her stateroom. After that she was able to appear among the other
passengers. Ben was very attentive, and confirmed the favorable
opinion she had already formed of him.

At last the voyage came to a close. It was a bright, cheery morning
when the steamer came within sight of San Francisco. It was not a
populous and brilliant city as at present, for Ben's expedition
dates back to the year 1856, only a few years after the discovery of
gold. Still, there was a good-sized town on the site of the future
city. The numerous passengers regarded it with rejoicing hearts, and
exchanged hopeful congratulations. Probably with the exception of
Miss Sinclair, all had gone out to make or increase their fortunes.
Her fortune was already made. She had gone to enjoy personal
liberty, and to find her plighted husband.

"Well, Ben, we have nearly reached our destination," said Miss
Sinclair, as she looked earnestly in the direction of the embryo
city. "You are glad, are you not?"

"Yes, Cousin Ida," said Ben slowly.

"But you look thoughtful. Is there anything on your mind?"

"I feel sorry that I am to part from you, Cousin Ida."

"Thank you, Ben, but we are not to part permanently. You don't mean
to forsake me utterly?"

"Not if you need me," said our hero.

"I shall still require your services. You remember that I came out
here in search of a--friend?" said Miss Sinclair, hesitating.

"Yes, I know, Cousin Ida."

"I am desirous that he should know that I am in San Francisco, but,
unfortunately, though I know he is in California, I have no idea
where, or in what part of it he is to be found. Once in
communication with him, I need have no further apprehension of
interference or persecution on the part of my guardian."

"To be sure," said Ben straightforwardly. "I suppose you would marry
him?"

"That may come some time," said Miss Sinclair, smiling, "but he must
be found first."

"You will travel about, I suppose?" said Ben.

"No; I shall engage some one to travel for me. It would not be
suitable for a young lady to go from one mining-camp to another."

"Have you thought of any one you can send?" asked our hero.

"Yes," said Miss Sinclair. "He is rather young, but I shall try the
experiment."

"Do you mean me?" asked Ben quickly.

"Yes; are you willing to be my agent in the matter?"

"I should like it of all things," said Ben, with sparkling eyes.

"Then you may consider yourself engaged. The details we will discuss
presently."

"And where will you stay, Cousin Ida?"

"In San Francisco. I have become acquainted with a lady on board who
proposes to open a boarding-house in the city, or, rather, to take
charge of one already kept by her sister. In my circumstances, it
will be better for me to board with her than at a hotel. There I
shall have a secure and comfortable home, while you are exploring
the mining-districts in my interest."

"That is an excellent plan," said Ben.

"So I think."

Here the conversation was interrupted by the bustle of approaching
departure. Ben landed in the company of Miss Sinclair and Mrs.
Armstrong, and the three proceeded at once to the boarding-house,
over which the latter was in future to preside. A comfortable room
was assigned to Miss Sinclair, and a small one to Ben. They were
plainly furnished, but both enjoyed being on land once more.

Our young hero, finding that his services were not required for the
present, began to explore the city. It was composed almost wholly of
wooden houses; some but one story in height, even on the leading
streets, with here and there sand-hills, where now stand stately
piles and magnificent hotels. He ascended Telegraph Hill, which
then, as now, commanded a good view of the town and harbor; yet how
different a view from that presented now. Ben was partly pleased and
partly disappointed. Just from New York, he could not help comparing
this straggling village on the shores of the Pacific with the even
then great city on the Atlantic coast. He had heard so much of San
Francisco that he expected something more. To-day a man may journey
across the continent and find the same comfort, luxury, and
magnificence in San Francisco which he left behind him in New York.

In his explorations Ben came to a showy building which seemed a
center of attraction. It seemed well filled, and people were
constantly coming in and going out. Ben's curiosity was excited.

"What is that?" he asked of a man who lounged outside, with a
Mexican sombrero on his head and his hands thrust deep in his
pockets.

"That's the Bella Union, my chicken."

"I don't know any better now."

"Just go in there with a pocketful of gold-dust, like I did, and
you'll find out, I reckon."

"Is it a gambling-house?" inquired Ben, rather excited, for he had
heard much of such places, but never seen one.

"It's the devil's den," said the man bitterly. "I wish I'd never
seen it."

"Have you been unlucky?"

"Look here, boy, jest look at me," said the stranger. "An hour ago I
was worth a thousand dollars in gold-dust-took six months' hard work
to scrape it together at the mines-now I haven't an ounce left."

"Did you lose it there?" asked Ben, somewhat startled.

"Well, I staked it, and it's gone."

"Have you nothing left?"

"Not an ounce. I haven't enough to pay for a bed."

"What will you do for a place to sleep?" inquired Ben, to whom this
seemed an alarming state of things.

The stranger shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't worry about that," he said. "I'll stretch myself out
somewhere when night comes. I'm used to roughing it."

"Won't you get cold sleeping out of doors?" asked Ben.

The other gave a short, quick laugh.

"What do you take me for, boy? I don't look delicate, do I?"

"Not very," answered Ben, smiling.

"I've slept out under the stars pretty reg'lar for the past six
months. I only wish I was back to the mines."

"Do you think I can go in?" Ben said hesitatingly.

"Yes, youngster, there's nothin' to bender, but take a fool's
advice, and ef you've got money in your pocket, don't do it."

"You don't think I'd gamble, do you?" said Ben, horror-struck.

"I've seen youngsters smaller than you bet their pile."

"You won't catch me doing it. I am a poor boy, and have nothing to
lose."

"All right, then. You're a country boy, ain't you?"

"Yes."

"So was I once, but I've had the greenness rubbed off'n me. I was
jest such a youngster as you once. I wish I could go back twenty
years."

"You're not very old yet," said Ben, in a tone of sympathy. "Why
don't you reform?"

"No, I'm not old-only thirty-six-and I ain't so bad as I might be.
I'm a rough customer, I expect, but I wouldn't do anything downright
mean. Ef you're goin' into this den, I'll go with you. I can't take
care of myself, but mayhap I can keep you out of danger."

"Thank you, sir."

So Ben and his new acquaintance entered the famous gambling-den. It
was handsomely furnished and decorated, with a long and gaily
appointed bar, while the mirrors, pictures, glass, and silverware
excited surprise, and would rather have been expected in an older
city. There were crowds at the counter, and crowds around the
tables, and the air was heavy with the odor of Chinese punk, which
was used for cigar-lights, The tinkle of silver coin was heard at
the tables, though ounces of gold-dust were quite as commonly used
in the games of chance.

"I suppose a good deal of money is won here?" said Ben, looking
around curiously.
