down in his heart Peter thought that little Mrs. Peter was just nervous
and foolish, for he was sure that Old Man Coyote had given up and gone
away long ago.

Now of course Old Man Coyote heard those thumps, and he knew just what
they meant. He knew that he never, never could catch Peter so long as
Mrs. Peter was watching him and ready to warn Peter, So he came out of
his hiding-place with an ugly snarl and sprang toward little Mrs.
Peter just to frighten her. He laughed as he watched her run and, all
breathless, dive into the dear, Old Briar-patch, and then he trotted
away to his favorite napping-place.

As soon as Peter was sure that he was safe he started for home, and
there little Mrs. Peter scolded him soundly for being so heedless and
thoughtless.

Peter didn't have a word to say. For a long time he sat thinking and
thinking, every once in a while scratching his head as if puzzled.
Little Mrs. Peter noticed it.

"What's the matter with you, Peter?" she asked finally.

"I'm just studying what Old Man Coyote means by telling me one day that
he is my friend, and proving it by doing me a good turn, and then trying
to catch me the very next time he sees me. I don't understand it," said
Peter, shaking his head.

"Oh, you dear old stupid!" replied little Mrs. Peter. "Now, you listen
to me. You did Old Man Coyote a good turn and he paid you back by doing
you a good turn. That made you even, didn't it?"

Peter nodded.

"Well, then you are right back where you started from, and Old Man
Coyote doesn't see any reason why he should treat you any differently
than at first, and I don't see why he should either, when I come to
think it over. I tell you what, Peter, the thing for you to do is to
keep doing good turns to Old Man Coyote so that he will always be in
debt to you. Then he will always be your friend."

As little Mrs. Peter stopped speaking, Peter sprang to his feet. "The
very thing!" he cried. "It's sort of a Golden Rule, and I do believe it
will work."

"Of course it will," replied little Mrs. Peter.




CHAPTER XXVII

MISTAH MOCKER PLAYS A JOKE ON MRS. PETER


 This little point remember, please--
 There's little gained by those who tease.
                              Peter Rabbit.

Mistah Mocker the Mockingbird had been very late in coming up to the
Green Meadows from way down South. The truth is, he had almost decided
not to come. You see, he loves the sunny south-land so much, and all
who live there love him so much, that if it hadn't been for Unc' Billy
Possum and Ol' Mistah Buzzard he never, never would have thought of
leaving, even for a little while. Unc' Billy and Ol' Mistah Buzzard are
particular friends of his, very particular friends, and he felt that he
just had to come up for a little visit.

Now Mistah Mocker reached the Green Meadows just after Peter Rabbit had
brought little Mrs. Peter down from the Old Pasture to live with him
in the dear Old Briar-patch. He knew that little Mrs. Peter didn't know
anything about him, for he never had visited the Old Pasture where she
had spent her life. But he knew all the bird people who do live there,
for he had met them in the sunny southland, where they spent the winter.

"I believe I'll go pay my respects to Mrs. Peter," said Mistah Mocker
one day, winking at Ol' Mistah Buzzard. Ol' Mistah Buzzard chuckled and
winked back.

"Ah cert'nly hopes yo'all will behave yo'self right proper and not
forget that yo' is a member of one of the oldest families in the Souf,"
said he.

Mistah Mocker looked quite solemn as he promised to behave himself, but
there was a twinkle in his eyes as he flew toward the Old Briar-patch.
There he hid in a thick tangle of vines. Now it happened that Peter
Rabbit had gone over to the sweet-clover patch, and little Mrs. Peter
was quite alone. Somehow she got to thinking of her old home, and for
the first time she began to feel just a wee, wee bit homesick. It was
just then that she heard a familiar voice. Little Mrs. Peter pricked up
her ears and smiled happily.

"That's the voice of Tommy Tit the Chickadee, and it must be that his
wife is with him, for I hear him calling 'Phoebe! Phoebe!' How lovely of
them to come down to see me so soon."

Just then she heard another voice, a deep, beautiful, ringing voice, a
voice that she loved. It was the voice of Veery the Thrush. "Oh!" cried
little Mrs. Peter, and then held her breath so as not to miss one note
of the beautiful song. Hardly had the song ended when she heard the
familiar voice of Redeye the Vireo. Little Mrs. Peter clapped her hands
happily. "It must be a surprise party by my old friends and neighbors
of the Old Pasture!" she cried. "How good of them to come way down here,
and how glad I shall be to see them!"

With that little Mrs. Peter hurried over to the tangle of vines from
which all the voices seemed to come and eagerly peered this way and that
way for a sight of her friends. But all she saw was a stranger wearing a
very sober-colored suit. He was very polite and told her that he was an
old friend of Peter Rabbit.

"If you are a friend of Peter, then you are a friend of mine." said
little Mrs. Peter very prettily. "Have you seen anybody in this tangle
of vines since you arrived? I am sure some friends of mine are here, but
I haven't been able to find them."

"No," said the stranger, who was, of course, Mistah Mocker the
Mockingbird. "I haven't seen any one here, and I don't think there has
been any one here but myself."

"Oh, yes, indeed there has!" cried little Mrs. Peter. "I heard their
voices, and I couldn't possibly be mistaken in those, especially the
beautiful voice of Veery the Thrush, I--I would like very much to find
them."

Mistah Mocker had the grace to look ashamed of himself when saw how
disappointed little Mrs. Peter was. Very softly he began to sing the
song of Veery the Thrush.

Little Mrs. Peter looked up quickly. "There it is!" she cried.
"There"--she stopped with her mouth gaping wide open. She suddenly
realized that it was Mistah Mocker who was singing.

"I--I'm very sorry," he stammered. "I did it just for a joke and not to
make you feel bad. Will you forgive me?"

"Yes," replied little Mrs. Peter, "if you will come here often at
shadow-time and sing to me." And Mistah Mocker promised that he would.




CHAPTER XXVIII

NEWS FROM THE OLD BRIAR-PATCH


 To use your eyes is very wise
   And much to be commended;
 But never see what cannot be
   For such as you intended.
                           Peter Rabbit.

Jenny Wren is a busybody. Yes, Sir, she certainly is a busybody. If
there is anything going on in her neighborhood that she doesn't know
about, it isn't because she doesn't try to find out. She is so small and
spry that it is hard work to keep track of her, and she pops out at the
most unexpected times and places. Then, before you can say a word, she
is gone.

And in all the Old Orchard or on the Green Meadows there is not to
be found another tongue so busy as that of Jenny Wren. It is sharp
sometimes, but when she wants it to be so there is none smoother. You
see she is a great gossip, is Jenny Wren, a great gossip. But if you get
on the right side of Jenny Wren and ask her to keep a secret, she'll do
it. No one knows how to keep a secret better than she does.

How it happened nobody knows, but it did happen that when Peter Rabbit
came home to the clear Old Briar-patch, bringing Mrs. Peter with him,
Jenny Wren didn't hear about it. Probably it was because the new home
which she had just completed was so carefully hidden that the messengers
sent by Peter to invite all his friends to call didn't find it, and
afterward she was so busy with household affairs that she didn't have
time to gossip. Anyway, Peter had been back some time before Jenny Wren
knew it. She was quite upset to think that she was the last to hear
the news, but she consoled herself with the thought that she had been
attending strictly to her duties, and now that her children were able to
look out for themselves she could make up for lost time.

Just as soon as she could get away, she started for the Old Briar-patch.
She wanted to hear all about Peter's adventures in the Old Pasture and
to meet Mrs. Peter. But like a great many other busybodies, she wanted
to find out all she could about Peter's affairs, and she thought that
the surest way to do it was not to let Peter know that she was about
until she had had a chance to use her sharp little eyes all she wanted
to. So when she reached the Old Briar-patch, she didn't make a sound.
It didn't take her long to find Peter. He was sitting under one of his
favorite bramble-bushes smiling to himself. He smiled and smiled until
Jenny Wren had to bite her tongue to keep from asking what was pleasing
him so.

[Illustration with caption: "THE QUICKEST WAY FOR ME TO KNOW IS FOR YOU
TO TELL ME," REPLIED JIMMY.]

"He looks tickled almost to death over something, but very likely if I
should ask him what it is he wouldn't tell me," thought Jenny Wren. "I
guess I'll look around a bit first. I wonder where Mrs. Peter is."

So leaving Peter to smile to his heart's content, she went peeking and
peering through the Old Briar-patch. Of course it wasn't a nice thing to
do, not a bit nice. But Jenny Wren didn't stop to think of that. By and
by she saw something that made her flutter all over with excitement. She
looked and looked until she could sit still no longer. Then she hurried
back to where Peter was sitting. He was still smiling.

"Oh, Peter Rabbit, it's perfectly lovely!" she cried.

Peter looked up quickly, and a worried look chased the smile away.
"Hello, Jenny Wren! Where did you come from? I haven't seen you since I
got back," said he.

"I've been so busy that I haven't had time to call before," replied
Jenny. "I know what you've been smiling about, Peter, and it's perfectly
splendid. Has everybody heard the news?"

"No," said Peter, "nobody knows it but you, and I don't want anybody
else to know it just yet. Will you keep it a secret, Jenny Wren?"

Now Jenny was just bursting with desire to spread the news, but Peter
looked so anxious that finally she promised that she would keep it
to herself, and she really meant to. But though Peter looked greatly
relieved as he watched her start for home, he didn't smile as he had
before. "I wish her tongue didn't wag so much," said he.




CHAPTER XXIX

JIMMY SKUNK VISITS PETER RABBIT


 It's hard to keep a secret which you fairly ache to tell;
 So not to know such secrets is often quite as well.
                                        Peter Rabbit.

On her way home from the Old Briar-patch, Jenny Wren stopped to rest in
a bush beside the Crooked Little Path that comes down the hill, when
who should come along but Jimmy Skunk. Now just as usual Jenny Wren was
fidgeting and fussing about, and Jimmy Skunk grinned as he watched her.

"Hello, Jenny Wren!" said he. "What are you doing here?"

"I'm resting on my way home from the Old Briar-patch, if you must know,
Jimmy Skunk!" replied Jenny Wren, changing her position half a dozen
times while she was speaking.

"Ho, ho, ho!" laughed Jimmy Skunk. "Do you call that resting! That's a
joke, Jenny Wren. Resting! Why, you couldn't sit still and rest if you
tried!"

"I could so! I'm resting right now, so there, Jimmy Skunk!" protested
Jenny Wren in a very indignant tone of voice, and hopped all over the
little bush while she was speaking. "I guess if you knew what I know,
you'd be excited too."

"Well, I guess the quickest way for me to know is for you to tell me,"
replied Jimmy. "I'm just aching to be excited."

Jimmy grinned, for you know Jimmy Skunk never does get excited and never
hurries, no matter what happens.

"You'll have to keep right on aching then," replied Jenny Wren, with
a saucy flirt of her funny little tail. "There's great news in the Old
Briar-patch, and I'm the only one that knows it, but I've promised not
to tell."

Jimmy pricked up his ears. "News in the Old Briar-patch must have
something to do with Peter Rabbit," said he. "What has Peter done now?"

"I'll never tell! I'll never tell!" cried Jenny Wren, growing so excited
that it seemed to Jimmy as if there was danger that she would turn
herself inside out. "I promised not to and I never will!" Then, for fear
that she would in spite of herself, she flew on her way home.

Jimmy watched her out of sight with a puzzled frown. "If I didn't know
that she gets so terribly excited over nothing, I'd think that there
really is some news in the Old Briar-patch," he muttered to himself.
"Anyway, I haven't anything better to do, so I believe I'll drop around
that way and make Peter Rabbit a call."

He found Peter in some sweet clover just outside the Old Briar-patch,
and it struck Jimmy that Peter looked uncommonly happy. He said as much.

"I am," replied Peter, before he thought. Then he added hastily, "You
see, I've been uncommonly happy ever since I returned with Mrs. Peter
from the Old Pasture."

"But I hear there's great news over here in the Old Briar-patch,"
persisted Jimmy Skunk. "What is it, Peter?"

Peter pretended to be very much surprised. "Great news!" he repeated.
"Great news! Why, what news can there be over here? Who told you that?"

"A little bird told me," replied Jimmy slyly.

"It must have been Jenny Wren!" said Peter, once more speaking before he
thought.

"Then there IS news over here!" cried Jimmy triumphantly. "What is it,
Peter?"
