"A little," answered Mrs. Estabrook, cautiously.

"How much, now?"

"About a thousand dollars."

"Let me manage it for you, and I will make it two thousand inside of
a month."

Mrs. Estabrook had a large share of acquisitiveness, but she had
also a large measure of caution, which she had inherited from her
Scotch ancestry.

"No, Willis," she said, shaking her head, "I can't take any risk.
This money it has taken me years to save. It is the sole dependence
I have for my old age, and I can't run the risk of losing it."

"But two thousand dollars will be better than one, mother. Just let
me tell you what happened to a customer of ours: He had above five
hundred dollars in the savings bank, drawing four per cent
interest--only twenty dollars a year. He had a friend in the Stock
Exchange who took charge of it, bought stocks judiciously on a
margin, then reinvested, and now, after three months, how much do
you think it amounts to?"

"How much?" asked the housekeeper, with interest.

"Six thousand five hundred dollars--just thirteen times as much!"
answered Willis, glibly.

This story, by the way, was all a fabrication, intended to influence
his stepmother. Mrs. Estabrook never doubted Ford's statement, but
her instinctive caution saved her from falling into the trap.

"It looks tempting, Willis," she said, "but I don't dare to take the
risk." Ford was deeply disappointed, but did not betray it.

"It is for you to decide," said he, carelessly, then drifted to
other subjects.

Ten minutes later he pressed his hand upon his breast, while his
features worked convulsively. "I believe I am sick," he said.

"What can I do for you, my dear son?" asked the housekeeper, in
alarm.

"If you have a glass of brandy!" gasped Willis.

"I will go downstairs and get some," she said, hurriedly.

No sooner had she left the room than Willis sprang to his feet,
locked the door, then went to the bureau, unlocked the upper
drawer--he had a key in his pocket which fitted the lock and,
thrusting in his hand, drew out a long envelope containing one
five-hundred-dollar government bond and five bonds of one hundred
dollars each, which he thrust into his side pocket. Then, closing
the drawer, he unlocked the door of the room, and when his
step-mother returned he threw himself back in his chair, groaning.
He took the glass of brandy the housekeeper brought him, and, after
a few minutes, professing himself much better, left the house.

"Saved!" he exclaimed, triumphantly. "Now I shall be all right
again."



CHAPTER XV -- AN ARTFUL TRAP



Willis Ford was anxious to get away. He feared that Mrs. Estabrook
might go to the bureau and discover the loss before he got out of
the house, which would make it awkward for him. Once out in the
street, he breathed more freely. He had enough with him to pay his
only debt, and give him four hundred dollars extra. It might be
supposed he would feel some compunction at robbing his stepmother of
her all. Whatever her faults, she was devoted to him. But Willis
Ford had a hard, selfish nature, and the only thought that troubled
him was the fear that he might be found out. Indeed, the
housekeeper's suspicions would be likely to fall upon him unless
they could be turned in some other direction. Who should it be?
There came to him an evil suggestion which made his face brighten
with relief and malicious joy. The new boy, Grant Thornton, was a
member of the household. He probably had the run of the house. What
more probable than that he should enter Mrs. Estabrook's chamber and
search her bureau? This was the way Willis reasoned. He knew that
his stepmother hated Grant, and would be very willing to believe
anything against him. He would take care that suspicion should fall
in that direction. He thought of a way to heighten that suspicion.
What it was my readers will learn in due time.

The next day, at half-past eight o'clock in the morning, on his way
down Broadway, Willis Ford dropped into the Grand Central Hotel, and
walked through the reading room in the rear. Here sat Jim Morrison
and Tom Calder, waiting for him by appointment.

Ford took a chair beside them.

"Good-morning," he said, cheerfully.

"Have you brought the money?" asked Morrison, anxiously.

"Hush! don't speak so loud," said Ford, cautiously. "We don't want
everybody to know our business."

"All right," said Morrison, in a lower voice; "but have you brought
it?"

"Yes."

"You're a trump!" said Morrison, his face expressing his joy.

"That is to say, I've brought what amounts to the same thing."

"If it's your note," said Morrison, with sharp disappointment, "I
don't want it."

"It isn't a note. It's what will bring the money."

"What is it, then?"

"It's government bonds for six hundred dollars."

"I don't know anything about bonds," said Morrison. "Besides, the
amount is more than six hundred dollars."

"These bonds are worth a hundred and twelve, amounting in all to six
hundred and seventy-two dollars. That's forty more than I owe you. I
won't make any account of that, however, as you will have to dispose
of them."

"I may get into trouble," said Morrison, suspiciously. "Where did
they come from?"

"That does not concern you," said Ford, haughtily. "Don't I give
them to you?"

"But where did you get them?"

"That is my business. If you don't want them, say the word, and I'll
take them back."

"And when will you pay the money?"

"I don't know," answered Ford, curtly.

"Maybe he'll sell 'em for us himself," suggested Tom Calder.

"Good, Tom! Why can't you sell 'em and give me the money? Then you
can pay the exact sum and save the forty dollars."

"I don't choose to do so," said Ford. "It seems to me you are
treating me in a very strange manner. I offer you more than I owe
you, and you make no end of objections to receiving it."

"I am afraid I'll get into trouble if I offer the bonds for sale,"
said Morrison, doggedly. "I don't know anybody in the business
except you."

"Yes, you do," said Ford, a bright idea occurring to him.

"Who?"

"You know the boy in our office."

"Grant Thornton?" said Tom.

"Yes, Grant Thornton. Manage to see him, and ask him to dispose of
the bonds for you. He will bring them to our office, and I will
dispose of them without asking any questions."

"First rate!" said Tom. "That'll do, won't it, Jim?"

"I don't see why it won't," answered Morrison, appearing satisfied.

"I would suggest that you see him some time today."

"Good! Hand over the bonds."

Willis Ford had already separated the bonds into two parcels, six
hundred in one and four hundred in the other. The first of these he
passed over to Jim Morrison.

"Put it into your pocket at once," he said. "We don't want anyone to
see them. There is a telegraph boy looking at us."

"I'm going to see if it is all there," muttered Morrison; and he
drew from the envelope the two bonds, and ascertained, by a personal
inspection, that they were as represented.

"It's all right," he said.

"You might have taken my word for it," said Willis Ford, offended.

"In matters of business I take no one's word," chuckled the
confidence man.

"I wonder what they're up to," said the little telegraph boy to
himself. "I know one of them fellers is a gambler. Wonder who that
feller with him is? Them must be gov'ment bonds."

Johnny Cavanagh was an observing boy, and mentally photographed upon
his memory the faces of the entire group, though he never expected
to see any of them again.

When Grant was hurrying through Wall Street about noon he came upon
Tom Calder and Morrison.

"Hello, there, Grant," said Tom, placing his hand upon his shoulder.

"What's the matter, Tom? I'm in a hurry," said Grant.

"Jim Morrison's got a little business for you."

"What is it?"

"He wants you to sell gov'ment bonds for him."

"You'd better take them round to our office."

"I haven't got time," said Morrison. "Just attend to them, like a
good fellow, and I'll give you a dollar for your trouble."

"How much have you got?"

"Six hundred--a five hundred and a one."

"Are they yours?"

"Yes; I've had 'em two years, but now I've got to raise money."

"What do you want for them?"

"Regular price, whatever it is."

"When will you call for the money?"

"Meet me at Fifth Avenue Hotel with it tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock."

"I shall have to meet you earlier--say half-past eight."

"All right. Here's the bonds."

Grant put the envelope into his pocket, and hurried to the Exchange.

When he returned to the office he carried the bonds to Willis Ford.

"Mr. Ford," he said, "an acquaintance of mine handed them to me to
be sold."

"Some one you know?" queried Ford.

"I know him slightly."

"Well, I suppose it's all right. I'll make out a check to your
order, and you can collect the money at the bank."

Grant interposed no objection, and put the check in his pocket.

"The boy's fallen into the trap," said Willis to himself,
exultantly, as he proceeded to enter the transaction on the books.



CHAPTER XVI -- GRANT FALLS UNDER SUSPICION



In furtherance of his scheme to throw suspicion upon Grant, Willis
Ford decided to make another call upon his stepmother the succeeding
evening. It occurred to him that she might possibly connect his
visit of the evening before with her loss, and he wished to
forestall this.

"Is Mrs. Estabrook at home?" he asked of the servant.

"Yes, sir."

When the housekeeper made her appearance he carefully scrutinized
her face. She was calm and placid, and it was clear that she had not
discovered the abstraction of the bonds.

"I dare say you are surprised to see me so soon again," he
commenced.

"I am always glad to see you, Willis," she said. "Come upstairs."

"What a pleasant room you have, mother!"

"Yes, I am very comfortable. Have you had any return of your
sickness?" she asked, anxiously.

"No, I have been perfectly well. By the way, mother, I have a
special object in calling."

"What is it, Willis?"

"I want to speak to you about those bonds of yours. If you will only
sell them out, and invest in Erie, I am sure you will make in six
months a sum equal to several years interest."

"That may be, Willis, but I am very timid about taking a risk. Those
bonds represent all the property I have."

Willis Ford's conscience pricked him a little, when he heard her
speaking thus of the property he had so heartlessly stolen; but he
did not show it in his manner.

"What is the date of your bonds, mother?" he asked.

"I don't know. Does that make any difference?"

"It makes some difference. Those that have longest to run are most
valuable."

"I can easily tell," said the housekeeper, as she rose from her
chair and opened the bureau drawer, in full confidence that the
bonds were safe.

It was an exciting moment for Willis Ford, knowing the sad discovery
that awaited her.

She put her hand in that part of the drawer where she supposed the
bonds to be, and found nothing. A shade of anxiety overspread her
face, and she searched hurriedly in other parts of the drawer.

"Don't you find them, mother?" asked Willis.

"It is very strange," said Mrs. Estabrook, half to herself.

"What is strange?"

"I always kept the bonds in the right-hand corner of this drawer."

"And you can't find them?"

"I have looked all over the drawer."

"You may have put them, by mistake, in one of the other drawers."

"Heaven grant it!" said Mrs. Estabrook, her face white with anxiety.

"Let me help you, mother," said Willis, rising.

She did not object, for her hands trembled with nervousness.

The other drawers were opened and were thoroughly searched, but, of
course, the bonds were not found.

Mrs. Estabrook seemed near fainting.

"I have been robbed," she said. "I am ruined."

"But who could have robbed you?" asked Ford, innocently.

"I-don't-know. Oh, Willis! it was cruel!" and the poor woman burst
into tears. "All these years I have been saving, and now I have lost
all. I shall die in the poorhouse after all."

"Not while I am living, mother," said Willis. "But the bonds must be
found. They must be mislaid."

"No, no! they are stolen. I shall never see them again."

"But who has taken them? Ha! I have an idea."

"What is it?" asked the housekeeper, faintly.

"That boy--Grant Thornton--he lives in the house, doesn't he?"

"Yes," answered Mrs. Estabrook, in excitement. "Do you think he can
have robbed me?"

"What a fool I am! I ought to have suspected when---"

"When what?"

"When he brought some bonds to me to-day to sell."

"He did!" exclaimed Mrs. Estabrook; "what were they?"

"A five-hundred-dollar and a hundred-dollar bond."

"I had a five-hundred and five one-hundred-dollar bonds. They were
mine--the young villain!"

"I greatly fear so, mother."

"You ought to have kept them, Willis. Oh! why didn't you? Where is
the boy? I will see Mr. Reynolds at once."

"Wait a minute, till I tell you all I know. The boy said the bonds
were handed to him by an acquaintance."

"It was a falsehood."

"Do you know the number of your bonds, mother?"

"Yes, I have them noted down, somewhere."

"Good! I took the number of those the boy gave me for sale."

Mrs. Estabrook found the memorandum. It was compared with one which
Willis Ford brought with him, and the numbers were identical. Four
numbers, of course, were missing from Ford's list.

"That seems pretty conclusive, mother. The young rascal has stolen
your bonds, and offered a part of them for sale. It was certainly
bold in him to bring them to our office. Is he in the house?"

