fish-wife. A sturdy lad of twelve came lurching after her in a pair
of very large rubber boots, with a dilapidated straw hat on the back
of his head and a pail on either arm.

Straight on went the girl, never turning head or eyes as she passed
the group on the piazza and vanished round the corner, though it was
evident that she heard the laugh the last speech produced, for the
color deepened in her cheeks and her step quickened. The boy,
however, returned the glances bent upon him, and answered the smiles
with such a cheerful grin that the youth with the cigarette called
out,--

"Good-morning, Skipper! Where do you hail from?"

"Island, yender," answered the boy, with a gesture of his thumb over
his shoulder.

"Oh, you are the lighthouse-keeper, are you?"

"No, I ain't; me and Gramper's fishermen now."

"Your name is Flucker Johnstone, and your sister's Christie, I
think?" added the youth, enjoying the amusement of the young ladies
about him.

"It's Sammy Bowen, and hern's Ruth."

"Have you got a Boaz over there for her?"

"No, we've got a devil-fish, a real whacker."

This unexpected reply produced a roar from the gentlemen, while the
boy grinned good-naturedly, though without the least idea what the
joke was. Pretty Miss Ellery, who had been told that she had "a
rippling laugh," rippled sweetly as she leaned over the railing to
ask,

"Are those lilies in your pails? I want some if they are for sale."

"Sister'll fetch 'em round when she's left the lobs. I ain't got
none; this is bait for them fellers." And, as if reminded of
business by the yells of several boys who had just caught sight of
him, Sammy abruptly weighed anchor and ran before the wind toward
the stable.

"Funny lot, these natives! Act as if they owned the place and are as
stupid as their own fish," said the youth in the white yachting
suit, as he flung away his cigarette end.

"Don't agree with you, Fred. I've known people of this sort all my
life and a finer set of honest, hardworking, independent men I never
met,--brave as lions and tender as women in spite of their rough
ways," answered the other young man, who wore blue flannel and had a
gold band on his cap.

"Sailors and soldiers always stand by one another; so of course you
see the best side of these fellows, Captain. The girls are fine
creatures, I grant you; but their good looks don't last long, more's
the pity!"

"Few women's would with the life they lead, so full of hard work,
suspense, and sorrow. No one knows till one is tried, how much
courage and faith it takes to keep young and happy when the men one
loves are on the great sea," said quiet, gray-haired lady, as she
laid her hand on the knee of the young man in blue with a look that
made him smile affectionately at her, with his own brown hand on
hers.

"Shouldn't wonder if Ben Bowen was laid up, since the girl brings
the fish. He's a fine old fellow. I've been to No Man's Land many a
time blue-fishing with him; must ask after him," said an elderly
gentleman who was pacing to and fro yearning for the morning papers.

"We might go over to the island and have a chowder-party or a
fish-fry some moonlight night. I haven't been here for several
years, but it used to be great fun, and I suppose we can do it now,"
suggested Miss Ellery with the laugh.

"By Jove, we will! And look up Christie; ask her when she comes
round," said Mr. Fred, the youthful dude, untwining his languid legs
as if the prospect put a little life into him.

"Of course we pay for any trouble we give; these people will do
anything for money," began Miss Ellery; but Captain John, as they
called the sailor, held up his hand with a warning, "Hush! she's
coming," as Ruth's weather-beaten brown hat turned the corner.

She paused a moment to drop the empty baskets, shake her skirts, and
put up a black braid that had fallen down; then, with the air of one
resolved to do a distasteful task as quickly as possible, she came
up the steps, held out the rough basket cover, and said in a clear
voice,--

"Would any of the ladies like some fresh lilies? Ten cents a bunch."

A murmur from the ladies expressed their admiration of the beautiful
flowers, and the gentlemen pressed forward to buy and present every
bunch with gallant haste. Ruth's eyes shone as the money fell into
her hand, and several voices begged her to bring more lilies while
they lasted.

"I didn't know the darlings would grow in salt water," said Miss
Ellery, as she fondly gazed upon the cluster Mr. Fred had just
offered her.

"They don't. There's a little fresh-water pond on our island, and
they grow there,--only place for miles round;" and Ruth looked at
the delicate girl in ruffled white lawn and a mull hat, with a
glance of mingled pity for her ignorance and admiration for her
beauty.

"How silly of me! I am SUCH a goose;" and Miss Ellery gurgled as she
hid her face behind her red parasol.

"Ask about the fish-fry," whispered Mr. Fred, putting his head
behind the rosy screen to assure the pretty creature that he didn't
know any better himself.

"Oh yes, I will!" and, quite consoled, Miss Ellery called out,
"Girl, will you tell me if we can have chower-parties on your rocks
as we used to a few seasons ago?"

"If you bring your own fish. Grandpa is sick and can't get 'em for
you."

"We will provide them, but who will cook them for us? It's such
horrid work."

"Any one can fry fish! I will if you want me to;" and Ruth half
smiled, remembering that this girl who shuddered at the idea of pork
and a hot frying-pan, used to eat as heartily as any one when the
crisp brown cunners were served up.

"Very good; then we'll engage you as cook, and come over to-night if
it's clear and our fishing prospers. Don't forget a dozen of the
finest lilies for this lady to-morrow morning. Pay you now, may not
be up;" and Mr. Fred dropped a bright silver dollar into the basket
with a patronizing air, intended to impress this rather too
independent young person with a proper sense of inferiority.

Ruth quietly shook the money out upon the door-mat, and said with a
sudden sparkle in her black eyes,--

"It's doubtful if I bring any more. Better wait till I do."

"I'm sorry your grandfather is sick. I'll come over and see him
by-and-by, and bring the papers if he would like some," said the
elderly gentleman as he came up with a friendly nod and real
interest in his face.

"Very much, thank you, sir. He is very feeble now;" and Ruth turned
with a bright smile to welcome kind Mr. Wallace, who had not
forgotten the old man.

"Christie has got a nice little temper of her own, and don't know
how to treat a fellow when he wants to do her a favor," growled Mr.
Fred, pocketing his dollar with a disgusted air.

"She appears to know how to treat a gentleman when HE offers one,"
answered Blue Jacket, with a twinkle of the eye as if he enjoyed the
other's discomfiture.

"Girls of that class always put on airs if they are the least bit
pretty,--so absurd!" said Miss Ellery, pulling up her long gloves as
she glanced at the brown arms of the fisher maiden.

"Girls of any class like to be treated with respect. Modesty in
linsey-woolsey is as sweet as in muslin, my dear, and should be even
more admired, according to my old-fashioned way of thinking," said
the gray-haired lady.

"Hear! hear!" murmured her sailor nephew with an approving nod.

It was evident that Ruth had heard also, as she turned to go, for
with a quick gesture she pulled three great lilies from her hat and
laid them on the old lady's lap, saying with a grateful look, "Thank
you, ma'am."

She had seen Miss Scott hand her bunch to a meek little governess
who had been forgotten, and this was all she had to offer in return
for the kindness which is so sweet to poor girls whose sensitive
pride gets often wounded by trifles like these.

She was going without her baskets when Captain John swung himself
over the railing, and ran after her with them. He touched his cap as
he met her, and was thanked with as bright a smile as that the elder
gentleman had received; for his respectful "Miss Bowen" pleased her
much after the rude "Girl!" and the money tossed to her as if she
were a beggar. When he came back the mail had arrived, and all
scattered at once,--Mr. Fred to spend the dollar in more cigarettes,
and Captain John to settle carefully in his button-hole the
water-lily Aunt Mary gave him, before both young men went off to
play tennis as if their bread depended on it.

As it bid fair to be a moonlight night, the party of a dozen young
people, with Miss Scott and Mr. Wallace to act as matron and admiral
of the fleet, set off to the Island about sunset. Fish in abundance
had been caught, and a picnic supper provided to be eaten on the
rocks when the proper time arrived. They found Sammy, in a clean
blue shirt and a hat less like a Feejee headpiece, willing to do the
honors of the Island, beaming like a freckled young merman as he
paddled out to pull up the boats.

"Fire's all ready for kindlin', and Ruth's slicin' the pertaters.
Hope them fish is cleaned?" he added with a face of deep anxiety;
for that weary task would fall to him if not already done, and the
thought desolated his boyish soul.

"All ready, Sam! Lend a hand with these baskets, and then steer for
the lighthouse; the ladies want to see that first," answered Captain
John, as he tossed a stray cookie into Sammy's mouth with a smile
that caused that youth to cleave to him like a burr all the evening.

The young people scattered over the rocks, and hastened to visit the
points of interest before dark. They climbed the lighthouse tower,
and paid Aunt Nabby and Grandpa a call at the weather-beaten little
house, where the old woman lent them a mammoth coffee-pot, and
promised that Ruth would "dish up them fish in good shape at eight
punctooal." Then they strolled away to see the fresh-water pond
where the lilies grew.

"How curious that such a thing should be here right in the middle of
the salt sea!" said one of the girls, as they stood looking at the
quiet pool while the tide dashed high upon the rocks all about them.

"Not more curious than how it is possible for anything so beautiful
and pure as one of those lilies to grow from the mud at the bottom
of the pond. The ugly yellow ones are not so out of place; but no
one cares for them, and they smell horridly," added another girl in
a reflective tone.

"Instinct sends the white lily straight up to the sun and air, and
the strong slender stem anchors it to the rich earth below, out of
which it has power to draw the nourishment that makes it so lovely
and keeps it spotless--unless slugs and flies and boys spoil it,"
added Miss Scott as she watched Mr. Fred poke and splash with his
cane after a half-closed flower.

"The naughty things have all shut up and spoilt the pretty sight;
I'm so disappointed," sighed Miss Ellery, surveying the green buds
with great disfavor as she had planned to wear some in her hair and
act Undine.

"You must come early in the morning if you want to see them at their
best. I've read somewhere that when the sun first strikes them they
open rapidly, and it is a lovely sight. I shall try to see it some
day if I can get here in time," said Miss Scott.

"How romantic old maids are!" whispered one girl to another.

"So are young ones; hear what Floss Ellery is saying," answered the
other; and both giggled under their big hats as they caught these
words followed by the rippling laugh,--

"All flowers open and show their hearts when the sun shines on them
at the right moment."

"I wish human flowers would," murmured Mr. Fred; and then, as if
rather alarmed at his own remark, he added hastily, "I'll get that
big lily out there and MAKE it bloom for you."

Trusting to an old log that lay in the pond, he went to the end and
bent to pull in the half-shut flower; but this too ardent sun was
not to make it blossom, for his foot slipped and down he went up to
his knees in mud and water.

"Save him! oh, save him!" shrieked Miss Ellery, clutching Captain
John, who was laughing like a boy, while the other lads shouted and
the girls added their shrill merriment as poor Fred scrambled to the
shore a wreck of the gallant craft that had set sail in spotless
white.

"What the deuce shall I do?" he asked in a tone of despair as they
flocked about him to condole even while they laughed.

"Roll up your trousers and borrow Sam's boots. The old lady will dry
your shoes and socks while you are at supper, and have them ready to
wear home," suggested Captain John, who was used to duckings and
made light of them.

The word "supper" made one carnal-minded youth sniff the air and
announce that he smelt "something good;" and at once every one
turned toward the picnic ground, like chickens hurrying to the barn
at feeding-time. Fred vanished into the cottage, and the rest
gathered about the great fire of driftwood fast turning to clear
coals, over which Ruth was beginning her long hot task. She wore a
big apron, a red handkerchief over her head, had her sleeves rolled
up, and was so intent on her work that she merely nodded and smiled
as the new-comers greeted her with varying degrees of courtesy.

"She looks like a handsome gypsy, with her dark face and that red
thing in the firelight. I wish I could paint her," said Miss Scott,
who was very young at heart in spite of her fifty years and gray
head.

"So do I, but we can remember it. I do like to see a girl work with
a will, even at frying fish. Most of 'em dawdle so at the few things
they try to do. There's a piece of energy for you!" and Captain John
leaned forward from his rocky seat to watch Ruth, who just then
caught up the coffee-pot about to boil over, and with the other hand
saved her frying-pan from capsizing on its unsteady bed of coals.

"She is a nice girl, and I'm much interested in her. Mr. Wallace
says he will tell us her story by-and-by if we care to hear it. He
has known the old man a long time."

"Don't forget to remind him, Aunty. I like a yarn after mess;" and
Captain John went off to bring the first plate of fish to the dear
old lady who had been a mother to him for many years.

It was a merry supper, and the moon was up before it ended; for
everything "tasted so good" the hearty young appetites sharpened by
sea air were hard to satisfy. When the last cunner had vanished and
nothing but olives and oyster crackers remained, the party settled
on a sloping rock out of range of the fire, and reposed for a brief
period to recover from the exertions of the feast, having, like the
heroes in the old story, "eaten mightily for the space of an hour."

Mr. Fred in the capacious boots was a never-failing source of
amusement, and consequently somewhat subdued. But Miss Ellery
consoled him, and much food sustained him till his shoes were dry.
Ruth remained to clear up, and Sammy to gorge himself on the
remnants of "sweet cake" which he could not bear to see wasted. So,
when some one proposed telling stories till they were ready to sing,
Mr. Wallace was begged to begin.

"It is only something about this island, but you may like to hear it
just now," said the genial old gentleman, settling his handkerchief
over his bald head for fear of cold, and glancing at the attentive
young faces grouped about him in the moonlight.

"Some twenty years ago there was a wreck over there on those great
rocks; you fellows have heard about it, so I'll only say that a very
brave sailor, a native of the Port here, swam out with a rope and
saved a dozen men and women. I'll call him Sam. Well, one of the
women was an English governess, and when the lady she was with went
on her way after the wreck, this pretty girl (who by the way was a
good deal hurt trying to save the child she had in charge) was left
behind to recover, and--"

"Marry the brave sailor of course," cried one of the girls.

"Exactly! and a very happy pair they were. She had no family who
wanted her at home; her father had been a clergyman, I believe, and
she was well born, but Sam was a fine fellow and earned his living
honestly, fishing off the Banks, as half the men do here. Well, they
were very happy, had two children, and were saving up a bit, when
poor Sam and two brothers were lost in one of the great storms which
now and then make widows and orphans by the dozen. It killed the
wife; but Sam's father, who kept the lighthouse here then, took the
poor children and supported them for ten years. The boy was a mere
baby; the girl a fine creature, brave like her father, handsome like
her mother, and with a good deal of the lady about her, though every
one didn't find it out."

"Ahem!" cried the sharp girl, who began to understand the point of
the story now, but would not spoil it, as the others seemed still in
the dark, though Miss Scott was smiling, and Captain John staring
hard at the old gentleman in the blue silk nightcap.

"Got a fly in your throat?" asked a neighbor; but Kate only laughed
and begged pardon for interrupting.

"There's not much more; only that affair was rather romantic, and
one can't help wondering how the children turned out. Storms seem to
have been their doom, for in the terrible one we had two winters
ago, the old lighthouse keeper had a bad fall on the icy rocks, and
if it had not been for the girl, the light would have gone out and
more ships been lost on this dangerous point. The keeper's mate had
gone ashore and couldn't get back for two days, the gale raged so
fiercely; but he knew Ben could get on without him, as he had the
girl and boy over for a visit. In winter they lived with a friend
and went to school at the Port. It would have been all right if Ben
hadn't broken his ribs. But he was a stout old salt; so he told the
girl what to do, and she did it, while the boy waited on the sick
man. For two days and nights that brave creature lived in the tower,
that often rocked as if it would come down, while the sleet and snow
dimmed the lantern, and sea-birds were beaten to death against the
glass. But the light burned steadily, and people said, 'All is
well,' as ships steered away in time, when the clear light warned
them of danger, and grateful sailors blessed the hands that kept it
burning faithfully."

"I hope she got rewarded," cried an eager voice, as the story-teller
paused for breath.

"'I only did my duty; that is reward enough,' she said, when some of
the rich men at the Port heard of it and sent her money and thanks.
She took the money, however, for Ben had to give up the place, being
too lame to do the work. He earns his living by fishing now, and
puts away most of his pension for the children. He won't last long,
and then they must take care of themselves; for the old woman is no
relation, and the girl is too proud to hunt up the forgetful English
friends, if they have any. But I don't fear for her; a brave lass
like that will make her own way anywhere."
