
So Harry thought. Accustomed to the painful frugality of the table at
home, he regarded this as a splendid dinner, and did full justice to it.

In the afternoon he resumed work in the shop under Robert's guidance.
He was in excellent spirits. He felt that he was very fortunate to have
gained a place so soon, and determined to write home that same evening.





CHAPTER XIII. AN INVITATION DECLINED


The summer passed quickly, and the time arrived for Robert Leavitt to go
to the city. By this time Harry was well qualified to take his place. It
had not been difficult, for he had only been required to peg, and
that is learned in a short time. Harry, however, proved to be a quick
workman, quicker, if anything, than Robert, though the latter had been
accustomed to the work for several years. Mr. Leavitt was well satisfied
with his new apprentice, and quite content to pay him the three dollars
a week agreed upon. In fact, it diminished the amount of cash he was
called upon to pay.

"Good-by, Harry," said Robert, as he saw the coach coming up the road,
to take him to the railroad station.

"Good-by, and good luck!" said Harry.

"When you come to the city, come and see me."

"I don't think I shall be going very soon. I can't afford it."

"You must save up your wages, and you'll have enough soon."

"I've got another use for my wages, Bob."

"To buy cigars?"

Harry shook his head. "I shall save it up to carry home."

"Well, you must try to make my place good in the shop."

"He can do that," said Mr. Leavitt, slyly; "but there's one place where
he can't equal you."

"Where is that?"

"At the dinner table."

"You've got me there, father," said Bob, good-naturedly. "Well, good-by
all, here's the stage."

In a minute more he was gone. Harry felt rather lonely, for he had grown
used to working beside him. But his spirits rose as he reflected that
the time had now come when he should be in receipt of an income. Three
dollars a week made him feel rich in anticipation. He looked forward
already with satisfaction to the time when he might go home with money
enough to pay off his father's debt to Squire Green. But he was not
permitted to carry out his economical purpose without a struggle.

On Saturday evening, after he had received his week's pay, Luke
Harrison, who worked in a shop near by, met him at the post office.

"Come along, Harry," he said. "Let us play a game of billiards."

"You must excuse me," said Harry.

"Oh, come along," said Luke, taking him by the arm; "it's only
twenty-five cents."

"I can't afford it."

"Can't afford it! Now that's nonsense. You just changed a two-dollar
note for those postage stamps."

"I know that; but I must save that money for another purpose."

"What's the use of being stingy, Harry? Try one game."

"You can get somebody else to play with you, Luke."

"Oh, hang it, if you care so much for a quarter, I'll pay for the game
myself. Only come and play."

Harry shook his head.

"I don't want to amuse myself at your expense."

"You are a miser," said Luke, angrily.

"You can call me so, if you like," said Harry, firmly; "but that won't
make it so."

"I don't see how you can call yourself anything else, if you are so
afraid to spend your money."

"I have good reasons."

"What are they?"

"I told you once that I had another use for the money."

"To hoard away in an old stocking," said Luke, sneering.

"You may say so, if you like," said Harry, turning away.

He knew he was right, but it was disagreeable to be called a miser.
He was too proud to justify himself to Luke, who spent all his money
foolishly, though earning considerably larger wages than he.

There was one thing that Harry had not yet been able to do to any great
extent, though it was something he had at heart. He had not forgotten
his motto, "Live and Learn," and now that he was in a fair way to make
a living, he felt that he had made no advance in learning during the few
weeks since he arrived in Glenville.

The day previous he had heard, for the first time, that there was a
public library in another part of the town, which was open evenings.
Though it was two miles distant, and he had been at work all day, he
determined to walk up there and get a book. He felt that he was very
ignorant, and that his advance in the world depended upon his improving
all opportunities that might present themselves for extending his
limited knowledge. This was evidently one.

After his unsatisfactory interview with Luke, he set out for the upper
village, as it was called. Forty minutes' walk brought him to the
building in which the library was kept. An elderly man had charge of
it--a Mr. Parmenter.

"Can I take out a book?" asked Harry.

"Do you live in town?"

"Yes, sir."

"I don't remember seeing you before. You don't live in this village, do
you?"

"No, sir. I live in the lower village."

"What is your name?"

"Harry Walton."

"I don't remember any Walton family."

"My father lives in Granton. I am working for Mr. James Leavitt."

"I have no doubt this is quite correct, but I shall have to have Mr.
Leavitt's certificate to that effect, before I can put your name down,
and trust you with books."

"Then can't I take any book to-night?" asked Harry, disappointed.

"I am afraid not."

So it seemed his two-mile walk was for nothing. He must retrace his
steps and come again Monday night.

He was turning away disappointed when Dr. Townley, of the lower village,
who lived near Mr. Leavitt, entered the library.

"My wife wants a book in exchange for this, Mr. Parmenter," he said.
"Have you got anything new in? Ah, Harry Walton, how came you here? Do
you take books out of the library?"

"That's is what I came up for, but the librarian says I must bring a
line from Mr. Leavitt, telling who I am."

"If Dr. Townley knows you, that is sufficient," said the librarian.

"He is all right, Mr. Parmenter. He is a young neighbor of mine."

"That is enough. He can select a book."

Harry was quite relieved at this fortunate meeting, and after a little
reflection selected the first volume of "Rollin's Universal History," a
book better known to our fathers than the present generation.

"That's a good, solid book, Harry," said the doctor.

"Most of our young people select stories."

"I like stories very much," said Harry; "but I have only a little time
to read, and I must try to learn something."

"You are a sensible boy," said the doctor, emphatically.

"I'm afraid there are few of our young people who take such wise views
of what is best for them. Most care only for present enjoyment."

"I have got my own way to make," said Harry, "and I suppose that is what
influences me. My father is poor and cannot help me, and I want to rise
in the world."

"You are going the right way to work. Do you intend to take out books
often from the library?"

"Yes, sir."

"It will be a long walk from the lower village."

"I would walk farther rather than do without the books."

"I can save you at any rate from walking back. My chaise is outside,
and, if you will jump in, I will carry you home."

"Thank you, doctor. I shall be very glad to ride."

On the way, Dr. Townley said: "I have a few miscellaneous book in my
medical library, which I will lend to you with pleasure, if you will
come in. It may save you an occasional walk to the library."

Harry thanked him, and not long afterwards availed himself of the
considerate proposal. Dr Townley was liberally educated, and as far
as his professional engagements would permit kept up with general
literature. He gave Harry some valuable directions as to the books which
it would benefit him to read, and more than once took him up on the road
to the library.

Once a week regularly Harry wrote home. He knew that his letters would
give pleasure to the family, and he never allowed anything to interfere
with his duty.

His father wrote: "We are getting on about as usual. The cow does
tolerably well, but is not as good as the one I lost. I have not yet
succeeded in laying up anything toward paying for her. Somehow, whenever
I have a few dollars laid aside Tom wants shoes, or your sister wants a
dress, or some other expense swallows it up."

Harry wrote in reply: "Don't trouble yourself, father, about your debt
to Squire Green. If I have steady work, and keep my health, I shall have
enough to pay it by the time it comes due."





CHAPTER XIV. THE TAILOR'S CUSTOMER


At the end of six weeks from the date of Robert's departure, Harry had
been paid eighteen dollars. Of this sum he had spent but one dollar,
and kept the balance in his pocketbook. He did not care to send it home
until he had enough to meet Squire Green's demand, knowing that his
father would be able to meet his ordinary expenses. Chiefly through the
reports of Luke Harrison he was acquiring the reputation of meanness,
though, as we know, he was far from deserving it.

"See how the fellow dresses," said Luke, contemptuously, to two of his
companions one evening. "His clothes are shabby enough, and he hasn't
got an overcoat at all. He hoards his money, and is too stingy to buy
one. See, there he comes, buttoned to the chin to keep warm, and
I suppose he has more money in his pocketbook than the whole of us
together. I wouldn't be as mean as he is for a hundred dollars."

"You'd rather get trusted for your clothes than do without them," said
Frank Heath, slyly; for he happened to know that Luke had run up a bill
with the tailor, about which the latter was getting anxious.

"What if I do," said Luke, sharply, "as long as I am going to pay for
them?"

"Oh, nothing," said Frank. "I didn't say anything against it, did I? I
suppose you are as able to owe the tailor as anyone."

By this time, Harry had come up.

"Where are you going, Walton?" asked Luke. "You look cold."

"Yes, it's a cold day."

"Left your overcoat at home, didn't you?"

Harry colored. The fact was, he felt the need of an overcoat, but didn't
know how to manage getting one. At the lowest calculation, it would cost
all the money he had saved up for one, and the purchase would defeat all
his plans. The one he had worn at home during the previous winter was
too small for him, and had been given to his brother.

"If I only could get through the winter without one," he thought, "I
should be all right." But a New England winter is not to be braved
with impunity, useless protected by adequate clothing. Luke's sneer was
therefore not without effect. But he answered, quietly: "I did not leave
it at home, for I have none to leave."

"I suppose you are bound to the tailor's to order one."

"What makes you think so?" asked Harry.

"You are not such a fool as to go without one when you have money in
your pocket, are you?"

"You seem very curious about my private affairs," said Harry, rather
provoked.

"He's only drumming up customers for the tailor," said Frank Heath. "He
gets a commission on all he brings."

"That's the way he pays his bill," said Sam Anderson.

"Quit fooling, boys," said Luke, irritated. "I ain't a drummer. I pay my
bills, like a gentleman."

"By keeping the tailor waiting," said Frank.

"Quit that!"

So attention was diverted from Harry by this opportune attack upon
Luke, much to our hero's relief. Nevertheless, he saw, that in order to
preserve his health, he must have some outer garment, and in order the
better to decide what to do, he concluded to step into the tailor's, and
inquire his prices.

The tailor, Merrill by name, had a shop over the dry goods store, and
thither Harry directed his steps. There was one other person in the
shop, a young fellow but little larger than Harry, though two years
older, who was on a visit to an aunt in the neighborhood, but lived in
Boston. He belonged to a rich family, and had command of considerable
money. His name was Maurice Tudor. He had gone into the shop to leave a
coat to be repaired.

"How are you, Walton?" he said, for he knew our hero slightly.

"Pretty well. Thank you."

"It's pretty cold for October."

"Yes, unusually so."

"Mr. Merrill," said Harry, "I should like to inquire the price of an
overcoat. I may want to order one by and by."

"What sort of one do you want--pretty nice?"

"No, I can't afford anything nice--something as cheap as possible."

"This is the cheapest goods I have," said the tailor, pointing to some
coarse cloth near by.

"I can make you up a coat from that for eighteen dollars."

"Eighteen dollars!" exclaimed Harry, in dismay. "Is that the cheapest
you have?"

"The very cheapest."

After a minute's pause he added, "I might take off a dollar for cash.
I've got enough of running up bills. There's Luke Harrison owes me over
thirty dollars, and I don't believe he means to pay it al all."

"If I buy, I shall pay cash," said Harry, quietly.

"You can't get anything cheaper than this." said the tailor.

"Very likely not," said Harry, soberly. "I'll think about it, and let
you know if I decide to take it."

Maurice Tudor was a silent listener to this dialogue. He saw Harry's
sober expression, and he noticed the tone in which he repeated "eighteen
dollars," and he guessed the truth. He lingered after Harry went out,
and said:

"That's a good fellow."

"Harry Walton?" repeated the tailor. "Yes, he's worth a dozen Luke
Harrisons."

"Has he been in the village long?"

"No, not more than two or three months. He works for Mr. Leavitt."

"He is rather poor, I suppose."

"Yes. The boys call him mean; but Leavitt tells me he is saving up every
cent to send to his father, who is a poor farmer."

"That's a good thing in him."

"Yes, I wish I could afford to give him and overcoat. He needs one, but
I suppose seventeen dollars will come rather hard on him to pay. If it
was Luke Harrison, it wouldn't trouble him much."

"You mean he would get it on tick."

"Yes, if he found anybody fool enough to trust him. I've done it as long
as I'm going to. He won't get a dollar more credit out of me till he
pays his bill."

"You're perfectly right, there."

"So I think. He earns a good deal more than Walton, but spends what he
earns on billiards, drinks and cigars."

