
"Really, I couldn't stand sailing in a little boat, you know."

"That's settled, then!" said the captain. "Into the boats with you!"

The sailors and two passengers lowered themselves into the long boat,
which was large enough to receive them all, till only Jack Pendleton
and the captain remained.

"Get in, boy!" said the captain, harshly.

Jack stepped back, and said, manfully: "I will remain on board the
ship, sir."

While this discussion had been going on, the boat was being stored
with kegs of water and provisions, and soon after the sailors began to
ply the oars.

The little band that remained looked silently and solemnly, as they
saw their late companions borne farther and farther away from them on
the crested waves.

"It's a question which will last longer, the ship or the boat," said
Mr. Holdfast.

"We must work--I know that," said Mr. Stubbs. "Captain Holdfast, I
salute you as my commander. Give us your orders."

"Are you all agreed, gentlemen?" asked Holdfast.

"We are," answered all except Montgomery Clinton, who was clinging to
the side with a greenish pallor on his face.

"Then I shall set you to work at the pumps. Jack I assign you and the
professor to duty first. You will work an hour; then Mr. Stubbs and
Mr. Vane will relieve you. I will look out for the vessel's course."

"I am afraid I couldn't pump," said Montgomery Clinton. "I feel so
awfully weak, you know, I think I'm going to die!"

Harry looked out to sea and saw the little boat containing the remnant
of their company growing smaller and smaller. A sudden feeling of
loneliness overcame him, and he asked himself, seriously: "Is death,
then, so near?"

The sea was still rough, but the violence of the storm was past. In a
few hours the surface of the sea was much less agitated. The spirits
of the passengers rose, especially after learning from the mate that
he had been able to stop the leak, through the experience which he
acquired in his younger days as assistant to a ship carpenter.

"Then the old ship is likely to float a while longer?" said
Mr. Stubbs, cheerfully.

"Not a short time, either, if the weather continues favorable."

"Captain Hill was in too much of a hurry to leave the vessel,"
remarked Harry.

"Yes," answered Holdfast. "Such was my opinion when I thought the
Nantucket in much worse condition than at present. If the captain and
sailors had remained on board, we could have continued our voyage to
Melbourne without difficulty.

"And now?" said Mr. Stubbs, interrogatively.

"Now we have no force to man her. Little Jack and myself are the only
sailors on board."

"But not the only men."

"That is true. I think, however, that you or the professor would find
it rather hard to spread or take in sail."

Mr. Stubbs looked up into the rigging and shrugged his shoulders.

The next day Mr. Clinton appeared on deck. He looked faded and played
out, but he was no longer the woebegone creature of a day or two
previous. Even he turned out to be of use, for he knew something about
cooking, and volunteered to assist in preparing the meals, the ship's
cook having left the ship with the captain. Accordingly, he rose in
the estimation of the passengers--having proved that he was not wholly
a drone.

Jack and Harry grew still more intimate. The young sailor was under no
restraint now that the captain was not on board, for with the mate he
had always been a favorite.

All efforts were made to keep the ship on her course. They could not
put up all the sails, however, and made but slow progress. They did
little but drift. Nor did they encounter any other vessel for several
days, so that there was no chance of obtaining the desired assistance.

"I wonder where it will all end, Jack?" said Harry, one evening.

"I don't trouble myself much about that, Harry," said the young
sailor. "I am content as I am."

"Don't you look ahead, then?"

"I am happy with you and the few we have on board. They are kind to
me; what more do I need?"

"I can't be contented so easily, Jack. I hope there is a long life
before us. Here we are, making no progress. We are doing nothing to
advance ourselves."

But this did not make much impression on Jack. He did not look beyond
the present, and so that this was comfortable, he left the future to
look out for itself.

"What do you think has become of Captain Hill and his companions,
Mr. Holdfast?" asked Mr. Stubbs, on the third evening after the
separation.

"He is probably still afloat, unless he has been fortunate enough to
be picked up by some vessel."

"There is no hope of reaching land in the Nantucket is there,"
continued Mr. Stubbs.

"There is considerable fear of it," said the mate.

"Why do you use the word fear?" asked Stubbs, puzzled.

"What I mean is, that we are likely to run aground upon some unknown
island. If the shore is rocky, it may break us to pieces, and that, of
course, will be attended with danger to life or limb."

Stubbs looked thoughtful.

"I should like to see land," he said, "but I wouldn't like to land in
that way. It reminds me of an old lady who, traveling by cars for the
first time, was upset in a collision. As she crawled out of the
window, she asked, innocently: 'Do you always stop this way?'"

"There are dangers on land as well as on the sea," said the mate, "as
your story proves; though one is not so likely to realize them. In our
present circumstances, there is one thing I earnestly hope for."

"What is that?"

"That we may not have another storm. I fear, in her dismantled
condition, the Nantucket would have a poor chance of outliving it,
particularly as we have no one but Jack and myself to do seamen's
work."

Mr. Stubbs walked thoughtfully away.

Harry, who had seen him talking with the mate, asked him what the
nature of the conversation was.

Mr. Stubbs told him.

"The fact is, Harry," he said, "we are in a critical condition.
Whether we are ever to see old terry firmy again"--Mr. Stubbs was not
a classical scholar--"seems a matter of doubt."

"And the worst of it is," said Harry, "there seems to be nothing you
or I can do to increase our chances of safety."

"No, unless we could manage to see a ship which the chief officer had
overlooked. That, I take it, is not very likely."

It was toward morning of the fifth night after the captain had left
the ship that all on board were startled by a mighty thumping,
accompanied by a shock that threw the sleepers out of bed.

Harry ran hastily on deck. The mate was there already.

"What's happened, Mr. Holdfast?" asked the boy, anxiously.

"The ship has struck on a rocky ledge!"

"Are we in danger?"

"In great danger. Call all the passengers. We must take to the boat,
for the Nantucket is doomed!"




CHAPTER XIV

THE WRECK OF THE NANTUCKET


It was still quite dark, but it was light enough to see that the ship
had struck upon a reef. Straining their eyes, the alarmed passengers
could descry land. Indeed, the reef was an outlying part of it.

All eyes were turned upon the captain, as Mr. Holdfast was now called.

"If I had had men enough to stand watch, this would not have
happened," he said.

"Is there any hope, Mr. Holdfast?" asked Montgomery Clinton, clasping
his hands in terror.

"Plenty of it," answered the mate, curtly, "but we must leave the
ship."

Under his direction the remaining boat--for Captain Hill and his
companions had only taken away one--was lowered. Steering clear of the
reef, they found themselves in a cove, bordered on three sides by
land. By the light, now rapidly increasing, they saw grass and trees,
and the sight gladdened them in spite of the grave peril that menaced
them.

They put in the boat as large a supply of stores as they dared, and
then rowed ashore. Landing the passengers, Holdfast selected Jack and
Harry, and went back to the ship for a further supply.

"We must lay in as much as we can, for we don't know how long we are
to remain here," he said.

When the second trip had been made, it was decided to rest for a time
and eat breakfast.

The little group gathered on a bluff looking out to sea, and, sitting
down, ate heartily. By this time the sun had made its appearance, and
it bade fair to be a pleasant day.

"Have you any idea where we are, Mr. Holdfast?" asked Mr. Stubbs.

"I only know that we are on an island. There is no mainland near
here," answered the commander.

"It seems to be a large one, then. While you were gone with the boys,
I ascended a tree, and, looking inland, could not see the ocean in
that direction."

"I feel like exploring the island," said Harry; "who will go with me?"

Curious to see what kind of a new home they had, all set out. First,
however, the professor asked:

"How long before the ship is likely to go to pieces, Mr. Holdfast?"

"Not under a day or two in this weather," was the answer. "Later in
the day I will board her again."

They struck inland and walked for about two miles. There were trees
and plants such as they had never seen before, and the songs of
unknown birds floated out upon the air. It was certainly a delightful
change from the contracted life they had been leading upon shipboard.

"Do you think the island is inhabited?" asked Harry.

"I know no more about it than you do, my lad," answered Holdfast.

"Suppose we should meet with a pack of savages armed with spears!"
suggested Harry, with a side look at Clinton, who was walking by him.

"Oh, good gracious! Mr. Holdfast, do you think we will?" asked that
young gentleman, nervously.

"We must do the best we can. I take it we are all brave, and would be
willing to fight."

After a considerable walk, they reached a grove of trees, bearing a
different leaf from any to which they were accustomed. They did not
appear to produce fruit of any kind, but were comely and afforded a
grateful shade. This was the more appreciated, because the sun had
begun to make its heat felt, and a feeling of languor diffused itself
over all.

"I move we squat here a while," said Mr. Stubbs.

"Very well," said the mate. "We have all day before us, and I am
afraid a great many more to come, in which we may explore the island."

All threw themselves on the grass without ceremony.

They returned to the shore about noon, and sitting down on the bluff,
ate heartily of the stores they had brought with them from the ship.
They had brought no water, but, fortunately, discovered a spring on
their homeward walk, which promised a constant supply of refreshing
drink.

"This seems a great deal like a picnic," said Harry, as they sat down
on the grass with the food in the center.

"I am afraid it will prove a larger picnic than we care for," remarked
the professor.

When dinner was over, if their informal meal can be dignified by that
name, Mr. Holdfast said:

"I think we had better make another trip to the ship, and bring back
what we can. We shall need a further supply of provisions, and there
will be other things that will occur to us as likely to be needed."

"May I go with you, Mr. Holdfast?" asked Harry.

"Yes," answered the mate; "I will take you and Jack, and Mr. Stubbs,
too, may come, if he will."

"I am quite at your command, captain," said the Yankee.

Nothing suited Harry better than to make one of the expeditions. He
and Jack clambered up the ship's sides, and chased each other in
boyish fun. Jack had no fear of a stern rebuke from Mr. Holdfast, who
had a sympathy with the young. He would not have dared to take such
liberties with Captain Hill.

"How long do you think the ship will hold together, Mr. Holdfast?"
asked Stubbs.

"For a week, perhaps, unless the sea becomes rough, and dashes her
against the reef with violence."

"At present she seems motionless."

"Yes, she is not at present receiving any damage. It will be a sad day
when she goes to pieces," continued the mate, gravely.

"Yes, but it will hardly make our position worse. There is no chance
of our making any use of her, I take it."

"You don't quite understand me," said Holdfast. "A sailor gets to feel
an attachment for the craft he sails on, and she seems to him
something like a living creature. This is my first voyage on the old
Nantucket, but it will grieve me to see her disappear."

It was not easy to decide of what the boat's load should consist. In
the main, provisions were taken as an article of first necessity. Some
clothing, also, was selected, and among the rest, at Harry's instance,
an extra pair of Mr. Clinton's trousers.

It was decided not to make another trip to the ship that day.
Mr. Holdfast expressed the opinion that the Nantucket was not in any
immediate danger of going to pieces, and there was much other work in
hand.

"Do you know anything about the climate here, Mr. Holdfast?" asked the
professor.

"I don't think it is ever cold. It is too far south for that."

"I mean as to the chance of rain. I am told that in these tropical
places, rain comes on very suddenly at times."

"I suspect that this is the dry season, professor."

"Still, it may be wise to provide ourselves with some shelter."

"True; have you anything to suggest?"

"It occurred to me that we might procure some of the sails, and use as
a roof covering to shield us from the heat of the sun, and from any
unexpected showers."

"A good idea. I am glad you mentioned it. On the whole, I think I will
make one more trip to the ship this afternoon for the special purpose
of bringing back materials for a roof. Then we can put it up
to-night."

"Better bring hatchets, if there are any on board, some nails and
cordage."

"Also well thought of. You are a practical man, professor."

"We shall all have to think for the general benefit. I am sorry I
can't do more work, but I never was handy with tools."

"I am," said Stubbs. "In fact, most Yankees are, and I am a Yankee.
You can command my services, Mr. Holdfast, in any way that you see
fit."

Mr. Holdfast made another trip to the vessel, and brought back quite
an expanse of sailcloth. All hands, with the exception of Mr. Clinton,
went to work at once, and by sunset a considerable space was roofed
over, which the little company regarded with complacency.

"Aren't you going to have any sides or doors?" asked Clinton.

"That can be considered hereafter," said Holdfast. "I don't think we
shall need any, since the probability is that the island is not
inhabited."

The next morning a great surprise awaited them.

It might have been because it was the first night on land, or perhaps
because they were unusually fatigued, but at any rate the little party
slept unusually late. The first one to awake was Harry Vane. It took
very little time for him to dress, since he had only taken off his
coat. He glanced at his slumbering companions, who were scattered
about in different postures.

"I'll go up to the spring, and have a wash," Harry decided. "I won't
wake anybody, for there's no hurry about waking up."

Returning from the spring, Harry for the first time looked in the
direction of the ship. What he saw filled him with amazement. The
wreck which he had thought deserted, was alive with men. He saw a
dozen on deck, including two who were obviously not sailors. He could
not immediately discern the figures, and ran hastily to the top of the
bluff. Then he made the startling discovery that these intruders were
the captain and his companions, who had abandoned the ship in the
expectation that it was doomed, and, after floating about in the long
boat, had by a wonderful coincidence drifted to the very point which
they themselves had reached.

The news was too important to keep, and he returned to the encampment,
and entering, approached the mate, who was sleeping soundly. He leaned
over and shook him gently.

"Mr. Holdfast!" he cried.

The mate slowly opened his eyes and started up.

"What's the matter?" he asked. "Has anything happened?"

"I've got great news for you, Mr. Holdfast. Captain Hill has arrived."

"What!" exclaimed the mate, in amazement. "Arrived--where?"

"He is at this moment on the Nantucket, with all the men that
accompanied him in the long boat."

Uttering an expression of amazement, Mr. Holdfast sprang from the
ground, and hastily made his way to the edge of the bluff.

"By Jove!" said he, "you're right. I never heard of anything more
wonderful."

Harry could not tell from the expression of his face whether he
considered the news good or not.

"Go and wake up the rest, Harry," he said. "They will be surprised,
too."

It is needless to say that the news produced surprise and excitement.
All hurried to the edge of the bluff.

"Will they come on shore, do you think?" asked Harry of the mate.

"They will have to; but I shall at once go out to the ship and report
to my superior officer. You and Jack may go with me."

It is needless to say that both boys were very glad to accept this
invitation. The rest of the party remained on shore and watched the
boat's course.

"What will be the issue of this, Mr. Stubbs?" asked the professor,
thoughtfully.

"I am afraid there will be friction. The captain is a natural despot,
and he will undertake to control us."

"He can have no authority after the ship is wrecked."

"He will claim it, as sure as my name is Stubbs. The fact is, I am
rather sorry he hadn't managed to drift to another island.
Mr. Holdfast is a much more agreeable man to deal with."

"I agree with you. As a passenger, I shall not recognize the captain's
authority on shore."

"Nor I."

