
"Well, sir, if so, so be it. You have dismissed the Armitages on
account of their upholding the king, and you can not, therefore, be
surprised that they uphold him more than ever. Nor can you be surprised
if a dismissed verderer becomes a poacher."

"Nor can you be surprised, if a poacher is caught, that he incurs the
penalty," replied the Roundhead. "So now there's an end of our
argument. If you go into the kitchen you will find wherewithal to
refresh the outward man, and if you wish to remain till Oswald
Partridge comes home, you are welcome."

Edward, who felt indignant at being dismissed to the kitchen, nodded
his head and smiled upon the little girl, and left the room. "Well,"
thought he, as he went along the passage, "I came here for two puppies,
and I have found a Roundhead. I don't know how it is, but I am not
angry with him as I thought I should be. That little girl had a nice
smile--she was quite handsome when she smiled. Oh, this is the kitchen,
to which," thought he, "the Lord of Arnwood is dismissed by a
Covenanter and Roundhead, probably a tradesman or outlaw, who has
served the cause. Well, be it so; as Humphrey says, 'I'll bide my
time.' But there is no one here, so I'll try if there is a stable for
White Billy, who is tired, I presume, of being at the gate."

Edward returned by the way he came, went out of the front door and
through the garden to where the pony was made fast, and led him away in
search of a stable. He found one behind the house, and filling the rack
with hay, returned to the house and seated himself at a porch which was
at the door which led to the back premises, for the keeper's house was
large and commodious. Edward was in deep thought, when he was roused by
the little girl, the daughter of the newly-appointed intendant of the
forest, who said:

"I am afraid, young sir, you have had but sorry welcome in the kitchen,
as there was no one to receive you. I was not aware that Phoebe had
gone out. If you will come with me, I may perhaps find you refreshment."

"Thanks, maiden, you are kind and considerate to an avowed poacher,"
replied Edward.

"Oh, but you will not poach, I'm sure; and if you do, I'll beg you off
if I can," replied the girl, laughing.

Edward followed her into the kitchen, and she soon produced a cold fowl
and a venison pasty, which she placed on the table; she then went out
and returned with a jug of ale.

"There," said she, putting it on the table, "that is all that I can
find.".

"Your father's name is Heatherstone, I believe. It was so on the
warrant."

"Yes, it is."

"And yours?"

"The same as my father's, I should presume."

"Yes, but your baptismal name?"

"You ask strange questions, young sir; but still I will answer you
that: my baptismal name is Patience."

"I thank you for your condescension," replied Edward "You live here?"

"For the present, good sir; and now I leave you."

"That's a nice little girl, thought Edward, although she is the
daughter of a Roundhead; and she calls me 'Sir.' I can not, therefore,
look like Jacob's grandson, and must be careful." Edward then set to
with a good appetite at the viands which had been placed before him,
and had just finished a hearty meal when Patience Heatherstone again
came in and said:

"Oswald Partridge is now coming home."

"I thank you, maiden," replied Edward. "May I ask a question of you?
Where is the king now?"

"I have heard that he resides at Hurst Castle," replied the girl;
"but," added she in a low tone, "all attempts to see him would be
useless and only hurt him and those who made the attempt." Having said
this, she left the room.




CHAPTER IX.


Edward, having finished his meal, and had a good pull at the jug of
ale, which was a liquor he had not tasted for a long while, rose from
the table and went out of the back door, and found there Oswald
Partridge. He accosted him, stating the reason for his coming over to
him. "I did not know that Jacob had a grandson: indeed I never knew
that he had a son. Have you been living with him long?"

"More than a year," replied Edward; "before that, I was in the
household at Arnwood."

"Then you are of the king's side, I presume?" replied Oswald.

"To death," replied Edward, "when the time comes."

"And I am also; that you may suppose, for never would I give a hound to
any one that was not. But we had better go to the kennels. Dogs may
hear, but they can't repeat."

"I little thought to have met any one but you here when I came," said
Edward; "and I will now tell you all that passed between me and the new
intendant." Edward then related the conversation.

"You have been bold," said Oswald; "but perhaps it is all the better. I
am to retain my situation, and so are two others; but there are many
new hands coming in as rangers. I know nothing of them, but that they
are little fitted for their places, and rail against the king all day
long, which, I suppose, is their chief merit in the eyes of those who
appoint them. However, one thing is certain, that if those fellows can
not stalk a deer themselves, they will do all they can to prevent
others; so you must be on the alert, for the punishment is severe."

"I fear them not; the only difficulty is, that we shall not be able to
find a sale for the venison now," replied Edward.

"Oh never fear that; I will give you the names of those who will take
all your venison off your hands without any risk on your part, except
in the killing of it. They will meet you in the park, lay down ready
money, and take it away. I don't know, but I have an idea, that this
new intendant, or what you may call him, is not so severe as he
pretends to be. Indeed, his permitting you to say what he did, and his
own words relative to the colonel, convince me that I am right in the
opinion that I formed."

"Do you know who he is?"

"Not much about him, but he is a great friend of General Cromwell, and
they say has done good service to the Parliamentary cause; but we shall
meet again, for the forest is free at all events."

"If you come here," continued Oswald, "do not carry your gun--and see
that you are not watched home. There are the dogs for your grandfather.
Why, how old must you be, for Jacob is not more than sixty or
thereabout?"

"I am fifteen, past, nevertheless."

"I should have put you down for eighteen or nineteen at least. You are
well grown indeed for that age. Well, nothing like a forest life to
turn a boy into a man! Can you stalk a deer?"

"I seldom go out without bringing one down."

"Indeed! That Jacob is a master of his craft, is certain; but you are
young to have learned it so soon. Can you tell the slot of a brocket
from a stag?"

"Yes, and the slot of a brocket from a doe."

"Better still. We must go out together; and besides, I must know where
the old man's cottage is (for I do not exactly), in the first place,
because I may want to come to you, and in the next, that I may put
others on a false scent. Do you know the clump of large oaks which they
call the Clump Royal?"

"Yes, I do."

"Will you meet me there the day after to-morrow, at early dawn?"

"If I live and do well."

"That's enough. Take the dogs in the leashes, and go away now."

"Many thanks; but I must not leave the pony, he is in the stable."

The keeper nodded adieu to Edward, who left him to go to the stable for
the pony. Edward saddled White Billy, and rode away across the forest
with the dogs trotting at the pony's heels.

Edward had much to reflect upon as he rode back to the cottage. He felt
that his position was one of more difficulty than before. That old
Jacob Armitage would not last much longer, he was convinced; even now
the poor old man was shrunk away to a skeleton with pain and disease.
That the livelihood to be procured from the forest would be attended
with peril, now that order had been restored, and the forest was no
longer neglected, was certain; and he rejoiced that Humphrey had, by
his assiduity and intelligence, made the farm so profitable as it
promised to be. Indeed he felt that, if necessary, they could live upon
the proceeds of the farm, and not run the risk of imprisonment by
stalking the deer. But he had told the intendant that he considered the
game as the king's property, and he was resolved that he would at all
events run the risk, although he would no longer permit Humphrey so to
do. "If any thing happens to me," thought Edward, "Humphrey will still
be at the cottage to take care of my sisters; and if I am obliged to
fly the country, it will suit well my feelings, as I can then offer my
services to those who still support the king." With these thoughts and
many others he amused himself until, late in the evening, he arrived at
the cottage. He found all in bed except Humphrey, who had waited for
him, and to whom he narrated all that had passed. Humphrey said little
in reply; he wished to think it over before he gave any opinion. He
told Edward that Jacob had been very ill the whole of the day, and had
requested Alice to read the Bible to him during the evening.

The next morning Edward went to Jacob, who for the last ten days had
altogether kept his bed, and gave him the detail of what had happened
at the keeper's lodge.

"You have been more bold than prudent, Edward," replied Jacob; "but I
could not expect you to have spoken otherwise. You are too proud and
too manly to tell a lie, and I am glad that it is so. As for your
upholding the king, although he is now a prisoner in their hands, they
can not blame you or punish you for that, as long as you have not
weapons in your hands; but now that they have taken the forest under
their jurisdiction, you must be careful, for they are the ruling powers
at present, and must be obeyed, or the forfeit must be paid. Still I do
not ask you to promise me this or that; I only point out to you that
your sisters will suffer by any imprudence on your part; and for their
sakes be careful. I say this, Edward, because I feel that my days are
numbered, and that in a short time I shall be called away. You will
then have all the load on your shoulders which has been latterly on
mine. I have no fear for the result if you are prudent; these few
months past, during which I have only been a burden to you, have proved
that you and Humphrey can find a living here for yourselves and your
sisters; and it is fortunate, now that the forest laws are about to be
put in force, that you have made the farm so profitable. If I might
advise, let your hunting in the forest be confined to the wild cattle;
they are not game, and the forest laws do not extend to them, and the
meat is as valuable as venison--that is to say, it does not sell so
dear, but there is more of it; but stick to the farm as much as you
can; for you see, Edward, you do not look like a low-born forester, nor
ought you to do so; and the more quiet you keep the better. As for
Oswald Partridge, you may trust him; I know him well; and he will prove
your friend for my sake, as soon as he hears that I am dead. Leave me
now--I will talk to you again in the evening. Send Alice to me, my dear
boy."

Edward was much distressed to perceive the change which had taken place
in old Jacob. He was evidently much worse; but Edward had no idea how
much worse he was. Edward assisted Humphrey in the farm, and in the
evening again went to Jacob, and then told him of the arrangement he
had made to meet Oswald Partridge on the following morning.

"Go, my boy," said Jacob; "be as intimate with him as you can, and make
a friend of him--nay, if it should be necessary, you may tell him who
you are; I did think of telling him myself, as it might be important to
you one day as evidence. I think you had better bring him here
to-morrow night, Edward; tell him I am dying, and wish to speak to him
before I go. Alice will read the Bible to me now, and I will talk with
you another time."

Early the next morning Edward set off to the appointed rendezvous with
Oswald Partridge. The Clump Royal, as it was called, from the peculiar
size and beauty of the oaks, was about seven miles from the cottage;
and at the hour and time indicated, Edward, with his gun in his hand,
and Smoker lying beside him, was leaning against one of those monarchs
of the forest. He did not wait long. Oswald Partridge, similarly
provided, made his appearance, and Edward advanced to meet him.

"Welcome, Oswald," said Edward.

"And welcome to you also, my fine lad," replied Oswald. "I have been
hard questioned about you since we parted--first by the Roundhead
Heatherstone, who plied me in all manner of ways to find out whether
you are what you assert, the grandson of Jacob--or some other person. I
really believe that he fancies you are the Duke of York--but he, could
not get any more from me than what I knew. I told him that your
grandfather's cottage was his own property, and a grant to his
forefathers; that you were brought up at Arnwood, and had joined your
grandfather after the death of the colonel, and the murderous burning
of the house and all within it by his party. But the pretty little
daughter was more curious still. She cross-questioned me in every way
when her father was not present, and at last begged me as a favor to
tell you not to take the deer, as her father was very strict in his
duty, and, if caught, you would be imprisoned."

"Many thanks to her for her caution, but I hope to take one to-day,
nevertheless," replied Edward; "a hart royal is not meat for
Roundheads, although the king's servants may feast on them."

"That's truly said. Well, now I must see your woodcraft. You shall be
the leader of the chase."

"Think you we can harbor a stag about here?"

"Yes, in this month, no doubt."

"Let us walk on," said Edward. "The wind is fresh from the eastern
quarter; we will face it, if you please--or, rather, keep it blowing on
our right cheek for the present."

"'Tis well," replied Oswald; and they walked for about half an hour.

"This is the slot of a doe," said Edward, in a low voice, pointing to
the marks; "yonder thicket is a likely harbor for the stag." They
proceeded, and Edward pointed out to Oswald the slot of the stag into
the thicket. They then walked round, and found no marks of the animal
having left his lair.

"He is here," whispered Edward; and Oswald made a sign for Edward to
enter the thicket, while he walked to the other side. Edward entered
the thicket cautiously. In the center he perceived, through the trees,
a small cleared spot, covered with high fern, and felt certain that the
stag was lying there. He forced his way on his knees till he had a
better view of the place, and then cocked his gun. The noise induced
the stag to move his antlers, and discover his lair. Edward could just
perceive the eye of the animal through the heath; he waited till the
beast settled again, took steady aim, and fired. At the report of the
gun another stag sprung up and burst away. Oswald fired and wounded it,
but the animal made off, followed by the dogs. Edward, who hardly knew
whether he had missed or not, but fait almost certain that he had not,
hastened out of the thicket to join in the chase; and, as he passed
through the fern patch, perceived that his quarry lay dead. He then
followed the chase, and, being very fleet of foot, soon came up with
Oswald, and passed him without speaking. The stag made for a swampy
ground, and finally took to the water beyond it, and stood at bay.
Edward then waited for Oswald, who came up with him.

"He has soiled," said Edward, "and now you may go in and kill him."

Oswald, eager in the chase, hastened up to where the dogs and stag were
in the water, and put a bullet through the animal's head.

Edward went to him, assisted him to drag the stag out of the water, and
then Oswald cut its throat, and proceeded to perform the usual offices.

"How did you happen to miss him?" said Oswald; "for these are my shots."

"Because I never fired at him," said Edward; "my quarry lies dead in
the fern--and a fine fellow he is."

"This is a warrantable stag," said Oswald.

"Yes, but mine is a hart royal, as you will see when we go back."

As soon as Oswald had done his work, he hung the quarters of the animal
on an oak-tree, and went back with Edward.

"Where did you hit him, Edward?" said Oswald, as they walked along.

"I could only see his eye through the fern, and I must have hit him
thereabouts."

On their arrival at the spot, Oswald found that Edward had put the ball
right into the eye of the stag.

"Well," said he, "you made me suppose that you knew something of our
craft, but I did not believe that you were so apt as you thought
yourself to be. I now confess that you are a master, as far as I can
see, in all branches of the craft. This is indeed a hart royal.
Twenty-five antlers, as I live! Come, out with your knife, and let us
finish; for if we are to go to the cottage, we have no time to lose. It
will be dark in half an hour." They hung all the quarters of the stag
as before, and then set off for Jacob's cottage, Edward proposing that
Oswald should take the cart and pony to carry the meat home next
morning, and that he would accompany him to bring it back.

"That will do capitally," said Oswald; "and here we are, if I recollect
right, and I hope there is something to eat."

"No fear of that--Alice will be prepared for us," replied Edward.

Their dinner was ready for them, and Oswald praised the cooking. He was
much surprised to see that Jacob had four grandchildren. After dinner,
he went into Jacob's room, and remained with him more than an hour.
During this conference, Jacob confided to Oswald that the four children
were the sons and daughters of Colonel Beverley, supposed to have been
burned in the firing of Arnwood. Oswald came out, much surprised as
well as pleased with the information, and with the confidence reposed
in him. He saluted Edward and Humphrey respectfully, and said, "I was
not aware with whom I was in company, sir, as you may well imagine; but
the knowledge of it has made my heart glad."

"Nay, Oswald," replied Edward, "remember that I am still Edward
Armitage, and that we are the grandchildren of old Jacob."

"Certainly, sir, I will, for your own sake, not forget that such is to
be supposed to be the case. I assure you, I think it very fortunate
that Jacob has confided the secret to me, as it may be in my power to
be useful. I little thought that I should ever have had my dinner
cooked by the daughter of Colonel Beverley."

They then entered into a long conversation, during which Oswald
expressed his opinion that the old man was sinking fast, and would not
last more than three or four days. Oswald had a bed made up for him on
the floor of the room where Edward and Humphrey slept; and the next
morning they set off, at an early hour, with the pony and cart, loaded
it with venison, and took it across the forest to the keeper's lodge.
It was so late when they arrived, that Edward consented to pass the
night there, and return home on the following morning. Oswald went into
the sitting-room to speak with the intendant of the forest, leaving
Edward in the kitchen with Phoebe, the maid-servant. He told the
intendant that he had brought home some fine venison, and wished his
orders about it. He also stated that he had been assisted by Edward
Armitage, who had brought the venison home for him in his cart, and who
was now in the kitchen, as he would be obliged to pass the night there;
and, on being questioned, he was lavish in his praises of Edward's
skill and knowledge of woodcraft, which he declared to be superior to
his own.

"It proves that the young man has had much practice, at all events,"
replied Mr. Heatherstone, smiling. "He has been living at the king's
expense, but he must not follow it up at the cost of the Parliament. It
would be well to take this young man as a ranger if we could; for
although he is opposed to us, yet, if he once took our service, he
would be faithful, I am sure. You can propose it to him, Oswald. The
hunches of that hart royal must be sent up to General Cromwell
to-morrow: the remainder we will give directions for, as soon as I have
made up my mind how to dispose of it."

Oswald left the room, and came back to Edward. "General Cromwell is to
have the hunches of your stag," said he to Edward, smiling: "and the
intendant proposes that you should take service as one of the rangers."

"I thank you," replied Edward, "but I've no fancy to find venison for
General Cromwell and his Roundheads; and so, you may tell the
intendant, with many thanks for his good-will toward me, nevertheless."

"I thought as much, but the man meant kindly, that I really think. Now,
Phoebe, what can you give us to eat, for we are hungry?"

"You shall be served directly," replied Phoebe. "I have some steaks on
the fire."

"And you must find a bed for my young friend here."

"I have none in the house, but there is plenty of good straw over the
stables."

"That will do," replied Edward; "I'm not particular."
