it would take her to make them?"

"About three weeks, I think, sir. Will that be soon enough?"

"That will do. Perhaps it will be well, however, to bring half the
number whenever they are finished."

"All right, sir."

"I suppose your mother can cut them out if I send a shirt as a pattern?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. Preston rose, and, going to a bureau, took therefrom a shirt which
he handed to Paul. He then wrote a few lines on a slip of paper, which
he also handed our hero.

"That is an order on Barclay & Co.," he explained, "for the requisite
materials. If either you or your mother presents it, they will be given
you."

"Very good, sir," said Paul.

He took his cap, and prepared to go.

"Good-evening, Mr. Preston," he said.

"Good-evening. I shall expect you with the shirts when they are ready."

Paul went downstairs and into the street, thinking that Mr. Preston was
very sociable and agreeable. He had fancied that rich men were generally
"stuck up," but about Mr. Preston there seemed an absence of all
pretense. Paul's ambition was aroused when he thought of the story he
had heard, and he wondered whether it would be possible for him to raise
himself to wealth and live in as handsome a house as Mr. Preston. He
thought what a satisfaction it would be if the time should ever come
when he could free his mother from the necessity of work, and give
little Jimmy a chance to develop his talent for drawing. However, such
success must be a long way off, if it ever came.

He had intended to ride home, but his mind was so preoccupied that he
forgot all about it, and had got some distance on his way before it
occurred to him. Then, not feeling particularly tired, he concluded to
keep on walking, as he had commenced.

"It will save me six cents," he reflected, "and that is something. If I
am ever going to be a prosperous merchant, I must begin to save now."

So he kept on walking. Passing the Cooper Institute, he came into the
Bowery, a broad and busy street, the humble neighbor of Broadway, to
which it is nearly parallel.

He was still engaged in earnest thought, when he felt a rude slap on the
back. Looking round, he met the malicious glance of Mike Donovan, who
probably would not have ventured on such a liberty if he had not been
accompanied by a boy a head taller than himself, and, to judge from
appearances, of about the same character.

"What did you do that for, Mike?" demanded Paul.

"None of your business. I didn't hurt you, did I?" returned Mike,
roughly.

"No, but I don't care to be hit that way by you."

"So you're putting on airs, are you?"

"No, I don't do that," returned Paul; "but I don't care about having
anything to do with you."

"That's because you've got a new shirt, is it?" sneered Mike.

"It isn't mine."

"That's what I thought. Who did you steal it from?"

"Do you mean to insult me, Mike Donovan?" demanded Paul, angrily.

"Just as you like," said Mike, independently.

"If you want to know why I don't want to have anything to do with you, I
will tell you."

"Tell ahead."

"Because you're a thief."

"If you say that again, I'll lick you," said Mike, reddening with anger.

"It's true. You stole my basket of candy the other day, and that isn't
the only time you've been caught stealing."

"I'll give you the worst licking you ever had. Do you want to fight?"
said Mike, flourishing his fist.

"No, I don't," said Paul. "Some time when I haven't a bundle, I'll
accommodate you."

"You're a coward!" sneered Mike, gaining courage as he saw Paul was not
disposed for an encounter.

"I don't think I am," said Paul, coolly.

"I'll hold your shirt," said Mike's companion, with a grin, "if you want
to fight."

Paul, however, did not care to intrust the shirt to a stranger of so
unprepossessing an appearance.

He, therefore, attempted to pass on. But Mike, encouraged by his
reluctance, stepped up and shook his fist within an inch of Paul's nose,
calling him at the same time a coward. This was too much for Paul's
self-restraint. He dropped the shirt and pitched into Mike in so
scientific a manner that the latter was compelled to retreat, and
finally to flee at the top of his speed, not without having first
received several pretty hard blows.

"I don't think he will meddle with me again," said Paul to himself, as
he pulled down the sleeves of his jacket.

He walked back, and looked for the shirt which he had laid down before
commencing the combat. But he looked in vain. Nothing was to be seen
of the shirt or of Mike's companion. Probably both had disappeared
together.



CHAPTER XI

BARCLAY & CO.

The loss of the shirt was very vexatious. It was not so much the value
of it that Paul cared for, although this was a consideration by no means
to be despised by one in his circumstances; but it had been lent as a
pattern, and without it his mother would be unable to make Mr. Preston's
shirts. As to recovering it, he felt that there was little chance of
this. Besides, it would involve delay, and his mother could not afford
to remain idle. Paul felt decidedly uncomfortable. Again Mike Donovan
had done him an injury, and this time of a more serious nature than
before.

What should he do?

There seemed but one answer to this question. He must go back to Mr.
Preston, explain the manner in which he had lost his shirt, and ask him
for another, promising, of course, to supply the place of the one lost.
He was not sure whether Mr. Preston would accept this explanation. He
might think it was only an attempt to defraud him. But, at any rate, it
seemed the only thing to do, and it must be done at once. He entered a
passing car, for it was too late to walk.

"I wish I had taken the car down," thought Paul. "Then I shouldn't have
lost the shirt."

But it was too late for regrets now. He must do the best that remained
to him.

It was nearly ten o'clock when Paul once more stood before the door of
Mr. Preston's boarding-place. He rang the bell and asked to see him.

"You have been here before this evening?" said the servant.

"Yes."

"Then you know the room. You can walk right up."

Paul went upstairs and knocked at Mr. Preston's room. He was bidden to
come in, and did so.

Mr. Preston looked up with surprise.

"I suppose you are surprised to see me," said Paul, rather awkwardly.

"Why, yes. I did not anticipate that pleasure quite so soon," said Mr.
Preston, smiling.

"I am afraid it won't be a pleasure, for I bring bad news."

"Bad news?" repeated the gentleman, rather startled.

"Yes; I have lost the shirt you gave me."

"Oh, is that all?" said Mr. Preston, looking relieved. "But how did you
lose it?"

"I was walking home down the Bowery, when two fellows met me. One of
them, Mike Donovan, forced me into a fight. I gave him a licking," added
Paul, with satisfaction; "but when it was all over, I found the other
fellow had run off with the shirt."

"I don't believe it will fit him," said Mr. Preston, laughing.

As the speaker probably weighed two hundred and fifty pounds, it was,
indeed, rather doubtful. Paul couldn't help laughing himself at the
thought.

"You were certainly unlucky," said Mr. Preston. "Did you know the boy
you fought with?"

"Yes, sir; he once before stole my stock of candy, when I was in the
prize-package business."

"That was the day we got acquainted," remarked Mr. Preston.

"Yes, sir."

"He doesn't seem to be a very particular friend of yours."

"No; he hates me, Mike does, though I don't know why. But I hope you
won't be angry with me for losing the shirt?"

"No; it doesn't seem to be your fault, only your misfortune."

"I was afraid you might think I had made up the story, and only wanted
to get an extra shirt from you."

"No, my young friend; I have some faith in physiognomy, and you have an
honest face. I don't believe you would deceive me."

"No, I wouldn't," said Paul, promptly. "If you will trust me with
another shirt, mother will make you an extra one to make up for the one
I have lost."

"Certainly you shall have the extra shirt, but you needn't supply the
place of the one lost."

"It is only fair that I should."

"That may be, and I am glad you made the offer, but the loss is of
little importance to me. It was no fault of yours that you lost it, and
you shall not suffer for it."

"You are very kind, sir," said Paul, gratefully.

"Only just, Paul."

Mr. Preston went to the bureau, and drew out another shirt, which he
handed to Paul.

"Let me suggest, my young friend," he said, "that you ride home this
time. It is late, and you might have another encounter with your friend.
I should like to see him with the shirt on," and Mr. Preston laughed
heartily at the thought.

Paul decided to follow his patron's advice. He had no idea of running
any more risk in the matter. He accordingly walked to Fourth avenue and
got on board the car.

It was nearly eleven o'clock when he reached home. As it was never
his habit to stay out late, his mother had become alarmed at his long
absence.

"What kept you so late, Paul?" she asked.

"I'll tell you, pretty soon, mother. Here's the shirt that is to serve
as a pattern. Can you cut out the new shirts by it?"

Mrs. Hoffman examined it attentively.

"Yes," she said; "there will be no difficulty about that. Mr. Preston
must be a pretty large man."

"Yes, he is big enough for an alderman; but he is very kind and
considerate, and I like him. You shall judge for yourself when I tell
you what happened this evening."

It will not be necessary to tell Paul's adventure over again. His
mother listened with pardonable indignation against Mike Donovan and his
companion.

"I hope you won't have anything to do with that bad boy, Paul," she
said.

"I shan't, if I can help it," said Paul. "I didn't want to speak to him
to-night, but I couldn't help myself. Oh, I forgot to say, when half the
shirts are ready, I am to take them to Mr. Preston."

"I think I can make one a day."

"There is no need of working so steadily, mother. You will be well paid,
you know."

"That is true; and for that reason I shall work more cheerfully. I wish
I could get paid as well for all my work."

"Perhaps Mr. Preston will recommend you to his friends, and you can get
more work that way."

"I wish I could."

"I will mention it to him, when I carry back the last half dozen."

"Is he going to send the cloth?"

"I nearly forgot that, too. I have an order on Barclay & Co. for the
necessary amount of cloth. I can go up there to-morrow morning and get
it."

"That will take you from your work, Paul."

"Well, I can close up for a couple of hours."

"I don't think that will be necessary. I will go up myself and present
the order, and get them to send it home for me."

"Will they do that?"

"It is their custom. Or, if the bundle isn't too large. I can bring it
home myself in the car."

"That's all right, then. And now, mother, as it's past eleven o'clock, I
think we may as well both go to bed."

The next day Paul went as usual to his business, and Mrs. Hoffman, after
clearing away the breakfast, put on her bonnet and shawl, and prepared
to go for the materials for the shirts.

The retail store of Barclay & Co. is of great size, and ranks among the
most important in New York. It was not so well filled when Mrs. Hoffman
entered as it would be later. She was directed to the proper counter,
where she presented the order, signed by Mr. Preston. As he was a
customer of long standing, there was no difficulty about filling the
order. A bundle was made up, which, as it contained the materials for
twelve shirts, necessarily was of considerable size.

"Here is your bundle, ma'am," said the clerk.

Mrs. Hoffman's strength was slender, and she did not feel able to carry
the heavy bundle offered her. Even if she took the car, she would be
obliged to carry it a portion of the way, and she felt that it would
overtask her strength.

"Don't you send bundles?" she asked.

"Sometimes," said the clerk, looking superciliously at the modest attire
of the poor widow, and mentally deciding that she was not entitled to
much consideration. Had she been richly dressed, he would have been very
obsequious, and insisted on sending home the smallest parcel. But there
are many who have two rules of conduct, one for the rich, and quite
a different one for the poor, and among these was the clerk who was
