
The Magician stood at the top of the steps as Aladdin began to climb
upward.

"Give the lamp to me," he cried, holding out his hand.

"Wait until I reach the top of the steps," Aladdin answered.

"Hand the lamp to me at once!" screamed the Magician.

"Not until I am safely out," replied Aladdin.

Then in a rage the Magician rushed to the fire. He threw more of the
curious powder upon the fire and muttered the same strange words as
before.

Instantly the stone slipped back into its place. The earth closed over
it, and Aladdin was left in darkness.

The Magician at once left Persia and went to Africa.

Poor Aladdin! He groped his way back through the halls to the beautiful
garden of shining fruits, but he could find no way of escape. For two
days, he cried and shouted for help. At last, as he clasped his hands in
despair, he happened to rub the magic ring which the Magician had placed
on his finger.

Instantly a Genie rose out of the earth and stood before him.

"What is thy will, my master?" asked the Genie. "I am the Slave of the
Ring. I serve the one who wears it."

"Deliver me from this place!" cried Aladdin.

Scarcely had he spoken these words when the earth opened. Aladdin found
himself at his mother's door. He showed his mother the lamp and the
colored fruit, which he still carried in his pockets.

"I will tell you all that has happened," he said, "but first give me
something to eat, for I am very hungry."

"Alas!" said the mother. "I have neither money nor food."

"Sell the old lamp that I brought back with me," said Aladdin.

"The lamp would bring a higher price if it were clean and bright,"
replied his mother, and she began to rub the lamp.

No sooner had she given the first rub than a great Genie appeared.

"What is thy will?" asked the Genie. "I am the Slave of the Lamp. I
serve the one who holds the lamp."

Aladdin's mother was so terrified that she dropped the lamp. Aladdin
managed to grasp it, and say, "Bring me something to eat."

The Slave of the Lamp disappeared. He returned, bringing a dainty
breakfast served upon plates of pure gold.

Aladdin now knew what use to make of the magic ring and the wonderful
lamp. His mother and he lived happily for years.

One day the Sultan ordered all of the people to stay at home and close
their shutters, while his daughter, the Princess, passed by on her way
to the bath.

Aladdin had heard how beautiful the Princess was, and he greatly desired
to see her face. This seemed impossible, for the Princess never went out
without a veil which covered her entirely.

He peeped through the shutters as she passed by. The Princess happened
to raise her veil, and Aladdin saw her face.

The moment Aladdin's eyes rested upon the Princess, he loved her with
all his heart.

"Mother," he cried, "I have seen the Princess, and I have made up my
mind to marry her. Go at once to the Sultan and beg him to give his
daughter to me."

Aladdin's mother laughed at the idea. The next day, however, she went to
the palace, carrying the magic fruit as a gift. No one paid any
attention to her.

She went every day for a week, before the Sultan noticed that she was
there.

"Who is the poor woman who comes here every day?" he asked. "Bring her
forward. I wish to speak to her."

Aladdin's mother knelt before the throne and told the Sultan of her
son's love for the Princess. "He sends you this gift," she continued,
presenting the magic fruit.

The Sultan was astonished at the gift. He exclaimed, "Here indeed is a
gift worthy of my daughter! Shall I not give her to the one who sends
it?"

Then the Sultan told Aladdin's mother to return in three months' time,
and he would give the Princess to her son in marriage.

When the time had passed, Aladdin again sent his mother to the Sultan.

"I shall abide by my word," said the Sultan, "but he who marries my
daughter must first send me forty golden basins filled to the brim with
precious stones.

"These basins must be carried by forty black slaves led by forty white
ones, all of them dressed in rich attire."

Aladdin's mother returned home.

"Your hopes are ended," she cried.

"Not so, mother," answered Aladdin.

Then he rubbed the Magician's lamp. When the Genie appeared, Aladdin
told him to provide the forty golden basins filled with jewels, and the
eighty slaves.

When the procession reached the palace, the slaves presented the jewels
to the Sultan.

He was so delighted with the gift that he was willing to have Aladdin
marry the Princess without delay.

"Go and tell your son that he may wed my daughter this very day," he
said to Aladdin's mother.

Aladdin was delighted to hear the news. He ordered the Genie to bring a
rich purple robe for him to wear; a beautiful white horse to ride upon;
twenty slaves to attend him; six slaves to attend his mother; and ten
thousand gold pieces to give to the people.

At last everything was ready. Aladdin, dressed in his royal robe,
started for the palace. As he rode on the beautiful white horse, he
scattered the gold coins among the people. They shouted with joy as they
followed the procession.

At the palace the Sultan greeted Aladdin joyfully and ordered the
wedding feast to be prepared at once.

But Aladdin said, "Not so, your Majesty. I will not marry the Princess
until I have built her a palace."

Then he returned home and once more summoned the Slave of the Lamp.

"Build the finest palace in the world," ordered Aladdin. "Let the walls
be of marble set with precious stones. In the center build a great hall
whose walls shall be of silver and gold, lighted by great windows on
each side. These windows are to be set with diamonds and rubies. Depart!
Lose no time in obeying my commands!"

When Aladdin looked out of the window the next morning, there stood the
most beautiful palace in the world.

Then Aladdin and his mother returned to the Sultan's palace, and the
wedding took place amid great rejoicing.

Aladdin was gentle and kind to all. He became a great favorite at the
court, and the people loved him well.

For a time, Aladdin and his bride lived happily.

But there was trouble coming. Far away in Africa, the Magician who had
pretended to be Aladdin's uncle learned of his escape with the magic
lamp.

The Magician traveled from Africa to Persia, disguised as a merchant.

He carried some copper lamps and went through the streets of the city
crying, "New lamps for old!"

Now it happened that Aladdin had gone hunting, and the Princess sat
alone near an open window.

She saw the merchant and sent a slave to find out what the man called.
The slave came back laughing.

He told the Princess that the merchant offered to give new lamps for old
ones.

The Princess laughed, too. Then she pointed to the old lamp that stood
in a niche of the wall.

"There is an old lamp," she said. "Take it and see if the man really
will exchange it for a new one."

When the Magician saw the lamp, he knew that it was the one for which he
was searching.

He took the magic lamp eagerly and gave the slave all of the new lamps.

Then the Magician hurried out of the city. When he was alone, he rubbed
the magic lamp, and the Genie stood before him.

"What is thy will, master?" said he.

"I command thee to carry the palace of Aladdin, with the Princess
inside, to Africa," said the Magician.

Instantly the palace disappeared.

The Sultan looked out of his window the next morning. No palace was to
be seen.

"This has been done by magic!" the Sultan exclaimed.

He sent his soldiers to bring Aladdin home in chains. They met him
riding back from the hunt. They carried him to the Sultan.

When Aladdin was allowed to speak, he asked why he was made prisoner.

"Wretch!" exclaimed the Sultan. "Come and I will show you."

Then he led Aladdin to the window and showed him that where the palace
had been there was only an empty space.

Aladdin begged the Sultan to spare his life and grant him forty days in
which to find the Princess.

So Aladdin was set free. He searched everywhere, but he could find no
trace of the Princess.

In despair, he wrung his hands. As he did so, he rubbed the magic ring.

Instantly the Slave of the Ring appeared.

"What is thy will, master?" asked the Genie.

"Bring back the Princess and the palace," said Aladdin.

"That is not within my power," said the Genie. "Only the Slave of the
Lamp can bring back the palace."

"Then take me to the place where the palace now stands, and set me down
under the window of the Princess."

Almost before Aladdin had finished these words, he found himself in
Africa, beneath a window of his own palace.

"Princess! Princess!" called Aladdin.

The Princess opened the window.

With a cry of joy, Aladdin entered and embraced the Princess. "Tell me,
dear," said he, "what has become of the old lamp that stood in the niche
of the wall?"

"Alas!" replied the Princess. "A man came through the streets, crying,
'New lamps for old!' I gave him the lamp that stood in the niche, and
the next I knew I was here."

"The man is a Magician. He wished only to secure the magic lamp," said
Aladdin.

"The Magician is here," said the Princess. "He carries the magic lamp
hidden in his robes during the day, and he places it under his pillow at
night."

While the Magician was sleeping that night, Aladdin stole softly into
the room and took the magic lamp from under the pillow. Then he rubbed
the lamp and the Genie appeared.

"I command you to carry the Princess and the palace back to Persia,"
cried Aladdin.

The following morning, the Sultan looked out of the window. There, to
his surprise, stood the palace of Aladdin, in the very place from which
it had disappeared.

Aladdin and the Princess lived happily for many years. When the Sultan
died, they ruled in his place. They were beloved by the people, and
there was peace in all the land.




THE WHITING AND THE SNAIL


"Will you walk a little faster?"
  Said a whiting to a snail,
"There's a porpoise close behind us,
  And he's treading on my tail.
See how eagerly the lobsters
  And the turtles all advance!
They are waiting on the shingle--
  Will you come and join the dance?

"You can really have no notion
  How delightful it will be,
When they take us up and throw us
  With the lobsters out to sea!
But the snail replied, "Too far, too far!"
  And gave a look askance--
Said he thanked the whiting kindly,
  But he would not join the dance.

"What matters it how far we go?"
  His scaly friend replied,
"There is another shore you know,
  Upon the other side.
The further off from England
  The nearer is to France;
Then turn not pale, beloved snail,
  But come and join the dance."

 LEWIS CARROLL.




THE BONFIRE IN THE SEA


Long, long ago, in Australia, it is said, fishes could travel as easily
on land as they could swim in water.

It happened, so the story goes, that the whole fish tribe had been
playing tag along a sandy beach near the sea. At last they became tired
of the game, Fin-fin, the leader of the fishes, said, "Let us coast down
the great, black rock."

Now beyond the level shore where the fishes had been playing tag, there
were cliffs and rocks. Some of the rocks rose straight out of the water,
others sloped toward the sandy beach.

High above the rest towered the great, black rock. The fishes climbed to
the top Then, one after another, they followed the leader, each gliding
head foremost down the rock. It was fine sport!

Then the fishes formed a circle and danced, while Fin-fin slid down the
rock alone.

Again and again he climbed to the top and slid down, as swiftly as an
arrow glides from the bow. Finally he turned a somersault at the foot of
the rock, and then called to the fishes to stop dancing.

"It is time to cook dinner," said Fin-fin.

"There is a good place for a camp under the trees on the tall cliff
yonder."

The fishes climbed to the top of the cliff overhanging the sea. They
gathered wood and heaped it high at the edge of the cliff.

When all was ready for the bonfire, Fin-fin rubbed two sticks briskly
together. Soon a spark fell upon the wood, and instantly the flames
leaped upward. Then the fishes put some roots in front of the fire to
roast.

While the roots were cooking, the fishes stretched themselves under the
trees. They had almost fallen asleep, when suddenly great drops of rain
came splashing down.

A dark cloud, which they had not noticed, had covered the sun.

The rain fell hard and fast and soon put out the fire.

Now, you know, this was very serious, for people in those days had no
matches, and it was difficult to light a fire. Then, too, an icy wind
began to blow, and the fishes were soon shivering in the cold.

"We shall freeze to death unless we can build a fire again," cried
Fin-fin.

He tried to kindle a flame by rubbing two sticks together. He could not
produce even one spark.

"It is of no use," said Fin-fin. "The wood is too wet. We shall have to
wait for the sun to shine again."

A tiny fish came forward and bowed before Fin-fin, saying, "Ask my
father, Flying-fish, to light the fire. He is skilled in magic, and he
can do more than most fishes."

So Fin-fin asked Flying-fish to light the fire once more.

Flying-fish knelt before the smoldering ashes and fanned briskly with
his fins.

A tiny thread of smoke curled upward, and a feeble red glow could be
seen in the ashes.

When the tribe of fishes saw this, they crowded close around
Flying-fish, keeping their backs toward the cold wind. He told them to
go to the other side, because he wanted to fan the fire.

By and by the spark grew into a flame, and the bonfire burned brightly.

"Bring more wood," cried Flying-fish.

The fishes gathered wood and piled it upon the fire. The red flames
roared, and sputtered, and crackled.

"We shall soon be warm now," said Fin-fin.

Then the fishes crowded around the fire, closer and closer. Suddenly a
blast of wind swept across the cliff from the direction of the land, and
blew the fire toward the fishes.

They sprang back, forgetting that they were on the edge of the cliff.
And down, down, down, went the whole fish tribe to the bottom of the
sea.

The water felt warm, for the strong wind had driven the fire down below,
too.

There, indeed, was the bonfire at the bottom of the sea, burning as
brightly as ever.

More wonderful still, the fire never went out, as fires do on land. The
water at the bottom of the sea has been warm ever since that day.

That is why, on frosty days, the fishes disappear from the surface of
the water. They dive to the bottom of the sea, where they can keep warm
and comfortable, around the magic bonfire.

AT LEAST, SO SOME PEOPLE SAY.




ROBINSON CRUSOE


Many years ago, there lived in England a boy whose name was Robinson
Crusoe.

Though he had never been near the sea, Crusoe's dearest wish was to
become a sailor and go on a ship to foreign lands.

This grieved his mother very much, and she begged the boy to remain at
home. His father also warned him of danger, saying, "If you go abroad,
you will be most miserable. I cannot give my consent."

It happened that Crusoe visited Hull, a large town by the sea, to say
good-by to a companion who was about to sail for London. He could not
resist the chance of going on a voyage, and without even sending a
