
"Bless yer heart, honey," said Jane, stooping down and kissing him, "an
inventory you means. Why, 'tis just this--Mrs. Purcell and me--we has
got to write down the names of every single thing in the house--every
stick, and stone, and old box, and even, I believe, the names of the
doors and cupboards. That's an inventory, and mighty sick we'll be of
it."

"Come, Jane, stop chattering," said Lydia. "Maurice, run out at once.
You'll find me in the attics, Jane, when you've done. We'll get well
through the attics to-day."

Aunt Lydia turned on her heel, and Maurice and Cecile went slowly out.
Very slow, indeed, were Cecile's footsteps.

"How dull you are, Cecile!" said the little boy.

"I'm not very well," said Cecile. "Maurice," she continued suddenly,
"you go and play with Toby, darling. Go into the fields, and not too
far away; and don't stay out too late. Here's our lunch. No, I don't
want any. I'm going to lie down. Yes, maybe I'll come out again."

She ran away before Maurice had even time to expostulate. She was
conscious that a crisis had come, that a great dread was over her, that
there might yet be time to take the purse from its hiding place.

An inventory meant that every box was looked into, every cupboard
opened. What chance then had her purse in its tin box in a forgotten
cupboard? That cupboard would be opened at last, and her treasure
stolen away. Aunt Lydia was even now in the attics, or was she? Was
there any hope that Cecile might be in time to rescue the precious
purse?

She flew up the attic stairs, her heart beating, her head giddy. Oh! if
she might be in time!

Alas! she was not. Aunt Lydia was already in full possession of
Cecile's and Maurice's attic. She was standing on tiptoe, and taking
down some musty books from a shelf.

"Go away, Cecile," she said to the little girl, "I'm very busy, and I
can't have you here; run out at once."

"Please, Aunt Lydia, I've such a bad headache," answered poor Cecile.
This was true, for her agitation was so great she felt almost sick.
"May I lie down on my bed?" she pleaded.

"Oh, yes, child! if your head is bad. But you won't get much quiet
here, for Jane and I have our work cut out for us, and there'll be
plenty of noise."

"I don't mind a noise, if I may lie down," answered Cecile thankfully.

She crept into her bed, and lay as if she was asleep. In reality, with
every nerve strung to the highest tension, sleep was as impossible for
her as though such a boon had never been granted to the world. Whenever
Aunt Lydia's back was turned, her eyes were opened wide. Whenever Aunt
Lydia looked in her direction, the poor little creature had to feign
the sleep which was so far away. As long as it was only Maurice's and
Cecile's attic, there was some rest. There was just a shadowy hope that
Aunt Lydia might go downstairs for something, that five minutes might
be given her to snatch her treasure away.

Lydia Purcell, however, a thoroughly clever woman, was going through
her work with method and expedition. She had no idea of leaving the
attics until she had taken a complete and exhaustive list of what they
contained.

Cecile began to count the articles of furniture in her little bedroom.
Alas! they were not many. By the time Jane appeared, a complete list of
them was nearly taken.

"Jane, go into that little inner attic, and poke out the rubbish," said
Aunt Lydia, "poke out every stick and stone, and box. Don't overlook a
thing. I'll be with you in a minute."

"Nasty, dirty little hole," remarked Jane. "I'll soon find what it
contains; not sixpence worth, I'll warrant."

But here the rack of suspense on which poor Cecile was lying became
past endurance, the child's fortitude gave way.

Sitting up in bed, she cried aloud in a high-pitched, almost strained
voice, her eyes glowing, her cheeks like peonies:

"Oh! not the little cupboard in the wall. Oh! please--oh! please, not
the little cupboard in the wall."

"What cupboard? I know of no cupboard," exclaimed Aunt Lydia.

Jane held up her hands.

"Preserve us, ma'am, the poor lamb must be wandering, and look at her
eyes and hands."

"What is it, Cecile? Speak! what is it, you queer little creature?"
said Aunt Lydia, in both perplexity and alarm, for the child was
sobbing hard, dry, tearless sobs.

"Oh, Aunt Lydia! be merciful," she gasped. "Oh! oh! if you find it
don't keep it. 'Tisn't mine, 'tis Lovedy's; 'tis to find Lovedy. Oh!
don't, don't, don't keep the purse if you find it, Aunt Lydia Purcell."

At the word "purse" Aunt Lydia's face changed. She had been feeling
almost kind to poor Cecile; now, at the mention of what might contain
gold, came back, sweeping over her heart like a fell and evil wind, the
love of gold.

"Jane," she said, turning to her amazed handmaiden; "this wicked, silly
child has been hiding something, and she's afraid of my finding it.
Believe me, I will look well into the inner attic. She spoke of a
cupboard. Search for a cupboard in the wall, Jane."

Jane, full of curiosity, searched now with a will. There was but a
short moment of suspense, then the sliding panel fell back, the little
tin box was pulled out, and Cecile's Russia-leather purse was held up
in triumph between Jane's finger and thumb.

There was a cry of pleasure from Aunt Lydia. Cecile felt the attic
growing suddenly dark, and herself as suddenly cold. She murmured
something about "Lovedy, Lovedy, lost now," and then she sank down, a
poor unconscious little heap, at Aunt Lydia's feet.




CHAPTER XIII.

ON THE ROAD TO THE CELESTIAL CITY.


When Cecile awoke from the long swoon into which she had sunk, it was
not to gaze into the hard face of Lydia Purcell. Lydia was nowhere to
be seen, but bending over her, with eyes full of compassion, was Jane.
Jane, curious as she was, felt now more sorrow than curiosity for the
little creature struck down by some mysterious grief.

At first the child could remember nothing.

"Where am I?" she gasped, catching hold of Jane's hand and trying to
raise herself.

"In yer own little bed, honey. You have had a faint and are just coming
round; you'll be all right in a minute or two. There, just one tiny sup
more wine and I'll get you a nice hot cup of tea."

Cecile was too weak and bewildered not to obey. She sipped the wine
which Jane held to her lips, then lay back with a little sigh of relief
and returning consciousness.

"I'm better now; I'm quite well now, Jane," she murmured in a thankful
voice.

"Yes, honey, you are a deal better now," answered Jane, stooping down
and kissing her. "And now never don't you stir a bit, and don't worry
about nothing, for Jane will fetch you a nice cup of tea, and then see
how pleasant you'll feel."

The kind-hearted girl hurried away, and Cecile was left alone in the
now quiet attic.

What thing had happened to her? What weight was at her heart? She had a
desire, not a keen desire, but still a feeling that it would give her
pleasure to be lying in the grave by her father's side. She felt that
she did not much care for anyone, that anything now might happen
without exciting her. Why was not her heart beating with love for
Maurice and Toby? Why had all hope, all longing, died within her? Ah!
she knew the reason. It came back to her slowly, slowly, but surely.
All that dreadful scene, all those moments of suspense too terrible
even to be borne, they returned to her memory.

Her Russia-leather purse of gold and notes were gone, the fifteen
pounds she was to spend in looking for Lovedy, the forty pounds she was
to give as her dead mother's dying gift to the wandering girl, had
vanished. Cecile felt that as surely as if she had flung it into the
sea, was that purse now lost. She had broken her promise, her solemn,
solemn promise to the dead; everything, therefore, was now over for her
in life.

When Jane came back with the nice hot tea, Cecile received it with a
wan smile. But there was such a look of utter, unchildlike despair in
her lovely eyes that, as the handmaiden expressed it, telling the tale
afterward, her heart went up into her mouth with pity.

"Cecile," said the young woman, when the tea-drinking had come to an
end, "I sees by yer face, poor lamb, as you remembers all about what
made you drop down in that faint. And look you here, my lamb, you've
got to tell me, Jane Parsons, all about it; and what is more, if I can
help you I will. You tell Jane all the whole story, honey, for it 'ud
go to a pagan's heart to see you, and so it would; and you needn't be
feared, for she ain't anywheres about. She said as she wanted no
dinner, and she's safe in her room a-reckoning the money in the purse,
I guess."

"Oh, Jane!" said little Cecile, "the purse! the Russia-leather purse! I
think I'll die, since Aunt Lydia Purcell has found the Russia-leather
purse."

"Well, tell us the whole story, child. It do seem a wonderful thing for
a bit of a child like you to have a purse of gold, and then to keep it
a-hiding. I don't b'lieve as you loves gold like Miss Purcell do; it
don't seem as if you could have come by so much money wrong, Cecile."

"No, Jane, I didn't come by it wrong. Mrs. D'Albert, my stepmother,
gave me that Russia-leather purse, with all the gold and notes in it,
when she was dying. I know exactly how much was in it, fifteen pounds
in gold, and forty pounds in ten-pound Bank of England notes. I can't
ever forget what was in that dreadful purse, as my stepmother told me I
was never to lose until I found Lovedy."

"And who in the name of fortune is Lovedy, Cecile? You do tell the
queerest stories I ever listened to."

"Yes, Jane, it is a very queer tale, and though I understand it
perfectly myself, I don't suppose I can get you to understand."

"Oh, yes! my deary, I'm very smart indeed at picking up a tale. You
tell me all about Lovedy, Cecile."

Thus admonished, Cecile did tell her tale. All that long sad story
which the dying woman had poured into the child's listening ears was
now told again to the wondering and excited cook. Jane listened with
her mouth open and her eyes staring. If there was anything under the
sun she dearly, dearly loved, it was a romance, and here was one quite
unknown in her experience. Cecile told her little story in childish and
broken words--words which were now and then interrupted by sobs of
great pain--but she told it with the power which earnestness always
gives.

"I'll never find Lovedy now; I've broken my promise--I've broken my
promise," she said in conclusion.

"Well," answered Jane, drawing a long breath when the story was over,
"that is interesting, and the queerest bit of a tale I ever set my two
ears to listen to. Oh, yes! I believes you, child. You ain't one as'll
tell lies--and that I'm gospel sure on. And so yer poor stepmother
wanted you not to let Lydia Purcell clap her eyes on that purse. Ah,
poor soul! she knew her own sister well."

"Yes, Jane, she said I'd never see it again if Aunt Lydia found it out.
Oh, Jane! I did think I had hid the purse so very, very secure."

"And so you had, deary--real beautiful, and if it hadn't been for that
horrid inventory, it might ha' lain there till doomsday. But now do
tell me, Cecile--for I am curious, and that I won't go for to
deny--suppose as you hadn't lost that purse, however 'ud a little mite
like you go for to look for Lovedy?"

"Oh, Jane! the purse is lost, and I can never do it now--never until I
can earn it all back again my own self. But I'd have gone to France--me
and Maurice and Toby had it all arranged quite beautiful--we were going
to France this very winter. Lovedy is quite safe to be in France; and
you know, Jane, me and Maurice ain't little English children. We are
just a little French boy and girl; so we'd be sure to get on well in
our own country, Jane."

"Yes, yes, for sure," said Jane, knowing nothing whatever of France,
but much impressed with Cecile's manner; "there ain't no doubt as
you're a very clever little girl, Cecile, and not the least bit
English. I dare say, young as you are, that you would find Lovedy, and
it seems a real pity as it couldn't be."

"I wanted the guide Jesus very much to go with us," said Cecile,
raising her earnest eyes and fixing them on Jane's face. "If _He_ had
come, we'd have been sure to find Lovedy. For me and Maurice, we are
very young to go so far by ourselves. Do you know anything about that
guide, Jane? Mistress Bell said when she was alive, that He took people
into the New Jerusalem and into the Celestial City. But she never heard
of His being a guide to anybody into France. I think 'tis a great,
great pity, don't you?"

Now Jane was a Methodist. But she was more, she was also a Christian.

"My dear lamb," she said, "the blessed Lord Jesus'll guide you into
France, or to any other place. Why, 'tis all on the road to the
Celestial City, darling."

"Oh! is it? Oh! would He really, really be so kind and beautiful?" said
Cecile, sitting up and speaking with sudden eagerness and hope. "Oh,
dear Jane! how I love you for telling me this! Oh! if only I had my
purse of gold, how surely, how surely I should find Lovedy now."

"Well, darling, there's no saying what may happen. You have Jane
Parsons for your friend anyhow, and what is more, you have the Lord
Jesus Christ. Eh! but He does love a little faithful thing like you.
But see here, Cecile, 'tis getting dark, and I must run downstairs; but
I'll send you up a real good supper by Maurice, and see that he and
Toby have full and plenty. You lie here quite easy, Cecile, and don't
stir till I come back to you. I'll bring you tidings of that purse as
sure as my name's Jane, and ef I were you, Cecile, I'd just say a bit
of a prayer to Jesus. Tell Him your trouble, it'll give you a power of
comfort."

"Is that praying? I did not know it was that."

"That is praying, my poor little lamb; you tell it all straight away to
the loving Jesus."

"But He isn't here."

"Oh, yes, darling! He'll be very nigh to you, I guess, don't you be
frightened."

"Does Jesus the guide come in the dark?"

"He'll be with you in the dark, Cecile. You tell Him everything, and
then have a good sleep."




CHAPTER XIV.

WHAT JANE PARSONS KNEW.


When, a couple of hours later, Maurice, very tired and fagged after his
long day's ramble, came upstairs, followed by Toby, and thrust into
Cecile's hand a great hunch of seed-cake, she pushed it away, and said
in an earnest, impressive whisper:

"Hush!"

"Oh, why?" asked Maurice; "you have been away all the whole day,
