eyes, saw a number of very large birds, as it seemed, alighting around
him, still singing.  It was strange to hear song from the throats of
such big birds.

And still singing, with large and round but not the less birdlike
voices, they began to weave a strange dance about him, moving their
wings in time with their legs.  But the dance seemed somehow to be
troubled and broken, and to return upon itself in an eddy, in place of
sweeping smoothly on.

And he soon learned, in the low short growls behind him, the cause of
the imperfection: they wanted to dance all round the tree, but Lina
would not permit them to come on her side.

Now curdie liked the birds, and did not altogether like Lina.  But
neither, nor both together, made a reason for driving away the
princess's creature.  Doubtless she had been the goblins' creature, but
the last time he saw her was in the king's house and the dove tower,
and at the old princess's feet.  So he left her to do as she would, and
the dance of the birds continued only a semicircle, troubled at the
edges, and returning upon itself.

But their song and their motions, nevertheless, and the waving of their
wings, began at length to make him very sleepy.  All the time he had
kept doubting whether they could really be birds, and the sleepier he
got, the more he imagined them something else, but he suspected no harm.

Suddenly, just as he was sinking beneath the waves of slumber, he awoke
in fierce pain.  The birds were upon him--all over him--and had begun
to tear him with beaks and claws.  He had but time, however, to feel
that he could not move under their weight, when they set up a hideous
screaming, and scattered like a cloud.  Lina was among them, snapping
and striking with her paws, while her tail knocked them over and over.
But they flew up, gathered, and descended on her in a swarm, perching
upon every part of her body, so that he could see only a huge misshapen
mass, which seemed to go rolling away into the darkness.  He got up and
tried to follow, but could see nothing, and after wandering about
hither and thither for some time, found himself again beside the
hawthorn.  He feared greatly that the birds had been too much for Lina,
and had torn her to pieces.  In a little while, however, she came
limping back, and lay down in her old place.  Curdie also lay down,
but, from the pain of his wounds, there was no sleep for him.  When the
light came he found his clothes a good deal torn and his skin as well,
but gladly wondered why the wicked birds had not at once attacked his
eyes.  Then he turned, looking for Lina.  She rose and crept to him.
But she was in far worse plight than he--plucked and gashed and torn
with the beaks and claws of the birds, especially about the bare part
of her neck, so that she was pitiful to see.  And those worst wounds
she could not reach to lick.

'Poor Lina!' said Curdie, 'you got all those helping me.'

She wagged her tail, and made it clear she understood him.  Then it
flashed upon Curdie's mind that perhaps this was the companion the
princess had promised him.  For the princess did so many things
differently from what anybody looked for!  Lina was no beauty
certainly, but already, the first night, she had saved his life.

'Come along, Lina,' he said, 'we want water.'

She put her nose to the earth, and after snuffing for a moment, darted
off in a straight line.  Curdie followed.  The ground was so uneven,
that after losing sight of her many times, at last he seemed to have
lost her altogether.  In a few minutes, however, he came upon her
waiting for him.  Instantly she darted off again. After he had lost and
found her again many times, he found her the last time lying beside a
great stone.  As soon as he came up she began scratching at it with her
paws.  When he had raised it an inch or two, she shoved in first her
nose and then her teeth, and lifted with all the might of her neck.

When at length between them they got it up, there was a beautiful
little well.  He filled his cap with the clearest and sweetest water,
and drank.  Then he gave to Lina, and she drank plentifully. Next he
washed her wounds very carefully.  And as he did so, he noted how much
the bareness of her neck added to the strange repulsiveness of her
appearance.  Then he bethought him of the goatskin wallet his mother
had given him, and taking it from his shoulders, tried whether it would
do to make a collar of for the poor animal.  He found there was just
enough, and the hair so similar in colour to Lina's, that no one could
suspect it of having grown somewhere else.

He took his knife, ripped up the seams of the wallet, and began trying
the skin to her neck.  It was plain she understood perfectly what he
wished, for she endeavoured to hold her neck conveniently, turning it
this way and that while he contrived, with his rather scanty material,
to make the collar fit.  As his mother had taken care to provide him
with needles and thread, he soon had a nice gorget ready for her.  He
laced it on with one of his boot laces, which its long hair covered.
Poor Lina looked much better in it. Nor could any one have called it a
piece of finery.  If ever green eyes with a yellow light in them looked
grateful, hers did.

As they had no longer any bag to carry them in, Curdie and Lina now ate
what was left of the provisions.  Then they set out again upon their
journey.  For seven days it lasted.  They met with various adventures,
and in all of them Lina proved so helpful, and so ready to risk her
life for the sake of her companion, that Curdie grew not merely very
fond but very trustful of her; and her ugliness, which at first only
moved his pity, now actually increased his affection for her.  One day,
looking at her stretched on the grass before him, he said:

'Oh, Lina!  If the princess would but burn you in her fire of roses!'

She looked up at him, gave a mournful whine like a dog, and laid her
head on his feet.  What or how much he could not tell, but clearly she
had gathered something from his words.



CHAPTER 12

More Creatures

One day from morning till night they had been passing through a forest.
As soon as the sun was down Curdie began to be aware that there were
more in it than themselves.  First he saw only the swift rush of a
figure across the trees at some distance.  Then he saw another and then
another at shorter intervals.  Then he saw others both farther off and
nearer.  At last, missing Lina and looking about after her, he saw an
appearance as marvellous as herself steal up to her, and begin
conversing with her after some beast fashion which evidently she
understood.

Presently what seemed a quarrel arose between them, and stranger noises
followed, mingled with growling.  At length it came to a fight, which
had not lasted long, however, before the creature of the wood threw
itself upon its back, and held up its paws to Lina. She instantly
walked on, and the creature got up and followed her. They had not gone
far before another strange animal appeared, approaching Lina, when
precisely the same thing was repeated, the vanquished animal rising and
following with the former.  Again, and yet again, and again, a fresh
animal came up, seemed to be reasoned and certainly was fought with and
overcome by Lina, until at last, before they were out of the wood, she
was followed by forty-nine of the most grotesquely ugly, the most
extravagantly abnormal animals imagination can conceive.  To describe
them were a hopeless task.

I knew a boy who used to make animals out of heather roots. Wherever he
could find four legs, he was pretty sure to find a head and a tail.
His beasts were a most comic menagerie, and right fruitful of laughter.
But they were not so grotesque and extravagant as Lina and her
followers.  One of them, for instance, was like a boa constrictor
walking on four little stumpy legs near its tail.  About the same
distance from its head were two little wings, which it was forever
fluttering as if trying to fly with them.  Curdie thought it fancied it
did fly with them, when it was merely plodding on busily with its four
little stumps.  How it managed to keep up he could not think, till once
when he missed it from the group: the same moment he caught sight of
something at a distance plunging at an awful serpentine rate through
the trees, and presently, from behind a huge ash, this same creature
fell again into the group, quietly waddling along on its four stumps.

Watching it after this, he saw that, when it was not able to keep up
any longer, and they had all got a little space ahead, it shot into the
wood away from the route, and made a great round, serpentine alone in
huge billows of motion, devouring the ground, undulating awfully,
galloping as if it were all legs together, and its four stumps nowhere.
In this mad fashion it shot ahead, and, a few minutes after, toddled in
again among the rest, walking peacefully and somewhat painfully on its
few fours.

From the time it takes to describe one of them it will be readily seen
that it would hardly do to attempt a description of each of the
forty-nine.  They were not a goodly company, but well worth
contemplating, nevertheless; and Curdie had been too long used to the
goblins' creatures in the mines and on the mountain, to feel the least
uncomfortable at being followed by such a herd.  On the contrary, the
marvellous vagaries of shape they manifested amused him greatly, and
shortened the journey much.

Before they were all gathered, however, it had got so dark that he
could see some of them only a part at a time, and every now and then,
as the company wandered on, he would be startled by some extraordinary
limb or feature, undreamed of by him before, thrusting itself out of
the darkness into the range of his ken. Probably there were some of his
old acquaintances among them, although such had been the conditions of
semi-darkness, in which alone he had ever seen any of them, that it was
not like he would be able to identify any of them.

On they marched solemnly, almost in silence, for either with feet or
voice the creatures seldom made any noise.  By the time they reached
the outside of the wood it was morning twilight.  Into the open trooped
the strange torrent of deformity, each one following Lina.  Suddenly
she stopped, turned towards them, and said something which they
understood, although to Curdie's ear the sounds she made seemed to have
no articulation.  Instantly they all turned, and vanished in the
forest, and Lina alone came trotting lithely and clumsily after her
master.



CHAPTER 13

The Baker's Wife

They were now passing through a lovely country of hill and dale and
rushing stream.  The hills were abrupt, with broken chasms for
watercourses, and deep little valleys full of trees.  But now and then
they came to a larger valley, with a fine river, whose level banks and
the adjacent meadows were dotted all over with red and white kine,
while on the fields above, that sloped a little to the foot of the
hills, grew oats and barley and wheat, and on the sides of the hills
themselves vines hung and chestnuts rose.

They came at last to a broad, beautiful river, up which they must go to
arrive at the city of Gwyntystorm, where the king had his court.  As
they went the valley narrowed, and then the river, but still it was
wide enough for large boats.  After this, while the river kept its
size, the banks narrowed, until there was only room for a road between
the river and the great Cliffs that overhung it. At last river and road
took a sudden turn, and lo! a great rock in the river, which dividing
flowed around it, and on the top of the rock the city, with lofty walls
and towers and battlements, and above the city the palace of the king,
built like a strong castle. But the fortifications had long been
neglected, for the whole country was now under one king, and all men
said there was no more need for weapons or walls.  No man pretended to
love his neighbour, but every one said he knew that peace and quiet
behaviour was the best thing for himself, and that, he said, was quite
as useful, and a great deal more reasonable.  The city was prosperous
and rich, and if everybody was not comfortable, everybody else said he
ought to be.

When Curdie got up opposite the mighty rock, which sparkled all over
with crystals, he found a narrow bridge, defended by gates and
portcullis and towers with loopholes.  But the gates stood wide open,
and were dropping from their great hinges; the portcullis was eaten
away with rust, and clung to the grooves evidently immovable; while the
loopholed towers had neither floor nor roof, and their tops were fast
filling up their interiors.  Curdie thought it a pity, if only for
their old story, that they should be thus neglected.  But everybody in
the city regarded these signs of decay as the best proof of the
prosperity of the place.  Commerce and self-interest, they said, had
got the better of violence, and the troubles of the past were whelmed
in the riches that flowed in at their open gates.

Indeed, there was one sect of philosophers in it which taught that it
would be better to forget all the past history of the city, were it not
that its former imperfections taught its present inhabitants how
superior they and their times were, and enabled them to glory over
their ancestors.  There were even certain quacks in the city who
advertised pills for enabling people to think well of themselves, and
some few bought of them, but most laughed, and said, with evident
truth, that they did not require them.  Indeed, the general theme of
discourse when they met was, how much wiser they were than their
fathers.

Curdie crossed the river, and began to ascend the winding road that led
up to the city.  They met a good many idlers, and all stared at them.
It was no wonder they should stare, but there was an unfriendliness in
their looks which Curdie did not like.  No one, however, offered them
any molestation: Lina did not invite liberties.  After a long ascent,
they reached the principal gate of the city and entered.

The street was very steep, ascending toward the palace, which rose in
great strength above all the houses.  Just as they entered, a baker,
whose shop was a few doors inside the gate, came out in his white
apron, and ran to the shop of his friend, the barber, on the opposite
side of the way.  But as he ran he stumbled and fell heavily.  Curdie
hastened to help him up, and found he had bruised his forehead badly.
He swore grievously at the stone for tripping him up, declaring it was
the third time he had fallen over it within the last month; and saying
what was the king about that he allowed such a stone to stick up
forever on the main street of his royal residence of Gwyntystorm!  What
was a king for if he would not take care of his people's heads!  And he
stroked his forehead tenderly.

'Was it your head or your feet that ought to bear the blame of your
fall?' asked Curdie.

'Why, you booby of a miner!  My feet, of course,' answered the baker.

'Nay, then,' said Curdie, 'the king can't be to blame.'

'Oh, I see!' said the baker.  'You're laying a trap for me.  Of course,
if you come to that, it was my head that ought to have looked after my
feet.  But it is the king's part to look after us all, and have his
streets smooth.'

'Well, I don't see, said Curdie, 'why the king should take care of the
baker, when the baker's head won't take care of the baker's feet.'

'Who are you to make game of the king's baker?' cried the man in a rage.

But, instead of answering, Curdie went up to the bump on the street
which had repeated itself on the baker's head, and turning the hammer
end of his mattock, struck it such a blow that it flew wide in pieces.
Blow after blow he struck until he had levelled it with the street.

But out flew the barber upon him in a rage. 'What do you break my
window for, you rascal, with your pickaxe?'

'I am very sorry,' said Curdie.  'It must have been a bit of stone that
flew from my mattock.  I couldn't help it, you know.'

'Couldn't help it!  A fine story!  What do you go breaking the rock
for--the very rock upon which the city stands?'

'Look at your friend's forehead,' said Curdie.  'See what a lump he has
got on it with falling over that same stone.'

'What's that to my window?' cried the barber.  'His forehead can mend
itself; my poor window can't.'

'But he's the king's baker,' said Curdie, more and more surprised at
the man's anger.

'What's that to me?  This is a free city.  Every man here takes care of
himself, and the king takes care of us all.  I'll have the price of my
window out of you, or the exchequer shall pay for it.'

Something caught Curdie's eye.  He stooped, picked up a piece of the
stone he had just broken, and put it in his pocket.

'I suppose you are going to break another of my windows with that
stone!' said the barber.

'Oh no,' said Curdie.  'I didn't mean to break your window, and I
certainly won't break another.'

