thinking of?" He could not conceal his annoyance, and Polly put aside
her own dismayed feelings at the new programme, to help him into his
usual serene mood.

"But think, Jasper, how she has never had any fun all her life, and now
her father is sick."

"She'd much better stay and take care of him," declared Jasper.

"But he's sick because he has worried so, I do believe," Polly went on,
"for you ought to have seen his face when we took Charlotte home, and
Grandpapa talked with him, and asked him to let Charlotte pass the rest
of the winter with us. Oh, I am glad, Jasper, for I do like Charlotte."

"The girl may be well enough," said Jasper shortly, "but she will bother
you, nevertheless, Polly, I am afraid."

"Never mind," said Polly brightly, with a little pang at her heart for
the nice times with the girls that now must be shared with another.
"Grandpapa thought he ought to do it, I suppose, and that's enough."

"It does seem as if the Chattertons would never be done annoying us,"
said Jasper gloomily. "Now when we once get this girl fastened on us,
there'll be an end to the hope of shaking her off."

"Perhaps we sha'n't want to," said Polly merrily, "for Charlotte may
turn out perfectly lovely; I do believe she's going to." And then she
remembered her promise to Mrs. Whitney, and she began: "Aunty is
worrying about your staying away so long from your business, Jasper, and
she wants you to go back."

A shade passed over his face. "I suppose I ought to go, Polly," he said,
and he pulled a letter from his pocket and held it out to her, "I was
going to show this to you, only the other matter came up."

Polly seized it with dread.

"We need your services very much" [the letter ran] "and cannot wait
longer for your return. We are very sorry to be so imperative, but the
rush of work at this time of the year, makes it necessary for all our
force to be in place.

"Very sincerely

"DAVID MARLOWE."

"You see they are getting all the books planned out, and put in shape
for the next year; and business just rushes," cried Jasper, with shining
eyes, showing his eagerness to be in the midst of the bustle of
manufacture.

"What, so early!" cried Polly, letting the letter drop. "Why, I thought
you didn't do anything until spring, Jasper--about making the books, I
mean."

He laughed. "The travelers go out on the road then," he said, "with
almost all the books ready to sell."

"Out on the road?" repeated Polly in amaze. "Oh, what do you mean,
Jasper?"

"Well, you see the business of selling is a good part of it done by
salesmen, who travel with samples and take advance orders," said Jasper,
finding it quite jolly to explain business intricacies to such an eager
listener.

"Oh!" said Polly.

"And when I get back I shall be plunged at once into all the thick of
the manufacturing work," he went on, straightening himself up; "Mr.
Marlowe is as good as he can be, and he has waited now longer than he
ought to."

"Oh, you must go, Jasper," cried Polly quickly; "at once, this very
day," and her face glowed.

"If you think sister Marian is really well enough to spare me," he said,
trying to restrain his impatience to be off.

"Yes--yes, I do," declared Polly. "Doctor Palfrey said this morning that
all danger was over now from inflammation, and really it worries her
dreadfully to think of your being here any longer. It really does hurt
her, Jasper," repeated Polly emphatically.

"In that case I'm off, then, this afternoon," said Jasper, with a glad
ring in his voice. "Polly, my work is the very grandest in all the
world."

"Isn't it?" cried Polly, with kindling eyes; "just think--to make good
books, Jasper, that will never stop, perhaps, being read. Oh, I wish I
was a man and could help you."

"Polly?" he stopped a minute, looked down into her face, then turned off
abruptly. "You are sure you won't bother yourself too much with
Charlotte?" he said awkwardly coming back.

"Yes; don't worry, Jasper," said Polly, wondering at his unusual manner.

"All right; then as soon as I've seen father I'll throw my traps
together and be off," declared Jasper, quite like the business man
again.

But old Mr. King was not to hear about it just then, for when Jasper
rapped at his door, it was to find that his father was fast asleep.

"See here, Jasper," said Mr. Whitney, happening along at this minute,
"here's a nice piece of work. Percy declares that he shall be made
miserable to go back to college to-morrow. His mother is able now for
him to be settled at his studies; won't you run up and persuade
him--that's a good fellow."

"I'm going back to my work to-night," cried Jasper, pulling out his
watch, "that is, if father wakes up in time for me to take the train."

"Is that so? Good," cried Mr. Whitney. "Well, run along and tell Percy
that, for the boy is so worried over his mother that he can't listen to
reason."

So Jasper scaled the stairs to Percy's den.

"Well, old fellow, I thought I'd come up and let you know that I'm off
to my work," announced Jasper, putting his head in the doorway.

"Eh!" cried Percy, "what's that?"

"Why, I'm off, I say; back to dig at the publishing business. Your
mother doesn't want us fellows hanging around here any longer. It
worries her to feel that we are idling."

"Is that so?" cried Percy. "How do you know?"

"Polly says so; she let me into the secret; says sister Marian requested
me to go back."

"Did Polly really say so?" demanded Percy in astonishment.

"Yes, in good plain English. So I'm off."

"Well, if Polly really said that mamma wanted you to go, why, I'll get
back to college as soon as I can," said Percy. "But if she should be
worse?" He stopped short.

"They can send for you instantly; trust Polly for that," said Jasper.
"But she won't be worse; not unless we worry her by not doing as she
wishes. Well, good-by, I'm off."

"So am I," declared Percy, springing up to throw his clothes into
traveling order. "All right, I'll take the train with you, Jappy."

"Now you see how much better I'm off," observed Van, coming in to perch
on the edge of the bed while Percy was hurrying all sorts of garments
into the trunk with a quick hand. "I tell you, Percy, I struck good luck
when I chose father's business. Now I don't have to run like a dog at
the beck of a lot of professors."

"Every one to his taste," said Percy, "and I can't bear father's
business, for one."

"No, you'd rather sit up with your glasses stuck on your nose, and learn
how to dole out the law; that's you, Percy. I say, I wouldn't try to
keep the things on," with a laugh as he saw his brother's ineffectual
efforts to pack, and yet give the attention to his eyeglasses that they
seemed to demand.

"See here now, Van," cried Percy warmly, "if you cannot help, you can
take yourself off. Goodness! I have left out my box of collars!"

"Here it is," cried Van, throwing it to him from the bed, where it had
rolled off under a pile of underclothing. "Well, you don't know how the
things make you look. And Polly doesn't like them a bit."

"How do you know?" demanded Percy, growing quite red, and desisting from
his employment a minute.

"Oh, that's telling; I know she doesn't," replied Van provokingly.

For answer Van felt his arms seized, and before he knew it Percy was
over him and holding him down so that he couldn't stir.

"Now how do you know that Polly doesn't like my eyeglasses?" he
demanded.

"Ow--let me up!" cried Van.

"Tell on, then. How do you know she doesn't like them?"

"Because--Let me up, and I'll tell."

"No, tell now," said Percy, having hard work to keep Van from slipping
out from under his hands.

"Boys," called Polly's voice.

"Oh dear me--she's coming!" exclaimed Percy, jumping to his feet, and
releasing Van, who, red and shining, skipped to the door. "Come in,
Polly."

"I thought I'd find you up here," said Polly in great satisfaction.
"Percy, can't I do something for you? Jasper says you are going back to
college right away."

"Yes, you can," said Percy, "take Van off; that would help me more than
anything else you could do."

Polly looked at Van and shook her brown head so disapprovingly that he
came out of his laugh.

"Oh, I'll be good, Polly," he promised.

"See that you are, then," she said. Then she went over to the trunk and
looked in.

"Percy, may I take those things out and fold them over again?" she
asked.

"Yes, if you want to," said Percy shamefacedly. "I suppose I have made a
mess of them; but it's too hard work for you, Polly."

"I should like nothing better than to attack that trunk," declared Polly
merrily. "Now, Van, you come and help me, that's a dear boy."

And in five minutes Polly and Van were busily working together; he
putting in the things, while she neatly made them into piles, and Percy
sorted and gave orders like a general.

"He does strut around so," said Van under his breath, "just see him
now."

"Hush--oh, Van, how can you? and he's going back to college, and you
won't see him for ever so many weeks."

Van swallowed something in his throat, and bent all his energies to
settling the different articles in the trunk.

"Percy," said Polly presently in a lull, "I do just envy you for one
thing."

"What for, pray?" asked Percy, settling his beloved eyeglasses for a
better view of her.

"Why, you'll be with Joel and Davie," said Polly. "Oh, you don't know
how I miss those boys!" She rested both hands on the trunk edge as she
knelt before it.

[Illustration: "OH, YOU DON'T KNOW HOW I MISS THOSE BOYS!" ]

"I wish you'd been our sister," said Van enviously, "then we'd have had
good times always."

"Oh, I don't see much of Joel," said Percy. "Dave once in a while I run
across, but Joel--dear me!"

"You don't see much of Joel," repeated Polly, her hands dropping
suddenly in astonishment. "Why, Percy Whitney, why not, pray tell?"

"Why, Joel's awful good--got a streak of going into the prayer-meetings
and that sort of thing," explained Percy, "and we call him Deacon Pepper
in the class."

"He goes to prayer-meetings, and you call him Deacon Pepper," repeated
Polly in amazement, while Van burst out into a fit of amusement.

"Yes," said Percy, "and he has a lot of old fogies always turning up
that want help, and all such stuff, and I expect that he is going to be
a minister."

He brought this out as something too dreadful to be spoken, and then
fell back to see the effect of his words.

"Can you suppose it?" cried Polly under her breath, still kneeling on
the floor, "oh, boys, can you?" looking from one to the other.

"Yes; I'm afraid it's true," said Percy, feeling that he ought to be
thrashed for having told her, while Van laughed again.

"Oh--oh! it's too lovely. Dear, beautiful, old Joel!" cried Polly,
springing suddenly to her feet; "just think how good he is, boys! Oh,
it's too lovely to be true!"

Percy retreated a few steps hastily.

"And oh, how much better we ought to be," cried Polly in a rush of
feeling. "Just think, with Joel doing such beautiful things, oh, how
glad Mamsie will be! And he never told--Joel never told."

"And he'll just about kill me if you tell him I've let it out," said
Percy abruptly. "Oh, dear me, how he'll pitch into me!" exclaimed Percy
in alarm.

"I never shall speak of it," declared Polly in a rapture, "because Joel
always hated to be praised for being good. But oh, how lovely it is!"

And then Grandpapa called, and she ran off on happy feet.

"Whew!" exclaimed Percy, with a look over at Van.

"I tell you what, if you want to get into Polly's good graces, you've
just got to brush up on your catechism, and such things," remarked Van;
"eyeglasses don't count."

Percy turned off uneasily.

"Nor suppers, and a bit of card-playing, eh, Percy?"

"Hold your tongue, will you?" cried his brother irritably.

"Nor swell clothes and a touch-me-if-you-dare manner," said Van
mockingly, sticking his fingers in his vest pockets.

Percy made a lunge at him, then thought better of it.

"Leave me alone, can't you?" he said crossly.

Van opened his mouth to toss back a teasing reply, when Percy opened up
on him. "I'd as soon take my chances with her, on the suppers and other
things, as to have yours. What would Polly say to see you going for me
like this, I'd like to know?"

It was now Van's turn to look uncomfortable, and he cast a glance at the
door.

"Oh, she may come in," said Percy, bursting into a laugh, "then you'd be
in a fine fix; and I wouldn't give a rush for the good opinion she'd
have of you."

Van hung his head, took two or three steps to the door, then came back
hurriedly.

"I cry 'Quits,' Percy," he said, and held out his hand.

"All right," said Percy, smoothing down his ruffled feelings, and
putting out his hand too.

Van seized it, wrung it in good brotherly fashion, then raced over the
stairs at a breakneck pace.

"Polly", he said, meeting her in the hall where she had just come from
Mr. King's room, "I've been blackguarding Percy, and you ought to know
it."

"Oh, Van!" cried Polly, stopping short in a sorry little way; "why,
you've been so good ever since you both promised years ago that you
wouldn't say bad things to each other."

"Oh, that was different," said Van recklessly; "but since he went to
college, Percy has been a perfect snob Polly."

Polly said nothing, only looked at him in a way that cut him to the
heart, as she moved off slowly.

"Aren't you going to say anything?" asked Van at last.

"I've nothing to say," replied Polly, and she disappeared into Mrs.
Whitney's room and closed the door.

That evening Jasper and Percy, who went together for a good part of the
way, had just driven to the station, when the bell rang and a housemaid
presently laid before Polly a card, at sight of which all the color
deserted her cheek. "Oh, I can't see him," she declared involuntarily.

"Who is it?" asked old Mr. King, laying down the evening paper.
