
'My gracious, Baldy, let's get out of this!' he instantly pleaded,'
starting the man himself.

'Go about fifty feet,' was the reply, 'but not any further.'

It may be said that the steam man fairly leaped over this space, and
somewhat further, like a frightened kangaroo, and even then it would
not have halted had not the trapper given peremptory orders for it to
do so.

The sky was now clear and the moon, riding high and nearly full,
illumined the prairie for a considerable distance, and there was no
fear but that they could detect the approach of the most treacherous
savage, let him come in whatever disguise he chose.

The night wore gradually away, without any particular demonstration
upon the part of either the Indians or white men, although dropping
shots were occasionally exchanged, without any particular result on
either side.

Now and then a red-skin, creeping cautiously along, made his
appearance on the edge of the ravine; but there was too much light for
him to expose himself to the deadly rifle of the trapper, who took a
kind of savage pleasure in sending his leaden messengers after the
aborigines.

This species of sport was not without its attendant excitement and
danger; for the last creature to take a shot quietly is an American
Indian; and they kept popping away at the steam man and its train
whenever a good opportunity offered.

Owing to the size and peculiar appearance of the steamer, he was a
fair target for his enemies; and, indeed, so uncomfortably close did
some of the bullets come, that the boy almost continually kept his
head lowered, so as to be protected by the sides of the wagon.

Finally morning came, greatly to the relief of all our friends. As
soon as it was fairly light the Irishman and Yankee were notified that
a move was about to be made, by means of the steam-whistle. An
answering signal coming back to them, the steam man at once advanced
to the very edge of the ravine.

The trapper peering cautiously down the gulch, caught sight of several
red-skins crouching near the cave, and, directing young Brainerd to
discharge his piece at a certain one, the two fired nearly together.
Scarce five seconds had elapsed, when both Ethan and Mickey did the
same. All four, or rather three, as the boy gave his principal attention
to the engine, began loading and firing as rapidly as possible.

The red-skins returned a few scattering shots; but they were taken at
such disadvantage, that they immediately began a precipitate retreat
down the ravine.

Ere they had withdrawn a hundred yards, Ethan and Mickey emerged from
the cave, shouting and excited, firing at every red-skin they could
see, the Irishman occasionally swinging his gun over his head, and
daring the savages to a hand-to-hand encounter.

While the two were thus engaged, the trapper was not idle. The steam
man maintained his place but a short distance behind the enemies, and
his deadly rifle scarcely ever failed of its mark.

The moment an Indian was killed or helplessly wounded, his companions
caught and dragged him away, there being a great fear upon the part of
all that some of their number might fall into the hands of their
enemies, and suffer the ineffaceable disgrace of being scalped.

The savages were followed a long distance, until their number had
diminished down to a fraction of what it was originally, and the
survivors had all they could do in 'taking care of their disabled
comrades.

Never was victory more complete. The Indians were thoroughly
discomfited, and only too glad to get away after being so severely
punished. During this singular running fight the steam man kept up a
constant shrieking, which doubtless contributed in no slight degree to
the rout of the red-skins. They fired continually at the
fearful-looking monster, and, finding their shots produced no effect,
invested the thing with a portion of the supernatural power which they
had given it at first sight.

When the last glimpse of the retreating Indians was seen, the trapper
turned triumphantly toward the boy.

'Warn't that purty well done, younker?'

'It was indeed.'

'They'll now stay away awhile.'

'We would have failed if we had waited any longer.'

'Why so, boy?'

'Because the last stick is burned, and the steam man couldn't be made
to run a mile further without more fuel.'



                    CHAPTER XVII. HOMEWARD BOUND.

THE PUNISHMENT administered to the Indians who had so greatly annoyed
the miners proved a very beneficial one.

Nothing more was seen of them, except one or two glimpses of the
red-skin upon his black horse. He, however, maintained a respectful
distance, and at the end of a day or two disappeared altogether.

These were golden moments indeed to the miners, and they improved them
to the utmost. From earliest light until the darkness of night they
toiled almost unceasingly. Half the time they went hungry rather than
stop their work to procure that which was so much needed. When,
however, the wants of nature could no longer be trifled with, Baldy
took his rifle and started off on a hunt, which was sure to be brief
and successful.

Sometimes he caught sight of some game in the gulch, and sometimes
something in the air drew the fire of his unerring rifle, and the
miners feasted and worked as only such violently laboring men can do.

Although the boy was unable to assist at the severe labor, yet he soon
demonstrated his genius and usefulness. He not only constructed a dam,
but made a 'rocker,' or machine, of an original style, that did the
work far more expeditiously and thoroughly than it had yet been done.

While the men were getting the auriferous sand, he separated it from
the particles of dirt and gravel, without any assistance from them,
and without any severe labor for himself.

There was some apprehension upon the part of all that the huge
trapper, whom young Brainerd had met at night, would make his
appearance. Should he do so, it would be certain to precipitate a
difficulty of the worst kind, as he was morose, sullen, treacherous,
envious and reckless of danger.

Baldy Bicknell really feared him more than he did the Indians, and the
constant watchfulness he exercised for several days showed how great
was his apprehension.

Fortunately, indeed, for all concerned, the giant hunter continued his
travels in a different direction, and the miners were undisturbed by
him.

Two weeks passed, by the end of which time the ravine was about
exhausted of its precious stuff, and the miners made their
preparations for going home.

It was impossible to do anything more than conjecture the amount of
wealth they had obtained, but Baldy was sure that there was enough,
when sold, to buy each of them a handsome farm.

'Jerusalem! but naow ain't that good?' exclaimed the delighted Ethan
Hopkins, as he mopped off his perspiring forehead. 'That 'ere
encourages me to take a step that I've often contemplated.'

'What might the same be?'

'Git married: me and Seraphenia Pike hev been engaged for the last ten
years, and now I'll be hanged ef I don't go home and get spliced.'

'And it's myself that'll do the same,' added Mickey, as he executed an
Irish jig on the barren earth in front of their cavern home, after
they had concluded to leave the place.

'Where does she reside?' inquired Ethan.

'Ballyduff, Kings County, in the Oim of the Sea; it's there that lives
the lass that's to have the honor of becoming Mrs. McSquizzle, and
becomin' the mither of her own children. Arrah, but isn't the same a
beauty?'

'The same as my own, Michael,' ventured the Yankee, who deemed it his
duty to correct this general remark of his friend.

'Arrah, now, get cut wid ye! she can't begin wid Miss Bridget
Moghlaghigbogh that resides wid her mither and two pigs on the
outskirts of Ballyduff, in the wee cabin that has the one room and the
one windy. Warrah, warrah, now isn't she a jewel?'

'And so is Seraphenia.'

'But has she the rid hair, that makes it onnecessary for them to have
the candle lit at night? and has she the same beautiful freckles, the
size of a ha'penny, on the face and the nose, that has such an iligant
turn up at the end, that she used to hang her bonnet on it? Arrah,
now, and didn't she have the swate teeth, six of the same that were so
broad that they filled her mouth, and it was none of yer gimblet holes
that was her mouth, but a beautiful one, that, when she smiled went
round to her ears, did the same. And her shoes! but you orter seen
them.'

'Why so?'

'What was the matter with her shoes?'

'Nothing was the same. They was the shoes that the little pigs went to
slaap in, afore they got so big that they couldn't git in them, and
then it was her brother that used one of them same for a trunk when he
emigrated to Amenity. Arrah, now, but wasn't me own Bridget a jewel?'

'Jehosephat! I should think she was!' exclaimed Hopkins, who had
listened in amazement to this enumeration of the beauties of the
gentle Irish lass, who had won the affections of Mickey McSquizzle.
'No doubt she had a sweet disposition.'

'Indeed she had, had she; it was that of an angel, was the same. It
was niver that I staid there a night coorting the same that she didn't
smash her shillaleh to smithereens over me head. Do yees obsarve
that?' asked Mickey, removing his hat, and displaying a scar that
extended half way across his head.

'I don't see how any one can help seeing that.'

'Well, that was the parting salute of Bridget, as I started for
Ameriky. Arrah, now, but she did the same in style.'

'That was her parting memento, was it?'

'Yes; I gave her the black eye, and she did the same fur me, and I
niver takes off me hat to scratch me head that I don't think of the
swate gal that I left at home.'

And thereupon the Irishman began whistling 'The Girl I Left Behind
Me,' accompanying it with a sort of waltzing dance, kept with
remarkably good time.

'And so you intend to marry her?' inquired Hopkins, with no little
amazement.

'It's that I do, ef I finds her heart fraa when I return to Ballyduff,
You know, that the loikes of her is sought by all the lads in Kings
County, and to save braaking their hearts, she may share the shanty of
some of 'em.'

'Jerusalem! but she is the all-firedest critter I ever heard tell on.'

'What does ye maan by that?' demanded the Irishman, instantly flaring
up; 'does ye maan to insinooate that she isn't the most charming
craater in the whole counthry?'

'You'll allow me to except my own Seraphenia?'

'Niver a once.'

'Then I'll do it whether you like it or not Your gal can't begin with
mine, and never could.'

'That I don't allow any man to say.'

And the Irishman immediately began divesting himself of his coat,
preparatory to settling the difference in the characteristic Irish
manner. Nothing loth, the Yankee put himself in attitude, determined
to stand up for the rights of his fair one, no matter by whom
assailed.

Matters having progressed so far, there undoubtedly would have been a
set-to between them, had not the trapper interfered. He and the boy
were engaged in preparing the steam man and wagon for starting, when
the excited words drew their attention, and seeing that a fight was
imminent, Baldy advanced to where they stood and said:

'Not another word, or skulpme ef I don't hammer both of you till
thar's nothin left o' you.'

This was unequivocal language, and neither of the combatants
misunderstood it. All belligerent manifestations ceased at once, and
they turned to in assisting in the preparations for moving.

When all four were seated in the wagon, with their necessary baggage
about them, it was found that there was comparatively little room for
the wood. When they had stored all that they could well carry, it was
found that there was hardly enough to last them twelve hours, so that
there was considerable risk run from this single fact.

The steam man, however, stepped off with as much ease as when drawing
the wagon with a single occupant. The boy let on enough of steam to
keep up a rattling pace, and to give the assurance that they were
progressing home ward in the fastest manner possible.

Toward the middle of the afternoon a storm suddenly came up and the
rain poured in torrents.

As the best they could do, they took refuge in a grove, where, by
stretching the canvas over themselves and the steam man, they managed
to keep free from the wet.

The steam man was not intended to travel during stormy weather, and so
they allowed him to rest.



                    CHAPTER XVIII. THE ENCAMPMENT.

THE STORM proved the severest which the steam man had encountered
since leaving St. Louis, and it put an effectual veto on his travels
during its continuance, and for a short time afterward.

The prairie was found so soft and slippery that they were compelled to
lie by until the sun had hardened it somewhat, when they once more
resumed their journey.

As they now had thousands of dollars in their possession, and as all
sorts of characters were found on the western plains, it may be said
that none of the company ever felt easy.

Baldy Bicknell, the trapper, from his extensive experience and
knowledge of the West, was the guide and authority on all matters
regarding their travels. He generally kept watch during the night,
obtaining what sleep he could through the day. The latter, however,
was generally very precarious, as at sight of every horseman or cloud
of smoke, they generally awakened him, so as to be sure and commit no
serious error.

As the steam man would in all probability attract an attention that
might prove exceedingly perilous to the gold in their possession, the
trapper concluded it prudent to avoid the regular emigrant routes.
Accordingly they turned well to the northward, it being their purpose
to strike the Missouri, where they would be pretty sure of
intercepting some steamer. Reaching such a place they would unjoint
and take apart the steam man, packing it up in such a manner that no
one could suspect its identity, and embark for St. Louis.

While this relieved them of the danger from their own race, it
increased the probability of an attack upon the Indians, who scarcely
ever seemed out of sight.

Their watchfulness, however, was constant, and it was due to this
fact, more than any other, that they escaped attack at night for the
greater part of their return journey.

Their position in the wagon was so cramped, that the party frequently
became excessively wearied, and springing out, trotted and walked for
miles alongside the tireless steam giant. Water was abundant, but
several times they were put to great inconvenience to obtain wood. On
three occasions they were compelled to halt for half a day in order to
obtain the necessary supply.

Once the steam man came to a dead standstill in the open prairie, and
narrowly escaped blowing up. A hasty examination upon the part of the
inventor, revealed the fact that a leak had occurred in the tank, and
every drop had run out..

This necessitated the greatest work of all, as water was carried the
better part of a mile, and nearly an entire day consumed before enough
steam could be raised to induce him to travel to the river, to procure
it himself, while the miners acted as convoys.

Late one afternoon, they reached a singular formation in the prairie.
It was so rough and uneven that they proceeded with great difficulty
and at a slow rate of speed. While advancing in this manner, they
found they had unconsciously entered a small narrow valley, the bottom
of which was as level as a ground floor. The sides contracted until
less than a hundred feet separated them, while they rose to the hight
of some eight or ten feet, and the bottom remained compact and firm,
making it such easy traveling for the steam man, that the company
followed down the valley, at a slow pace, each, however, feeling some
misgiving as to the propriety of the course.

'It runs in the right direction,' said young Brainerd, 'and if it only
keeps on as it began, it will prove a very handy thing for us.'

'Hyar's as afeared it ain't goin' to keep on in that style,' remarked
Baldy; 'howsumever, you can go ahead awhile longer.'

'Naow, that's what I call real queer,' remarked Ethan Hopkins, who was
stretching his legs by walking alongside the steamer.

'And it's meself that thinks the same,' added Mickey, puffing away at
his short black pipe. 'I don't understand it, as me father obsarved
when they found fault with him for breaking another man's head.'

'Ef we git into trouble, all we've got ta do is to back out,' remarked
Baldy, as a sort of apology for continuing his advance.

'This fellow doesn't know how to go backward,' said Johnny, 'but if it
prove necessary, we can manage to turn him round.'

'All right, go ahead.'

At the same moment, the limber Yankee sprung into the wagon, and the
steam man started ahead at a speed which was as fast as was prudent.

However, this delightful means of progress was brought to an
unexpected standstill, by the sudden and abrupt termination of the
valley. It ended completely as though it were an uncompleted canal,
the valley rising so quickly to the level of the prairie, that there
was no advancing any further, nor turning, nor in fact was there any
possible way of extricating themselves from the difficulty, except by
working the steam man around, and withdrawing by the same path that
they had entered by.

'Well, here we are' remarked the boy, as they came to a standstill,
'and what is to be done?'

'Get out of it,' was the reply of Hopkins, who advanced several yards
further, until he came up on the prairie again, so as to make sure of
the exact contour of the ground.

'Did yer ever try to make the thing go up hill?' asked the trapper.

Young Brainerd shook his head. 'Impossible! he would fall over on us,
the minute it was attempted. When I was at work at first making him,
what do you think was the hardest thing for me to do?'

'Make him go, I s'pose.'

'That was difficult, but it was harder work to balance him, that is, so
when he lifted up one foot he wouldn't immediately fall over on the
same side. I got it fixed after a while, so that he ran as evenly and
firmly as an engine, but I didn't fix upon any plan by which he could
ascend or descend a hill.'

'Can't you make him do it?'

'Not until he is made over again. I would be afraid to attempt to walk
him up a moderate inclination, and know it would be sure destruction
to start him up such a steep bank at that.'

'Then we must work him round, I s'pose.'

'There is nothing else that can be done.'

'Let's at it, then.'

This proved as difficult a job as they imagined. The steam man was so
heavy that it was impossible to lift him, but he was shied around as
much as possible; and, by the time he had walked across the valley he
had half turned round.
