
"I do, Bob. I'm dead sorry."

"If you'd stay sorry it might do some good," returned Bob. A sudden
thought seemed to strike him. He did not speak for a few moments;
then he said half aloud: "Who knows--it might help."

"What might help?"

"Nothing."

Bob got up and sauntered to the door.

"Will you stay right here like a decent chap and not get into any
more mischief until I get back?"

"Where are you going?"

"Nowhere much--just across the campus for a little while. I'll be
back soon. Will you wait here exactly where you are?"

"Yes, but--"

"Honor bright?"

"Sure!"

"All right. Don't quit this room until I come. So long!"

Bob was gone.

Van lay very still after the door had closed, and to keep him
company in his solitude back swarmed all those dreary thoughts that
Bob's cheery presence had for the time being banished; with a rush
they came to jeer, taunt, and terrify.

The _little while_ lengthened into an hour and on into a second
one.

The room became intolerable.

Then upon the stone floor of the corridor outside sounded Bob's
foot.

"Still here, Van?" he cried, coming in with elastic step and banging
the door after him.

His face was wreathed in smiles.

"What's happened to you that you look like that?" questioned Van,
sitting up among the pillows.

"Like what?"

"Why, as if somebody had sent you a Christmas-tree or made you
president of a railroad?"

Bob laughed.

"I've been to see the Head," he said.

"Humph! I never knew of his causing any one such overwhelming
delight," observed Van a little spitefully.

"Hush up, old man; don't run down the Doctor," Bob said. "You may
have more cause to be grateful to him than you know."

"You don't mean--" Van's voice trembled. "Did you go to see him
about me?"

Bob nodded.

"Bob! How did you dare?"

"I dare do anything that becomes a man; who dares do more is none,"
quoted Bob merrily. "I don't believe, though, I'd have dared go for
myself," he answered. "It is different when you are doing it for
some one else. Now sit up and listen and I'll tell you all about it.
The Doctor was mighty white about you; but in spite of all he stuck
to the fact that you'd disobeyed the rules; he kept going back to
that every time I tried to switch him off. We squabbled over you a
solid hour, and the upshot of it was this: you are to stay at
Colversham--"

"Hurrah!"

Van hurled a pillow into the air.

"Shut up and hear the rest of it. You are to stay here because I
promised upon my word of honor that you would keep straight and
study."

"I'll do it."

"That isn't all."

Bob hesitated.

It was a wrench for him to deliver the remainder of the message.

"Yes, you are to stay," he repeated as if to gain time. "But of
course you can't expect to slip through with no punishment at all."

"No, indeed!"

Still Van spoke with jaunty hopefulness.

"The Doctor thinks it is only fair that you should be pretty
severely reminded of what you've done."

"That's all right. I'm not afraid. Fire ahead! What's he going to do
with me?"

"He thinks--he says--he feels it is best--"

"Oh, come on, come on--out with it!"

"He has forbidden you to take any part in the school athletics this
spring," was the reluctant whisper.

Van did not speak.

"I'm mighty sorry, old fellow," declared Bob, "but it was the best
I could do."

Still Van made no reply.

With troubled gaze Bob regarded his chum.

"I'd far rather Maitland had knocked me out," he ventured at last.

Stooping, he put his hand on Van's shoulder.

Van roused himself and looked up into his friend's face with one of
his quick smiles.

"It's all right, Bob," he said. "Don't you fuss about me any more.
You were a trump to get me off as well as you did. I'll take my
medicine without whimpering. I ought to bless my stars that my
banishment from athletics is only temporary. Suppose I had been
smashed up so I could never play another game like that little kid,
Tim McGrew," he shuddered. "It was just sheer luck that saved me.
Why, do you suppose, he should have been the one to be crippled and
I go scot free?" he observed meditatively.

"I don't know. Maybe because there is something in the world that
only you can do. My father believes that."

"Do you?"

"I don't know."

"It would be strange, wouldn't it, to feel you were let off just to
do something?" mused Van. "You'd be wondering all the time what it
was. Of course it would be something big."

"You could never tell what it was," Bob replied, falling in with his
friend's mood. "I suppose the only way to make sure would be to do
whatever came to you the best way you could do it. You never could
be sure that what you were doing was not the great thing."

"Not studying and stuff like that."

"It might be; or at least studying might lead to it."

"I don't believe it."

"It wouldn't hurt you to try it."

"No, I suppose not." Then with characteristic caprice Van shifted
the subject. "But seriously, Bobbie, there is something I am going
to do. You'll howl, I guess, and maybe you'll be disappointed, too.
It's about that sick kid, Tim McGrew. The surgeon says the little beggar
will never walk again. I feel pretty sore about it; I suppose
because I was there," explained Van uneasily. "I've about decided to
chip in the money Father was going to send me for a canoe and get a
wheel chair for him. His folks are poor, and can't get one, and the
doctor says--"

"You're a--"

"Oh, shut up, can't you, Bobbie? It's only because I'm so cut up
about the accident. Remember, it might have been me instead of him.
You won't mind much if we don't have the canoe, will you?"

"No," was the low answer.

Neither of the boys spoke for some time.

Then Bob whispered:

"Have you thought, Van, that maybe the thing you are to do is
something for that little lame boy, Tim McGrew?"




CHAPTER X

HOW VAN BORE HIS PUNISHMENT


The spring term passed much faster than either Bob or Van dreamed it
would and despite the absence of athletics Van Blake found plenty to
do to fill the gap left by this customary activity.

In the first place there was his studying. Had not Bob assumed an
obligation that must be lived up to and that was quite as binding as
if it existed on paper instead of in a mere invisible point of
honor? He was very grateful to Bob and had given bond that he would
live up to the pledge his chum had made for him. Now he must fulfil
his promise, Van argued. So although the call of the springtime was
strong and difficult to resist he had been faithful to his work,
"plugging away," as he expressed it, with all his strength. To his
surprise the task, so irksome at first, became interesting. It was
a novel experience to enter a classroom and instead of moving in a
mental haze possess a clear idea of what was going on. Twice he was
able to furnish the correct answers to Latin questions on which
every one else had failed, and what a thrill of satisfaction
accompanied the performance!

The attitude of his teachers changed, too. Formerly they had been
polite; now they became even cordial, demonstrating by an
unsuspected friendliness that they were after all ordinary human
beings and rather likable ones at that. They were moreover amazingly
sympathetic and met every endeavor of Van's with generous aid.
Perhaps schools were not the prison-houses he had formerly thought
them!

There had, of course, been no chance to conceal from the boys the
reason of his banishment from the ball field and tennis-courts; such
a story as the motor accident travels with insidious speed. Before
a day had passed from one end of Colversham to the other everybody
knew that Van Blake had disobeyed the school rules and had in
consequence forfeited his place in out-of-door sports. Van, however,
was a great favorite and the manly way in which he accepted his
penalty provoked nothing but admiration and respect from his
classmates. He frankly admitted his mistake, owning that while his
sentence was severe it was perfectly just; nor would he permit a
word of criticism of Dr. Maitland's decree to be voiced in his
hearing.

"Maitland is all right!" was his hearty endorsement, and that remark
was the only encouragement his pals received when they came to
condone with him.

Gradually the affair dropped out of sight. Van went among the boys,
cheerily giving advice as to the make-up of the school teams and
even coaching the fellow who was to serve as his successor as
pitcher on the nine.

Nevertheless there still remained quite a margin of leisure, and it
was during this lonely interval when every one else was training for
the coming games that he would stray off by himself and visit little
Tim McGrew. Between the two a peculiar friendship sprang up. On
Van's part it arose from forlornness mingled with a half formulated
belief that he must do something to express his thankfulness that he
himself had escaped from the fate that had overtaken the child. On
the small lad's side it had its root in gratitude and hero-worship.
In Tim's eyes Van Blake was an all-powerful person. Was it not he
who had picked him up and carried him to the hospital? And had not
this same big schoolboy bought the beautiful wheel-chair that
enabled one to travel about the house and yard almost as readily as
if on foot? In addition to all this was it not Van who came often to
the house, never forgetting to bring in his pocket some toy or
picture-book? Small things they often were--these gifts that meant
so much to the child--often things of very slight money value; but
to the invalid whose long, tedious days of convalescence were
stretches of monotony the tiny presents seemed treasures from an
enchanted land.

Tim was now at home in the shabby cottage on the outskirts of
Colversham where he lived with his mother and four sisters. Poor as
the place was it was spotlessly neat and Tim's family were
spotlessly tidy too. Mrs. McGrew, who supported her household by
doing washing for some of the families in the town, might have had
a permanent and much more lucrative position elsewhere had it not been
for leaving her five little ones; as it was, she clung to her
children, struggling to meet her living expenses as best she could.
It had been a sore grief to her when Tim, her only boy and the baby
of the home, had become crippled. Perhaps she sensed more clearly
than did the lad the full seriousness of the calamity. As for Tim,
he accepted it in childish fashion, hopefully ignoring the problems
of the future.

To Van Blake Mrs. McGrew was all gratitude. Of all her children her
boy was her favorite.

"But for you, sir, little Timmie might have been left at the
roadside to die," she would exclaim over and over. "We'll never
forget it--never--neither I nor the children!"

It was thus that Van became the hero of the McGrew household, and
the warmth and genuineness of the welcome he unfailingly received
there aroused in him an answering friendliness. Many a time when he
saw things either new or interesting he would find himself
instinctively saying:

"I must tell Tim about that," or "I must take that to Tim."

But with his enthronement as the sovereign of Tim's universe there
came to Van a very disquieting experience. Tim thought his big
friend knew everything, and in consequence whenever he became
puzzled about facts that were being read to him or that he heard he
would instantly appeal to Van, whom he was sure could right every
sort of dilemma that might arise. But too often the unlucky Van was
forced to blush and falter that he would have to look it up; and
when he did so he frequently learned something himself. For Tim
never forgot. No sooner would Van be inside the gate than the shrill
little voice would pipe: "And did you find out how far away Mars is,
Mr. Blake?"

Poor Van, it kept him scrambling to satisfy Tim McGrew's
intellectual curiosity, yet there was a tang in the game that
rendered it very interesting. He found, too, ample reward in seeing
the wee invalid's face brighten when the query was answered.

So the spring sped on.

In the meantime Van had heard only irregularly from his parents. In
a long letter to his father he had sent all the facts of his
disgrace at school and had added that he was truly sorry; the reply
he received had been terse and rather stern but not unkind. Mr.
Blake expressed much regret for his son's conduct and closed his
epistle with the caustic comment that he should look for a proof of
Van's desire to make good. That was all. Van knew that Dr. Maitland
had also written; but what he did not know was that with the
fearlessness so characteristic of him Bob Carlton had taken the time
and trouble to pen a long note to Colorado as a plea for his chum.
It was a remarkable composition from a boy so young--a letter full
of affection and earnestness and voicing a surprising insight into
his friend's character and disposition. Mr. Blake read it over three
times, and when he finished sat in a reverie with it still between
his fingers. The tone of it was so like the man he had known long
ago, that friend from whom a misunderstanding that now seemed
pitiably trivial had separated him. It had been his fault; Mr. Blake
could see that now. He had been both hasty and unjust. Over him
surged a great wave of regret. Well, it was too late to mend the
matter at this late day. One chance was, however, left him--to make
up to the son for the injustice done the father.

It therefore came about that at the close of the school term Bob
Carlton was overjoyed to receive from Van's parents an invitation to
come west with their boy and pass the summer holidays. Such a
miracle seemed too good to be a reality, and the lads' instant fear
was that the Carltons would be unwilling to spare Bob from home for
such a long time. To their surprise, however, Mr. Carlton welcomed
the plan with enthusiasm. A trip to Colorado would be a wonderful
opportunity, the educational value of which could scarcely be
estimated, he argued. Underneath this most excellent reason there
also existed on Mr. Carlton's part a desire to show his former
partner that he cherished no ill will for the past. Who knew but the
boy might even be a messenger of peace?

So one June morning, after bidding good-bye to Colversham and to Tim
McGrew, the two lads set forth on their western journey. They were
in high spirits. Both had passed the examinations with honors, and
as Van thought of his achievement again and again he wondered if it
could be true that he was one of that light-hearted band who were
starting off on their summer vacation with no conditions to work
off.

The solitary cloud on the horizon was the grief of little Tim at
having his friend go. But Van promised there should be letters--lots
of them--and post-cards, too, all along the route; the parting would
not be for long anyway.

These were some of the thoughts that surged through Van's mind as he
and Bob settled themselves into their places on the train and began
the attempt to fathom the reams of directions Mr. Blake had sent
them; pages and pages there were of what to do and what not to do on
the long trip, the letter closing with the single sentence:

"I am trusting you to make this journey alone because I believe your
chum, Bob Carlton, has a level head."

"If your own head is not level, Bobbie, it is at least an honor to
be associated with a head that is," remarked Van humorously. "I
guess that is about all the recommendation you need from Dad, old
boy. I wonder how he happened to take such a fancy to you without
ever having met you."

"I wonder," echoed Bob quietly.




CHAPTER XI

THE BOYS MAKE A NEW ACQUAINTANCE


To Bob every mile of the western journey was a step into Wonderland;
novel sights, novel ideas confronted him on every hand and viewed
through the medium of his enthusiasm things that had become
threadbare to Van became, as if by magic, suddenly new. The
greatness of the country was a marvel of which Bob had never before
had any adequate conception. Then there were the cities, alive with
varying industries, and teeming with their strangely mixed American
population. Above all was the amazing natural beauty of scenery
hitherto undreamed of. Hour after hour Bob sat spellbound at the
window of the observation-car, never tiring of watching the shifting
landscape as it whirled past. His interest and intelligence caught
the notice of a gentleman who occupied the section opposite the
boys, and soon the three formed one of those pleasant acquaintances
so frequently made in traveling.

Mr. Powers (for that was the stranger's name) was on his way back to
his farm in Utah, and very eager was he to reach home.

"So many things on the place need my attention that the journey you
are delighting in seems very long to me," he remarked to Bob one
morning as they came from the dining-car.

"Is your farm a large one, Mr. Powers?" questioned Bob.

Mr. Powers smiled.

"It is larger than you would want to build a fence around," he
returned humorously.

"I suppose you have all sorts of cows and pigs and horses on it, and
raise every kind of fruit and vegetable that ever was invented," put
in Van mischievously.
