behind them. On the part of the trappers three had been killed and quite
a number badly wounded.



CHAPTER XVI.


 At Brown's Hole--Trading in the Navajoe Country--Carson Serves as Hunter
 at Brown's Hole--Trapping in the Black Hills--On the Yellowstone--Fight
 with the Blackfeet--Their Retreat to an Island--Their Flight During the
 Night--An Imposing Array of Warriors.

The fight between the Blackfeet and trappers was one of the most
important in which Kit Carson, previous to the late war, was ever
engaged. The forces must have included several hundred, and the lesson
administered to the aggressive red men was remembered by them a long
time.

After burying their dead, looking after the wounded and setting matters
to rights, the hunters resumed trapping through the Blackfoot country.
They were scarcely disturbed by their old enemies who dreaded rousing
the resentment of such a formidable body of daring and unerring
marksmen.

Our friends were very successful, and, when they made their way to the
rendezvous, a week's journey away, they carried with them an immense
stock of peltries. When the trading was finished, the parties made new
combinations and departed in different directions. Instead of attaching
himself to a large company, Kit Carson and seven choice spirits started
for a trading post known at that time as Brown's Hole. They reached
there just in time for the leader to join an expedition, numbering only
two beside himself, which went into the Navajoe country for purposes of
barter. The venture proved a great success and Carson drifted back again
to Brown's Hole. There such liberal offers were made him to serve
as hunter for the fort, that he accepted and entered upon his rather
singular, but exceedingly congenial duties.

These, as the reader must know, simply consisted of keeping the garrison
supplied with all the meat they needed. Though the country was noted for
its fine game, it required much time, skill and patience for Carson to
make sure that none of the vigorous appetites at the post suffered. No
one could have done better and very few as well as he. When spring came,
and he gave up his position, he was complimented by those whom he left
behind on the admirable manner in which he had met all requirements.

During those years there was much similarity in the life and experience
of Kit Carson. He had become known all through the west and southwest
as the most daring, sagacious and brilliant leader in that country. His
services were in demand wherever he went, and as he was in the enjoyment
of perfect health, overrunning with life and activity, he made money
rapidly and showed his wisdom by laying aside a respectable sum for a
rainy day.

In the spring following his engagement at Brown's Hole, he went with
a small party to the Black Hills, where they were quite successful in
hunting. Later in the summer they joined the main body of trappers on
Green River. All meeting at the general rendezvous on a branch of the
Wind River. Still later, the majority of the trappers went into winter
quarters on the Yellowstone. They were again in the country of their
bitter enemies, the Blackfeet, and were certain of a fight with them;
but several months passed without molestation.

One day, however, several of the trappers who were making the rounds
of the traps, came upon signs which showed they were close to a strong
force of the Blackfeet. The men lost no time in hurrying back to camp
with the news, where it was agreed that trouble was at hand.

Forty men were selected at once to hunt out the Indians and engage them
in battle. It goes without saying, that Kit Carson was made the leader
and there was not a moment's unnecessary delay in starting out to find
the enemy.

They were successful in their search. They suddenly found themselves in
the presence of a scouting party, who were undoubtedly looking for them;
but perceiving the strength of the whites, they began retreating. Carson
and his men pressed them hotly, when, as anticipated, they fell back on
the main body and one of the old fashioned battles between trappers and
Indians began.

The Blackfeet always fight bravely, and, for a time, they held their
ground well, but they were forced to give way and retired to a small
island in the Yellowstone, where they had thrown up rude fortifications
and felt able to hold their own against a much superior force.

Darkness closed in upon the contending forces, and the assailants ceased
firing and encamped for the night on the bank of the river. They were on
the qui vive through the still hours, and so eager for the attack that
with the earliest streakings of light in the east, they plunged into the
stream and made for the barricades. It was not to be supposed that the
Blackfeet would be taken off their guard, and the trappers expected to
reach the defences through a hot fusillade from the dusky defenders.

To their surprise, however, not a single gun was discharged and they
rushed pell mell over the rugged fortifications to engage the enemy
in hand to hand conflict. To their chagrin, however, not a solitary
Blackfoot was visible. Despite the watchfulness of the white men, the
entire Indian force had withdrawn during the night without arousing the
least suspicion on the part of the watchers.

But the trappers were too wise to misconstrue the action of the
Blackfeet. Their withdrawal was a strategic movement, and did not by
any means signify they were afraid of the large force or that they would
prefer not to molest them. The signs around the fortifications showed
that the Indians had suffered severely and they would never content
themselves until full retaliation had been made.

The trappers returned to camp, where a long council was held. The
conclusion was that the Blackfoot village was near by, and when they
learned of the severe punishment received by the scouting party, they
would lose no time in entering upon a campaign of revenge. As the
Blackfeet nation included several thousand warriors, there was reason to
fear they would overwhelm the trappers, despite their bravery and skill.
Barricades were thrown up and the best men stationed as sentinels. One
of them hastened to the top of an adjoining hill, which commanded an
extensive view of the surrounding country.

The sentinel had been in position but a short time when he signalled
to his friends the approach of a large body of Indians. The hunters
immediately began strengthening their defences, and before the redskin
arrived, they had rendered their position almost impregnable against any
force that could be gathered in the country.

As the Blackfeet approached, the sentinel hurried down from the hill and
joined the main body. Shortly after, the advance party of Blackfeet came
in sight and made a reconnaissance which apprised them of the nature of
the defences. They did not fire a shot but waited until the arrival of
the main band.

When that came in sight, it was enough to strike dismay into every
heart. There were few if any less than a thousand warriors. Dr. Peters,
the biographer of Carson, says:

"It was a sight which few white men of the American nation have looked
upon. Arrayed in their fantastic war costume and bedaubed with paint,
armed with lances, bows and arrows, rifles, tomahawks, knives, etc.,
some mounted and some on foot, they presented a wild and fearful scene
of barbaric fancy.

"Soon after their last company had reported, the frightful war dance,
peculiar to the American savages, was enacted in sight of the trappers'
position. The battle songs and shouts which accompanied the dance
reached the ears of the whites with fearful distinctness. Any other
than hearts of oak with courage of steel would have quailed before this
terrible display of savage enmity and ferocity. This dance, to men well
skilled in the ways of the Indian warrior, was a sure signal that the
next day would be certain to have a fearful history for one party or the
other and doubtless for both. The odds, most assuredly, were apparently
greatly in favor of the savage host and against the little band of hardy
mountaineers."



CHAPTER XVII.


 The Morrow--Withdrawal of the Indian Army--At Fort Hall--In the
 Blackfoot Country--The Ambush--The Trappers Decide to Withdraw--Trapping
 in Other Localities--Carson Decides to Abandon the Business--Visits
 Bent's Fort Where He Serves as Hunter for Eight Years.

Having gone through what the red men consider the necessary
preliminaries of such a grand campaign, the vast number of warriors
awaited the dawn that was to witness the annihilation of the entire
force that had dared to venture upon their hunting grounds without so
much as asking permission.

It was scarcely light when the imposing array advanced upon the
mountaineers, who coolly awaited their approach. When the Blackfeet came
close enough to see the fortifications thrown up by the whites, they
were astonished. They knew from previous experience the strength of such
means of defence and suddenly lost their eagerness to make the attack.

After a full survey of the work before them, they concluded the task
was beyond accomplishment. The magnificent force, therefore, began
withdrawing. It was the turn of the trappers to feel disappointed. They
had not thought of any such issue and were enraged. They shouted and
made tantalizing gestures to the Blackfeet, in the hope of goading them
to stand their ground, but they were too wise to do so. They retreated
to a safe point where a council of war was held. It was not to be
expected that after such an abrupt withdrawal, they could summon enough
courage to make the assault.

When the conference was over, the Indian army, as it may be called,
broke into two divisions, one of which went back toward their own
village while the other set their faces toward the Crow country.
Uncertain whether they would not reappear when they believed there
was hope of surprising the mountaineers, the latter maintained their
vigilance day and night.

It may have been that the red men made several reconnaissances, but, if
so, they concluded it would be imprudent to attack the mountaineers
who held their position and continued trapping as opportunity presented
through the winter.

After trapping in various localities, Kit Carson and several friends
visited Fort Hall, where they joined a party in the employ of the
Northwest Fur Company. They trapped around the head of Salmon River and
other streams, and finally returned to Fort Hall, where the peltries
were sold for a fair valuation. Then Carson and a few others set out to
join a party which he knew was trapping in the Blackfoot country.
Upon coming up with them, he was told that they had had several sharp
skirmishes with the Indians, in one of which a trapper was severely
wounded. The following morning, Carson and his comrades parted from the
rest and were trapping slowly up stream, when they were fired upon by
Blackfeet and compelled to retreat. They hurried back and succeeded
in escaping a serious danger; but the pursuit was so close that Carson
hastily stationed his men in ambush. A hot fire dropped several of the
warriors and caused the others to hesitate.

The halt was just long enough to allow the trappers to reload their
pieces, when the Blackfeet made a fiercer rush than before; but with
that pertinacious courage for which the tribe is noted, they kept up the
fight through the rest of the day, determined to throw away no advantage
they might gain. Had Carson chosen his position with less judgment,
he and his command must have been overwhelmed, for nothing could have
exceeded the daring of their assailants, who in their desperation set
fire to the thicket in which the mountaineers had ensconced themselves;
but the shrubbery was too green to burn well, and, after a little while,
it died out. Then it must have been the red men concluded it was useless
to strive further, and, learning that the main body of the trappers were
not far off, they departed.

The annoyance from these Indians was so great that it was decided
to leave the country. While the trappers were able to hold their own
against them, yet it was impossible to make much progress in taking
furs, when their attention was mainly taken up in fighting the warriors,
who varied their shooting by destroying the traps that were set for the
beavers.

The next scene of operations was the North Fork of the Missouri where
they had been engaged only a short time when they came upon an extensive
village of Flathead Indians. These showed their friendliness to the
trappers by sending one of their chiefs and a number of warriors who
helped them hunt along the different streams.

The following spring Carson and a single companion set their traps
in the vicinity of Big Snake River. This was the country of the Utah
Indians, who were well disposed towards the whites. Thus, while furs
were plenty, the couple were enabled to devote their whole time to
taking them, without fear of being fired upon every time they ventured
out of sight of camp. As a consequence, they succeeded beyond their own
expectations, and, making their way to the nearest post, sold the stock
for a fair sum.

The peltries were scarcely disposed of, when Carson organized another
expedition which visited the Grand River, over which they trapped until
winter, when they returned to Brown's Hole, where Carson remained until
spring. Then he trapped once more in the land of the Utahs and at New
Park, taking their furs to the post where he was obliged to sell them
for a much less sum than he had ever received before.

The transaction had an important bearing on the fortunes of Kit Carson,
for it was proof of an unpleasant truth that had been forcing itself
for a number of months upon him: the days of remunerative trapping were
ended.

For years, the demand had been growing steadily less both in Europe and
America. The ingenuity of the manufacturer showed itself in the make
of cheaper substitutes, while the beavers that had been hunted so
persistently were becoming scarce: there were few regions in which
trapping could be pursued with any success.

Nothing could be plainer, therefore, to Carson than the fact that he
must soon give up the business and engage in something else to gain a
livelihood. What should it be?

Carson and several veteran trappers started for Bent's Fort, located on
the Arkansas, near an immense forest of cottonwoods, known as the Big
Timbers. Messrs. Bent and St. Vrain, the proprietors, no sooner learned
that Carson contemplated a change of occupation, than they offered
him the position of hunter for the fort, his duties being to keep it
supplied with all the game that was required.

Carson was more willing to accept the offer than he would have been
under other circumstances. He agreed that the large number of men should
never want for animal food, and, having given his promise, he kept it
most faithfully for a period of eight years.

This statement includes a great deal, for it means that his wonderful
rifle brought down thousands of deer, antelope, elk and bisons; that he
tramped over hundreds of leagues of wilderness; that his splendid
health never failed him, and that his knowledge of the woods and its
inhabitants was as full and complete as it could be.

Furthermore, it is stated by Dr. Peters, that during that entire period,
not a single impatient word passed between Carson and his employers. He
attended to his duties with such regularity, promptness and skill that
the only comments they could make on his work were in the nature of
strong compliments.

Inasmuch as we have claimed that Carson was the superior in every
respect of those with whom he was associated, we must dwell for a moment
on this fact. Let the reader ask himself how many cases he knows where
the term of service has been so long, in which not a single unkind word
has passed between employer and employee.

His occupation as hunter was not monotonous, for where there were so
many to provide for, difficult and dangerous work was required and the
journeys which he often made through the long stretches of wilderness
were sometimes attended with much personal danger.

But the surrounding tribes, including the Arapahoes, Kiowas, Cheyennes,
Comanches and others, looked upon the great hunter with affectionate
admiration and no guest was more welcome and honored in their lodges
than he.



CHAPTER XVIII.


 Carson Visits his Old Home in Missouri--He Goes to St. Louis--Voyage up
 the Missouri--Makes the Acquaintance of Lieutenant John C. Fremont--Is
 engaged as a Guide for Fremont's First Expedition--The Start
 Westward--Various Mishaps--The Emigrants--The False Alarm.

Kit Carson had left his home in Missouri when only a boy and he was now
in the prime of a vigorous young manhood. The years since he turned his
back upon his old home had been busy and eventful ones and now, as
is often the case with those placed as was he, he longed to visit the
scenes of his childhood, and to meet and shake the hands of those of his
old friends who were still among the living.

In the spring of 1842, Carson went eastward with a train of wagons,
carrying goods to the States. When the borders of Missouri were reached,
he bade his companions goodbye and made his way back to his old home.
His experience was touching. His parents were dead, the old building
which would ever linger in his memory, had tumbled down and nearly every
one whom he met was a stranger. The cheeks of the hardy mountaineer were
wet with tears, and with a sigh, he turned his face away forever.

Carson had never seen a large city, and he made his way to St. Louis,
where he spent more than a week in sight seeing. Before the end of that
time, the old yearning for the mountains, prairies and streams of
