several others in its course, and opening a vista through which a
view could be obtained of the surface of the lake. The party
consisted of Peter Lambton, Harold, Jake, Ephraim Potter, another old
frontiersman, and two Indians.

The company under Captain Wilson had made its way safely to the St.
Lawrence after undergoing considerable hardships in the forest. They
had been obliged to depend entirely on what game they could shoot and
such fish as they could catch in the rivers whose course they
followed. They had, however, reached Montreal without loss, and there
they found that General Carleton had in all about 500 regulars and
about 200 volunteers who had recently been engaged.

It was clear that if the people of Canada were as hostile to the
connection with England as were those of the other colonies, the
little force at the disposal of the English general could do nothing
to defend the colony against the strong force which the Americans
were collecting for its invasion. Fortunately this was not the case.
Although the Canadians were of French descent and the province had
been wrested by arms from France, they for the most part preferred
being under English rule to joining the insurgent colonies. They had
been in no way oppressed by England, their property had been
respected, and above all things no attempt had ever been made to
interfere with their religion. In the New England provinces the hard
Puritan spirit of the early fathers had never ceased to prevail.
Those who had fled from England to obtain freedom of worship had been
intolerant persecutors of all religion different from their own. The
consequence was that the priests of Canada were wholly opposed to any
idea of union with the insurgent colonists. Their influence over the
people was great, and although these still objected to the English
rule and would have readily taken up arms against it under other
circumstances, they had too little sympathy with the New Englanders
to join in their movement, which, if successful, would have placed
Canada under the rule of the United States instead of that of
England.

The upper classes of Canadians were almost to a man loyal to the
English connection. They had been well treated and enjoyed a greater
state of independence than had been the case under French rule.
Moreover, they were for the most part descended from old French
families, and their sympathies were entirely opposed to popular
insurrection. Thus, when Captain Wilson and his party reached
Montreal, they found that, in spite of the paucity of English troops
under the command of General Carleton, the position was not so bad as
had been feared by General Gage. It was possible, and indeed
probable, that Upper Canada might fall into the hands of the
Americans, and that even Quebec itself might be captured; but unless
the people joined the Americans the success of the latter would be
but temporary. With the spring the navigation of the river would be
open and re-enforcements would arrive from England. The invaders
would then be at a disadvantage. Separated from home by a wide tract
of forest-covered country, they would have the greatest difficulty in
transporting artillery, ammunition, and stores, and, fighting as an
army in invasion, they would be placed in a very different position
to that occupied by the colonists fighting on their own ground. It
was probable that for a time the tide of invasion would succeed.

The Indians of the Five Nations, as those dwelling near the British
frontier at this point were called, had volunteered their services to
the general to cross the frontier to recapture Ticonderoga and Crown
Point, which had been seized by the Americans, and to carry the war
into the colonies. But General Carleton, an exceedingly humane and
kind-hearted man, shrank from the horrors that such a warfare would
entail upon the colonists. He accepted the services of the Indians as
far as the absolute defense of Canada from invasion, but refused to
allow them to cross the frontier.

On the arrival of Captain Wilson with his little force he was ordered
to march at once to the fort of St. John's, which was held by a party
of regular troops.

On arriving at that place the two scouts had been sent down toward
Lake Champlain to watch the proceedings of the enemy. Harold had
obtained leave from his father to accompany the scouts, and Jake had
been permitted to form one of the party. Peter Lambton had grumbled a
little at this last addition to the number. He knew Jake's affection
for his young master, and the great strength of the negro would have
rendered him useful in a hand-to-hand fight, but he was altogether
unaccustomed to forest work, and his habit of bursting into fits of
laughter on the smallest provocation, as is the manner of his race,
enraged the scout to the last degree. Indeed, he had not left the
fort above an hour when he turned savagely on the negro.

"Look-ee here," he said, "if that's the way ye're a-going on, the
sooner ye turns yer face and tramps back to the fort the better. When
you were at Concord it done no harm to make as much noise as a
jackass braying whenever you opened that mouth of yours, but it won't
do in the forests. It would cost us our har and your wool ef yer were
to make that noise with the enemy anywhere within fifteen miles of
yer. I aint a-going, if I knows it, to risk my sculp on such a
venture as this; still less I aint a-going to see this young chap's
life thrown away. His father hez put him in my charge, and I aint
a-going to see him sacrificed in no such way. So ye've got to make up
yer mind; yer have got to keep that mouth of yours shut tight or
yer've got to tramp back to the fort."

Jake gave many promises of silence, and although at first he often
raised his voice to a point far exceeding that considered by the
hunters safe in the woods, he was each time checked by such a savage
growl on the part of Peter, or by a punch in the ribs from Harold,
that he quickly fell into the ways of the others and never spoke
above a loud whisper.

At a short distance from the fort they were joined by the two
Indians, who were also out on a scouting expedition on their own
account. They had previously been well known both to Peter and
Ephraim. They were warriors of the Seneca tribe, one of the Five
Nations. They had now been for two days on the north shore of Lake
Champlain. They were sitting round a fire eating a portion of a deer
which had been shot by Harold that morning. So far they had seen
nothing of the enemy. They knew that 3000 men, under Schuyler and
Montgomery, had marched to the other end of the lake. The colonists
had been sending proclamations across the frontier to the
inhabitants, saying that they were coming as friends to free them
from the yoke of England and calling upon them to arise and strike
for freedom. They were also in negotiation with some of the chiefs of
the Five Nations and with other Indian tribes to induce them to join
with them.

"I propose," Peter said when the meal was finished and he had lighted
his pipe, "to go down the lake and see what they're doing. Deer Tail
here tells me that he knows where there's a canoe. He, Harold, and me
will go and reconnoiter a bit; the other three had best wait here
till we comes back with news. In course, chief," he continued to the
other Indian, after explaining to him in his own language what he
intended to do, "you'll be guided by circumstances--you can see a
long way down the lake, and ef anything should lead you to think that
we're in trouble, you can take such steps as may seem best to you.
It's mighty little I should think of the crowd of colonists; but ef,
as you say, a number of the warriors of the Five Nations, indignant
at the rejection, of their offers by the English general, have gone
down and joined the colonists, it'll be a different affair
altogether."

The Elk, as the second Seneca chief was called, nodded his assent. In
a few words Peter told Harold what had been arranged. Jake looked
downcast when he heard that he was not to accompany his master, but
as he saw the latter had, since leaving the fort, obeyed without
questioning every suggestion of the scout, he offered no
remonstrance.

A quarter of an hour later Peter rose, Deer Tail followed his
example, and Harold at once took up his rifle and fell in in their
steps. There was but little talk in the woods, and the matter having
been settled, it did not enter the mind either of Peter or of the
Indian to say a word of adieu to their comrades. Harold imitated
their example, but gave a nod and a smile to Jake as he started.

Half an hour's tramp took them to the shore of the lake. Here they
halted for a minute while the Indian closely examined the locality.
With the wonderful power of making their way straight through the
forest to the required spot, which seems to be almost an instinct
among Indians, Deer Tail had struck the lake within two hundred yards
of the point which he aimed at. He led the way along the shore until
he came to a spot where a great maple had fallen into the lake; here
he turned into the forest again, and in fifty yards came to a clump
of bushes; these he pushed aside and pointed to a canoe which was
lying hidden among them. Peter joined him, the two lifted the boat
out, placed it on their shoulders, and carried it to the lake. There
were three paddles in it. Peter motioned Harold to take his place in
the stern and steer, while he and the Indian knelt forward and put
their paddles in the water.

"Keep her along on the right shore of the lake, about fifty yards
from the trees. There's no fear of anyone lurking about near this
end."

The canoe was light and well made, and darted quickly over the water
under the strokes of the two paddlers. It was late in the afternoon
when they started, and before they had gone many miles darkness had
fallen. The canoe was run in close to shore, where she lay in the
shadow of the trees until morning. Just as the sun rose the redskin
and Peter simultaneously dipped their paddles in the water and sent
the canoe under the arches of the trees. They had at the same instant
caught sight of four canoes making their way along the lake.

"Them's Injuns," Peter whispered. "They're scouting to see if the
lake's free. If the general could have got a couple of gunboats up
the Sorrel the enemy could never have crossed the lake, and it would
have given them a month's work to take their guns round it. It's
lucky we were well under the trees or we should have been seen. What
had we best do, Deer Tail?"

For two or three minutes the scouts conversed together in the Indian
tongue.

"The Seneca agrees with me," Peter said. "It's like enough there are
Injuns scouting along both shores. We must lay up here till
nightfall. Ef we're seen they'd signal by smoke, and we should have
them canoes back again in no time. By their coming I expect the
expedition is starting, but it won't do to go back without being sure
of it."

The canoe was paddled to a spot where the bushes grew thickly by the
bank. It was pushed among these, and the three, after eating some
cooked deer's flesh which they had brought with them, prepared to
pass the day.

"The Seneca and I'll keep watch by turns," the scout said. "We'll
wake you if we want ye."

Harold was by this time sufficiently accustomed to the ways of the
woods to obey orders at once without offering to take his turn at
watching, as his inclination led him to do, and he was soon sound
asleep. It was late in the afternoon when he was awoke by the scout
touching him.

"There's some critters coming along the bank," he said in a whisper.
"They aint likely to see us, but it's best to be ready."

Harold sat up in the canoe, rifle in hand, and, listening intently,
heard a slight sound such as would be produced by the snapping of a
twig. Presently he heard upon the other side of the bushes, a few
yards distant, a few low words in the Indian tongue. He looked at his
companions. They were sitting immovable, each with his rifle directed
toward the sound, and Harold thought it would fare badly with any of
the passers if they happened to take a fancy to peer through the
bushes. The Indians had, however, no reason for supposing that there
were any enemies upon the lake, and they consequently passed on
without examining more closely the thicket by the shore. Not until it
was perfectly dark did Peter give the sign for the continuance of the
journey. This time, instead of skirting the lake, the canoe was
steered out toward its center. For some time they paddled, and then
several lights were seen from ahead.

"I thought so," the scout said. "They've crossed to the Isle La Motte
and they're making as many fires as if they war having a sort of
picnic at home. We must wait till they burns out, for we daren't go
near the place with the water lit up for two or three hundred yards
round. It won't be long, for I reckon it must be past eleven o'clock
now."

The fires were soon seen to burn down. The paddles were dipped in the
water and the canoe approached the island.

"I'd give something," Peter said, "to know whether there's any
redskins there. Ef there are, our chance of landing without being
seen aint worth talking of; ef there aint we might land a hull fleet;
at any rate we must risk it. Now, Harold, the chief and me'll land
and find out how many men there are here, and, ef we can, how long
they're likely to stop. You keep the canoe about ten yards from
shore, in the shadow of the trees, and be ready to move close the
instant you hear my call. I'll jest give the croak of a frog. The
instant we get in you paddle off without a word. Ef ye hears any
shouts and judges as how we've been seen, ye must jest act upon the
best of yer judgment."

The boat glided noiselessly up to the shore. All was still there, the
encampment being at the other side of the island. The two scouts, red
and white, stepped noiselessly on to the land. Harold backed the
canoe a few paces with a quick stroke upon the paddle, and seeing
close to him a spot where a long branch of a tree dipped into the
water, he guided the canoe among the foliage and there sat without
movement, listening almost breathlessly.

Ere many minutes had elapsed he heard footsteps coming along the
shore. They stopped when near him. Three or four minutes passed
without the slightest sound, and then a voice said, in tones which
the speaker had evidently tried to lower, but which were distinctly
audible in the canoe:

"I tell yer, redskin, it seems to me as how you've brought us here on
a fool's errand. I don't see no signs of a canoe, and it aint likely
that the British would be along the lake here, seeing as how there's
a score of canoes with your people in them scouting ahead."

"I heard canoe," another voice said, "first at other end of the
island and then coming along here."

"And ef yer did," the first speaker said, "likely enough it was one
of the canoes of your people."

"No," the Indian answered. "If canoe come back with news, would have
come straight to fires."

"Well, it aint here, anyway," the first speaker said, "and I don't
believe yer ever heard a canoe at all. It's enough to make a man
swear to be called up jest as we were making ourselves comfortable
for the night on account of an Injun's fancies. I wonder at the
general's listening to them. However, we've got our orders to go
round the island and see ef there's any canoe on either shore; so
we'd better be moving, else we shall not get to sleep before
morning."

Harold held his breath as the group passed opposite to him.
Fortunately the trunk of the tree grew from the very edge of the
water, and there were several bushes growing round it, so that at
this point the men had to make a slight _detour_ inland. Harold felt
thankful indeed that he had taken the precaution of laying his canoe
among the thick foliage, for although the night was dark it would
have been instantly seen had it been lying on the surface of the
lake. Even as it was, a close inspection might have detected it, but
the eyes of the party were fixed on the shore, as it was there, if at
all, that they expected to find an empty canoe lying.

Harold was uneasy at the discovery that there were still some
redskins on the island. It was possible, of course, that the one he
had heard might be alone as a scout, but it was more likely that
others of the tribe were also there.

After landing, Peter and the Seneca made their way across the island
to the side facing the American shore. Creeping cautiously along,
they found a large number of flat-bottomed boats, in which the
Americans had crossed from the mainland, and which were, Peter
thought, capable of carrying 2000 men. They now made their way toward
the spot where the forces were encamped. The fires had burned low,
but round a few of them men were still sitting and talking. Motioning
to the Seneca to remain quiet, Peter sauntered cautiously out on to
the clearing where the camp was formed. He had little fear of
detection, for he wore no uniform, and his hunter's dress afforded no
index to the party to which he was attached.

A great portion of the Americans were still in their ordinary attire,
it having been impossible to furnish uniforms for so great a number
of men as had been suddenly called to arms throughout the colonies.

From the arbors of boughs which had been erected in all directions,
he judged that the force had been already some days upon the island.
But large numbers of men were sleeping in the open air, and picking
his way cautiously among them, he threw himself down at a short
distance from one of the fires by which three or four men were
sitting.

For some time they talked of camp matters, the shortness of food, and
want of provisions.

"It is bad here," one said presently; "it will be worse when we move
forward. Schuyler will be here tomorrow with the rest of the army,
and we are to move down to Isle-aux-Noix, at the end of the lake, and
I suppose we shall land at once and march against St. John's. There
are only a couple of hundred Britishers there, and we shall make
short work of them."

"The sooner the better, I say," another speaker remarked. "I am ready
enough to fight, but I hate all this waiting about. I want to get
back to my farm again."

"You are in a hurry, you are," the other said. "You don't suppose we
are going to take Canada in a week's time, do you. Even if the
Canadians join us, and by what I hear that aint so sartin after all,
we shall have to march down to Quebec, and that's no child's play. I
know the country there. It is now September 4. Another month and the
winter will be upon us, and a Canadian winter is no joke, I can tell
you."

"The more reason for not wasting any more time," the other one
grumbled. "If Montgomery had his way we should go at them quickly
enough, but Schuyler is always delaying. He has kept us waiting now
since the 17th of last month. We might have been halfway to Quebec by
this time."

"Yes," the other said, "if the Britishers had run away as we came;
but we have got St. John's and Fort Chamblee to deal with, and they
may hold out some time. However, the sooner we begin the job the
sooner it will be over, and I am heartily glad that we move tomorrow."

Peter had now obtained the information he required, and rising to
his feet again, with a grumbling remark as to the hardness of the
ground, he sauntered away toward the spot where he had left the
Indian. Just as he did so a tall figure came out from an arbor close
by. A fire was burning just in front, and Peter saw that he was a
tall and handsome man of about forty years of age. He guessed at once
that he was in the presence of the colonial leader.

"You are, like myself," the newcomer said, "unable to sleep, I
suppose?"

"Yes, general," Peter answered. "I found I could not get off, and so
I thought I'd stretch my legs in the wood a bit. They're lying so
tarnal thick down there by the fires, one can't move without treading
on 'em."

"Which regiment do you belong to?"

"The Connecticut," Peter replied, for he knew by report that a
regiment from this province formed part of the expedition.

"As good men as any I have," the general said cordially. "Their only
fault is that they are in too great a hurry to attack the enemy."

"I agree with the rest, general," Peter said. "It's dull work wasting
our time here when we're wanted at home. I enlisted for six months,
and the sooner the time's up the better, say I."

"You have heard nothing moving?" the general asked. "One of the
Chippewas told me that he heard a canoe out in the lake. Ah! here he
is."

At that moment five or six men, headed by an Indian, issued from the
