and diddled, and lisped, and looked at herself in the glass, and was
generally grown-up and airy. When Aunt Izzie spoke to her, she fluttered
and behaved so queerly, that Clover almost laughed; and even Katy, who
could see nothing wrong in people she loved, was glad to carry her away
to the playroom.

"Come out to the bower," she said, putting her arm round the blue
barege waist.

"A bower!" cried Imogen. "How sweet!" But when they reached the
asparagus boughs her face fell. "Why it hasn't any roof, or pinnacles,
or any fountain!" she said.

"Why no, of course not," said Clover, staring, "we made it ourselves."

"Oh!" said Imogen. She was evidently disappointed. Katy and Clover felt
mortified; but as their visitor did not care for the bower, they tried
to think of something else.

"Let us go to the Loft," they said.

So they all crossed the yard together. Imogen picked her way daintily
in the white satin slippers, but when she saw the spiked post, she
gave a scream.

"Oh, not up there, darling, not up there!". she cried; "never, never!"

"Oh, do try! It's just as easy as can be," pleaded Katy, going up and
down half a dozen times in succession to show how easy it was. But
Imogen wouldn't be persuaded.

"Do not ask me," she said affectedly; "my nerves would never stand such
a thing! And besides--my dress!"

"What made you wear it?" said Philly, who was a plain-spoken child, and
given to questions. While John whispered to Dorry, "That's a real stupid
girl. Let's go off somewhere and play by ourselves."

So, one by one, the small fry crept away, leaving Katy and Clover to
entertain the visitor by themselves. They tried dolls, but Imogen did
not care for dolls. Then they proposed to sit down in the shade, and cap
verses, a game they all liked. But Imogen said that though she adored
poetry, she never could remember any. So it ended in their going to the
orchard, where Imogen ate a great many plums and early apples, and
really seemed to enjoy herself. But when she could eat no more, a
dreadful dulness fell over the party. At last Imogen said:

"Don't you ever sit in the drawing-room?"

"The what?" asked Clover.

"The drawing-room," repeated Imogen.

"Oh, she means the parlor!" cried Katy. "No, we don't sit there except
when Aunt Izzie has company to tea. It is all dark and poky, you know.
Beside, it's so much pleasanter to be out-doors. Don't you think so?"

"Yes, sometimes," replied Imogen, doubtfully, "but I think it would be
pleasant to go in and sit there for a while, now. My head aches
dreadfully, being out here in this horrid sun."

Katy was at her wit's end to know what to do. They scarcely ever went
into the parlor, which Aunt Izzie regarded as a sort of sacred place.
She kept cotton petticoats over all the chairs for fear of dust, and
never opened the blinds for fear of flies. The idea of children with
dusty boots going in there to sit! On the other hand, Katy's natural
politeness made it hard to refuse a visitor anything she asked for. And
beside, it was dreadful to think that Imogen might go away and report
"Katy Carr isn't allowed to sit in the best room, even when she has
company!" With a quaking heart she led the way to the parlor. She dared
not open the blinds, so the room looked very dark. She could just see
Imogen's figure as she sat on the sofa, and Clover twirling uneasily
about on the piano-stool. All the time she kept listening to hear if
Aunt Izzie were not coming, and altogether the parlor was a dismal place
to her; not half so pleasant as the asparagus bower, where they felt
perfectly safe.

But Imogen, who, for the first time, seemed comfortable, began to talk.
Her talk was about herself. Such stories she told about the things
which had happened to her! All the young ladies in The Ledger put
together, never had stranger adventures. Gradually, Katy and Clover got
so interested that they left their seats and crouched down close to the
sofa, listening with open mouths to these stories. Katy forgot to
listen for Aunt Izzie. The parlor door swung open, but she did not
notice it. She did not even hear the front door shut, when Papa came
home to dinner.

Dr. Carr, stopping in the hall to glance over his newspaper, heard the
high-pitched voice running on in the parlor. At first he hardly
listened; then these words caught his ear:

"Oh, it was lovely, girls, perfectly delicious! I suppose I did look
well, for I was all in white, with my hair let down, and just one rose,
you know, here on top. And he leaned over me, and said in a low, deep
tone, 'Lady, I am a Brigand, but I feel the enchanting power of your
beauty. You are free!'"

Dr. Carr pushed the door open a little farther. Nothing was to be seen
but some indistinct figures, but he heard Katy's voice in an eager tone:

"Oh, _do_ go on. What happened next?"

"Who on earth have the children got in the parlor?" he asked Aunt Izzie,
whom he found in the dining-room.

"The parlor!" cried Miss Izzie, wrathfully, "why, what are they there
for?" Then going to the door, she called out, "Children, what are you
doing in the parlor? Come out right away. I thought you were playing
out-doors."

"Imogen had a head-ache," faltered Katy. The three girls came out into
the hall; Clover and Katy looking scared, and even the Enchanter of the
Brigand quite crest-fallen.

"Oh," said Aunt Izzie, grimly, "I am sorry to hear that. Probably you
are bilious. Would you like some camphor or anything?"

"No, thank you," replied Imogen, meekly. But afterwards she
whispered to Katy:

"Your aunt isn't very nice, I think. She's just like Jackima, that
horrid old woman I told you about, who lived in the Brigand's Cave and
did the cooking.

"I don't think you're a bit polite to tell me so," retorted Katy, very
angry at this speech.

"Oh, never mind, dear, don't take it to heart!" replied Imogen, sweetly.
"We can't help having relations that ain't nice, you know."

The visit was evidently not a success. Papa was very civil to Imogen at
dinner, but he watched her closely, and Katy saw a comical twinkle in
his eye, which she did not like. Papa had very droll eyes. They saw
everything, and sometimes they seemed to talk almost as distinctly as
his tongue. Katy began to feel low-spirited. She confessed afterward
that she should never have got through the afternoon if she hadn't run
up stairs two or three times, and comforted herself by reading a little
in "Rosamond."

"Aren't you glad she's gone?" whispered Clover, as they stood at the
gate together watching Imogen walk down the street.

"Oh, Clover! how can you?" said Katy But she gave Clover a great hug,
and I think in her heart she _was_ glad.

"Katy," said Papa, next day, "you came into the room then, exactly like
your new friend Miss Clark."

"How? I don't know what you mean," answered Katy, blushing deeply.

"_So_," said Dr. Carr; and he got up, raising his shoulders and squaring
his elbows, and took a few mincing steps across the room. Katy couldn't
help laughing, it was so funny, and so like Imogen. Then Papa sat down
again and drew her close to him.

"My dear," he said, "you're an affectionate child, and I'm glad of
it. But there is such a thing as throwing away one's affection. I
didn't fancy that little girl at all yesterday. What makes you like
her so much?"

"I didn't like her so much, yesterday," admitted Katy, reluctantly.
"She's a great deal nicer than that at school, sometimes."

"I'm glad to hear it," said her father. "For I should be sorry to think
that you really admired such silly manners. And what was that nonsense I
heard her telling you about Brigands?"

"It really hap--" began Katy.--Then she caught Papa's eye, and bit her
lip, for he looked very quizzical. "Well," she went on, laughing, "I
suppose it didn't really all happen;--but it was ever so funny, Papa,
even if it was a make-up. And Imogen's just as good-natured as can be.
All the girls like her."

"Make-ups are all very well," said Papa, "as long as people don't try to
make you believe they are true. When they do that, it seems to me it
comes too near the edge of falsehood to be very safe or pleasant. If I
were you, Katy, I'd be a little shy of swearing eternal friendship for
Miss Clark. She may be good-natured, as you say, but I think two or
three years hence she won't seem so nice to you as she does now. Give me
a kiss, Chick, and run away, for there's Alexander with the buggy."




CHAPTER VII

COUSIN HELEN'S VISIT


A little knot of the school-girls were walking home together one
afternoon in July. As they neared Dr. Carr's gate, Maria Fiske
exclaimed, at the sight of a pretty bunch of flowers lying in the middle
of the sidewalk:

"Oh my!" she cried, "see what somebody's dropped! I'm going to have it."
She stooped to pick it up. But, just as her fingers touched the stems,
the nosegay, as if bewitched, began to move. Maria made a bewildered
clutch. The nosegay moved faster, and at last vanished under the gate,
while a giggle sounded from the other side of the hedge.

"Did you see that?" shrieked Maria; "those flowers ran away of
themselves."

"Nonsense," said Katy, "it's those absurd children." Then, opening the
gate, she called: "John! Dorry! come out and show yourselves." But
nobody replied, and no one could be seen. The nosegay lay on the path,
however, and picking it up, Katy exhibited to the girls a long end of
black thread, tied to the stems.

"That's a very favorite trick of Johnnie's," she said: "she and Dorry
are always tying up flowers, and putting them out on the walk to tease
people. Here, Maria, take 'em if you like. Though I don't think John's
taste in bouquets is very good."

"Isn't it splendid to have vacation come?" said one of the bigger girls.
"What are you all going to do? We're going to the seaside."

"Pa says he'll take Susie and me to Niagara," said Maria.

"I'm going to make my aunt a visit," said Alice Blair. "She lives in a
real lovely place in the country, and there's a pond there; and Tom
(that's my cousin) says he'll teach me to row. What are you going to
do, Katy?"

"Oh, I don't know; play round and have splendid times," replied Katy,
throwing her bag of books into the air, and catching it again. But the
other girls looked as if they didn't think this good fun at all, and as
if they were sorry for her; and Katy felt suddenly that her vacation
wasn't going to be so pleasant as that of the rest.

"I wish Papa _would_ take us somewhere," she said to Clover, as they
walked up the gravel path. "All the other girls' Papas do."

"He's too busy," replied Clover. "Beside, I don't think any of the rest
of the girls have half such good times as we. Ellen Robbins says she'd
give a million of dollars for such nice brothers and sisters as ours to
play with. And, you know, Maria and Susie have _awful_ times at home,
though they do go to places. Mrs. Fiske is so particular. She always
says 'Don't,' and they haven't got any yard to their house, or anything.
I wouldn't change."

"Nor I," said Katy, cheering up at these words of wisdom. "Oh, isn't it
lovely to think there won't be any school to-morrow? Vacations are just
splendid!" and she gave her bag another toss. It fell to the ground
with a crash.

"There, you've cracked your slate," said Clover.

"No matter, I sha'n't want it again for eight weeks," replied Katy,
comfortably, as they ran up the steps.

They burst open the front door and raced up stairs, crying "Hurrah!
hurrah! vacation's begun. Aunt Izzie, vacation's begun!" Then they
stopped short, for lo! the upper hall was all in confusion. Sounds of
beating and dusting came from the spare room. Tables and chairs were
standing about; and a cot-bed, which seemed to be taking a walk all by
itself, had stopped short at the head of the stairs, and barred the way.

"Why, how queer!" said Katy, trying to get by. "What _can_ be going to
happen? Oh, there's Aunt Izzie! Aunt Izzie, who's coming? What _are_ you
moving the things out of the Blue-room for?"

"Oh, gracious! is that you?" replied Aunt Izzie, who looked very hot and
flurried. "Now, children, it's no use for you to stand there asking
questions; I haven't got time to answer them. Let the bedstead alone,
Katy, you'll push it into the wall. There, I told you so!" as Katy gave
an impatient shove, "you've made a bad mark on the paper. What a
troublesome child you are! Go right down stairs, both of you, and don't
come up this way again till after tea. I've just as much as I can
possibly attend to till then."

"Just tell us what's going to happen, and we will," cried the children.

"Your Cousin Helen is coming to visit us," said Miss Izzie, curtly, and
disappeared into the Blue-room.

This was news indeed. Katy and Clover ran down stairs in great
excitement, and after consulting a little, retired to the Loft to talk
it over in peace and quiet. Cousin Helen coming! It seemed as strange as
if Queen Victoria, gold crown and all, had invited herself to tea. Or as
if some character out of a book, Robinson Crusoe, say, or "Amy Herbert,"
had driven up with a trunk and announced the intention of spending a
week. For to the imaginations of the children, Cousin Helen was as
interesting and unreal as anybody in the Fairy Tales: Cinderella, or
Blue-Beard, or dear Red Riding-Hood herself. Only there was a sort of
mixture of Sunday-school book in their idea of her, for Cousin Helen was
very, very good.

None of them had ever seen her. Philly said he was sure she hadn't any
legs, because she never went away from home, and lay on a sofa all the
time. But the rest knew that this was because Cousin Helen was ill. Papa
always went to visit her twice a year, and he liked to talk to the
children about her, and tell how sweet and patient she was, and what a
pretty room she lived in. Katy and Clover had "played Cousin Helen" so
long, that now they were frightened as well as glad at the idea of
seeing the real one.

"Do you suppose she will want us to say hymns to her all the time?"
asked Clover.

"Not all the time," replied Katy, "because you know she'll get tired,
and have to take naps in the afternoons. And then, of course, she reads
the Bible a great deal. Oh dear, how quiet we shall have to be! I wonder
