animals, their habits and uses.

The geographer, geologist, botanist, and zoologist direct the work at
the sand table, and assist in reproducing the country in miniature.

The _Merchants_ and _Tradesmen_ tell us of the products for which their
country is noted, and show samples of as many as it is possible to
secure. They also tell what they import, and why.

A _Librarian_ or Correspondent may visit the library for information
sought by the club. He must be able to give a list of books of travel,
and be ready to read or quote extracts referring to the places visited
on the tour.

He or his assistant may also clip all articles of interest from papers,
magazines, and other sources, and arrange these, as well as the
articles secured by other pupils, in a scrapbook, devoted to each
country.

The _Artist_ and his assistant may tell us about the famous artists and
their works, if any. He may illustrate his remarks with pictures, if he
can obtain or make them.

The _Club Artist_ may also place upon the board in colored crayons the
flag, the coat of arms, and the national flower of the country.

A _Photographer_ may be appointed to provide or care for the photographs
and pictures used in the class talks. The photographs may often be
borrowed from tourists or others. Pictures may be obtained from
magazines, railroad pamphlets, the illustrated papers, or from the Perry
Pictures, and mounted on cardboard or arranged by the artist in a
scrapbook with the name of the country on the cover.

If the members of the travel or geography class are not provided with
the "LITTLE JOURNEYS," the teacher should have at least two copies. The
pictures from one of these books should be removed and mounted for class
use. They may be mounted on a screen, or on cardboard, and placed about
the room or grouped in a corner. They should be allowed to remain there
during the month, that all the pupils may have an opportunity to examine
them.

Another pupil may collect curiosities. Many families in each
neighborhood will be able to contribute some curio. Pupils in other
rooms in the building will be interested in collecting and loaning
material for this little museum and picture gallery.

Coins and stamps may be placed with this collection. Begin a stamp
album, and collect the stamps of all the countries studied. The stamps
of many countries show the heads of the rulers. One of the most
attractive of these is the United States postage stamp showing "Columbus
in Sight of Land."

The album should be kept on the reading table with the scrapbooks, in
order that pupils may have access to it during their periods of leisure.

Dolls may be dressed in the national costume or to represent historical
personages.

This form of construction work may be done outside of school hours by
pupils under the direction of the historian and artist. The dolls, when
dressed, may be made the centers of court, home, field or forest scenes
arranged on the sand table.

A _Musician_ or musicians may tell us of the characteristic music of the
country, and of famous singers or composers. She may also sing or play
the national song or air of the country, if there be one.

The singer should be dressed in national costume, if it is possible to
secure it, or to make it out of calico, paper, or some other cheap
material.

A _Man of Letters_ may tell of the famous men and women of the country
through which we are traveling, and may visit their homes with us. He
may call attention to the literature of the people and give selections
from noted writers, from or about the places visited.

PREPARATIONS FOR THE TRIP.

With maps, guide-books, time-tables and notebooks before us, we look up
the steamer lines and routes and decide when, where, and how to go.
(Good maps will be found in the railroad guide-books).

City newspapers publish once a week the lines of steamboats and their
times of sailing. The steamboat agents also furnish advertising matter
giving other necessary and interesting information.

When we have decided upon our route, we telegraph ahead for our
staterooms. Now let us plan for our baggage. What kind of a trunk must
we take? Why a steamer trunk? How large must this be? What will we do
with this trunk when we leave the boat? (We are advised to leave it and
part of its contents at the ship company's office. They will store it
until we are ready to take the return trip). How many pounds of baggage
are we allowed on the steamer?

What other baggage shall we take (hand bags)? Why not small trunks?
(Because every pound of baggage must be paid for in some countries.)
Many countries have not our convenient system of checking baggage. What
else will we need? (Traveling rugs.)

What clothes must we take? First, we must take warm clothes for steamer
wear, which may be packed away when we arrive. Then we must take
traveling suits for train wear, and thin clothing to use after arriving
at our destination.

We have promised friends at home that we will inform them of our safe
arrival immediately. How can we do this? By mail? Is there not a quicker
way? How many know of the cable? How many have ever sent a cablegram?
Can we cable from Puerto Rico? How much will it cost? Our guide-books
give us all this information.

We must have guide-books, phrase books, toilet articles and writing
materials. These should be packed in linen or canvas bags, because more
easily carried about than heavy leather satchels.

Our guide must be able to speak Spanish, for that is the language of the
Puerto Rican people.

If one of our party acts as guide, we must be careful to select a
polite, tactful, and, above all, a patient and good-natured person.
Why?--Because his patience will be severely taxed many times during this
trip.

Arriving at the city from which we are to sail, we visit points of
interest, the docks especially, and compare our steamer with others,
learning what we can about all the ships in the harbor.

If our lesson is well planned, we can accomplish a great deal the day we
sail.

CLASS WORK.

After two or three conversational lessons, let pupils begin their
diaries (composition books). In these may be written descriptions of
what they see, hear, or read about the place being studied or visited.

In most schools will be found one or more pupils who have been upon or
crossed the ocean. Let them give both oral and written descriptions of
the voyage.

In giving accounts of these journeys, have pupils describe the incidents
and details of everyday life on ship-board. They may tell of the ship,
its furnishings, rigging, engines, officers and crew.

Let them also describe the dining room, the meals, and the manner of
serving.

They may further describe a stateroom or berth, and picture their fellow
passengers in words or drawings.

It will greatly cultivate their power of expression to tell how the time
on board the vessel was passed, and to narrate any interesting
occurrences of the voyage. They may describe the ocean by day and by
night; also its appearance in a storm.

Many will be interested in descriptions of the birds that were met and
of the fishes that swarmed about the ship.

If time will not permit each pupil to give oral descriptions or to write
compositions on each topic, assign a different topic to each pupil. Bind
all papers together, when finished, to keep with scrap-books devoted to
the country visited.

These diaries or reproduction stories may be illustrated with pictures
clipped from illustrated papers and other sources or by original
drawings.

Try to secure specimens of seaweed to be exhibited to pupils during the
lesson on the sea voyage. Ask pupils to secure ocean shells, sponges,
pictures of sea birds, and specimens or pictures of other animal and
plant life in the ocean.

AFTERNOONS ABROAD.

At the conclusion of the study of a country, a topic may be assigned to
each pupil, or selected by him. With this topic he is to become
thoroughly familiar.

In place of the old-time review, invitations may be issued by the
pupils, and the results of the month's work be summed up in the form of
an entertainment, called--

AFTERNOONS OR EVENINGS ABROAD.

When a class, club, or school has been studying a country, the work may
be brought to a close in a way that pupils and their parents and friends
will enjoy and remember, by giving _An Afternoon or Evening Abroad_.

This form of geography review would be appreciated more particularly in
villages, or in country districts, where entertainments, books,
pictures, and opportunities for study and social intercourse are rarer
than in cities.

At the conclusion of an afternoon talk or entertainment, any pictures
used may be placed on the chalk tray along the blackboard, that visitors
may examine them more closely.

If the entertainment is given in the evening, the teacher may be able to
use stereopticon views.

These will prove a very great attraction to both pupils and parents, and
should be secured if possible. The lantern with oil lamp may be easily
operated by the teacher while the pupils give the descriptions of the
pictures or give talks about the country.

The lanterns and slides may be rented for the evening or afternoon at
reasonable rates, and the cost covered by an admission fee of from ten
to twenty-five cents. In sending for catalogue and terms, ask for the
paper used to darken windows if the lantern is to be used in the
afternoon.

Two of the largest dealers in stereopticon views and lanterns are T. H.
McAllister, 49 Nassau St., New York, and the McIntosh Stereopticon Co.,
35 Randolph St. Chicago.

SUGGESTIONS.

For the afternoons abroad, given as geography reviews, or as a part of
the Friday afternoon exercises, invitations may be written out by the
pupils, or mimeographed, or hectographed, and carried to friends and
parents.

If given as an evening entertainment and illustrated by stereopticon
views, handbills may be printed and circulated, at least a week
beforehand. The following form may be used:--

       *       *       *       *       *


SCHOOL ENTERTAINMENT.

A TRIP TO PUERTO RICO FOR TEN CENTS.

You are invited by the pupils of the _____________ school [or the
members of the Travel Class or Club] to spend _an evening_ [_or
afternoon_] _in Puerto Rico_.

The party starts promptly at 1.30 P.M. [or 8 P.M.], November 1st. Those
desiring to take this trip should secure tickets before the day of
sailing, as the party is limited. Guides are furnished free.

The proceeds of this entertainment are to be used in the purchase of a
library, and of pictures and stereopticon views for the school.

       *       *       *       *       *


A PUERTO RICAN MARKET PLACE.

Decorate the room with ferns, potted palms and other tropical plants, or
pictures of them. (Exact reproductions in paper or other material can
now be procured at small cost.) On one side of the room have one table
devoted to Puerto Rican curios; another to fruits and vegetables; and a
third to other products from the island. (Or fit up one end or corner as
a market place in San Juan or Ponce.)

Explain your plan for the entertainment to your groceryman and other
merchants most convenient to your school, and enlist their aid. They
will usually be willing to lend products imported from or native to the
country.

For a list of the fruits and vegetables to be exhibited in the market
place, see the list given when on a visit to the market place at San
Juan. (See p. 22).

On the product-tables arrange pieces of sugar cane, samples of raw,
loaf, granulated, and powdered sugar, and of molasses. If possible to
secure the stalks of sugar cane, have short lengths to be sold for
consumption--as in Puerto Rico. Near the table, tack up pictures of
sugar plantations and mills. Have the coffee-berry and beans, ground
coffee, cups of coffee prepared as a drink, and pictures of the tree,
fruit, and coffee plantations; also secure specimens of the fruit of the
cacao tree, a cake of solid chocolate, chocolate candy, and a cake
containing chocolate layers. Cups of cacao or chocolate may be prepared
as a drink. Have near pictures of the cacao tree and fruit.

Secure, if possible, samples of rice, allspice, nutmeg, mace, cinnamon,
pepper, cloves, ginger and vanilla; bottles of clove oil and bay rum;
packages of the annatto and logwood dyes; sponges, tortoise-shell combs,
and articles made of cedar, ebony, or mahogany, or pieces of these
woods.

The tables and booths in the market places should be presided over by
pupils dressed as Puerto Ricans, and venders should go about the room,
after the entertainment is over, with native wares to sell.

Among these venders will be the bread man, the milk man, the fruit and
vegetable man, the dulce seller, and the vender of ices.

These venders should, if possible, carry their wares as the Puerto
Ricans do.


COSTUMES.

The girls may be costumed in very simply made white dresses.
Handkerchiefs may be tied about the head, for head coverings.

The boys may be dressed in loose white trousers, girdled at the waist by
a belt of leather, a white shirt, and a silk or cotton handkerchief
around the neck.

A broad brimmed hat may be worn.

The dulce seller carries guava, pieces of pineapple, preserved fruits,
chocolate candy, fresh cocoanut meat, grated cocoanut, etc.

The bread vender carries small rolls on his tray. The milk man carries
his can upon his head, ready to serve milk from tin cups which are tied
to the sides of the can.


REFRESHMENTS.

These may be served during an intermission or at the close of the
entertainment, and may consist of the national drinks, orangeade,
lemonade, chocolate, coffee, cocoanut milk, and of rolls, cheese, native
fruits and confectionery.

