Hester Paine was not particularly well pleased with the meeting. She had
been made acquainted by her brother with the quarrel between Halbert and
Robert, and the mean revenge which the former had taken in procuring the
dismissal of the latter from the factory. Having a partiality for
Robert, this was not likely to recommend his enemy in her eyes.

"Good-morning, Mr. Davis," she said, with cool politeness.

"You are very ceremonious this morning, Miss Hester," said Halbert, who
liked well enough to be called "Mr." by others, but not by Hester.

"Am I?" asked Hester, indifferently. "How so?"

"You called me Mr. Davis."

"That's your name, isn't it?"

"I am not called so by my intimate friends."

"No, I suppose not," said Hester, thus disclaiming the title.

Halbert bit his lips. He was not in love, not because he was too young,
but because he was too selfish to be in love with anybody except
himself. But he admired Hester, and the more she slighted him the more
he was determined to force her to like him. He did, however, feel a
little piqued at her behavior, and that influenced his next words.

"Perhaps you'd rather have the factory boy walking beside you," he said,
with not very good judgment, if he wanted to recommend himself to her.

"There are a good many factory boys in town," she said. "I can't tell
unless you tell me whom you mean."

"I mean Robert Rushton."

"Perhaps I might," said Hester.

"He's a low fellow," said Halbert, bitterly.

"No one thinks so but you," retorted Hester, indignantly.

"My father was obliged to dismiss him from the factory."

"I know all about that, and who was the means of having him sent away."

"I suppose you mean me."

"Yes, Halbert Davis, I mean you, and I consider it a very mean thing to
do," said Hester, her cheeks flushed with the indignation she felt.

"He attacked me like the low ruffian that he is," pleaded Halbert, in
extenuation. "If he hadn't insulted me, he wouldn't have got into
trouble."

"You struck him first, you know you did. My brother told me all about
it. You were angry because he walked home with me. I would rather go
home alone any time than have your escort."

"You're very polite, Miss Hester," said Halbert, angrily. "I can tell
you some news about your favorite."

"If it's anything bad, I won't believe it."

"You'll have to believe it."

"Well, what is it?" demanded Hester, who was not altogether unlike girls
in general, and so felt curious to learn what it was that Halbert had to
reveal.

"Your brother was foolish enough to leave his boat in Rushton's care."

"That is no news. Will was very glad to do Robert a favor."

"He'll be sorry enough now."

"Why will he?"

"Because the boat is completely ruined."

"I don't believe it," said Hester, hastily.

"It's true, though. I was down at the river just now, and saw it with my
own eyes. There is a great hole in the bottom, and it is hacked with a
hatchet, so that it wouldn't bring half price."

"Do you know who did it?" asked Hester, with the momentary thought that
Halbert himself might have been tempted by his hatred into the
commission of the outrage.

"No, I don't. It was only accidentally I saw it."

"Was Robert at the boat?"

"No."

"Have you asked him about it?"

"No, I have not seen him."

"Then I am sure some enemy has done it. I am sure it is no fault of
his."

"If your brother had let me have the boat, it wouldn't have happened. I
offered him a fair price for its use."

"He won't be sorry he refused, whatever has happened. But I must bid you
good-morning, Mr. Davis," and the young lady, who was now at her own
gate, opened it, and entered.

"She might have been polite enough to invite me in," said Halbert, with
chagrin. "I don't see how she can be so taken up with that low fellow."

He waited till Hester had entered the house, and then bent his steps to
Mr. Paine's office, which was a small one-story building in one corner
of the yard.

The lawyer was sitting at a table covered with papers, from which he
looked up as Halbert entered the office.

"Sit down, Halbert," he said. "Any message from your father?"

"No, sir."

"No legal business of your own?" he inquired, with a smile.

"No, sir, no legal business."

"Well, if you have any business, you may state it at once, as I am quite
busy."

"It is about the boat which your son lent to Robert Rushton."

"I shall not interfere with that arrangement," said the lawyer,
misunderstanding his object. "I told your father that this morning," and
he resumed his writing.

"I did not come to say anything about that. The boat wouldn't be of any
use to me now."

"Why not?" asked the lawyer, detecting something significant in the
boy's tone.

"Because," said Halbert, in a tone which he could not divest of the
satisfaction he felt at his rival's misfortune, "the boat's completely
ruined."

Mr. Paine laid down his pen in genuine surprise.

"Explain yourself," he said.

So Halbert told the story once more, taking good care to make the damage
quite as great as it was.

"That is very strange," said the lawyer, thoughtfully. "I can't conceive
how such damage could have happened to the boat."

"Robert Rushton don't know how to manage a boat."

"You are mistaken. He understands it very well. I am sure the injury
you speak of could not have happened when he was in charge. You say
there was not only a hole in the bottom, but it was otherwise defaced
and injured?"

"Yes, sir, it looked as if it had been hacked by a hatchet."

"Then it is quite clear that Robert could have had nothing to do with
it. It must have been done by some malicious person or persons."

Knowing something of Halbert, Mr. Paine looked hard at him, his
suspicions taking the same direction as his daughter's. But, as we know,
Halbert was entirely innocent, and bore the gaze without confusion.

"I don't see why Robert hasn't been and let me know of this," said Mr.
Paine, musing.

"He was probably afraid to tell you," said Halbert, with a slight sneer.

"I know him better than that. You can testify," added the lawyer,
significantly, "that he is not deficient in bravery."

"I thought I would come and tell you," said Halbert, coloring a little.
"I thought you would like to know."

"You are very kind to take so much trouble," said Mr. Paine, but there
was neither gratitude nor cordiality in his tone.

Halbert thought it was time to be going, and accordingly got up and
took his leave. As he opened the office door to go out, he found himself
face to face with Robert Rushton, who passed him with a slight nod, and
with an air of trouble entered the presence of his friend's father.




CHAPTER XV.


HALBERT'S MALICE.

Robert was forced, by Ben Haley's, taking possession of his boat to give
up for the present his design of recrossing the river. He felt bound to
go back and inform Paul of Ben's escape.

"He has carried off my gold," exclaimed Paul, in anguish. "Why didn't
you catch him?"

"He had too much start of us," said Robert's companion. "But even if we
had come up with him, I am afraid he would have proved more than a match
for us. He is a desperate man. How much money did he take away with
him?"

"More than five hundred dollars," wailed the old man. "I am completely
ruined!"

"Not quite so bad as that, Mr. Nichols. You have your farm left."

But the old man was not to be comforted. He had become so wedded to his
gold that to lose it was like losing his heart's blood. But was these no
hope of recovery?

"Why don't you go after him?" he exclaimed, suddenly. "Raise the
neighbors. It isn't too late yet."

"He's across the river before this," said Robert.

"Get a boat and go after him."

"I am willing," said our hero, promptly. "Where can we find a boat, Mr.
Dunham?"

"There's one about a quarter of a mile down the stream--Stetson's boat."

"Let's go, then."

"Very well, Robert. I've no idea we can do anything, but we will try."

"Go, go. Don't waste a moment," implored the old man, in feverish
impatience.

Robert and Mr. Dunham started, and were soon rowing across the river in
Stetson's boat.

"Whereabout would he be likely to land?" asked the farmer.

"There's my boat now," said Robert, pointing it out. "He has left it
where I usually keep it."

Quickly they rowed alongside. Then to his great sorrow Robert perceived
the malicious injury which his enemy had wrought.

"Oh, Mr. Dunham, look at that!" he said, struck with grief. "The boat is
spoiled!"

"Not so bad as that. It can be mended."

"What will Will Paine say? What will his father say?"

"Then it isn't your boat?"

"No, that is the worst of it. It was lent me by Will Paine, and I
promised to take such good care of it."

"It isn't your fault, Robert?"

"No, I couldn't help it, but still it wouldn't have happened if it had
not been in my charge."

"You can get it repaired, so that it will look almost as well as new."

If Robert had had plenty of money, this suggestion would have comforted
him, but it will be remembered that he was almost penniless, dependent
on the fish he caught for the means of supporting his mother and
himself. Now this resource was cut off. The boat couldn't be used until
it was repaired. He felt morally bound to get it repaired, though he was
guiltless of the damage. But how could he even do this? One thing was
clear--Mr. Paine must at once be informed of the injury suffered by the
boat. Robert shrank from informing him, but he knew it to be his duty,
and he was too brave to put it off.

But first he must try to find some clew to Ben Haley. He had now a
personal interest in bringing to justice the man who had made him so
much trouble. He had scarcely got on shore than the boy who had sold Ben
Haley the hatchet, strolled up.

"Who was that man who came across in your boat?" he asked.

"Did you see him?" asked Robert, eagerly.

"To be sure I did," said Tom Green, with satisfaction. "I sold him my
old hatchet for money enough to buy a new one, and he give me a quarter
besides for my trouble."

"I wish you hadn't done it, Tom," said Robert, gravely. "See what he's
done with it."

Tom Green opened his eyes wide with astonishment.

"What did he do that for?" he asked.

"To be revenged on me. I'll tell you what for another time. Now I want
to find him. Can you tell me where he went?"

"No; I left him here, while I went to the store for a new hatchet."

The old hatchet was found under a clump of bushes. Robert took
possession of it, feeling that he had a right to it, as part
compensation for the mischief it had done.

"We'd better go to the railroad depot, Mr. Dunham," he said. "He'd be
most likely to go there."

"You're right. We'll go."

They walked rapidly to the station, but too late, of course, for the
train. The station-master was standing on the platform, superintending
the removal of a trunk.

"Mr. Cross," said Robert, "I want to find out if a particular man left
by the last train. I'll describe him."

"Yes," said the station-master, "that's the man I was wondering about.
He had a wound in the shoulder."

"He got that from me," said Robert.

"Sho! you don't say so," returned the station-master, in surprise. "He
said he was out hunting with a friend, and his friend's gun went off
accidentally."

"I don't believe he feels very friendly to me," said Robert, smiling.
"He's stolen five or six hundred dollars in gold from old Paul Nichols."

"It'll about kill the old man, won't it?"

"He feels pretty bad about it. For what place did he buy a ticket?"

"For Cranston; but that ain't no guide. When he gets there, he'll buy a
ticket for further on."

Had there been a telegraph station, Robert would have telegraphed on to
have Ben Haley stopped, but there was none nearer than the next town. He
determined to give information to a justice of the peace, and leave the
matter in his hands. But Justice in a country town is slow, and it may
as well be stated here, before anything was done Ben Haley was out of
danger. But Robert was destined to fall in with him at a future day.

This business attended to, Robert bent his steps to Mr. Paine's office.
This brings us to his meeting with Halbert Davis at the door. He was
slightly surprised at the encounter, but was far from guessing the
object of Halbert's call.

Mr. Paine looked up as he entered, and had no difficulty in guessing his
errand.

"What can I do for you, Robert?" he asked, kindly.

"I bring bad news, Mr. Paine," said our hero, boldly plunging into the
subject which had brought him to the office.

"It's about the boat, isn't it?" said the lawyer.

"What, do you know about it?" asked Robert, in surprise.

"Yes; a disinterested friend brought the news."

"Halbert Davis?"

"The same. He takes a strong interest in your affairs," added the
lawyer, dryly. "Now tell me how it happened."

Robert gave a full explanation, the lawyer occasionally asking a
question.

"It seems, then," he said, "that you incurred this man's enmity by your
defense of Mr. Nichols' money."

"Yes, sir."

"It was incurred in a good cause. I can't blame you, nor will my son. I
will get Mr. Plane, the carpenter, to look at the boat and see what he
can do to repair it."

"Some time I will pay you the cost of the repairs, Mr. Paine. I would
now if I had any money; but you know how I am situated."

"I shall not call upon you to do that," said the lawyer, kindly. "It was
not your fault."

"But the damage would not have happened if Will had not lent the boat to
me."

"That is true; but in undertaking the defense of Mr. Nichols you showed
a pluck and courage which most boys would not have exhibited. I am
interested, like all good citizens, in the prevention of theft, and in
this instance I am willing to assume the cost."

"You are very kind, Mr. Paine. I was afraid you would blame me."

"No, my boy; I am not so unreasonable. It will save me some trouble if
you will yourself see Mr. Plane and obtain from him an estimate of the
probable expense of putting the boat in order."

Robert left the office, feeling quite relieved by the manner in which
his communication had been received. A little way up the road he
overtook Halbert Davis. In fact, Halbert was waiting for him, expressly
to get an opportunity of enjoying his discomfiture at the ruin of the
boat.

"Hallo, Rushton!" he said.

"Good-morning, Halbert!"

"Are you going out in your boat this afternoon?" asked Halbert,
