never be happy again. Do not think, sir, that I would give the child
away; how shall I, how shall we all be able to bear it, when the dear,
sunny face shall have disappeared forever from among our children." The
tears came into the mother's eyes also, and she could say no more.

"Well, I have to declare that the little wanderer has fallen into good
hands," said the colonel, giving his hand to the pastor's wife in an
approving way. "You will allow me now to depart."

This time the gentleman was determined to go. He went out and walked
along the long corridor with head lifted proudly, followed by the
pastor, who tried in vain to overtake him so that he could open the door
for his guest. But before the door could be opened from within, it was
pushed open with great force from outside, and like an arrow the slender
Edi shot straight into the tall colonel, who had been standing directly
behind the closed door; and at once after Edi, Ritz rushed into Edi, and
the tall gentleman received the second push, and in his ears rang
confused screamings of mixed words: "They are coming--they
come--Marianne--Erick--Marianne--they come--they come." And really! In
the house door appeared Marianne, quite broad in her Sunday best,
holding Erick, of whom she kept a firm grasp, as if he might fall from
there down again into the Woodbach. Behind both the partaking scholars
of the parishes pressed in with shouts of rejoicing.

There was no possibility for the military gentleman to get out; the
crowd pressed into the house with great force. He gave in and did what
he had never done before in his life--he retreated, step by step, until
he had arrived, backwards, over the threshold of the study, together
with the whole of the pastor's family, old and young; and at last the
fighting Sally pressed in. She had taken Erick by the hand and did not
want to let go of him, and on the other side Marianne held his hand as
in a clamp, and she herself was held back from all sides, for the
schoolfellows wanted to know first the story of how Erick was lost and
found again.

It was an indescribable uproar. Only after the efforts of Sally had
succeeded in pulling Erick and Marianne out of the human ball and into
the study, was there sufficient calm so that one could understand the
other, for the school friends had stayed respectfully before the door;
they did not dare to press into the study-room of their pastor.

Now only could the information be understood, which Erick and
Marianne--each relieving the other--gave about the whole occurrence.
Erick told how he, after a strong push, had fallen into the water and
then had known nothing more, and had wakened again when somebody was
rubbing him firmly. That had been Marianne, who now related further. She
had gone yesterday afternoon from Oakwood, where she was living now,
upward along the Woodbach, to the place where the berries grew the most
plentifully, as she knew these many years that she had sought and sold
them in the taverns of Upper and Lower Wood. As she was seeking for
berries close by the water, bending down behind the willow bush, she saw
how the bush was being shaken and how something had remained hanging to
it. She bent around the bush to find out what it might be, and saw the
black velvet jacket on the water! "Oh, dear God!" she then cried out
with unutterable horror, and never stopped crying until, under her
desperate rubbing with skirt and apron, Erick opened his eyes and looked
with surprise at Marianne. Now she quickly took the large market-basket
in which she intended to put the many small baskets, when they were
filled; threw the latter all in a heap, put the dripping Erick in it,
and carried him, as quickly as she could, toward her small cottage, far
beyond Oakwood, in which she lived together with her cousin. Here she at
once undressed the wet boy, wound him closely in a large blanket so that
nothing was to be seen of him besides a tuft of yellow, curly hair, put
him in bed with the heavy cover far above his head, for, "getting him
warm is the principal thing for the little boy," she kept on saying to
herself. Then she went into her kitchen and soon came back with a cup of
steaming hot milk, lifted Erick's head from under the covers, so that
his mouth became free, and poured the hot milk in it to make the little
fellow warm. When she now had packed him in the blanket again, and the
fright at finding the unconscious Erick and the fear of his taking cold
had passed a little, then it came into her mind that the people of the
parsonage did not know what had become of him, and that they too would
be anxious about him. She went again to the bed and tried to bring the
deeply hidden Erick up again. But Erick was already half asleep, and
when Marianne told him her thoughts, he said comfortingly: "No, no, they
will know that I will come back again, and if they are anxious, then
'Lizebeth will come and look for me."

Of that Marianne was sure: 'Lizebeth would come and take him home. No
doubt Erick had started to come and see Marianne, his friend in Oakwood,
and on his way there had fallen into the Woodbach by accident, Marianne
thought, for in her anxiety for his welfare, she had not spoken a word
with Erick about the accident. Now he was fast asleep.

Marianne sat down beside him and lifted the cover now and then to listen
whether he was breathing properly. After she had sat thus a while and
noticed how the little fellow's cheeks began to glow like the reddest
strawberries, then she feared no longer that he would catch cold, and
she also felt sure that 'Lizebeth would not come and thought that the
people in the parsonage would assume that he was going to spend the
night at the cottage. So Marianne had peacefully locked her cottage and
gone to sleep.

The next morning Marianne first had to brush and press the velvet suit,
for she would not bring the boy back to the parsonage in disorder; she
would not have done that for the sake of his blessed mother. Then she
too must dress in her Sunday best, and so the morning had almost passed
before they both had started on their way, quite contented and without
any suspicion of the enormous fear and excitement which had been in the
parsonage and had spread over the whole of Upper Wood. At the church
they had been greeted by the assembled crowd with great noise and much
confused talking, and then they were accompanied to the parsonage by the
schoolmates, who were crazed with joy at seeing Erick.

In the general excitement and joy, the colonel had been quite forgotten.
He had sat down unnoticed on a chair, and had listened attentively to
the reports, following with his eyes the lively gestures which the
excited Erick was making in the zeal of telling his story. Now the
reports were finished and for the first time Erick's eyes beheld the
stranger in the crowd. The latter beckoned him to come to him; Erick
obeyed at once.

"Come here, my boy, hither," and the colonel placed him right before
him. "So, just look straight in my eyes. What is your name?"

Erick with his bright eyes looked directly into those of the strange
gentleman, and without hesitation he said: "Erick Dorn."

The gentleman looked at him still more directly. "After whom were you
called, boy, do you know?"

Erick hesitated a moment with the answer, but he did not divert his
glance. It seemed as if the eyes of the stranger attracted and conquered
him. "After my grandfather," he now said with a clear voice.

"My boy--your mother used to look at me just so,--I am your
grandfather--" and now big tears ran down the austere gentleman's
cheeks. Erick must have been seized by the attraction of kinship, for
without the least shyness, he threw both arms around the old gentleman's
neck and rejoicingly exclaimed: "Oh, Grandfather, is it really you? I
know you well! And I have so much to tell you from Mother, so much."


[Illustration: _He threw both arms around the old gentleman's neck and
rejoicingly exclaimed: "Oh, Grandfather, is it really you?"..._]


"Have you? Have you, my boy?" But the grandfather could say no more.

When Erick noticed that his grandfather kept on wiping away the tears,
then sad thoughts gained the upper hand in him and all at once the
rejoicing expression disappeared, and he said quite sadly: "Oh,
Grandfather, I was not to come to you now, and not for a long time. Only
when I had become an honorable man, was I to step before you and say to
you: 'My mother sends me to you, that you may be proud of me, and that I
may make good the sorrow, which my mother has caused you.'"

The grandfather put his arms lovingly around Erick and said: "Now
everything is all right. It is enough that your mother has sent you to
me. She meant it well with the 'honorable man', in this I recognize my
child; and you do not disobey her, my boy, for you see, you did not come
to me, but I came to you. And an honorable man you will also become with
me."

"Yes, that I will, and I know too, how one becomes one, for the reverend
pastor has told me how."

"That is lovely of him, we will thank him for it. And now we start, this
very day, on our journey to Denmark."

"To Denmark, Grandfather, to the beautiful estate, right now?" Erick's
eyes grew larger and larger with astonishment and expectation, for he
only now comprehended, what he was going to meet: all that had stood
before his mental eyes as the highest and most splendid, ever since he
could think, and that his mother had painted for him in the bright
coloring of her childhood's remembrances, again and again, the distant,
beautiful estate, the handsome horses, the pond with the barge, the
large house with the winter-garden,--everything he was now to see, and
live there with this grandfather, for whom his mother had planted such a
love and reverence in her boy's heart, that he saw in him the highest of
what could be found on this earth,--all this over-powered Erick so much
that he was not able to comprehend his good fortune, and with a deep
breath he asked: "Are you sure, Grandfather?"

"Yes, yes, my boy," the grandfather assured him, laughing. "Come, I hope
you can start at once. You will not have much to pack?"

"Oh, no," said Erick. "You see,"--and he counted on his fingers: "three
writing-books, three school-books, the pen-box and the beautiful
Christmas present that I received here in the parsonage."

"That is well, that will make a small bundle," but the old gentleman
looked at his grandson, rather surprised, and said: "I am astonished,
little waif, that you look so fine."

"Yes, I believe you, Grandfather," answered Erick. "That is good stuff
that I am wearing; it comes from you. You see, when in the old suit
which I had worn so long, the patches became holes, then Mother brought
out the beautiful velvet cloak, with the broad lace, and said: 'That is
good, that comes from Grandfather, you can wear that a long time.' And
then she cut everything apart and sewed everything together again, and
so there came out what I am now wearing. And Mother received a great
deal of money for the broad lace. But only when all was finished and I
was wearing it, she became glad again; during the cutting and the sewing
together, she was very quiet."

The grandfather too had become still, and he turned away for a while. No
doubt he too thought of the time and what happy days they were when he
had hung around his beloved child the rich mantle, and how sweetly she
stood before him, she whom he was never to see again.

"Come, my boy," he said, turning again to Erick. "What has become of
your foster-parents? It is time that we thank them."

The pastor's wife had seen at once that the grandfather had recognized
his grandson, and as the latter was standing before him, she gently
urged her husband and children, as well as Marianne, out of the room and
closed the door after her; and outside, in the long passage, she let the
interested crowd ask their loud questions, and give their loudest
answers, undisturbed. But when the colonel, holding Erick by the hand,
came out of the study, she at once made an open path for them through
the assembled people, to bring them upstairs to the quiet reception
room, where at last the family and their guest could be among
themselves. Here the beaming grandfather went first to the lady of the
house, and then to the master and then again to the lady, and every time
he took each by both their hands with indescribable heartiness and kept
on saying: "I have no words, but thanks, eternal thanks!" And all at
once he saw Sally's head peeping out from behind her mother. He suddenly
took it between his two hands and cried: "There is, I believe, the great
friend and defender of my boy. Well, now will you forgive me?"

Sally pulled one of his hands down and pressed a hearty kiss on it, and
now the colonel tenderly stroked her hair and said: "Such good friends
are worth a great deal!"

But when he expressed his intention to start at once with Erick, there
arose great opposition, and this time the mother distinguished herself
in opposition against such quick separation. The grandfather of her
Erick ought to spend at least one night beneath her roof, and give the
family the chance of learning to know him a little better and to have
Erick another day in their midst.

All the children as well as Erick supported, louder and always louder,
the mother's request, and the beleaguered grandfather had to give in.
Ritz and Edi ran with much delight and noise down the stairs to seat
themselves proudly in the coach, and thus drive to the inn, where both
must tell to the guests present, who had changed their consultation
place from the church to the inn, what they knew of the strange
gentleman. And so it came about that on the same Sunday afternoon, all
Upper and Lower Wooders, as well as the Middle Lotters, knew Erick's
family and fate, and they had to talk loud and zealously before every
door, over this change of luck that had come to Erick.

In the parsonage, too, the evening was spent with unusually animated
conversation. How much had to be told to the grandfather of the
happenings of the last and all former days, and Erick had to throw in a
question now and then, which referred to the distant estate, for his
thoughts always travelled back to that spot.

"Is Mother's white pony still alive, Grandfather?" he once suddenly
asked.

The beautiful pony had long been put away, was the answer. "But you
shall have one just like your mother's, my boy. I can now bear the sight
of it again," the grandfather said.

"Does old John still live, who made the barge and scraped the
pebble-walks so nicely?" Erick asked another time.

"What, you know of that too? Yes, indeed, he is still living, but the
joy of seeing my daughter's son whom I am bringing home will almost kill
him," said the colonel, smiling contentedly at the prospect.

When Sally and Erick told of their first meeting and Sally's call in
Marianne's cottage, and now it came out that it was the same Marianne
who had pulled Erick out of the water, and who had stuck so faithfully
to his mother, the colonel suddenly jumped up and demanded that Erick
should go with him at once to Marianne for, from pure joy, they both had
not thanked her as they ought to. But the lady had foreseen such a
request, and had not let Marianne go home. And so she was called into
the room and the colonel quickly took a chair and placed it in front of
him. Marianne had to sit down there and tell everything that she knew of
his daughter, and what she herself had heard and seen. Marianne was very
glad to do that, and she spoke with such love and reverence of the dear
one, that at the end of her story, the colonel took her hand and shook
it heartily, but he could not speak. He rose and walked a few times up
and down the room, then he beckoned to Erick, took out of his wallet two
papers and said: "Give this to the good old woman, my boy; she shall
have a few good days, she deserves it."

Erick had never before enjoyed the happiness of giving; never had he
been able to give anything to anyone, for he himself had never owned
anything. An enormous joy rose up in his heart and with bright eyes he
stepped to Marianne and said: "Marianne, here is something for you, for
which you can buy whatever you like."

But when Marianne saw that on the paper was a number and several zeros
after it, she struck her hands together from astonishment and fright,
and cried: "Dear God, I have not earned that, this is riches!" And when
she still kept her hands away from the money, Erick stuck the papers
deep into her pocket and said:

"Do you remember, Marianne, how you have said that you were growing old
and could no longer work as you used to, and therefore you had to give
up the little house and go to your old cousin? Now you can have your
cottage again, with that money, and live in it happily."

"That I can, that I can," cried Marianne, forgetting in her joy that she
did not want to take the large present. Tears of joy ran down her
cheeks, and from happiness and emotion she could not utter a word of
thanks, but kept on pressing the colonel's hand and then Erick's, and
all were glad with Marianne that she could move again into the cottage
and keep it for always. When at last they must separate for the night,
the colonel pressed the house-mother's hand once more and said: "My dear
friend, you will understand with what gratitude my heart is full, when I
tell you that this is the first happy evening which I have had for the
last twelve years."

Parting had to come the next morning. The mother took Erick in her arms
and after she pressed him to her heart, she said: "My dear Erick, never
forget your mother's song! It has already brought you once from the
wrong road into the right one; it will guide you well as long as you
live. Keep it in your heart, my Erick."

When Erick noticed tears in the mother's eyes, then his grew wet, and
when Sally noticed that, she put both hands to her face and began to
sob. Then Erick ran to his grandfather and pleadingly cried: "Oh,
Grandfather, can we not take Sally along? Don't you think we could?"

The grandfather smiled and answered: "I could not wish anything I should
like better, my boy, but we cannot rob the parsonage of all its
children, all at once. But come, perhaps we can make some arrangement.
What does the mother think about it, if we were to take our little
friend next summer and bring her back for the winter, and do so every
year?"

"Yes, yes," shouted Erick, "every, every year as long as we live! Will
you give me your word on it, Grandfather, now, right away?"

"To give you my word on it that it shall be so long as we live, that is
asking much, my boy," said the grandfather smiling. "If now you, both of
you, should wish, all at once, to have things different--what then?"

"Oh, no, we are not so stupid," said Erick, "are we, Sally? Just you
promise right away, Grandfather."

The latter held out his hand to the mother and said: "If it suits Mamma,
then we both will promise, that it shall continue, as long as it pleases
our children."

The mother gave her hand on it, and now the two hands were pressed most
heartily.

And the pastor said: "So, so! Agreements are made between the colonel
and the parson's wife behind my back, and I have nothing to do with it
but say yes. Well, then, I will say at once a firm _yes_ and _Amen_."

With these words he too shook his guest's hand firmly and there remained
only to take leave from Ritz and Edi, both of whom he heartily invited
to Denmark, wherein Erick strongly supported him, adding: "And you know,
Edi, when you are in Denmark, then you can go on ships, and study there
all about them. That will be a good thing for your calling." For Erick
had not forgotten that Edi intended to sail around the whole world, and
that Ritz too wanted to be something on the sea.

The grandfather was already entering the travelling coach, when Erick
was held back by 'Lizebeth; he had pressed into her hand a valuable
paper, but she had put her apron to her eyes and had begun to sob aloud
behind it, and now she was holding Erick and said: "I think the Sir
Grandfather, he means it well as far as he sees things; but that he
takes the dear boy away from us,--to take one's little boy simply
away--"

"I will come back again, 'Lizebeth, every year when the storks return.
Therefore, good-bye, 'Lizebeth, until I come again."

Saying this, Erick quickly jumped into the carriage, and he wore the
same velvet suit in which he had come. For a long, long time he saw the
white handkerchiefs wave, and he waved his in answer, until the
carriage, down below at the foot of the hill, turned around the corner
and disappeared into the woods. But when the fleet horses, soon after,
reached the first houses of the Middle Lot, there was another halt.

From the moment that Erick had disappeared, Churi had looked like a
picture of horror. He had grown white and grayish looking, and at every
sound that he heard, he trembled, for he thought: "Now they are coming
to fetch you, to put you into prison." Churi had heard that someone who
had thrown another boy into the water had been fetched by two gendarmes
and had been put into prison, where he had been kept for twenty years in
chains. Churi saw this picture always before him and for fear, he could
no longer eat nor sleep; and he dared look at no one. And when the
report came that Erick had turned up again, then his fear increased. For
now, so he thought, it would surely come out that he had done the deed;
and now he was sure that the police would come to get him. But when on
Sunday, the story went round like lightning that Erick, in looking for
berries, had fallen into the water, then it all at once was clear to
Churi, that Erick had not told about him and that he again could go
about quite free and without fear. A great, oppressive weight fell from
Churi's heart, and he was so touched by Erick's kindness and generosity
that he did not sleep from thinking what he could possibly do for Erick
to show him his gratitude.

It had really been so. Erick had thought that Churi had not meant to
push him into the water, so he had felt sorry for him, if he should be
punished for what he did not mean to do, and so Erick had only said that
he had received a push when looking for berries, and had fallen into the
water. And they had assumed that the boys had knocked each other about
as usual, and Erick had been pushed accidentally.

Churi had thought out his reward, and had arranged the following
program. All the scholars of Middle Lot had to place themselves in a
long line along the street, and when now the carriage with Erick came
driving along, they, the scholars, all together must shout, "Hurrah for
Erick."

As they one and all now shouted with all their might, there was a
terrible noise, so that the horses jumped and shied. But the coachman
had them well in hand and brought them in a short time to stand quietly.
At this moment one of the boys shot out of the line and onto the
carriage step. It was Churi. He bent to Erick's ear and whispered: "I
will never again hurt you as long as I live, Erick, and when you come
back again, you just reckon on me; no one shall ever touch you, and you
shall have all the crabs and strawberries and hazel nuts which I can
find."

But on the other side someone else had sprung on the carriage step and
clamored for Erick's attention. He felt something under his nose from
which came various odors. It was an enormous bunch of fire-red and
yellow flowers, which Kaetheli held out to him, who with one foot on the
step was balancing over the colonel, and called to Erick: "Here, Erick,
you must take a nosegay from the garden with you, and when you come
back, be sure you come and see us, do not forget."

"Thank you, Kaetheli," Erick called back, "I shall certainly come to see
you, a year from now. Good-bye, Kaetheli, good-bye, Churi!"
