
"Have you any correspondents in New York, Ben?" she asked.

"What makes you ask, Rose?"

Because the postmaster told me there was a letter for you by this
evening's mail.  It was mailed in New York, and was directed in a
lady's hand.  I hope you haven't been flirting with any New York
ladies, Mr. Barclay."

"The only lady I know in New York is at least fifty years old,"
answered Ben, smiling.

"That is satisfactory," answered Rose solemnly.  "Then I won't be
jealous."

"What can the letter be?" thought Ben.  "I hope it contains good
news."

He hurried to the post office in a fever of excitement.




CHAPTER XVII
WHAT THE LETTER CONTAINED


"I hear there is a letter for me, Mr. Brown," said Ben to the
postmaster, who was folding the evening papers, of which he received a
parcel from the city by the afternoon train.

"Yes, Ben," answered the postmaster, smiling.  "It appears to be from
a lady in New York.  You must have improved your time during your
recent visit to the city."

"I made the acquaintance of one lady older than my mother," answered
Ben.  "I didn't flirt with her any."

"At any rate, I should judge that she became interested in you or she
wouldn't write."

"I hope she did, for she is very wealthy," returned Ben.

The letter was placed in his hands, and he quickly tore it open.

Something dropped from it.

"What is that?" asked the postmaster.

Ben stooped and picked it up, and, to his surprise, discovered that it
was a ten-dollar bill.

"That's a correspondent worth having," said Mr. Brown jocosely.
"Can't you give me a letter of introduction?"

Ben didn't answer, for he was by this time deep the letter.  We will
look over his shoulder and read it with him.  It ran thus:

                             "No. ---- Madison Avenue,
                                   New York, October 5.

  "My Dear Young Friend:

  "Will you come to New York and call upon me?  I have a very pleasant
  remembrance of you and the service you did me recently, and think I
  can employ you in other ways, to our mutual advantage.  I am willing
  to pay you a higher salary than you are receiving in your country
  home, besides providing you with a home in my own house.  I inclose
  ten dollars for expenses.  Yours, with best wishes,

                             "Helen Hamilton"

Ben's heart beat with joyful excitement as he read this letter.  It
could not have come at a better time, for, as we know, he was out of
employment, and, of course, earning nothing.

"Well, Ben," said the postmaster, whose curiosity was excited, is it
good news?"

"I should say it was," said Ben emphatically.  "I am offered a good
situation in New York."

"You don't say so!  How much are offered?"

"I am to get more than Mr. Crawford paid me and board in a fine house
besides--a brownstone house on Madison Avenue."

"Well, I declare!  You are in luck," ejaculated Mr. Brown.  "What are
you to do?"

"That's more than I know.  Here is the letter, if you like to read
it."

"It reads well.  She must be a generous lady.  But what will your
mother say?"

"That's what I want to know," said Ben, looking suddenly sober.  "I
hate to leave her, but it is for my good."

"Mothers are self-sacrificing when the interests of their children are
concerned."

"I know that," said Ben promptly; "and I've got one of the best
mothers going."

"So you have.  Every one likes and respects Mrs. Barclay."

Any boy, who is worth anything, likes to hear his mother praised, and
Ben liked Mr. Brown better for this tribute to the one whom he loved
best on earth.  He was not slow in making his way home.  He went at
once to the kitchen, where his mother was engaged in mixing bread.

"What's the matter, Ben?  You look excited," said Mrs. Barkley.

"So I am, mother.  I am offered a position."

"Not in the store?"

"No; it is in New York."

"In New York!" repeated his mother, in a troubled voice.  "It would
cost you all you could make to pay your board in some cheap boarding
house.  If it were really going to be for your own good, I might
consent to part with you, but--"

"Read that letter, mother," said Ben.  "You will see that I shall have
an elegant home and a salary besides.  It is a chance in a thousand."

Mrs. Barclay read the letter carefully.

"Can I go, mother?" Ben asked anxiously.

"It will be a sacrifice for me to part with you," returned his mother
slowly; "but I agree with you that it is a rare chance, and I should
be doing wrong to stand in the way of your good fortune.  Mrs.
Hamilton must have formed a very good opinion of you."

"She may be disappointed in me," said Ben modestly.

"I don't think she will," said Mrs. Barclay, with a proud and
affectionate glance at her boy.  "You have always been a good son, and
that is the best of recommendations."

"I am afraid you are too partial, mother.  I shall hate to leave you
alone."

"I can bear loneliness if I know you are prospering, Ben."

"And it will only be for a time, mother.  When I am a young man and
earning a good income, I shall want you to come and live with me."

"All in good time, Ben.  How soon do you want to go?"

"I think it better to lose no time, mother.  You know I have no work
to keep me in Pentonville."

"But it will take two or three days to get your clothes ready."

"You can send them to me by express.  I shall send you the address."

Mrs. Barclay was a fond mother, but she was also a sensible woman.
She felt that Ben was right, and, though it seemed very sudden, she
gave him her permission to start the next morning.  Had she objected
strenuously, Ben would have given up his plan, much as he desired it,
for he felt that his mother had the strongest claims upon him, and he
would not have been willing to run counter to her wishes.

"Where are you going, Ben?" asked his mother, as Ben put on his hat
and moved toward the door.

"I thought I would like to call on Rose Gardiner to say good-by,"
answered Ben.

"Quite right, my son.  Rose is a good friend of yours, and an
excellent girl"

"I say ditto to that, mother," Ben answered warmly.

I am not going to represent Ben as being in love--he was too young for
that--but, like many boys of his age, he felt a special attraction in
the society of one young girl.  His good taste was certainly not at
fault in his choice of Rose Gardiner, who, far from being frivolous
and fashionable, was a girl of sterling traits, who was not above
making herself useful in the household of which she formed a part.

On his way to the home of Rose Gardiner, Ben met Tom Davenport.

"How are you getting along?" asked Tom, not out of interest, but
curiosity.

"Very well, thank you."

"Have you got through helping the farmer?"

"Yes."

"It was a very long job.  Have you thought better of coming to saw
wood for father?"

"No; I have thought worse of it," answered Ben, smiling.

"You are too proud.  Poor and proud don't agree."

"Not at all.  I would have had no objection to the work.  It was the
pay I didn't like."

"You can't earn more than forty cents a day at anything else."

"You are mistaken.  I am going to New York to-morrow to take a place,
where I get board and considerable more money besides."

"Is that true?" asked Tom, looking as if he had lost his best friend.

"Quite so.  The party inclosed ten dollars to pay my expenses up to
the city."

"He must be a fool."

"Thank you.  It happens to be a lady."

"What are you to do?"

"I don't know yet.  I am sure I shall be well paid.  I must ask you to
excuse me now, as I am going to call on Rose Gardiner to bid her
good-by."

"I dare say she would excuse you," said Tom, with a sneer.

"Perhaps so; but I wouldn't like to go without saying good-by."

"At any rate, he will be out of my way," thought Tom, "and I can
monopolize Rose.  I'm glad he's going."

He bade Ben an unusually civil good-night at this thought occurred to
him.




CHAPTER XVIII
FAREWELL TO PENTONVILLE


"I have come to say good-by, Rose," said Ben, as the young lady made
her appearance.

"Good-by!" repeated Rose, in surprise.  "Why, where are you going?"

"To New York."

"But you are coming back again?"

"I hope so, but only for a visit now and then.  I am offered a
position in the city."

"Isn't that rather sudden?" said Rose, after a pause.

Ben explained how he came to be offered employment.

"I am to receive higher pay than I did here, and a home besides," he
added, in a tone of satisfaction.  "Don't you think I am lucky?"

"Yes, Ben, and I rejoice in your good fortune; but I shall miss you so
much," said Rose frankly.

"I am glad of that," returned Ben.  "I hoped you would miss me a
little.  You'll go and see mother now and then, won't you?  She will
feel very lonely."

"You may be sure I will.  It is a pity you have to go away.  A great
many will be sorry."

"I know someone who won't."

"Who is that?"

"Tom Davenport."

Rose smiled.  She had a little idea why Tom would not regret Ben's
absence.

"Tom could be spared, as well as not," she said.

"He is a strong admirer of yours, I believe," said Ben mischievously.

"I don't admire him," retorted Rose, with a little toss of her head.

Ben heard this with satisfaction, for though he was too young to be a
lover, he did have a strong feeling of attraction toward Rose, and
would have been sorry to have Tom step into his place.

As Ben was preparing to go, Rose said, "Wait a minute, Ben."

She left the room and went upstairs, but returned almost immediately,
with a small knit purse.

"Won't you accept this, Ben?" she said.  "I just finished it
yesterday.  It will remind you of me when you are away."

"Thank you, Rose.  I shall need nothing to keep you in my remembrance,
but I will value it for your sake."

"I hope you will be fortunate and fill it very soon, Ben."

So the two parted on the most friendly terms, and the next day Ben
started for New York in the highest of spirits.

After purchasing his ticket, he gave place to Squire Davenport, who
also called for a ticket to New York.  Now, it so happened that the
squire had not seen Tom since the interview of the latter with our
hero, and was in ignorance of his good luck.

"Are you going to New York, Benjamin?" he asked, in surprise.

"Yes, sir."

"Isn't it rather extravagant for one in your circumstances?"

"Yes, sir; if I had no object in view."

"Have you any business in the city?"

"Yes, sir; I am going to take a place."

Squire Davenport was still more surprised, and asked particulars.
These Ben readily gave, for he was quite elated by his good fortune.

"Oh, that's it, is it?" said the squire contemptuously.  "I thought
you might have secured a position in some business house.  This lady
probably wants you to answer the doorbell and clean the knives, or
something of that sort."

"I am sure she does not," said Ben, indignant and mortified.

"You'll find I am right," said the squire confidently.  "Young man, I
can't congratulate you on your prospects.  You would have done as well
to stay in Pentonville and work on my woodpile."

"Whatever work I may do in New York, I shall be a good deal better
paid for than here," retorted Ben.

Squire Davenport shrugged his shoulders, and began to read the morning
paper.  To do him justice, he only said what he thought when he
predicted to Ben that he would be called upon to do menial work.

"The boy won't be in so good spirits a week hence," he thought.
"However, that is not my affair.  There is no doubt that I shall get
possession of his mother's house when the three months are up, and I
don't at all care where he and his mother go.  If they leave
Pentonville I shall be very well satisfied.  I have no satisfaction in
meeting either of them," and the squire frowned, as if some unpleasant
thought had crossed his mind.

Nothing of note passed during the remainder of the journey.  Ben
arrived in New York, and at once took a conveyance uptown, and due
time found himself, carpet-bag in hand, on the front steps of Mrs.
Hamilton's house.

He rang the bell, and the door was opened by a servant.

"She's out shopping," answered the girl, looking inquisitively at
Ben's carpet-bag.  "Will you leave a message for her?"

"I believe I am expected," said Ben, feeling a little awkward.  "My
name is Benjamin Barclay."

"Mrs. Hamilton didn't say anything about expecting any boy," returned
the servant.  "You can come in, if you like, and I'll call Mrs. Hill."

"I suppose that is the housekeeper," thought Ben.

"Very well," he answered.  "I believe I will come in, as Mrs. Hamilton
wrote me to come."

Ben left his bag in the front hall, and with his hat in his hand
followed the servant into the handsomely-furnished drawing room.

"I wish Mrs. Hamilton had been here," he said to himself.  "The girl
seems to look at me suspiciously.  I hope the housekeeper knows about
my coming."

Ben sat down in an easy-chair beside a marble-topped center table, and
waited for fifteen minutes before anyone appeared.  He beguiled the
time by looking over a handsomely illustrated book of views, but
presently the door was pushed open and he looked up.

The newcomer was a spare, pale-faced woman, with a querulous
