"There's no Indian about," he said. "I killed two turkeys with one shot,
and I'm mighty proud of it, too. I saw that they were directly in the
line of the bullet, and it went through both."

Silent Tom heaved a mighty sigh of relief, drawn up from great depths.

"I'm tre-men-jeous-ly glad uv that, Henry," he said. "Now when I saw
that third turkey come tumblin' down I wuz shore that one Injun or mebbe
more had got on this snug little place uv ourn in the swamp, an' that
we'd hev to go to fightin' ag'in. Thar come times, Henry, when my mind
just natchally rises up an' rebels ag'in fightin', 'specially when I
want to eat or sleep. Ain't thar anythin' else but fight, fight, fight,
'though I 'low a feller hez got to expect a lot uv it out here in the
woods?"

They picked up the three turkeys, two gobblers and a hen, and found
them large and fat as butter. More than once the wild turkey had come to
their relief, and, in fact, this bird played a great part in the life
of the frontier, wherever that frontier might be, as it shifted steadily
westward. As they walked back toward the hut they faced three figures,
all three with leveled rifles.

"All right, boys," sang out Henry. "It's nobody but Tom and myself,
bringing in our breakfast."

The three dropped their rifles.

"That's good," said Shif'less Sol. "When them shots roused us out o'
our beauty sleep we thought the whole Iroquois nation, horse, foot,
artillery an' baggage wagons, wuz comin' down upon us. So we reckoned
we'd better go out an' lick 'em afore it wuz too late.

"But it's you, an' you've got turkeys, nothin' but turkeys. Sho' I
reckoned from the peart way Long Jim spoke up that you wuz loaded down
with hummin' birds' tongues, ortylans, an' all them other Roman and
Rooshian delicacies Paul talks about in a way to make your mouth water.
But turkeys! jest turkeys! Nothin' but turkeys!"

"You jest wait till you see me cookin' 'em, Sol Hyde," said Long Jim.
"Then your mouth'll water, an' it'll take Henry and Tom both to hold you
back."

But Shif'less Sol's mouth was watering already, and his eyes were glued
on the turkeys.

"I'm a pow'ful lazy man, ez you know, Saplin'," he said, "but I'm goin'
to help you pick them turkeys an' get 'em ready for the coals. The
quicker they are cooked the better it'll suit me."

While they were cooking the turkeys, Henry, a little anxious lest the
sound of the shots had been heard, crossed on the stepping stones and
scouted a bit in the woods. But there was no sign of Indian presence,
and, relieved, he returned to the islet just as breakfast was ready.

Long Jim had exerted all his surpassing skill, and it was a contented
five that worked on one of the turkeys--the other two being saved for
further needs.

"What's goin' to be the next thing in the line of our duty, Henry?"
asked Long Jim as they ate.

"We'll have plenty to do, from all that Sol tells us," replied the boy.
"It seems that they felt so sure of you, while you were prisoners, that
they often talked about their plans where you could hear them. Sol has
told me of two or three talks between Timmendiquas and Thayendanegea,
and from the last one he gathered that they're intending a raid with a
big army against a place called Wyoming, in the valley of a river named
the Susquehanna. It's a big settlement, scattered all along the river,
and they expect to take a lot of scalps. They're going to be helped by
British from Canada and Tories. Boys, we're a long way from home, but
shall we go and tell them in Wyoming what's coming?"

"Of course," said the four together.

"Our bein' a long way from home don't make any difference," said
Shif'less Sol. "We're generally a long way from home, an' you know we
sent word back from Pittsburgh to Wareville that we wuz stayin' a while
here in the east on mighty important business."

"Then we go to the Wyoming Valley as straight and as fast as we can,"
said Henry. "That's settled. What else did you bear about their plans,
Sol?"

"They're to break up the village here soon and then they'll march to
a place called Tioga. The white men an' I hear that's to be a lot uv
'em-will join 'em thar or sooner. They've sent chiefs all the way to our
Congress at Philydelphy, pretendin' peace, an' then, when they git our
people to thinkin' peace, they'll jump on our settlements, the whole
ragin' army uv 'em, with tomahawk an' knife. A white man named John
Butler is to command 'em."

Paul shuddered.

"I've heard of him," he said. "They called him 'Indian' Butler at
Pittsburgh. He helped lead the Indians in that terrible battle of the
Oriskany last year. And they say he's got a son, Walter Butler, who is
as bad as he is, and there are other white leaders of the Indians, the
Johnsons and Claus."

"'Pears ez ef we would be needed," said Tom Ross.

"I don't think we ought to hurry," said Henry. "The more we know about
the Indian plans the better it will be for the Wyoming people. We've a
safe and comfortable hiding place here, and we can stay and watch the
Indian movements."

"Suits me," drawled Shif'less Sol. "My legs an' arms are still stiff
from them deerskin thongs an' ez Long Jim is here now to wait on me I
guess I'll take a rest from travelin."

"You'll do all your own waitin' on yourself," rejoined Long Jim; "an' I'm
afraid you won't be waited on so Pow'ful well, either, but a good deal
better than you deserve."

They lay on the islet several days, meanwhile keeping a close watch
on the Indian camp. They really had little to fear except from hunting
parties, as the region was far from any settled portion of the country,
and the Indians were not likely to suspect their continued presence.
But the hunters were numerous, and all the squaws in the camp were busy
jerking meat. It was obvious that the Indians were preparing for a great
campaign, but that they would take their own time. Most of the scouting
was done by Henry and Sol, and several times they lay in the thick
brushwood and watched, by the light of the fires, what was passing in
the Indian camp.

On the fifth night after the rescue of Long Jim, Henry and Shif'less Sol
lay in the covert. It was nearly midnight, but the fires still burned
in the Indian camp, warriors were polishing their weapons, and the women
were cutting up or jerking meat. While they were watching they heard
from a point to the north the sound of a voice rising and failing in a
kind of chant.

"Another war party comin'," whispered Shif'less Sol, "an' singin' about
the victories that they're goin' to win."

"But did you notice that voice?" Henry whispered back. "It's not a
man's, it's a woman's."

"Now that you speak of it, you're right," said Shif'less Sol. "It's
funny to hear an Injun woman chantin' about battles as she comes into
camp. That's the business o' warriors."

"Then this is no ordinary woman," said Henry.

"They'll pass along that trail there within twenty yards of us, Sol, and
we want to see her."

"So we do," said Sol, "but I ain't breathin' while they pass."

They flattened themselves against the earth until the keenest eye could
not see them in the darkness. All the time the singing was growing
louder, and both remained, quite sure that it was the voice of a woman.
The trail was but a short distance away, and the moon was bright. The
fierce Indian chant swelled, and presently the most singular figure that
either had ever seen came into view.

The figure was that of an Indian woman, but lighter in color than most
of her kind. She was middle-aged, tall, heavily built, and arrayed in a
strange mixture of civilized and barbaric finery, deerskin leggins and
moccasins gorgeously ornamented with heads, a red dress of European
cloth with a red shawl over it, and her head bare except for bright
feathers, thrust in her long black hair, which hung loosely down her
back. She held in one hand a large sharp tomahawk, which she swung
fiercely in time to her song. Her face had the rapt, terrible expression
of one who had taken some fiery and powerful drug, and she looked
neither to right nor to left as she strode on, chanting a song of blood,
and swinging the keen blade.

Henry and Shif'less Sol shuddered. They had looked upon terrible human
figures, but nothing so frightful as this, a woman with the strength
of a man and twice his rage and cruelty. There was something weird and
awful in the look of that set, savage face, and the tone of that Indian
chant. Brave as they were, Henry and the shiftless one felt fear, as
perhaps they had never felt it before in their lives. Well they might!
They were destined to behold this woman again, under conditions the
most awful of which the human mind can conceive, and to witness savagery
almost unbelievable in either man or woman. The two did not yet know
it, but they were looking upon Catharine Montour, daughter of a French
Governor General of Canada and an Indian woman, a chieftainess of the
Iroquois, and of a memory infamous forever on the border, where she was
known as "Queen Esther."

Shif'less Sol shuddered again, and whispered to Henry:

"I didn't think such women ever lived, even among the Indians."

A dozen warriors followed Queen Esther, stepping in single file, and
their manner showed that they acknowledged her their leader in every
sense. She was truly an extraordinary woman. Not even the great
Thayendanegea himself wielded a stronger influence among the Iroquois.
In her youth she had been treated as a white woman, educated and dressed
as a white woman, and she had played a part in colonial society at
Albany, New York, and Philadelphia. But of her own accord she had turned
toward the savage half of herself, had become wholly a savage, had
married a savage chief, bad been the mother of savage children, and here
she was, at midnight, striding into an Iroquois camp in the wilderness,
her head aflame with visions of blood, death, and scalps.

The procession passed with the terrifying female figure still leading,
still singing her chant, and the curiosity of Henry and Shif'less Sol
was so intense that, taking all risks, they slipped along in the rear to
see her entry.

Queen Esther strode into the lighted area of the camp, ceased her chant,
and looked around, as if a queen had truly come and was waiting to be
welcomed by her subjects. Thayendanegea, who evidently expected her,
stepped forward and gave her the Indian salute. It may be that he
received her with mild enthusiasm. Timmendiquas, a Wyandot and a guest,
though an ally, would not dispute with him his place as real head of the
Six Nations, but this terrible woman was his match, and could inflame
the Iroquois to almost anything that she wished.

After the arrival of Queen Esther the lights in the Iroquois village
died down. It was evident to both Henry and the shiftless one that they
had been kept burning solely in the expectation of the coming of this
formidable woman and her escort. It was obvious that nothing more was to
be seen that night, and they withdrew swiftly through the forest toward
their islet. They stopped once in an oak opening, and Shif'less Sol
shivered slightly.

"Henry," he said, "I feel all through me that somethin' terrible is
comin'. That woman back thar has clean give me the shivers. I'm more
afraid of her than I am of Timmendiquas or Thayendanegea. Do you think
she is a witch?"

"There are no such things as witches, but she was uncanny. I'm afraid,
Sol, that your feeling about something terrible going to happen is
right."

It was about two o'clock in the morning when they reached the islet. Tom
Ross was awake, but the other two slumbered peacefully on. They told Tom
what they had seen, and he told them the identity of the terrible woman.

"I heard about her at Pittsburgh, an' I've heard tell, too, about her
afore I went to Kentucky to live. She's got a tre-men-jeous power over
the Iroquois. They think she ken throw spells, an' all that sort of
thing-an' mebbe she kin."

Two nights later it was Henry and Tom who lay in the thickets, and then
they saw other formidable arrivals in the Indian camp. Now they were
white men, an entire company in green uniforms, Sir John Johnson's Royal
Greens, as Henry afterward learned; and with them was the infamous John
Butler, or "Indian" Butler, as he was generally known on the New York
and Pennsylvania frontier, middle-aged, short and fat, and insignificant
of appearance, but energetic, savage and cruel in nature. He was a
descendant of the Duke of Ormond, and had commanded the Indians at the
terrible battle of the Oriskany, preceding Burgoyne's capture the year
before.

Henry and Tom were distant spectators at an extraordinary council around
one of the fires. In this group were Timmendiquas, Thayendanegea, Queen
Esther, high chiefs of the distant nations, and the white men, John
Butler, Moses Blackstaffe, and the boy, Braxton Wyatt. It seemed to
Henry that Timmendiquas, King of the Wyandots, was superior to all the
other chiefs present, even to Thayendanegea. His expression was nobler
than that of the great Mohawk, and it had less of the Indian cruelty.

Henry and Tom could not hear 'anything that was said, but they felt sure
the Iroquois were about to break up their village and march on the great
campaign they had planned. The two and their comrades could render no
greater service than to watch their march, and then warn those upon whom
the blow was to fall.

The five left their hut on the islet early the next morning, well
equipped with provisions, and that day they saw the Iroquois dismantle
their village, all except the Long House and two or three other of the
more solid structures, and begin the march. Henry and his comrades went
parallel with them, watching their movements as closely as possible.




CHAPTER VIII. A CHANGE OF TENANTS


The five were engaged upon one of their most dangerous tasks, to keep
with the Indian army, and yet to keep out of its hands, to observe what
was going on, and to divine what was intended from what they observed.
Fortunately it, was early summer, and the weather being very beautiful
they could sleep without shelter. Hence they found it convenient to
sleep sometimes by daylight, posting a watch always, and to spy upon the
Indian camp at night. They saw other reinforcements come for the Indian
army, particularly a strong division of Senecas, under two great war
chiefs of theirs, Sangerachte and Hiokatoo, and also a body of Tories.

Then they saw them go into their last great camp at Tioga, preparatory
to their swift descent upon the Wyoming Valley. About four hundred
white men, English Canadians and Tories, were present, and eight hundred
picked warriors of the Six Nations under Thayendanegea, besides the
little band of Wyandots led by the resolute Timmendiquas. "Indian"
Butler was in general command of the whole, and Queen Esther was the
high priestess of the Indians, continually making fiery speeches and
chanting songs that made the warriors see red. Upon the rear of this
extraordinary army hung a band of fierce old squaws, from whom every
remnant of mercy and Gentleness had departed.

From a high rock overlooking a valley the five saw "Indian" Butler's
force start for its final march upon Wyoming. It was composed of many
diverse elements, and perhaps none more bloodthirsty ever trod the soil
of America. In some preliminary skirmish a son of Queen Esther had been
slain, and now her fury knew no limits. She took her place at the
very head of the army, whirling her great tomahawk about her head, and
neither "Indian" Butler nor Thayendanegea dared to interfere with her in
anything great or small.

Henry and his comrades, as they left their rock and hastened toward the
valley of Wyoming, felt that now they were coming into contact with the
great war itself. They had looked upon a uniformed enemy for the first
time, and they might soon see the colonial buff and blue of the eastern
army. Their hearts thrilled high at new scenes and new dangers.

They had gathered at Pittsburgh, and, through the captivity of the four
in the Iroquois camp, they had some general idea of the Wyoming Valley
and the direction in which it lay, and, taking one last look at the
savage army, they sped toward it. The time was the close, of June, and
the foliage was still dark green. It was a land of low mountain, hill,
rich valley, and clear stream, and it was beautiful to every one of the
five. Much of their course lay along the Susquehanna, and soon they
saw signs of a more extended cultivation than any that was yet to be
witnessed in Kentucky. From the brow of a little hill they beheld a
field of green, and in another field a man plowing.

"That's wheat," said Tom Ross.

"But we can't leave the man to plow," said Henry, "or he'll never
harvest that wheat. We'll warn him."

The man uttered a cry of alarm as five wild figures burst into his
field. He stopped abruptly, and snatched up a rifle that lay across
the plow handles. Neither Henry nor his companions realized that their
forest garb and long life in the wilderness made them look more like
Indians than white men. But Henry threw up a hand as a sign of peace.

"We're white like yourselves," he cried, "and we've come to warn you!
The Iroquois and the Tories are marching into the valley!"

The man's face blanched, and he cast a hasty look toward a little wood,
where stood a cabin from which smoke was rising. He could not doubt on a
near view that these were white like himself, and the words rang true.

"My house is strong," he said, "and I can beat them off. Maybe you will
help me."

"We'd help you willingly enough," said Henry, "if this were any ordinary
raiding band, but 'Indian' Butler, Brant, and Queen Esther are coming at
the head of twelve or fifteen hundred men. How could we hold a house, no
matter how thick its walls, against such an army as that? Don't hesitate
a moment! Get up what you can and gallop."

The man, a Connecticut settler-Jennings was his name-left his plow in
the furrow, galloped on his horse to his house, mounted his wife and
children on other horses, and, taking only food and clothing, fled to
Stroudsburg, where there was a strong fort. At a later day he gave Henry
heartfelt thanks for his warning, as six hours afterward the vanguard
of the horde burned his home and raged because its owner and his family
were gone with their scalps on their own heads.

The five were now well into the Wyoming Valley, where the Lenni-Lenape,
until they were pushed westward by other tribes, had had their village
Wy-wa-mieh, which means in their language Wyoming. It was a beautiful
valley running twenty miles or more along the Susquehanna, and about
three miles broad. On either side rose mountain walls a thousand feet in
height, and further away were peaks with mists and vapors around their
crests. The valley itself blazed in the summer sunshine, and the river
sparkled, now in gold, now in silver, as the light changed and fell.

More cultivated fields, more houses, generally of stout logs, appeared,
and to all that they saw the five bore the fiery beacon. Simon Jennings
was not the only man who lived to thank them for the warning. Others
were incredulous, and soon paid the terrible price of unbelief.

The five hastened on, and as they went they looked about them with
wondering eyes-there were so many houses, so many cultivated fields, and
so many signs of a numerous population. They had emerged almost for the
first time from the wilderness, excepting their memorable visit to New
Orleans, although this was a very different region. Long Jim spoke of
it.

"I think I like it better here than at New Or-leeyuns," he said. "We
found some nice Frenchmen an' Spaniards down thar, but the ground feels
firmer under my feet here."

"The ground feels firmer," said Paul, who had some of the prescience of
the seer, "but the skies are no brighter. They look red to me sometimes,
Jim."

Tom Ross glanced at Paul and shook his head ominously. A woodsman, he
had his superstitions, and Paul's words weighed upon his mind. He began
