
CHAPTER VIII.


_Dick and his friends visit the Indians and see many wonders--Crusoe,
too, experiences a few surprises, and teaches Indian dogs a lesson--An
Indian dandy--A foot-race._

The Pawnee village, at which they soon arrived, was situated in the
midst of a most interesting and picturesque scene.

It occupied an extensive plain which sloped gently down to a creek[*],
whose winding course was marked by a broken line of wood, here and
there interspersed with a fine clump of trees, between the trunks of
which the blue waters of a lake sparkled in the distance. Hundreds of
tents or "lodges" of buffalo-skins covered the ground, and thousands
of Indians--men, women, and children--moved about the busy scene. Some
were sitting in their lodges, lazily smoking their pipes. But these
were chiefly old and infirm veterans, for all the young men had gone
to the hunt which we have just described. The women were stooping over
their fires, busily preparing maize and meat for their husbands and
brothers; while myriads of little brown and naked children romped
about everywhere, filling the air with their yells and screams, which
were only equalled, if not surpassed, by the yelping dogs that seemed
innumerable.

[Footnote *: In America small rivers or rivulets are termed "creeks."]

Far as the eye could reach were seen scattered herds of horses. These
were tended by little boys who were totally destitute of clothing,
and who seemed to enjoy with infinite zest the pastime of
shooting-practice with little bows and arrows. No wonder that these
Indians become expert bowmen. There were urchins there, scarce two
feet high, with round bullets of bodies and short spindle-shanks, who
could knock blackbirds off the trees at every shot, and cut the heads
off the taller flowers with perfect certainty! There was much need,
too, for the utmost proficiency they could attain, for the very
existence of the Indian tribes of the prairies depends on their
success in hunting the buffalo.

There are hundreds and thousands of North American savages who would
undoubtedly perish, and their tribes become extinct, if the buffaloes
were to leave the prairies or die out. Yet, although animals are
absolutely essential to their existence, they pursue and slay them
with improvident recklessness, sometimes killing hundreds of them
merely for the sake of the sport, the tongues, and the marrow bones.
In the bloody hunt described in the last chapter, however, the
slaughter of so many was not wanton, because the village that had to
be supplied with food was large, and, just previous to the hunt, they
had been living on somewhat reduced allowance. Even the blackbirds
shot by the brown-bodied urchins before mentioned had been thankfully
put into the pot. Thus precarious is the supply of food among the
Red-men, who on one day are starving, and the next are revelling in
superabundance.

But to return to our story. At one end of this village the creek
sprang over a ledge of rock in a low cascade and opened out into a
beautiful lake, the bosom of which was studded with small islands.
Here were thousands of those smaller species of wild water-fowl which
were either too brave or too foolish to be scared away by the noise
of the camp. And here, too, dozens of children were sporting on the
beach, or paddling about in their light bark canoes.

"Isn't it strange," remarked Dick to Henri, as they passed among the
tents towards the centre of the village--"isn't it strange that them
Injuns should be so fond o' fightin', when they've got all they can
want--a fine country, lots o' buffalo, an', as far as I can see, happy
homes?"

"Oui, it is remarkaibel, vraiment. Bot dey do more love war to peace.
Dey loves to be excit-ed, I s'pose."

"Humph! One would think the hunt we seed a little agone would be
excitement enough. But, I say, that must he the chiefs tent, by the
look o't."

Dick was right. The horsemen pulled up and dismounted opposite the
principal chief's tent, which was a larger and more elegant structure
than the others. Meanwhile an immense concourse of women, children,
and dogs gathered round the strangers, and while the latter yelped
their dislike to white men, the former chattered continuously, as they
discussed the appearance of the strangers and their errand, which
latter soon became known. An end was put to this by San-it-sa-rish
desiring the hunters to enter the tent, and spreading a buffalo robe
for them to sit on. Two braves carried in their packs, and then led
away their horses.

All this time Crusoe had kept as close as possible to his master's
side, feeling extremely uncomfortable in the midst of such a strange
crowd, the more especially that the ill-looking Indian curs gave him
expressive looks of hatred, and exhibited some desire to rush upon him
in a body, so that he had to keep a sharp look-out all round him. When
therefore Dick entered the tent, Crusoe endeavoured to do so along
with him; but he was met by a blow on the nose from an old squaw, who
scolded him in a shrill voice and bade him begone.

Either our hero's knowledge of the Indian language was insufficient to
enable him to understand the order, or he had resolved not to obey it,
for instead of retreating, he drew a deep gurgling breath, curled his
nose, and displayed a row of teeth that caused the old woman to draw
back in alarm. Crusoe's was a forgiving spirit. The instant that
opposition ceased he forgot the injury, and was meekly advancing, when
Dick held up his finger.

"Go outside, pup, and wait."

Crusoe's tail drooped; with a deep sigh he turned and left the tent.
He took up a position near the entrance, however, and sat down
resignedly. So meek, indeed, did the poor dog look that six
mangy-looking curs felt their dastardly hearts emboldened to make a
rush at him with boisterous yells.

Crusoe did not rise. He did not even condescend to turn his head
toward them; but he looked at them out of the corner of his dark eye,
wrinkled--very slightly--the skin of his nose, exhibited two beautiful
fangs, and gave utterance to a soft remark, that might be described
as quiet, deep-toned gurgling. It wasn't much, but it was more than
enough for the valiant six, who paused and snarled violently.

It was a peculiar trait of Crusoe's gentle nature that, the moment any
danger ceased, he resumed his expression of nonchalant gravity. The
expression on this occasion was misunderstood, however; and as about
two dozen additional yelping dogs had joined the ranks of the enemy,
they advanced in close order to the attack.

Crusoe still sat quiet, and kept his head high; but he _looked_ at
them again, and exhibited four fangs for their inspection. Among the
pack there was one Indian dog of large size--almost as large as Crusoe
himself--which kept well in the rear, and apparently urged the lesser
dogs on. The little dogs didn't object, for little dogs are generally
the most pugnacious. At this big dog Crusoe directed a pointed glance,
but said nothing. Meanwhile a particularly small and vicious cur, with
a mere rag of a tail, crept round by the back of the tent, and coming
upon Crusoe in rear, snapped at his tail sharply, and then fled
shrieking with terror and surprise, no doubt, at its own temerity.

Crusoe did not bark; he seldom barked; he usually either said nothing,
or gave utterance to a prolonged roar of indignation of the most
terrible character, with barks, as it were, mingled through it. It
somewhat resembled that peculiar and well-known species of thunder,
the prolonged roll of which is marked at short intervals in its
course by cannon-like cracks. It was a continuous, but, so to speak,
_knotted_ roar.

On receiving the snap, Crusoe gave forth _the_ roar with a majesty and
power that scattered the pugnacious front rank of the enemy to the
winds. Those that still remained, half stupified, he leaped over with
a huge bound, and alighted, fangs first, on the back of the big
dog. There was one hideous yell, a muffled scramble of an instant's
duration, and the big dog lay dead upon the plain!

It was an awful thing to do, but Crusoe evidently felt that the
peculiar circumstances of the case required that an example should be
made; and to say truth, all things considered, we cannot blame him.
The news must have been carried at once through the canine portion of
the camp, for Crusoe was never interfered with again after that.

Dick witnessed this little incident; but he observed that the Indian
chief cared not a straw about it, and as his dog returned quietly
and sat down in its old place he took no notice of it either, but
continued to listen to the explanations which Joe gave to the chief,
of the desire of the Pale-faces to be friends with the Red-men.

Joe's eloquence would have done little for him on this occasion had
his hands been empty, but he followed it up by opening one of his
packs and displaying the glittering contents before the equally
glittering eyes of the chief and his squaws.

"These," said Joe, "are the gifts that the great chief of the
Pale-faces sends to the great chief of the Pawnees. And he bids me say
that there are many more things in his stores which will be traded for
skins with the Red-men, when they visit him; and he also says that if
the Pawnees will not steal horses any more from the Pale-faces, they
shall receive gifts of knives, and guns, and powder, and blankets
every year."

"Wah!" grunted the chief; "it is good. The great chief is wise. We
will smoke the pipe of peace."

The things that afforded so much satisfaction to San-it-sa-rish were
the veriest trifles. Penny looking-glasses in yellow gilt tin frames,
beads of various colours, needles, cheap scissors and knives,
vermilion paint, and coarse scarlet cloth, etc. They were of priceless
value, however, in the estimation of the savages, who delighted to
adorn themselves with leggings made from the cloth, beautifully worked
with beads by their own ingenious women. They were thankful, too, for
knives even of the commonest description, having none but bone ones of
their own; and they gloried in daubing their faces with intermingled
streaks of charcoal and vermilion. To gaze at their visages, when
thus treated, in the little penny looking-glasses is their summit of
delight!

Joe presented the chief with a portion of these coveted goods, and
tied up the remainder. We may remark here that the only thing which
prevented the savages from taking possession of the whole at once,
without asking permission, was the promise of the annual gifts,
which they knew would not be forthcoming were any evil to befall
the deputies of the Pale-faces. Nevertheless, it cost them a severe
struggle to restrain their hands on this occasion, and Joe and his
companions felt that they would have to play their part well in order
to fulfil their mission with safety and credit.

"The Pale-faces may go now and talk with the braves," said
San-it-sa-rish, after carefully examining everything that was given
to him; "a council will be called soon, and we will smoke the pipe of
peace."

Accepting this permission to retire, the hunters immediately left the
tent; and being now at liberty to do what they pleased, they amused
themselves by wandering about the village.

"He's a cute chap that," remarked Joe, with a sarcastic smile; "I
don't feel quite easy about gettin' away. He'll bother the life out o'
us to get all the goods we've got, and, ye see, as we've other tribes
to visit, we must give away as little as we can here."

"Ha! you is right," said Henri; "dat fellow's eyes twinkle at de
knives and tings like two stars."

"Fire-flies, ye should say. Stars are too soft an' beautiful to
compare to the eyes o' yon savage," said Dick, laughing. "I wish we
were well away from them. That rascal Mahtawa is an ugly customer."

"True, lad," returned Joe; "had _he_ bin the great chief our scalps
had bin dryin' in the smoke o' a Pawnee wigwam afore now. What now,
lad?"

Joe's question was put in consequence of a gleeful smile that
overspread the countenance of Dick Varley, who replied by pointing to
a wigwam towards which they were approaching.

"Oh! that's only a dandy," exclaimed Joe. "There's lots o' them in
every Injun camp. They're fit for nothin' but dress, poor contemptible
critters."

Joe accompanied his remark with a sneer, for of all pitiable objects
he regarded an unmanly man as the most despicable. He consented,
however, to sit down on a grassy bank and watch the proceedings of
this Indian dandy, who had just seated himself in front of his wigwam
for the purpose of making his toilet.

He began it by greasing his whole person carefully and smoothly over
with buffalo fat, until he shone like a patent leather boot; then he
rubbed himself almost dry, leaving the skin sleek and glossy. Having
proceeded thus far, he took up a small mirror, a few inches in
diameter, which he or some other member of the tribe must have
procured during one of their few excursions to the trading-forts of
the Pale-faces, and examined himself, as well as he could, in so
limited a space. Next, he took a little vermilion from a small parcel
and rubbed it over his face until it presented the somewhat demoniac
appearance of a fiery red. He also drew a broad red score along the
crown of his head, which was closely shaved, with the exception of the
usual tuft or scalplock on the top. This scalplock stood bristling
straight up a few inches, and then curved over and hung down his back
about two feet. Immense care and attention was bestowed on this lock.
He smoothed it, greased it, and plaited it into the form of a pigtail.
Another application was here made to the glass, and the result was
evidently satisfactory, to judge from the beaming smile that played on
his features. But, not content with the general effect, he tried the
effect of expression--frowned portentously, scowled savagely, gaped
hideously, and grinned horribly a ghastly smile.

Then our dandy fitted into his ears, which were bored in several
places, sundry ornaments, such as rings, wampum, etc., and hung
several strings of beads round his neck. Besides these he affixed one
or two ornaments to his arms, wrists, and ankles, and touched in a few
effects with vermilion on the shoulders and breast. After this, and
a few more glances at the glass, he put on a pair of beautiful
moccasins, which, besides being richly wrought with beads, were soft
as chamois leather and fitted his feet like gloves. A pair of leggings
of scarlet cloth were drawn on, attached to a waist-belt, and bound
below the knee with broad garters of variegated bead-work.

It was some time before this Adonis was quite satisfied with himself.
He retouched the paint on his shoulders several times, and modified
the glare of that on his wide-mouthed, high-cheek-boned visage, before
he could tear himself away; but at last he did so, and throwing
a large piece of scarlet cloth over his shoulders, he thrust his
looking-glass under his belt, and proceeded to mount his palfrey,
which was held in readiness near to the tent door by one of his wives.
The horse was really a fine animal, and seemed worthy of a more
warlike master. His shoulders, too, were striped with red paint, and
feathers were intertwined with his mane and tail, while the bridle was
decorated with various jingling ornaments.

Vaulting upon his steed, with a large fan of wild goose and turkey
feathers in one hand, and a whip dangling at the wrist of the other,
this incomparable dandy sallied forth for a promenade--that being his
chief delight when there was no buffalo hunting to be done. Other men
who were not dandies sharpened their knives, smoked, feasted, and
mended their spears and arrows at such seasons of leisure, or played
at athletic games. "Let's follow my buck," said Joe Blunt.

"Oui. Come 'long," replied Henri, striding after the rider at a pace
that almost compelled his comrades to run.

"Hold on!" cried Dick, laughing; "we don't want to keep him company. A
distant view is quite enough o' sich a chap as that."

"Mais you forgit I cannot see far."

"So much the better," remarked Joe; "it's my opinion we've seen enough
o' him. Ah! he's goin' to look on at the games. Them's worth lookin'
at."

The games to which Joe referred were taking place on a green level
plain close to the creek, and a little above the waterfall before
referred to. Some of the Indians were horse-racing, some jumping,
and others wrestling; but the game which proved most attractive was
throwing the javelin, in which several of the young braves were
engaged.

This game is played by two competitors, each armed with a dart, in an
arena about fifty yards long. One of the players has a hoop of six
inches in diameter. At a signal they start off on foot at full speed,
and on reaching the middle of the arena the Indian with the hoop rolls
it along before them, and each does his best to send a javelin through
the hoop before the other. He who succeeds counts so many points; if
both miss, the nearest to the hoop is allowed to count, but not so
much as if he had "ringed" it. The Indians are very fond of this game,
and will play at it under a broiling sun for hours together. But a
good deal of the interest attaching to it is owing to the fact that
they make it a means of gambling. Indians are inveterate gamblers, and
will sometimes go on until they lose horses, bows, blankets, robes,
and, in short, their whole personal property. The consequences are, as
might be expected, that fierce and bloody quarrels sometimes arise in
which life is often lost.

"Try your hand at that," said Henri to Dick.

"By all means," cried Dick, handing his rifle to his friend, and
springing into the ring enthusiastically.

