


** How to Make Lantern Slides [127]

The popularity of lantern slides, and especially of colored ones,
as a means of illustrating songs, has caused so large a demand for
this class of work that almost any amateur may take up slide
making at a good profit. The lantern slide is a glass plate,
coated with slow and extremely fine-grained emulsion. The size is
3-1/4 by 4 in. A lantern slide is merely a print on a glass plate
instead of on paper. Lantern slides can be made in two different
ways. One is by contact, exactly the same as a print is made on
paper, and the other by reduction in the camera. In making slides
by contact, select the negative and place it in the printing frame
and put the lantern plate upon it, film to film. Clamp down the
back and expose just as in making a print. A good method of
exposing is to hold a lighted match about 3 in. from the frame for
three or more seconds according to the density.

Development is carried on in the same manner as with a negative.
The image should appear in. about a minute, and development should
be over in three or four minutes. If the exposure has been
correct, the high lights will stay white throughout the
development and will come out as clear glass after fixing. It is
best to use the developers recommended by the manufacturer of the
plates used, the formulas being found in each package of plates.
It is best, also, to use a plain fixing bath, which must be fresh
and kept as cool as possible in hot weather.

The lantern-slide film that is new on the market can be handled in
the same manner as the glass-plate slide, except that the binding
is different. The results are the same and the slides are not so
bulky to handle. Being unbreakable, they are much used by
travelers. The manner of binding them for use in a lantern is
described on the circular enclosed with the film.

[Illustration: The Camera as It is Arranged in Front of the Window
for Reducing the Size of a Picture, and the Method of Binding the
Slides]

When the negative is larger than the lantern-slide plate, and it
is desirable to reduce the entire view upon the slide, a little
extra work will be necessary. Select a room with one window, if
possible, and fit a light-proof frame into it to keep out all
light with the exception of a hole in which to place the negative,
as shown in Fig. 1. Unless this hole is on a line with the sky it
will be necessary to place a sheet of white cardboard at an angle
of 45 deg. on the outside of the frame to reflect the light
through the negative as shown in Fig. 2. Make or secure an inside
kit to place in the plate holder of your camera to hold the
lantern slide plate as shown in Fig. 3. Draw lines with a pencil,
outlining on the ground glass of the camera the size of the
lantern slide plate, and in the place where the plate will be in
the plate holder when placed in position in the camera. This will
enable you to focus to the proper size. Place the camera in front
of the hole in the frame, place the negative in the hole and focus
the camera for the lantern slide size. Expose with a medium stop
for about 20 seconds and treat the plate the same as with the
contact exposure.

When dry the lantern slide plate may be tinted any color by means
of liquid colors. These can be purchased from any photo material
store. In coloring the slide plate it is only necessary to moisten
the gelatine film from time to time with a piece of cloth dampened
in water. The colors may then be spread evenly with a soft brush,
which should be kept in motion to prevent spots.

The slide is put together by placing a mat made of black paper, as
shown in Fig. 4, on the gelatine side of the lantern slide, A,
Fig. 5, and then a plain glass, B, over the mat, C, and the three
bound together with passepartout tape, D. Contrasty negatives make
the best slides, but the lantern slide plate should be made
without any attempt to gain density.



** HOW TO MAKE A PORCH SWING CHAIR [128]

The material needed for making this porch swing chair are two
pieces of round wood 2-1/2 in. in diameter and 20 in. long, and
two pieces 1-1/4 in. in diameter and 40 in. long. These longer
pieces can be made square, but for appearance it is best to have
them round or square with the corners rounded. A piece of canvas,
or other stout cloth, 16 in. wide and 50 in. long, is to be used
for the seat. The two short pieces of wood are used for the ends
of the chair and two 1-in. holes are bored in each end of them
1-1/2 in. from the ends, and between the holes and the ends
grooves are cut around them to make a place to fasten ropes, as
shown at B, Fig. 1. The two longer pieces are used for the sides
and a tenon is cut on each end of them to fit in the 1-in. holes
bored in the end pieces, as shown at A, Fig. 1. The canvas is now
tacked on the end pieces and the pieces given one turn before
placing the mortising together.

[Illustration: Swing Chair]

The chair is now hung up to the porch ceiling with ropes attached
to a large screw eye or hook. The end of the chair to be used for
the lower part is held about 16 in. from the floor with ropes
direct from the grooves in the end pieces to the hook. The upper
end is supported by using a rope in the form of a loop or bail, as
shown in Fig. 2. The middle of the loop or bail should be about 15
in. from the end piece of the chair. Another rope is attached to
the loop and through the hook and to a slide as shown. This will
allow for adjustment to make the device into a chair or a hammock.
--Contributed by Earl R. Hastings, Corinth, Vt.



** How to Find the Blind Spot in the Eye [129]

Make a small black circular dot 1/2 in. in diameter on a piece of
cardboard and about 3 in. from the center of this dot draw a star.
Hold the cardboard so that the star will be directly in front of
one eye, while the dot will be in front of the other. If the star
is in front of the left eye, close the right eye and look steadily
at the star while you move the cardboard until the point is
reached where the dot disappears. This will prove the presence of
a blind spot in a person's eye. The other eye can be given the
same experiment by turning the cardboard end for end. The blind
spot does not indicate diseased eyes, but it simply marks the
point where the optic nerve enters the eyeball, which point is not
provided with the necessary visual end organs of the sight, known
as rods and cones.



** Beeswax Substitute [129]

A wax from the rafie palm of Madagascar is being used as a
substitute for beeswax.



** Home-Made Water Wheel Does Family Washing [129]

[Illustration: Water Wheel]

The accompanying sketch illustrates a very ingenious device which
does the family washing, as well as to operate other household
machines. A disk 1 in. in thickness and 10 in. in diameter was cut
from a piece of rough board, and on its circumference were nailed
a number of cup-shaped pieces cut from old tin cans. A hole was
then bored through the center of the disk and an old piece of iron
rod was driven through to form a shaft. Two holes were then bored
opposite each other through the sides of a wooden box in which the
disk was placed, allowing the shaft to project through the holes.
A small grooved wooden pulley was driven tightly on one of the
projecting ends of the shaft. The top of the box was then tightly
closed and a hole, large enough to admit the nozzle of a garden
hose, was bored so that the jet of water would flow upon the tin
buckets that were nailed to the circumference of the wheel or
disk. Another hole was bored in the bottom of the box large enough
to allow the waste water to run away freely. A belt, made from an
ordinary sash cord, was run from the small pulley on the
waterwheel to a large pulley, as shown in Fig. 1. A pitman was
attached to the large pulley, which operates the washing machine
by its reciprocating motion, and the length of the stroke is
adjusted by moving the position of the hinge joint on the arm of
the washing machine, as shown in Fig. 2. The pressure at the
nozzle is about 20 lb. per square inch, and is sufficient to drive
the waterwheel under all ordinary circumstances.
--Contributed by P. J. O'Gara, Auburn, Cal,



** An Optical Illusion [130]

When looking at the accompanying sketch you will say that the
letters are alternately inclined to the right and left. They are
not so and can be proved by measuring the distance of the top and
bottom of any vertical strokes from the edge of the entire block.
They will be found to be exactly the same distance. Or take any of
the horizontal strokes of the four letters and see how far their
extremities are from the top and bottom of the entire block. It
will be found that a line joining the extremities of the strokes
are strictly parallel to the top or bottom and that they are not
on a slant at all. It is the slant of the numerous short lines
that go to make up the letter as a whole that deceives the eye.

[Illustration: Illusion]



** Home-Made Micrometer [130]

It often becomes necessary to find the thickness of material so
thin, or inconvenient to measure, that a rule or other measuring
device will not serve the purpose. A simple, fairly accurate, and
easily made apparatus of the micrometer form may be constructed as
shown by the accompanying sketch. Secure a common iron or brass
bolt about 1/4-in. in diameter and about 2-1/2 in. long, with as
fine a thread as possible, and the thread cut to within a short
distance of the head of the bolt. The head of the bolts should
have a slot cut for the use of a screwdriver. Clamp together two
blocks of wood with square corners which are about 1 in. wide, 3/4
in. thick and 2-1/2 in. long and fasten them together with small
pieces nailed across the ends. The width of the blocks will then
be about 2 in. Bore a 1/4-in. hole through the center of the
blocks in the 2 in. direction. Remove the clamp and set the nut
into one of the blocks, so that the hole will be continuous with
the hole in the wood. Cut out a piece from the block combination,
leaving it shaped like a bench, and glue the bottoms of the legs
to a piece of thin board about 2-1/2 in. square for a support.

Solder one end of a stiff wire that is about 2 in. long to the
head of the bolt at right angles to the shaft, and fix a disc of
heavy pasteboard with a radius equal to the length of the wire,
and with its circumference graduated into equal spaces, to serve
in measuring revolutions of the end of the wire, to the top of the
bench. Put the bolt in the hole, screwing it through the nut,

[Illustration: Micrometer]

and the construction is complete. The base is improved for the
measuring work by fastening a small piece of wood on the board
between the legs of the bench. A small piece of metal is glued on
this piece of wood at the point where the bolt meets it.

Find the number of threads of the screw to the inch by placing the
bolt on a measuring rule, and counting the threads in an inch of
its length. The bolt in making one revolution will descend a
distance equal to the distance between the threads.

The device is used by placing the object whose thickness is to be
measured on the base under the bolt, and screwing the bolt down
until its end just touches the object, then removing the object,
and screwing the bolt down until its end just touches the base,
carefully noting while doing so the distance that the end of the
wire moves over the scale. The part of a rotation of the bolt, or
the number of rotations with any additional parts of a rotation
added, divided by the number of threads to the inch, will be the
thickness of the object. Quite accurate measurements may be made
with this instrument, says the Scientific American, and in the
absence of the expensive micrometer, it serves a very useful
purpose.



** Another Electric Lamp Experiment [131]

Break a portion of the end off from a 16-cp. globe that has been
thrown away as useless. Shake the globe until all the filament is
broken away, leaving only the ends of the platinum wire exposed.
Screw the globe into a socket that sets upright and fill it with
salt water. Make one connection to the socket from the positive
wire of a 110 volt circuit and the other to a ground. When the
current is turned on small stars will be seen in the globe, which
show up fine at night.
--Contributed by Lindsay McMillan, Santa Maria, Oal.



** Removing Ink Stains [131]

Two or three applications of milk which are wiped up with a dry
cloth will remove india ink spots on carpets.



** Feat of Balancing on Chairs [131]

[Illustration: For Boys Balanacing]

Among the numerous physical exercises is the feat of balancing on
the two rear legs of a chair while one foot rests on the front
part of the seat and the other on the back of the chair. This may
appear to be a hard thing to do, yet with a little practice it may
be accomplished. This exercise is one of many practiced by the
boys of a boys' home for an annual display given by them. A dozen
of the boys will mount chairs at the same time and keep them in
balance at the word of a commanding officer.



** How to Make a Merry-Go-Round Swing [131]

A 6 by 6-in. piece of wood 12 ft. long is used for the center
pole. Bore a 3/4-in. hole in each end to a depth of 6 in. Place a
3/4-in. bolt in each hole, the bolt being long enough to protrude
2 in. beyond the end of the wood. Short pieces of wood are nailed
on the center pole about 2 ft. from the end that is to be used for
the bottom. This should form a hub on which to place the inner
ends of the extending spokes that hold the platform. The spokes
are made from twelve pieces of 2 by 4-in. material 12 ft. long.

Usually a wheel can be found in a scrap pile suitable to place on
the pin that is in the top end of the center pole. The wheel
should be open

[Illustration: Side and Top View]

or have spokes. This wheel is used to attach wires for guying. The
bottom pin in the center pole is placed in a hole that is bored
into a block of wood about 12-in. square and 3 or 4 in. thick. A
piece of sheet metal should be drilled and placed on the pin
between the block and end of the pole to make a smooth bearing.
The center pole is now placed in position and guyed with six wires
that are about 35 ft. long. Stakes are driven into the ground and
the wires fastened to them and to the wheel at the top end of the
pole. Care should be taken when attaching the wires to get the
center pole to stand perpendicular. Twelve hooks should be placed
at equal distances around the center pole about 1 ft. from the top
end. Wires are fastened to these hooks and to the twelve 2 by
4-in. pieces used for the spokes. The wires should be tied around
each spoke about 2 ft. from the ends. Space the spokes with equal
divisions and cover the outer 2 ft. of the ends with boards, as
shown in the plan sketch on the right hand end of the drawing. The
boards may be nailed or bolted. If bolted and the wires made in a
loop at the hooks, the swing can easily be taken apart and changed
from one place to another.
--Contributed by A. O. Graham, Fort Worth, Tex.



** Home-Made Arc Lamp [132]

The frame of the lamp is made from bar metal 3/4 in. wide and 1/8
in. thick, bent and welded to make a continuous loop in the shape
as shown at G in the sketch. This frame should be about 10-1/2 in.
long with the upper or wider part 4 in. long, and the lower part
6-1/2 in. long. The width should be about 5-1/4 in. at

[Illustration: Arc Lamp]

the top and 4 in. at the bottom. A cross bar, L, made of the same
material, is fitted into the off-set in the frame and riveted.
Holes are drilled through the frame and brass bushings, H and J,
are fitted for bearings to receive the adjusting brass rod, B,
which should be 1/4 in. in diameter. A brass curtain rod can be
used for the rod B, and on its lower end a socket, P, is soldered.

A piece of brass 2 in. long, 1/2 in. wide and 1/8 in. thick is
used for the armature, A, to be operated by the magnet coil, C.
The coil, C, is made in the usual manner by wrapping No. 14
cotton-covered magnet wire on a wooden spool that has a soft iron
core. The spool is about 2-1/2 in. long. The armature, A, is
drilled, making a hole just a little larger than the rod, B, and
is adjusted in place by two set screws, D and E. A soft piece of
iron, F, is fastened to the opposite end of the armature with a
screw, which should be placed directly under the end of the coil's
core. This end of the armature may be kept from swinging around by
placing it between a U-shaped piece of brass fastened to the cross
piece L. At the bottom end of the frame, and directly centering
the holes H and J, a hole is drilled to receive a hard rubber
bushing, R, for insulating the brass ferrule, S, that holds the
lower carbon.

One connection is made from the main to the upper binding-post,
which is in turn connected to one terminal of the coil, C, the
other coil terminal being attached to the frame. The other main
connection is made to the lower binding-post, which is also
connected to the brass ferrule, S, by soldering. The two
binding-posts are insulated from the frame the same as the ferrule
S. When using on a 110-volt circuit there must be some resistance
in connection, which may be had by using German silver wire, or a
water rheostat heretofore described.
--Contributed by Arthur D. Bradlev. Randolph, Mass.



** Irrigation [132]

The Mexican government has appropriated $25,000,000 for irrigation
work.



** How to Hang Your Hat on a Lead Pencil [133]

Take a smooth hexagon lead pencil, one without either rubber or
metal end, and place it against a door or window casing; then with
a firm, heavy pressure slide the pencil some 3 or 4 in. and it
will stay as if glued to the casing. You may now hang your hat on
the end of the pencil.

When you slide the pencil along the casing, do it without any
apparent effort, and it will appear to your audience as though you
had hypnotized it. This is a very neat trick if performed right.
Figure 1 shows the pencil on the casing and Fig. 2 the hat hanging
on it.

[Illustration: Pencil Trick]



** Tying a Knot for Footballs [133]

One of the most prominent English football clubs kept the tying of
this knot on the rubber hose of their football a secret and never
allowed all of its members to know how it was tied. This tie can
be used on grain sacks, and in numerous other like instances. Make
one loop in the cord and then another exactly the same way, as

[Illustration: A Secure Knot]

shown in Fig. 1, placing the end of the cord under the first loop,
then pulling at each end of the cord as in Fig. 2.--A.E.J.



** Stove polish [133]

Stove polish consists of 2 parts graphite, 4 parts copperas and 2
parts bone black, mixed with water to form a paste.



** How to Give an Electric Shock While Shaking Hands [133]

There is nothing quite so startling as to receive an electric
shock unexpectedly and such a shock may be given to a friend while
shaking hands upon meeting. The shock produced is not harmful and
the apparatus can be carried in the pocket. It consists of a small
induction coil that can be constructed at home.

The core of the coil, A, Fig. 1, is constructed in the usual
manner, of small soft-iron wire to make a bundle about 3/16 in. in
diameter and 2 in. long. The coil ends are made from cardboard,
about 1 in. in diameter, with a 3/16-in. hole in the center. The
hole

[Illustration: Details of Induction Coil]

should be cut as shown in Fig. 2, so as to have four small pieces
that can be bent out, leaving the projections as shown. After
wrapping three or four turns of paper around the bundle of wires
the cardboard ends are put on with the projections inside, so the
coils of wire will hold them in place. About 70 turns of No. 24
gauge double covered magnet wire is first placed on the core, for
the primary, and then 1,500 turns of No. 32 or 34 gauge
double-covered wire is wrapped on top of the primary, for the
secondary. Sufficient length of wire must be left outside at each
end of both windings to make connections. The vibrator B, Fig. 1,
and the support C are made from thin spring steel, about 1/8 in.
wide, bent as shown and securely fastened to the cardboard end of
the coil. The armature is made from a soft piece of iron, about
3/16 in. in diameter and 1/16 in. thick, which is soldered to the
end of the vibrator directly opposite the end of the core. A small
screw is fitted in the end of the support, C, for adjustment,
which should be tipped with platinum and also a small piece of
platinum placed where the screw will touch the vibrator, B.

One of the primary wires is connected to the screw support. The
vibrator, is connected to a flash lamp battery, D. The other
primary wire is connected to a switch, S, which in turn is
connected to the other terminal of the battery. The switch, S, may
be made from a 3/8-in. cork with the wires put through about 3/16
in. apart and allow them to project about 1/2 in. The plate E is
cut about 1/2 in. square from a piece of copper and is fastened to
the heel of one shoe and connected with a wire from the secondary
coil which must be concealed inside of the trouser leg. The other
secondary wire is connected through the coat sleeve to a finger
ring, F. The vibrator screw must be properly adjusted. When the
vibrator is not working the armature should be about 1/16 in. from
the core and directly opposite.

The coil when complete will be about 2-1/2 in. long and 1 in. in
diameter. The coil can be placed in an old box that has been used
for talcum powder or shaving stick. The space around the coil in
the box can be filled with paper to keep it tight.

The coil and battery are carried in the pockets and the cork
button put in the outside coat pocket, where it can be pressed
without attracting attention.



** Experiment with Heat [134]

[Illustration: Heat Experiment]

Place a small piece of paper, lighted, in an ordinary water glass.
While the paper is burning turn the glass over and set into a
saucer previously filled with water. The water will rapidly rise
in the glass, as shown in the sketch.



** How to Attach a Combination Trunk Lock [134]

[Illustration: Trunk Lock]

A small combination lock for chests can be purchased for a small
sum of money and attached to a trunk cover after first removing
the old lock as shown in Fig. 1. It is necessary to add 1/2-in. to
the thickness of the trunk lid or cover. This may be done by
placing a brass plate 1/8-in. thick on the outside and a board
3/8-in. thick on the inside. The lock, brass plate, board and
trunk cover are all securely riveted together. The support for the
dial is soldered to the brass plate.

The hasp, if that be the name for the double toothed arrangement
that catches into the lock, was to be secured by only three brass
screws, which seemed to be insufficient, says a correspondent of
the Metal Worker; therefore a piece of heavy tin was formed over
the front of the trunk, which is only 3/8-in. board, the hasp
tinned and soldered to the back of the now U-shaped tin, and the
tin placed over the board and all fastened in position. The tin is
4 in. wide, 16 in. long and when placed over the board, it laps
down about 8 in. between the boards, and the same distance inside
of the new board, as shown by the heavy line in the cross section,
Fig. 1. Wrought nails are used which pass twice through the tin
and both boards, and then well clinched. The three screws were
then put in the hasp.

The knob on the dial extends out too far, which may be filed off
and two holes substituted, as shown, with which to operate the
dial. An old key is filed down in the shape shown in Fig. 2 to fit
the two holes.

As the dial is convex it will need protection to prevent injury by
rough handling. A leather shield may be used for this purpose,
which is cut with two holes, one for the key and the other to
permit the operator to observe the numbers on the dial. The shield
answers a further purpose of preventing any bystander from noting
the numbers on the dial.



** AN ELECTRIC ILLUSION BOX [135]

The accompanying engravings show a most interesting form of
electrically operated illusion consisting of a box divided
diagonally and each division alternately lighted with an electric
lamp. By means of an automatic thermostat arranged in the lamp
circuit causing the lamps to light successively, an aquarium
apparently without fish one moment is in the next instant swarming
with live gold fish; an empty vase viewed through the opening in
the box suddenly is filled with flowers, or an empty cigar box is
seen and immediately is filled with cigars.

These electric magic boxes as shown are made of metal and oxidized
copper finished, but for ordinary use they can be made of wood in
the same shape and size. The upper magic boxes as are shown in the
engraving are about 12 in. square and 8-1/2 in. high for parlor
use and the lower boxes are 18 in. square and 10-1/2 in. high for
use in window displays. There is a partition arranged diagonally
in the box as shown in the plan view, which completely divides the
box into two parts. One-half the partition is fitted with a plain,
clear glass as shown. The partition and interior of the box are
rendered non-reflecting by painting with a dull, not shiny, black
color. When making of wood, a door must be provided on the side or
rear to make changes of exhibits. If the box is made large enough,
or in the larger size mentioned, openings may be made in the
bottom for this purpose, and also used in case of performing the
magic trick of allowing two persons to place their

[Illustration: Construction of Magic Boxes]

heads in the box and change from one to the other.

The electric globes are inserted as shown at LL through the top of
the box, one in each division. When the rear part is illuminated,
any article arranged within that part will be visible to the
spectator looking into the box through the front opening, but when
the front part is illuminated, and the back left dark, any article
placed therein will be reflected in. the glass, which takes the
same position to the observer as the one in the rear. Thus a plain
aquarium is set in the rear part and one with swimming fish placed
in

[Illustration: Four Electric Magic Boxes Complete for Use]

the front, and with the proper illumination one is changed, as it
appears, into the other. When using as a window display, place the
goods in one part and the price in the other. Many other changes
can be made at the will of the operator.

Electric lamps may be controlled by various means to produce
different effects. Lamps may be connected in parallel and each
turned on or off by means of a hand-operated switch or the button
on the lamp socket, or if desired a hand-operated adjustable
resistance may be included in the circuit of each lamp for
gradually causing the object to fade away or reappear slowly.

Instead of changing the current operated by hand, this may be done
automatically by connecting the lamps in parallel on the lighting
circuit and each connected in series with a thermostatic switch
plug provided with a heating coil which operates to automatically
open and close the circuit through the respective lamp.

When there is no electric current available, matches or candles
may be used and inserted through the holes H, as shown in the
sketch, alternately.



** Replace Dry Putty [136]

Painting over putty that has not become dry will cause scaling or
cracking around the edges of the putty.



** Photo Print Washing Tank [136]

The accompanying sketch shows a simple form of a print washing
tank that tips from side to side by the weight of the water. For
prints 4 by 5 and 5 by 7-in. a tank 2 ft. long and 1 ft. wide will
be about the right size. This tank is then divided with a
partition placed exactly in the center. This partition should
extend 3 or 4 in. above the top of the tank. The partition may
also extend below the tank about 1-1/2 in., or a piece of this
width put on the bottom, as shown at A in the sketch.

[Illustration: Keeps Prints Constantly Moving]

A row of holes about 1/2 in. in diameter is bored through each end
of the tank, as shown at B. These holes will allow the water to
spill out while the opposite side is filling. The tank may be made
from 1/2-in. material and when completed as shown, lined with oil
cloth to make it watertight. The tank is placed with the partition
directly under a water tap and the flow of water will cause it to
tip from time to time, keeping the prints constantly moving about
in the water.



** Home-Made Soldering Clamps [137]

Take a cotter pin and bend it over a small rod to bring the points
together, as shown in the sketch. This will make a spring clamp
that is opened to slip over the articles to be clamped together by
inserting a scratch awl or scriber between the legs at the bowed
portion. To make a more positive clamp before bending the legs to
a bow, slip a short coil of wire over the pin, passing it down to
the ring end. Wire 1/32 in. in diameter wound over a wire slightly
larger in diameter than that of the cotter will do. In soldering,
smoke the legs well to avoid solder adhering to them. The clamp is
tightened by pushing up the coil ring toward the bow of the legs
and then twisting it like a nut, the coil being wound
right-handed, so that it will have a screw effect.

[Illustration: Clamp]



** A Telephone Experiment [137]

If the small apparatus, as shown in the accompanying sketch, is
attached to the under side of an ordinary dining table, it will,
if connected to a telephone circuit, set the table in vibration,
so that any number of people who put their ears flat upon the
table will hear the voice of a person speaking from a distance,
apparently coming out of the table, says the Model Engineer. A
small piece of wood, A, Fig. 1, is cut about 5 in. square, to the
center of which is attached a small piece of soft iron wire, such
as used for cores

[Illustration: Mechanical Table Talk]

of induction coils, about 4 in. long and bent in the form of a
hook at the lower end, as shown at B. This wire is attached to the
block of wood, A, as shown in Fig. 2. The end of the wire is
soldered to a small brass plate which is set in the block so it
will be level or flush with the top of the block and then fastened
with two screws. The block A is fastened to the under side of the
table with two screws. A small coil, C, is made by winding No. 24
silk or cotton covered wire around a small tube, either a piece of
glass, a short straw or a quill. The coil is made tapering as
shown without using wood ends. This coil is slipped over the wire
B previous to soldering it to the small brass plate. The ends of
the coil are connected to two binding-posts which are fastened to
the block A. A small lead weight weighing 2 or 3 oz. is hung on
the hook made in the lower end of the wire B.

When all connections are made, as shown in Fig. 1, and the block
fastened to the under side of the table, the apparatus is ready
for use, and has only to be connected to an ordinary telephone
transmitter and batteries as shown. The apparatus will work to a
certain extent even if the weight is removed, though not so clear.



** Wax Wood Screws [137]

Some workmen use tallow on lag or wood screws. Try beeswax for
this purpose. It is much cleaner to use and is just as good if not
better.



** How to Make an Induction Coil [138]

A small shocking coil, suitable for medical purposes, may be
constructed of materials found in nearly every amateur mechanic's
collection of odds and ends. The core, A, Fig. 1, is a piece of
round soft iron rod about 1/4 in. in diameter and about 4 in.
long. A strip of stiff paper about 3/4 in. wide is covered with
glue and wrapped around one end of the core, as shown at B, until
the diameter is about 3/8 in. The portion of the core remaining
uncovered is then wrapped with a piece of paper about 4 in. wide.
No glue is used on this piece, as it is removed later to form the
space, C, after the paper shell, D, has been wound upon it. This
paper shell is made of stiff paper and glue the same as B and is
made about 3/64 in. thick. Two pieces of hardwood, EE, 1-3/4 in.
square and about 5/16 in. thick, are drilled in the center and
glued on the ends of the paper shell as shown.

The primary winding consists of 4 or 5 layers of No. 18 or 20
single cotton-covered magnet wire, the ends of which may be passed
through small holes in the wooden ends. If a drill small enough is
not available, the holes may be made with a hot knitting needle or
a piece of wire heated to redness. After the primary coil is wound
it should be thoroughly insulated before winding the secondary.
This may be done by wrapping with 4 or 5 thicknesses of paper.

The secondary coil should be wound with single covered wire,
preferably silk-covered, although cotton will do. The more turns
there are on the secondary the higher the voltage will be, so the
wire used must be fine. Number 32 to 36 will give good results,
the latter giving more voltage but less amperage. Each layer of
the secondary winding should be insulated from the others by a
piece of thin paraffined paper wrapped over each layer as it is
finished. It is well not to wind to the extreme ends of the paper
insulations, but to leave a space of about 1/8-in. at each end of
the winding to prevent the wires of one layer slipping over the
ends of the paraffin

[Illustration: Induction Coil]

paper and coming in contact with the layer beneath, thus causing a
short circuit. The secondary winding should have at least a dozen
layers and should be carefully wound to prevent short circuiting.

In order to reduce the strength of the current a piece of brass
tubing, F, is pushed into the space, C, surrounding the core, or
if no brass tubing of the required size is on hand, roll a paper
tube, cover with 4 or 5 thicknesses of tinfoil and then wrap with
more paper, using glue to hold the tinfoil in place and to keep
the tube from unwinding. When the tube is pushed all the way in,
the current produced

[Illustration: Induction Coil]

will be almost unnoticeable, but when it is withdrawn the current
will be so strong that a person cannot let go the handles until
the coil is shut off. After the secondary coil is wound it should
be covered with stiff paper, and the whole coil, including the
wood ends, should then be enameled black.

It is then ready to be mounted on a wooden base as shown in Fig.
2. The secondary terminals are connected to the binding-posts, AA,
which may be fastened on the base if desired. One wire from the
primary is connected with the binding-post, B, and the other is
connected with the armature, D, which may be taken from an old
electric bell. The contact screw, E, also from an electric bell,
is connected to the binding-post, C. The contact spring, F, should
be bent against and soldered to the armature in order to make the
vibrations more rapid.

If a false bottom is used on the base, all the wiring may be
concealed, which adds greatly to the appearance and if desired a
small switch may be added. The handles, which may be old bicycle
pumps or electric light carbons, are connected to the
binding-posts, AA, by means of wires about 3 or 4 ft. long. This
coil when operating with the tube pulled all the way out and
connected to a single dry cell will give a current stronger than
most persons can stand.



** Home-Made Toaster [139]

Each outside frame of the toaster is made from one piece of wire
30 in. long. These are bent in a perfect square making each side
7-in. long. This will allow 1 in. on each end for tying by
twisting the ends together. The first two wires inside and on each
side of each frame are 8 in. long. Eight wires will be required
for this purpose and as they are 8 in. long 1/2 in. is allowed on
each end for a bend around the outside frame, as shown in the
sketch. The two middle wires are extensions of the handles. Each
of these wires are made from a piece about 26 in. long and bent in
the shape of a U. The ends of the wire are bent around the frame
in the same manner

[Illustration: Toaster]

as the other wires. This will leave the handle laying across the
other side of the frame. The frame is fastened to the handle on
this side by giving the handle one turn around the frame. The
inside edges of the frame are now tied together with a small ring
of wire which is loose enough to allow each half to swing freely.
--C. D. M.



** Home-Made Shocking Machine [139]

An ordinary electric bell may be connected up in such a way as to
produce the same results as an expensive

[Illustration: Inexpensive and Effectual]

shocking machine. The connections are made from the batteries to
the bell in the usual manner. Two other wires are then connected,
one to the binding-post of the bell that is not insulated from the
frame and the other to the adjusting screw on the make and break
contact of the bell as shown in the sketch. The other ends of the
wires are connected each to a common table knife. This will give
quite a good shock and a much larger one can be had by placing one
knife in a basin of water and while holding the other knife in one
hand, dipping the fingers of the other hand in the water.
--Contributed by D. Foster Hall.



** Mahogany Wood Putty [139]

Mix venetian red with quite thick arabic muscilage, making it into
a putty, and press this well into the cracks of mahogany before
finishing. The putty should be colored to suit the finish of the
wood, says the Master Painter, by adding such dry color to the gum
as will give the best result.



** How to Make a Thermoelectric Battery [140]
By Arthur E. Joerin

A novel way of producing an electric current by means of hot and
cold water, heat from a match or alcohol

[Illustration: Details of Battery]

lamp, is obtained from a device constructed as shown in the
sketch. Take two hardwood boards, marble, or slate plates, about 8
or 10 in. long, place them together, as in Fig. 1, and mark and
drill about 500 holes. These two pieces should be separated about
8 in. and fastened with boards across the ends, as shown in Fig.
2.

Take soft copper wire, not smaller than No. 18 gauge, and cut in
lengths to pass through the holes in the two boards, leaving
sufficient end to make a tie. It will require about 70 ft. of wire
to fill one-half the number of holes. Also, cut the same number of
lengths from the same gauge galvanized-iron wire to fill the
remaining holes. The wires are put through the holes in the boards
alternately, that is: begin with copper, the next hole with iron,
the next copper, the next iron, and so on, twisting the ends
together as shown in Fig. 3. The connections, when complete,
should be copper for the first and iron for the last wire.

When the whole apparatus is thus strung, the connections, which
must be twisted, can be soldered. Connect one copper wire to the
bell and the other terminal, which must be an iron wire, to the
other post of the bell. The apparatus is then short-circuited, yet
there is no current in the instrument until a lighted match, or,
better still, the flame of an alcohol lamp is placed at one end
only.

Best results are obtained by putting ice or cold water on one side
and a flame on the other. The experimenter may also place the
whole apparatus under sink faucets with the hot water turned on at
one terminal and the cold water at the other. The greater the
difference of temperature in the two terminals, the more current
will be obtained.

Very interesting experiments may thus be performed, and these may
lead to the solving of the great thermoelectric problem.



** How to Make a Hygrometer [140]

Mount a wire on a board which is used for a base and should be 3/8
by 4 by 8 in., as shown in the sketch. A piece of catgut--a string
used on a violin will do--is suspended from the bent end of the
wire. A hand or pointer is cut from a piece of tin and secured to
the catgut string about 1/2 in. from the base. A small piece of
wood and some glue will fasten the pointer to the string. The
scale is

[Illustration: Simple Hygrometer]

marked on a piece of cardboard, which is fastened to the base and
protected with a piece of glass.
--Contributed by J. Thos. Rhamstine.



** Softening Leather in Gloves and Boots [140]

The leather in high-top boots and gauntlet gloves may be softened
and made waterproof by the use of plain mutton tallow. Apply hot
and rub in well with the fingers.



** How to Make a Mission Library Table [141]

The mission library table, the drawings for which are here given,
has been found well proportioned and of pleasing appearance. It
can be made of any of the several furniture woods in common use,
such as selected, quarter-sawed white oak which will be found
exceptionally pleasing in the effect produced.

If a planing mill is at hand the stock can be ordered in such a
way as to avoid the hard work of planing and sandpapering. Of
course if mill-planed stock cannot be had, the following
dimensions must be enlarged slightly to allow for "squaring up the
rough."

For the top, order 1 piece 1-1/8 in. thick, 34 in. wide and 46 in.
long. Have it S-4-S (surface on four sides) and "squared" to
length. Also, specify that it be sandpapered on the top surface,
the edges and ends.

For the shelf, order 1 piece 7/8 in. thick, 22 in. wide and 42 in.
long, with the four sides surfaced, squared and sandpapered the
same as for the top.

For the side rails, order 2 pieces 7/8 in. thick, 6 in. wide and
37 in. long, S-4-S and sanded on one side. For the end rails, 2
pieces 7/8 in. thick, 6 in. wide and 25 in. long. Other
specifications as for the side rails.

For the stretchers, into which the shelf tenons enter, 2 pieces
1-1/8 in. thick,

[Illustration: This Picture Is from a Photograph of the Mission
Table Described]

3-3/4 in. wide and 25 in. long, surfaced and sanded on four sides.
For the slats, 10 pieces 5/88 in. thick, 1-1/2 in. wide and 17 in.
long, surfaced and sanded on four sides. For the keys, 4 pieces
3/4 in. thick, 1-1/4 in. wide and 2-7/8 in. long, S-4-S. This
width is a little wide; it will allow the key to be shaped as
desired.

The drawings obviate any necessity for going into detail in the

[Illustration: Table Details]

description. Fig. 1 gives an assembly drawing showing the relation
of the parts. Fig. 2 gives the detail of an end. The tenons for
the side rails are laid off and the mortises placed in the post as
are those on the end. Care must, be taken, however, not to cut any
mortises on the post, below, as was done in cutting the stretcher
mortises on the ends of the table. A good plan is to set the posts
upright in the positions they are to occupy relative to one
another and mark with pencil the approximate positions of the
mortises. The legs can then be laid flat and the mortises
accurately marked out with a fair degree of assurance that they
will not be cut where they are not wanted and that the legs shall
"pair" properly when effort is made to assemble the parts of the
table.

The table ends should be glued up first and the glue allowed to
harden, after which the tenons of the shelf may be inserted and
the side rails placed.

There is a reason for the shape, size and location of each tenon
or mortise. For illustration, the shape of the tenon on the top
rails permits the surface of the rail to extend almost flush with
the surface of the post at the same time permitting the mortise in
the post to be kept away from that surface. Again, the shape of
the ends of the slats is such that, though they may vary slightly
in length, the fitting of the joints will not be affected. Care
must be taken in cutting the mortises to keep their sides clean
and sharp and to size.

In making the mortises for the keyed tenons, the length of mortise
must be slightly in excess of the width of the tenon--about
1/8-in. of play to each side of each tenon. With a shelf of the
width specified for this table, if such allowance is not made so
that the tenons may move sideways, the shrinkage would split the
shelf.

In cutting across the ends of the shelf, between the tenons, leave
a hole in the waste so that the turning saw or compass saw can be
inserted. Saw within one-sixteenth of the line, after which this
margin may be removed with chisel and mallet.

In Fig. 3 is shown two views of the keyed tenon and the key. The
mortise for the key is to be placed in the middle of the tenon. It
will be noted that this mortise is laid out 1-1/16 in. from the
shoulder of the tenon while the stretcher is 1-1/8 in. thick. This
is to insure the key's pulling the shelf tightly against the side
of the stretcher.

Keys may be made in a variety of shapes. The one shown is simple
and structurally good. Whatever shape is used, the important thing
to keep in mind is that the size of the key and the slant of its
forward surface where it passes through the tenon must be kept the
same as the mortise made for it in the tenon.

The top is to be fastened to the rails by means either of wooden
buttons, Fig. 4, or small angle irons.

There are a bewildering number of mission finishes upon the
market. A very satisfactory one is obtained by applying a coat of
brown Flemish water stain, diluted by the addition of water in the
proportion of 2 parts water to 1 part stain. When this has dried,
sand with number 00 paper, being careful not to "cut through."
Next, apply a coat of dark brown filler; the directions for doing
this will be found upon the can in which the filler is bought. One
coat usually suffices. However, if an especially smooth surface is
desired a second coat may be applied in a similar manner.

After the filler has hardened, a very thin coat of shellac is to
be put on. When this has dried, it should be sanded lightly and
then one or two coats of wax should be properly applied and
polished. Directions for waxing are upon the cans in which the wax
is bought. A beautiful dull gloss so much sought by finishers of
modern furniture will be the result of carefully following these
