"Two hundred dollars in one week!" he said to himself.  "What would
Oscar say to that?  It seems like a fairy tale."

Joe did not forget that he was five hundred dollars In debt.  He went
to George Morgan, who had bought out for himself a gentlemen's
furnishing store, and said:

"Mr. Morgan, I want to pay up a part of that debt."

"So soon, Joe?  How much do you want to pay?"

"A hundred and fifty dollars."

"You don't mean to say that you have cleared that amount?" said
Morgan, in amazement.

"Yes, sir, and fifty dollars more."

"Very well.  I will receive the money.  You do well to wipe out your
debts as soon as possible."

Joe paid over the money with no little satisfaction.

Without going too much into detail, it may be stated that at the end
of a month Joe was out of debt and had three hundred dollars over.
He called on the owner of the land to pay the monthly ground-rent.

"Why don't you buy the land, and get rid of the rent?" asked the
owner.

"Do you want to sell?" asked Joe.

"Yes; I am about to return to the East."

"What do you ask?"

"I own two adjoining lots.  You may have them all for a thousand
dollars."

"Will you give me time?"

"I can't.  I want to return at once, and I must have the cash."

A thought struck Joe.

"I will take three hours to consider," said Joe.

He went to George Morgan and broached his business.

"Mr. Morgan," he said, "will you lend me seven hundred dollars?"

"Are you getting into pecuniary difficulties, Joe?" asked Morgan,
concerned.

"No, sir; but I want to buy some real estate."

"Explain yourself."

Joe did so.

"It is the best thing you can do," said Morgan, "I will lend you the
money."

"I hope to repay it inside of two months," said Joe.

"I think you will, judging from what you have done already."

In two hours Joe had paid over the entire amount, for it will be
remembered that he had three hundred dollars of his own, and was
owner of three city lots.

"Now," thought he, "I must attend to business, and clear off the debt
I have incurred.  I shan't feel as if the land is mine till I have
paid for it wholly."

Joe found it a great advantage that he obtained his own board and
lodging free.  Though wages were high, the necessary expenses of
living were so large that a man earning five dollars a day was worse
off oftentimes than one who was earning two dollars at the East.

"How shall I make my restaurant more attractive?" thought Joe.

He decided first that he would buy good articles and insist upon as
much neatness as possible about the tables.  At many of the
restaurants very little attention was paid to this, and visitors who
had been accustomed to neatness at home were repelled.

Soon Joe's dining-room acquired a reputation, and the patronage
increased.  At the end of the third month he had not only paid up the
original loan of seven hundred dollars, but was the owner of the
three lots, and had four hundred dollars over.  He began to feel that
his prosperity was founded on a solid basis.

One day about this time, as he was at the desk where he received
money from his patrons as they went out, his attention was drawn to a
rough fellow, having the appearance of a tramp, entering at the door.
The man's face seemed familiar to him, and it flashed upon him that
it was Henry Hogan, who had defrauded him in New York.

The recognition was mutual.

"You here?" he exclaimed, in surprise.

"So it seems," said Joe.

"Is it a good place?"

"I like it."

"Who's your boss?"

"Myself."

"You don't mean to say this is your own place?"

"Yes, I do."

"Well, I'll be blowed!" ejaculated Hogan, staring stupidly at Joe.




CHAPTER XVIII

MR. HOGAN'S PROPOSAL

Joe enjoyed Hogan's amazement.  He felt rather proud of his rapid
progress.  It was not four months since, a poor, country boy, he had
come up to New York, and fallen a prey to a designing sharper.  Now,
on the other side of the continent, he was master of a business and
owner of real estate.

The day has passed for such rapid progress.  California is no longer
a new country, and the conditions of living closely approximate those
in the East.  I am careful to say this because I don't wish to
mislead my young readers.  Success is always attainable by pluck and
persistency, but the degree is dependent on circumstances.

"How have you made out?" asked Joe of his visitor.

"I've had hard luck," grumbled Hogan, "I went to the mines, but I
wasn't lucky."

"Was that the case with other miners?" asked Joe, who had a shrewd
suspicion that Hogan's ill luck was largely the result of his
laziness and want of application.

"No," said Hogan.  "Other men around me were lucky, but I wasn't."

"Perhaps your claim was a poor one."

"It was, as long as I had anything to do with it," said Hogan.  "I
sold it out for a trifle and the next day the other man found a
nugget.  Wasn't that cursed hard?" he grumbled.

"You ought to have kept on.  Then you would have found the nugget."

"No, I shouldn't.  I am too unlucky.  If I had held on, it wouldn't
have been there.  You've got on well.  You're lucky."

"Yes; I have no reason to complain.  But I wasn't lucky all the time.
I was robbed of every cent of money, when I met a good friend, who
bought this business for me."

"Does it pay?" asked the other eagerly.

"Yes, it pays," said Joe cautiously.

"How much do you make, say, in a week?" asked Hogan, leaning his
elbows on the counter and looking up in Joe's face.

"Really, Mr. Hogan," said Joe, "I don't feel called upon to tell my
business to others."

"I thought maybe you'd tell an old friend," said Hogan.

Joe could not help laughing at the man's matchless impudence.

"I don't think you have treated me exactly like a friend, Mr. Hogan,"
he said.  "You certainly did all you could to prevent my coming to
California."

"There's some mistake about that," said Hogan.

"You're under a misapprehension; but I won't go into that matter now.
Will you trust me for my supper?"

"Yes," said Joe promptly.  "Sit down at that table."

The man had treated him badly, but things had turned out favorably
for Joe, and he would not let Hogan suffer from hunger, if he could
relieve him.

Hogan needed no second invitation.  He took a seat at a table
near-by, and ate enough for two men, but Joe could not repeat the
invitation he had given.  He felt that he could not afford it.

It was rather late when Hogan sat down.  When he finished, he was the
only one left in the restaurant, except Joe.  He sauntered up to the
desk.

"You've got a good cook," said Hogan, picking his teeth with a knife.

"Yes," answered Joe.  "I think so."

"You say the business pays well?"

"Yes; it satisfies me."

"Are you alone? Have you no partner?"

"You could do better with one.  Suppose you take me into business
with you?"

Joe was considerably surprised at this proposition from a man who had
swindled him.

"How much capital can you furnish?" he asked.

"I haven't got any money.  I'm dead broke," said Hogan, "but I can
give my services.  I can wait on the table.  I'll do that, and you
can give me my board and one-third of the profits.  Come, now, that's
a good offer.  What do you say?"

Joe thought it best to be candid.

"I don't want any partner, Mr. Hogan," he said; "and I may as well
tell you, I don't think I should care to be associated with you if I
did."

"Do you mean to insult me?" asked Hogan, scowling.

"No; but I may as well be candid."

"What's the matter with me?" asked Hogan roughly.

"I don't like the way you do business," said Joe.

"Look here, young one, you put on too many airs just because you're
keepin' a one-horse restaurant," said Hogan angrily.

"If it's a one-horse restaurant, why do you want to become my
partner?" retorted Joe coolly.

"Because I'm hard up--I haven't got a cent."

"I'm sorry for you; but a man needn't be in that condition long here."

"Where do you sleep?" asked Hogan suddenly.

"Here.  I put a bed on the floor in one corner, and so am on hand in
the morning."

"I say," Hogan continued insinuatingly, "won't you let me stay here
to-night?"

"Sleep here?"

"Yes."

"I'd rather not, Mr. Hogan."

"I haven't a cent to pay for a lodging.   If you don't take me in, I
shall have to stay in the street all night."

"You've slept out at the mines, haven't you?"

"Yes."

"Then you can do it here."

"You're hard on a poor man," whined Hogan.  "It wouldn't cost you
anything to let me sleep here."

"No, it wouldn't," said Joe; "but I prefer to choose my own company
at night."

"I may catch my death of cold," said Hogan.

"I hope not; but I don't keep lodgings," said Joe firmly.

"You haven't any feeling for an unlucky man."

"I have given you your supper, and not stinted you in any way.  What
you ate would cost two dollars at my regular prices.  I wasn't called
to do it, for you never did me any service, and you are owing me
to-day fifty dollars, which you cheated me out of when I was a poor
boy.  I won't let you lodge here, but I will give you a breakfast in
the morning, if you choose to come round.  Then you will be
strengthened for a day's work, and can see what you can find to do."

Hogan saw that Joe was in earnest and walked out of the restaurant,
without a word.

When Joe was about to close his doors for the night his attention was
drawn to a man who was sitting down on the ground, a few feet
distant, with his head buried between his two hands, in an attitude
expressive of despondency.

Joe was warm-hearted and sympathetic, and, after a moment's
hesitation, addressed the stranger.

"Is anything the matter with you, sir?" he asked.  "Don't you feel
well?"

The man addressed raised his head.  He was a stout, strongly built
man, roughly dressed, but had a look which inspired confidence.

"I may as well tell you, boy," he answered, "though you can't help
me.  I've been a cursed fool, that's what's the matter."

"If you don't mind telling me," said Joe gently, "perhaps I can be of
service to you."

The man shook his head.

"I don't think you can," he said, "but I'll tell you, for all that.
Yesterday I came up from the mines with two thousand dollars.  I was
about a year getting it together, and to me it was a fortune.  I'm a
shoemaker by occupation, and lived in a town in Massachusetts, where
I have a wife and two young children.  I left them a year ago to go
to the mines.  I did well, and the money I told you about would have
made us all comfortable, if I could only have got it home."

"Were you robbed of it?" asked Joe, remembering his own experience.

"Yes; I was robbed of it, but not in the way you are thinking of.  A
wily scoundrel induced me to enter a gambling-den, the Bella Union,
they call it.  I wouldn't play at first, but soon the fascination
seized me.  I saw a man win a hundred dollars, and I thought I could
do the same, so I began, and won a little.  Then I lost, and played
on to get my money back.  In just an hour I was cleaned out of all I
had.  Now I am penniless, and my poor family will suffer for my
folly."

He buried his face in his hands once more and, strong man as he was,
he wept aloud.

"Have you had any supper, sir?" said Joe compassionately.

"No; but I have no appetite."

"Have you any place to sleep?"

"No."

"Then I can offer you a supper and a night's lodging.  Don't be
discouraged.  In the morning we can talk the matter over, and see
what can be done."

The stranger rose and laid his hand on Joe's arm.

"I don't know how it is," he said, "but your words give me courage.
I believe you have saved my life.  I have a revolver left and I had a
mind to blow my brains out."

"Would that have helped you or your family?"

"No, boy.  I was a fool to think of it.  I'll accept your offer, and
to-morrow I'll see what I can do.  You're the best friend I've met
since I left home."




CHAPTER XIX

THE UNLUCKY MINER

Joe brought out some cold meat and bread and butter, and set it
before his guest.

"The fire's gone out," he said, "or I would give you some tea.  Here
is a glass of milk, if you like it."

"Thank you, boy," said his visitor.  "Milk is good enough for
anybody.  One thing I can say, I've steered clear of liquor.  A
brother of mine was intemperate and that was a warning to me.  I took
credit to myself for being a steady-going man, compared with many of
my acquaintances out at the mines.  But it don't do to boast.  I've
done worse, perhaps.  I've gambled away the provision I had made for
my poor family."

"Don't take it too hard," said Joe, in a tone of sympathy.  "You know
how it is out here.  Down to-day and up to-morrow."

"It'll take me a long time to get up to where I was," said the other;
"but it's my fault, and I must make the best of it."

Joe observed, with satisfaction, that his visitor was doing ample
justice to the supper spread before him.  With a full stomach, he
would be likely to take more cheerful views of life and the future.
In this thought Joe proved to be correct.

"I didn't think I could eat anything," said the miner, laying down
his knife and fork, twenty minutes later, "but I have made a hearty
supper, thanks to your kindness.  Things look a little brighter to me
now.  I've had a hard pullback, but all is not lost.  I've got to
stay here a year or two longer, instead of going back by the next
steamer; but I must make up my mind to that.  What is your name, boy?"

"Joe Mason."

"You've been kind to me, and I won't forget it.  It doesn't seem
