

It is a fact, one of the biggest facts in all the world, that tongues
make the greatest part of all the trouble that brings uncomfortable
feelings, and bitterness and sadness and suffering and sorrow. If it
wasn't for unruly, careless, mean tongues, the Great World would be a
million times better to live in, a million times happier. It is because
of his unruly tongue that Sammy Jay is forever getting into trouble. It
is the same way with Chatterer the Red Squirrel. And it is just the same
way with a great many little boys and girls, and with grown-ups as well.

When the little people of the Green Forest and Green Meadows who fear
Shadow the Weasel found that he was a prisoner, many of them took
particular pains to visit him when the way was clear, just to make fun
of him and tease him and tell him that they were not afraid of him and
that they were glad that he was a prisoner, and that they were sure
something dreadful would happen to him and they hoped it would. Shadow
said never a word in reply. He was too wise to do that. He just turned
his back on them. But all the time he was storing up in his mind all
these hateful things, and he meant, if ever he got free again, to make
life very uncomfortable for those whose foolish tongues were trying to
make him more miserable than he already felt.

But these little people with the foolish tongues didn't stop to think of
what might happen. They just took it for granted that Shadow never again
would run wild and free in the Green Forest, and so they just let their
tongues run and enjoyed doing it. Perhaps they wouldn't have, if they
could have known just what was going on in the mind of Farmer Brown's
boy. Ever since he had found Shadow in the trap which he had set for him
in the henhouse, Farmer Brown's boy had been puzzling over what he
should do with his prisoner. At first he had thought he would keep him
in a cage the rest of his life. But somehow, whenever he looked into
Shadow's fierce little eyes and saw how unafraid they looked, he got to
thinking of how terrible it must be to be shut up in a little narrow
cage when one has had all the Green Forest in which to go and come. Then
he thought that he would kill Shadow and put him out of his misery at
once.

"He killed my pullets, and he is always hunting the harmless little
people of the Green Forest and the Green Meadows, so he deserves to be
killed," thought Farmer Brown's boy. "He's a pest."

Then he remembered that after all Shadow was one of Old Mother Nature's
little people, and that he must serve some purpose in Mother Nature's
great plan. Bad as he seemed, she must have some use for him. Perhaps it
was to teach others through fear of him how to be smarter and take
better care of themselves and so be better fitted to do their parts. The
more he thought of this, the harder it was for Farmer Brown's boy to
make up his mind to kill him. But if he couldn't keep him a prisoner
and he couldn't kill him, what could he do?

He was scowling down at Shadow one morning and puzzling over this when a
happy idea came to him. "I know what I'll do!" he exclaimed. Without
another word he picked up the cage with Shadow in it and started off
across the Green Meadows, which now, you know, were not green at all but
covered with snow. Happy Jack watched him out of sight. He had gone in
the direction of the Old Pasture. He was gone a long time, and when he
did return, the cage was empty.

Happy Jack blinked at the empty cage. Then he began to ask in a
scolding tone, "What did you do with him? What did you do with him?"

Farmer Brown's boy just smiled and tossed a nut to Happy Jack. And far
up in the Old Pasture, Shadow the Weasel was once more free. It was well
for Happy Jack's peace of mind that he didn't know that.




CHAPTER XXXII

HAPPY JACK IS PERFECTLY HAPPY

    Never say a thing is so
    Unless you absolutely know.
    Just remember every day
    To be quite sure of what you say.

    _Happy Jack._


Taking things for granted doesn't do at all in this world. To take a
thing for granted is to think that it is so without taking the trouble
to find out whether it is or not. It is apt not only to get you yourself
into trouble, but to make trouble for other people as well. Happy Jack
saw Farmer Brown's boy carry Shadow the Weasel away in a cage, and he
saw him bring back the cage empty. What could he have done with Shadow?
For a while he teased Farmer Brown's boy to tell him, but of course
Farmer Brown's boy didn't understand Happy Jack's language.

Now Happy Jack knew just what he would like to believe. He would like to
believe that Farmer Brown's boy had taken Shadow away and made an end of
him. And because he wanted to believe that, it wasn't very hard to
believe it. There was the empty cage. Of course Farmer Brown's boy
wouldn't have gone to the trouble of trapping Shadow unless he intended
to get rid of him for good.

"He's made an end of him, that's what he's done!" said Happy Jack to
himself, because that is what he would have done if he had been in
Farmer Brown's boy's place. So having made up his mind that this is what
had been done with Shadow, he at once told all his friends that it was
so, and was himself supremely happy. You see, he felt that he no longer
had anything to worry about. Yes, Sir, Happy Jack was happy. He liked
the house Farmer Brown's boy had made for him in the big maple tree
close by his own house. He was sure of plenty to eat, because Farmer
Brown's boy always looked out for that, and as a result Happy Jack was
growing fat. None of his enemies of the Green Forest dared come so near
to Farmer Brown's house, and the only one he had to watch out for at
all was Black Pussy. By this time he wasn't afraid of her; not a bit. In
fact, he rather enjoyed teasing her and getting her to chase him. When
she was dozing on the doorstep he liked to steal very close, wake her
with a sharp bark, and then race for the nearest tree, and there scold
her to his heart's content. He had made friends with Mrs. Brown and with
Farmer Brown, and he even felt almost friends with Bowser the Hound.
Sometimes he would climb up on the roof of Bowser's little house and
drop nutshells on Bowser's head when he was asleep. The funny thing was
Bowser never seemed to mind. He would lazily open his eyes and wink one
of them at Happy Jack and thump with his tail. He seemed to feel that
now Happy Jack was one of the family, just as he was.

So Happy Jack was just as happy as a fat Gray Squirrel with nothing to
worry him could be. He was so happy that Sammy Jay actually became
jealous. You know Sammy is a born trouble maker. He visited Happy Jack
every morning, and while he helped himself to the good things that he
always found spread for him, for Farmer Brown's boy always had something
for the little feathered folk to eat, he would hint darkly that such
goodness and kindness was not to be trusted, and that something was sure
to happen. That is just the way with some folks; they always are
suspicious.

But nothing that Sammy Jay could say troubled Happy Jack; and Sammy
would fly away quite put out because he couldn't spoil Happy Jack's
happiness the least little bit.




CHAPTER XXXIII

SAMMY JAY UPSETS HAPPY JACK

A good deed well done often is overlooked,
but you never are allowed to forget a mistake.

_Happy Jack._


Sammy Jay chuckled as he flew across the snow-covered Green Meadows on
his way to his home in the Green Forest. He chuckled and he chuckled. To
have heard him you would have thought that either he had thought of
something very pleasant, or something very pleasant had happened to him.
Once he turned in the direction of Farmer Brown's house, but changed his
mind as he saw the Black Shadows creeping out from the Purple Hills,
and once more headed for the Green Forest.

"Too late to-day. Time I was home now. It'll keep until to-morrow," he
muttered. Then he chuckled, and he was still chuckling when he reached
the big hemlock tree, among the thick branches of which he spent each
night.

"Don't know what started me off to the Old Pasture this afternoon, but
I'm glad I went. My, my, my, but I'm glad I went," said he, as he
fluffed out his feathers and prepared to tuck his head under his wing.
"It pays to snoop around in this world and see what is going on. I
learned a long time ago not to believe everything I hear, and that the
surest way to make sure of things is to find out for myself. Nothing
like using my own eyes and my own ears. Well, I must get to sleep." He
began to chuckle again, and he was still chuckling as he fell asleep.

The next morning Sammy Jay was astir at the very first sign of light. He
waited just long enough to see that every feather was in place, for
Sammy is a bit vain, and very particular about his dress. Then he headed
straight for Farmer Brown's house. Just as he expected he found Happy
Jack Squirrel was awake, for Happy Jack is an early riser.

"Good morning," said Sammy Jay, and tried very hard to make his voice
sound smooth and pleasant, a very hard thing for Sammy to do, for his
voice, you know, is naturally harsh and unpleasant. "You seem to be
looking as happy as ever."

"Of course I am," replied Happy Jack. "Why shouldn't I be? I haven't a
thing to worry about. Of course I'm happy, and I hope you're just as
happy as I am. I'm going to get my breakfast now, and then I'll be
happier still."

"That's so. There's nothing like a good breakfast to make one happy,"
said Sammy Jay, helping himself to some suet tied to a branch of the
maple tree. "By the way, I saw an old friend of yours yesterday. He
inquired after you particularly. He didn't exactly send his love, but he
said that he hoped you are as well and fat as ever, and that he will see
you again some time. He said that he didn't know of any one he likes to
look at better than you."

Happy Jack looked flattered. "That was very nice of him," said he. "Who
was it?"

"Guess," replied Sammy.

Happy Jack scratched his head thoughtfully. There were not many friends
in winter. Most of them were asleep or had gone to the far away
southland.

"Peter Rabbit," he ventured.

Sammy shook his head.

"Jimmy Skunk!"

Again Sammy shook his head.

"Jumper the Hare!"

"Guess again," said Sammy, chuckling.

"Little Joe Otter!"

"Wrong," replied Sammy.

"I give up. Who was it? Do tell me," begged Happy Jack.

"It was Shadow the Weasel!" cried Sammy, triumphantly.

Happy Jack dropped the nut he was just going to eat, and in place of
happiness something very like fear grew and grew in his eyes. "I--I
don't believe you," he stammered. "Farmer Brown's boy took him away and
put an end to him. I saw him take him."

"But you didn't see him put an end to Shadow," declared Sammy, "because
he didn't. He took him 'way up in the Old Pasture and let him go, and I
saw him up there yesterday. That's what comes of guessing at things.
Shadow is no more dead than you are. Well, I must be going along. I hope
you'll enjoy your breakfast."

With this, off flew Sammy Jay, chuckling as if he thought he had done a
very smart thing in upsetting Happy Jack, which goes to show what queer
ideas some people have.

As for Happy Jack, he worried for a while, but as Shadow didn't come,
and there was nothing else to worry about, little by little Happy Jack's
high spirits returned, until he was as happy as ever. And now, though
he has had many adventures since then, I must leave him, for there is no
more room in this book. Perhaps if you ask him, he will tell you of
these other adventures himself. Meanwhile, bashful little Mrs. Peter
Rabbit is anxious that you should know something about her. So I have
promised to call the next book, "Mrs. Peter Rabbit."











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Happy Jack, by Thornton Burgess

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAPPY JACK ***

***** This file should be named 13355.txt or 13355.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/5/13355/

Produced by Stephen Schulze and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
