
"Did you do the job?"

"Did I? Well, I reckon. That boat ain't no good any more."

"Do you think any one saw you do it?"

"No; it was pretty dark, and there wasn't no one round. It may have been
found out by now. Give me the two dollars and I'll be off."

"You are sure you did the job? You are not deceiving me?"

"No, I'm not. You can go and see for yourself."

This, however, did not seem prudent. Conrad wished some one else to
discover the ruined boat.

After all, there was no reason to doubt the tramp's word. His avowed
hostility to Andy made it quite certain that he had done his work.

"Here's the money," he said.

"And here's the hatchet."

"I wish it was back in the toolhouse where it belongs," thought Conrad.
"However, I'll manage to get it back without any one seeing me."

He decided to return to the barn at once, carrying the hatchet with him.
He was not to do it without observation. Just before he reached the barn
he met John Larkin.

"What are you doing with the hatchet, Conrad?"

"Oh, I have been using it in the pasture."

"I didn't know but you were going to imitate George Washington and cut
down a cherry tree."

"Perhaps I have," said Conrad, with a smile.

He felt in good humor, for his plan had been carried out. He was aching
to see just how badly Andy's boat was injured, and as there was no
school, it being Saturday, he proposed to John Larkin to go down to the
pond.

"Suppose we have a row, John," he said. "We'll take a trip across the
pond."

"All right."

They were perhaps thirty rods from the pond when they met Jimmy Morris,
coming from it. He seemed excited. He had been running and was
breathless.

"What's the matter, Jimmy?" asked John Larkin.

Jimmy looked toward Conrad, who naturally guessed the cause of his
excitement.

"Oh, Conrad," he said. "It is such a pity! I am so sorry for you!"

"Why are you sorry for me?" demanded Conrad, sharply.

"Because your boat is ruined. It is all hacked up, and has been set on
fire."

"My boat! You mean Andy Grant's?"

"No, I don't. Come and see for yourself."




CHAPTER XI.

CONRAD'S DISAPPOINTMENT.


With his mind in a whirl, and still believing that it was Andy's boat
which had been injured instead of his own, Conrad pushed on rapidly
toward the pond. Yet he had an instinctive fear that his informant might
be correct.

When he reached the point where his boat had been moored, he used his
eyes eagerly.

It was all true! His boat--his beautiful boat--with which he had been
perfectly satisfied till Andy received a better, was scorched and hacked
up till it was clear he could never use it again, and Andy's boat was
not visible anywhere. Tears of rage filled Conrad's eyes.

"It is a terrible mistake!" he ejaculated.

"Mistake! What do you mean?" asked John Larkin.

Conrad reflected that his words were betraying him.

"I don't know what I am saying," he replied, vaguely. "Yes, I do. I
believe Andy Grant did this."

"Andy Grant!" repeated Jimmy Morris. "Why should he injure your boat?"

"Because he hates me."

"Andy isn't that kind of a boy. Besides, he has a newer and much
handsomer boat himself."

There it was! That was what stung Conrad. His boat was second to Andy's.

As the three boys stood on the bank, a small boy, named Peter Hill, came
up. He lived in the house nearest the boats.

"Did you see any one near the boat, Peter?" asked John Larkin.

"Yes, I seed a big tramp in de boat. He set it on fire."

"That explains it, Conrad!" exclaimed Jimmy Morris. "I saw the tramp
myself in the village."

"Pooh!" said Conrad. "I don't believe it."

"But I seed him burnin' de boat!" persisted little Peter.

"Then why didn't you tell somebody?"

"All de folks was away and I didn't dare to go near it. He had a
hatchet, too."

"I say, Conrad, let us hunt for the tramp, and, if we find him, have him
arrested."

For obvious reasons this proposal of John Larkin did not meet Conrad's
approval. He was afraid of what the tramp would tell.

"I'll ask my father what to do," he replied, evasively. "The mischief is
done and there is no help for it."

Conrad was already looking more cheerful. An idea had come to him.

Now that the boat was destroyed, his father might be willing to buy him
another, and, if so, he might be persuaded to buy one as good as Andy's,
perhaps better. He turned to go home, and let the boys know that he did
not care for company.

On the way, not far from his own house, he encountered the tramp. At the
sight of this man, whose stupid blunder had cost him his boat, his eyes
blazed with anger.

But this the tramp did not see. He slouched up to his young employer,
saying, with a cunning grin:

"Well, did you see it?"

"Did I see it?" repeated Conrad, boiling over with fury. "Yes, I did."

"I did it pretty well, didn't I? I guess the boat isn't good for much
now."

"You stupid fool!" blazed out Conrad. "It is my boat that you ruined. I
have a great mind to have you arrested!"

"Your boat? It was the boat you pointed out to me."

"No, it wasn't. It was my own boat."

"Then where was the other boat? I didn't see but one."

"I don't know, but you might have had sense enough to know that you'd
got the wrong boat."

The tramp's hopes fell. He had intended to ask for another dollar from
Conrad, but he saw now that there was no chance whatever of his
obtaining it.

"You'd better get out of town as soon as you can," said Conrad, roughly.

"Why should I?" demanded the tramp, sullenly.

"Because you were seen destroying the boat."

"Who saw me?"

"A small boy who lives at the next house. You might be arrested."

"If I am, I'll tell the truth. I'll tell who put me up to it."

"And I'll deny it. Do you think any one would believe your word against
mine, especially as it was my boat that was ruined?"

The tramp saw the logic of this remark and walked away. He was seen no
more in the village.

"Now I'll tackle father," thought Conrad.

He directed his steps homeward and informed the squire of what had
happened.

His father frowned and looked displeased.

"If you are not smart enough to take care of your boat," he said,
coldly, "you will have to suffer the consequences."

"But I don't see how I am to blame?"

"Have you any idea who did the mischief?"

"Perhaps Andy Grant did--he doesn't like me."

"I don't think that very probable. You can charge him with it if you
think best. But I thought you told me he had a new boat of his own?"

"So he has--a perfect beauty! It is ever so much better than mine. I
wish--"

"Well, what do you wish?"

"That you would buy me one like his."

"Well, I like that. After losing your boat through your own
carelessness, you want me to invest a large sum in another."

"Must I go without one, then?" asked Conrad, in dismay.

"It looks that way."

Conrad resorted to earnest entreaties. He was willing, now, to accept
any sort of boat, for he was fond of rowing; but Squire Carter had just
heard unfavorable reports from his broker about a speculation he had
entered into, and he was inflexible.

"What a fool I was!" reflected Conrad, bitterly. "My boat was a good
one, even if it wasn't as fine as Andy's, and now I have none. I shall
have to borrow his or Valentine's when I want to go out rowing."

Later in the day he met Andy.

Andy had heard of Conrad's loss and was full of sympathy.

"Conrad," he said, "it's a shame about your boat being destroyed."

"Yes, it is pretty hard."

"The boys say a tramp did the mischief."

"I think it very likely. There was a tramp about town yesterday. I saw
him myself."

"What could have been his object? Ruining the boat would not benefit
him."

"It might have been out of revenge. He asked me for a quarter and I
wouldn't give it to him."

This explanation occurred to Conrad on the spur of the moment.

"Can't you have him arrested?"

"He is probably out of town by this time."

"I suppose you will have a new boat?"

"Yes, after a while."

"I will lend you mine any time you wish."

"Thank you," said Conrad, but he spoke coldly and ungraciously.

It seemed to him humiliating to receive any favors from a poor boy like
Andy Grant.

Two weeks later, when Andy went over to the hotel, as usual, to meet his
employer and pupil, Mr. Gale said:

"I have some news for you."

"I hope it is good news."

"I don't know that you will consider it so. I shall have to leave you
for a time."

Andy's face fell. This certainly was bad news.

"I have received a letter this morning," continued Walter Gale, "from
an uncle living in the interior of Pennsylvania. He is not an old man--I
don't think he is much over fifty--but he writes me that he is near his
end. The doctor says he may live three months, certainly not over six.
He has always been a bachelor, and I believe owns coal mines of
considerable value. I was always a favorite of his, and now that he is
so sick he wants me to go out and be with him in the closing weeks of
his life."

"I suppose you will go?" said Andy, and he looked very sober.

"I think it is my duty--don't you?"

"Yes, I suppose it is your duty."

Andy began to think what he should do. He had had an easy and profitable
engagement with Mr. Gale, but this would now be over, and he would have
to go back to farm work, or try to get a place in the village store.

The latter would yield him only two dollars and a half a week, which
seemed to him very small compared with what he now received.

"I shall miss you very much, Mr. Gale," he said.

"I hope you will. I shall certainly miss you."

