
1. Susie Smith came home from school one day, and had no sooner entered
the sitting room than she burst into tears. "What is the matter, my dear
child?" said her mother, drawing her daughter to her side and smiling.

2. "O mother, matter enough," sobbed Susie. "All our class must bring in
compositions to-morrow morning, and I never, never can write one. We must
write twelve lines at least, and I have written only a few words after
trying nearly all the afternoon. See what work I have made of it!"

3. Mrs. Smith took the rumpled, tear-stained paper which Susie held in her
hand, and glanced at what she had written. In a careful hand she had tried
to write upon three themes: "Time," "Temperance," and "Industry."

4. "Time is short. We should all improve our time." "Temperance is a very
useful thing." "We should all be industrious if we wish to do anything in
the world." These sentences were all she had written.

5. "Now," said Susie, "I can't think of another word to say upon any of
these subjects, and I know I shall have to go to school without a
composition, for I won't be so mean as to copy one from a book, or to ask
you or papa to write one for me."

6. "That is right, my dear," said her mother. "You will be far happier
with a poor composition, if it is all your own, than with a fine one
written by somebody else. But cheer up. You have not begun right--you have
been trying to write upon subjects that you know nothing about. Run into
the garden and play. I will call you in half an hour."

7. "But my composition," began Susie. "Don't think about your composition
while you are gone," said Mrs. Smith, "but have as pleasant a time as you
can."

8. It seemed but a few minutes to Susie before she heard her mother's
voice calling her. She went into the house at once--her hands full of
sweet flowers, and her cheeks rosy with exercise.

9. "Now, Susie," said her mother, "I want you to sit by the window with
this nice sheet of paper and a pencil, and write something about what you
can see." "But my composition, mother," said Susie; "when shall I begin
that?" "Never mind your composition, my dear; do this to please me, and we
will talk about that by and by."

10. Susie thought her mother's request was a strange one; but she knew
that she always had a good reason for everything she did: so she took the
paper and pencil, and sat by the window.

11. "Do not talk to me at all," said her mother. "Look out of the window,
and then write down your thoughts about everything you see."

12. Susie could not help laughing, it seemed such a funny thing to be
doing. As she looked out, she first saw the western sky and some bright,
sunset clouds. "O mother!" she exclaimed, "what a splendid sunset!" "Don't
talk," said her mother, "but write."

13. "I'll write about the sunset, then," said she, and the pencil began to
move rapidly across the paper. In a few moments she said, "Mother, shall I
read you what I have written?" "No, not now," answered her mother; "I am
going into the dining room. You may sit and write until I return."

14. As Susie went on writing, she became very much interested in her
occupation, and for a time forgot all about the dreaded composition. She
wrote about the sunset clouds, the appearance of the distant hills, the
trees, the river, the garden with its gay flowers, and the birds flying
past the window.

15. Just as she had reached the bottom of the page, her mother came in.
"Well, Susie," said she, with a smile, "how does that composition come
on?" "Composition!" exclaimed Susie; "you told me not to think about my
composition, and I have not thought of it once; I have had such a nice
time writing about what I could see from the window."

16. Mrs. Smith took the paper and read aloud what Susie had written: "I am
sitting on a low seat at the bay window, one half of which is open, so
that I can smell the sweet flowers in the garden. The sky is all bright
with sunset; I can see purple, and pink, and golden. I do not believe that
anyone on earth has a paint box with such lovely colors in it."

17. "I can see one cloud, far above the rest, that looks like a ship
sailing in the blue sea. I should like to sail on a cloud, if it would not
make me dizzy. Now, while I have been writing, the clouds have changed in
color and form, but they are just as beautiful as they were before."

18. "The green hills are tipped with light, and look as if they were
wearing golden crowns. I can see a river a great way off, and it looks
quite still, although I know it is running as fast as it can to get to the
ocean."

19. "The birds are flying past the window to go home and take care of
their little ones. I am glad the birds are not afraid to live in our
garden, and to build nests in our trees."

20. "Our garden is full of flowers--pinks, lilies, and roses. Mother calls
this the month of roses. My birthday will come in a week, and we can have
all the flowers we wish for wreaths and bouquets."

21. "There, Susie," said Mrs. Smith, "that is a very nice composition,
indeed." "A composition!" exclaimed Susie, "is that a composition?" "Yes,
my dear, and a very good one, too," replied her mother. "When it hasn't
even a subject?"

22. "We can find one for it, and I do not doubt it will please your
teacher, as it does me. You see, my dear," continued her mother, "that it
is easy enough to write if you have anything interesting to write about."

23. The next morning Susie copied her composition very neatly, and started
to school with a happy heart, saying, as she gave her mother a kiss, "Just
think how funny it is, dear mother, that I should have written so long a
composition without knowing it."


DEFINITIONS.--Com-po-si'tion, that which is thought out and arranged, a
written or literary work. 3. Rum'pled, wrinkled, creased. Themes, subjects
or topics on which a person writes. 10. Re-quest', that which is asked.
14. Oc-cu-pa'tion, that which employs the time. 20. Bou-quets' (pro.
boo-kas'), bunches of flowers.


EXERCISES.--What is a composition? Why was Susie so troubled? Why could
she not write about "Time," "Temperance," or "Industry"? What did her
mother have her do? What did Susie write? Was it a composition? Did she
know, at the time, that it was? What fault did she find with it? Can you
give her composition a proper subject?



XXXVIII. THE SUMMER SHOWER. (109)

The author, Thomas Buchanan Read, was born in Chester Co., Pa., March 12,
1822. His life was devoted to the fine arts, and he attained a high
reputation both as artist and poet. He died in New York, May 11, 1872.

1. Before the stout harvesters falleth the grain,
   As when the strong stormwind is reaping the plain,
   And loiters the boy in the briery lane;
   But yonder aslant comes the silvery rain,
Like a long line of spears brightly burnished and tall.

2. Adown the white highway like cavalry fleet,
   It dashes the dust with its numberless feet.
   Like a murmurless school, in their leafy retreat,
   The wild birds sit listening the drops round them beat;
And the boy crouches close to the blackberry wall.

3. The swallows alone take the storm on the wing,
   And, taunting the tree-sheltered laborers, sing.
   Like pebbles the rain breaks the face of the spring,
   While a bubble darts up from each widening ring;
And the boy in dismay hears the loud shower fall.

4. But soon are the harvesters tossing their sheaves;
   The robin darts out from his bower of leaves;
   The wren peereth forth from the moss-covered eaves;
   And the rain-spattered urchin now gladly perceives
That the beautiful bow bendeth over them all.


DEFINITIONS.--l. A-slant', toward one side. 2. High'way, a public road.
Re-treat', a place of refuge or safety, Crouch'es, stoops low. 3.
Taunt'ing, deriding, mocking. 4. Ur'chin, a child.



XXXIX. CONSEQUENCES OF IDLENESS. (110)

1. Many young persons seem to think it of not much consequence if they do
not improve their time well in youth, vainly expecting that they can make
it up by diligence when they are older. They also think it is disgraceful
for men and women to be idle, but that there can be no harm for persons
who are young to spend their time in any manner they please.

2. George Jones thought so. When he was twelve years old, he went to an
academy to prepare to enter college. His father was at great expense in
obtaining books for him, clothing him, and paying his tuition. But George
was idle. The preceptor of the academy would often tell him that if he did
not study diligently when young he would never succeed well.

3. But George thought of nothing but present pleasure. He would often go
to school without having made any preparation for his morning lesson; and,
when called to recite with his class, he would stammer and make such
blunders that the rest of the class could not help laughing at him. He was
one of the poorest scholars in the school, because he was one of the most
idle.

4. When recess came, and all the boys ran out of the academy upon the
playground, idle George would come moping along. Instead of studying
diligently while in school, he was indolent and half asleep. When the
proper time for play came, he had no relish for it. I recollect very well,
that, when "tossing up" for a game of ball, we used to choose everybody on
the playground before we chose George; and if there were enough without
him we used to leave him out. Thus he was unhappy in school and out of
school.

5. There is nothing which makes a person enjoy play so well as to study
hard. When recess was over, and the rest of the boys returned, fresh and
vigorous, to their studies, George might be seen lagging and moping along
to his seat. Sometimes he would be asleep in school; sometimes he would
pass his time in catching flies, and penning them up in little holes,
which he cut in his seat; and sometimes, when the preceptor's back was
turned, he would throw a paper ball across the room.

6. When the class was called up to recite, George would come drowsily
along, looking as mean and ashamed as though he were going to be whipped.
The rest of the class stepped up to the recitation with alacrity, and
appeared happy and contented. When it came George's turn to recite, he
would be so long in doing it, and make such blunders, that all most
heartily wished him out of the class.

7. At last, George went with his class to enter college. Though he passed
a very poor examination, he was admitted with the rest; for those who
examined him thought it was possible that the reason why he did not answer
questions better was because he was frightened. Now came hard times for
poor George. In college there is not much mercy shown to bad scholars; and
George had neglected his studies so long that he could not now keep up
with his class, let him try ever so hard.

8. He could, without much difficulty, get along in the academy, where
there were only two or three boys of his own class to laugh at him. But
now he had to go into a large recitation room, filled with students from
all parts of the country. In the presence of all these, he must rise and
recite to a professor. Poor fellow! He paid dearly for his idleness.

9. You would have pitied him if you could have seen him trembling in his
scat, every moment expecting to be called upon to recite. And when he was
called upon, he would stand up and take what the class called a "dead
set;" that is, he could not recite at all. Sometimes he would make such
ludicrous blunders that the whole class would burst into a laugh. Such are
the applauses an idler gets. He was wretched, of course. He had been idle
so long that he hardly knew how to apply his mind to study. All the good
scholars avoided him; they were ashamed to be seen in his company. He
became discouraged, and gradually grew dissipated.

10. The officers of the college were soon compelled to suspend him. He
returned in a few months, but did no better; and his father was then
advised to take him from college. He left college, despised by everyone. A
few months ago, I met him, a poor wanderer, without money and without
friends. Such are the wages of idleness. I hope every reader will, from
this history, take warning, and "stamp improvement on the wings of time."


DEFINITIONS.--1. Con'se-quence, importance, influence. 2. A-cad'e-my, a
school of high order. Col'lege, a seminary of learning of the highest
order. Pre-cep'tor, a teacher. 3. Prep-a-ra'-tion, a making ready. 5.
Vig'or-ous, full of activity and strength. 6. A-lac'ri-ty, cheerfulness,
sprightliness. 8. Pro-fess'or, a teacher in a college. 9. Lu'di-crous,
adapted to raise laughter. Ap--plaus'es, praises. Dis'-si-pa-ted, given up
to bad habits. 10. Im-prove'ment, increase of knowledge.



XL. ADVANTAGES OF INDUSTRY. (113)

1. I gave you, in the last lesson, the history of George Jones, an idle
boy, and showed you the consequences of his idleness. I shall now give you
the history of Charles Bullard, a classmate of George. Charles was about
the same age as George, and did not possess superior talents. Indeed, I
doubt whether he was equal to him in natural powers of mind.

2. But Charles was a hard student. When quite young, he was always careful
and diligent in school. Sometimes, when there was a very hard lesson,
instead of going out to play during recess, he would stay in to study. He
had resolved that his first object should be to get his lessons well, and
then he could play with a good conscience. He loved play as well as
anybody, and was one of the best players on the ground. I hardly ever saw
any boy catch a ball better than he could. When playing any game, everyone
was glad to get Charles on his side.

3. I have said that Charles would sometimes stay in at recess. This,
however, was very seldom; it was only when the lessons were very hard
indeed. Generally, he was among the first on the playground, and he was
also among the first to go into school when called. Hard study gave him a
relish for play, and play again gave him a relish for hard study; so he
was happy both in school and out. The preceptor could not help liking him,
for he always had his lessons well committed, and never gave him any
trouble.

4. When he went to enter college, the preceptor gave him a good
recommendation. He was able to answer all the questions which were put to
him when he was examined. He had studied so well when he was in the
academy, and was so thoroughly prepared for college, that he found it very
easy to keep up with his class, and had much time for reading interesting
books.

5. But he would always get his lesson well before he did anything else,
and would review it just before recitation. When called upon to recite, he
rose tranquil and happy, and very seldom made mistakes. The officers of
the college had a high opinion of him, and he was respected by all the
students.

6. There was, in the college, a society made up of all the best scholars.
Charles was chosen a member of that society. It was the custom to choose
some one of the society to deliver a public address every year. This honor
was conferred on Charles; and he had studied so diligently, and read so
much, that he delivered an address which was very interesting to all who
heard it.

7. At last he graduated, as it is called; that is, he finished his
collegiate course, and received his degree. It was known by all that he
was a good scholar, and by all that he was respected. His father and
mother, brothers and sisters, came on the commencement day to hear him
speak.

8. They all felt gratified, and loved Charles more than ever. Many
situations of usefulness and profit were opened to him; for Charles was
now an intelligent man, and universally respected. He is still a useful
and a happy man. He has a cheerful home, and is esteemed by all who know
him.

9. Such are the rewards of industry. How strange it is that any person
should be willing to live in idleness when it will certainly make him
unhappy! The idle boy is almost invariably poor and miserable; the
industrious boy is happy and prosperous.

10. But perhaps some child who reads this, asks, "Does God notice little
children in school?" He certainly does. And if you are not diligent in the
improvement of your time, it is one of the surest evidences that your
heart is not right with God. You are placed in this world to improve your
time. In youth you must be preparing for future usefulness. And if you do
not improve the advantages you enjoy, you sin against your Maker.

  With books, or work, or healthful play,
  Let your first years be passed;
  That you may give, for every day,
  Some good account, at last.


DEFINITIONS.--l. His'to-ry, a description or a narration of events. 2.
Con'science, our own knowledge of right and wrong. Game, play, sport. 3.
Com-mit'ted, fixed in mind. 4. Rec-om-men-da'tion, what is said in praise
of anyone. 5. Re view', to examine again. Tran'quil, quiet, calm. 6.
Con-ferred', given to or bestowed upon anyone. 7. Grad'u-a-ted, received a
degree from a college. Com-mence'ment, the day when students receive their
degree. 8. U-ni-ver'sal-ly, by all, without exception. 9. In-va'ri-a-bly,
always, uniformly. 10. Ev'i-den-ces, proofs. Ad-van'ta-ges, opportunities
for improvement.


EXERCISES.--What was the character of George Jones? Of Charles Bullard?
How did George appear in the class at school? How did he behave at recess?
How did Charles differ from him in these respects? Relate what happened
when George went to college. What became of him? Did Charles succeed at
college? Which of them do you think more worthy of imitation? What is said
of the idle? What is said of the industrious? Who watches all our actions
wherever we may be? For what are we placed in this world? Should you not
then be diligent in your studies?



XLI. THE FOUNTAIN. (116)

By James Russell Lowell, one of the most noted of American poets; also
well known as an essayist and lecturer. He was born at Cambridge, Mass.,
in 1819, and died there in 1891.

      1.
Into the sunshine,
Full of the light,
Leaping and flashing,
From morn till night!

      2.
Into the moonlight,
Whiter than snow,
Waving so flower-like
When the winds blow!

      3.
Into the starlight,
Rushing in spray,
Happy at midnight,
Happy by day!

      4.
Ever in motion,
Blithesome and cheery,
Still climbing heavenward,
Never aweary;

      5.
Glad of all weathers,
Still seeming best,
Upward or downward,
Motion, thy rest;

      6.
Full of a nature
Nothing can tame,
Changed every moment,
Ever the same;

      7.
Ceaseless aspiring,
Ceaseless content,
Darkness or sunshine
Thy element;

      8.
Glorious fountain!
Let my heart be
Fresh, changeful, constant,
Upward like thee!


DEFINITIONS.--4. Blithe'some, gay. Cheer'y, in good spirits. A-wea'ry,
weary, tired. 7. As-pir'ing, ambitious. El'e-ment, the proper habitation
or sphere of anything, suitable state. 8. Con'-stant, fixed, not to be
changed.



XLII. COFFEE. (117)

1. The coffee tree is a native of eastern Africa, but it was in Arabia
that it first became known to the people of Europe, and until about the
year 1700 A. D. that country afforded the entire supply.

2. Then the coffee seeds found their way to Java, by means of some
traders, and one of the first plants grown on that island was sent as a
present to the governor of the Dutch East India Company, who lived in
Holland.

3. It was planted in the Botanical Gardens at Amsterdam, and in a few
years seeds taken from it were sent to South America, where the
cultivation of coffee has steadily increased, extending to the West
Indies, until now the offspring of this one plant produce more coffee than
is obtained from all the other plants in the world.

4. The plant is an evergreen, and is from six to twelve feet high, the
stem being from ten to fifteen inches in diameter. The lower branches bend
down when the tree begins to grow old, and extend themselves into a round
