several miles up the road to the next station to call for the
snow-plough, and the rest of us settled down to spend the night.
Certainly we could not hope to be extricated before the next evening,
especially as the storm then gave no signs of abating. We all went up to
the front of the car and sat around the stove in which we kept up a
bright fire,--fortunately we had plenty of fuel--and in such
circumstances we speedily got acquainted with each other. One of the men
was a "drummer," a travelling man for a notion house; another was a
cow-boy; the third was a big cattle-man; and I was the last. We soon
found that the woman was a widow who had maintained herself and the
children precariously since the death of her husband by sewing and other
feminine odd jobs but had at last given up the unequal struggle and was
going back to live with her mother, also a widow who had some little
property.

The poor little threadbare children had cherished anticipations of a
joyous Christmas with their grandmother. From their talk we could hear
that a Christmas tree had been promised them and all sorts of things.
They were intensely disappointed at the blockade. They cried and sobbed
and would not be comforted. Fortunately the woman had a great basket
filled with substantial provisions which, by the way, she generously
shared with the rest of us, so we were none of us hungry. As the night
fell, we tipped up two of the seats, placed the bottoms sideways, and
with our overcoats made two good beds for the little folks. Just before
they went to sleep the drummer said to me:

"Say, parson, we've got to give those children some Christmas."

"That's what," said the cow-boy.

"I'm agreed," added the cattle-man.

"Madam," said the drummer, addressing the woman with the easy assurance
of his class, after a brief consultation between us, "we are going to
give your kids some Christmas."

The woman beamed at him gratefully.

"Yes, children," said the now enthused drummer, as he turned to the
open-mouthed children, "Santa Claus is coming round to-night sure. We
want you to hang up your stockings."

"We ain't got none," quivered the little girl, "'ceptin' those we've got
on and ma says it's too cold to take 'em off."

"I've got two new pair of woollen socks," said the cattle-man eagerly,
"which I ain't never wore, and you are welcome to 'em."

There was a clapping of little hands in childish glee, and then the two
faces fell as the elder remarked.

"But Santa Claus will know they are not our stockings and he will fill
them with things for you instead."

"Lord love you," said the burly cattle-man, roaring with infectious
laughter, "he wont bring me nothin'. One of us will sit up anyway and
tell him it's for you. You've got to hustle to bed right away because he
may be here any time now."

Then came one of those spectacles which we sometimes meet once or twice
in a lifetime. The children knelt down on the rough floor of the car
beside their improvised beds. Instinctively the hands of the men went to
their heads and at the first words of "Now I lay me down to sleep," four
hats came off. The cow-boy stood twirling his hat and looking at the
little kneeling figures; the cattle-man's vision seemed dimmed; while in
the eyes of the travelling man there shone a distant look--a look across
snow-filled prairies to a warmly lighted home.

The children were soon asleep. Then the rest of us engaged in earnest
conversation. What should we give them? was the question.

"It don't seem to me that I've got anything to give 'em," said the
cow-boy mournfully, "unless the little kid might like my spurs, an' I
would give my gun to the little girl, though on general principles I
don't like to give up a gun. You never know when you're goin' to need
it, 'specially with strangers," he added with a rather suspicious glance
at me. I would not have harmed him for the world.

"I'm in much the same fix," said the cattle-man. "I've got a flask of
prime old whiskey here, but it don't seem like it's very appropriate for
the occasion, though it's at the service of any of you gents."

"Never seen no occasion in which whiskey wasn't appropriate," said the
cow-boy, mellowing at the sight of the flask.

"I mean 'taint fit for kids," explained the cattle-man handing it over.

"I begun on't rather early," remarked the puncher, taking a long drink,
"an' I always use it when my feelin's is onsettled, like now." He handed
it back with a sigh.

"Never mind, boys," said the drummer. "You all come along with me to the
baggage car."

So off we trooped. He opened his trunks, and spread before us such a
glittering array of trash and trinkets as almost took away our breath.

"There," he said, "look at that. We'll just pick out the best things
from the lot, and I'll donate them all."

"No, you don't," said the cow-boy. "My ante's in on this game, an' I'm
goin' to buy what chips I want, an' pay fer 'em too, else there ain't
going to be no Christmas around here."

"That's my judgment, too," said the cattle-man.

"I think that will be fair," said I. "The travelling man can donate what
he pleases, and we can each of us buy what we please, as well."

I think we spent hours looking over the stock which the obliging man
spread out all over the car for us. He was going home, he said, and
everything was at our service. The trainmen caught the infection, too,
and all hands finally went back to the coach with such a load of stuff
as you never saw before. We filled the socks and two seats besides with
it. The grateful mother was simply dazed.

As we all stood about, gleefully surveying our handiwork including the
bulging socks, the engineer remarked:

"We've got to get some kind of a Christmas tree."

So two of us ploughed off on the prairie--it had stopped snowing and
was bright moon-light--and wandered around until we found a good-sized
piece of sage-brush, which we brought back and solemnly installed and
the woman decorated it with bunches of tissue paper from the notion
stock and clean waste from the engine. We hung the train lanterns around
it.

We were so excited that we actually could not sleep. The contagion of
the season was strong upon us, and I know not which were the more
delighted the next morning, the children or the amateur Santa Clauses,
when they saw what the cow-boy called the "layout."

Great goodness! Those children never did have, and probably never will
have, such a Christmas again. And to see the thin face of that mother
flush with unusual colour when we handed her one of those monstrous red
plush albums which we had purchased jointly and in which we had all
written our names in lieu of our photographs, and between the leaves of
which the cattle-man had generously slipped a hundred dollar bill, was
worth being blockaded for a dozen Christmases. Her eyes filled with
tears and she fairly sobbed before us.

During the morning we had a little service in the car, in accordance
with the custom of the Church, and I am sure no more heartfelt body of
worshippers ever poured forth their thanks for the Incarnation than
those men, that woman, and the little children. The woman sang "Jesus
Lover of my Soul" from memory in her poor little voice and that small
but reverent congregation--cow-boy, drummer, cattle-man, trainmen, and
parson--solemnly joined in.

"It feels just like church," said the cow-boy gravely to the cattle-man.
"Say I'm all broke up; let's go in the other car and try your flask
ag'in." It was his unfailing resource for "onsettled feelin's."

The train-hand who had gone on to division headquarters returned with
the snow-plough early in the afternoon, but what was more to the purpose
he brought a whole cooked turkey with him, so the children had turkey, a
Christmas tree, and Santa Claus to their heart's content! I did not get
home until the day after Christmas.

But, after all, what a Christmas I had enjoyed!

During a season of great privation we were much assisted by barrels of
clothing which were sent to us from the East. One day just before
Christmas, I was distributing the contents of several barrels of wearing
apparel and other necessities to the women and children at a little
mission. The delight of the women, as the good warm articles of clothing
for themselves and their children which they so sadly needed were
handed out to them was touching; but the children themselves did not
enter into the joy of the occasion with the same spontaneity. Finally
just as I got to the bottom of one box and before I had opened the other
one, a little boy sniffling to himself in the corner remarked, _sotto
voce_:

"Ain't there no real Chris'mus gif's in there for us little fellers,
too?"

I could quite enter into his feelings, for I could remember in my
youthful days when careful relatives had provided me with a "cardigan"
jacket, three handkerchiefs, and a half-dozen pairs of socks for
Christmas, that the season seemed to me like a hollow mockery and the
attempt to palm off necessities as Christmas gifts filled my childish
heart with disapproval. I am older now and can face a Christmas
remembrance of a cookbook, a silver cake-basket, or an ice-cream freezer
(some of which I have actually received) with philosophical equanimity,
if not gratitude.

I opened the second box, therefore, with a great longing, though but
little hope. Heaven bless the woman who had packed that box, for, in
addition to the usual necessary articles, there were dolls, knives,
books, games galore, so the small fry had some "real Chris'mus gif's" as
well as the others.

After one of the blizzards a young ranchman who had gone into the
nearest town some twenty miles away to get some Christmas things for his
wife and little ones, was found frozen to death on Christmas morning,
his poor little packages of petty Christmas gifts tightly clasped in his
cold hands lying by his side. His horse was frozen too and when they
found it, hanging to the horn of the saddle was a little piece of an
evergreen tree--you would throw it away in contempt in the East, it was
so puny. There it meant something. The love of Christmas? It was there
in his dead hands. The spirit of Christmas? It showed itself in that bit
of verdant pine over the lariat at the saddle-bow of the poor bronco.

Do they have Christmas out West? Well, they have it in their hearts if
no place else, and, after all, that is the place above all others where
it should be.




A CHRISTMAS WISH

_For Everybody, Everywhere_


MAY peace and goodwill, prosperity and plenty, joy and satisfaction
abound in your homes and in your hearts this day and all days. May
opportunities for good work be many, and may you avail yourselves of
them all. May your sorrows be lightened, may your griefs be assuaged.
May your souls be fitted for what they must endure; may your backs be
strengthened for your burdens; may your responsibilities be met; may
your obligations be discharged; may your duties be performed. May love
abound more and more until the perfect day breaks in your lives. In
short, every wish that would be helpful, uplifting, and comforting, I
wish you at this hour and in all hours.

In the words of Tiny Tim.

"_God Bless us every one!_"

CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY.



FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: These loving and appealing verses were written by Harriet
F. Blodgett, of whom unfortunately I know absolutely nothing but her
name. I am sure, however, that if they had been written today another
verse, even more touching than those I have quoted, would have been
inspired by present conditions. And we should have seen "The Little
Christ" coming down between the lines in Flanders, on the Balkan
Frontier, amid the snows of Russia and the deserts of Mesopotamia, and
perhaps, as of old, even walking on the waters in the midst of the sea.]

[Footnote 2: This bit of personal history is reprinted from my book
_Recollections of a Missionary in the Great West_ by the courtesy of
Messrs. Charles Scribner's Sons, the publishers thereof. Incidentally
the reader will find much interesting matter in the way of reminiscence
and anecdote in that little volume, should he chance upon it.

There are some amusing things connected with the publication in serial
form of these episodes. The great magazine in which it appeared has very
strong views on certain subjects. Following out a policy which has
deservedly won them perhaps the largest circulation of any magazine in
the world it seemed to the editors necessary and desirable to make some
changes in the story as originally written and as it appears hereafter.

For instance the revised serial version made the cowboy lift the flask
of whiskey to his lips and then it declared that after a long look at
the sleeping children he put it down! I was quite agreeable to the
change. I remember remarking that the cowboy certainly did "put it
down." It was a way cowboys had in those bygone days; so the editor and
the author were both satisfied.

Another amusing thing I recall in connection with the serial publication
was this: The art editor of the magazine wrote to the officials of the
railroad, the name of which I gave in the first version but which I now
withhold, saying that the magazine had a story of a snow-bound train on
the railroad in question and asking for pictures of snow-bound trains to
help the artist illustrate it. By return mail came an indignant
remonstrance almost threatening a lawsuit because the railroad in
question, one of the southerly transcontinental roads, made a point in
its appeal to travellers that its trains were never snow-bound! The art
editor who was not without a vein of humour wrote back and asked if they
could furnish him with pictures of snow-bound trains on competing roads
and they sent him a box full! C.T.B.]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Book for Christmas
by Cyrus Townsend Brady

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK FOR CHRISTMAS ***

***** This file should be named 15343.txt or 15343.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/3/4/15343/

Produced by Gene Smethers and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK
