"There's water laid on," she said; "you don't have to pump any. Here's
the washtubs in the shed. That's a real nice tin boiler for the
clothes,--I never see a nicer. Mis Starkey had that heater in the
dining-room set the very week before she went away. 'Winter's coming on,'
she says, 'and I must see about keeping my husband warm;' never thinking,
poor thing, how 't was to be."

"Does this chimney draw?" asked the practical Clover; "and does the
kitchen stove bake well?"

"First-rate. I've seen Mis Starkey take her biscuits out many a time,--as
nice a brown as ever you'd want; and the chimney don't smoke a mite. They
kep' a wood fire here in May most all the time, so I know."

Clover thought the matter over for a day or two, consulted with Dr. Hope,
and finally decided to try the experiment. No. 13 was taken, and Mrs.
Kenny engaged for two days' work each week, with such other occasional
assistance as Clover might require. She was a widow, it seemed, with one
son, who, being employed on the railroad, only came home for the nights.
She was glad of a regular engagement, and proved an excellent stand-by and
a great help to Clover, to whom she had taken a fancy from the start; and
many were the good turns which she did for love rather than hire for "my
little Miss," as she called her.

To Phil the plan seemed altogether delightful. This was natural, as all
the fun fell to his share and none of the trouble; a fact of which Mrs.
Hope occasionally reminded him. Clover persisted, however, that it was all
fair, and that she got lots of fun out of it too, and didn't mind the
trouble. The house was so absurdly small that it seemed to strike every
one as a good joke; and Clover's friends set themselves to help in the
preparations, as if the establishment in Piute Street were a kind of
baby-house about which they could amuse themselves at will.

It is a temptation always to make a house pretty, but Clover felt herself
on honor to spend no more than was necessary. Papa had trusted her, and
she was resolved to justify his trust. So she bravely withstood her
desire for several things which would have been great improvements so far
as looks went, and confined her purchases to articles of clear
necessity,--extra blankets, a bedside carpet for Phil's room, and a
chafing-dish over which she could prepare little impromptu dishes, and so
save fuel and fatigue. She allowed herself some cheap Madras curtains for
the parlor, and a few yards of deep-red flannel to cover sundry shelves
and corner brackets which Geoffrey Templestowe, who had a turn for
carpentry, put up for her. Various loans and gifts, too, appeared from
friendly attics and store-rooms to help out. Mrs. Hope hunted up some old
iron firedogs and a pair of bellows, Poppy contributed a pair of
brass-knobbed tongs, and Mrs. Marsh lent her a lamp. No. 13 began to look
attractive.

They were nearly ready, but not yet moved in, when one day as Clover stood
in the queer little parlor, contemplating the effect of Geoff's last
effort,--an extra pine shelf above the narrow mantel-shelf,--a pair of
arms stole round her waist, and a cheek which had a sweet familiarity
about it was pressed against hers. She turned, and gave a great shriek of
amazement and joy, for it was her sister Katy's arms that held her.
Beyond, in the doorway, were Mrs. Ashe and Amy, with Phil between them.

"Is it you; is it really you?" cried Clover, laughing and sobbing all at
once in her happy excitement. "How did it happen? I never knew that you
were coming."

"Neither did we; it all happened suddenly," explained Katy. "The ship was
ordered to New York on three days' notice, and as soon as Ned sailed,
Polly and I made haste to follow. There would have been just time to get a
letter here if we had written at once, but I had the fancy to give you a
surprise."

"Oh, it is _such_ a nice surprise! But when did you come, and where are
you?"

"At the Shoshone House,--at least our bags are there; but we only stayed a
minute, we were in such a hurry to get to you. We went to Mrs. Marsh's
and found Phil, who brought us here. Have you really taken this funny
little house, as Phil tells us?"

"We really have. Oh, what a comfort it will be to tell you all about it,
and have you say if I have done right! Dear, dear Katy, I feel as if home
had just arrived by train. And Polly, too! You all look so well, and as if
California had agreed with you. Amy has grown so that I should scarcely
have known her."

Four delightful days followed. Katy flung herself into all Clover's plans
with the full warmth of sisterly interest; and though the Hopes and other
kind friends made many hospitable overtures, and would gladly have turned
her short visit into a continuous _fete_, she persisted in keeping the
main part of her time free. She must see a little of St. Helen's, she
declared, so as to be able to tell her father about it, and she must help
Clover to get to housekeeping,--these were the important things, and
nothing else must interfere with them.

Most effectual assistance did she render in the way of unpacking and
arranging. More than that, one day, when Clover, rather to her own
disgust, had been made to go with Polly and Amy to Denver while Katy
stayed behind, lo! on her return, a transformation had taken place, and
the ugly paper in the parlor of No. 13 was found replaced with one of
warm, sunny gold-brown.

"Oh, why did you?" cried Clover. "It's only for a few months, and the
other would have answered perfectly well. Why did you, Katy?"

"I suppose it _was_ foolish," Katy admitted; "but somehow I couldn't bear
to have you sitting opposite that deplorable mustard-colored thing all
winter long. And really and truly it hardly cost anything. It was a
remnant reduced to ten cents a roll,--the whole thing was less than four
dollars. You can call it your Christmas present from me, if you like, and
I shall 'play' besides that the other paper had arsenic in it; I'm sure it
looked as if it had, and corrosive sublimate, too."

Clover laughed outright. It was so funny to hear Katy's fertility of
excuse.

"You dear, ridiculous darling!" she said, giving her sister a good hug;
"it was just like you, and though I scold I am perfectly delighted. I did
hate that paper with all my heart, and this is lovely. It makes the room
look like a different thing."

Other benefactions followed. Polly, it appeared, had bought more Indian
curiosities in Denver than she knew what to do with, and begged permission
to leave a big bear-skin and two wolf-skins with Clover for the winter,
and a splendid striped Navajo blanket as a portiere to keep off draughts
from the entry. Katy had set herself up in California blankets while they
were in San Francisco, and she now insisted on leaving a pair behind, and
loaning Clover besides one of two beautiful Japanese silk pictures which
Ned had given her, and which made a fine spot of color on the pretty new
wall. There were presents in her trunks for all at home, and Ned had sent
Clover a beautiful lacquered box.

Somehow Clover seemed like a new and doubly-interesting Clover to Katy.
She was struck by the self-reliance which had grown upon her, by her
bright ways and the capacity and judgment which all her arrangements
exhibited; and she listened with delight to Mrs. Hope's praises of her
sister.

"She really is a wonderful little creature; so wise and judgmatical, and
yet so pretty and full of fun. People are quite cracked about her out
here. I don't think you'll ever get her back at the East again, Mrs.
Worthington. There seems a strong determination on the part of several
persons to keep her here."

"What do you mean?"

But Mrs. Hope, who believed in the old proverb about not addling eggs by
meddling with them prematurely, refused to say another word. Clover, when
questioned, "could not imagine what Mrs. Hope meant;" and Katy had to go
away with her curiosity unsatisfied. Clarence came in once while she was
there, but she did not see Mr. Templestowe.

Katy's last gift to Clover was a pretty tea-pot of Japanese ware. "I meant
it for Cecy," she explained. "But as you have none I'll give it to you
instead, and take her the fan I meant for you. It seems more appropriate."

Phil and Clover moved into No. 13 the day before the Eastern party left,
so as to be able to celebrate the occasion by having them all to an
impromptu house-warming. There was not much to eat, and things were still
a little unsettled; but Clover scrambled some eggs on her little blazer
for them, the newly-lit fire burned cheerfully, and a good deal of quiet
fun went on about it. Amy was so charmed with the minute establishment
that she declared she meant to have one exactly like it for Mabel whenever
she got married.

"And a spirit-lamp, too, just like Clover's, and a cunning, teeny-weeny
kitchen and a stove to boil things on. Mamma, when shall I be old enough
to have a house all of my own?"

"Not till you are tired of playing with dolls, I am afraid."

"Well, that will be never. If I thought I ever could be tired of Mabel, I
should be so ashamed of myself that I should not know what to do. You
oughtn't to say such things, Mamma; she might hear you, too, and have her
feelings hurt. And please don't call her _that_," said Amy, who had as
strong an objection to the word "doll" as mice are said to have to the
word "cat."

Next morning the dear home people proceeded on their way, and Clover fell
to work resolutely on her housekeeping, glad to keep busy, for she had a
little fear of being homesick for Katy. Every small odd and end that she
had brought with her from Burnet came into play now. The photographs were
pinned on the wall, the few books and ornaments took their places on the
extemporized shelves and on the table, which, thanks to Mrs. Hope, was no
longer bare, but hidden by a big square of red canton flannel. There was
almost always a little bunch of flowers from the Wade greenhouses, which
were supposed to come from Mrs. Wade; and altogether the effect was cosey,
and the little interior looked absolutely pretty, though the result was
attained by such very simple means.

Phil thought it heavenly to be by themselves and out of the reach of
strangers. Everything tasted delicious; all the arrangements pleased him;
never was boy so easily suited as he for those first few weeks at No. 13.

"You're awfully good to me, Clover," he said one night rather suddenly,
from the depths of his rocking-chair.

The remark was so little in Phil's line that it quite made her jump.

"Why, Phil, what made you say that?" she asked.

"Oh, I don't know. I was thinking about it. We used to call Katy the
nicest, but you're just as good as she is. [This Clover justly considered
a tremendous compliment.] You always make a fellow feel like home, as
Geoff Templestowe says."

"Did Geoff say that?" with a warm sense of gladness at her heart. "How
nice of him! What made him say it?"

"Oh, I don't know; it was up in the canyon one day when we got to
talking," replied Phil. "There are no flies on you, he considers. I asked
him once if he didn't think Miss Chase pretty, and he said not half so
pretty as you were."

"Really! You seem to have been very confidential. And what is that about
flies? Phil, Phil, you really mustn't use such slang."

"I suppose it is slang; but it's an awfully nice expression anyway."

"But what _does_ it mean?"

"Oh, you must see just by the sound of it what it means,--that there's no
nonsense sticking out all over you like some of the girls. It's a great
compliment!"

"Is it? Well, I'm glad to know. But Mr. Templestowe never used such a
phrase, I'm sure."

"No, he didn't," admitted Phil; "but that's what he meant."

So the winter drew on,--the strange, beautiful Colorado winter,--with
weeks of golden sunshine broken by occasional storms of wind and sand, or
by skurries of snow which made the plains white for a few hours and then
vanished, leaving them dry and firm as before. The nights were often
cold,--so cold that comfortables and blankets seemed all too few, and
Clover roused with a shiver to think that presently it would be her duty
to get up and start the fires so that Phil might find a warm house when he
came downstairs. Then, before she knew it, fires would seem oppressive;
first one window and then another would be thrown up, and Phil would be
sitting on the piazza in the balmy sunshine as comfortable as on a June
morning at home. It was a wonderful climate; and as Clover wrote her
father, the winter was better even than the summer, and was certainly
doing Phil more good. He was able to spend hours every day in the open
air, walking, or riding Dr. Hope's horse, and improved steadily. Clover
felt very happy about him.

This early rising and fire-making were the hardest things she had to
encounter, though all the housekeeping proved more onerous than, in her
inexperience, she had expected it to be. After the first week or two,
however, she managed very well, and gradually learned the little
labor-saving ways which can only be learned by actual experiment. Getting
breakfast and tea she enjoyed, for they could be chiefly managed by the
use of the chafing-dish. Dinners were more difficult, till she hit on the
happy idea of having Mrs. Kenny roast a big piece of beef or mutton, or a
pair of fowls every Monday. These _pieces de resistance_ in their
different stages of hot, cold, and warmed over, carried them well along
through the week, and, supplemented with an occasional chop or steak,
served very well. Fairly good soups could be bought in tins, which needed
only to be seasoned and heated for use on table. Oysters were easily
procurable there, as everywhere in the West; good brown-bread and rolls
came from the bakery; and Clover developed a hitherto dormant talent for
cookery and the making of Graham gems, corn-dodgers, hoe-cakes baked on a
barrel head before the parlor fire, and wonderful little flaky biscuits
raised all in a minute with Royal Baking Powder.

She also became expert in that other fine art of condensing work, and
making it move in easy grooves. Her tea things she washed with her
breakfast things, just setting the cups and plates in the sink for the
night, pouring a dipper full of boiling water over them. There was no
silver to care for, no delicate glass or valuable china; the very
simplicity of apparatus made the house an easy one to keep. Clover was
kept busy, for simplify as you will, providing for the daily needs of two
persons does take time; but she liked her cares and rarely felt tired. The
elastic and vigorous air seemed to build up her forces from moment to
moment, and each day's fatigues were more than repaired by each night's
rest, which is the balance of true health in living.

Little pleasures came from time to time. Christmas Day they spent with
the Hopes, who from first to last proved the kindest and most helpful of
friends to them. The young men from the High Valley were there also, and
the day was brightly kept,--from the home letters by the early mail to the
grand merry-making and dance with which it wound up. Everybody had some
little present for everybody else. Mrs. Wade sent Clover a tall
india-rubber plant in a china pot, which made a spire of green in the
south window for the rest of the winter; and Clover had spent many odd
moments and stitches in the fabrication of a gorgeous Mexican-worked
sideboard cloth for the Hopes.

But of all Clover's offerings the one which pleased her most, as showing a
close observation of her needs, came from Geoff Templestowe. It was a
prosaic gift, being a wagon-load of pinon wood for the fire; but the
gnarled, oddly twisted sticks were heaped high with pine boughs and long
trails of red-fruited kinnikinnick to serve as a Christmas dressing, and
somehow the gift gave Clover a peculiar pleasure.

"How dear of him!" she thought, lifting one of the big pinon logs with a
gentle touch; "and how like him to think of it! I wonder what makes him so
different from other people. He never says fine flourishing things like
Thurber Wade, or abrupt, rather rude things like Clarence, or
inconsiderate things like Phil, or satirical, funny things like the
doctor; but he's always doing something kind. He's a little bit like papa,
I think; and yet I don't know. I wish Katy could have seen him."

Life at St. Helen's in the winter season is never dull; but the gayest
fortnight of all was when, late in January, the High Valley partners
deserted their duties and came in for a visit to the Hopes. All sorts of
small festivities had been saved for this special fortnight, and among the
rest, Clover and Phil gave a party.

"If you can squeeze into the dining-room, and if you can do with just
cream-toast for tea," she explained, "it would be such fun to have you
come. I can't give you anything to eat to speak of, because I haven't any
cook, you know; but you can all eat a great deal of dinner, and then you
won't starve."

Thurber Wade, the Hopes, Clarence, Geoff, Marian, and Alice made a party
of nine, and it was hard work indeed to squeeze so many into the tiny
dining-room of No. 13. The very difficulties, however, made it all the
jollier. Clover's cream-toast,--which she prepared before their eyes on
the blazer,--her little tarts made of crackers split, buttered, and
toasted brown with a spoonful of raspberry jam in each, and the big loaf
of hot ginger-bread to be eaten with thick cream from the High Valley,
were pronounced each in its way to be absolute perfection. Clarence and
Phil kindly volunteered to "shunt the dishes" into the kitchen after the
repast was concluded; and they gathered round the fire to play "twenty
questions" and "stage-coach," and all manner of what Clover called
"lead-pencil games,"--"crambo" and "criticism" and "anagrams" and
"consequences." There was immense laughter over some of these, as, for
instance, when Dr. Hope was reported as having met Mrs. Watson in the
North Cheyenne Canyon, and he said that knowledge is power; and she, that
when larks flew round ready roasted poor folks could stick a fork in; and
the consequence was that they eloped together to a Cannibal Island where
each suffered a process of disillusionation, and the world said it was the
natural result of osculation. This last sentence was Phil's, and I fear he
had peeped a little, or his context would not have been so apropos; but
altogether the "cream-toast swarry," as he called it, was a pronounced
success.

It was not long after this that a mysterious little cloud of difference
seemed to fall on Thurber Wade. He ceased to call at No. 13, or to bring
flowers from his mother; and by-and-by it was learned that he had started
for a visit to the East. No one knew what had caused these phenomena,
though some people may have suspected. Later it was announced that he was
in Chicago and very attentive to a pretty Miss Somebody whose father had
made a great deal of money in Standard oil. Poppy arched her brows and
made great amused eyes at Clover, trying to entangle her into admissions
as to this or that, and Clarence experimented in the same direction; but
Clover was innocently impervious to these efforts, and no one ever knew
what had happened between her and Thurber,--if, indeed, anything had
happened.

So May came to St. Helen's in due course, of time. The sand-storms and the
snow-storms were things of the past, the tawny yellow of the plains began
to flush with green, and every day the sun grew more warm and beautiful.
Phil seemed perfectly well and sound now; their occupancy of No. 13 was
drawing to a close; and Clover, as she reflected that Colorado would soon
be a thing of the past, and must be left behind, was sensible of a little
sinking of the heart even though she and Phil were going home.




CHAPTER XI.

THE LAST OF THE CLOVER-LEAVES.


Last days are very apt to be hard days. As the time drew near for quitting
No. 13, Clover was conscious of a growing reluctance.

"I wonder why it is that I mind it so much?" she asked herself. "Phil has
got well here, to be sure; that would be enough of itself to make me fond
of the place, and we have had a happy winter in this little house. But
still, papa, Elsie, John,--it seems very queer that I am not gladder to go
back to them. I can't account for it. It isn't natural, and it seems wrong
in me."

It was a rainy afternoon in which Clover made these reflections. Phil,
weary of being shut indoors, had donned ulster and overshoes, and gone up
to make a call on Mrs. Hope. Clover was quite alone in the house, as she
sat with her mending-basket beside the fireplace, in which was burning the
last but three of the pinon logs,--Geoff Templestowe's Christmas present.

"They will just last us out," reflected Clover; "what a comfort they have
been! I would like to carry the very last of them home with me, and keep
it to look at; but I suppose it would be silly."

She looked about the little room. Nothing as yet had been moved or
disturbed, though the next week would bring their term of occupancy to a
close.

"This is a good evening to begin to take things down and pack them," she
thought. "No one is likely to come in, and Phil is away."

She rose from her chair, moved restlessly to and fro, and at last leaned
forward and unpinned a corner of one of the photographs on the wall. She
stood for a moment irresolutely with the pin in her fingers, then she
jammed it determinedly back into the photograph again, and returned to
her sewing. I almost think there were tears in her eyes.

"No," she said half aloud, "I won't spoil it yet. We'll have one more
pleasant night with everything just as it is, and then I'll go to work and
pull all to pieces at once. It's the easiest way."

Just then a foot sounded on the steps, and a knock was heard. Clover
opened the door, and gave an exclamation of pleasure. It was Geoffrey
Templestowe, splashed and wet from a muddy ride down the pass, but wearing
a very bright face.

"How nice and unexpected this is!" was Clover's greeting. "It is such a
bad day that I didn't suppose you or Clarence could possibly get in. Come
to the fire and warm yourself. Is he here too?"

"No; he is out at the ranch. I came in to meet a man on business; but it
seems there's a wash-out somewhere between here and Santa Fe, and my man
telegraphs that he can't get through till to-morrow noon."

"So you will spend the night in town."

"Yes. I took Marigold to the stable, and spoke to Mrs. Marsh about a room,
and then I walked up to see you and Phil. How is he, by the way?"

"Quite well. I never saw him so strong or so jolly. Papa will hardly
believe his eyes when we get back. He has gone up to the Hopes, but will
be in presently. You'll stay and take tea with us, of course."

"Thanks, if you will have me; I was hoping to be asked."

"Oh, we're only too glad to have you. Our time here is getting so short
that we want to make the very most of all our friends; and by good luck
there is a can of oysters in the house, so I can give you something hot."

"Do you really go so soon?"

"Our lease is out next week, you know."

"Really; so soon as that?"

"It isn't soon. We have lived here nearly eight months."

"What a good time we have all had in this little house!" cried Geoff,
regretfully. "It has been a sort of warm little centre to us homeless
people all winter."

"You don't count yourself among the homeless ones, I hope, with such a
pleasant place as the High Valley to live in."

"Oh, the hut is all very well in its way, of course; but I don't look at
it as a home exactly. It answers to eat and sleep in, and for a shelter
when it rains; but you can't make much more of it than that. The only time
it ever seemed home-like in the least was when you and Mrs. Hope were
there. That week spoiled it for me for all time."

"That's a pity, if it's true, but I hope it isn't. It was a delightful
week, though; and I think you do the valley an injustice. It's a beautiful
place. Now, if you will excuse me, I am going to get supper."

"Let me help you."

"Oh, there is almost nothing to do. I'd much rather you would sit still
and rest. You are tired from your ride, I'm sure; and if you don't mind,
I'll bring my blazer and cook the oysters here by the fire. I always did
like to 'kitch in the dining-room,' as Mrs. Whitney calls it."

Clover had set the tea-table before she sat down to sew, so there really
was almost nothing to do. Geoff lay back in his chair and looked on with a
sort of dreamy pleasure as she went lightly to and fro, making her
arrangements, which, simple as they were, had a certain dainty quality
about them which seemed peculiar to all that Clover did,--twisted a trail
of kinnikinnick about the butter-plate, laid a garnish of fresh parsley on
the slices of cold beef, and set a glass full of wild crocuses in the
middle of the table. Then she returned to the parlor, put the kettle,
which had already begun to sing, on the fire, and began to stir and season
her oysters, which presently sent out a savory smell.

"I have learned six ways of cooking oysters this winter," she announced
gleefully. "This is a dry-pan-roast. I wonder if you'll approve of it. And
I wonder why Phil doesn't come. I wish he would make haste, for these are
nearly done."

"There he is now," remarked Geoff.

But instead it was Dr. Hope's office-boy with a note.

    DEAR C.,--Mrs. Hope wants me for a fourth hand at whist, so I'm
    staying, if you don't mind. She says if it didn't pour so she'd
    ask you to come too. P.

"Well, I'm glad," said Clover. "It's been a dull day for him, and now
he'll have a pleasant evening, only he'll miss you."

"I call it very inconsiderate of the little scamp," observed Geoff. "He
doesn't know but that he's leaving you to spend the evening quite alone."

"Oh, boys don't think of things like that."

"Boys ought to, then. However, I can stand his absence, if you can!"

It was a very merry little meal to which they presently sat down, full of
the charm which the unexpected brings with it. Clover had grown to regard
Geoff as one of her very best friends, and was perfectly at her ease with
him, while to him, poor lonely fellow, such a glimpse of cosey home-life
was like a peep at Paradise. He prolonged the pleasure as much as
possible, ate each oyster slowly, descanting on its flavor, and drank more
cups of tea than were at all good for him, for the pleasure of having
Clover pour them out. He made no further offers of help when supper was
ended, but looked on with fascinated eyes as she cleared away and made
things tidy.

At last she finished and came back to the fire. There was a silence. Geoff
was first to break it. "It would seem like a prison to you, I am afraid,"
he said abruptly.

"What would?"

"I was thinking of what you said about the High Valley."

"Oh!"

"You've only seen it in summer, you know. It's quite a different place in
the winter. I don't believe a--person--could live on the year round and be
contented."

"It would depend upon the person, of course."

"If it were a lady,--yourself, for instance,--could it be made anyway
tolerable, do you think? Of course, one might get away now and then--"

"I don't know. It's not easy to tell beforehand how people are going to
feel; but I can't imagine the High Valley ever seeming like a prison,"
replied Clover, vexed to find herself blushing, and yet unable to help it,
Geoff's manner had such an odd intensity in it.

"If I were sure that you could realize what it would be--" he began
impetuously; then quieting himself, "but you don't. How could you? Ranch
life is well enough in summer for a short time by way of a frolic; but in
winter and spring with the Upper Canyon full of snow, and the road down
muddy and slippery, and the storms and short days, and the sense of being
shut in and lonely, it would be a dismal place for a lady. Nobody has a
right to expect a woman to undergo such a life."

Clover absorbed herself in her sewing, she did not speak; but still that
deep uncomfortable blush burned on her cheeks.

"What do you think?" persisted Geoff. "Wouldn't it be inexcusable
selfishness in a man to ask such a thing?"

"I think;" said Clover, shyly and softly, "that a man has a right to ask
for whatever he wants, and--" she paused.

"And--what?" urged Geoff, bending forward.

"Well, a woman has always the right to say no, if she doesn't want to say
yes."

"You tempt me awfully," cried Geoff, starting up. "When I think what this
place is going to seem like after you've gone, and what the ranch will be
with all the heart taken from it, and the loneliness made twice as lonely
by comparison, I grow desperate, and feel as if I could not let you go
without at least risking the question. But Clover,--let me call you so
this once,--no woman could consent to such a life unless she cared very
much for a man. Could you ever love me well enough for that, do you
think?"

"It seems to me a very unfair sort of question to put," said Clover, with
a mischievous glint in her usually soft eyes. "Suppose I said I could, and
then you turned round and remarked that you were ever so sorry that you
couldn't reciprocate my feelings--"

"Clover," catching her hand, "how can you torment me so? Is it necessary
that I should tell you that I love you with every bit of heart that is in
me, and need you and want you and long for you, but have never dared to
hope that you could want me? Loveliest, sweetest, I do, and I always
shall, whether it is yes or no."

"Then, Geoff--if you feel like that--if you're quite sure you feel like
that, I think--"

"What do you think, dearest?"

"I think--that I could be very happy even in winter--in the High Valley."

And papa and the children, and the lonely and far-away feelings? There was
never a mention of them in this frank acceptance. Oh, Clover, Clover,
circumstances _do_ alter cases!

Mrs. Hope's rubber of whist seemed a long one, for Phil did not get home
till a quarter before eleven, by which time the two by the fire had
settled the whole progress of their future lives, while the last logs of
the pinon wood crackled, smouldered, and at length broke apart into
flaming brands. In imagination the little ranch house had thrown out as
many wings and as easily as a newly-hatched dragon-fly, had been
beautified and made convenient in all sorts of ways,--a flower-garden had
sprouted round its base, plenty of room had been made for papa and the
children and Katy and Ned, who were to come out continually for visits in
the long lovely summers; they themselves also were to go to and fro,--to
Burnet, and still farther afield, over seas to the old Devonshire grange
which Geoff remembered so fondly.

