
"Well, my dear boy," said his aunt, seriously, "what if there was
something hidden within little Nora, which was alive too, and which,
leaving the poor dead shell behind, has flown on shining wings away to
distant heights, where it is entering on a new and happy life!"

Fred stood thoughtful a few moments, and then said, "I never thought of
it in that way, aunty. Now I shall have a very different idea about
Nora. How glad she must be to fly away on her new wings from the sick
body in which she was imprisoned! Are not you glad, aunty, that you know
about the chrysalis, and isn't it wonderful?"

"It certainly is; and it teaches us that there are many things about us
that we cannot understand, and yet which are true, though no one can
explain them. So by and by, Fred, when you are a learned man, as I hope
you will be, when you come to something you cannot understand in nature,
you must say modestly, 'This is beyond my powers of explanation; this is
the work of God'; and so stand reverently before his greatness, that is
about and above us all."

Fred handled his chrysalis with respect as he laid it away with his
other treasures. A new thought had come to him about that and about
other things.

Clarissa had arrived; but her coming did not bring comfort to the
sorrowing mother; on the contrary, it seemed only to renew her grief.
Clarissa would have been glad to hear all about her darling's last days,
and how the end came, but the mother could not bear any allusion to the
subject, and Clarissa kept silence. She consoled herself by looking at
Nora's peaceful face, that seemed to have a message of comfort for her.
When she heard that Elsli had been alone with Nora when she died, she
was very anxious to see the girl, and sent for her to come and speak
with her. When Elsli came into the pleasant room where she had passed so
many happy days, and glanced towards the empty window-seat, she was
overcome with fresh grief. Clarissa took her by the hand, and, drawing
her to a seat by her side, immediately began to ask about Nora; and soon
Elsli was pouring out her whole heart; and she told Clarissa all that
she and Nora had said to each other about the heavenly land, and she
repeated the hymn that Nora had taught her. Then she told how quietly
Nora had left her at last, and said that she hoped to follow her soon
into her beautiful home.

Clarissa hung upon every word that fell from Elsi's lips with gratitude
and satisfaction. It was she who had taught Nora that hymn as she sat
upon her knees when she was a very little child, and as she heard it
repeated now it was with the same tones, the same motions of hand and
head that the child had used who learned it from her own lips; it seemed
to Clarissa as if Nora lived again in Elsli. Weeping with mingled joy
and sorrow, she went in search of Mrs. Stanhope.

"Surely," she exclaimed, "this child is the image of our darling; it is
her sister, with her voice, her words, her very thought. This, too, is
our child."

Mrs. Stanhope roused herself for a moment to listen to Clarissa's words,
but she was not moved by them; she threw herself again on her bed and
would not be comforted. Clarissa was not disheartened by this
indifference; she was so completely impressed herself by the wonderful
resemblance between the children that she led Elsli into the room where
the hopeless mother lay in full indulgence of her grief, and said:--

"I bring you this little girl, Mrs. Stanhope; for I look upon her as a
legacy that our Nora has left us."

Mrs. Stanhope looked for a moment into the girl's face; then she
suddenly kissed her and said:--

"Elsli, Nora loved you, and you loved her. You shall stay with me
always"; and they all three wept together, but there was healing in the
tears.

Like one in a dream Elsli went home that day. She understood, but not
wholly, what had happened. She had believed that Nora would ask her
heavenly Father to call her to heaven, and would come herself to meet
her; and now it seemed as if she had already come to meet her to lead
her elsewhere than to heaven.

Clarissa went to make the arrangements with Marget, about which there
was no difficulty whatever. For as soon as Marget understood that not
only was Elsli to be provided with a home for life, but that the help
which she might have afforded her parents as she grew older was to be
made good to them, she was overjoyed. She said that Elsli was not fit
for hard work, and that the care of the little boys was quite beyond
her, especially since Hans was growing more and more troublesome. So she
gladly agreed to let her go, with the understanding that she should
return home at least once a year for a visit.

In an incredibly short time the whole village was in possession of the
news that the wealthy Mrs. Stanhope had offered to take Elsli home with
her, and to keep her as her own child always; and that they were to
start for the villa on the Rhine the very next day. The excitement
produced by this news was intense. Wherever two neighbors met on the
road, they stopped to talk over the good-luck that had happened to
Elsli. In the school, the children could not keep quiet, so great was
their interest in the event. Even Mr. Bickel was moved to make an
unheard-of effort He took his big stick in his hand, saying:--

"Wife, we ought to go and call on Mrs. Stanhope, and apprise her of our
relationship with that girl Elsli. If she needs any advice about the
child, I am the proper person to give it. Perhaps we shall be asked to
make our cousin a visit, when she is settled there by the Rhine; there
are great factories of all kinds there, and perhaps Mrs. Stanhope may
have some connection with them, and that may help us in our business."

But Mr. Bickel had to lay aside his stick again, for his wife was not
ready to go to make so important a visit at so short notice.

If there was excitement elsewhere, at the doctor's house there was a
real jubilee. The mother and the aunt were filled with thankfulness that
the delicate girl had fallen into such good hands, where she would be
loved and cared for, and where her natural refinement would have every
chance of development. All the family were full of pleasure and
anticipations of great things in the future.

Oscar went about all day, lost in thought. He was trying to turn this
new state of things to account; for it was a great trial to him that the
beautiful embroidered banner had had to be laid aside; and he was
determined, if possible, to find some use to put it to. Emma, too, was
evidently preoccupied, and Fred said to himself, as he saw her knitted
brows, "She's got some scheme working in her brain." As for Fred
himself, he sat deeply engaged in making long lists of all the
caterpillars, beetles, snails, and other similar creatures that he knew
were to be found in the neighborhood of the Rhine. To make assurance
doubly sure, he put the Latin name under the common name of each.

That evening Elsli was sitting on the long bench at home, quite hidden
by the three little brothers, who had taken complete possession of her.
She bore the infliction patiently, for she knew it was the last time,
at least for many months. She had begun to realize her good fortune, and
to rejoice in the prospect before her. Clarissa had completely won her
heart; and the child could talk to her freely and without reserve, as
she had never spoken to any one before, except Nora. She did not feel so
much at ease with Mrs. Stanhope, but she loved her as Nora's mother, and
Mrs. Stanhope was kind to her, but not like Clarissa. Elsli puzzled her
mind a good deal about the sort of life she was to lead in her new home;
and as to whether she should be able to do all that was required of her,
and to do it properly. But more than all, she was worried about Fani,
from whom she was now so completely separated, and whom she might not
see again for long years. As she sat pondering on these problems, she
was totally unconscious that Hanseli was pulling and kicking her in the
old style, when Emma suddenly came into the room.

"Elsli," she cried, breathlessly, before she had fairly passed the
threshold, "you are going away to-morrow, and I have something very
important to say to you. Put the boys down, and come with me; do."

"Hanseli will scream if I do," said Elsli, and he did scream; but Emma
took him without ceremony from his sister's arms, setting him on the
ground with no gentle hand; and before the frightened child had
recovered from his surprise, she had dragged Elsli away round the corner
of the house to a secluded place behind the big apple-tree.

"Here, I want you to take this with you," she began, holding out a thick
roll of paper, "and I want to tell you that you are going to pass
through Basel on your way."

"Are you sure?" asked Elsli, with sparkling eyes.

"Yes, yes, I am sure; and now listen. Tell Mrs. Clarissa that Fani is in
Basel, and that you want to see him. I know she will take you, she is so
kind. Then you give him this roll, and tell him that I sent it, and that
I hope he is well. Here is his address."

"Oh, how glad I am!" cried Elsli. "Do you really think I ought to ask
Mrs. Clarissa to take me to Fani?"

"Of course you ought; only think how pleased he will be to see you.
Promise, Elsli,--" but before Elsli could answer, Oscar came round the
corner; and, spying Elsli, he seized her by the hand, exclaiming:--

"I've been hunting for you everywhere; and I've found you at last! Come
with me; I want to tell you something!"

He drew her away to the other side of the house, and stopped by the
hazelnut hedge; Emma did not follow them, for fear of vexing her
brother. She had sent to Fani, by Elsli, all the white paper and all the
pencils that she could collect in the children's room at home, and she
thought it but prudent to keep out of Oscar's way.

"Now, attend to what I am going to say, Elsli," began Oscar, seriously;
"it is something very important for you to know. You are going to
foreign parts, where you will have no friends; I mean no acquaintances
among people in general. But no doubt there will be some Swiss there,
and you can form a society of our countrymen, that can meet every week,
and talk over all the news from their own country."

"Yes, but I shouldn't know what to say," said Elsli, very much
perplexed.

"Never mind, the others can do the talking," said the boy, eagerly;
"but now comes the really important part of it. Next summer, when you
are coming home again, you must agree upon some convenient place where
all the members of the society shall meet Then crowds of people will
collect from all sides, and I will be there with my beautiful banner,
and we will have a procession and a great celebration of the first
anniversary. Be sure to write me the date of the foundation, Elsli!"

"Yes, I will certainly," assented Elsli, but her tone was less decided
than her words, for she was anything but clear as to how the society
could be formed, or why it should be formed at all. Further questions
were, however, impossible, for at this moment Fred appeared with Rikli
in his wake, and a long strip of paper in his hand. Oscar vanished.

"Now, Elsli, read this," said Fred.

"Here are the names of all the beautiful caterpillars, and rare beetles
and snails, that you are likely to find where you are going. I want you
to hunt in all the hedges, and stir up the earth now and then in your
walks. Then the fellows will turn up, and you can collect them, and send
me the finest specimens. You will, won't you? I'll send you something
pretty in return. You can put them right into your pocket, you know,
until you get home from your walk, and hold the pocket together _so_,--;
so that they won't crawl out"; and Fred pinched up his pocket-hole so
that no kind of a crawling thing could have escaped from it. Rikli
shuddered all over.

Elsli was very willing to do Fred this service, but she did not really
see how, any more than in Oscar's case; but she said, modestly:--

"I will do my best, Fred; but how am I to know the creatures whose
names are on your list?"

This was a sensible question, and Fred could not help seeing the
importance of it; but he was not to be deterred by a slight obstacle. He
looked again at his lists.

"Suppose I should draw a figure of each creature against its name!" he
said to himself. "I will come to see you to-morrow morning, before you
go away," he said to Elsli, and was off.

Little Rikli, whose lesson had been learned at such a severe cost, was
quite cured of her foolish screaming whenever Fred came near her with
his dear little insects; but she watched his every motion, lest his fist
or his pockets should disgorge some green-eyed frog or other equally
unpleasant treasure. Her big brother had, however, a great fascination
for the child, who followed him everywhere like his shadow. She now
came nearer to Elsli, and said, entreatingly:--

"Don't send the nasty things alive, will you, Elsli, dear? You'll stuff
them first, won't you?"

Just then, who should make his appearance but Feklitus, in his very best
Sunday suit, and at the same moment Marget's voice was heard from the
cottage, calling in a tone loud enough to sound above Hans' screams:--

"Elsli, where are you? It's strange that you can't stay in the house two
minutes at a time to-day."

Rikli ran away; but Feklitus seized Elsli by the arm and held her fast.

"I want to go to see the lady at Oak-ridge," he said, roughly. "I am
your cousin, and I want to tell her so, and that some time or other we
mean to come and visit you down there by the Rhine; but I'm not going
alone, and you've just got to come with me."

"Let me alone; don't you hear that I am wanted in the house!" And Elsli
tried to free herself from his hold.

"You shall come," said the boy; and he grasped Elsli still more firmly,
and dragged her away with him.

Oscar, Emma, Fred, and Rikli all met with the same reception from Kathri
on their return home; she stood on the front porch, and said to one
after another as they came up, in a warning whisper:--

"Hush, hush! don't make a noise! Mrs. Stickhop is in the parlor, come to
say good-bye."

Poor Elsli did not sleep much that last night at home. She was excited
by all the last words and commissions and leave-takings of her friends,
and oppressed by the thought of what was before her on the morrow, and
it was in a half-dreamy state that early on the following morning she
began her journey, with Mrs. Stanhope and Clarissa, in the large
carriage, along the high road, through the country that lay still in the
dawning light. Suddenly a folded paper, weighted with a small stone,
flew through the air into the carriage window.

"Good-bye, Elsli. I wish I could go with you," cried a voice from the
road-side. It was Fred, who had not been able to finish his work before,
and who had only painted his last snail just in season to throw his now
illustrated list after Elsli.

This last greeting brought the tears to Elsli's eyes. She seemed now
fully to realize that she was leaving home, leaving all who had ever
known and loved her. Clarissa saw it all, and, taking Elsli's hand in
hers, she expressed, by the warm grasp that she gave her, a mother's
sympathy and love.

For the next week the doctor's family were busy talking over and over
all the events of the past few weeks, from the arrival of little Nora to
Elsli's final departure. On the tenth day came a long letter from Elsli,
which gave food for farther conversation. The mother and the aunt and
the four brothers and sisters were all equally impatient to know the
contents. The letter was addressed to Emma, who knew it from its
envelope, opened it out, and exclaimed with delight:--

"It is eight pages long! I will read it aloud to you"

     ROSEMOUNT ON THE RHINE, Sept. 28, 18--.

     DEAR FRIEND,--Thank you a thousand times for your good advice, for
     without it I should never have dared to say a word about Fani.

     But I will begin at the beginning and tell you everything as it has
     happened. When Fred said good-bye and I drove away from you all, I
     had to cry a little! But Aunt Clarissa--this is what I am to call
     her always--was very kind, and talked to me, and bade me tell her
     everything that troubled me. Mrs. Stanhope shut her eyes and lay
     back in the carriage, so still that I thought she was asleep, so I
     thought it was a good time to tell Aunt Clarissa all about Fani, as
     you advised. She didn't even know that there was such a person, so
     I had to tell her everything that had happened, and how long it was
     since I had seen him. She said of course I must see him in Basel,
     and that we should have plenty of time, as we were not going
     farther than that, that day. She said she would go with me to find
     him, and that Mrs. Stanhope would be perfectly willing. When we
     reached Basel we went to a big hotel. I never saw anything like it
     before. I could scarcely eat my dinner for joy that I was going to
     see Fani again. Directly after dinner Aunt Clarissa told Mrs.
     Stanhope that we wanted to go to see my brother, and Mrs. Stanhope
     said she would go with us, as she did not want to stay alone.

     We went across a long bridge, over a river, and quite a distance
     further. At last we came to some small houses, and we began to
     inquire for the painter Schulz. There we were right before his
     house. Mrs. Stanhope opened the door and went right into the
     work-shop, and we followed her. Fani sprang up with a great cry of
     joy, and threw his arms round Mrs. Stanhope, and his eyes were full
     of tears, for he was terribly homesick, and had never seen any one
     from home since he went away. Then he caught sight of me, and he
     was gladder still; and he wasn't the least shy with Mrs.
     Stanhope--you know he never is--but he put his arms round her
     again, and exclaimed:--

     "Oh, you don't know how glad I am to see some one from home!"
