following words: _jingling, nostrils, farewell_.

Let pupils use other words to express the following:

    A stout heart.    Towards the setting sun.


[07] See paragraph 22 beginning, "There arose one day at noon...."

[08] See paragraph 21 beginning, "Several days were thus passed...."


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXII.


pro pose', _offer; advise_.

group, _a number of persons or things together_.

grief, _great sorrow; distress_.

draughts (drafts), _quantities of water taken at one time_.

quenched, _satisfied; put out_.

re' cently, _newly; lately_.

flick'er ing, _fluttering; keeping in motion_.

greed'ily, _very eagerly_

pre'cious, _of great price; costly_.

wea'ry, _very tired_.

refresh'ing, _cooling; reviving_.


       *       *       *       *       *




ALI, THE BOY CAMEL-DRIVER.

PART II.


Poor Ali suffered like the rest from terrible thirst. He drank the last
drop of water from his water-bottle, and thought of the morrow with
fear.

He was so tired when night came, he was glad to lie down by the side of
Meek-eye and go to sleep. Ali slept, but before morning, was awakened by
the sound of voices.

He listened, and heard the chief driver tell one of the merchants that,
if they did not find water very soon, the next day a camel must be
killed, in order to get the water contained in its stomach.

This is often done in cases of great need in the desert, the stomach of
the camel being so formed as to hold a great quantity of water.

Ali was not surprised to hear such a thing spoken of; but what was his
distress and alarm, when he heard the merchant propose that it should be
"the boy's camel" that should be killed!

The merchant said the other camels were of too good a kind, and of too
much value; while, as to this young boy, what business had he to have a
camel of his own?

It would be better far, they said, for him to lose his camel than for
him to die, like the rest, of thirst. And so it was decided that
Meek-eye should be killed, unless water were found the next morning.

Ali slept no more. His heart was full of grief; but his grief was mixed
with courage and resolution. He said to himself that Meek-eye should not
die.

His father had trusted him to bring the camel, and what would he say if
he should arrive at Suez without it? He would try to find his way alone,
and leave the caravan as soon as possible.

That night when all was quiet, and the merchant and camel-driver had
gone to sleep, Ali arose, and gently patting the neck of Meek-eye, awoke
him.

He placed his empty bag and water-bottles on his back, and seating
himself on him, made signs for the creature to rise, and then suddenly
started off.

Tramp, tramp, tramp, went Meek-eye over the soft sand. The night was
cool and refreshing, and Ali felt stronger and braver with every tramp.
The stars were shining brightly, and they were his only guides.

He knew the star which was always in the north, and the one which was in
the west after the sun had gone down. He must keep that star to the
right, and he would be sure to be going towards the south.

He journeyed on till day began to dawn. The sun came up on the edge of
the desert, and rose higher and higher. Ali felt faint, weary, and
thirsty, and could scarcely hold himself on to Meek-eye. When he thought
of his father and mother, he took courage again, and bore up bravely.

The sun was now at its height. Ali fancied he saw a palm-tree in the
distance. It seemed as if Meek-eye saw it also, for he raised his head
and quickened his step.

It was not long before Ali found himself at one of those pleasant green
islands which are found throughout the desert, and are called oases.

He threw himself from the camel's back, and hunted out the pool of water
that he knew he should find in the midst of the reeds and long grass
which grew there.

He dipped in his water-bottle and drank, while Meek-eye, lying down,
stretched out his long neck, and greedily sucked up great draughts of
the cool water.

How sweet was the sleep which crept over them as they lay down in the
shade of the great palm-tree, now that they had quenched their thirst!

Refreshed and rested, Ali was able to satisfy his hunger on some ripe
dates from the palm-tree, while Meek-eye began to feed upon the grass
and leaves around.

Ali noticed, while eating his dates, that other travelers had been there
recently: as the grass at the side of the pool was trampled down. This
greatly cheered him. He quickly followed in their track, still going in
a southerly direction.

He kept the setting sun to his right, and when it had gone down, he
noticed the bright star that had guided him before.

He traveled on, tired and faint with hunger for many a mile, till at
last he saw, a long way off, the fires of a caravan which had halted for
the night.

Ali soon came up to them. He got down, from Meek-eye, and leading him by
the bridle, came towards a group of camel-drivers, who were sitting in a
circle.

He told them his story, and asked permission to join the party, and
begged a little rice, for which he was ready to pay with the piece of
money that his mother had given him when he left home.

Ali was kindly received by them, and allowed to partake of their supper.
The men admired the courage with which he had saved his favorite camel.
After supper Ali soon closed his weary eyes, and slept soundly by the
side of Meek-eye.

In the midst of a pleasant dream, Ali was suddenly aroused by the sound
of tinkling bells, and on waking up he saw that another caravan had
arrived, which had come from the south.

The merchants sat down to wait until their supper was brought to them,
and a party of camel-drivers drew round the fire near which Ali had
been sleeping. They raked up its ashes, put on fresh fuel, and then
prepared to boil their rice.

What voice was that which roused Ali just as he was falling asleep
again? He listened, he started to his feet, he looked about him, and
waited for a flash of flame from the fire to fall on the faces of the
camel-drivers who stood around it.

It came flickering up at first, and then all at once blazing out,
flashed upon the camel-driver who stood stooping over it, and lighted up
the face of Ali's father!

The father had waited at Suez many days, wondering why Ali did not come;
and then, thinking there had been some mistake, determined to return
home with the caravan, which was starting for Gaza.

We need hardly describe the joy of both father and son at thus meeting,
nor the pleasure with which the father listened to the history of Ali
the fears and dangers to which his young son had been exposed. He was
glad, too, that their precious Meek-eye had been saved.

There was no one in the whole caravan so happy as Hassan, when, the next
morning, he continued, his journey to Gaza in company with Meek-eye and
his beloved son Ali.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Syllabify, accent, and mark sounds of letters in the
following words: _suffered, permission, partake, merchants, beloved_.

Let pupils use other words to express the meaning of what is given below
in dark type.

    Ali _bore up bravely_.

    Meek-eye _quickened his step_.

    _The sun_ was now _at its height_.

Write statements containing each of the following words, used in such a
manner as to show their proper meaning: _herd, heard; need, knead; no,
know; way, weigh; knew, new_.

Make out an _analysis_ of the two lessons, and use it in telling the
story in your own words.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXIII.


ob served', _saw; noticed_.

trans par'ent, _clear; easily seen through_.

ma te'ri al, _that of which any thing is made or to be made_.

ob tained', _taken from; received_.

gar'ments, _articles of clothing_.

verd'ure, _any green growth_.

a dorn', _dress with taste; beautify_.

par tic'ular, _of an unusual kind_.

va ri'e ty, _a number of different kinds_.

del'i cate, _gentle; tender_.

ca ressed', _treated with fondness_.


       *       *       *       *       *




A QUEER PEOPLE.


One evening, as Captain Perry was sitting by the fireside at his home in
Liverpool, his children asked him to tell them a story.

[Illustration]

"What shall it be about?" said the captain.

"O," said Harry, "tell us about other countries, and the curious people
you have seen in them."

"Yes, yes!" exclaimed Mary. "We were much interested, while you were
away the last time, in reading 'Gulliver's Travels' and 'Sindbad the
Sailor.'"

"You have seen as wonderful things as they did, haven't you, father?"
said Harry.

"No, my dears," said the captain. "I never met such wonderful people as
they tell about, I assure you; nor have I seen the 'Black Loadstone
Mountain' or the 'Valley of Diamonds.'"

"But," said Mary, "you have seen a great many people, and their
different manners and ways of living."

"Yes," said the captain, "and if it will interest you, I will tell you
some of the curious things that I have observed."

"Pray, do so!" cried Harry, as both the children drew close to him.

"Well, then," began the captain, "I was once in a country where it was
very cold, and the poor people could scarcely keep themselves from
starving.

"They were clothed partly in the skins of beasts, made smooth and soft
by some particular art; but chiefly in garments made from the outer
covering of an animal cruelly stripped off its back while alive.

"They lived in houses partly sunk below the ground. These houses were
mostly built of stones or of earth hardened by fire.

"The walls of the houses had holes to let in light; but to prevent the
cold air and rain from coming in, they were covered with a sort of
transparent stone, made of melted sand.

"As wood was rather scarce, they used for fuel a certain kind of stone
which they dug out of the earth, and which, when put among burning
wood, catches fire and makes a bright flame."

"Dear me!" said Harry. "What a wonderful stone! Why didn't you
bring a piece home with you, father?"

"I have a piece, which I will show you some time," replied the captain.
"But to go on with my story.

"What these people eat is remarkable, too. Some of the poor people eat
fish which had been hung up and smoked until quite dry and hard, and
along with it they eat the roots of plants, or coarse, black cake made
of powdered seeds.

"The rich people have a whiter kind of cake upon which they spread a
greasy matter that is obtained from a large animal. They eat also the
flesh of many birds and beasts when they can get it, and the leaves and
other parts of a variety of vegetables--some raw and others cooked.

"For drink they use the water in which certain dry leaves have been
steeped. These leaves, I was told, came from a country a great distance
away.

"I was glad to leave this country because it was so very cold; but about
six months after, I was obliged to go there again. What was my surprise
to find that great changes had taken place!

"The climate was mild and warm, and the country was full of beauty and
verdure. The trees and shrubs bore a great variety of fruits, which,
with other vegetable products, were used largely as food.

"The people were gentle and civilized. Their dress was varied. Many wore
cloth woven from a sort of wool grown in pods on bushes.

"Another singular material was a fine, glossy stuff used chiefly by the
rich people. I was told that it was made out of the webs of
caterpillars, which to me seemed quite wonderful, as it must have taken
a great number of caterpillars to produce the large quantity of the
stuff that I saw.

"These people have queer ideas about their dress. The women wear
strangely figured garments, and adorn their heads, like some Indian
nations, with feathers and other fanciful head-dresses.

"One thing surprised me very much. They bring up in their houses an
animal of the tiger species, having the same kind of teeth and claws as
the tiger.

"In spite of the natural fierceness of this little beast, it is played
with and caressed by the most timid and delicate of their women and
children."

"I am sure I would not play with it," said Harry.

"You might get an ugly scratch, if you did," said the captain.

"Aha!" cried Mary; "I've found you out: you have been telling us of our
country and what is done at home all this while!"

"But we don't burn stones, or eat grease and powdered seeds, or wear
skins and caterpillars' webs, or play with tigers," said Harry.

"No?" said the captain. "Pray, what is coal but a kind of stone; and is
not butter, grease; and wheat, seeds; and leather, skins; and silk, the
web of a kind of caterpillar; and may we not as well call a cat an
animal of the tiger kind, as a tiger an animal of the cat kind?"

"So, if you will remember what I have been describing, you will find
that all the other wonderful things that I have told you of, are well
known among ourselves."

"I have told you the story to show that a foreigner might easily
represent every thing among us as equally strange and wonderful, as we
could with respect to his country."


       *       *       *       *       *


Directions for Reading.--Point out breathing-places in the last
paragraph.

Name the _emphatic words_ in the last paragraph.

Pronounce carefully the following words: _vegetable, foreigner, beasts,
products, across, again, also, apron_.


       *       *       *       *       *


Language Lesson.--Let pupils express the meaning of what is given below
in dark type, using a single word for each example.

    Houses built of _earth hardened by fire_.

    The walls have _holes to let in the light_.

    They were covered with _a sort of transparent stone_.

    They drink _water in which dry leaves have been steeped_.

    Many wore cloth woven from _a sort of wool grown in pods_.


       *       *       *       *       *




LESSON XXIV.


lin'net, _a kind of bird_.

com pare', _be equal; have similar appearance_.

wor'ried, _troubled; anxious_.

hum'ble, _meek; lowly_.

mis'chiev ous, _full of mischief; troublesome_.

grub, _dig up by the roots_.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE ILL-NATURED BRIER


  Little Miss Brier came out of the ground,
  She put out her thorns, and scratched ev'ry thing 'round.
              "I'll just try," said she,
              "How bad I can be;
  At pricking and scratching, there are few can match me."

