returned sooner than the Rat had expected, and by the crumbs which he
had dropped upon the way tracked him to the hole.

"Come out, thief!" cried the Owl, "or I will surely kill you. Come out
and return to me my morrow's dinner." The Rat trembled with fear at
these threatening words.

"Alas!" he squeaked, "I cannot do that, for already the dinner is eaten.
My wife and hungry little ones have eaten it. Pity us, for we were
starving!"

"Bah!" screamed the Owl, "I care little for that. It is for my dinner
alone that I care. Since you have eaten it you shall certainly die," and
he began to scratch fiercely at the mouth of the hole. The Rat trembled
more than ever. But suddenly he had an idea which made his whiskers
twitch.

"Hold!" he cried. "Dear, good Master Owl, permit me to live and I will
give you something which is worth many dinners, something that
men-creatures value very highly, and which with great labor and pain I
brought away from one of their dens."

"Umph!" grumbled the Owl. "Let us see what it is."

The Rat crawled timidly out of his hole with the peace-offering; and
what do you think it was? Why, a gimlet! Just a plain, ordinary,
well-sharpened gimlet for boring holes.

"Hoo!" cried the Owl. "I don't think much of _that_. What is it good
for?" Now the Rat had not the faintest idea as to what the gimlet really
was, but he had another idea instead.

"That? Why--that--oh, _that_! That is a very valuable thing. It is able
to give you the keenest delight. I will show you how it works. But you
must do just as I say, or it will be of no use."

"Hoo!" cried the Owl. "Continue with the directions."

"Well, first you must stick the thing point upwards in the ground at the
foot of this tree."

"Very good," said the Owl, doing as was suggested, and waiting
expectantly for the next move.

"Now you must mount to the top of the tree and slide down the trunk,"
said the Rat solemnly. Old Master Owl was certainly very far from wise
that night, for he obeyed the Rat's word without a suspicion. He flew to
the top of the tree, and then, sitting back and giving a warning cry of
"Hoo-hoo!" coasted down the trunk with the speed of lightning. But
midway down he struck a knot in the tree and rolled heels over head. And
when he reached the ground of course he landed fast upon the sharp point
of the gimlet, just as the Rat had planned.

With bloody head, and hooting with pain, the Owl started off in pursuit
of the Rat, resolved this time to kill him without fail. The Rat was
nimble, and his fear added to his speed, but at last the Owl caught him.
Ruffled and ferocious, the great bird was about to tear him in pieces,
when the Rat once more begged his life.

"It was only a joke," he cried. "Only a silly joke. Spare me this once,
dear Master Owl, and I will give you something that you really need.
Look at your bleeding head. You cannot go about the world with that
exposed. Spare my life, and I will give you a lovely cap of tufted
feathers to hide the bite of the wicked sharp-thing-made-by-man. Pray,
let me go, dear Master Owl."

The Owl considered for a moment, and then decided to accept the bargain.
For he thought of Putri Balan, the Princess of the Moon, and knew that
he should lose his last chance to win her if she happened to see him
with this ridiculous wound in his head.

So the Rat gave him a nice cap of tufted feathers, which he wears to
this day; and the Owl let the thief go free. But after that there was a
coolness between them, as you may well imagine.




THE GOOD HUNTER


Once upon a time there was an Indian who was a famous hunter. But he did
not hunt for fun; he took no pleasure in killing the little wild
creatures, birds and beasts and fishes, and did so only when it was
necessary for him to have food or skins for his clothing. He was a very
kind and generous man, and loved all the wood-creatures dearly, often
feeding them from his own larder, and protecting them from their
enemies. So the animals and birds loved him as their best friend, and he
was known as the Good Hunter.

The Good Hunter was very brave, and often went to war with the fierce
savages who were the enemies of his tribe. One sad day he set forth with
a war party, and they had a terrible battle, in which the Good Hunter
was slain, and his enemies took away his scalp, leaving him lying dead
in the forest.

The Good Hunter had not remained long cold and lifeless in the shadowy
stillness, when the Fox came trotting through the woods. "Alack and
alas!" cried the Fox, spying the body stretched on the leaves. "Here is
our dear friend, the Good Hunter, slain! Alack and alas! what shall we
do now that our dear friend and protector is gone?"

The Fox ran out into the forest crying the death lament, which was the
signal to all the beasts that something most sorrowful had happened.
Soon they came flocking to the spot, all the animals of the forest. By
hundreds they came, and surrounding the body of their friend raised the
most doleful howls. For, though they rubbed him with their warm noses,
and licked him with their warm tongues, and nestled against him with
their warm fur, they could not bring him back to warm life.

They called upon Brother Bear to speak and tell them what to do; for he
was the nearest relative to man. The Bear sat up on his haunches and
spoke to the sad assembly with tears in his eyes, begging each animal to
look carefully through his medicine-box and see whether there might not
be some balm which would restore the Good Hunter to life. Then each
animal looked carefully through his medicine-box of herbs and healing
roots, bark and magic leaves, and they tried every remedy that they
knew. But nothing brought the color to their friend's pale cheeks, nor
light into his eyes. He who had helped them so often was helpless now,
and they could not aid him. Again the kind beasts sank back on their
haunches and raised a mighty howl, a requiem for the dead.

Wild and piercing and long-drawn, the sound swept through the forest,
such a sound of sorrow as had never been heard before. The Oriole, who
was flying overhead, heard and was surprised. Soon his brightness came
flashing down through the leafy boughs like a ray of sunlight into the
gloom and darkness of the forest.

"What has happened, O four-footed friends," he asked, "that you mourn so
mightily?" Then they showed him the body of the Good Hunter lying in the
midst of their sad company, and the Oriole joined his voice of sorrow to
theirs.

"O friend of the birds," he cried, "is there no bird who can aid you
now, you who have fed us so many times from the door of your generous
wigwam? I will call all the feathered tribes, and we will do our best."

So the Oriole went forth and summoned the birds to the forest council.
There was a great flapping of wings, a great twittering and chirping,
questioning and exclamation when the birds assembled to hear the sad
news. Every one was there, from the tiny Humming Bird to the great
Eagle of the Iroquois, who left his lonely eyrie to pay his respects to
the Good Hunter's memory. The poor little birds tried everything in
their power to bring back to life their dear friend. With beak and claw
and tender wing they strove, but all their efforts were in vain. Their
Good Hunter was dead, and his scalp was gone.

Then the great Eagle, whose head was white with years of wisdom and
experience, spoke to the despairing assemblage of creatures. From his
lofty perch above the world the Eagle had looked down upon centuries of
change and decay. He knew every force of nature and all the strange
things of life. The hoary-headed sage said that the Good Hunter could
not be restored until his scalp was found. Then all the animals clamored
that they might be allowed to go and seek for the missing scalp. But to
the Fox was given this honor, because he had first found the body of the
Good Hunter in the forest. The Fox set out upon his search, in his foxy
way. He visited every hen-roost and every bird's-nest, but no scalp did
he find. "Of course not!" screamed the birds when he returned from his
fruitless quest, "Of course no bird has taken the Good Hunter's scalp.
You should have known better than that, Master Fox."

So the next time a bird was sent upon the search. The Pigeon Hawk went
forth, confident that she should be successful. But she was in such a
hurry and flew so fast that she saw nothing, and she too returned
without that for which she sought. Then the White Heron begged that he
might be allowed to try. "For," said he, "you all know how slowly I fly,
and how careful I am to see everything."

"Yes, especially if it be something good to eat," chirped the saucy Jay,
"do not trust him, birds, he is too greedy."

Yet the Heron was allowed to go. He flapped away, slowly and sedately,
and the Council sat down to await his return. But the Heron had not gone
far when he came to a field of luscious wild beans; and he stopped to
take a mouthful or two. He ate, and he ate, and he ate, the greedy
fellow! until he could eat no more. And then he was sleepy, so that he
slept and slept and slept. And when he awoke he was so hungry that he
fell to eating again, while the Council waited and wondered and waited.
At last they grew impatient and began to suspect that the Jay had been
right, which was indeed the case. They decided to wait no longer for the
Heron, who did not return. Then the Crow stepped forward and said, "Let
me go, I pray you, for I think I know where the scalp may be found; not
in the nest of a bird, not in the den of any animal, not in the watery
haunt of a fish. For all the creatures of earth, air, and water are
friends of the Good Hunter. It is men who are most cruel to men:
therefore in the tents of men must we look for the missing scalp. Let me
go to seek it there, for men are used to see me flying near and will not
suspect why I come."

The Crow flew forth upon his errand, and before long came to the wigwam
where lived the warrior who had slain the Good Hunter. And sure enough,
there, outside the tent, was the scalp of the Good Hunter, stretched on
a pole to dry. The Crow flew near, and the warrior saw him, but thought
nothing of it, for he was used to seeing crows about the camp. Presently
when no one was looking the skillful thief managed to steal the scalp,
and away he flew with it to the Council in the forest. Great was the
rejoicing of the birds and beasts when they saw that the Crow had been
successful, and they said more kind things to him than he had heard for
many moons. At once they put the scalp upon the Good Hunter's head, but
it had grown so dry in the smoke of the warrior's wigwam that it would
not fit. Here was a new trouble. What was to be done to make the scalp
soft and flexible once more? The animals did their best, but their
efforts were of no avail.

Once more the great Eagle came forward and bade them listen.

"My children," he said, "my wings are never furled. Night and day for
hundreds of years the dews of heaven have been collecting upon my back
as I sit on my throne above the clouds. Perhaps this dew may have a
healing power such as no earthly fountain holds. We will see."

Gravely the Eagle plucked a long feather, and dipping it in the dew
which moistened his plumage, applied it to the stiffened scalp.
Immediately it became soft, and could be fitted to the head of the Good
Hunter closely as when it had first grown there. The birds and animals
hurried away and brought leaves and flowers, bark and berries and roots,
which they made into a mighty healing balsam to bathe the poor head
which had been so cruelly treated. And presently great was their joy to
see a soft color come into the pale cheeks of the Good Hunter, and light
into his eyes. He breathed, he stirred, he sat up and looked around him
in surprise.

"Where am I? What has happened?" he asked.

"You slept and your friends have wakened you," said the great Eagle
tenderly. "Stand up, Good Hunter, that they may see you walk once more."

The Good Hunter stood up and walked, rather unsteadily at first, back to
his own wigwam, followed by a great company of happy forest creatures,
who made the sky ring with their noises of rejoicing. And long, long
after that, the Good Hunter lived to love and protect them.




THE COURTSHIP OF MR. STORK AND MISS HERON


This is a very good story to read at night just before going to sleep.
And if you ask why, I must only tell you that you will find out before
you reach the end of the tale.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was once a Heron, a pretty, long-legged, slender lady Heron, who
lived in the mushy-squshy, wady-shady swamp. The lady Heron lived in her
swamp all alone, earning her living by catching little fish; and she was
very happy, never dreaming that she was lonesome, for no one had told
her what lonesome was. She loved to go wading in the cool waters; she
loved to catch the little fish who swam by unsuspectingly while she
stood still upon one leg pretending to think about something a thousand
miles away. And she loved to look at her slender, long-legged blue
reflection in the water; for the lady Heron was just a little bit vain.

Now one day Mr. Stork came flying over the mushy-squshy, wady-shady
swamp where the Heron lived, and he too saw the reflection in the water.
And he said to himself, "My! How pretty she is! I wonder I never noticed
her before. And how lonesome she must be there all by herself in such a
nasty, moist, mushy-squshy old swamp! I will invite her to come and
share my nice, warm, dry nest on the chimney-top. For to tell the truth,
I am growing lonely up there all by myself. Why should we not make a
match of it, we two long-legged creatures?"

Mr. Stork went home to his house, which he set prettily in order: for he
never dreamed but that the lady Heron would accept his offer at the very
first croak. He preened his feathers and made himself as lovely as he
could, and forthwith off he flew with his long legs dangling, straight
to the wady-shady swamp where Miss Heron was standing on one leg waiting
for her supper to get itself caught.

"Ahem!" croaked Mr. Stork, waving his wing politely. "Good evening, Miss
Heron. Fine weather we are having, eh? But how horribly moist it is down
here! I should think that your nice straight legs would grow crooked
with rheumatism. Now I have a comfortable, dry house on the roof."

"Pouf!" grunted Miss Heron disdainfully.

But Mr. Stork pretended not to hear, and went on with his remarks,--"a
nice dry house which I should be glad to have you share with me. Come,
Miss Heron! Here I am a lonely old bachelor, and here are you a lonely
old maid"--

"Lonely old maid, indeed!" screamed the Heron interrupting him. "I don't
know what it is to be lonely. Go along with you!" and she splashed water
on him with her wings, she was so indignant.

Poor Mr. Stork felt very crestfallen at this reception of his
well-meaning invitation. He turned about and stalked away towards his
nest upon the roof, without so much as saying good-by to the lady.

But no sooner was he out of sight than Miss Heron began to think. He had
said that she was lonely; was she lonely? Well, perhaps he ought to know
better than she, for he was a very wise bird. Perhaps she was lonely,
now that she came to think of it. However, there was no reason why she
should go to live in that stupid, dry, old nest on the house-top. Why
could he not come to dwell in her lovely, mushy-squshy, wady-shady
swamp? That would be very pleasant, for he was a good sort of fellow
with nice long legs; and there were fish enough in the water for two.
Besides, he could then do the fishing for the family; and, moreover,
there would then be two to admire her reflection in the water. Yes; her
mind was made up. She would invite him. She glanced down at her
reflection and settled some of the feathers which her fit of temper had
ruffled out of order. Then off she started in pursuit of Mr. Stork.

Mr. Stork had not gone very far, for a sad, rejected lover is a dawdling
creature. And so she came up with him long before he was in sight of his
nest.

"Good evening, Mr. Stork," said the lady nervously. "I--I have been
thinking over what you said to me just now, and I have concluded that
perhaps I was a bit hasty. To tell you the truth, sir, I _am_ a trifle
lonely, now that you suggest the thought to me. And it would be very
agreeable to have pleasant company. I am ready, sir, to agree to your
proposal. But of course I cannot think of changing my abode. My swamp is
the most beautiful home that a maiden ever knew, and I could not give it
up for any one. As for your ugly old nest on the chimney-top, bah! I
cannot endure the idea with patience."

Mr. Stork was gradually stiffening into an angry attitude, but she did
not notice. "Now you can come and live in my swamp," Miss Heron went on
warmly, "and you will be very welcome to catch fish for me, and to look
in my mirror. It will be very nice indeed!"

"Nice!" croaked the Stork, "I should say as much! What can you be
thinking of, Miss? I to give up my comfortable home on the house-top,
close by the warm chimney, and go to live in that disgusting
mushy-squshy bog of yours! Ha-ha! That is really too ridiculous! I bid
you good morning." And with an elaborate bow he turned his back and flew
away.

Miss Heron flounced back to her swamp, mortified because she had left it
to propose terms to so ungallant a fellow. But hardly had she begun her
tardy supper when once more Mr. Stork's shadow darkened the mirror
before her, and once more she heard his apologetic croak.

"Ahem, ahem!" he began. "I hope I find you well, Miss Heron? I have
been--ha hum!--considering your last most condescending words, and I
find that I have been hasty. You are so good as to express a belief that
I should make a pleasant companion. So I should! so I should! And as for
you," he bowed gallantly, "one can readily imagine the charm of your
society. Come, then, Miss Heron, why should we not make a happy couple,
if we can only arrange this one little foolish matter? Be my wife: come
live with me in my lovely nest."

But at this word Miss Heron uttered a little scream and cried, "Be off
with you, you villain! Leave my premises instantly!" and she waved her
wings so fiercely that once more Mr. Stork took to his and flapped away
to his home.

Now when he had gone Miss Heron found that she had been bad-tempered,
and she thought how pleasantly they might have arranged the matter if
only she had been more moderate. So she spread her beautiful blue wings
and flew to the housetop where Mr. Stork lived, and, perching on the
chimney, she said,--

"Oh, Mr. Stork, I was bad-tempered and impolite, and I beg your pardon.
Let us be friends once more. Leave this hot old stupid house-top and
come live in my cool, moist, wady-shady swamp, and I will be your very
loving little wife."

But the Stork arose in his nest, flapping his wings crossly, and cried,
"Be off, you baggage! Don't come here to insult my beautiful house. Be
off, I say, to your mushy-squshy, rheumaticky bog. I want no more of
you!"

So the Heron flew back disconsolately to the watery swamp, where she
began to feel very lonely indeed. And the Stork, too, began to feel very
lonely indeed; and he was sorry that he had been rude to a lady.
Presently, once more he came flapping to the mushy-squshy marsh, where
he found Miss Heron just ready to go to sleep.

"Oh, dear Miss Heron!" he cried. "I made a great mistake, and said
things for which I am truly sorry. Do come to be my loving wife, as you
promised, and we will live happily ever after on the chimney-top, far
above the other birds. And I will never be cross again."

But the Heron answered, "Away with you! I want to go to sleep. I am
tired of your croaking voice. Leave me alone!" So the Stork flew away in
a huff.

But the Heron could not sleep, she was so lonely. So she rose, and,
flying through the still night air, came again to the Stork's high-built
nest.

"Come, Storkie dear," she said in her sweetest tone, "come home to your
dear wife's house in the wady-shady, mushy-squshy marsh, and I will be
good."

But the Stork pretended to be asleep, and only snored in reply. So the
Heron flew home in a huff. But the Stork could not truly sleep, he was
so lonely. So he rose, and, flying through the still night air, came
again to the Heron's home in the marsh.

"Come, my dear," he said. "Come home to your dear husband's house, and I
will be good."

But the Heron made no answer, pretending to be asleep. So the Stork flew
home in a huff. But the Heron could not truly sleep, she was so lonely.
So she rose at break of day, and, flying through the cool morning air,
came again to the Stork's nest.

"Come, Storkie dear," she said, "come home to your dear wife's house,
and I will be good."

But the Stork did not answer, he was so angry. So the Heron flew home in
a huff.

       *       *       *       *       *

And if you are not asleep when you get as far as this, you may go on
with the story by yourself, perfectly well. You may go on just as long
as you can keep awake. For the tale has no end, no end at all. It is
still going on to this very day. The Stork still lives lonely on his
house-top, and the Heron still lives lonely in her marsh, growing
lonelier and lonelier, both of them. But because they have no tact, they
are never able to agree to the same thing at the same time. And they
keep flying back and forth, saying the same things over, and over, and
over, and over....




THE PHOENIX


On the top of a palm tree, in an oasis of the Arabian desert, sat the
Phoenix, glowering moodily upon the world below. He was alone, quite
alone, in his old age, as he had been alone in his youth, and in his
middle years; for the Phoenix has neither mate nor children, and there
is never but one of his kind upon the earth.

Once he had been proud of his solitariness and of his unusual beauty,
which caused such wonder when he went abroad. But now he was old and
weak and weary, and he was lonely, oh! so lonely! He had lived too long,
he thought.

For years and years and years, afar and apart, he had watched the coming
and going of things in the world. He had seen the other birds created,
and had watched them undergo strange changes in form and color until
they became as they are to-day. He had seen the hundred bright eyes of
Argus, the watchman, set in the Peacock's tail. He had seen the flaming
heart of the volcano tamed and quieted until it became the flaming
little Humming-Bird. He had seen the Crow turn black and the Goldfinch
become a gaudy bird, and he knew how and why all these things had come
to pass. For centuries, how many he knew not, he had watched the birds
hatch out of their little eggs, flutter their feeble little wings, fly
away to build nests for their little mates, and finally die and
disappear as birds do, leaving no trace behind.

But the Phoenix did not die. He was of different clay from these
ordinary feathered creatures. He was the glorious bird of the Sun, the
only one, the gold-and-crimson one, who when he went abroad filled all
creatures with awe of his beauty and wisdom and mystery, so that they
dared not come near, but followed him afar off, hushing their song and
adoring silently. The Phoenix fed not on flowers or fruit or
disgusting insect-fry, but on precious frankincense and myrrh and
odoriferous gums. And the Sun himself loved to caress his plumage of
gold and crimson.

As for men, they also had adored him in time past, and had built temples
in his honor. They also were puny mortals, scarcely longer of life than
the birds themselves. The Phoenix had seen many generations of men
grow up, do good or evil deeds, and die, sometimes leaving grand
monuments upon the earth, sometimes disappearing from knowledge like
the very birds, leaving scarcely a trace behind.

In his time great kings had lived and reigned and turned to dust.
Prophets had grown hoary, said their word, and passed away, leaving no
echo. Poets had sung and had died singing. But the Phoenix, looking
down from the palms of his desert, saw it all and did not die.
