
"And are the Shawnees upon Fluellina's trail?"

"If the eye of the Shawnee can follow the trail of the canoe, he has
tracked us to the hiding-place."

This conversation being carried on in the Huron tongue, of course the
others failed to catch its meaning; but Lieutenant Canfield suspected,
from the singularly hurried and excited manner of Oonomoo, that
something unusual had occurred with him.  Never before had he seen him
give way to his feelings, or speak in such loud, almost fierce tones.
The soldier remained at a respectful distance, until the Huron turned
his head and told him to approach.

"Dis my son Niniotan," said he.  "He go wid us."

"I am glad of his company I am sure.  Did you expect to meet him in
this place?"

"No--Fluellina, his mother, send him in big hurry to Oonomoo--been
huntin' all day--jes' found us."

"No trouble, I trust?"

"Tell in de mornin'--mus' walk fas' now--don't talk much--git to
settlement quick as can.  Take gal's hand--lead her fast."

The soldier knew there must be cause for this haste of his friend, and
acting upon the hint which he had given him to ask no further
questions, he took the hand of Miss Prescott, and the party moved
forward at a rapid walk.  Little did he suspect the true cause of the
Huron's silence.  Knowing the solicitations that would be made by the
soldier and the girl for him to leave them at once and attend to the
safety of his wife, the noble Indian refrained from imparting the
truth.  It was his intention to conduct his friends as far as possible
during the night, that they might be beyond all danger, when,
accompanied by his son, he would make all haste to his Fluellina, and
carry her to some place beyond the reach of his inhuman foes.

For fully eight hours, the little party hurried through the woods.
Miss Prescott bore the fatigue much better than she expected.  Being
strong, healthy, and accustomed to long rambles and sports in the open
air, and having been so long inactive in the Shawnee village, the rapid
walk for a long time was pleasant and exhilarating to her.  It sent the
blood bounding through her glowing frame, and there being withal the
spice of an unseen and unknown danger to spur her on, she was fully
able to go twice the distance, when the Huron gave the order to halt.

It was broad daylight and the sun was just rising.  They were several
miles beyond the ruins of Captain Prescott's mansion, so that the
settlement could be easily reached in a few hours more.  Oonomoo
brought down a turkey with his rifle, dressed it, and had a fire
burning with which to cook it.  This was accomplished in a short time
under his skillful manipulations, and a hearty meal afforded to every
one of the little company.  Lieutenant Canfield noticed that neither
the Huron nor his son ate more than a mouthful or two, and he was now
satisfied that the news brought by the latter was bad and
disheartening.  He refrained, however, from referring to the subject
again, well knowing that the Indian would tell him all that he thought
proper, when the time arrived.

They had just completed their meal, when Niniotan and Oonomoo started,
raising their heads, as if something had caught their ears.  Listening
a moment, the latter said:

"Somebody comin'."

"Hebens, golly! am it Injines?" asked Cato, looking around for some
good place to hide.  The eyes of the soldier and Miss Prescott asked
the same question, and the Huron replied:

"Ain't Injins--walk too heavy--white men."

"They must be friends then," exclaimed the girl, springing up and
clapping her hands.

"Dey're comin'--hear 'em."

The dull tramp, tramp of men walking in regular file was distinctly
audible to all, and while they listened, a clear, musical voice called
out:

"This way, boys, we've a long tramp before we reach that infernal
Indian town."

"Your father, as I live!" whispered the soldier to the girl beside him.
The next moment, the blue uniform of an officer of the Federal army was
distinguished through the trees, and the manly form of Captain
Prescott, at the head of a file of a dozen men, came into full view.

"Hello! what have we here?" he asked, suddenly stopping and looking at
the company before him.  "Why there's Lieutenant Canfield as sure as I
am alive, and if that ain't my dear little daughter yonder, I hope I
may never lift my sword for Mad Anthony again.  And there's Oonomoo,
the best red-man that ever pulled the trigger of a rifle, with a little
pocket edition of himself, and grinning Cato too!  Why don't you come
to the arms of your father, sis, and let him hug you?"

This unexpected meeting with his loved daughter, when his worst fears
were aroused for her safety, caused the revulsion of feeling in Captain
Prescott, and his pleasantry is perhaps excusable when all the
circumstances are considered.  The tears of joy coursed down the
gray-headed soldier's cheeks as he pressed his cherished daughter to
his bosom, and murmured, "God bless you!  God bless you!" while the
hardy soldiers ranged behind him smiled, and several rubbed their eyes
as if dust had gotten in them.

"Is mother and sister well?" asked the daughter, looking up in her
father's face.

"Yes, well, but anxious enough about you."

"Our house and place is destroyed forever."

"Who cares, sis?  Who cares?  Haven't I you left?  Don't mention it."

"But the servants!  All were killed except poor Cato there."

"Ah! that is bad! that is bad!  I mourn them, poor fellows! poor
fellows!  But I have my own darling child left! my own darling child!"
and the overjoyed father again pressed his daughter to him.

"But what am I about?" he suddenly asked, with a surprised look.  "I
haven't spoken to the others here.  Lieutenant, allow me to
congratulate you, sir, on this happy state of affairs.  I congratulate
you, sir."

Captain Prescott had a way of repeating his remarks, while his radiant
face was all aglow with his hearty good-humor, that was irresistibly
contagious in itself.  His jovial kindness won every heart, and he was
almost idolized by his men.

"A happy turn, indeed; but, Captain, I am somewhat surprised to see you
here," said Lieutenant Canfield as he grasped the offered hand.

"Ah! yes, I haven't explained that yet; but the fact is, Lieutenant,
you hadn't been gone two hours--not two hours--when the General told me
I was to take charge of the garrison at the settlement, where my wife
and daughter now are.  I wasn't sorry to hear that--not sorry to hear
that, and as you were to be Lieutenant, I didn't think it would be
unpleasant to you either to be located so near our family--not
unpleasant at all, eh, Lieutenant?"

"Nothing, certainly, could be more agreeable to me," replied the
gallant young fellow, blushing deeply at the looks which were turned
upon him.

"Glad to hear it! glad to hear it!  Well, sir, I started right
off--right straight off, and tried my best to overtake you, but, bless
me, I might as well have tried to run away from my own shadow, as to
catch up with a young chap when he is in love.  I got to the settlement
yesterday, toward night, and the first thing I heard was that my house
had been burned, and my sweet little darling Mary there, either killed
or carried off a prisoner.  I felt bad about that," added the Captain,
wiping his eyes with his handkerchief, but smiling all the while, "yes,
I won't deny I felt a little bad about that.  They had all seen the
light from the settlement, and knowing the direction of my house, were
pretty sure it was that.  But, to be certain, one of the men came out
here yesterday, and found there was no mistake about it.  But the
queerest part of the matter was, that all the people, the garrison
especially, appeared to feel bad about it too--actually felt bad about
it.  And when I asked for volunteers, they all sprung forward and
insisted that they would go--insisted that they would go.  I picked out
those twelve there--because they had all been in Indian fights and
understood the country through which we would be compelled to go.  They
are all good fellows, and perfect phenomena, if you may believe all
they say--perfect phenomena.  You see that chap there, with the big
mouth and crossed eyes.  Well, sir, he informs me that he has dined off
a live Indian every morning for the last seventeen years, and is
certain that he should pine away and die, if he should be deprived of
his usual meal.  You see he is pretty nearly an Indian himself.  His
hair is black as a savage's, and if he goes a few months longer without
washing, he will have the war-paint all over his face.  That one
standing beside him, with a nose like a hickory knot and with feet like
flat-boats, calls himself 'half horse, half alligator, tipped with a
wild-cat and touched with a painter.'  The rest are about the same, so
that I have a good mind to march right into the Indian country on a
campaign against the whole set that have been in this business--the
whole set that have been in this business."

The pleasant humor with which this sarcasm was uttered, made every man
laugh and respect their commander the more.  They saw that while he
rather disliked the extravagant boasting in which several of them had
indulged, he still had great confidence in their skill and courage, as
was shown by his selection of them for this perilous enterprise.

"They are the right stuff," added the Captain.  "They ain't used to the
drill, but they will soon understand that.  I had some trouble to keep
them in line in the woods, as they couldn't exactly see the use, but
they were doing first rate, when we came upon you--doing first rate.
But, I declare, I haven't spoken to Oonomoo, there, I dare say he is at
the bottom of this rescue.  He generally is--generally is."

Stepping forward in front of the Huron, who with his son had stood
silent and gloomy, he said, as he grasped his hand:

"Oonomoo, receive the thanks of a delighted father for your kindness to
his daughter.  Your repeated services have won you the gratitude of
hundreds----"

"Cap'n," said the Huron, speaking quickly and earnestly, "the Shawnees
have found de lodge ob Oonomoo--his wife runnin' trough de woods--de
Shawnees chasin' her--Oonomoo must go."

"God bless me!  God bless me!" exclaimed Captain Prescott; "and here
the noble-hearted fellow has been waiting a half-hour without saying a
word, while my infernal tongue has been going all the time; that tongue
will be the death of me yet.  Your wife is in danger, eh?  The ----
Shawnees at their deviltry again here.  See here, men," said he,
turning around, "Oonomoo's wife is in danger, and are we going to help
her out or not, eh?  I want to know that.  Are we going to stand by and
let him do it alone, when for twenty years he has worked night and day
for us?"

"NO!" responded every voice, in thunder tones.

"I say, Captain, if I ain't counted in this muss, I'll never smile
agin.  Freeze me to death on a stump, if I won't walk into their
meat-houses in style, then my name ain't Tom Lannoch."

"Jes' place me whar tha'll be some heads to crack, with gougin' and
punchin' thrown in, and then count me in."

"And hyer's Dick Smaddock, what----"

"Order!" roared the Captain; "I'll arrange matters without any gabbing
from you.  We are losing time.  As we are pretty near the settlement,
and as there can be no danger between us and that, we will let the
Lieutenant take my daughter home, while we go with Oonomoo to shoot
Shawnees."

"I must protest against that," said Lieutenant Canfield.  "If I thought
there could possibly be any danger to Miss Mary, I would not think of
deserting her; but surely there cannot be.  I, therefore, propose that
Cato act as her guide, while all of us go to assist Oonomoo.  I could
never forgive myself if I failed to requite the faithful Huron, in such
a small degree, when the opportunity is given."

The suggestion of the young soldier received the enthusiastic support
of all; but, Captain Prescott, who could not bear the thought that his
daughter should be placed in the least peril, selected one of his men,
a bronzed border-ranger, who, accompanied by Cato, started at once for
the settlement with her, which (we may as well remark here) was safely
reached by them a few hours later.

"The matter is all arranged then," said Captain Prescott, when he had
selected the man who was to take charge of his daughter.  "We are now
ready to follow you, Oonomoo."

"Come quick, den--Oonomoo can't wait--leave his trail--all see it."

As the Huron spoke, his son bounded off in the woods and dashed away
like an arrow, while he followed him with such astonishing speed, that
he almost instantly disappeared from sight.

"God bless me! that's an original way of guiding us!" exclaimed the
Captain, taken aback by the unexpected disappearance of the Indian.

"The danger that threatens his wife is so imminent that he dare not
wait for our tardy movements," said Lieutenant Canfield.  "He will
leave a trail that your men can follow without the least difficulty,
and, I trust, we may come up in time to prevent anything serious
occurring to him and her.  His son joined him last night and brought
the news of his misfortune to him, but the noble fellow, although his
heart must have nearly burst within him, would not leave us until he
was assured of your daughter's safety."

"Noble chap! noble chap! he must be paid for such devotion.  Come, my
boys, let us lose no time.  As you all understand the woods better than
I do, I must select one of you to walk beside me and keep the trail in
sight, while the rest of you must remember and not fall out of line.
If a tree should stand in the way, just step around it, but don't lose
the step.  There's nothing like discipline--nothing like discipline."

The guide was selected, who took his station beside Captain Prescott,
and the word was given and away they started in the wake of the flying
Huron.




CHAPTER X.

CONCLUSION.


    I leave the Huron shore
    For emptier groves below!
    Ye charming solitudes,
    Ye tall ascending woods,
  Ye glassy lakes and prattling streams.
    Whose aspect still was sweet,
    Whether the sun did greet,
  Or the pale moon embrace you with her beams--
        Adieu to all!
    Adieu, the mountain's lofty swell,
    Adieu, thou little verdant hill,
  And seas, and stars, and skies, farewell!--P. FRENAU.


Away started Niniotan like a fawn, his father following at a rate that
kept both within a few feet of each other.  The densest portions of the
wood seemed to offer them no impediments, as they glided like rabbits
through them.  The boy trailed a rifle in his right hand with as much
ease and grace as a full-grown warrior, and the speed which he kept up,
mile after mile, seemed to have as little effect upon him as upon the
indurated frame of his father.  The step of neither lagged, and their
respiration was hardly quickened.  The dark eyes of Niniotan appeared
larger, as if expanded with terror, and looked as if they were fixed
upon some point, many leagues away in the horizon.  The habitual gloomy
expression rested upon the face of Oonomoo, and it needed no skillful
physiognomist to read the signs of an unusual emotion upon his swarthy
countenance.  It was seen in the dark scowl, the glittering eye, and
the compressed lip, although he spoke not a word until they had
penetrated far into the forest.

In something less than an hour, the swamp, in the interior of which was
the Huron's lodge, was reached; but instead of taking the usual route
to it, Niniotan diverged to the left, until they reached a portion of
the creek that was less swampy in its character.  Running along its
bank a few moments, the boy came upon a canoe, which he shoved into the
water, and, springing into it, took his seat in front.  Oonomoo was
scarce a second behind him.  The son pointed down-stream, and, dipping
deep the paddle, the Huron sent the frail vessel forward at a velocity
that was truly wonderful.  A half-mile at this rate, and a tributary of
the creek--a brook, merely--was reached, up which the canoe shot with
such speed, that a few minutes later it ran almost its entire length
where the water was no more than an inch in depth.  Springing ashore,
Niniotan darted off, closely followed by his father, until they reached
a portion of the wood so dense that they paused.

"Here was left Fluellina," said the boy, looking around at Oonomoo.
The latter uttered his usual signal, a tremulous, thrilling whistle,
similar to that by which he had made himself known to his child before,
but he received no response.  Three times it was repeated with a
considerable rest, when, like the faint echo far in the distance, came
back the response.  The Huron was about to plunge into the thicket,
when a sound caught his ear, and the next moment his wife was before
him.  Neither spoke a word, until they had stood a few seconds in a
fervent embrace, when Fluellina stepped back, and looking up in her
husband's face, said: "The Shawnees have found our home and are now
following me."

The husband became the warrior on the instant.  His woodcraft told him
that if his foes were searching for him and his, they would be in such
force that he could not hope to combat with them; and the only plan,
therefore, that offered him any safety was to fall back and meet his
white friends at the earliest possible moment.  In reaching the creek,
he had bent down the bushes, and broken the branches on the way so that
his trail could be followed without difficulty.

He now sped back to his canoe, which, when reached, he shoved into deep
water, and ran a considerable distance before he deemed it best to
enter.  Lifting Fluellina in his arms, he deposited her carefully in
it.  Niniotan leaped after her, and the next moment they were going
down the stream at a speed that seemed would tear the boat asunder
every moment.  Debouching into the creek, the canoe rounded gracefully
and went upward with undiminished velocity, until, in almost an
incredible space, the point of embarkation was reached, when Oonomoo
ran in and sprung ashore, followed instantly by his wife and son.

The Huron had scarcely landed, when his quick ear detected a suspicious
sound.  He glanced furtively around.  Nothing, however, was seen,
although his apprehensions of the proximity of his foes had assumed a
certainty.  Without pausing in the least, he instantly took the back
trail, Fluellina being close behind him, and Niniotan bringing up the
rear.  They had gone scarce a dozen steps when the Shawnee war-whoop
was heard, and full a score of the red demons sprung up seemingly from
the very ground, and plunged toward the fugitives.  Simultaneously
several rifles were discharged, and Oonomoo, who had thrown himself in
the rear of Fluellina upon the appearance of danger, knew by the sharp,
needle-like twinges in different parts of his body, that he was
severely wounded.  Flight was useless, and as he and his wife took
shelter behind separate trees, he called to his son: "Niniotan, prove
yourself a warrior, the son of Oonomoo, the Huron!"

As quick as lightning, the youth was also sheltered, and his gun
discharged.  A death-shriek from a howling Shawnee showed that the
training of Oonomoo had not been thrown away.  The boy reloaded and
waited his opportunity.

The Shawnees, seeing they had driven their foe to the wall at last,
prudently halted, as they were in no hurry to engage such a terrible
being in a hand-to-hand contest, overwhelming as were their own odds.
The Huron wisely held his fire, believing he could keep his enemies at
bay much better by such means than by discharging it.  The great point
with him was to defer the attack until the arrival of assistance, and
he had strong hopes that he could succeed in doing it.

Not Oonomoo's personal fear, but his excessive anxiety for the safety
of Fluellina, induced him now to adopt a resort that was fatal in its
consequences.  Knowing that Captain Prescott and his men could be at no
great distance, he gave utterance to a loud, prolonged whoop, which he
knew some of the rangers would recognize as a call for assistance, and
consequently hasten to his aid.  Unfortunately, the Shawnees also
understood the meaning of the signal, and satisfied that not a moment
was to be lost, they boldly left their cover and advanced to the attack.

The foremost of the approaching savages fell, shot through the heart by
the rifle of young Niniotan, and almost at the same instant the one by
his side had the ball of Oonomoo's rifle sent crashing through his
brain.  The Huron now sprung to the side of his wife, and drawing his
knife in his left, and his tomahawk in his right hand, he stood at bay!

It was a scene worthy the inspired pencil of the artist.  The
malignant, scowling Shawnees, steadily advancing upon the dauntless
Huron, who, though his moccasins were soaked with the blood from his
own wounds, stood as firm and immovable as the adamantine rock.  His
left leg was thrown somewhat in advance of his right, as if he were
about to spring, but in such a manner that his weight was perfectly
balanced.  The knife was held firmly, but not as it would have been
were he about to strike.  The tomahawk, however, was drawn back, as if
he were only holding it a second, while he selected his victim.  His
eyes! no imagination can conceive their fierce electric glitter as
their burning gaze was fixed upon his merciless enemies.  Black as
midnight, they seemed to emit palpable rays, that shot through the air
with an irresistibly penetrating power, and not once was their awful
power eclipsed for an instant by the closing of the eyelid.

Onward came the exultant Shawnees.  There was no checking them, and
throwing all his mighty strength in his right arm, Oonomoo hurled his
tomahawk like a thunderbolt among them.  Striking an Indian fair
between the eyes, it clove his skull as if it had been wax; and
striking another on the shoulder, cut through the flesh and bone as if
they were but the green leaves of the trees above, Fluellina sunk down
by the feet of her husband in prayer, while he, changing his knife to
his right hand, waited the shock of the coming avalanche!  So terrible
did the exasperated Huron appear, that the entire party of Shawnees
paused out of sheer horror of closing in with him.  Wounded and
bleeding as he was, they knew that he would carry many of their number
to the earth, before his defiant spirit could be driven out of him.
And at scarcely a dozen feet distant, the craven, cowardly wretches
poured a volley from their rifles upon both him and the kneeling woman
beside him.

[Illustration: So terrible did the exasperated Huron appear, that the
entire party of Shawnees paused out of sheer horror.]

Oonomoo did not leap or yell; but with his eyes still fixed upon his
enemies, and his knife still firmly clutched in his hand, commenced
slowly sinking backward to the earth.  The Shawnees saw it, and one of
them sprung forward, as if to claim his scalp, but he fell howling to
the ground, prostrated by a ball from the undaunted Niniotan who still
maintained his place behind his tree.  His companions were in the act
of moving forward, to avenge the deaths of hundreds of their comrades,
when the tramp of approaching men was heard, and a clear voice rung
out: "This way, boys!  I see the infernal copper-heads through the
trees.  Make ready, take aim--God bless me! you fired before the orders
were given."

At the first glimpse of the Shawnees, huddled together in a rushing
body, every one of the border men discharged his piece, without waiting
for the command, right in among them.  The destruction was fearful and
the panic complete.  Numbers came to the ground, writhing, dying and
dead, while the survivors scattered howling to the woods, and were seen
no more.

Shortly after Captain Prescott and Lieutenant Canfield had started with
their men on the trail of Oonomoo, they came upon an elderly man in the
forest who was hunting.  He proved to be Eckman, the Moravian
missionary, who had brought up and educated Fluellina, the wife of
Oonomoo, and to whom she made her stated visits for religious counsel
and encouragement.  Upon learning the object of the party, he at once
joined them, as he felt a fatherly affection for the Huron warrior.
Being a skillful backwoodsman, he acted as guide to the men,
proceeding, in spite of his years, at a rate which cost them
considerable effort to equal.  They had not gone a great distance, when
the shout of Oonomoo was heard, and the missionary understood its
significance.  Bounding forward, the men came upon the Shawnees at a
full run, Captain Prescott panting and still at their head, vainly
endeavoring to keep them in line and to make them aim and fire
together.  The missionary and Lieutenant Canfield took in the state of
affairs at once.  Niniotan was unhurt, and now came forward, his face
as rigid as marble.  Swelled to nearly bursting as was his heart, he
endeavored to obey the instructions of his father, and show himself a
warrior, by concealing his emotion to those around him.  The man of God
instantly ran to the prostrate Huron and his wife, the latter managing
to maintain a sitting position with great difficulty.  He saw both were
mortally wounded and would soon die.  Oonomoo lay flat upon his back,
breathing heavily, while the copious pools of blood around him showed
how numerous and severe were his wounds.  Lieutenant Canfield lifted
his head, while the missionary supported Fluellina.  The latter opened
her languid eyes, which instantly brightened as she recognized her
noble friend, and said in a low, sweet voice, speaking English
perfectly: "I am glad you have come, father.  Oonomoo and Fluellina are
dying.  We want you to smooth the way for us to the Bright Land."

"The way is already smoothed, my child, so that your feet can tread it.
Can I do anything to relieve your pain?"

"No; my body suffers, but my heart is on fire with joy.  Please attend
to Oonomoo," said Fluellina, looking toward him.

The Huron was so close to his wife, that by taking a position between
them, the missionary was enabled to support both.  Raising their heads
with the assistance of Lieutenant Canfield and Captain Prescott, he
laid them upon his lap in close proximity to each other.  The men stood
silent and affected witnesses of the scene.  Brushing the luxuriant
hair from the face of the dying Indian, the preacher said:

"Oonomoo, is there anything I can do for you?"

"Where be Niniotan?"

"Here," responded the boy, approaching him.

"Stand where you be, and see a Christian warrior die," he commanded, in
his native tongue.  "Where is Fluellina's hand?"

The affectionate wife heard the inquiry, and instantly closed her hand
in his.  He held it, in loving embrace.  The missionary spread a
blanket over the body and limbs of the Huron, so as to hide his
frightful wounds from sight.  A single stream, tiny, crimson and
glistening, wound down from the shoulder of Fluellina, over her bare
arm, to her waist, where it fell in rapid drops to the leaves below.
No one of her wounds were visible, although it was evident that
dissolution was proceeding rapidly with her.

The minister, at this point, noticed that the lips of Oonomoo were
moving.  Thinking he had some request to make, he leaned forward and
listened.  His soul was thrilled with holy joy when he heard
unmistakably the words of supplication.  Oonomoo was addressing the
