lengthy song, three qualities which alone would recommend it to any
audience of Jack Tars, as I have since had many occasions to observe.
The intense dolefulness of the ditty was not diminished by the fact that
the cook had no musical ear, and having started on a note that was no
note in particular, he flattened with every long-drawn lamentation till
the ballad became more of a groan than a song. When the grog-tub was
deposited, Dennis beckoned to the boatswain, and we made our way to his
side.

"Your cook's a vocal genius, anyhow, bo'sun," said he. "But don't ye
think we'd do more justice to our accomplishments, _and keep in tune_,
if we'd an accompaniment? Have ye such a thing as a fiddle about ye?"

The boatswain was delighted. Of course there was a fiddle, and I was
despatched for it. I should find it hanging on a hook at the end of the
plate-rack, and if the bow was not beside it it would be upon the shelf,
and there used to be a lump of resin and a spare string or two in an
empty division of the spice-box. The whole kit had belonged to a former
cook, a very musical nigger, who had died at sea, and bequeathed his
violin to his ship. Sambo had been well liked, and there were some old
hands would be well pleased to hear his fiddle once more.

It took me some little time to find everything, and when I got back to
Dennis another song had begun. A young sailor I did not know was singing
it, and the less said about it the better, except that it very nearly
led to a row. It was by way of being a comic song, but except for one
line which was rather witty as well as very nasty, there was nothing
humorous about it, unless that it was funny that any one could have been
indecent enough to write it, and any one else unblushing enough to sing
it. I am ashamed to say I had heard some compositions of a similar type
at Snuffy's, and it filled me with no particular amazement to hear a
good deal of sniggering in the circle round the spittoon, though I felt
miserably uncomfortable, and wondered what Mr. O'Moore would think. I
had forgotten Alister.

I was not likely soon to forget his face as I saw it, the blood swelling
his forehead, and the white wrath round his lips, when he gripped me by
the shoulder, saying, in broader Scotch than usual, "Come awa' wi' ye,
laddie! I'll no let ye stay. Come awa' oot of this accurst hole. I
wonder he doesna think black burning shame of himsel' to stand up before
grey-heided men and fill a callant's ears with filth like yon."

Happily just indignation had choked Alister's voice as well as his
veins, and I don't think many of the company heard this too accurate
summary of the situation. The boatswain did, but before he could speak,
Dennis O'Moore had sprung to the ground between them, and laying the
fiddle over his shoulder played a wild sort of jig that most effectually
and unceremoniously drowned the rest of the song, and diverted the
attention of the men.

"The fiddle's an old friend, so the bo'sun tells me," he said, nodding
towards the faces that turned to him.

"Aye, aye, sir."

"Why, I'm blessed if it isn't Sambo's old thing."

"It's your honour knows how to bring the heart out of it, anyhow."

"My eyes, Pat! You should ha' heerd it at the dignity ball we went
ashore for at Barbadoes. Did you ever foot the floor with a black
washerwoman of eighteen stun, dressed out in muslin the colour of orange
marmalade, and white kid shoes?"

"I did not, the darlin'!"

As the circle gossiped, Dennis tuned the fiddle, talking vehemently to
the boatswain between whiles.

"Bo'sun! ye're not to say a word to the boy. (Sit down, Alister, I tell
ye!) I ask it as a favour. He didn't mince matters, I'll allow, but it
was GOD'S truth, and no less, that he spoke. Come, bo'sun, who's a
better judge of manners than yourself? We'd had enough and to spare of
that, (Will ye keep quiet, ye cantankerous Scotchman! Who's harming ye
now? Jack, if ye move an inch, I'll break this fiddle over your head.)
Bo'sun! we're perishing for our grog, are ye aware?"

The diversion was successful. The boatswain, with a few indignant
mutterings, devoted himself to doling out the tots of grog, and then
proposed Dennis O'Moore's health in a speech full of his own style of
humour, which raised loud applause; Dennis commenting freely on the
text, and filling up awkward pauses with flourishes on Sambo's fiddle.
The boatswain's final suggestion that the ship's guest should return
thanks by a song, instead of a sentiment, was received with
acclamations, during which he sat down, after casting a mischievous
glance at Dennis, who was once more blushing and fidgeting with shyness.

"Ye've taken your revenge, bo'sun," said he.

"Them that blames should do better, sir," replied the boatswain, folding
his arms.

"A song! a song! Mr. O'Moore!" shouted the men.

"I only know a few old Irish songs," pleaded Dennis.

"Ould Ireland for ever!" cried Pat Shaughnessy.

"Hear! hear! Encore, Pat!" roared the men. They were still laughing.
Then one or two of those nearest to us put up their hands to get
silence. Sambo's fiddle was singing (as only voices and fiddles can
sing) a melody to which the heads and toes of the company soon began to
nod and beat:

               "La, l[)e] l[=a] la la, la la la, l[=a] l[)e] la, la
                L[=a], le l[=a] la la, la la la, la--l[)e] la la,"

hummed the boatswain. "Lor' bless me, Mr. O'Moore, I heard that afore
you were born, though I'm blessed if I know where. But it's a genteel
pretty thing!"

"It's all about roses and nightingales!" shouted Dennis, with comical
grimaces.

"Hear! hear!" answered the oldest and hairiest-looking of the sailors,
and the echoes of his approbation only died away to let the song begin.
Then the notes of Sambo's fiddle also dropped off, and I heard Dennis
O'Moore's beautiful voice for the first time as he gave his head one
desperate toss and began:

          "There's a bower of roses by Bendemeer's stream,
             And the nightingale sings round it all the night long.
           In the time of my childhood 'twas like a sweet dream
             To sit in the roses and hear the bird's song."

One by one the pipes were rested on the smokers' knees; they wanted
their mouths to hear with. I don't think the assembled company can have
looked much like exiles from flowery haunts of the nightingale, but we
all shook our heads, not only in time but in sympathy, as the clear
voice rose to a more passionate strain:

          "That bower and its music I never forget;
             But oft when alone in the bloom of the year,
           I think--is the nightingale singing there yet?
             Are the roses still bright by the calm Bendemeer?"

I and the oldest and hairiest sailor were sighing like furnaces as the
melody recommenced with the second verse:

          "No, the roses soon withered that hung o'er the wave,
             But some blossoms were gathered while freshly they shone,
           And a dew was distilled from their flowers, that gave
             All the fragrance of summer when summer was gone."

If making pot-pourri after my mother's old family recipe had been the
chief duty of able-bodied seamen, this could not have elicited more nods
of approbation. But we listened spell-bound and immovable to the passion
and pathos with which the singer poured forth the conclusion of his
song:

          "Thus memory draws from delight, ere it dies,
             An essence that breathes of it many a year;
           Thus bright to my soul--as 'twas then to my eyes--
             Is that bower on the banks of the calm Bendemeer."

And then (as somebody said) the noise we made was enough to scare the
sea-gulls off the tops of the waves.

"You scored that time, Mr. O'Moore," said the boatswain. "You'd make
your fortune in a music-hall, sir."

"Thank ye, bo'sun. Glad I didn't give ye your revenge, anyhow."

But the boatswain meant to strike nearer home. A ship's favourite might
have hesitated to sing after Dennis, so Alister's feelings may be
guessed on hearing the following speech:

"Mr. O'Moore, and comrades all. I believe I speak for all hands on this
vessel, when I say that we ain't likely to forget sech an agreeable
addition to a ship's company as the gentleman who has just given us a
taste of the nightingale's quality" (loud cheers). "But we've been
out-o'-way favoured as I may say, this voyage. We mustn't forget that
there's two other little strangers aboard" (roars of laughter). "They
'olds their 'eads rather 'igh p'raps, for _stowaways_" ("Hear! hear!"),
"but no doubt their talents bears 'em out" ("Hear, hear!" from Dennis,
which found a few friendly echoes). "Anyway, as they've paid us a visit,
without waiting to ask if we was at 'ome to callers, we may look to 'em
to contribute to the general entertainment. Alister Auchterlay will now
favour the company with a song."

The boatswain stood back and folded his arms, and fixed his eyes on the
sea-line, from which attitude no appeals could move him. I was very
sorry for Alister, and so was Dennis, I am sure, for he did his best to
encourage him.

"Sing 'GOD save the Queen,' and I'll keep well after ye with the
fiddle," he suggested. But Alister shook his head. "I know one or two
Scotch tunes," Dennis added, and he began to sketch out an air or two
with his fingers on the strings.

Presently Alister stopped him. "Yon's the 'Land o' the Leal'?"

"It is," said Dennis.

"Play it a bit quicker, man, and I'll try 'Scots wha hae.'"

Dennis quickened at once, and Alister stood forward. He neither fidgeted
nor complained of feeling shy, but as my eyes (I was squatted
cross-legged on the deck) were at the level of his knees, I could see
them shaking, and pitied him none the less, that I was doubtful as to
what might not be before _me_. Dennis had to make two or three false
starts before poor Alister could get a note out of his throat, but when
he had fairly broken the ice with the word "Scots!" he faltered no more.

The boatswain was cheated a second time of his malice. Alister could not
sing in the least like Dennis, but he had a strong manly voice, and it
had a ring that stirred one's blood, as he clenched his hands, and
rolled his Rs to the rugged appeal:

                    "Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled,
                     Scots, wham Bruce has aften led;
                     Welcome to your gory bed,
                        Or to victory!"

Applause didn't seem to steady his legs in the least, and he never moved
his eyes from the sea, and his face only grew whiter by the time he
drove all the blood to my heart with

                    "Wha will be a traitor knave?
                     Wha can fill a coward's grave?
                     Wha sae base as be a slave?
                        Let him turn and flee!"

"GOD forbid!" cried Dennis impetuously. "Sing that verse again, me boy,
and give us a chance to sing with ye!" which we did accordingly; but as
Alister and Dennis were rolling Rs like the rattle of musketry on the
word _turn_, Alister did turn, and stopped suddenly short. The captain
had come up unobserved.

"Go on!" said he, waving us back to our places.

By this time the solo had become a chorus. Beautifully unconscious, for
the most part, that the song was by way of stirring Scot against Saxon,
its deeper patriotism had seized upon us all. Englishmen, Scotchmen, and
sons of Erin, we all shouted at the top of our voices, Sambo's fiddle
not being silent. And I maintain that we all felt the sentiment with
our whole hearts, though I doubt if any but Alister and the captain knew
and sang the precise words:

                    "Wha for Scotland's king and law
                     Freedom's sword will strongly draw,
                     Freeman stand, or freeman fa',
                         Let him on wi' me!"




CHAPTER VIII.

        "'Tis strange--but true; for truth is always strange--
         Stranger than fiction."--BYRON.

        "Fair laughs the morn, and soft the zephyr blows."--GRAY.


The least agreeable part of our voyage came near the end. It was when we
were in the fogs off the coast of Newfoundland. The work that tired one
to death was not sufficient to keep one warm; the cold mist seemed to
soak through one's flesh as well as one's slops, and to cling to one's
bones as it clung to the ship's gear. The deck was slippery and cold,
everything, except the funnel, was sticky and cold, and the fog-horn
made day and night hideous with noises like some unmusical giant trying
in vain to hit the note Fa. The density of the fog varied. Sometimes we
could not see each other a few feet off, at others we could see pretty
well what we were about on the vessel, but could see nothing beyond.

We went very slowly, and the fog lasted unusually long. It included a
Sunday, which is a blessed day to Jack at sea. No tarring, greasing,
oiling, painting, scraping or scrubbing but what is positively
necessary, and no yarn-spinning but that of telling travellers' tales,
which seamen aptly describe as spinning yarns. I heard a great many that
day which recalled the school-master's stories, and filled my head and
heart with indefinable longings and impatience. More and more did it
seem impossible that one could live content in one little corner of this
interesting world when one has eyes to see and ears to hear, and hands
for work, and legs to run away with.

Not that the tales that were told on this occasion were of an
encouraging nature, for they were all about fogs and ice; but they were
very interesting. One man had made this very voyage in a ship that got
out of her course as it might be where we were then. She was too far to
the north'ard when a fog came on, as it might be the very fog we were in
at that moment, and it lasted, lifting a bit and falling again worse
than ever, just the very same as it was a-doing now. Cold? He believed
you this fog was cold, and you might believe him that fog was cold, but
the cold of both together would not be a patch upon what it was when
your bones chattered in your skin and you heard the ship's keel
grinding, and said "Ice!" "He'd seen some queer faces--dead and
living--in his time, but when _that_ fog lifted and the sun shone upon
walls of green ice on both sides above our head, and the captain's face
as cold and as green as them with knowing all was up--"

At this point the narrator was called away, and somebody asked,

"Has any one heard him tell how it ended?"

"I did," said Pat Shaughnessy, "and it spoilt me dinner that time."

"Go on, Pat! What happened to them?"

"The lowest depths of misfortune. Sorra a soul but himself and a boy
escaped by climbing to a ledge on the topmost peak of one of the
icebergs just in the nick of time to see the ship cracked like a walnut
between your fingers. And the worst was to come, bad luck!"

"What? Go on, Paddy! What did he and the boy do?"

"They just eat each other," faltered Pat. "But, Heaven be praised! a
whaler fetched off the survivor. It was then that he got the bad fever
though, so maybe he dreamt the worst."

I felt great sympathy with Pat's evident disrelish for this tale, but
the oldest and hairiest sailor seemed hardly to regard it as worth
calling an adventure. If you wanted to see ice that was ice, you should
try the coast of Greenland, he said. "Hartic Hexploration for choice,
