neck of Lightfoot. His eyes also blazed. He bounded out into a little
open place by the pond of Paddy the Beaver and there he waited.

Meanwhile Sammy Jay was flying about in the greatest excitement,
screaming at the top of his lungs, "A fight! A fight! A fight!" Blacky
the Crow, over in another part of the Green Forest, heard him and took
up the cry and at once hurried over to Paddy's pond. Everybody who was
near enough hurried there. Bobby Coon and Unc' Billy Possum climbed
trees from which they could see and at the same time be safe. Billy Mink
hurried to a safe place on the dam of Paddy the Beaver. Paddy himself
climbed up on the roof of his house out in the pond. Peter Rabbit and
Jumper the Hare, who happened to be not far away, hurried over where
they could peep out from under some young hemlock-trees. Buster Bear
shuffled down the hill and watched from the other side of the pond.
Reddy and Granny Fox were both there.

For what seemed like the longest time, but which was for only a minute,
Lightfoot and the big stranger stood still, glaring at each other.
Then, snorting with rage, they lowered their heads and plunged together.
Their antlers clashed with a noise that rang through the Green Forest,
and both fell to their knees. There they pushed and struggled. Then they
separated and backed away, to repeat the movement over again. It was a
terrible fight. Everybody said so. If they had not known before,
everybody knew now what those great antlers were for. Once the big
stranger managed to reach Lightfoot's right shoulder with one of the
sharp points of his antlers and made a long tear in Lightfoot's gray
coat. It only made Lightfoot fight harder.

Sometimes they would rear up and strike with their sharp hoofs. Back
and forth they plunged, and the ground was torn up by their feet. Both
were getting out of breath, and from time to time they had to stop for a
moment's rest. Then they would come together again more fiercely than
ever. Never had such a fight been seen in the Green Forest.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

AN UNSEEN WATCHER


As Lightfoot the Deer and the big stranger from the Great Mountain
fought in the little opening near the pond of Paddy the Beaver, neither
knew or cared who saw them. Each was filled fully with rage and
determined to drive the other from the Green Forest. Each was fighting
for the right to win the love of Miss Daintyfoot.

Neither of them knew that Miss Daintyfoot herself was watching them. But
she was. She had heard the clash of their great antlers as they had
come together the first time, and she had known exactly what it meant.
Timidly she had stolen forward to a thicket where, safely hidden, she
could watch that terrible fight. She knew that they were fighting for
her. Of course. She knew it just as she had known how both had been
hunting for her. What she didn't know for some time was which one she
wanted to win that fight.

Both Lightfoot and the big stranger were handsome. Yes, indeed, they
were very handsome. Lightfoot was just a little bit the bigger and it
seemed to her just a little bit the handsomer. She almost wanted him to
win. Then, when she saw how bravely the big stranger was fighting and
how well he was holding his own, even though he was a little smaller
than Lightfoot, she almost hoped he would win.

That great fight lasted a long time. To pretty Miss Daintyfoot it seemed
that it never would end. But after a while Lightfoot's greater size and
strength began to tell. Little by little the big stranger was forced
back towards the edge of the open place. Now he would be thrown to his
knees when Lightfoot wasn't. As Lightfoot saw this, he seemed to gain
new strength. At last he caught the stranger in such a way that he threw
him over. While the stranger struggled to get to his feet again,
Lightfoot's sharp antlers made long tears in his gray coat. The stranger
was beaten and he knew it. The instant he succeeded in getting to his
feet he turned tail and plunged for the shelter of the Green Forest.
With a snort of triumph, Lightfoot plunged after him.

But now that he was beaten, fear took possession of the stranger. All
desire to fight left him. His one thought was to get away, and fear gave
him speed. Straight back towards the Great Mountain from which he had
come the stranger headed. Lightfoot followed only a short distance. He
knew that that stranger was going for good and would not come back.
Then Lightfoot turned back to the open place where they had fought.
There he threw up his beautiful head, crowned by its great antlers, and
whistled a challenge to all the Green Forest. As she looked at him, Miss
Daintyfoot knew that she had wanted him to win. She knew that there
simply couldn't be anybody else so handsome and strong and brave in all
the Great World.




CHAPTER XXXIX

LIGHTFOOT DISCOVERS LOVE


Wonderfully handsome was Lightfoot the Deer as he stood in the little
opening by the pond of Paddy the Beaver, his head thrown back proudly,
as he received the congratulations of his neighbors of the Green Forest
who had seen him win the great fight with the big stranger who had come
down from the Great Mountain. To beautiful Miss Daintyfoot, peeping out
from the thicket where she had hidden to watch the great fight,
Lightfoot was the most wonderful person in all the Great World. She
adored him, which means that she loved him just as much as it was
possible for her to love.

But Lightfoot didn't know this. In fact, he didn't know that Miss
Daintyfoot was there. His one thought had been to drive out of the Green
Forest the big stranger who had come down from the Great Mountain. He
had been jealous of that big stranger, though he hadn't known that he
was jealous. The real cause of his anger and desire to fight had been
the fear that the big stranger would find Miss Daintyfoot and take her
away. Of course this was nothing but jealousy.

Now that the great fight was over, and he knew that the big stranger
was hurrying back to the Great Mountain, all Lightfoot's anger melted
away. In its place was a great longing to find Miss Daintyfoot. His
great eyes became once more soft and beautiful. In them was a look of
wistfulness. Lightfoot walked down to the edge of the water and drank,
for he was very, very thirsty. Then he turned, intending to take up once
more his search for beautiful Miss Daintyfoot.

When he turned he faced the thicket in which Miss Daintyfoot was hiding.
His keen eyes caught a little movement of the branches. A beautiful head
was slowly thrust out, and Lightfoot gazed again into a pair of soft
eyes which he was sure were the most beautiful eyes in all the Great
World. He wondered if she would disappear and run away as she had the
last time he saw her.

He took a step or two forward. The beautiful head was withdrawn.
Lightfoot's heart sank. Then he bounded forward into that thicket. He
more than half expected to find no one there, but when he entered that
thicket he received the most wonderful surprise in all his life. There
stood Miss Daintyfoot, timid, bashful, but with a look in her eyes which
Lightfoot could not mistake. In that instant Lightfoot understood the
meaning of that longing which had kept him hunting for her and of the
rage which had filled him when he had discovered the presence of the big
stranger from the Great Mountain. It was love. Lightfoot knew that he
loved Miss Daintyfoot and, looking into her soft, gentle eyes, he knew
that Miss Daintyfoot loved him.




CHAPTER XL

HAPPY DAYS IN THE GREEN FOREST


These were happy days in the Green Forest. At least, they were happy for
Lightfoot the Deer. They were the happiest days he had ever known. You
see, he had won beautiful, slender, young Miss Daintyfoot, and now she
was no longer Miss Daintyfoot but Mrs. Lightfoot. Lightfoot was sure
that there was no one anywhere so beautiful as she, and Mrs. Lightfoot
knew that there was no one so handsome and brave as he.

Wherever Lightfoot went, Mrs. Lightfoot went. He showed her all his
favorite hiding-places. He led her to his favorite eating-places. She
did not tell him that she was already acquainted with every one of them,
that she knew the Green Forest quite as well as he did. If he had
stopped to think how day after day she had managed to keep out of his
sight while he hunted for her, he would have realized that there was
little he could show her which she did not already know. But he didn't
stop to think and proudly led her from place to place. And Mrs.
Lightfoot wisely expressed delight with all she saw quite as if it were
all new.

Of course, all the little people of the Green Forest hurried to pay
their respects to Mrs. Lightfoot and to tell Lightfoot how glad they
felt for him. And they really did feel glad. You see, they all loved
Lightfoot and they knew that now he would be happier than ever, and that
there would be no danger of his leaving the Green Forest because of
loneliness. The Green Forest would not be the same at all without
Lightfoot the Deer.

Lightfoot told Mrs. Lightfoot all about the terrible days of the hunting
season and how glad he was that she had not been in the Green Forest
then. He told her how the hunters with terrible guns had given him no
rest and how he had had to swim the Big River to get away from the
hounds.

"I know," replied Mrs. Lightfoot softly. "I know all about it. You see,
there were hunters on the Great Mountain. In fact, that is how I
happened to come down to the Green Forest. They hunted me so up there
that I did not dare stay, and I came down here thinking that there might
be fewer hunters. I wouldn't have believed that I could ever be thankful
to hunters for anything, but I am, truly I am."

There was a puzzled look on Lightfoot's face. "What for?" he demanded.
"I can't imagine anybody being thankful to hunters for anything."

"Oh, you stupid," cried Mrs. Lightfoot. "Don't you see that if I hadn't
been driven down from the Great Mountain, I never would have found
_you_?"

"You mean, I never would have found _you_," retorted Lightfoot. "I guess
I owe these hunters more than you do. I owe them the greatest happiness
I have ever known, but I never would have thought of it myself. Isn't it
queer how things which seem the very worst possible sometimes turn out
to be the very best possible?"

Blacky the Crow is one of Lightfoot's friends, but sometimes even
friends are envious. It is so with Blacky. He insists that he is quite
as important in the Green Forest as is Lightfoot and that his doings are
quite as interesting. Therefore just to please him the next book is to
be Blacky the Crow.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Lightfoot the Deer, by 
Thornton W. Burgess

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF LIGHTFOOT ***

***** This file should be named 19079.txt or 19079.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/0/7/19079/

Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Juliet Sutherland and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
