counsel that any of them had any domestic troubles at all.

"Girls are a good deal more difficult to manage than boys, I'm afraid,"
sighed Aunt Theresa, repeating Mrs. O'Connor's _dictum_.

"Women are _dreadful_ creatures at any age," said Mrs. St. John to the
Major, opening her brown eyes in the way she always does when she is
talking to a gentleman. "I always _longed_ to have been a man."

[Eleanor says she hates to hear girls say they wish they were boys. If
they do wish it, I do not myself see why they should not say so. But one
thing has always struck me as very odd. If you meet a woman who is
incomparably silly, who does not know an art or a trade by which she
could keep herself from starvation, who could not manage the
account-books of a village shop, who is unpunctual, unreasoning, and in
every respect uneducated--a woman, in short, who has, one would think,
daily reason to be thankful that her necessities are supplied by other
people, she is pretty sure to be always regretting that she is not a
man.

Another, trick that some silly ladies have _riles_ me (as we say in
Yorkshire) far more than this odd ambition for responsibilities one is
quite incompetent to assume. Mrs. St. John had it, and as it was
generally displayed for the benefit of gentlemen, who seem as a rule to
be very susceptible to flattery, I suppose it is more a kind of
drawing-room "pretty talk" than the expression of deliberate opinions.
It consists of contrasting girls with boys and women with men, to the
disparagement of the former, especially in matters over which
circumstances and natural disposition are commonly supposed to give them
some advantage.

I remember hearing a fat, good-natured girl at one of Aunt Theresa's
garden-parties say, with all the impressiveness of full conviction,
"Girls are far more cruel than boys, really. You know, women are _much_
more cruel than men--oh, I'm _sure_ they are!" and the idea filled me
not less with amazement than with horror. This very young lady had been
most good-natured to us. She had the reputation of being an unselfish
and much-beloved elder sister. I do not think she would have hurt a fly.
Why she said this I cannot imagine, unless it was to please the young
gentleman she was talking to. I think he did look rather gratified. For
my own part, the idea worried my little head for a long time--children
give much more heed to general propositions of this kind than is
commonly supposed.]

There was one disadvantage in the very fulness of the sympathy the
ladies gave each other over their little affairs. The main point was apt
to be neglected for branches of the subject. If Mrs. Minchin consulted
Mrs. Buller about a cook, that particular cook might be discussed for
five minutes, but the rest of a two hours' visit would probably be
devoted to recollections of Aunt Theresa's cooks past and present, Mrs.
Minchin's "coloured cooks" in Jamaica, and the cooks engaged by the
mothers and grandmothers of both ladies.

Thus when Aunt Theresa took counsel with her friends about poor Matilda,
they hardly kept to Matilda's case long enough even to master the facts,
and on this particular occasion Mrs. St. John plunged at once into a
series of illustrative anecdotes of the most terrible kind, for she
always talked, as she dressed, in extremes. The moral of every story was
that Matilda should be sent to school.

"And I'll send you over last year's numbers of the _Milliner and
Mantua-maker_, dear Mrs. Buller. There are always lots of interesting
letters about people's husbands and children, and education, and that
sort of thing, in the column next to the pastry and cooling drinks
receipts. There was a wonderfully clever letter from a 'M.R.C.S.' about
the difficulty of managing young girls, and recommending a strict school
where he had sent his daughter. And next month there were long letters
from five 'British Mothers' and 'A Countess' who had not been able to
manage their daughters, and had sent them to this school, and were in
every way satisfied. Mr. St. John declared that all the letters were
written by one person to advertise the school, but he always does say
those sort of things about anything I'm interested in."

"You're very kind," said Mrs. Buller.

"There was a most extraordinary correspondence, too, after that
shoemaker's daughter in Lambeth was tried for poisoning her little
brother," continued Mrs. St. John. "The _Saturday Review_ had an article
on it, I believe, only Mr. St. John can't bring papers home from the
mess, so I didn't see it. The letters were all about all the dreadful
things done by girls in their teens. There were letters from twelve
'Materfamiliases,' I know, because the editor had to put numbers to
them, and four 'Paterfamiliases,' and 'An Anxious Widower,' and 'A
Minister,' and three 'M.D.'s.' But the most awful letter was from 'A
Student of Human Nature,' and it ended up that every girl of fifteen was
a murderess at heart. If I can only lay my hand on that number---- but
I've lent it to so many people, and there was a capital paper pattern in
it too, of the _jupon a l'Imperatrice_, ready pricked."

At this point Uncle Buller literally exploded from the room. Aunt
Theresa said something about draughts, but I think even Mrs. St. John
must have been aware that it was the Major who banged the door.

I was sitting on the footstool by the fire-place making a night-dress
for my doll. My work had been suspended by horror at Mrs. St. John's
revelations, and Major Buller's exit gave an additional shock in which I
lost my favourite needle, a dear little stumpy one, with a very fine
point and a very big eye, easy to thread, and delightful to use.

When Mrs. St. John went away Major Buller came back.

"I am sorry I banged the door, my dear," said he kindly, "but whatever
the tempers of girls may be made of at fifteen, mine is by no means
perfect, I regret to say, at fifty; and I _cannot_ stand that woman. My
dear Theresa, let me implore you to put all this trash out of your head
and get proper medical advice for the child at once. And--I don't like
to seem unreasonable, my dear, but--if you must read those delectable
articles to which Mrs. St. John refers, I wish you'd read them at her
house, and not bring them into ours. I'd rather the coarsest novel that
ever was written were picked up by the children, if the broad lines of
good and evil were clearly marked in it, than this morbid muddle of
disease and crime, and unprincipled parents and practitioners."

Uncle Buller seldom interfered so warmly; indeed, he seldom interfered
at all. I think Aunt Theresa would have been glad if he would have
advised her oftener.

"Indeed, Edward," said she, "I'll do anything you think right. And I'm
sure I wouldn't read anything improper myself, much less let the
children. And as to the _Milliner and Mantuamaker_ you need not be
afraid of that coming into the house unless I send for it. Mrs. St. John
is always promising to lend me the fashion-book, but she never remembers
it."

"And you'll have proper advice for Matilda at once?"

"Certainly, my dear."

Mrs. Buller was in the habit of asking the regimental Surgeon's advice
in small matters, and of employing a civilian doctor (whose fees made
him feel better worth having) in serious illness. She estimated the
seriousness of a case by danger rather than delicacy. So the Surgeon
came to see Matilda, and having heard her cough, promised to send a
"little something," and she was ordered to keep indoors and out of
draughts, and take a tablespoonful three times a day.

Matilda had not gone graciously through the ordeal of facing the
principal Surgeon in his uniform, and putting out her tongue for his
inspection; and his prescriptions did not tend to reconcile her to being
"doctored." Fresh air was the only thing that hitherto had seemed to
have any effect on her aches and pains, or to soothe her hysterical
irritability, and of this she was now deprived. When Aunt Theresa
called in an elderly civilian practitioner, she was so sulky and
uncommunicative, and so resolutely refused to acknowledge to any
ailments, that (his other prescriptions having failed to cure her
lassitude, and his pompous manner and professional visits rather
provoking her feverish perversity) the old doctor also recommended that
she should be sent to school.

Medical advice is very authoritative, and yet Uncle Buller hesitated.

"It's like packing a troublesome son off to the Colonies, my dear," said
he. "And though Dr. Brown may be justified in transferring his
responsibilities elsewhere, I don't think that parents should get rid of
theirs in this easy fashion."

But when Eleanor came, the Major's views underwent a change. If I went
with Matilda, and we had Eleanor Arkwright for a friend, he allowed that
he would consent.

"That is if the girl is willing to go. I will send no child of mine out
of my house against her will."

Major Buller asked her himself. Asked with so much kindness, and
expressed such cheery hopes that change of air, regular occupation, and
the society of other young people would make her feel "stronger and
happier" than she had seemed to be of late, that to say that Matilda
would have gone anywhere and done anything her father wished is to give
a feeble idea of the gush of gratitude which his sensible and
sympathetic words awoke in her. Unfortunately she could not keep herself
from crying just when she most wanted to speak, and Uncle Buller, having
a horror of "scenes," cut short the one interview in which Matilda felt
disposed to confide in her parents.

But she confided to me, when she came to bed that night (_I_ didn't mind
her crying between the sentences), that she was very, very sorry to have
been "so cross and stupid," and that if we were not going to school she
meant to try and be very different. I begged her to let me ask Uncle
Buller to keep us at home a little longer, but Matilda would not hear of
it.

"No, no," she sobbed, "not now. I should like to do something he and
Mamma want, and they want us to go to school."

For my own part I was quite willing to go, especially after I had seen
Eleanor Arkwright. So we were sent--to Bush House.




CHAPTER XIII.

AT SCHOOL--THE LILAC-BUSH--BRIDGET'S POSIES--SUMMER--HEALTH.


We knew when it was summer at Bush House, because there was a lilac-tree
by the gate, which had one large bunch of flowers on it in the summer
when Eleanor and I and Matilda were at school there. As we left the
house in double file to take our daily exercise on the high-road, the
girls would bob their heads to catch a whiff of the scent as they
passed, or to let the cool fragrant flowers brush their foreheads. On
this point Madame, our French governess, remonstrated in vain. We took
turns for the side next to the lilac, and sniffed away as long as there
was anything to smell. Even when the delicate colour began to turn
brown, and the fragrance vanished, we were loth to believe that the
blossoms were fading.

"I think I have got a cold in my head," said Matilda, who had plunged
her nose into the cluster one day in vain.

"You have a cough, ma foi! Mademoiselle Buller," replied Madame, who
seemed to labour under the idea that Matilda rather enjoyed this
privilege. But I had tried the lilac-bush myself with no better
success.

"I think," I whispered to Eleanor, in English, "that we have smelt it
all up."

"Parlez-vous francais, mesdemoiselles!" cried Madame, and we filed out
into the dusty street, at the corner of which sat another of our visible
tokens of the coming of the season of flowers; a dirty, shrivelled old
Irishwoman, full of benedictions and beggary, who, all through the
summer, sold "posies" to the passers-by. We school-girls were good
customers to her. We were all more or less sentimental, more or less
homesick, and had more or less of that susceptibility to the influence
of scents which may, some day, be the basis of a new school of medicine.
One girl had cultivated pinks and _Roses de Meaux_ in her own garden "at
home," and Bridget was soon wise enough to discover that a nosegay
composed of these materials was an irresistible temptation to that
particular customer. Another had a craving for the sight and smell of
southernwood (or "old man," as Eleanor called it), and preferred it in
combination with bachelor's buttons.

"There was an old woman 'at home' whom we used to go to tea with when we
were children--my brother and I," she said; "there were such big bunches
of southernwood by her cottage. And bachelor's buttons all round the
garden."

The brother was dead, I knew, and there were two flattened "buttons" and
a bit of withered "old man" gummed into her Bible. "Picked the last day
we were out together. Before he was taken ill with scarlet fever," she
told me. She had the boy's portrait in a standing frame, and, little
space as we had in our bedrooms, the other girls piled their brushes and
ribbon-boxes on one side of the looking-glass as best they could, and
left the rest of the dressing-table sacred to his picture, and to the
Bible, and the jar of Bridget's flowers, which stood before the likeness
as if it had been that of a patron saint.

For my own part I was very ignorant of the names and properties of
English flowers. I knew some by sight, from Adelaide St. Quentin's
bouquets, and from my great-grandfather's sketches; and I knew the names
of others of which Adolphe had given me plants, and of which I was glad
to see the flower. As I had plenty of pocket-money I was a liberal
customer, and I made old Bridget tell me the names of the flowers in her
bunches. I have since found out that whenever she was at fault she
composed a name upon the spot, with the ready wit and desire to please
characteristic of her nation. These names were chiefly connected with
the Blessed Virgin and the saints.

"The Lord blesh ye, my dear," she would say; "that's 'Mary's flower';"
or, "Sure it's the 'Blessed Virgin's spinning-wheel,' and a pretty name
too!"

A bitter-smelling herb which she commended to me as "Saints' Savory," I
afterwards learned to be tansy.

The youngest of us, a small, silent little orphan, had bought no posy
till one day she quietly observed, "If you could get me a peony, I would
buy it."

The peony was procured; so large, so round, and so red, that some one
unfeelingly suggested that it should be cut up for pickled cabbage. The
little miss walked home with it in her hand, looking at it as
sentimentally as if it had been a forget-me-not. As we had been
hard-hearted enough to laugh at it, we never learned the history which
made it dear.

Madame would certainly never have allowed us to break our ranks, and
chaffer with Bridget, but that some one had been lucky enough to think
of giving her bouquets.

Madame liked flowers--as ornaments--and was sentimental herself, after a
fashion, a sentimentality of appearances. She liked a bright spot of
colour on her sombre dresses too, and she was economical; for every day
that she had a bright bouquet a day's wear and tear was saved to her
neck-ribbons. She pinned the bright flowers by her very clean collar,
and not very clean throat, and permitted us to supply ourselves also
from Bridget's basket.

A less pleasant sign of summer than the lilac-blossom or Bridget's
flower-basket was the heat. It was hot in the dusty, draughty streets of
the little town. The empty bedrooms at Bush House were like ovens, and
the well-filled school-room was much worse. Madame would never hear any
complaints of the heat from me or from Matilda. Summer at Bush House, in
the nature of things, could be nothing to summer in India, to which we
were accustomed. It was useless to point out that in India the rooms in
which we lived were large, well shaded, and ventilated by constant
currents of fresh air. Also that there, our heaviest meal, our longest
walk, and our hardest work were not all crowded into the hottest hours
of the day.

"England is at no time so warm as India," said Madame.

"I suppose we are not as hot as the cook," suggested little "Peony" as
we now called her, one very hot day, when we sat languidly struggling
through our work in the stifling atmosphere of the school-room. "I
thought of her to-day when I looked at that great fat leg of roast
mutton. We're better off than she is."

"And she's better off than if she were in the Black Hole of Calcutta;
but that doesn't make either her or us cool," said Emma Lascelles, an
elder girl. "Don't preach, Peony; lessons are bad enough in this heat."

"I shan't eat any dinner to-morrow, I think," said Eleanor; "I cannot
keep awake after it this weather, so it's no use."

"I wish I were back at Miss Martin's for the summer," said another girl.

We knew to what this referred, and Madame being by a rare chance absent,
we pressed for an account, in English, of Miss Martin's arrangements in
the hot weather. "Miss Martin's" was a school at which this girl had
been before she came to Bush House.

"I can't think why on earth you left her," said Eleanor.

"Well, this is nearer home for one thing, and the masters are better
here, certainly. But she did take such care of us. It wasn't everlasting
backaches, and headaches, and coughs, and pains in your side all along.
And when the weather got hot (and it was a very warm summer when I was
there), and she found we got sleepy at work after dinner, and had
headaches in the afternoon, she said she thought we had better have a
scrap meal in the middle of the day, and dine in the cool of the
evening; and so we used to have cold rice-pudding or thick
bread-and-butter, such as we should have had for tea, or anything there
was, and tumblers of water, at one, and at half-past five we used to
wash and dress; and then at six, just when we were getting done up with
the heat and work, and yet cool enough to eat, we had dinner. I can tell
you a good fat roast leg of mutton looked all right then! It cured all
our headaches, and we worked twice as well, both at midday work and at
getting lessons ready for next day after dinner. I know----"

"Tais-toi, Lucy!" hissed Peony through her teeth. "Madame!"

"Donnez-moi cette grammaire, Marguerite, s'il vous plait," said Lucy, as
Madame entered.

And I gave her the grammar, and we set to work again, full of envy for
the domestic arrangements of Miss Martin's establishment during the dog
days.

If there is a point on which Eleanor and I are quite agreed, among the
many points we discuss and do not always agree upon, it is that of the
need for a higher education for women. But ill as I think our sex
provided for in this respect, and highly as I value good teaching, I
would rather send a growing girl to a Miss Martin, even for fewer
"educational advantages," and let her start in life with a sound,
healthy constitution and a reasonable set of nerves, than have her head
crammed and her health neglected under "the first masters," and so good
an overseer as "Madame" to boot. For Madame certainly made us work, and
was herself indefatigable.

The reckless imprudence of most girls in matters of health is
proverbial, the wisdom of young matrons in this respect is not beyond
reproach, and the lore which long and painful experience has given to
older women is apt, like other lessons from that stern teacher, to come
too late. It should at least avail to benefit their daughters, were it
not that custom prescribes that they also should be kept in the dark
till instructed in turn by the lamentable results of their ignorance,
too often only when these are past repair.

Whether, though there are many things that women have no knowledge of,
and many more of which their knowledge is superficial, their lack of
learning on these points being erudition compared with their crass
ignorance of the laws of health, the matter is again one of education;
or whether it is an unfortunate development of a confusion between
ignorance and innocence, and of mistaken notions of delicacy, who shall
say? Unhappily, a studied ignorance of the ills that flesh is heir to is
apt to bring them in double force about one's ears, and this kind of
delicate-mindedness to bring delicacy of body in its train. Where it
guides the counsels of those in charge of numbers of young people (as in
Miss Mulberry's case), it is apt to result in the delicacy (more or
less permanent) of several bodies.
