distant cry. It was a low, wailing note that was not unpleasant,
softened by the spaces over which it came. It seemed to be far behind
them, but inclining to the right, and after a few moments there came
another faint cry just like it, also behind them, but far to the left.
Despite the soft, wailing note both Henry and Paul felt a shiver run
through them. The strange low sound, coming in the utter silence of the
night, had in it something ominous.

"It was the cry of a wolf," said Paul.

"And his brother wolf answered," said Henry.

Shif'less Sol was just behind them, and they heard him laugh, a low
laugh, but full of irony. Paul wheeled about at once, his pride aflame
at the insinuation that he did not know the wolf's long whine.

"Well, wasn't it a wolf--and a wolf that answered?" he asked.

"Yes, a wolf an' a wolf that answered," replied Shif'less Sol with
sardonic emphasis, "but they had only four legs between 'em. Them was
the signal cries of the Shawnees, an', as Tom has been tellin' you all
the time, they're hot on our trail. It's a mighty lucky thing for us we
didn't undertake to stay all night back there where we stopped."

Paul turned pale again, but his courage as usual came back. "Thank God
it will be daylight soon," he murmured to himself, "and then if they
overtake us we can see them."

Faint and far, but ominous and full of threat came the howl of the wolf
again, first from the right and then from the left, and then from points
between. Henry noticed that Ross and Shif'less Sol seemed to draw
themselves together, as if they would make every nerve and muscle taut,
and then his eyes shifted to Mr. Pennypacker, and seeing him, he knew at
once that the master did not understand; he had not heard the words of
Shif'less Sol.

"It seems that we are pursued by a pack of wolves instead of a war
party," said Mr. Pennypacker. "At least we are numerous enough to beat
off a lot of cowardly four-footed assailants."

Henry smiled from the heights of his superior knowledge.

"Those are not wolves, Mr. Pennypacker," he said, "those are the
Shawnees calling to one another."

"Then, why in Heaven's name don't they speak their own language!"
exclaimed the exasperated schoolmaster, "instead of using that which
appertains only to the prowling beast?"

Henry, despite himself, was forced to smile, but he turned his face and
hid the smile--he would not offend the schoolmaster whom he esteemed
sincerely.

The dawn now began to brighten. The sun, a flaming red sword, cleft the
gray veil, and then poured down a torrent of golden beams upon the vast,
green wilderness of Kentucky. Henry, as he looked around upon the little
band, realized what a tiny speck of human life they were in all those
hundreds of miles of forest, and what risks they ran.

Ross gave the word to halt, and again they ate of cold food. While the
others sat on fallen timber or leaned against tree trunks, Ross and Sol
talked in low tones, but Henry could see that all their words were
marked by the deepest earnestness. Ross presently turned to the men and
said in tones of greatest gravity:

"All of you heard the howlin' just afore dawn, an' I guess all of you
know it was not made by real wolves, but by Shawnees, callin' to each
other an' directin' the chase of us. We've come fast, but they've come
faster, an' I know that by noon we'll have to fight."

The schoolmaster's eyes opened in wonder.

"Do you really mean to say that they are overhauling us?" he asked.

"I shore do," replied Ross. "You see, they're better trained travelers
for woods than we are, an' they are not hampered by anythin'."

Mr. Pennypacker said nothing more, but his lips suddenly closed tightly
and his eyes flashed. In the great battle ground of the white man and
the red man, called Kentucky, the early schoolmaster was as ready as any
one else to fight.

Ross and Sol again consulted and then Ross said:

"We think that since we have to fight it would be better to fight when
we are fresh and steady and in the best place we can find."

All the men nodded. They were tired of running and when Ross gave the
word to stop again they did so promptly. The questioning eyes of both
Ross and Sol roamed round the forest and finally and simultaneously the
two uttered a low cry of pleasure. They had come into rocky ground and
they had been ascending. Before them was a hill with a rather steep
ascent, and dropping off almost precipitously on three sides.

"We couldn't find a better place," said Ross loud enough for all to
hear. "It looks like a fort just made for us."

"But there is no line of retreat," objected the schoolmaster.

"We had a line of a retreat last night and all this mornin' an' we've
been followin' it all the time," rejoined the leader. "Now we don't need
it no more, but what we do need to do is to make a stan'-up fight, an'
lick them fellers."

"And save our salt," added the master.

"Of course," said Ross emphatically. "We didn't come all these miles an'
work all these days just to lose what we went so far after an' worked so
hard for."

They retreated rapidly upon the great jutting peninsula of rocky soil,
which fortunately was covered with a good growth of trees, and tethered
the horses in a thick grove near the end.

"Now, we'll just unload our salt an' make a wall," said Ross with a
trace of a smile. "They can shoot our salt as much as they please, just
so they don't touch us."

The bags of salt were laid in the most exposed place across the
narrowest neck of the peninsula and they also dragged up all the fallen
tree trunks and boughs that they could find to help out their primitive
fortification. Then they sat down to wait, a hard task for men, but
hardest of all for two boys like Henry and Paul.

Two of the men went back with the horses to watch over them and also to
guard against any possible attempt to scale the cliff in their rear, but
the others lay close behind the wall of salt and brushwood. The sun
swung up toward the zenith and shone down upon a beautiful world. All
the wilderness was touched with the tender young green of spring and
nothing stirred but the gentle wind. The silky blue sky smiled over a
scene so often enacted in early Kentucky, that great border battle
ground of the white man and the red, the one driven by the desire for
new and fertile acres that he might plow and call his own, the other by
an equally fierce desire to retain the same acres, not to plow nor even
to call his own, but that he might roam and hunt big game over them at
will.

The great red eye of the sun, poised now in the center of the heavens,
looked down at the white men crouched close to the earth behind their
low and primitive wall, and then it looked into the forest at the red
men creeping silently from tree to tree, all the eager ferocity of the
man hunt on the face of everyone.

But Paul and Henry, behind their wall, saw nothing and heard nothing but
the breathing of those near them. They fingered their rifles and through
the crevices between the bags studied intently the woods in front of
them, where they beheld no human being nor any trace of a foe. Henry
looked from tree to tree, but he could see no flitting shadow. Where the
patches of grass grew it moved only with the regular sweep of the
breeze. He began to think that Ross and Sol must be mistaken. The
warriors had abandoned the pursuit. He glanced at Ross, who was not a
dozen feet away, and the leader's face was so tense, so eager and so
earnest that Henry ceased to doubt, the man's whole appearance indicated
the knowledge of danger, present and terrible.

Even as Henry looked, Ross suddenly threw up his rifle, and, apparently
without aim, pulled the trigger. A flash of fire leaped from the long
slender muzzle of blue steel, there was a sharp report like the swift
lash of a whip, and then a cry, so terrible that Henry, strong as he
was, shuddered in every nerve and muscle. The short high-pitched and
agonizing shout died away in a wail and after it came silence, grim,
deadly, but so charged with mysterious suspense that both Henry and Paul
felt the hair lifting itself upon their heads. Henry had seen nothing,
but he knew well what had happened.

"They've come and Ross has killed one of 'em," he whispered breathlessly
to Paul.

"That yell couldn't mean anything else," said Paul trembling. "I'll hear
it again every night for a year."

"I hope we'll both have a chance to hear it again every night for a
year," said Henry with meaning.

The master crouched nearer to the boys. He was one of the bravest of the
men and in that hour of danger and suspense his heart yearned over these
two lads, his pupils, each a good boy in his own way. He felt that it
was a part of his duty to get them safely back to Wareville and their
parents, and he meant to fulfill the demands of his conscience.

"Keep down, lads," he said, touching Henry on his arm, "don't expose
yourselves. You are not called upon to do anything, unless it comes to
the last resort."

"We are going to do our best, of course, we are!" replied Henry with
some little heat.

He resented the intimation that he could not perform a man's full duty,
and Mr. Pennypacker, seeing that his feelings were touched, said no
more.

A foreboding silence followed the death cry of the fallen warrior, but
the brilliant sunshine poured down on the woods, just as if it were a
glorious summer afternoon with no thought of strife in a human breast
anywhere. Henry again searched the forest in front of them, and,
although he could see nothing, he was not deceived now by this
appearance of silence and peace. He knew that their foes were there,
more thirsty than ever for their blood, because to the natural desire
now was added the tally of revenge.

More than an hour passed, and then the forest in front of them burst
into life. Rifles were fired from many points, the sharp crack blending
into one continuous ominous rattle; little puffs of white smoke arose,
whistling bullets buried themselves with a sighing sound in the bags of
salt, and high above all rang the fierce yell, the war whoop of the
Shawnees, the last sound that many a Kentucky pioneer ever heard.

The terrible tumult, and above all, the fierce cry of the warriors sent
a thrill of terror through Paul and Henry, but their disciplined minds
held their bodies firm, and they remained crouched by the primitive
breastwork, ready to do their part.

"Steady, everybody! Steady!" exclaimed Ross in a loud sharp voice, every
syllable of which cut through the tumult. "Don't shoot until you see
something to shoot at, an' then make your aim true!"

Henry now began to see through the smoke dusky figures leaping from tree
to tree, but always coming toward them. It was his impulse to fire, the
moment a flitting figure appeared, gone the next instant like a shadow,
but remembering Ross's caution and their terrible need he restrained
himself although his finger already lay caressingly on the trigger.
Around him the rifles had begun to crack. Ross and Sol were firing with
slow deliberate aim, and then reloading with incredible swiftness, and
down the line the others were doing likewise. Bullets were spattering
into trunks and boughs, or burying themselves with a soft sigh in the
salt, but Henry could not see that anybody was yet hurt.

He saw presently a dark figure passing from one tree to another and the
passage was long enough for him to take a good aim at a hideously
painted breast. He pulled the trigger and then involuntarily he shut his
eyes--he was a hunter, but he had never hunted men before. When he
looked again he saw a blur upon the ground, and despite himself and the
fight for life, he shuddered. Paul beside him was now in a state of wild
excitement. The smaller boy's nerves were not so steady and he was
loading and firing almost at random. Finally he lifted himself almost
unconsciously to his full height, but he was dragged down the next
instant, as if he had been seized from below by a bear.

"Paul!" fiercely exclaimed the schoolmaster, all the instincts of a
pedagogue rising within him, "if you jump up that way again exposing
yourself to their bullets, I'll turn you over my knee right here, big as
you are, and give you a licking that you'll remember all your life!"

The master was savagely in earnest and Paul did not jump up again. Henry
fired once more, and a third time and the tumult rose to its height.
Then it ceased so suddenly and so absolutely that the silence was
appalling. The wind blew the smoke away, a few dark objects lay close to
the ground among the trees before them, but not a sound came from the
forest, and no flitting form was there.




CHAPTER IX

THE ESCAPE


Henry and Paul, with their eyes at the crevices, stared and stared, but
they saw only those dark, horrible forms lying close to the earth, and
heard again the peaceful wind blowing among the peaceful trees. The
savage army had melted away as if it had never been, and the dark
objects might have been taken for stones or pieces of wood.

"We beat 'em off, an' nobody on our side has more'n a scratch,"
exclaimed Shif'less Sol jubilantly.

"That's so," said Ross, casting a critical eye down the line, "it's
because we had a good position an' made ready. There's nothin' like
takin' a thing in time. How're you, boys?"

"All right, but I've been pretty badly scared I can tell you," replied
Paul frankly. "But we are not hurt, are we, Henry?"

"Thank God," murmured the schoolmaster under his breath, and then he
said aloud to Ross: "I suppose they'll leave us alone now."

Ross shook his head.

"I wish I could say it," he replied, "but I can't. We've laid out four
of 'em, good and cold, an' the Shawnees, like all the other redskins,
haven't much stomach for a straightaway attack on people behind
breastworks; I don't think they'll try that again, but they'll be up to
new mischief soon. We must watch out now for tricks. Them's sly devils."

Ross was a wise leader and he gave food to his men, but he cautioned
them to lie close at all times. Two or three bullets were fired from the
forest but they whistled over their heads and did no damage. They seemed
safe for the present, but Ross was troubled about the future, and
particularly the coming of night, when they could not protect themselves
so well, and the invaders, under cover of darkness, might slip forward
at many points. Henry himself was man enough and experienced enough to
understand the danger, and for the moment, he wondered with a kind of
impersonal curiosity how Ross was going to meet it. Ross himself was
staring at the heavens, and Henry, following his intent eyes, noticed a
change in color and also that the atmosphere began to have a different
feeling to his lungs. So much had he been engrossed by the battle, and
so great had been his excitement, that such things as sky and air had no
part then in his life, but now in the long dead silence, they obtruded
themselves upon him.

The last wisp of smoke drifted away among the trees, and the sunlight,
although it was mid-afternoon, was fading. Presently the skies were a
vast dome of dull, lowering gray, and the breeze had a chill edge. Then
the wind died and not a leaf or blade of grass in the forest stirred.
Somber clouds came over the brink of the horizon in the southwest, and
crept threateningly up the great curve of the sky. The air steadily
darkened, and suddenly the dim horizon in the far southwest was cut by a
vivid flash of lightning. Low thunder grumbled over the distant hills.

"It's a storm, an' it's to be a whopper," said Shif'less Sol.

"Ay," returned Ross, who had been back among the horses, "an' it may
save us. All you fellows be sure to keep your powder dry."

There would be little danger of that fatal catastrophe, the wetting of
the powder, as it was carried in polished horns, stopped securely, nor
would there be any danger either of the salt being melted, as it was
inclosed in bags made of deerskin, which would shed water.

"One of the men," continued Ross, "has found a big gully running down
the back end of the hill, an' I think if we're keerful we can lead the
horses to the valley that way. But just now, we'll wait."

Henry and Paul were watching, as if fascinated. They had seen before the
great storms that sometimes sweep the Mississippi Valley, but the one
preparing now seemed to be charged with a deadly power, far surpassing
anything in their experience. It came on, too, with terrible swiftness.
The thunder, at first a mere rumble, rose rapidly to crash after crash
that stunned their ears. The livid flash of lightning that split the
southwest like a flaming sword appeared and reappeared with such
intensity that it seemed never to have gone. The wind rose and the
forest groaned. From afar came a sullen roar, and then the great
hurricane rushed down upon them.

"Lie flat!" shouted Ross.

All except four or five who held the struggling and frightened horses
threw themselves upon the ground, and, although Henry and Paul hugged
the earth, their ears were filled with the roar and scream of the wind,
and the crackle of boughs and whole tree trunks snapped through, like
the rattle of rifle fire. The forest in front of them was quickly filled
with fallen trees, and fragments whistled over their heads, but
fortunately they were untouched.

The great volley of wind was gone in a few moments, as if it were a
single huge cannon shot. It whistled off to the eastward, but left in
its path a trail of torn and fallen trees. Then in its path came the
sweep of the great rain; the air grew darker, the thunder ceased to
crash, the lightning died away, and the water poured down in sheets over
the black and mangled forest.

"Now boys, we'll start," said Ross. "Them Shawnees had to hunt cover,
an' they can't see us nohow. Up with them bags of salt!"

In an incredibly short time the salt was loaded on the pack horses and
then they were picking their way down the steep and dangerous gully in
the side of the hill. Henry, Paul and the master locked hands in the
dark and the driving rain, and saved each other from falls. Ross and Sol
seemed to have the eyes of cats in the dark and showed the way.

"My God!" murmured Mr. Pennypacker, "I could not have dreamed ten years
ago that I should ever take part in such a scene as this!"

Low as he spoke, Henry heard him and he detected, too, a certain note of
pride in the master's tone, as if he were satisfied with the manner in
which he had borne himself. Henry felt the same satisfaction, although
he could not deny that he had felt many terrors.

After much difficulty and some danger they reached the bottom of the
hill unhurt, and then they sped across a fairly level country, not much
troubled by undergrowth or fallen timber, keeping close together so that
no one might be lost in the darkness and the rain, Ross, as usual,
leading the line, and Shif'less Sol bringing up the rear. Now and then
the two men called the names of the others to see that all were present,
but beyond this precaution no word was spoken, save in whispers.

Henry and Paul felt a deep and devout thankfulness for the chance that
had saved them from a long siege and possible death; indeed it seemed to
them that the hand of God had turned the enemy aside, and in their
thankfulness they forgot that, soaked to the bone, cold and tired, they
were still tramping through the lone wilderness, far from Wareville.

The darkness and the pouring rain endured for about an hour, then both
began to lighten, streaks of pale sky appeared in the east, and the
trees like cones emerged from the mist and gloom. All of the
salt-workers felt their spirits rise. They knew that they had escaped
from the conflict wonderfully well; two slight wounds, not more than the
breaking of skin, and that was all. Fresh strength came to them, and as
they continued their journey the bars of pale light broadened and
deepened, and then fused into a solid blue dawn, as the last cloud
disappeared and the last shower of rain whisked away to the northward. A
wet road lay before them, the drops of water yet sparkling here and
there, like myriads of beads. Ross drew a deep breath of relief and
ordered a halt.

"The Shawnees could follow us again," he said, "but they know now that
they bit off somethin' a heap too tough for them to chaw, an' I don't
think they'll risk breaking a few more teeth on it, specially after
havin' been whipped aroun' by the storm as they must 'a been."

"And to think we got away and brought our salt with us, too!" said Mr.
Pennypacker.

