that."




CHAPTER XVI.

AN UNPLEASANT ADVENTURE.


A week later Jasper was one of the passengers on a train bound for St.
Louis, and already within sixty miles of that flourishing city. He had
stopped over at Niagara and Cincinnati--a day or so at each place. He
gratified his desire to see the great cataract, and felt repaid for
doing so, though the two stops trenched formidably upon his small
capital. Indeed, at the moment when he is introduced anew to the
reader's notice he had but ten dollars remaining of the sum with which
he started. He was, however, provided, besides, with a through ticket to
St. Louis.

He had been sitting alone, when a stranger entering the car seated
himself in the vacant seat.

Looking up, Jasper noticed that he was a tall man, shabbily dressed,
with thin, sallow face and a swelling in the left cheek, probably
produced by a quid of tobacco.

"Good-mornin', colonel," said the stranger, sociably.

"Good-morning, sir," said Jasper, smiling. "I haven't the honor of being
a colonel."

"Haven't you, cap'n? Well, that ain't of no account. It'll come in time.
Where are you travelling?"

"To St. Louis."

"Ever been there afore?"

"No; this will be my first visit."

"You don't say! Where may you be from?"

"From New York State," answered Jasper, amused.

The stranger drew from his pocket a package of chewing tobacco and
passed it politely to Jasper.

"Help yourself, colonel," he said hospitably.

"No, thank you; I don't chew."

"Shoo, you don't say so! High time you began, then."

"I don't think I shall ever form the habit of chewing."

"Yes, you will, colonel; everybody does. Travellin' on business?"

"Well, not exactly," said Jasper, hesitatingly. "That is, I am looking
for a chance to go into business."

"Got any capital?" interjected the stranger, carelessly, squirting a
yellow stream upon the floor of the car.

"Oh, I don't expect to go into business for myself at present," said
Jasper, amused at the thought.

"No?" said the other, reflectively. "If you had five thousand dollars I
might take you into partnership."

"What is your business?" asked Jasper, with curiosity.

"Cotton," said the stranger. "I'm a cotton broker. I do a large
business."

"You don't look like it," thought Jasper, looking at his shabby costume.

"You don't want a clerk, do you?" asked our hero.

"Well, no, colonel. There ain't any vacancy now in my establishment. May
be soon."

Had Jasper felt favorably impressed with his companion he would have
inquired where in the city his place of business might be, but it did
not strike him that he should care to be in his employ.

He accordingly pulled out a copy of a popular magazine which he had
bought the day before, and began to read. The stranger bought a paper of
the train-boy, and engaged in a similar way. Fifteen minutes passed in
this way. At the end of that time the stranger rose leisurely, and with
a brief "Mornin', colonel," passed out of the car. Whether he got into
the next one or got out at the station which they were approaching
Jasper could not distinguish, nor did he feel specially interested in
the matter.

The time soon came when he felt his interest increased.

A few miles further on the conductor entered the car.

It was one of his usual rounds to look at tickets.

When he came up to Jasper, he said:

"Be lively now. Let me see your ticket."

"Isn't it in my hat?" asked Jasper, taking it off.

"No; did you put it there?"

"I thought I did," said our hero, surprised. "It was there when you last
passed round."

"Look in your pockets."

Jasper felt in all of them, but the missing ticket could not be found.

"It may have fallen on the floor," he said, and rising he looked under
the seat.

But in vain.

"Did you have any ticket?" asked the conductor, suspiciously.

"Certainly. You have looked at it yourself several times."

"You are mistaken; I got on at the last station."

"I have come all the way from Cincinnati," said Jasper, uncomfortably.
"I couldn't have come so far without a ticket. What shall I do?"

"You'll have to pay from the last station to St. Louis."

This was not very agreeable in the state of Jasper's finances.

"How much is it?" he asked.

"Two dollars."

Jasper felt for his pocket-book, when a new surprise awaited him. A look
of consternation swept over his countenance.

His pocket-book was gone.

"Don't keep me waiting," said the conductor, impatiently.

"My pocket-book is gone!" exclaimed our hero, gazing in blank dismay at
the expectant official.

"What?"

"I can't find my pocket-book."

"Look here, young man," said the conductor, roughly, "that's too thin."

"It's true!" said Jasper.

"It won't go down, young man. I've seen such customers as you before.
You're a beat!"

"A what?"

"A beat--a dead-beat, if you prefer it. Off you go at the next station!"

Jasper was greatly alarmed at the unexpected turn affairs had taken.

"Let me go to St. Louis, and I'll get money to pay you."

"It's no use," said the conductor, inexorably. "My orders are strict. If
you can't pay, you can't ride."

"But my pocket was picked," said Jasper, new light flashing upon him.
"There was a stranger who sat beside me a while ago. He must have taken
my ticket and money, too."

"Of course there was," said the conductor, with sarcasm. "That's the way
it usually happens. I'm used to such games, young man. It won't do you
any good. Out you go!"

"Let me go through the cars and see if I can't find the man that robbed
me. I'd know him in a minute."

"Well," said the conductor, relenting slightly, "be quick about it."

Jasper waited for no more. He rose from his seat and, carpet-bag in
hand, passed into the next car.

It proved to be the smoking car.

Groups of men were playing cards, and, as Jasper judged, were playing
for money. Among them, to his great joy, he recognized his shabby
companion, the cotton broker of St. Louis. The latter was playing with
three other men, black-bearded, and loud both in their dress and speech.

Without a moment's hesitation Jasper advanced and touched his late
companion on the shoulder.

The latter looked up, and without a sign of recognition said:

"What's wanted, sir?"

For the first time it struck Jasper that his errand was rather an
awkward one. How could he ask this man if he had taken his property?

"I beg your pardon, sir," said he, "but did you see anything of my
ticket and money?"

"What do you mean, stranger?"

"You were sitting by me a little while ago, in the rear car."

"I don't remember it."

"And I thought you might have seen my pocket-book and ticket."

"Well, I didn't," said the other, fiercely. "What made you think I did?"

"I can't find them."

"I don't know anything about them. General, it's your deal."

He turned abruptly away from Jasper, and the boy slowly withdrew to a
little distance, sorely puzzled. On the one hand, he felt convinced that
this man had abstracted his ticket and money. On the other, he doubted
whether it would be safe to charge him with it.

While he was hesitating, the cars began to go more slowly.

The conductor entered the car.

"Have you found your ticket?" he asked.

"No."

"Then leave the train at this next stopping-place."

Jasper had no chance to remonstrate. Obeying necessity, he stepped upon
the platform, and the train swept on.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE DESERTED HOUSE.


To be without money is far from pleasant under any circumstances, but to
be penniless a thousand miles from home, in the midst of strangers, is
far worse. Jasper found himself in this position so unexpectedly that as
he stood beside the little depot with his carpet-bag in his hand he felt
utterly bewildered.

He looked around him.

Not a house was in sight. Why the railroad company should have
established a depot there he could not understand. Probably there must
be some village not far away.

No other passenger had got out with Jasper. There was no other person in
sight but the station-master, a tall, sallow-faced man, in a slouched
hat, who eyed our hero curiously.

Jasper approached him.

"What place is this?" he asked.

"Don't you know?" questioned the man.

"No."

"What made you stop here, then?"

Jasper hesitated. There seemed no use in taking this man into his
confidence.

"I am going to take a look at the village. I suppose there is a
village?"

"Well," drawled the man, "there's some houses back."

"What's the name of the place?"

"Croyden."

"How far back is the village?"

"A matter of two miles."

"Is it easy to find the way?"

"There's the road."

The station-master pointed out a road leading through woods.

"Thank you," said Jasper.

"You don't happen to have any 'baccy with you?" asked the
station-master.

"No, I am sorry to say."

"I thought maybe you might. I'm most out."

Jasper took the road indicated by his informant and pressed on.

When he had walked half a mile along the lonely road he stopped suddenly
and asked himself:

"What are my plans? What use is there in going to Croyden?"

It was a hard question to answer.

Still, he must go somewhere. He could not go to St. Louis without money,
and there was a bare possibility that he might find something to do in
Croyden. If he could earn a few dollars he could go on, and once in a
large city there would be hope of permanent employment.

How different would have been his situation if he had not lost his
money, and how unfortunate it was that he should have been set down at
this dismal place!

He kept on, meeting no one.

Finally he came to a place where the road divided into two forks or
branches, one leading to the right, the other to the left.

"Which shall I take?" he asked himself.

There seemed no choice so far as he could see. Neither was very
promising, nor was there any sign-post to inform him of what he wished
to know.

"I wish somebody would come along," thought Jasper.

But nobody did.

Forced to decide, he decided in favor of the left-hand road, and walked
on.

After a while he began to suspect that he had made a wrong decision. The
road became little more than a lane, and seemed unfrequented. But just
as he was going to turn back he espied at some distance from the road a
rude dwelling, which, from its weather-beaten appearance, seemed never
to have been painted.

"I can find out something there, at any rate," thought Jasper, and he
bent his steps toward it.

Brief time brought him in front of the house. It was certainly a
quiet-looking place.

"It must be dismal to live here," thought Jasper.

He knocked with his fist at the door. On account of the smallness of the
house the knock certainly must have been heard, but there was no
response.

"The people must be deaf," thought Jasper.

He knocked again, this time considerably louder, and waited for some one
to answer his summons.

He waited in vain.

"It must be a deserted house," thought our hero. "I have a great mind to
explore it--that is, if I can get in."

He tried the door, and, a little to his surprise, it yielded to his
touch. The door being in the centre of the house, there was a room on
each side. The door to the left; opened into a room which was quite bare
of furniture. On the other side, however, was a room containing a table
and three chairs. On the table was a dirty clay-pipe and a box of
tobacco, and there was a dead odor of tobacco-smoke lingering in the
closely-shut room.

"That looks as if there were somebody living here," thought Jasper.

"Halloo!" he shouted, raising his voice.

He felt that it would be better to make his presence known, as otherwise
he might be suspected of entering the house with burglarious designs,
though it would have puzzled a burglar to find anything worth
purloining.

"There can't be anybody in the house or I should have been heard,"
thought our hero. "However, I'll call again."

This time there was a faint sound that came to his ears. It seemed like
the voice of a child.

"Where did that come from?" Jasper considered.

And he waited to hear if it would be repeated.

It was repeated, and now he could make out that it came from above.

"I'll go up," he decided.

He climbed the rude staircase, and pushed open the door of the room
above the one in which he had been standing a moment before. He gazed in
wonder at the spectacle before him.

A boy, five years of age, who in spite of his frightened expression
possessed great personal beauty, was lying on a bed in one corner of the
room. He looked at Jasper in uncertainty at first, then with confidence,
and said:

"Did you come for me?"

"Do you live here?" asked Jasper, in surprise, for this boy was not at
all like the children usually to be found in such houses as this.

His complexion was of dazzling whiteness, his hair was a bright
chestnut, and his clothing was such as wealthy parents can afford to
give to their children.

"Do you live here?" repeated Jasper.

"No," said the child.

"How came you here, then?"

"Big man--big, ugly man brought me."

"When?"

"I don't know," said the child.

He was evidently too young to measure the lapse of time.

"Was it yesterday?"

"No; long ago."

"I suppose it seems long to him," thought Jasper.

"Is there nobody else in the house?" asked Jasper.

"There's a woman," said the little boy.

"Is she the wife of the man who took you away?"

But this question the little boy did not seem to comprehend.
