
"What a brute I am!" he said, when he saw the expression on her face;
"but I swear before God, Effie, if you will help me, I'll turn over a
new leaf; I'll never do a wrong thing again as long as I live--I swear
it."

"Don't swear it," said Effie; "it seems to make it worse to do that. If
you did wrong once, you may again. Don't swear. Ask God to help you. I
don't know that I have been praying all night, but I have been trying
to."

"Well, Effie, what have you determined to do?" he asked.

"Is there no one else who can help you, George?"

"Not a soul; I have only one friend, and that is Fred Lawson."

"Oh, yes! I remember you spoke of him last night. Would he help you?"

"He help me!" said George, with a hysterical laugh. "Why, he is the chap
I have wronged. There, don't ask me any more. If you can help me, I am
saved; if you can't, say so, and I'll go straight to destruction."

"No, you shan't do that, George. I have thought of something--nothing
may come of it, but I'm going to try. It is terribly repugnant to me,
but I would sacrifice much to save my mother. If it fails, all fails."

"I have thought," said George eagerly, "that, as the case is such an
extreme one, we might take some of the capital. There is a thousand
pounds; a quarter of that sum would put me right."

"It cannot be done for a moment," said Effie, her face flushing hotly.
"That money must under no circumstances be touched; my mother and the
children depend on it for their bread."

"I don't know what is to be done, then," said George in a hopeless
voice.

"You must trust to me, George; I am going to try to help you in my own
way. If I fail, I fail; but somehow I don't think I shall. If I have any
news I will write to you soon; and now good-by, good-by."

George turned and kissed Effie; she gave him her cheek, but her lips did
not touch his. She was willing to help him, but her love for the time
was dead or dying.

The young man walked hurriedly down the village street. Effie stood in
the porch and watched him; his shoulders were bowed, he stooped. George
used to have a fine figure; Effie used to be proud of him--she was not
proud of her brother now.

She went back to the house, and sat down listlessly for a time in the
little parlor--her hands were folded in her lap. It seemed to her as if
the end of all things had come.

Presently the sound of the children's voices overhead aroused her; she
went upstairs, and helped Susan to dress them. Returning to the everyday
duties of life had a soothing effect upon her. She made a violent effort
and managed to put her trouble behind her for the time being. Whatever
happened, her mother must not see any traces of it.

When the baby was dressed, she took him as usual to her mother's room.

Mrs. Staunton sat up in bed and stretched out her arms to receive him.
Effie gave him to her mother, who began to kiss his little face
hungrily.

"Has George gone, Effie?" said the mother.

"Yes, mother, dear."

"Did anyone see him off--did he have his breakfast?"

"Yes, he had a good breakfast; I got it ready for him last night."

"But did anyone see him off?"

"I did."

"That's right; I should not have liked him to have had his last meal by
himself. I miss him awfully. Effie, dear, how soon do you think we can
go to London?"

"As soon as possible, mother--in about six weeks."

"Six weeks!" exclaimed Mrs. Staunton. "I can't live without George for
six weeks."

"Oh, yes, you can, mother--at least you'll try."




CHAPTER XII.


When Effie had finished the many small duties which fell to her share in
the household economy, she went up to her bedroom and hastily changed
her everyday dress for her best one. She did not take long about this
task. Her small face looked very pale and thin under the heavy crepe on
her hat. Taking up her gloves she ran down to the parlor where her
mother was sitting. Mrs. Staunton was busily mending some stockings for
George. A pile of his clothes lay on the table by her side.

"I thought we might send these to London next week," she said, looking
up as her daughter entered the room. "George will want a really warm
greatcoat for the winter, and this one of your father's--why, Effie, my
dear----" She stopped abruptly, and gazed up at Effie's best hat. "Where
are you going, my love?" she said. "I thought you could help me this
morning."

"I am going out, mother, for a little."

"But where to? Why have you your best things on?"

"I am going to the Harveys'."

"To the Harveys'--to The Grange?"

Mrs. Staunton shuddered slightly; she turned her head aside. "Why are
you going there?" she asked, after a pause.

"I want to see them--I won't be long away. Please, mother, don't tire
yourself over all that mending now."

"It interests me, my dear; I find it impossible to sit with my hands
before me. I am stronger than I used to be. I have got to live for
George; and George is young, he is entering life, he must not be saddled
with an old, ailing mother. I must get strong, I must get back my youth
for his sake. Don't be long away, Effie, dear. I wonder you like to go
to the Harveys' under the circumstances, but you know best. Children are
very independent nowadays," concluded Mrs. Staunton, with a sigh.

Effie went up to her mother and kissed her, then she softly left the
room.

The day was a particularly fine one, the sun shone brightly upon the
little High Street. Effie walked quickly; she soon turned into a shady
lane, the lane led her into the highroad. By and by she stopped at the
gates of The Grange.

The woman of the lodge came out when she saw her. This woman had been
fond of Dr. Staunton, and she recognized Effie.

Effie's little figure, her heavy black dress, her crepe hat, her white
cheeks and dark eyes, all appealed with great pathos to the woman. She
ran towards her with outstretched hands.

"Miss Effie, my dear, you're welcome," she said. She caught Effie's
little white hands in her hard, toil-worn ones. "You are welcome, Miss
Effie," she repeated; "it is good of you to come. Eh, dear, but it goes
to the heart to see you in that deep black! Come in and rest, my dear
young lady--come in and rest."

"I cannot just now, Mrs. Jones," replied Effie. "I am in a hurry--I want
to go up to see the Squire on business."

"And how is your mother, poor lady--how is she bearing up, my dear?"

"Wonderfully," said Effie. "I'll come and see you another day, Mrs.
Jones."

"Eh, do! you'll be more than welcome. I long to hear all about the
doctor, poor man, and how he went off at the end. The last words of the
pious are always worth listening to. I'll be glad to hear particulars,
if you can give me half an hour some time, Miss Effie."

"Some time," said Effie.

She walked on, trembling a little. The woman's words and her eager look
of curiosity were dreadful to her; nevertheless, she knew that her
father, under similar circumstances, would have been very patient with
this woman.

By and by she arrived at the heavy front door of the old Grange. She
walked up the steps and rang the bell.

The door was opened almost immediately by a servant in livery. He knew
Effie, and asked her in.

"Is the Squire at home?" she asked.

"I am not sure, miss, but I'll inquire. Will you step in here while I go
to ask?"

The man opened the door of a little sitting room. Effie went in, and he
closed it softly behind him.

After what seemed a very short time, she heard eager steps coming along
the hall--the room door was flung open, and Squire Harvey, accompanied
by his wife, came in.

Mrs. Harvey looked like a shadow--but her sweet face had a tender
blush-rose color about it, her eyes had the intensely clear look which
long illness gives; she was better, but she looked so frail and delicate
that Effie's heart went out to her.

"My dear child," said Mrs. Harvey, "how good, how very good of you to
come! I am only just downstairs. Dr. Edwards only allowed me down
yesterday, but I could not resist coming to welcome you myself. Won't
you come into my sitting room? It is just at the opposite side of the
hall. I'll send Rhoda upstairs to fetch little Freda. She will be so
enraptured at seeing you. Come, my dear. Now that we have got you, we
won't let you go in a hurry. I think it so sweet of you to come to see
us, and under the circumstances. Don't you think it is sweet of her,
Walter, dear?"

Squire Harvey had more perception of character than his wife. He noticed
how white Effie's face grew; he noticed the pathetic trembling of her
hands.

"My dear," he said, "perhaps Miss Staunton wishes to see me by herself.
I understood from the servant that she had asked for me."

"Yes, I did want to see you very much," said Effie.

"Of course, dear little thing," interrupted Mrs. Harvey; "but I'll stay
while you talk to her. I am immensely interested in you. Miss Staunton.
I can never forget, as long as I live, what you and yours have done for
us."

"Please don't talk of it now," said Effie. "I mean--I know how kindly
you feel, and indeed I am not ungrateful, but I cannot bear to talk it
over, and I want very badly, please, to say something to the Squire."

"Come with me to my study, Miss Staunton," said the Squire.

He opened the door, and Effie followed him.

"Be sure you make her stay, Walter, when your business is over," called
Mrs. Harvey after him. "I'll send for Freda to my boudoir. Miss Staunton
must stay to lunch. It is delightful to see her again, and it is so
sweet of her to come to see us."

The thin, high voice kept calling these words out a little louder and a
little louder as Effie followed the Squire down one long corridor after
another, until at last they entered his special study.

He shut the door at once, and offered her a chair.

"If I can do anything for you, you have but to command me," he said.

"I see you are in great trouble," he continued. "Pray take your own
time. I have nothing whatever to do--I can listen to you as long as ever
you like."

Poor Effie found great difficulty in using her voice. For one dreadful
moment words seemed to fail her altogether. Then she gave a swift
thought to her mother, to George, and her resolve was taken.

"I want to make a very queer request of you, Mr. Harvey," she said. "It
may not be possible for you to grant it. For my father's sake, will you
promise that you will never tell anyone what I am now asking you, if you
don't find it convenient to grant it to me?"

"I'll keep your secret, of course," said the Squire. "But permit me to
say one thing before you begin to tell it to me: there's not the
slightest fear of my not granting it. There is nothing that you can
possibly ask of me, that, under the circumstances, I should think it
right to refuse. Now, pray proceed."

"I want you," said Effie--she gulped down a great lump in her throat,
and proceeded in a sort of desperation--"I want you to lend me 250
pounds. I'll pay you interest--I think five per cent. is fair
interest--I'll pay you interest on the money, and return it to you by
installments."

There was not the least doubt that Effie's request startled the Squire.
The amount of the money required was nothing to him, for he was a very
rich man; but the girl's manner, her evident distress, the look of
shame and misery on her face, surprised him. He guessed that she was
borrowing the money for another, but for whom?

"I can see you are in trouble," he said in his kindest tone. "Why don't
you confide in me? As to the money, make your mind easy, you shall have
it; but girls like you don't as a rule borrow a large sum of money of
this kind. Do you want it for yourself?"

"No."

"You won't tell me who it is for?"

"I cannot, Mr. Harvey. Please don't ask me."

"I won't ask you anything that distresses you. As you are talking of
money, you will forgive me for saying that I am told that your mother is
left badly off."

"No; that's a mistake," said Effie. "She has money. My father left her
very well off for a man in his position. He insured his life for a
thousand pounds, and my mother had a little fortune of her own, which
brings in about sixty pounds a year."

"And you think your mother well off with that?" said the Squire in a
tone of almost amused pity.

"Yes, for a woman in her position," said Effie in almost a proud tone.
"Forgive me," she said; "I know that, after the request I have just
made, you would be justified in asking me any questions, but I would
rather not say any more about my mother. If you'll lend me the money--if
indeed you will be so good, so noble--when can I have it?"

"When do you want it?"

"I must have it before six weeks are up, but the sooner the better."

"You shall have it in a week. Come here this day week and I'll give you
a check for the amount."'

"A check!" said Effie; "but I would have to pass that through mother's
bank--and--and she might know."

"Are you really asking for this money without your mother's knowledge,
Miss Staunton?"

"Yes; my mother is not to know. Mr. Harvey, the object of our lives is
to keep all anxiety from our mother--she must never know."

"Forgive me," said the Squire, after a pause. "I know a great deal about
business, and you very little. Would it not be best to open an account
in your own name? I am told that you propose soon to go to London. I
would introduce you to my bankers there, who would be very glad to open
an account with you; and if at any time you should have need of
assistance, Miss Staunton, you would give me the privilege of helping
you. Remember, but for me and mine you would not now be fatherless. You
must see that you have a claim on me. Allow me to fulfill that claim in
the only possible way in my power."

"You are good, you are more than good," said Effie, rising. "But this is
all I really need. I'll pay you the interest on the money every half
year."

"Oh, that doesn't matter. I earnestly wish you would take it as a gift."

"Thank you, but that is impossible."

Effie stood up; she had nothing further to say.

"May I take you to my wife's room now?" said, the Squire. "I know she is
waiting to see you, she is longing to be friends with you. Her recovery
has been wonderful; and as to little Freda, she is almost herself again.
You would like to see Freda, would you not?"

"Yes," said Effie, "but not to-day--I must hurry back to my mother. I
don't know how to thank you, Mr. Harvey. Will you please tell
your--your wife that I cannot stay to-day?--my mother wants me. Thank
you--thank you."

The Squire himself showed Effie out. He stood for a moment by his open
hall door, watched her as she walked slowly down the avenue.

"That is a plucky little thing," he said to himself. "Now, what in the
world does she want that money for? Not for herself, I'll be bound. I do
hope she has got no disreputable relations hanging onto her. Well, at
