HOPE AND HAVE; or, Fanny Grant among the Indians. $1.25.

"This is a story of Western adventure and of peril among the Indians,
and contains the experience of Fanny Grant, who, from a very naughty
girl, became a very good one, by the influence of a pure and beautiful
example exhibited by an erring child, in the hour of her greatest
wandering from the path of virtue."--_Philadelphia Age._

HASTE AND WASTE; or, The Young Pilot of Lake Champlain. $1.25.

"This is a story of boyish daring and integrity upon Lake Champlain, and
older heads than those of sixteen may read and profit by it."

The stories in the "Woodville" series are hinged together only so far as
the same characters have been retained in each.

Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of
price.

     *     *     *     * *     *     *     *

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.

LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

     *     *     *     *

OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

     *     *     *     *

STARRY FLAG SERIES.

_Each volume handsomely illustrated. In sets or separate._

     *     *     *     *

THE STARRY FLAG; or, the Young Fisherman of Cape Ann. $1.25.

"The early history of Levi Fairfield, the boy hero of this volume, as it
is graphically traced by Oliver Optic, will be apt to hold boy-readers
spell-bound. His manly virtue, his determined character, his superiority
to mean vice, his industry, and his stirring adventures, will suggest
good lessons for imitation."--_Presbyterian._

BREAKING AWAY; or, the Fortunes of a Student. $1.25.

"In this volume Oliver Optic opens the school-room door, and shows the
nature, construction, and workings of the school system; its lights and
shadows; its discipline, and the serious consequences that come from
want of discipline."--_Patriot._

SEEK AND FIND; or, the Adventures of a Smart Boy. $1.25.

Earnest Thornton, the "smart boy" of this story, is a clear headed, well
intentioned, plucky boy, that has a high aim and means right even where
he is wrong, and his adventures will be read with interest.

FREAKS OF FORTUNE; or, Half around the World,--a sequel to "The Starry
Flag." $1.25.

"The adventures of Levi Fairfield, the noble young Captain of the Starry
Flag, excited such an interest among the young folks that the
continuance of his story was called for, with which demand the ever
ready author has complied, with a story equally attractive and
interesting."

MAKE OR BREAK; or, the Rich Man's Daughter. $1.25.

"This is a lively, stirring volume, full of interest and instruction
from one cover to the other. Just the book a smart, wide-awake boy will
enjoy intensely."--_Press._

DOWN THE RIVER; or, Buck Bradford and his Tyrants. $1.25.

"These stories are not only written in a manner well calculated to
enchain the attention of young readers, but teach at the same time such
important lessons of sobriety, industry and cheerfulness, that we should
like to see them in the hands of every boy in the land."--_Galesburg
Free Press._

Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on
receipt of price.

     *     *     *     *

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.

LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

     *     *     *     *

SOPHIE MAY'S BOOKS.

     *     *     *     *

LITTLE PRUDY STORIES.

_Six volumes. Illustrated. In Sets or separate. Per volume, 75 cents._

LITTLE PRUDY.
  LITTLE PRUDY'S Sister Susy.
    LITTLE PRUDY'S Captain Horace.
      LITTLE PRUDY'S Cousin Grace.
        LITTLE PRUDY'S Story Book.
          LITTLE PRUDY'S Dotty Dimple.

     *     *     *     *

DOTTY DIMPLE STORIES.

By the author of "Little Prudy Stories."

_Six volumes. Illustrated. In Sets or separate. Per volume_, 75 _cents_.

DOTTY DIMPLE at her Grandmother's.
  DOTTY DIMPLE at Home.
    DOTTY DIMPLE out West.
      DOTTY DIMPLE at Play.
        DOTTY DIMPLE at School.
          DOTTY DIMPLE'S Flyaway.

Read the high commendation of the _North American Review_, which places
Sophie May's Books at the

=Head of Juvenile Literature.=

"Genius comes in with 'Little Prudy.' Compared with her, all other
book-children are cold creations of Literature only; she alone is the
real thing. All the quaintness of childhood, its originality, its
tenderness and its teasing,--its infinite, unconscious drollery, the
serious earnestness of its fun, the fun of its seriousness, the natural
religion of its plays, and the delicious oddity of its prayers,--all
these waited for dear Little Prudy to embody them. Sam Weller is not
more piquant; Hans Anderson's nutcrackers and knitting-needles are not
more thoroughly charged with life. There are six little green volumes in
the series, and of course other _dramatis personae_ must figure; but one
eagerly watches for every reappearance of Prudy, as one watches at the
play for Owens or Warren to re-enter upon the stage. Who is our
benefactress in the authorship of these books, the world knows not.
Sophie May must doubtless be a fancy name, by reason of the spelling,
and we have only to be greatful that the author did not inflict on us
the customary alliteration in her pseudonyme. The rare gift of
delineating childhood is hers, and may the line of 'Little Prudy' go out
to the end of the earth.... To those oversaturated with transatlantic
traditions we recommend a course of 'Little Prudy,'"

Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on
receipt of price.

     *     *     *     *

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.

LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

     *     *     *     *

VACATION STORY BOOKS.

6 volumes. Each volume handsomely illustrated. 80 cents.

WORTH NOT WEALTH.
  COUNTRY LIFE.
    THE CHARM.
      KARL KEIGLER.
        WALTER SEYTON.
          HOLIDAYS AT CHESTNUT HILL.

     *     *     *     *

ROSY DIAMOND STORY BOOKS.

6 volumes. Each volume handsomely illustrated. 80 cents.

THE GREAT ROSY DIAMOND.
  DAISY; or, The Fairy Spectacles.
    VIOLET: A Fairy Story.
      MINNIE; or, The Little Woman.
        THE ANGEL CHILDREN.
          LITTLE BLOSSOM'S REWARD.

These volumes are finely and profusely illustrated from designs by
Hoppin and other eminent artists. They are elegantly bound, and neatly
packed in ornamental boxes. As gifts for holidays and birthdays, where a
uniform value and appearance is desired, they are excellent.

     *     *     *     *

=_Mrs. Madeline Leslie's Books._=

PLAY AND STUDY SERIES.

4 volumes. Each volume illustrated. Price, $1.50.

PLAY AND STUDY.
  THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
    HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
      JACK, THE CHIMNEY-SWEEP.

     *     *     *     *

LITTLE AGNES' LIBRARY.

4 volumes. Each volume illustrated. Price, $1.50.

LITTLE AGNES.
  TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
    I'LL TRY.
      ART AND ARTLESSNESS.

For family reading and Sabbath School libraries there are no better
books written than these by Mrs. Leslie. With attractive and interesting
stories are mingled wholesome truths and moral lessons. Of all these
books large editions have been printed, and they may be found largely
circulated in Sabbath Schools.

Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on
receipt of price.

     *     *     *     *

=LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.=

LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

     *     *     *     *

OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

     *     *     *     *

RIVERDALE STORY-BOOKS.

Six volumes, profusely illustrated from new designs by Billings. In neat
box. Cloth. Per vol., .45.

COMPRISING

Little Merchant.
Young Voyagers.
Dolly and I.
Proud and Lazy.
Careless Kate.
Robinson Crusoe, Jr.

These little volumes are very interesting and attractive, and they carry
a moral with them, which, if heeded, there is no doubt will set Youth in
the right direction for its own benefit.

FLORA LEE STORY BOOKS.

Companions to the above. Six volumes, profusely illustrated from new
designs by Billings. In neat box. Cloth. Per volume, .45.

COMPRISING

Christmas Gift.
Uncle Ben.
Birthday Party.
The Picnic Party.
The Gold Thimble.
The Do-Somethings.

These stories are written in "Oliver Optic's" best style, and all are
interesting and attractive.

OUR STANDARD BEARER; Or, The Life of Gen'l Ulysses S. Grant: His Youth,
His Manhood, His Campaigns, and his eminent Services in the
Reconstruction of the Nation his Sword has redeemed. As seen and related
by Captain Bernard Galligasken, Cosmopolitan, and written out by Oliver
Optic. Illustrated by Thos. Nast. 16mo. Cloth. $1.50.

"This is a book for young men to read; for boys to read; and old men
will find their dull blood stirred by its graphic descriptions, its
thrilling narrative, and its hearty enthusiasm."--_New Bedford Mercury._

THE WAY OF THE WORLD.

By William T. Adams (Oliver Optic). 12mo. $2.00.

"This excellent writer for children has here tried his hand at writing
for grown people, and has succeeded admirably."--_Times._

"It is long since we have read a more interesting book."--_Gazette._

"The Way of the World is a popular story of the intense class, full of
thrilling incidents and exciting scenes, such as boys delight to
read."--_Congregationalist._

Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid,
on receipt of price.

     *     *     *     *

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.

LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

     *     *     *     *

OLIVER OPTIC'S BOOKS.

ARMY AND NAVY STORIES.

     *     *     *     *

THE SOLDIER BOY; or, Tom Somers in the Army. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

"This is a story of the rebellion, narrating the adventures of a
patriotic youth, who left the comforts of home to share the dangers of
the field. He is carried through several battles, and for a while shared
the hospitalities of the rebels as a prisoner. The story is true to
history, giving in the form of personal adventure correct accounts of
many stirring scenes of the war."--_Hartford Courant._

THE SAILOR BOY; or, Jack Somers in the Navy. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

"Jack is the brother of Tom, the Soldier Boy, whose adventures in the
army were so much enjoyed. We have only to repeat that there are few
better stories for boys than these of Mr. Adams'. Always bright and even
sparkling with animation, the story never drags; there are no stupid
tasks or tiresome descriptions; the boys whose characters are drawn are
real boys, impulsive, with superabundant animal life, and the heroes are
manly, generous, healthy creations."--_Hartford Press._

THE YOUNG LIEUTENANT; or, The Adventures of an Army Officer. 16mo.
Illustrated. $1.50

"The Young Lieutenant" is a sequel to "The Soldier Boy," and carries the
reader through the stormy scenes of the rebellion, creates Thomas Somers
an officer, and as such he performs much difficult work in the
rebellion.

YANKEE MIDDY; or, Adventures of a Naval Officer. 16mo. Illustrated.
$1.50.

"The incidents of the story are those which have occurred on the ocean,
and on the bays, inlets, and rivers of the South, common in the
experience of all our naval officers who have been actively employed
during the war."--_Notices of the Press._

FIGHTING JOE; or, The Fortunes of a Staff Officer. 16mo. Illustrated.
$1.50.

"The description of battles and sieges, of picket and skirmishing, of
camp life and marching, are wrought out with thrilling detail, making
the story truly fascinating; while, in connection with this, useful and
practical information respecting men and places is conveyed, and a
proper spirit of morality and patriotism inculcated."--_Notices of the
Press._

BRAVE OLD SALT; or, Life on the Quarter-Deck. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

A book of adventure, of personal experience, describing a living hero,
and exhibiting the great truth that, by fidelity of conscience, country,
and God, earthly and heavenly blessings are secured.

Sold by all booksellers and newsdealers, and sent by mail, post-paid, on
receipt of price.

