"Of course it's quite right to forgive," drawled Green, with a curl of
the lip. "I'm more than willing."

Jack ground his teeth, but Hallett saved him the trouble of replying.

"No, no; if we do the thing at all, we'll do it properly. Don't let's
have any half-measures--kindly-forgivings, and all the rest of it! If
anyone starts forgiving me, I'll lick him! We won't forgive anyone, not
even ourselves. We'll go straight ahead on a new tack, and forget
everything that's happened. If our friends the enemy look askance at us
at first (and we needn't be surprised if they do), that mustn't affect
us. Remember this: Scores are Settled. That's our motto; there is to be
no more paying off. Chaff them if you like--I fancy they'd think there
was something fishy if we didn't--but no tricks, if you please."

"What if they start them on us, Hallett?" enquired Grey, in the tone of
one who merely seeks information. Hallett frowned slightly.

"Hadn't thought of that. Of course if they insist on picking a quarrel
in that way--"

"But I'm nearly sure they won't," cried Jack.

"I caught Lucy pasting the leaves of my _Delectus_ together," murmured
Grey, looking at the ceiling.

"And how many things have you done to them?" retorted Jack desperately,
sighing as he felt the weakness of that argument.

"Vick, will you hand Grey your india-rubber?" put in Cadbury. "There's a
bit of his memory he hasn't rubbed out yet. I did as Hallett told us,
and forgot everything at once. I've even forgotten my translation for
to-morrow--it's gone entirely. Never mind: to obey is our first duty; to
labour for Peace comes only second."

"Labouring for peace--why, Brady, that's been your little task!"
exclaimed Vickers. "And a noble one"--here he put on the "West voice".
"Have you thought of it in that light, my boy? To labour for peace! We
might all do worse. Conceive, for instance, of working for love!"

Jack laughed noisily, and called Vickers "a silly old loony". But he
blushed at the same time. And he went to sleep that night feeling
uncommonly hopeful.

When, in short jerky phrases, he broke to Hannah the plan he had
devised, the maid was so grateful and "took aback", as she said, as to
become for the moment half-hysterical; but soon rallying her common
sense, she sat down and penned a note to her father, to accompany the
young gentlemen's communication. Hannah's spelling, handwriting, and
grammar were all very shaky, but it is a fact that Mr. J. Thompson,
Nurseryman, found her letter a help in throwing light upon the "formal,
business" document.




CHAPTER IX

LOST--A NAME


Of course Jack's task was only half accomplished. And the second half
was somewhat harder than he had anticipated. When in the morning he met
the day-scholars, they were not as eager for a reconciliation as he
would have liked to find them.

Mason had come armed with a handful of wild barley-grass, or "crawly",
as it was better known among the boys.

"_Dictee_ this morning," he said with a sly wink.

In Monsieur Blonde's class, dictation offered great possibilities to a
quick writer, with a supply of crawly. When heads are bent, what a
chance down the collar for a deft hand! And the Monsieur was very
short-sighted.

"I sit between Vickers and Green," Mason added.

"But look here, you must chuck that stuff away," cried Jack. He knew
that as a good-humoured joke an inch of crawly can be tolerated, but
when used in malice, nothing is more irritating. "Chuck it away! We've
all agreed to call _Pax_ now, _Pax_ for good and all."

"Oh, I dare say!" retorted Mason. "When our lives have been made a
burden for the last week! Who are the 'all' who've agreed, pray?"

"The whole lot of the boarders. They're ready to chum up right away.
Mason, you must agree! We've got to join forces over Saturday's job."

But Mason didn't see it. Nor did Armitage. Nor did Bacon. And the rest
were doubtful, except little Frere, who declared at once that he was
longing to be friends with everybody--and to feel safe.

"But don't mind us, Brady," pursued Mason. "We aren't so sweet on
shoving wheel-barrows as all that. You and your dear Green and the rest
can have the whole glory and honour of the pots and the barrows to
yourselves. We won't fight for them, will we? After all, there are more
amusing ways of spending a half than in wheeling flower-pots round the
town."

Jack's hopes sank. He did not feel equal to making a second speech, but
he caught Mason by the arm, and spoke with vehement emphasis:

"It's an awful responsible thing, Mason, to refuse to patch a quarrel.
The chance of making-up doesn't come every day."

"We must have a chance of getting even with them first, and then we'll
talk about stopping."

"Nonsense! You know that tit-for-tat's a game without an end!"

"My dear Brady, if you knew the toil and time it has cost me to gather
this bunch of crawly, you wouldn't ask me so lightly to waste it."

"If that's all," said Jack, "you can stick the whole lot down my neck. I
give you free leave. Go on!"

There is no stronger influence than earnestness, and Jack was intensely
in earnest. It had its effect on his listeners, who were almost won over
already, while he thought his efforts were thrown away. While he spoke,
Simmons had secretly released three earwigs with which he had meant
mischief, and Hughes was opening his mouth to utter a word or two for
Jack, when Cadbury glided up to the group with outspread arms, and a
square box balanced on his head.

"Pax tea-cup! pax O biscuit!" began the flippant boy. "Dear brethren, I
entreat you to join with me in smoking the calumet of peace in the shape
of this humble weed."

As he bowed, the box fell from his head into his hands, and, removing
the lid, he offered it round. It appeared to contain a double layer of
cigars; but the Brincliffe scholars knew these cigars well, and where
they came from. They were composed of almond paste, and coated with a
brown sugary paper, which was always consumed with the rest.

Jack almost held his breath. Would the boys refuse or accept them?

Hughes dipped his hand in at once with a smile and a nod. "Thanks very
much, Cadbury!" Simmons followed suit with a wicked little chuckle.
Bacon hesitated, and then helped himself awkwardly. Frere took one with
an "Oo!" of appreciation. Now it was Mason's turn. If Jack had been a
recruiting sergeant, and the sugar cigar the Queen's shilling, he could
scarcely have felt more anxious.

Mason put forward his thumb and finger, then hesitated and looked at
Jack with a twinkle in his eye.

"Now, shall I, Brady?"

[Illustration]

Jack nodded. He really dared not speak, for fear Mason should take it
into his head to go exactly contrary to him.

Hurrah! The cigar was taken!

From that moment Cadbury and Jack turned themselves into a couple of the
maddest, silliest clowns imaginable. But there was method in their
madness. Though they did not even own it to each other, they were making
themselves ridiculous and foolish to prevent the rest from feeling so.
Boys loathe sentiment, and many a quarrel drifts on and on, simply
because each party dreads "being made to feel a fool".

At Brincliffe on this particular day the two sides felt distinctly shy
of each other, and it was a real boon to have a pair of "giddy lunatics"
to scream at.

But when Cadbury had boxed Frere's ears for giving the dates of the
royal Georges correctly, and when Simmons had sharpened his pencil with
Vickers's knife without asking leave, the relations between boarders and
day-pupils grew easier.

       *       *       *       *       *

There were few idle wheel-barrows in Elmridge on Saturday afternoon.

If you had passed along the dusty Brickland Road between four and five
o'clock, you would have encountered a droll procession. One passer-by
stopped to enquire if there was going to be a Battle of Flowers.

Six barrows, laden with flowering plants, each pulled by two boys, and
pushed by one, were slowly but steadily travelling towards the town, and
at the rear of all was a bath-chair in charge of Hallett and Armitage,
wherein sat a thin, delicate-looking man, whose bright eyes and flushed
cheeks spoke eloquently of gratitude and pleasure. That bath-chair was
Hallett's own idea, and he was very proud of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a warm and weary company of boy-labourers who gathered at eight
o'clock that evening round a very tempting supper-table, spread in the
Brincliffe dining-room, to which, by special invitation, the day-pupils
sat down with the boarders. But every face was bright, and the meal was
the merriest ever known.

By Mr. West's direction, the boys were left to enjoy it "un-mastered".

The clatter of knives and spoons had almost ceased when Vickers rose
slowly to his feet, a glass of ginger-beer in his hand. He was impelled
to do so by the nudges of his neighbours, Green and Mason. His rising
was received with loud applause, which he acknowledged with a grave bow.

"I have been very much pressed--elbow-pressed," he began, "to get up and
say something. I scarcely see why I should be pitched on, unless it is
because I have more brass than the rest of you. (Hear, hear.) Anyhow,
here I am, and I'll ask three questions and then sit down. First"--and
up came one finger--"Isn't this the jolliest supper we've ever had?
(Cries of "Yes!") Very well, I'll tell you why. Reason Number One:
West's in a jolly good temper, _vide_ the groaning table and the absence
of masters. Reason Number Two: We're all in a jolly good temper, and
have done a jolly good day's work. Now, secondly--(Shouts of "Thirdly,
you mean, old man!") I mean what I say--Secondly! We had two divisions
under the first head. You may have got confused, but I haven't.
Secondly, then, we're all pretty thoroughly fagged: is anyone sorry he's
fagged? (No!) Well, the job wasn't my idea, or West's idea. But it was
somebody's, and I think we all know whose. The same somebody who has
annoyed us all horribly in the past by refusing to so much as do one
ill-natured thing. The same somebody who has steadily prevented us from
quarrelling comfortably and consistently, as we wanted to, and has
finally dragged us into this unhappy state of good-fellowship. Now for
my thirdly: Will you drink with me to that somebody's health?"

The question was received with shouting and banging, while the words,
"Bravo, Vickers! Here's to good old Brady!" "I drink to Jack of Both
Sides!" "Here's to you, Jack!" "Speech, Brady--speech!" and similar
cries filled the air.

Poor Jack felt extremely ill at ease, and not at all grateful to
Vickers. He studied his plate with the closest attention, his face
growing redder and redder each moment. Then Cadbury thumped him on the
back, and Hallett and Bacon fairly forced him to his feet. But a speech
was quite beyond Jack at that minute.

"I say, sha'n't we beg the release of the March Hare?" was all he said,
and the first person he looked at was Armitage.

Armitage, too, was the first to cry back, "Yes!"

The petition, which was written and signed before they separated, was
received favourably, and the following Monday saw the return of the
March Hare to his place in the school, scared, penitent, and profoundly
grateful to all his school-fellows, including Armitage. And he insisted
on pressing Jack's hand to his lips, which made our hero feel
excessively uncomfortable. But for the remainder of the term, the use of
a knife, even at dinner, was denied the little Italian.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Brady, have you missed anything?" asked Cadbury a few days later.

"No, I don't think so," replied Jack, feeling doubtfully in his pockets.

"Because you have certainly lost something," continued Cadbury.

"Well, give it me quick, then," said Jack, laughing. "Whatever is it?"

"I can't give it you. It's gone for ever," was the rejoinder. "You'll
never have it again."

"Well, what was it, then? Nothing valuable, I hope?"

"When two things are made into one thing, you can't speak of them any
longer as 'both'; can you?"

"Fetch us a grammar, Toppin," said Jack. "We're getting out of our
depths. Have I lost two things, please, Cadbury, or only one?"

"Don't frivol, Jack! listen to me. We are all one-sided now, so you have
lost your title. You can never again be called Jack of Both Sides."


THE END





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jack of Both Sides, by Florence Coombe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK OF BOTH SIDES ***

***** This file should be named 20354.txt or 20354.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/3/5/20354/

Produced by Dave Morgan, Paul Stephen, Fox in the Stars
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

