himself up to his misery.

"I don't want that man for a father!" he cried, over and over again,
half tearfully and with set teeth. "I don't want him! He isn't a bit
like anybody I could love! Oh, how I wish I had never set eyes on him!"

"It is a great shock to Jack, and to all of us," was Mrs. Ruthven's
comment, after the lad was gone.

"My reception here has been a great shock to me," said the doctor
bluntly. "My own son runs away from me."

"He had some trouble with you a couple of weeks ago."

"Pooh, that was nothing! I had almost forgotten it."

"Jack does not forget such things easily. Moreover, he is slow to make
friends with anybody."

"He doesn't know the chances he is throwing away. Were it not that he is
my son, and my heart goes out toward him, I would never bother him."

"What chances has he?" asked Marion.

"I shall be very rich; and, not only that, our family has a famous name
in England, with a title attached. Jack may some day be a nobleman."

"I reckon he'd rather be an American," answered Marion.

"Well, there is no accounting for tastes," said the surgeon dryly. "And
you evidently have him well drilled in."

"What actual proofs have you that Jack is your son?" asked Mrs. Ruthven,
after a painful pause.

"I have a number of private papers; also the marriage certificate which
proves that I married Jack's mother. More than that, I expect soon to
meet an old college chum who knows much of the past, and who can testify
in my behalf."

"Well, on my own account and on Jack's, I feel that I must make you
prove your claim, Dr. Mackey. It will be hard enough to give up the boy
when I am assured that he is really your own."

"I will not discuss the situation further," cried the doctor, moving
stiffly toward the door. "But unless you wish me to take immediate steps
to take Jack from you, you must make me one promise."

"And what is that, sir?"

"That you will not spirit the boy away from this plantation, so that he
cannot be brought into court when wanted."

"I will promise that. I do not wish to do anything contrary to law."

"Then that is all for the present, Mrs. Ruthven, and I will bid you
good-day."

"When do you expect to come back again?"

"As soon as my duties will permit. The Yankees are pressing us hard, and
I cannot neglect my duties as a surgeon in our army."

In a moment more the doctor was gone. Mrs. Ruthven watched him out of
sight, then sank in a chair, all but overcome. Old Ben saw her and came
up, hat in hand, his honest face full of genuine grief.

"Missus, dis am de worst wot I eber did heah," he said. "De idea, dat
dat man wants to take our Jack away! It am dreadful!"

"Yes, Ben; I do not know how I can endure it."

"He don't look like Jack one bit; not one bit, missus!"

"I know it, Ben. He says Jack resembles his brother Walter."

"Maybe he dun nebber had a brudder Walter."

"Evidently you do not believe him?"

"No, I don't."

"Where did you meet him?"

"He cum to de boathouse, and got me to row him ober to de wrack."

"You took him there. What did he want at the wreck?"

"I dunno dat, missus. He tole me to go away fer an hour or so. He went
below in de wrack, out ob sight."

"Perhaps he was after something belonging to the past. Did he bring
anything away with him?"

"I aint suah about dat, missus. When I rowed him ashore he had a tin box
hidden away under his coat, but he might have had dat when I took him
ober."

"How large a box?"

"About dis size," and Ben held out his hands.

"He wouldn't be likely to take such a box to the wreck with him. He must
have found it on the ship," went on Mrs. Ruthven, with interest.

"Where could he find it, missus? De folks around yeah has tuk everyt'ing
off dat wrack long ago."

"Perhaps not. To tell the truth, Ben, I do not like that man's manner at
all."

"No more do I, missus. He's got a bad eye, he has," responded the
colored man warmly.

"If you see him again, Ben, I wish you would watch him closely."

"I will do it, missus. Yo' can trust Ole Ben."

"You may be able to learn something important."

"If I do, I'll bring de news to yo' directly, missus."

"Perhaps you had better follow him now," went on Mrs. Ruthven suddenly.
"If he goes to the battlefield, you can come back."

"I will, missus," and in a moment more Ben was off.

Meanwhile Marion had gone up to Jack's room and knocked on the door. At
first there was no answer, and the girl knocked again.

"Who is it?" came in a half-choked voice.

"It is I, Marion. Can't I come in?"

"Yes," answered Jack, and Marion entered the room and sat down beside
our hero on the bed.

"Oh, Jack, I'm so sorry for you!" was all she could say.

"Marion, do you honestly think that man is my father?" he questioned
anxiously.

"I don't know what to say, Jack. It's all so strange."

"If he was my father it seems to me I ought to feel differently toward
him."

"Perhaps it's the shock, Jack."

"No, it isn't. I could never love that man as a son ought to love his
father," went on our hero impetuously.

"Hush! you mustn't talk so!"

"I can't help it. I hated that man when we met on the bridge--and--and I
hate him still!"

"Oh, Jack!"

"It's true, Marion. I don't see why he wanted to come here. I was happy
enough, with you and mother."

"He hasn't taken you away yet, Jack. Mother will make him prove his
claim first, never fear. She feels as badly almost as do you."

"To me the whole story sounds unreasonable, Marion. If there is a big
fortune in the background, that man may only be scheming to get it."

"But, if that is true, why doesn't he ignore you and keep the money for
himself?"

"I don't know--excepting it may be that he wants me in order to make his
claim stronger, or something like that. I don't know much about law."

"Neither do I. But if it comes to the worst, mother will get a lawyer
and make that man prove everything he says."

The two talked the matter over for a while, and gradually Jack grew
calmer. But look at it from every possible light, he could not make
himself believe that Dr. Mackey was his father.

Presently Mrs. Ruthven entered the chamber and also sat down to comfort
our hero.

"He is certainly a strange man," said she, referring to the surgeon. "He
went to the wreck and was aboard alone for some time, so Old Ben tells
me."

"What did he do?"

"Ben doesn't know."

"I shall visit the wreck again before long and make a search," said
Jack.

The three talked the matter over for several hours, but reached no
further conclusions. Jack expected the doctor back the next day, but he
did not appear, nor did he show himself for some time to come. In the
meantime things of great importance happened.




CHAPTER XV.

CAPTAIN JACK AT THE FRONT.


Two days after the conversation recorded in the last chapter the folks
living at the Ruthven plantation were disturbed at daybreak by the
distant firing of cannon, which continued for over two hours, gradually
drawing closer and closer.

"What can this mean?" asked Mrs. Ruthven, in alarm, as she moved to the
window. "Can the Yankees be pressing our army back again?"

"I will take the spyglass and go to the roof," said Jack. "Perhaps I'll
be able to see something."

Armed with the glass he made his way to the garret of the plantation
home, and then up a ladder leading to a scuttle of the roof. Marion, as
anxious as anybody, came after him.

Standing on the roof, Jack adjusted the spyglass and gave a long look in
the direction from whence the sounds were proceeding.

"What do you see, Jack?"

"I can see nothing but smoke," he answered. "Some is over at Bannock's
woods and the other near Townley church."

"Don't you see any of our soldiers?"

"No. The trees are in the way, and all I can see is a stretch of the bay
road. Hark! the cannon are at it again!"

"But the sounds are closer," persisted Marion.

"That is true. They must be--hullo! there come our men, along the bottom
of the woods--they are retreating!"

"Do you mean to say they are coming this way, Jack?"

"Yes, Marion. See for yourself!" And he handed the girl the spyglass.

Marion took a long look, and gave a sigh. "You are right, our brave
soldiers are suffering another defeat. Perhaps they will come to our
plantation!"

"If they do, we ought to do all we can for the wounded," answered Jack
quickly.

"To be sure. Oh, see! they are running this way as fast as they
can--fully two regiments of them!"

Again Jack took the glass. "Yes, and now I can see the Yankees. My, what
a lot of them! At least twice as many men as there are on our side. I
really believe they are going to push on to here, Marion!"

At this the girl turned pale. "And if they do?"

"We must defend ourselves as best we can," answered Jack. "Do you know
what I am going to do? Call out the Home Guard!"

"But, Jack, you may be shot down?"

"If I am, it will be only at my post of duty, Marion."

So speaking, Jack leaped down the ladder into the garret and ran
downstairs. He met Old Ben just coming into the house, accompanied by
Darcy Gilbert.

"Darcy! just the fellow I want to see! And Old Ben, too!"

"The Yankees are coming!" answered Darcy.

"I know it, Darcy. I was going to call out the Home Guard."

"Exactly my idea."

"Old Ben can help you get the boys together."

"'Deed I will, Massah Jack, if yo' wants me to," responded the colored
man.

Darcy and Ben were soon off and Jack re-entered the house, to be
confronted by Mrs. Ruthven.

"What are you up to, Jack?"

"I have called out our Home Guard, mother. The Yankees shall not destroy
this plantation or molest you and Marion."

"You must do nothing rash, Jack."

"I will be careful. But this is private property, and you and Marion are
ladies, and our enemy must remember this," responded Jack, and ran off
to don his uniform and his sword.

Inside of half an hour the members of Jack's company began to appear,
until there were nineteen boys assembled. Each had his gun or his pistol
fully loaded, and the appearance made by the lads, when drawn up in a
line, was quite an imposing one.

"Ise got a pistol," said Old Ben, showing a long, old-fashioned "hoss"
pistol on the sly. "If anybody tries to shoot Massah Jack, he will heah
from dis darky, suah."

"Thank you, Ben," answered our hero. "You always were true to me. If
ever I grow up to be a man and get rich, I shan't forget you," and this
made Old Ben grin from ear to ear.

Presently there was a clatter on the road beyond the plantation, and a
Confederate battery, drawn by horses covered with foam, swept past.

"The Yanks are coming!" was the cry. "Get indoors and hide your jewelry
and silverware!"

"They are coming!" muttered our hero. He called the boys together. "Home
Guard, attention!" he cried out. "Line up here. Carry arms! Boys, are
you willing to stand by me and help me to keep my mother's house from
being ransacked?"

"Yes! yes!" was the ready reply.

"Hurrah for Captain Jack!" put in several of the more enthusiastic ones.

"Thank you, boys. We won't fight unless we have to. But if it comes to
that, let everybody give a good account of himself."

"We will! We will!"

Soon another battery swept by the house, the horses almost ready to drop
from exhaustion. Marion saw this and whispered to her mother.

"Let me do it, mother," she pleaded.

"If you so much wish it," answered Mrs. Ruthven.

With all speed the girl ran to the barn and brought out her own horse, a
beautiful black, and ran him to the road.

"Take my horse and hitch him to yonder cannon!" she cried. "He is
fresh--he will help you save the piece!"

"Good fer you, young lady!" shouted one of the cannoneers. "We've got
friends yet, it seems!" The horse was taken, and the cannon moved on at
a swifter pace than ever.

"That was grand of you, Marion!" cried Jack. He knew just how much she
thought of the steed she had sacrificed, her pet saddle horse.

And now came several of the hospital corps, carrying the wounded on
stretchers, and also several ambulances. In the meantime the shooting
came closer and closer, and several shells sped over the plantation, to
burst with a crash in the woods beyond.

"The battle is at hand! God defend us!" murmured Mrs. Ruthven.

Several Confederates with stretchers were crossing the lawn. On the
stretchers lay three soldiers, all badly wounded.

"We can't carry them any further, madam," said one of the party. "Will
you be kind enough to take them in?"

"Yes, yes!" cried Mrs. Ruthven. "Bring them in at once. We will do our
best for them!" And she summoned the servants to prepare cots on the
lower floor, since it would have been awkward to take the wounded
upstairs.

The stretcher-carriers were followed by others, until six wounded
Confederates lay on cots in the sitting room. A young surgeon was at
hand, and he went to work without delay, and Mrs. Ruthven and Marion
assisted.

And now the army was passing by the plantation, some on foot, some on
horseback, and all exhausted, ragged, covered with dust and dirt, and
many badly wounded. The shooting of small-arms had ceased, but the
distant cannon still kept booming, and occasionally a shell burst in the
vicinity. As the last of the Confederates swept by Jack ran down to the
roadway.

"The enemy are coming!" he said, after a long look ahead. "They will be
here in less than ten minutes."

Soon the trampling of horses' hoofs was heard, and then came the
occasional blast of a trumpet. At last a troop of cavalry swept by,
paying no attention to the Ruthven homestead.

The cavalry was followed at a distance by a company of rascally looking
guerrillas--followers of every army--who fight simply for the sake of
looting afterward.

"To the house!" cried the captain of the guerrillas, a man named Sandy
Barnes.

"Company, attention!" cried out Jack, and drew up his command across the
lawn in front of the homestead.

"Halt!" shouted Captain Barnes. And then he added; "What are you boys
doing here?"

"We are the guard of this house," answered Jack, quietly but firmly.

"Guard nothin'! Out of our way!" growled the guerrilla.

"We will not get out of your way, and you will advance at your peril."

"What, will you boys show fight?" queried the guerrilla curiously.

"We will!" came from the boys. "Keep back!"

"This is private property and must be respected," went on Jack.
"Besides, the house is now a hospital, for there are six wounded
