confined itself almost altogether to school affairs, and chiefly to the
coming boat-race.

This last subject was one of intense interest to young Wyndham.  As
brother to the old captain, he was naturally eager to see his brother's
boat retain its old position on the river; and as an ardent schoolhouse
boy himself, he had a further reason for wishing the same result.

"You know," said he, "I think our fellows are looking up, don't you,
Gilks?"

"So fellows say," replied Gilks; "of course, being in the boat myself,
it's hard to tell."

"But doesn't the boat seem to be going better?" asked Wyndham.  "It
looks to be going a lot better from the bank."

"But you don't mean to say, young un," said Silk, "you ever expect the
schoolhouse will beat Parrett's?"

"I'm afraid they are rather strong," said Wyndham, regretfully.

"Strong!" said Silk; "they're the finest crew Willoughby's turned out
for years.  Better even than the one your brother stroked last races."

"And they mean winning, too," said Gilks, "from all I hear.  They're
specially set on it because they think they've been snubbed over the
captaincy, and mean to show they _are_ the cock house, though the doctor
won't own it."

"Well," said Silk, "as I've not much faith in the Welchers' boat--in
fact, I'm not sure if they'll be able to get up a crew at all--I feel
delightfully impartial."

"I hope you'll back us," said Wyndham, earnestly.

"Of course, old Gilks is one of your crew," said Silk.

"You know," said the boy, "I'd give anything for our boat to win.  It
would be such a score for us, after all that has been said, wouldn't it,
Gilks?"

"Well, fellows haven't been very complimentary about the schoolhouse
lately, certainly," said Gilks.

"No, they certainly haven't," replied Wyndham.  "By the way, Gilks, what
sort of cox does Riddell make?"

"Rather an amusing one, from all I can hear," said Gilks.  "He's not
steered the four yet; but he's had some tub practice, and is beginning
to find out that the natural place for a boat is between the banks
instead of on them."

"Oh," said Wyndham, "I heard Fairbairn say he promised very well.  He's
a light-weight, you know, and as the juniors are all stopped river-play,
we shall have to get a cox.  And if Riddell will do, it won't be a bad
thing any way."

"I'm rather surprised they didn't try you for it," said Gilks.  "You're
well-known, you know, and used to the river."

"Oh, I'd rather Riddell did it if he can," said Wyndham.  "I know he's
awfully anxious to get it up."

The talk went on like this, and trenched on no uncomfortable topic.  The
only reference to anything of the sort was when Silk said, just as
Wyndham was going, "Oh, Wyndham, I've told Gilks here that you've
promised not to let out about Beamish's--"

"Yes," said Gilks, "I wouldn't care for that to get about, young un."

"Oh, of course I won't say anything," said Wyndham.

"Thanks, no more will we; will we, Silk?" replied Gilks.

Silk assented and their visitor departed.

"Young fool!" said Gilks, when he and his friend were left alone.  "He's
not worth bothering about."

"If it weren't for the other prig I'd agree with you," said Silk.  "But
don't you think we can hit at his reverence occasionally through his
disciple?"

"I dare say," said Gilks.  "The young prig had an innocent enough time
of it to-night to suit even him.  How he does talk!"

"Yes, and isn't he hot about the race?  I say, Gilks, I hope there'll be
no mistake about Parrett's winning.  I've a lot of money on them."

"Never fear," said Gilks.  "It'll be rather a rum thing if I, rowing in
the schoolhouse boat, can't put the drag on them somehow.  I don't
expect for a moment it will be wanted; but if it is, Gilks will be under
the painful necessity of catching a crab!"

"I don't mind how you do it as long as there's no mistake about it,"
said Silk.  With which ungenerous admission Gilks produced a couple of
cigar-ends from his pocket, and these two nice boys proceeded to spend a
dissipated evening.

The reader will have guessed from what has already been said that the
coming boat-race was every day becoming a more and more exciting topic
in Willoughby.  Under any circumstances the race was, along with the May
sports and the cricket-match against Rockshire, one of the events of the
year.  But this year, ever since it had come somehow to be mixed up with
the squabble about the captaincy, and the jealousy between Parrett's and
the schoolhouse, it had become more important than ever.

Old Wyndham had, of course, left the schoolhouse boat at the head of the
river, but there was scarcely a boy (even in the schoolhouse itself) who
seriously expected it would remain there over the coming regatta.

The Parrett's fellows were already crowing in anticipation, and the
victory of Bloomfield's boat was only waited for as a final ground for
resisting the authority of any captain but their own.  Their boat was
certainly one of the best which the school had turned out, and compared
with their competitors' it seemed as if nothing short of a miracle could
prevent its triumph.

But the schoolhouse fellows, little as they expected to win, were
meaning to make a hot fight of it.  They were on their mettle quite as
much as their rivals.  Ever since Wyndham had left, the schoolhouse had
been sneered at as having no pretensions left to any athletic
distinction.  They meant to put themselves right in this particular--if
not in victory, at any rate in a gallant attempt.

And so the schoolhouse boat might be seen out early and late, doing
honest hard work, and doing it well too.  Strict training was the order
of the day, and scarcely a day passed without some one of the crew
adding to his usual labours a cross-country run, or a hard grind in the
big tub, to better his form.  These extraordinary exertions were a
source of amusement to their opponents, who felt their own superiority
all the more by witnessing the efforts put forth to cope with it; and
even in the schoolhouse there were not a few who regarded all the work
as labour thrown away, and as only adding in prospect to the
glorification of the enemy.

However, Fairbairn was not the man to be moved by small considerations
such as these.  He did not care what fellows said, or how much they
laughed, as long as Porter swung out well at the reach forward, and
Coates straightened his back, and Gilks pulled his oar better through
from beginning to end.  To secure these ends he himself was game for any
amount of work and trouble, and no cold water could damp either his
ardour or his hopefulness.

But the chief sensation with regard to the training of the schoolhouse
boat was the sudden appearance of Riddell as its coxswain.  As the
reader has heard, the new captain had already been out once or twice "on
the quiet" in the pair-oar, and during these expeditions he had learned
all he knew of the art of navigation.  The idea of his steering the
schoolhouse boat had never occurred either to himself or Fairbairn when
he first undertook these practices at the solicitation of his friend.
But after a lesson or two he showed such promise that the idea did
strike Fairbairn, who mentioned it to one or two of his set and asked
their advice.

These judges were horrified naturally at the idea.  Riddell was too
heavy, too clumsy, too nervous.  But Fairbairn was loth to give up his
idea; so he went to Mr Parrett, and asked him if he would mind running
with the schoolhouse pair-oar during the next morning's spin, and
watching the steering of the new captain.  Mr Parrett did so; and was
not a little pleased with the performance, but advised Fairbairn to try
him in the four-oar before deciding.

Fairbairn, delighted, immediately broached the subject to his friend.
Poor Riddell was astounded at such a notion.

_He_ cox the schoolhouse boat in the regatta!

"My dear fellow," said he to Fairbairn.  "I'm not a very exalted
personage in Willoughby as it is--but this would be the finishing
stroke!"

"What do you mean--that it's _infra dig._ to cox the boat?"

"Oh no!" said Riddell, "anything but that.  But it might be _infra dig._
for the boat to be steered into the bank in the middle of the race."

"Humbug, if that's your only reason.  Anyhow, old man, come down and try
your hand in the four to-morrow morning."

Riddell protested that the idea was absurd, and that he wouldn't hear of
it.  But Fairbairn reasoned him down.  He hadn't steered them into the
bank since the second morning--he hadn't tried steering the four-oar,
how did he know he couldn't do it?  Mr Parrett had advised the trial
strongly, and so on.

"No," said he, "the only question is your weight.  You'd have to run off
a bit of that, you know."

"Oh," said Riddell, "as to that, you can take as many pounds off me as
you like; but--"

"None of your buts, old man," said Fairbairn.  "I say, if we only were
to win, with you as cox, what a score it would be!"

"None of your `ifs,' old man," said Riddell, laughing.  "But I'll come
to-morrow, if you are determined to have your way."

"Of course I am," said Fairbairn.

This conversation took place the evening that young Wyndham was taking
tea with Silk and Gilks in the study of the former.

The intelligence that the new captain was to be taken out to steer the
schoolhouse boat mysteriously got wind before the evening was over, and
spread over the school like wildfire.  Consequently, when Riddell
arrived at the boat-house in the morning, he was surprised and horrified
to find that nearly all Willoughby was awake and down at the river banks
to see him.

It was embarrassing certainly, and when presently the crew got into
their seats and a start was made, it became evident the new coxswain was
anything but at home in his new position.  The boat was a long time
getting clear of the landing stage owing to his persistently mistaking
in his flurry his right hand for his left, and then when it did get out
into mid-stream the same reason prevented him from discovering that the
reason why the boat would turn round instead of going straight was
because he had his right cord pulled hard the whole time.

This spectacle, as may be imagined, afforded intense gratification to
the curious onlookers, and many and hilarious were the shouts which fell
on the ears of the unlucky captain.

"Oh, well coxed there!" one voice cried.

"Well steered in a circle!" shouted another.

"Mind you don't knock the bank down," yelled a third.

"Pull your right there!"

"Try him without the rudder.  See if he don't steer better that way."

In the midst of these uncomplimentary shouts the boat slowly wended its
erratic course up the river, amidst crowds of boys on either bank.

"Riddell, old man," said Fairbairn, leaning forward from his place at
stroke, "what's the row?"

It only needed a friendly voice to recall the captain to himself.  By an
effort he forgot about the crowds and turned a deaf ear to the shouts,
and straightening himself, and taking the lines steadily in his hands,
looked up quietly at his friend.  Richard was himself again.

"Now then!" cried Fairbairn to his men behind, "row all!" and he led
them off with a long steady stroke.

For a little distance the boat travelled well.  Riddell kept a good
course, and the whole crew worked steadily.  The scoffers on the bank
were perplexed, and their jeers died away feebly.  This was not a crew
of muffs assuredly.  Those first twenty or thirty yards were rowed in a
style not very far short of the Parrett's standard, and Parson himself,
the best cox of Parrett's house, could hardly have taken the boat down
that reach in a better course.

There was something ominous in this.  But, to the great relief of the
unfriendly critics, this showy lead was not maintained.  Before a
hundred yards were completed something seemed to go wrong in the boat.
It rolled heavily and wavered in its course.  What was wrong?

The fault was certainly not in Fairbairn, who kept doggedly to work in
perfectly even style.  Nor, to all appearance, was it in Riddell.  He
was evidently puzzled by the sudden unsteadiness of the boat, but no one
could lay it to his charge.

"Who's that digging behind?" cried Fairbairn over his shoulder.

None of the other three owned the soft impeachment, and the boat seemed
to right itself of its own accord.

Fairbairn, whose temper was never improved by perplexities, quickened
his stroke, and gave his men a spell of hard work for a bit to punish
them.

This seemed to have a good effect, and once again the onlookers were
startled to see how steadily and fast the boat was travelling.  But once
again the mysterious disturbance interrupted their progress.

This time Fairbairn stopped short, and turning round demanded angrily
who it was who was playing the fool, for an effect like this could only
be put down to such a course.  Porter, Coates, and Gilks all repudiated
the suggestion, and once more, amid the ironical cheers of the
onlookers, Fairbairn resumed his work and lashed viciously out with his
oar.

This last protest of his seemed to have had the desired effect, for
during the rest of the journey up to the Willows the boat travelled
fairly well, though it was evident plenty of work was needed before the
crew could be considered in proper racing trim.  But no sooner had they
turned and started for the home journey than once again the rolling
suddenly became manifest.  Fairbairn rowed on a stroke or two without
apparently noticing it, then turning sharply round in the middle of a
stroke he discovered the reason.

The blade of Gilks's oar was about a foot under the surface, and he
himself was lurching over his seat, with the handle of the oar up to
about his chin.

"What on earth do you mean by it?" demanded Fairbairn, angrily.

"Mean by what?" asked Gilks.

"By playing the fool like that; that's what I mean," retorted Fairbairn.

"Who was playing the fool?" snarled Gilks.  "How can I help catching a
crab when he's constantly turning the boat's head in the middle of a
stroke?"

"All rot!" said Fairbairn.

"All very well for you at stroke," said Gilks, viciously.  "You come and
row bow and see if you don't feel it.  I'd like to know who could keep
his oar straight with such steering."

"If you'd row half as well as he steers," said Fairbairn, "you'd row a
precious sight better than you do!  You'd better take care, Gilks."

"Take care of what, you fool?" demanded Gilks, whose temper was now
fairly gone.

"Ready all, you fellows!" cried Fairbairn, stretching forward.

This brief conversation had been heard only by those in the boat, but
its purport had been gathered by those on the bank who had watched the
angry looks and heard the angry voices of the speakers.

"Bravo! fight it out!" cried some one, and the news that there was a
quarrel in the schoolhouse boat added greatly to the zest of the
critics' enjoyment.

Fairbairn's caution--whether purposely, or because he could not help
it--was lost upon the offending bow oar.  The boat had scarcely started
again when Gilks caught another crab, which for the moment nearly upset
the crew.  Fairbairn rowed on, with thunder in his face, regardless of
the incident, and Riddell kept as straight a course as he could, despite
the unsteadiness.  In due time the unsatisfactory practice came to an
end, and the crew stood together again on the steps of the boat-house.

Gilks seemed to expect, and every one else expected, that Fairbairn
would once more take the defaulter to task for his performance that
morning, and Fairbairn did not disappoint him; though he dealt with the
matter in a rather unexpected manner.

"I shall want the tub-pair after third school," said he to the boatman.
"Riddell, will you come and cox.  Crossfield and me?"

"Who--Crossfield?" asked Coates.

"Yes; I shall try him for bow."

"You mean to say," exclaimed Gilks, taking the matter in, "you're going
to turn me out of the boat?"

"Certainly," said Fairbairn, coolly.

"What for?" demanded Gilks, threateningly.

"Because," replied Fairbairn, taking Riddell's arm and walking slowly
off--"because we can do better without you."

Gilks stared at him a moment as though he meditated flying at him.  If
he did, he thought better of it, and turned away, muttering to himself
that he would pay them all out, let them see if he did not.

Threats of this sort were not unheard-of things from Gilks, and no one
was greatly disturbed by them.  On the whole, Fairbairn's decision was
approved of by most of the schoolhouse partisans, particularly those who
had watched the proceedings of the morning.  A few thought Gilks might
have been accorded a second chance, but the majority argued that if a
fellow caught crabs like that in a practice he would probably do it in
the race, and they did not want the risk of that.

As to his excuse about the steering, every one who knew anything about
that knew it meant nothing, and Gilks did not repeat it.

As he reached the school Silk met him with angry looks.

"Is it true what I hear," said he, "that you're out of the boat?"

"Yes, it is," growled Gilks.

"Why, you idiot! whatever have you done this for?"

"I did nothing.  They wanted to get rid of me, and they did."

"Yes, because you hadn't the ordinary sense to keep up appearances till
the race, and must begin to practise your tricks a month beforehand!"
said Silk, greatly enraged, for him.

"All very well," said Gilks, sullenly.  "I should have liked to see you
rowing your best with that puppy steering; thinking he's doing it so
wonderfully, the prig!"

"And just because you hadn't the patience to hold out a week or two you
go and spoil everything.  I didn't think you were such a fool, upon my
word."

Gilks was cowed by the wrath of his friend.

"I couldn't help it," he said.  "I'm awfully sorry."

"It's done us completely now," said Silk.  "For all we know they may
win.  Who's to take your place?"

"Crossfield."

"Just the man I was afraid.  He's the best man they could have picked
out.  I tell you what, Gilks, you'd better go and apologise and see if
you can't get back into the boat.  Who could have believed you'd be such
a fool!  Go at once, for goodness' sake."

Gilks, who saw his own mistake fully as well as his friend, obeyed.  He
found Fairbairn in his study with Riddell.  The former seemed not at all
surprised to see him.

"Fairbairn," said Gilks, "I hope you'll let me stay in the boat.  I'm
sorry I played the fool this morning."

"Then you _were_ playing the fool?" demanded Fairbairn, to whom Riddell
had just been confiding that perhaps, after all, there had been some
fault in the steering to account for it.

"Yes," said Gilks, sullenly.

"Then," said Fairbairn, hotly, "you may be a fool, but I won't be such a
big one as to let you stay in the boat another day!"

Gilks glared a moment at the speaker.  Evidently it would be no use to
argue or plead further; and, smarting with rage and humiliation, none
the less keen that Riddell had been present and heard all, he turned
away.

"You'll be sorry for this, you two," he growled.  "Humbugs!"

"Well rid of him," said Fairbairn, as soon as he had gone.

"Yes.  I don't think much of him," said Riddell, thinking as much of
young Wyndham and his temptations as of the schoolhouse boat.

"Well, old man," said Fairbairn, after a pause, "you steered awfully
well when you once began.  Whatever made you so shaky at first?"

"My usual complaint," said Riddell, smiling.  "I was thinking what other
people were thinking."

"Oh," said Fairbairn, "unless you can give that up you may as well shut
up shop altogether."

"Well, if I must do one or the other, I think I'll keep the shop open,"
said Riddell, cheerily.  "By the way," added he, looking at his watch
and sighing, "I have to see some juniors in my study in two minutes.
Good-bye."

"Be sure you're down for the tub practice this afternoon."

"I'll be there," said Riddell.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

BLOOMFIELD IN TRIBULATION.

Bloomfield was beginning to discover already that the new dignity to
which he had been raised by his own partisans at Willoughby was anything
but a bed of roses.  Vain and easily led as he was, he was not a bad
fellow by any means; and when the mutiny against the new captain first
began, he flattered himself that by allowing himself to be set up in
opposition he was really doing a service to Willoughby, and securing the
school against a great many disasters which were certain to ensue if
Riddell was left supreme.

But in these lofty hopes he was getting to be a trifle disappointed.  In
his own house, of course, especially among those over whom he was wont
to rule in athletic sports, his authority was paramount.  But these,
after all, constituted only a small section of Willoughby.  Over the
rest of the school his influence was strangely overlooked, and even the
terrors of his arm failed to bring his subjects to obedience.

It was all very well at first, when the one idea was indignation against
the doctor's new appointment.  But as soon as the malcontents discovered
that they had raised one more tyrant over their own heads, they began to
find out their mistake, and did their best to correct it.  They argued
that as they had elected Bloomfield themselves they weren't bound to
obey him unless they chose; and when it came to the point of having to
give up their own will in obedience to his, they remembered he was not
the real captain of Willoughby and had no right to order them!

So poor Bloomfield did not find things quite as comfortable as he had
expected.

One of the first rebuffs he got was administered by no less stately a
hand than that of Master Telson of the schoolhouse.

This young gentleman ever since his last unfortunate expedition in
"Noah's Ark" had been somewhat under a cloud.  His forced absence from
the river for a whole week had preyed upon his spirits.  And when at the
end of that period he did revisit his old haunts, armed with a captain's
permit, it was only to discover that whatever small chance he ever had
of coxing his house's boat at the coming regatta, had vanished under the
new arrangement which had brought Riddell into the boat.

It is only fair to say that this disappointment, keen as it was, had no
effect on his loyalty.  He was as ready as ever to fight any one who
spoke ill of the schoolhouse.  But it certainly had given him a jar,
which resulted in rather strained relations with some of his old allies
in Parrett's.

Of course nothing could shake his devotion to Parson.  That was secure
whatever happened, but towards the other heroes of Parrett's,
particularly the seniors, he felt unfriendly.  He conceived he must have
been the victim of a plot to prevent his steering the schoolhouse boat.
It was the only reason he could think of for his ill-luck; and though he
never tried to argue it out, it was pretty clear to his own mind some
one was at the bottom of it.  And if that was so, who more likely than
Bloomfield and Game and that lot, who had everything to gain by his
being turned out of the rival boat?

This was the state of mind of our aggrieved junior one afternoon not
long before the regatta, as he strolled dismally across the "Big" on his
way to the river.  Parson was not with him.  He was down coxing his
boat, and the thought of this only reminded Telson of his own bad luck,
and added to his ill-temper.

He was roused from his moody reflections by the approach of two boys,
who hailed him cheerily.

"What cheer, Telson, old man?" cried King.  "How jolly blue you look!
What's the row?"

"Nothing," replied Telson.

"We've just been down to see the boats.  Awful spree to see old Riddell
steering! isn't it, Bosher?"

"Yes," said Bosher; "but he's better than he was."

"Never mind, they won't lick us," said King.  "You should have seen our
boat!  Bless you, those schoolhouse louts--"

"King, I'll fight you!" said Telson, suddenly.

"Oh! beg pardon, old man, I didn't--eh--what?"
