personages in "Young Lochinvar."  In arranging the _dramatis persona_
some difficulty had arisen from the fact that none of the girls was
willing to represent the elderly bridegroom so unflatteringly described
as "a laggard in love and a dastard in war."  It was not an ingratiating
character, and Nancy and Barbara flatly refused to personate it.  Susan
could do it, she was the smallest, and would best look the part.  For
two minutes on end Susan stoutly refused to do anything of the kind, and
then placidly consented, being of a peace-at-any-price disposition,
which found it easier to submit than to preserve a determined
opposition.  She submitted, therefore, and reaped her reward in the
shape of a costume which was beyond doubt the most striking in the
group.  A Norfolk jacket, a shawl pleated to represent a kilt, and a
plaid thrown across her shoulders, were but insignificant details
compared to the delight of sporting a pair of whiskers manufactured out
of two long heads of pampas grass, so white, so silky, so bushy that
they had really to be seen to be appreciated!  The pampas grasses had
been Dreda's inspiration, and when she had tied them securely into
place, run several long black crayon marks from nose to chin, and popped
a pair of spectacles over the eyes, behold the demure Susan transformed
into so comical an imitation of an old man that the spectators rocked on
their seats with merriment.  There he stood, "plucking his bonnet and
plume," while Dreda simpered in a corner, and Nancy as Lochinvar
interviewed Barbara in the character of indignant father.  Both actors
had donned imitations of the Scottish costume, and the former made a
picturesque figure as he led forward his lady love.

  "One touch to her hand, and one word in her ears,
  And they reached the hall door, and the charger stood near."

The charger was represented by an ancient and battered hobby horse,
astride which the eloping lovers galloped violently across the stage, to
disappear from sight through the open doorway.  Confusion followed among
the spectators, who hurriedly supplied themselves with imaginary steeds
and galloped off in wild pursuit.

Again there was no difficulty in guessing the poem represented, but long
and continued applause testified to the delight of the audience, while a
special call was given to the wearer of the pampas whiskers.

After an interval of several minutes the screens were withdrawn for the
third impersonation, when an impromptu bed was beheld placed on the
extreme left of the stage.  Lying snugly snoozled into a pillow was a
fair head, at sight of which the audience laughed uproariously, for the
head belonged to Dreda Saxon; but her fair hair, parted in the middle
and plastered straightly down on either side, gave a ridiculously staid
and old-world effect to her pink and white face.  She snored gently,
unperturbed by the mocking laughter, and presently two stout dames
hurried into the room, and with a great show of agitation, roused the
damsel from her sleep.  Her arms were thrust into a blue dressing-gown,
her bare feet into bedroom slippers, and, thus attired, she was escorted
past a second screen into the presence of two grave and reverend
segniors, who fell on their knees and humbly kissed her outstretched
hand.  The ludicrous solemnity of Dreda's face beneath the plastered
bandeaux of hair brought down the house, and no one had the least
difficulty in recognising in the representation the youthful Queen
Victoria at the moment of her accession.

There was only enough time left for two more representations: Sir Walter
Raleigh spreading his cloak on the ground so that Queen Elizabeth could
escape the mud, and a spirited rendering of Horatius keeping the bridge,
in which last representation Nancy won much applause as the "great Lord
of Luna" clanking a four-fold shield in the shape of large-sized tea
trays.  The bridge was typified by a blackboard stretched between two
tables--and the manner in which Horatius made his final dive into a nest
of cushions was blood-curdling to behold.  In truth, the hour's
amusement passed like a flash, and when Dreda in ordinary dress re-
entered the drawing-room at the head of her troupe, she was everywhere
greeted with congratulations and applause.

"Supper" was another surprise, consisting, as it did, of fruit salad and
whipped-up cream.  The fortunates who were first in the field waxed
eloquent in appreciation, but, alas! the cream soon fell short, and the
last helpings of "salad" were so small as to be almost invisible.

"But some people are never satisfied," quoth Dreda scornfully.  "What if
the salad _did_ run short!  It was a feast of reason and a flow of soul.
I've no pity for a person whose mind can't soar above stewed prunes!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

The energy with which Etheldreda the Ready set about her work as sub-
editor threatened to ruin the magazine before its birth, for intending
contributors grew so tired of daily and sometimes hourly reminders that
by the end of a week weariness had developed into right-down crossness
and irritation.  "For goodness' sake leave me alone.  I'm sick of the
name of the old magazine!  If you worry me once more I won't do a
thing--so there!"  Such answers were more than a little disconcerting to
one who had worked herself up to a white heat of enthusiasm, and could
neither think, dream, nor speak of any other subject under the sun.  So
engrossed was Dreda in trying to keep other writers to the mark, that it
was not until ten day's of the allotted fourteen had passed by that she
set to work to think out her own contribution.  It was to be a story, of
course--not a stupid, amateury, namby-pamby story, such as you could
read in other school magazines, but something striking and original,
that would make everyone talk and wonder, and lie awake at night.  So
far so good; but when the time for writing it arrived it was
astonishingly difficult to hit upon a suitable idea!  Dreda chewed the
end of her pen, wrote "Synopsis of Plot" at the top of her paper in an
imposing round hand with the downstrokes elaborately inked, dotted
wandering designs here and there, and cudgelled her brains for
inspiration.  There must be a girl, of course--a girl heroine, blonde
and lovely, and an adventuress (brunette), and a hero.  But she did not
intend to write a love story--that was piffle.  Something _really_
thrilling and dangerous!  She mentally ran over a list of
misadventures--fire, flood, shipwreck.  She had read of them all dozens
of times over; and, mentioned in a synopsis, they would have quite an
ordinary effect.  It was after hours of anxious deliberation, during
which ordinary lessons went completely to the wall, that the brilliant
idea of an earthquake flashed upon Dreda's mind.  An earthquake story
might be as complicated as one pleased, for all the superfluous people
could be killed off at the crucial moment, while legal papers and wills
could disappear, so that one could not even be expected to unravel the
mystery!  She hovered uncertainly between three sensational titles--"A
Hopeless Quest," "For Ever Hidden," "In the Twinkling of an Eye!"--and
plunged boldly into the first sentence of the synopsis without having
the faintest idea how it should end:

"A lovely young girl, Leila (English, yellow hair, sixteen) lives on a
beautiful isle which had been a volcano hundreds of years before.  (This
will not be mentioned till the last, but mysterious remarks made about
rumblings, to prepare the mind.)  Dolores (Spanish), aged seventeen,
pretends to be her friend, but is really jealous.  They stay together at
a country house with a veranda, and exciting things happen.  Leila is
supposed to be an orphan, and Dolores patronises her because she is
poor.  An English officer comes to call, and staggers back at sight of
Leila.  (He is really her father.)  Dolores makes mischief, and
persuades him to leave her all his money.  They go to the lawyers, and
Leila goes out for a sail in a boat to cheer her spirits.  While she is
sailing, the volcano blows up and everyone is killed.  Leila is picked
up by a passing ship, and inherits the money."

Compared with this sensational programme, Susan's story promised to be
deplorably tame and uneventful, and Dreda curled her lip in scorn as she
read the neatly written lines:

"I want to write the story of a man who was naturally very nervous and
afraid, but who hid it so well that everyone believed him to be a hero.
I want to show that he really did become brave, because his friends
believed in him, and he tried to be worthy of their trust."

"Gracious!  How dull.  It sounds like a tract.  Susan is a dear; but
she's a currant bun when all is said and done, and she can't get away
from it.  They _are_ stodgers!" quoth Miss Dreda, with a shrug, as she
placed the paper beside her own in her desk.  Her anger against Susan
had died a rapid death, for the double reason that she herself found it
impossible to harbour resentment, and that Susan steadily refused to be
a second party to a quarrel.  Scornfully though her help had been
refused, she offered it afresh every evening, and after three days'
experience of struggle and defeat, Dreda was thankful to accept.

"But you _were_ mean about the editorship, all the same.  It wasn't like
you, Susan!" she declared severely, feeling it would be too great a
condescension to capitulate without protest.  "You are generally quite
sweet about helping other people.  I don't understand what you were
thinking about!"

Susan's quiet smile seemed to express agreement with this last
statement, but she made no protest and allowed herself to be kissed and
petted with a condescending "We'll say no more about it, will we, dear?
Now for this exercise--it's a perfect brute!"

It was only by dint of ceaseless entreaties and cajoleries that the sub-
editor succeeded in collecting a respectable number of entries for the
first number of the magazine before the appointed date, and if the
absolute truth had been known she was already feeling overweighted with
the cares of office.  It was a fag to be worried out of one's life, and
as a result to be disliked rather than praised.

"I shake in my shoes at the very sight of Dreda Saxon!" said Norah West
of the spectacles and freckles.  "There's no peace in life while she is
on the rampage.  This school has never been the same since she came.
She seems to have upset everything."

Nancy offered to contribute an article on "Characteristics of School
Celebrities--Literary and Sportive," and refused to be coaxed to a more
decorous subject.  "That, or nothing!" was her mandate, so down it went
on the synopsis, followed, by way of contrast, by Mary Webster's "Essay
on Ancient Greece," and the head girl's "Great Women of History."  Beryl
Turner, who had a passion for figure drawing, unjustified by skill,
submitted half a dozen sketches of an impossible young woman apparently
entirely devoid of joints, to explain which she proposed to write a
story, thus entirely reversing the usual process of illustration; and,
fired by a desire to show her own artistic superiority, Dreda hastily
embellished her own paper with two vignette paintings of her own
heroines.  Leila, with luxuriant locks of yellow, splashed with green,
and Dolores with inky hair and eyes of a rich gamboge.  On the afternoon
of the fourteenth day of the month Dreda spent her recreation hour in
arranging the collected sheets to the best advantage, and in fastening
them within the cover of an old exercise book.  She was aglow with self-
satisfaction at having accomplished her task in time, and intended to
lay special stress on the fact in her next letter home and so win from
the home circle that admiration and praise which her schoolfellows were
so slow to bestow.

On the whole, she was well pleased with the result of her labours, and
looked forward with a lively curiosity to Miss Drake's comments and
criticisms.  When the booklet was finished and a printed label pasted in
the middle of the black cover, she laid it carefully inside her desk and
went to rejoin her companions by the study fire.  They stopped talking
as she approached, and began to "rag" in true school fashion.

"Here comes our literary friend.  Quite worn out with the strain of her
intellectual efforts!  Sit down, my love, and calm your fevered brow!"
This from Barbara, while Norah cried scornfully:

"Look at her fingers--inked to the joints!  Anyone could tell she was a
budding author!"

"Did you tie the papers together with blue ribbon?  That's an absolute
necessity.  I have a piece I could give you."

"Thank you, Nancy.  I'll accept it with pleasure--for my hair.  The book
is finished and needs no trimmings.  It looks beautifully neat and
professional.  I can't show it to anyone until my--my colleague has seen
it and made her alterations; but as soon as it comes back--"

She nodded in condescending fashion, and the girls chuckled and
exchanged twinkling glances.

"`My colleague'!  That's good!"

"Good word, Dreda!  Bring that in in your story.  It has a fine effect."

"I'm thankful it is finished at last.  We shall be able to sleep in
peace to-night without being disturbed by your plunging and snortings.
I've always heard that geniuses were trying to live with, but they are
even worse by night than by day!"

"At what time are you going to present the Opus to your colleague?
After prep, to-morrow?  Then I beg to suggest that until it has been
reviewed and the verdict passed the subject shall be forbidden.  The
strain is _too_ great!"

Norah rolled her eyes, a performance rendered weirdly effective by the
presence of her large round glasses, and the other girls taking up the
clue, flopped in their seats, leant feebly against a neighbouring
shoulder, and fanned themselves faintly with their handkerchiefs.  As a
rule, Dreda was as quick to take offence as she was to forgive, but this
afternoon she manifested no signs of irritation.  "They laugh who win,"
and no one could deny that she had won this time--won all along the
line--in gaining consent to the establishment of a magazine, in
obtaining the post of sub-editor; lastly, and most striking of all, in
being ready up to time, despite the gloomy prophecies to the contrary.

For the next twenty-four hours she was her brightest, most charming
self, so radiant with happiness that she overflowed with sympathy and
kindness to all around.  She nursed little Vida Neale, the baby of the
school, on her knee, and recounted such fascinating stories that earache
was forgotten in squeals of delighted merriment.  She went up early to
dress for the evening and carried hot water to the cubicles of her four
best friends; she talked in the most amiable of fashions to poor, dull
Fraulein at supper; listened to remarks on the superiority of Germany
with a self-control bordering on the miraculous; and finally laid her
head down on the pillow of her bed with the feeling of being at peace
with all the world.

"Prosperity suits me," she told herself, snuggling cosily beneath the
clothes.  "It brings out the best points in my disposition.  I ought
never to be crossed!"

The next morning passed slowly.  Dreda did not distinguish herself at
lessons, and it was with a somewhat strained manner that Miss Drake
crossed the room to speak to her at the end of the preparation hour.
She had been obliged to find fault with her new pupil several times in
the course of the day's classes.  There was that in her manner which
showed that she feared lest yet another reprimand might be necessary.

"Dreda, have you remembered that to-day is the fifteenth of the month?"

"Yes, Miss Drake."

"Have you the synopsis of the school magazine ready to show me?"

"Yes, Miss Drake."

"Quite ready?"

"Yes, Miss Drake."

The Duck smiled her prettiest, most approving smile.

"Good girl!  I like punctuality.  Bring it up to me now, please, in my
sitting-room."

"Yes, Miss Drake."

Up the stairs ran Dreda, light of foot, bright of eye, heart beating
high with happiness, into the bare empty schoolroom, where the windows
stood open and the fire smouldered on the grate.  She switched on the
electric light, crossed the floor to her own desk, and threw open the
lid.  Stupid!  She had imagined that she had left the manuscript book on
top ...  How came she to be mistaken in so strong an impression?

...  She lifted a pile of exercise sheets, pushed the books aside, and
scattered miscellaneous possessions to right and to left.  Her eyes
distended as if about to fall from her head.  She sank back on a chair
and gazed stupidly before her.  The synopsis had disappeared!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

The synopsis had disappeared!  Incredible though it seemed, it was but
too true.  For the first few minutes Dreda was too much stunned to move
from her seat, but presently with a painful effort after self-
possession, she arose, and began hastily lifting the contents of the
desk, and dropping them one by one on the floor.  In this way it seemed
impossible to overlook anything, but still no sign of the shining black
cover met her sight.  She scooped everything together with impatient
fingers, pushed them back into the desk, and ran breathlessly into the
study.

The girls were amusing themselves in various fashions after the fatigues
of "prep.," but one and all looked round with expressions of
astonishment at the violent opening of the door which heralded the
unexpected appearance of the sub-editor, white-cheeked, and tragic of
demeanour.

"What in the world's the matter?"

"The list!  The synopsis!  It's gone!  It was in my desk.  Miss Drake
sent me for it.  She is waiting for me now, and it's _gone_: I can't
find it.  Has anyone moved it?  Does anyone know where it's gone?"

The girls' faces lengthened; there was a moment's tense silence, then
everyone spoke at once.

"_Dreda_!  How dreadful!  Are you _sure_?  In your desk?  No one would
take it out of your desk!"

"Dreda!  You are _always_ mislaying your things.  You have put it
somewhere else.  _Think_!  Remember your keys!  You vowed you had put
them in your glove drawer, and they were found in the box with your best
hat."

"Have you been upstairs to look in your cubicle?"

Dreda stamped with impatience.

"Of course I haven't.  My cubicle, indeed!  As if I would keep a book
there!  It was in my desk, I tell you.  I left it there last night.  I
saw it with my own eyes this morning.  Oh! don't ask silly questions--
don't waste time.  She is waiting for me.  What am I to do?"

"Come!" cried Susan quickly, and sped upstairs towards the classroom,
while Dreda followed hard in her wake, leaving the other girls to
discuss the situation round the fire.  The universal impression was that
Dreda had stowed away the book in some hiding-place, and had promptly
forgotten all about it.  She was always doing it; never a day arrived
but she went about inquiring in melancholy accents if anyone had seen
her indiarubber, her penknife, her keys, her gloves.  She was always
