
[Illustration: RED-WINGED BLACKBIRD]




MEADOW LARK (_Sturnella magna_)

CALLED ALSO FIELD LARK


Length of male, ten and one-half inches; spread of wings, sixteen
inches. The female is smaller. The feathers above are dark brown, with
transverse dark brown bars across the wings and tail; the outer tail
feathers, white; the throat, breast, under parts and edge of wing,
bright yellow. A yellow spot extends from the nostril to the eye. The
breast has a large black crescent, the points of which reach halfway
up the neck; hind toes long, its claws twice as long as the middle
one. The female is like the male, but duller in color.

Their food is various forms of insects, beetles, grasshoppers,
cutworms, larvae, sometimes varied by the seeds of grasses and weeds,
wild cherries, and berries.

The nest is built upon the ground, of dried grasses, carefully
concealed in tufts of grass. The eggs are oval, usually five in
number; they are white, dotted with reddish brown. Both sexes engage
in building the nest.

[Illustration: MEADOW LARK]




BALTIMORE ORIOLE (_Icterus galbula_)

CALLED ALSO GOLDEN ROBIN, FIREBIRD, AND HANGBIRD


Length, about eight inches; extent, twelve and one-half inches. The
head, throat, and upper part of the back are black; the lower part of
the back, the breast, and forward part of the wing are a brilliant
orange. The base of the middle tail feathers is orange, the ends
black; all the others are orange, with a black band in the middle. The
female is smaller, and colors are not so bright.

The nest is composed of various materials, such as grasses, plant
fibers, hairs, strings, which are capable of being interwoven. It is
suspended near the end of a limb. The eggs are commonly five in
number. They are whitish and variously marked with black and brown
spots and lines.

[Illustration: BALTIMORE ORIOLE]




SONG SPARROW (_Melospiza fasciata_)


Length, a little over six inches; extent, about eight and one-half
inches. General color of the upper parts brown streaked with black,
gray, and different shades of brown; no white wing bars; the crown
dull brown, with a faint grayish line in the middle; white line over
the eye; under parts whitish with numerous dark brown streaks on the
neck, breast, and sides; a conspicuous black spot in the middle of the
breast; bill, legs, and feet are brownish. The female is the same as
the male.

The nest is composed of grasses, lined with finer grass. It is built
in a low bush or on the ground. The eggs vary greatly both in size and
in markings. They are generally five in number, and are greenish or
bluish white, variously spotted with brown. These birds raise two and
sometimes three broods.

Not to know the song sparrow is to miss one of the delights of
summer.

[Illustration: SONG SPARROW]




GOLDFINCH (_Spinus tristis_)

CALLED ALSO YELLOWBIRD, THISTLE-BIRD, AND WILD CANARY


Length, five and one-fourth inches; extent, nearly nine inches. The
back and under parts are bright yellow; wings and crown cap, black;
tips of the wing and tail feathers, white on their inner webs. The
male in autumn loses his black cap, and his bright yellow parts change
to a dull brownish yellow similar to the female; the wings and tail,
however, remain darker and the white markings are more noticeable than
those of the female. The female has no black cap; the wings and tail
are dusky, marked with white as in the male; lower parts, yellowish
gray; upper parts inclining to olive.

The nest is cup-shaped, composed of plant fibers, lined with downy
substances. The eggs are usually five in number, white or faintly
bluish.

[Illustration: GOLDFINCH]




ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK (_Habia Ludoviciana_)


Length, eight inches; extent, thirteen inches. Back, throat, and head
are black; breast and under wings, rose-red; wings, black; rump, white
tipped with black. The female is about the same size as the male. Her
upper parts are brown, margined with buff and pale brown, with whitish
line over the eye; wings and tail, dark gray; feathers of the fore
wing tipped with white; under parts yellowish, streaked with brown.

The nest is a thin, flat structure made of dried grasses and small
twigs. The eggs are greenish white with brown spots; they are usually
four in number. These birds are said to be great destroyers of potato
bugs.

[Illustration: ROSE-BREASTED GROSBEAK]




CEDAR BIRD (_Ampelis cedrorum_)

CALLED ALSO CHERRY BIRD, AMERICAN WAXWING, AND CANADIAN ROBIN


Length, seven and one-fourth inches; extent, about twelve inches. The
head is crested; general color, grayish brown; forehead, chin, and a
line through the eye, black; tail and wings, gray; tail tipped with
yellow; some of the shorter wing feathers are tipped with small oblong
beads of red, resembling sealing wax.

These birds are fond of cherries and berries. The fruit grower can
protect his interests by planting some choke cherries, mulberries, and
mountain ash trees at the edges of his orchard. Cedar birds destroy
great quantities of insects, and are entitled to a part of the fruit
which they have helped to save.

The nest is large and loosely made of strips of bark, leaves, grasses,
sometimes of mud, lined with finer materials. The eggs are usually
five in number, dull gray spotted with black and brown.

[Illustration: CEDAR BIRD]




BROWN THRUSH (_Harporhynchus rufus_)

CALLED ALSO BROWN THRASHER


Length, eleven and one-fourth inches; extent, thirteen inches; tail,
five and one-half inches long. The iris is yellow; upper parts,
reddish or cinnamon brown; lower parts, white; feathers of middle wing
edged with white; the breast and sides strongly spotted with dark
brown.

The nest is a carelessly made, bulky affair, composed of rootlets,
strips of bark, twigs, leaves, and other material. It is generally
poorly concealed in some low tree or even in the corner of a fence.
For this reason it is frequently broken up. The eggs, four or five in
number, are brownish mottled with darker brown. During the nesting
season the bird at morning and in the afternoon ascends to the tops of
trees and pours forth his wonderful song. He has even been thought to
be "showing off," for he will sing almost as long as any one will stay
to listen; but he is probably attracting attention to himself in order
to detract it from his nest, which is always somewhere within the
circle of his song.

[Illustration: BROWN THRUSH]




CHICKADEE (_Parus atricapillus_)

CALLED ALSO BLACKCAP TITMOUSE


Length, five and one-half inches; extent, eight inches. The general
color of back is ashy; the top of head, throat, and chin black; no
crest; under parts, whitish with buff on the sides; wing and tail
feathers edged with white; legs, bluish gray; bill, black. The song of
this bird is an oft-repeated _chick-a-dee_, from which it takes its
name. Its call consists of two high notes, the first one a third above
the second, which may be easily imitated, and the bird attracted to
the vicinity of the person answering his call.

Its nest is made of grasses and feathers, placed in a hole in a stump
or tree; frequently in the deserted cavity made by a woodpecker. The
eggs, six or seven, are white, spotted with brown about the larger
end.

[Illustration: CHICKADEE]




CATBIRD (_Galeoscoptes Carolinensis_)


Length, nine inches; extent, eleven and one-half inches. The general
color is dark slate, somewhat lighter beneath; top of the head and
tail, black; under side of tail near the base, chestnut; bill and
feet, black; eye, brown. The female is like the male, but smaller. As
a musician, this bird closely approaches the brown thrush. There are
great differences in individual singers.

The nest is bulky, composed of twigs, rootlets, dead leaves, strips of
bark, etc. Strips of grapevine bark are quite commonly used, some
nests being constructed almost wholly of this material. The eggs are
generally four in number and of a greenish blue, unmarked.

[Illustration: CATBIRD]




BLUEBIRD (_Sialia sialis_)


Length, six and one-half inches; extent, twelve and one-half inches.
The upper parts, wings, and tail are bright blue; sides of the head
and upper part of chin also blue; throat, breast, and sides, reddish
brown; abdomen and under side of tail, white; legs and bill, blackish;
eye, brown. The female is similarly marked, but the colors are duller.

The bluebird's song is a continued pleasing, rich warble.

The nest is loosely built of grasses, feathers, and soft material, in
holes of trees, in hollows of posts, or in bird boxes. The eggs are
light blue and are four or five in number.

[Illustration: BLUEBIRD]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Bird Day; How to prepare for it, by
Charles Almanzo Babcock

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD DAY; HOW TO PREPARE FOR IT ***

***** This file should be named 21266.txt or 21266.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/2/6/21266/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Sankar Viswanathan, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Library of Congress)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
