Snakes do not masticate their food.  Their teeth are not formed for
this, but only for seizing and killing.  The blood-snake is not
venomous, and is, therefore, without fangs such as venomous snakes
possess.  In lieu of these he possesses a double row of sharp teeth;
and, like the "black snake," the "whip," and others of the genus
coluber, he is extremely swift, and possesses certain powers of
constriction, which are mostly wanting in serpents of the venomous
tribes.  Like all the others, he swallows his prey just as he kills it--
whole.  So with the one in question.  Having placed the nose of the
lizard _vis-a-vis_ with his own, he opened his jaws to their full
extent, took in the head, and commenced gradually sucking the body down
his throat.  It was a curious operation; and the boys watched it with
feelings of interest.

But other eyes were bent upon the reptile.  His bright blood-coloured
body lying along the grass had caught the far-seeing eye of an enemy,
whose dark shadow was now seen moving over the ground.  On looking up,
the boys beheld a large bird wheeling in the air.  Its snow-white head
and breast, the far spread, tapering wings, but, above all, the long
forked tail, told them at a glance what bird it was.  It was the great
Southern kite (_Falco furcatus_).

When first seen he was sailing in circles,--or rather in a spiral curve,
that was constantly contracting downward and inward.  The centre of that
curve was the spot occupied by the snake.

It was a beautiful sight to behold this creature cutting the thin air.
His flight was the _beau ideal_ of ease and gracefulness--for in this no
bird can equal the kite.  Not a stroke of his long pointed wings
betrayed that he needed their assistance; and he seemed to glory that he
could navigate the air without them.  Besides, the motion of these, had
he used them, might have caught the eye of his intended victim, and
warned it of the danger.  I say it was a beautiful sight to watch him as
he swam through his aery circles, at one moment appearing all white--as
his breast was turned to the spectators--the next moment his black back
and purple wings glittering in the sun, as sideways he guided himself
down the spiral curve.  It was a beautiful sight, and the young hunters
stood gazing with silent admiration.

Basil and Francois wondered that he did not at once pounce upon the
snake, for towards it his flight was evidently tending.  They had seen
other hawks do this--such as the red-tailed, the peregrine, and the
osprey--which last sometimes shoots several hundred feet perpendicularly
down upon its prey.  Lucien, however, knew better.  He knew that that
feat can be performed only by those hawks whose tails are full and not
forked, as the bald eagle, and the species already named--their
spreading tails giving them the power to suddenly arrest the downward
motion, and prevent them from dashing themselves against the earth.  The
kites, on the other hand, have not that power; and in this arrangement
Lucien could perceive a beautiful adaptation of Nature--an equalising of
advantages between these two kinds of birds.  He reasoned thus:--

The hawks, although swift of wing, and capable of extended flight,
cannot remain long in the air.  They grow weary and need rest, which
they take, perching themselves upon some tree.  It may be observed,
moreover, that they choose dead trees that overlook an open space.  They
do so, in order that the leaves may not obstruct their vision--thus
giving them a wider range, and, consequently, a better chance of espying
their prey.  But even with this advantage their chances of seeing their
prey are circumscribed, when compared with that of hawks upon the wing;
and they are frequently compelled to take to the air in order to
discover it.

Now the kites are always in the air, or nearly so.  They, in fact, _live
upon the wing_, eating their food as they fly, from their claws.  Living
thus, they have many more chances of _seeing_ their prey than their
cousins of the hawk species; and were they possessed of the power to
_pounce_ upon it with as much certainty as the latter do, it is evident
they would have greatly the advantage.  The want of that capability,
however, brings them upon an equality; and, as I have said, Lucien
perceived in this that peculiar equilibrium, or "balance of power,"
which constantly presents itself to the student of Nature.

These thoughts passed through his mind at the moment.  They occupied but
a moment however--for it was but a few seconds from the time the kite
was first noticed wheeling high in the air, until he swept along the
tops of the low trees, so close that the boys could distinguish the red
iris of his glistening eyes.

Now, for the first time, the snake caught sight of him.  Hitherto it had
been too much occupied with its own prey, which it had succeeded in
swallowing.  The shadow of the broad wings fell upon the sunlit sward
directly before its eyes.  It looked up, and saw its terrible enemy.  It
seemed to shiver through its whole length, and turn paler in colour.  It
struck its head into the grass, endeavouring to hide itself.  It was too
late.  The kite swooped gently downward; and, with open claw, poised
himself a moment over the spot.  As he rose again, the reptile was seen
wriggling in his talons!

A few strokes of his bold wing carried the kite upward, above the tops
of the tallest trees; but he was observed to fly heavily.  As he rose
higher, the flapping of his wings became more hurried and irregular.  It
was evident that something was impeding his flight.  The snake was no
longer hanging from his talons.  The reptile had twined itself around
his body; and its glistening folds, like red bands, could be seen
half-buried in the white plumage of the bird!

All at once the kite began to flutter--then one of his wings
disappeared; and, notwithstanding the hurried flapping of the other,
both bird and serpent fell heavily to the earth!

They fell close to the spot from whence they had risen.  Neither was
killed by the fall, nor, to all appearance, hurt; for, the moment after
they had touched the ground, both were seen engaged in a violent
struggle--the bird evidently endeavouring to free himself from the folds
of the reptile, while the latter seemed equally bent upon holding him!
The snake knew well that this was its only hope; for, should it unfold
itself and endeavour to escape, it would only give the kite an
opportunity of clutching it a second time, when he would be certain to
do it with more fatal effect.  It was because the reptile had buried its
head in the grass that the kite had failed in seizing it properly by the
neck, and putting an end to it at once.

This, no doubt, was the idea of the snake; but it is probable that its
antagonist at the moment would have been delighted to "cry quits" with
it, for the bird was in a worse "fix" than it was.  As things stood, the
serpent had undoubtedly the advantage.

It was likely to prove a protracted struggle; for, although there was
much twisting and wriggling over the ground, and flapping of the odd
wing--that was still free--very little change for a long time appeared
to take place in the relative position of the combatants.  This could be
seen, whenever they paused to rest themselves--which they did every two
or three minutes.

How was it to end?  The kite could not kill the snake, for he could not
get at it, either with his beak or talons.  The hold which he had at
first taken he had lost, in his attempts to save himself from falling;
and he was now unable to renew it, so closely was the reptile warped
around him.  The snake, on the other hand, could not kill the kite; for,
although possessed of considerable powers of constriction, they were not
sufficient.  It was strong enough to hold, and, perhaps, _squeeze_ its
antagonist, but not strong enough to crush and kill him.

Though each, no doubt, at the moment wished to be far enough from the
other, they could not separate with safety to both.  The kite _could not
get away_, and the snake _dared not let him go_!

How, then, was the affair to end, in the event that no third party
should interfere?  This was the conjecture of our adventurers, as with
curious eyes they watched this singular contest.  The train of reasoning
was as follows:--

By one or the other dying of hunger.  But which would starve first?  It
was well-known that the kite could live for days without food.  Ha! but
so too could the snake,--nay, more, for every day the bird could go
without eating, the reptile could fast ten; besides, the snake had just
dined--dined sumptuously upon the scorpion-lizard, that was now lying
undigested in his stomach; whereas the kite had not tasted dinner,--nay,
it was very certain he had not breakfasted either--and must have been
very hungry indeed to have attempted preying upon a blood-snake full
four feet long--for, as is well-known, his usual prey is the locust, the
chameleon, and the little green snake (_Coluber aestivus_).  Under every
view of the question then, the snake had the advantage of the bird, and
would easily outstarve him.  Thus, then, the affair would end, if the
combatants were left to themselves.

The young hunters arrived at this conclusion; and, having watched the
contest until their curiosity was satisfied, were about stepping forward
to put an end to it, when a new manoeuvre on the part of the combatants
caused them to remain still.  The kite had got his beak close to the
head of the serpent, and was striking with open mandibles, endeavouring
to seize the jaw of the latter.  He was upon his back--for these birds
fight best in that position.  The serpent, on the other hand, was trying
his best to bite the bird; and for this purpose at intervals extended
its jaws, showing the double rows of sharp conical teeth.  At one of
these intervals, while its mouth was open, the kite struck quickly
upward, and seized the lower jaw of the reptile in his beak.  The latter
closed its mouth on the instant; but the horny mandible was impervious
to its sharp teeth, and the bird regarded them not.

The kite continued to hold fast with his powerful beak.  He had now
gained the advantage, for which he had been all the while contending.
He had got a "fulcrum for his lever," and he was not slow in using it.
Suddenly turning back upward, with the aid of his wing and one of his
claws, he held himself fast to the ground, while with his strong neck he
drew the head of the serpent close under him until it lay within reach
of his other claw.  Then with a quick fierce stroke he planted his
talons, so as to encircle the throat of his adversary, clutching and
holding it like a vice.

This manoeuvre put a period to the contest.  The red coils were seen to
loosen, then fall off; and, although the reptile still writhed, it was
only in its death-struggles.  In a few moments its body lay along the
grass, powerless and without motion.

The kite after a short rest drew his beak from the jaws of the serpent,
raised his head, extended his wings--to assure himself they were free--
and, with a scream of triumph, rose upward, the long carcass of the
reptile trailing after him like a train!

At this moment another scream reached the ears of the young hunters.  It
might have passed for the echo of the first, but its tones were wilder
and louder.  All eyes were turned to the direction whence it came.  The
boys knew very well what sort of a creature had uttered it, for they had
heard such notes before.  They knew it was the _white-headed eagle_.

They caught sight of him the moment they turned.  It was not difficult
to see him soaring upward--his great tail and broad wings expanded,
seven feet in extent, against the light blue sky.

When first seen his flight was nearly in a straight line, slanting up in
the direction of the kite--for that was the object that had started him.
He was evidently bent upon robbing the latter of his late-gotten booty.

The kite had heard the cry that echoed his own; and, knowing its import,
at once plied all the power of his wings to rise higher into the air.
He seemed resolved to hold on to his hard-earned plunder; or, at all
events, not to yield it, without giving the more powerful robber the
trouble of a chase.  The fresh remembrance of the peril he had passed
through in obtaining it, no doubt stimulated him to this resolve.

Birds of his species will sometimes outfly and escape the eagle--that
is, _some_ eagles, for these bird-kings differ in degrees of swiftness
as hounds or horses.  So, too, do the kites; and the one in question
having, no doubt, full confidence in _his_ wings, thought he would make
trial of those of his pursuer--who, being personally unknown to him,
might be some individual too fat, or too old, or too young, perhaps, to
possess full powers of flight.  At all events he had made up his mind to
have a "fly" for it--believing that if overtaken he could easily put an
end to the pursuit by surrendering the snake, as his cousin, the osprey,
often has to do with his fish.  Up, therefore, he went, in a spiral
curve of about fifty yards in diameter.

If the kite entertained the idea that his pursuer was either a very old
or young bird, or too fat a bird, or in any way a "slow" bird, he was
likely to be soon undeceived.  That idea was not shared by those who
watched him in his flight.  On the contrary, the young hunters thought
they had never seen a more splendid specimen of his kind,--of full
feather, snow-white head and tail-tip, and broad clean-cut wings.  He
was one of the largest size, too; which proved him not to be a "him,"
but a female--for, strange to say, Nature seems to have reversed her
order with these birds--the females being universally brighter in
plumage, larger in body, swifter of wing, stronger, and even fiercer
than the males.  It may be inferred, that in the social life of
"eagle-dom" the fair sex have their "rights," and perhaps a little more.
One thing is certain, and it seems to be a consequence of this (in
compliment to the sex I say it) that nothing like polygamy is known
amongst them.  Woe to the eagle husband that would even dream of such a
thing!

_Voila_! up goes the kite, straining every pinion of his pointed wings--
up the spiral curve, _screwing_ himself towards the zenith.  Upward
follows the eagle, spirally as well, but in wider gyrations that embrace
and seem to hold the curvatures of the other within their circumference.
Both birds circle concentrically.  Now their orbits cross each other--
now they are wheeling in parallel curves.  Still upward flies the kite--
still upward goes the pursuing eagle.  Closer and closer they appear to
come; narrower grow their soaring circles--but that is because they are
more distant and seem so.  See! the kite is but a speck, and appears
stationary--now he is lost to the view.  See! the eagle is but a speck!
She, too, disappears!  No, not altogether--the little spot like the
fragment of a white cloud, or a piece of snow upon the sky--that is her
tail-tip.  Ha! it is gone too--they are beyond the reach of our vision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hark!  _Ish-sh-ish_!  Did you hear that sound, like the whistling of a
rocket?  See!  Something has fallen upon the tree-top, breaking several
branches!  As I live it is the kite!  Dead he is, and the blood is
spurting from a wound in his shoulder!

Hark, again!  _Whush-sh-ush_!  It is the eagle.  See! she has the
serpent in her talons!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The eagle had shot down from her elevation, though no eye could have
followed her in that arrow-like descent.  When within two or three
hundred yards of the ground, her wings flew out, her tail was spread,
and, suddenly lowered, fan-like to its fullest extent, arrested her
downward course; and, with a few measured strokes, she glided slowly
over the tops of the trees, and alighted on the summit of the dead
magnolia.

Basil seized his rifle, with the intention of having a shot.  There was
not much cover on the ground that encircled the tree where the eagle had
perched herself; and the young hunter knew from experience that his only
chance of getting near enough was to make his approach upon horseback.
He therefore drew the picket that fastened Black Hawk; and, flinging
himself upon the horse's back, rode off among the bushes.  He had been
gone but a few minutes when a sharp crack was heard, and the eagle was
seen tumbling from her perch.

This was the last link in the _chain of destruction_!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE WHITE-HEADED EAGLE.

Basil returned, bringing with him the great bird.  It was a female--as
Lucien knew--and one of the largest, being over twelve pounds in weight,
and measuring seven feet between the tips of the wings when expanded.
The bird of this species rarely exceeds eight pounds in weight, and is
proportionately small in other respects.

The white-headed eagle (_Falco leucocephalus_), or "bald eagle," as he
is generally called because his white head gives him somewhat of a bald
appearance--has been adopted by the United States as the emblem of their
Republic.  If his disposition be considered, he would be a more fit
emblem for a band of robbers--for a more absolute robber and tyrant does
not exist among the feathered races.  He robs the osprey of his fish,
and the vulture of his carrion; in short, lords it over every creature
weaker than himself.  Now this is not the character of the nation he
represents--far from it.  It is true they have shown a desire to extend
their territory, and have made conquests to this end.  But what is the
motive of these conquests?  Is it to enslave and render tribute?  No.
They conquer not _to enslave_, but to _make free_!  There are two
motives for Anglo-American--I may say Anglo-Saxon, conquest, for _true_
Englishmen feel these motives as much as Americans do.  They wish to
bring the whole world under a liberal form of government--one that will
bear the scrutiny of reason--one that in time may extinguish crime, and
render poverty a thing of the past--one that is not a patent usurpation
and a robbery--a robbery perhaps more criminal in the eyes of God than
waylaying on the highroad, or piracy on the high seas--more criminal,
because more extensive in its fatal effects.  Anglo-Saxons wish to
destroy despotism, lest they or their descendants might again become
what their ancestors once were--its victims.  This, then, is one motive
of their conquests, and it is nothing more than the naked instinct of
self-preservation.  But there is another motive--a nobler and more
generous one.  They have drunk from the cup of Liberty--the draught has
pleased them, has given them happiness and joy; and, urged by that
better part of our nature, they wish to share that sweet cup--ample for
all--_with all men_.  This is the true motive of the conquest of
civilisation; and under the banner of such a cause, it is a question
whether war and anarchy and confusion be not preferable to the deceptive
