Fish, as with us, and of the finest quality, formed the second course.

A variety of dishes were now brought upon the table; most of them new to
us, but all piquant, pleasant to the taste, and peculiar.

The major tried them all, determined to find out which he might like
best--a piece of knowledge that he said would serve him upon some future
occasion.

The Don seemed to take a pleasure in helping the major, whom he honoured
by the title of "Senor Coronel."

"_Puchero_, Senor Coronel?"

"Thank you, sir," grunted the major, and tried the puchero.

"Allow me to help you to a spoonful of _mole_."

"With pleasure, Don Cosme."

The _mole_ suddenly disappeared down the major's capacious throat.

"Try some of this _chile relleno_."

"By all means," answered the major.  "Ah, by Jove! hot as fire!--whew!"

"_Pica!  Pica_!" answered Don Cosme, pointing to his thorax, and smiling
at the wry faces the major was making.  "Wash it down, Senor, with a
glass of this claret--or here, Pepe!  Is the Johannisberg cool yet?
Bring it in, then.  Perhaps you prefer champagne, Senores?"

"Thank you; do not trouble yourself, Don Cosme."

"No trouble, Capitan--bring champagne.  Here, Senor Coronel, try the
_guisado de pato_."

"Thank you," stammered the major; "you are very kind.  Curse the thing!
how it burns!"

"Do you think he understands English?" inquired Clayey of me in a
whisper.

"I should think not," I replied.

"Well, then, I wish to say aloud that this old chap's a superb old gent.
What say you, Major?  Don't you wish we had him on the lines?"

"I wish his kitchen were a little nearer the lines," replied the other,
with a wink.

"Senor Coronel, permit me--"

"What is it, my dear Don?" inquired the major.

"_Pasteles de Moctezuma_."

"Oh, certainly.  I say, lads, I don't know what the plague I'm eating--
it's not bad to take, though."

"Senor Coronel, allow me to help you to a _guana_ steak."

"A guana steak!" echoed the major, in some surprise.

"_Si, Senor_," replied Don Cosme, holding the steak on his fork.

"A guana steak!  Do you think, lads, he means the ugly things we saw at
Lobos."

"To be sure--why not?"

"Then, by Jove, I'm through!  I can't go lizards.  Thank you, my dear
Don Cosme; I believe I have dined."

"Try this; it is very tender, I assure you," insisted Don Cosme.

"Come, try it, Major, and report," cried Clayey.

"Good--you're like the apothecary that poisoned his dog to try the
effect of his nostrums.  Well,"--with an oath--"here goes!  It can't be
very bad, seeing how our friend gets it down.  Delicious, by Jupiter!
tender as chicken--good, good!"--and amidst sundry similar ejaculations
the major ate his first guana steak.

"Gentlemen, here is an ortolan pie.  I can recommend it--the birds are
in season."

"Reed-birds, by Jove!" said the major, recognising his favourite dish.

An incredible number of these creatures disappeared in an incredibly
short time.

The dinner dishes were at length removed, and dessert followed: cakes
and creams, and jellies of various kinds, and blancmange, and a
profusion of the most luxurious fruits.  The golden orange, the ripe
pine, the pale-green lime, the juicy grape, the custard-like cherimolla,
the zapote, the granadilla, the pitahaya, the tuna, the mamay; with
dates, figs, almonds, plantains, bananas, and a dozen other species of
fruits, piled upon salvers of silver, were set before us: in fact, every
product of the tropical clime that could excite a new nerve of the sense
of taste.  We were fairly astonished at the profusion of luxuries that
came from no one knew where.

"Come, gentlemen, try a glass of curacoa.  Senor Coronel, allow me the
pleasure."

"Sir, your very good health."

"Senor Coronel, would you prefer a glass of Majorca?"

"Thank you."

"Or perhaps you would choose _Pedro Ximenes_.  I have some very old
_Pedro Ximenes_."

"Either, my dear Don Cosme--either."

"Bring both, Ramon; and bring a couple of bottles of the Madeira--_sello
verde_," (green seal).

"As I am a Christian, the old gentleman's a conjuror!" muttered the
major, now in the best humour possible.

"I wish he would conjure up something else than his infernal wine
bottles," thought I, becoming impatient at the non-appearance of the
ladies.

"_Cafe_, Senores?"  A servant entered.

Coffee was handed round in cups of Sevres china.

"You smoke, gentlemen?  Would you prefer a Havanna?  Here are some sent
me from Cuba by a friend.  I believe they are good; or, if you would
amuse yourself with a cigaritto, here are Campeacheanos.  These are the
country cigars--_puros_, as we call them.  I would not recommend them."

"A Havanna for me," said the major, helping himself at the same time to
a fine-looking "regalia."

I had fallen into a somewhat painful reverie.

I began to fear that, with all his hospitality, the Mexican would allow
us to depart without an introduction to his family; and I had conceived
a strong desire to speak with the two lovely beings whom I had already
seen, but more particularly with the brunette, whose looks and actions
had deeply impressed me.  So strange is the mystery of love!  My heart
had already made its choice.

I was suddenly aroused by the voice of Don Cosme, who had risen, and was
inviting myself and comrades to join the ladies in the drawing-room.

I started up so suddenly as almost to overturn one of the tables.

"Why, Captain, what's the matter!" said Clayley.  "Don Cosme is about to
introduce us to the ladies.  You're not going to back out?"

"Certainly not," stammered I, somewhat ashamed at my _gaucherie_.

"He says they're in the drawing-room," whispered the major, in a voice
that betokened a degree of suspicion; "but where the plague that is,
Heaven only knows!  Stand by, my boys!--are your pistols all right?"

"Pshaw, Major! for shame!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

A SUBTERRANEAN DRAWING-ROOM.

The mystery of the drawing-room, and the servants, and the dishes, was
soon over.  A descending stairway explained the enigma.

"Let me conduct you to my cave, gentlemen," said the Spaniard: "I am
half a subterranean.  In the hot weather, and during the northers, we
find it more agreeable to live under the ground.  Follow me, Senores."

We descended, with the exception of Oakes, who returned to look after
the men.

At the foot of the staircase we entered a hall brilliantly lighted.  The
floor was without a carpet, and exhibited a mosaic of the finest marble.
The walls were painted of a pale blue colour, and embellished by a
series of pictures from the pencil of Murillo.  These were framed in a
costly and elegant manner.  From the ceiling were suspended chandeliers
of a curious and unique construction, holding in their outstretched
branches wax candles of an ivory whiteness.

Large vases of waxen flowers, covered with crystals, stood around the
hall upon tables of polished marble.  Other articles of furniture,
candelabra, girandoles, gilded clocks, filled the outline.  Broad
mirrors reflected the different objects; so that, instead of one
apartment, this hall appeared only one of a continuous suite of splendid
drawing-rooms.

And yet, upon closer observation, there seemed to be no door leading
from this hall, which, as Don Cosme informed his guests, was the
_ante-sala_.

Our host approached one of the large mirrors, and slightly touched a
spring.  The tinkling of a small bell was heard within; and at the same
instant the mirror glided back, reflecting in its motion a series of
brilliant objects, that for a moment bewildered our eyes with a blazing
light.

"_Pasan adentro, Senores_," said Don Cosme, stepping aside, and waving
us to enter.

We walked into the drawing-room.  The magnificence that greeted us
seemed a vision--a glorious and dazzling hallucination--more like the
gilded brilliance of some enchanted palace than the interior of a
Mexican gentleman's habitation.

As we stood gazing with irresistible wonderment, Don Cosme opened a
side-door, and called aloud, "_Ninas, ninas, ven aca_!"  (Children, come
hither!)

Presently we heard several female voices, blending together like a
medley of singing birds.

They approached.  We heard the rustling of silken dresses, the falling
of light feet in the doorway, and three ladies entered--the senora of
Don Cosme, followed by her two beautiful daughters, the heroines of our
aquatic adventure.

These hesitated a moment, scanning our faces; then, with a cry of
"_Nuestro Salvador_!" both rushed forward, and knelt, or rather
crouched, at my feet, each of them clasping one of my hands and covering
it with kisses.

Their panting agitation, their flashing eyes, the silken touch of their
delicate fingers, sent the blood rushing through my veins like a stream
of lava; but in their gentle accents, the simple ingenuousness of their
expressions, the childlike innocence of their faces, I regarded them
only as two beautiful children kneeling in the _abandon_ of gratitude.

Meanwhile Don Cosme had introduced Clayley and the major to his senora,
whose baptismal name was Joaquina; and taking the young ladies one in
each hand, he presented them as his daughters, Guadalupe and Maria de la
Luz (Mary of the Light).

"Mama," said Don Cosme, "the gentlemen had not quite finished their
cigars."

"Oh! they can smoke here," replied the senora.

"Will the ladies not object to that?"  I inquired.

"No--no--no!" ejaculated they simultaneously.

"Perhaps you will join us?--we have heard that such is the custom of
your country."

"It _was_ the custom," said Don Cosme.  "At present the young ladies of
Mexico are rather ashamed of the habit."

"We no smoke--Mamma, yes," added the elder--the brunette--whose name was
Guadalupe.

"Ha! you speak English?"

"Little Englis speak--no good Englis," was the reply.

"Who taught you English?"  I inquired, prompted by a mysterious
curiosity.

"Un American us teach--Don Emilio."

"Ha! an American?"

"Yes, Senor," said Don Cosme: "a gentleman from Vera Cruz, who formerly
visited our family."

I thought I could perceive a desire upon the part of our host not to
speak further on this subject, and yet I felt a sudden, and, strange to
say, a painful curiosity to know more about Don Emilio, the American,
and his connection with our newly-made acquaintance.  I can only explain
this by asking the reader if he or she has not experienced a similar
feeling while endeavouring to trace the unknown past of some being in
whom either has lately taken an interest--an interest stronger than
friendship?

That mamma smoked was clear, for the old lady had already gone through
the process of unrolling one of the small cartouche-like cigars.  Having
re-rolled it between her fingers, she placed it within the gripe of a
pair of small golden pincers.

This done, she held one end to the coals that lay upon the _brazero_,
and ignited the paper.  Then, taking the other end between her thin,
purlish lips, she breathed forth a blue cloud of aromatic vapour.

After a few whiffs she invited the major to participate, offering him a
cigarrito from her beaded cigar-case.

This being considered an especial favour, the major's gallantry would
not permit him to refuse.  He took the cigarrito, therefore; but, once
in possession, he knew not how to use it.

Imitating the senora, he opened the diminutive cartridge, spreading out
the edges of the wrapper, but attempted in vain to re-roll it.

The ladies, who had watched the process, seemed highly amused,
particularly the younger, who laughed outright.

"Permit me, Senor Coronel," said the Dona Joaquina, taking the cigarrito
from the major's hand, and giving it a turn through her nimble fingers,
which brought it all right again.

"Thus--now--hold your fingers thus.  Do not press it: _suave, suave_.
This end to the light--so--very well!"

The major lit the cigar, and, putting it between his great thick lips,
began to puff in a most energetic style.

He had not cast off half a dozen whiffs when the fire, reaching his
fingers, burned them severely, causing him to remove them suddenly from
the cigar.  The wrapper then burst open; and the loose pulverised
tobacco by a sudden inhalation rushed into his mouth and down his
throat, causing him to cough and splutter in the most ludicrous manner.

This was too much for the ladies, who, encouraged by the cachinnations
of Clayley, laughed outright; while the major, with tears in his eyes,
could be heard interlarding his coughing solo with all kinds of oaths
and expressions.

The scene ended by one of the young ladies offering the major a glass of
water, which he drank off, effectually clearing the avenue of his
throat.

"Will you try another, Senor Coronel?" asked Dona Joaquina, with a
smile.

"No, ma'am, thank you," replied the major, and then a sort of internal
subterraneous curse could be heard in his throat.

The conversation continued in English, and we were highly amused at the
attempts of our new acquaintances to express themselves in that
language.

After failing, on one occasion, to make herself understood, Guadalupe
said, with some vexation in her manner:

"We wish brother was home come; brother speak ver better Englis."

"Where is he?"  I inquired.

"In the ceety--Vera Cruz."

"Ha! and when did you expect him?"

"Thees day--to-night--he home come."

"Yes," added the Senora Joaquina, in Spanish: "he went to the city to
spend a few days with a friend; but he was to return to-day, and we are
looking for him to arrive in the evening."

"But how is he to get out?" cried the major, in his coarse, rough
manner.

"How?--why, Senor?" asked the ladies in a breath, turning deadly pale.

"Why, he can't pass the pickets, ma'am," answered the major.

"Explain, Captain; explain!" said the ladies, appealing to me with looks
of anxiety.

I saw that concealment would be idle.  The major had fired the train.

"It gives me pain, ladies," said I, speaking in Spanish, "to inform you
that you must be disappointed.  I fear the return of your brother to-day
is impossible."

"But why, Captain?--why?"

"Our lines are completely around Vera Cruz, and all intercourse to and
from the city is at an end."

Had a shell fallen into Don Cosme's drawing-room it could not have
caused a greater change in the feelings of its inmates.  Knowing nothing
of military life, they had no idea that our presence there had drawn an
impassable barrier between them and a much-loved member of their family.
In a seclusion almost hermetical they knew that a war existed between
their country and the United States; but that was far away upon the Rio
Grande.  They had heard, moreover, that our fleet lay off Vera Cruz, and
the pealing of the distant thunder of San Juan had from time to time
reached their ears; but they had not dreamed, on seeing us, that the
city was invested by land.  The truth was now clear; and the anguish of
the mother and daughters became afflicting when we informed them of what
we were unable to conceal--that it was the intention of the American
commander to _bombard the city_.

The scene was to us deeply distressing.

Dona Joaquina wrung her hands, and called upon the Virgin with all the
earnestness of entreaty.  The sisters clung alternately to their mother
