lane more rapidly, when I perceived in front what appeared to be a large
open space.  I pushed forward for this, but the nearer I came to its
border the more densely I found the creatures packed.  I could only see
that it was an open space by leaping up.  I did not know what was
causing it.  I did not stay to reflect.  I only wished to get forward as
rapidly as possible, thinking about our flock.

"I continued to clear my way, and at length found myself in the position
I had coveted; while the lane I had made, in getting there, closed
instantaneously behind me.  I was about to rush on, and take advantage
of the bit of clear ground, when, what should I see in the centre, and
directly before me, but a great yellow lion!

"That accounted for the break in the herd.  Had I known what had been
causing it, I should have fought my way in any other direction but that;
but there was I, out in the open ground, the lion not ten paces from me,
and a fence of springboks two deep around both of us!

"I need not say I was frightened, and badly too.  I did not for some
moments know how to act.  My gun was still loaded--for, after thinking
of saving our little flock, I did not care to empty it at the antelopes.
I could get one, thought I, at any time when I had secured the sheep in
the kraal.  The piece, therefore, was loaded and with bullets.

"Should I take aim at the lion, and fire?  I asked myself this question,
and was just on the point of deciding in the affirmative, when I
reflected that it would be imprudent.  I observed that the lion, whose
back was turned to me, had either not seen, or as yet took no notice of
me.  Should I only wound him--and from the position he was in I was not
likely to do more,--how then?  I would most likely be torn to pieces.

"These were my reflections, all of which scarce occupied a second of
time.  I was about to `back out' or back in among the springboks, and
make my way in some other direction, and had even got near the edge,
when, in looking over my shoulder, I saw the lion suddenly halt and turn
round.  I halted too, knowing that to be the safest plan; and, as I did
so, I glanced back at the lion's eyes.

"To my relief, I saw they were not upon _me_.  He seemed to have taken
some fancy in his head.  His appetite, perhaps, had returned; for the
next moment he ran a few yards, and then, rising with a terrific bound,
launched himself far into the herd, and came down right upon the back of
one of the antelopes!  The others sprang right and left, and a new space
was soon opened around him.

"He was now nearer than ever to where I stood, and I could see him
distinctly crouched over his victim.  His claws held its quivering body,
and his long teeth grasped the poor creature by the neck.  But, with the
exception of his tail, he was making not the slightest motion, and that
vibrated gently from side to side, just as a kitten that had caught a
tiny mouse.  I could see, too, that his eyes were close shut, as though
he were asleep!

"Now I had heard that under such circumstances the lion may be
approached without much danger.  Not that I wished to go any nearer--for
I was near enough for my gun--but it was this recollection, I believe,
that put me in the notion of firing.  At all events, something whispered
me I would succeed, and I could not resist trying.

"The broad blind jaw of the brute was fair before me.  I took aim, and
pulled trigger; but, instead of waiting to see the effect of my shot, I
ran right off in an opposite direction.

"I did not halt till I had put several _acres_ of antelopes between
myself and the place where I had last stood; and then I made the best of
my way to the wagon.

"Long before I had reached it, I could see that Jan, and Truey, and
Totty, were safe under the tent.  That gave me pleasure, but I also saw
that the sheep and goats had got mixed up with the springboks, and were
moving off with them as if they belonged to the same species!  I fear
they are all lost."

"And the lion?" inquired Hendrik.

"Yonder he lies!" answered Hans, modestly pointing to a yellow mass out
upon the plain, over which the vultures were already beginning to hover.
"Yonder he lies, you could hardly have done it better yourself, brother
Hendrik."

As Hans said this, he smiled in such a manner as to show, that he had no
idea of making a boast of his achievements.

Hendrik was loud in acknowledging that it was a most splendid feat, and
also in regretting that he had not been on the ground to witness the
wonderful migration of the springboks.

But there was no time for much idle talk.  Von Bloom and his party were
in a very unpleasant situation.  His flocks were all gone.  The cow and
horses alone remained; and for these not a blade of grass had been left
by the antelopes.  Upon what were they to be fed?

To follow the spoor of the migratory springboks with the hope of
recovering their flock would be quite useless.  Swartboy assured them of
this.  The poor animals might be carried hundreds of miles before they
could separate themselves from the great herd, or bring their
involuntary journey to an end!

The horses could travel but little farther.  There was nought to feed
them on but the leaves of the mimosas, and this was but poor food for
hungry horses.  It would be fortunate if they could be kept alive until
they should reach some pasture; and where now was pasture to be found?
Locusts and antelopes between them seemed to have turned all Africa into
a desert!

The field-cornet soon formed his resolution.  He would remain there for
the night, and early on the morrow set out in search of some other
spring.

Fortunately Hans had not neglected to secure a brace of the springboks;
and their fat venison now came into general use.  A roast of that, and a
drink of cool water from the spring, soon refreshed the three wearied
travellers.

The horses were let loose among the mimosa-trees, and allowed to shift
for themselves; and although under ordinary circumstances they would
have "turned up their noses" at such food as mimosa-leaves, they now
turned them up in a different sense, and cleared the thorny branches
like so many giraffes.

Some naturalist of the "Buffon" school has stated that neither wolf,
fox, hyena, nor jackal, will eat the carcass of a lion,--that their fear
of the royal despot continues even after his death.

The field-cornet and his family had proof of the want of truth in this
assertion.  Before many hours both jackals and hyenas attacked the
carcass of the king of beasts, and in a very short while there was not a
morsel of him there but his bones.  Even his tawny skin was swallowed by
these ravenous creatures, and many of the bones broken by the strong
jaws of the hyenas.  The respect which these brutes entertain for the
lion ends with his life.  When dead, he is eaten by them with as much
audacity as if he were the meanest of animals.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

SPOORING FOR A SPRING.

Von Bloom was in the saddle at an early hour.  Swartboy accompanied him,
while all the others remained by the wagon to await his return.  They
took with them the two horses that had remained by the wagon, as these
were fresher than the others.

They rode nearly due westward.  They were induced to take this direction
by observing that the springboks had come from the north.  By heading
westward they believed they would sooner get beyond the wasted
territory.

To their great satisfaction an hour's travelling carried them clear of
the track of the antelope migration; and although they found no water,
there was excellent grass.

The field-cornet now sent Swartboy back for the other horses and the
cow, pointing out a place where he should bring them to graze, while he
himself continued on in search of water.

After travelling some miles farther, Von Bloom perceived to the north of
him a long line of cliff rising directly up from the plain, and running
westward as far as he could see.  Thinking that water would be more
likely to be found near these cliffs, he turned his horse's head towards
them.  As he approached nearer to their base, he was charmed with the
beautiful scenery that began to open before his eyes.  He passed through
grassy plains of different sizes, separated from each other by copses of
the delicate-leaved mimosa; some of these forming large thickets, while
others consisted of only a few low bushes.  Towering high over the
mimosas, grew many trees of gigantic size, and of a species Von Bloom
had never seen before.  They stood thinly upon the ground; but each,
with its vast leafy head, seemed a little forest of itself.

The whole country around had a soft park-like appearance, which
contrasted well with the dark cliff that rose beyond--the latter
stepping up from the plain by a precipice of several hundred feet in
height, and seemingly as vertical as the walls of a house.

The fine landscape was gratifying to the eyes of the traveller--such a
fine country in the midst of so much barrenness; for he knew that most
of the surrounding region was little better than a wild karoo.  The
whole of it to the north for hundreds of miles was a famous desert--the
desert of Kalihari--and these cliffs were a part of its southern border.
The "vee-boor" would have been rejoiced at such a sight under other
circumstances.  But what to him now were all these fine pastures--now
that he was no longer able to stock them?

Notwithstanding the beauty of the scene, his reflections were painful.

But he did not give way to despair.  His present troubles were
sufficiently grievous to prevent him from dwelling much on the future.
His first care was to find a place where his horses might be recruited;
for without them he could no longer move anywhere--without them he would
be helpless indeed.

Water was the desired object.  If water could not be found, all this
beautiful park through which he was passing would be as valueless to him
as the brown desert.

Surely so lovely a landscape could not exist without that most essential
element!

So thought the field-cornet; and at the turning of every new grove his
eyes wandered over the ground in search of it.

"_Ho_!" he joyfully exclaimed as a covey of large Namaqua partridges
whirred up from his path.  "A good sign that: _they_ are seldom far from
water."

Shortly after, he saw a flock of beautiful pintados, or guinea-hens,
running into a copse.  This was a still further proof that water was
nigh.  But surest of all, on the top of a tall _cameel-doorn_ tree, he
next observed the brilliant plumage of a parrot.

"Now," muttered he to himself, "I must be very near to some spring or
pool."

He rode cheerfully forward: and after a little while arrived upon the
crest of an elevated ridge.  Here he halted to observe the flight of the
birds.  Presently he noticed a covey of partridges flying in a westerly
direction, and shortly after, another covey going the same way.  Both
appeared to alight near a gigantic tree that grew in the plain about
five hundred yards from the bottom of the cliffs.  This tree stood apart
from any of the others, and was by far the largest Von Bloom had yet
seen.

As he remained gazing at its wonderful dimensions, he observed several
pairs of parrots alighting upon it.  These, after chattering a while
among its branches, flew down upon the plain not far from its base.

"Surely," thought Von Bloom, "there must be water there.  I shall ride
forward and see."

But his horse had scarcely waited for him to form this design.  The
animal had been already dragging upon the bridle; and as soon as his
head was turned in the direction of the tree, he started forward with
outstretched neck, snorting as he rushed along.

The rider, trusting to the instinct of his horse, surrendered up the
bridle; and in less than five minutes both horse and rider were drinking
from the sweet water of a crystal fountain that gushed out within a
dozen yards of the tree.

The field-cornet would now have hastened back to the wagon: but he
thought that by allowing his horse to browse an hour or so upon the
grass, he would make the return-journey with more spirit, and in quite
as good time.  He, therefore, took off the bridle, gave the animal his
liberty, while he stretched himself under the shade of the great tree.

As he lay, he could not help admiring the wonderful production of nature
that towered majestically above him.  It was one of the largest trees he
had ever beheld.  It was of the kind known as the "nwana" tree, a
species of _ficus_, with large sycamore-shaped leaves that grew thickly
over its magnificent head.  Its trunk was full twenty-feet in diameter,
rising to more than that height without a branch, and then spreading off
into numerous limbs that stretched far out in a horizontal direction.
Through the thick foliage Von Bloom could perceive shining egg-shaped
fruits as large as cocoa-nuts; and upon these the parrots and several
other kinds of birds appeared to be feeding.

Other trees of the same species stood out upon the plain at long
distances apart; and though they were all taller than the surrounding
timber, none were so large or conspicuous as the one that grew by the
spring.

The field-cornet, as he enjoyed the cool shade which its umbrageous
frondage afforded, could not help thinking what an admirable spot it
would be to build a kraal.  The inmates of a dwelling placed beneath its
friendly shelter, need never dread the fierce rays of the African sun;
even the rain could scarce penetrate its leafy canopy.  In fact, its
dense foliage almost constituted a roof of itself.

Had his cattle still remained to him, no doubt the vee-boor would have
resolved at once to make this spot his future home.  But, tempting as it
was, what now could he do in such a place?  To him it would be only a
wilderness.  There was no species of industry he could follow in such a
remote quarter.  True, he might sustain himself and his family by
hunting.  He saw that game was plenteous all around.  But that would be
but a sorry existence, with no promise for the future.  What would his
children do hereafter?  Were they to grow up with no other end than to
become poor hunters--no better than the wild Bushmen?  No! no! no!  To
make a home there would be out of the question.  A few days to recruit
his wearied horses, and then he would make a struggle and trek back to
the settlements.

But what after he had got back?  He knew not what then.  His future was
gloomy and uncertain.

After indulging in such reflections for an hour or more, he bethought
him that it was time to return to the camp; and having caught and
bridled his horse, he mounted and set forth.

The animal, refreshed by the sweet grass and cool water, carried him
briskly along; and in less than two hours he came up with Swartboy and
Hendrik where they were pasturing the horses.

These were taken back to the wagon and harnessed in; and then the great
vehicle once more "trekked" across the plains.

Before the sun had set, the long white cap-tent was gleaming under the
leafy screen of the gigantic "nwana."



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE TERRIBLE "TSETSE."

The verdant carpet that stretched away around them--the green leaves
upon the trees--the flowers by the fountain--the crystal water in its
bed--the black bold rocks towering up at a distance--all combined to
make a lovely picture.  The eyes of the wayfarers were glad as they
beheld it; and while the wagon was outspanning, every one gave utterance
to their delightful emotions.

The place seemed to please every one.  Hans loved its quiet and sylvan
beauty.  It was just such a place as he would choose to ramble in, book
in hand, and dream away many a pleasant hour.  Hendrik liked it much,
because he had already observed what he termed "extensive spoor" about
the spot: in other words, he had noticed the tracks of many of Africa's
largest wild animals.

Little Truey was delighted to see so many beautiful flowers.  There were
bright scarlet geraniums, and starlike sweet-scented jessamines, and the
gorgeous belladonna lily, with its large blossoms of rose-colour and
white; and there were not only plants in flower, but bushes, and even
trees, covered with gaudy and sweetly-perfumed blossoms.  There was the
"sugar-bush" (_Protea mellifera_), the most beautiful of its family,
with its large cup-shaped corollas of pink, white, and green; and there,
too, was the "silver-tree" (_Leucodendron argenteum_), whose soft
silvery leaves playing in the breeze, looked like a huge mass of silken
flowers; and there were the mimosas covered with blossoms of golden
yellow that filled the air with their strong and agreeable perfume.

