ministering to our wants and doing all possible to cheer and soothe our
suffering! True, we must go alone through the Dark Valley, but others
may lead us down to the border, and their cheering words may yet linger
with us as the day closes and we step into that awful gloom through
which we must pass before we can enter into the eternal day beyond.
Though we know that He stands waiting to take our hand in His and lead
us through the solemn darkness, yet the soul, hovering in its flight,
longs for the companionship of the dear ones, until the final adieu must
come! Oh, loving Father, whose sympathizing arms reach out to enfold us
all, grant that such may be mine and the lot of all my friends.

Upon looking at the Indian an hour later, he was seen to be sleeping as
calmly as an infant, while his face was covered with a mild, healthful
moisture.

"He will git well!" said Tim. "Did I not stand by the bedside of my poor
mother and give her the cowld water that brought her back to life agin?"

"The crisis of the fever has passed, or is passing," said Howard. "He
must have an iron constitution, like all his people, and he will rally,
I have no doubt."

"Yes," added Elwood, with much feeling, "there is one thing certain;
_all_ are not our enemies; we have made one friend at least."

"True, an Indian never forgets an injury nor a kindness, and his
friendship may be of benefit to us before we reach home."

"I b'laves you, boys; that Injin will remember us as long as he lives,
and will sarve us a good turn if the chances for the same be iver given
him."

"But see, he has awaked!"




CHAPTER XXI.

A HUNT FOR FOOD.


The Indian was awake and making signs to his friends. For some time they
were at a loss to understand their meaning, but Howard noticed that he
had a leaf in his hand which he offered to them. When the boy took it
his face showed that he was pleased, but continued his signs as before.

Suddenly Elwood's eyes sparkled.

"He wants us to bring him some of those leaves. Let me have it; they
must be on the island."

He hastened away and was not long in finding a bush that bore precisely
the same species, and gathering quite a lot he returned to the Indian
and offered them to him. But he did not seem satisfied. He looked at the
leaves, nodded his head, and then taking them by the slight twigs to
which they were fastened, he made as if to pull them up again.

"Ah! I know what he means!" said Howard. "It is not the leaf but the
root that he wishes."

"I can soon get that."

Elwood verified his words, and scarce ten minutes elapsed ere he
returned with several goodly-sized roots, which were washed and cleaned.
The look of the Indian showed that he had now got what he wanted, and he
began gnawing the bark and chewing it.

"He's a docthering himself now!" said Tim, "as the patient said when he
gave the docther his own medicine and pisened him to death by raisin of
the same. He will get along."

They watched the sufferer for a few moments. Gathering his mouth nearly
full of the bark, he continued chewing and swallowing for some time
longer, when he finally shut his eyes and again slept.

Picking up a piece of the root which he had gathered Elwood tasted of
it. He found it so bitter that he instantly spat it out.

"It must have some medicinal quality," remarked Howard, "or he would not
use it. I believe the Indians doctor entirely with herbs, and I have no
doubt that he will soon be well."

"Do yez mind that if it isn't noon it is close to the same? And be the
tame towken we are all slightly hungry."

Now arose a query. The island was so small that it contained no game of
any kind, and so was unavailable to supply their wants. The river
abounded in fish, but there was no means of catching them; and finally,
after some discussion, it was agreed that Tim should cross over to the
mainland and shoot something.

"Do yez kaap your eyes about yez till I'z back again, for some of the
coppery gintlemen may take a notion to pay yez a visit."

The boys felt a little uneasiness as they saw their companion enter the
canoe and paddle toward the eastern shore--the shore which as yet had
been unvisited by them. They watched until he landed, pulled the boat up
behind him into shelter, and then disappeared in the wood.

"We shall be in rather a bad situation if he never comes back," remarked
Elwood.

"I don't know about that; in what better occupation can we be found than
in ministering to the wants of a suffering Indian? Would not that itself
protect us from injury?"

"Perhaps it might; but what would become of us any way? They wouldn't be
kind enough to guide us up to San Francisco."

"They might take us so far that we could find our way."

"Hardly; I don't like to see Tim go to that shore; it looks too
dangerous. I wonder why he did it?"

"He must have believed there is more game there."

"But there is enough on the other side, and he would avoid this greater
danger by going there."

"I imagine that a river running through a hostile country is as
dangerous upon one side as upon the other, and there is little choice,
Howard, in the matter."

"But I know _you_ feel unpleasant in being thus left alone."

"I know I shall be glad to see Tim come back again, for there is always
great danger in such a small party separating."

"Halloo! there goes his gun or somebody else's."

The sharp crack of the rifle came from the shore, and Elwood was sure he
saw the faint smoke of the discharge ascend from some thick bushes near
the edge of the wood. But he was no doubt mistaken, for as they
scrutinized the spot they detected nothing of him who had fired the gun.

"I suppose it was Tim firing at some game. You know he is not a very
good shot, and so he has badly wounded without killing it."

"Then we ought to hear his gun again."

"We shall no doubt----"

"Hark!"

Crack went a gun, almost instantly followed by three similar reports.
The boys turned pale and looked at each other.

"What does that mean?" whispered Elwood.

"That is bad; Tim is in trouble."

"He ought to have had better sense than to paddle out there in open day,
plunge right into the woods and go to shooting without stopping to see
what the danger is. But what will become of him?"

"And of us?"

"This Indian here must have had some way of getting upon the island. I
believe he has a canoe hid somewhere."

"But what of it? We cannot think of leaving until we know something
definite about Tim."

"Unless some of the Indians start to come over to the island, and then
we'll leave."

"Do you think that would be the wisest plan, Elwood? They can handle the
paddle so much better than we that it would take but little time for
them to overhaul us. Then, too, if they should find us by this suffering
brother of theirs would it not make friends of them?"

"Suppose this Indian here is one of their enemies?"

This was a supposition that had never occurred to Howard before, but
which he saw was very reasonable. All Indians not belonging to the same
tribe might be supposed to be enemies of each other, and thus the mercy
and kindness of our young heroes might be made the means of their
destruction.

"I didn't think of that," said Howard, "it may be so. But let us hope
for the best. Tim may soon return to us again."

"Not if he has a grain of sense left."

"And why not?"

"He has been seen by Indians, and if they haven't got him now they will
soon have him if he undertakes to paddle his canoe over to the island."

"You are right, Elwood; he will no doubt wait until it is dark, and then
come out to us as stealthily as he can."

"That is if he gets the chance. I tell you, Howard," said his cousin,
starting up, "this begins to look bad."

"I know it does."

"We know how those red men handle their guns, and it don't look likely
to me that all those shots have missed Tim."

"They may be quite a distance apart--far enough to make their aim
uncertain."

"But then they could cut off his return to the shore."

Howard suddenly laid his hand upon the arm of his cousin and pointed to
the other shore.




CHAPTER XXII.

DANGER.


Three Indians walked leisurely down to the shore of the river, as though
in quest of nothing particular, and stood gesticulating as they
generally do with their whole arms. They were about two hundred yards
above the point where Tim O'Rooney landed, but their position was such
that the canoe might have rested on the surface of the water without
being seen. Sensible of their danger, the boys at first sight of them
withdrew into cover, from which they cautiously peered out and watched
their movements.

"Those must be the three who fired the guns," whispered Elwood.

"Very probably they are; that looks more encouraging, for I do not see
Tim among them."

"Maybe they have slain him and are talking as to where he came from."

"Heaven! I hope not."

"So do I; but it looks reasonable that they have made away with him and
are now looking for us."

"How did they know he had any friends with him? Then, too, if they had
slain him, would they not have followed his trail straight down to the
water?"

"I didn't think of that. _That_ question makes me more hopeful than
anything else. It does now look somewhat cheering. But what are they
after?"

The Indians were still talking in an excited manner, and more than once
pointed across the river to the island as if there were something there
which claimed their attention. It might be the boys themselves, or they
may have known that one of their race lay there in dire extremity; but
whatever the cause was it boded no good to the two boys, who were
crouching in the bushes and grass and furtively watching their motions.

The latter were still gazing at them when their hearts were thrilled by
the sight of Tim O'Rooney. The eyes of Elwood chanced to be fixed upon a
small open space, a rod or two from where the canoe lay, when he saw the
Irishman come cautiously into view, and then pause and look around him.
He had an animal slung over his shoulders, whose weight was sufficient
to make him stop and travel with some difficulty. They saw him turn his
head and carefully scrutinize every suspicious point that was visible,
and then he walked slowly toward the spot where the canoe was concealed.
Whether his low stoop was caused by the weight of his game, or whether
it was a precautionary measure on his part, was difficult to decide. The
boys at once became painfully excited and alarmed.

"They will see him! they will see him!" said Elwood, "and it will be all
over with us. What a pity! when he has got along so well!"

"Can we not warn him in some manner? The Indians do not know how near he
is, nor does he know how close they are."

"How can we do it?" asked Elwood, who was anxious to give Tim some
warning of his danger. "If we make any sign the Indians will see us."

"Perhaps not; for they are not looking in this direction all the time,
while Tim knows that we are watching him."

"Yes; but he has his hands full to see that the savages do not find
him."

The case looked critical indeed. Tim was nearing the point where it
seemed inevitable that a discovery should take place. He paused at
nearly every step or two, looked behind him and up and down the river in
a manner that showed plainly enough his fear of his enemies. Elwood
Brandon in his eagerness had risen to his feet, and was looking intently
at him, waiting until he should cast his eye toward the island that he
might give him warning. But the Irishman was so occupied with his
enemies that he appeared to forget the existence of his friends.

Elwood did not remove his gaze, and all at once he saw him raise his
head. Quick as a flash the boy sprung up a foot or two from the ground
and waved his hat toward him.

"Did he see me?" he asked, as he sunk down to the earth again.

"He has paused and is looking toward us."

Tim had caught sight of the signal of the boy, but was uncertain as to
its meaning. The waving of the hat might be supposed as an act of
encouragement than otherwise; but there was something in the silent,
hurried manner of his young friend, united with the fact that he had
been, and was still, in great personal peril, that arrested his
attention and set him to thinking.

"Did the Indians see me?" asked Elwood.

"I can't say positively, as I was looking at Tim at the moment you made
your signal, but they do not seem to act as if they had discovered us."

"Tim saw me, didn't he? He doesn't know what to make of it."

The Irishman had laid the animal he was carrying upon the ground, and
stood looking toward the inland as if waiting for some further
manifestation before advancing or retreating. Believing the safety of
the entire party demanded it, Elwood begun cautiously rising to his feet
to repeat his warning, when he was quickly caught by his cousin.

"Down! those Indians are suspicious; they are looking right at us--don't
stir."

The admonition was not a moment too soon; but while it prevented
discovery on the part of the boys, it rendered the signal already given
the Irishman void and of no effect. Tim, seeing nothing more of his
young friend, concluded that all was right, and lifting his game to his
shoulder continued his descent until he reached his canoe. This was
drawn from its hiding place and launched in the water, and the animal
placed in the rear. Seating himself carefully in the front, Tim lifted
his paddle and began making his way toward the inland.

"Too bad! too bad!" muttered Elwood, unable to repress his feelings. "He
is coming right out where they will have a fair chance with their
rifles."

"If he would only turn up stream, they would see nothing of him."

"_Can't_ I warn him?"

"No, Elwood, it will make matters worse. Their eyes are fixed upon us."

Grasping the long oar Tim headed his boat somewhat up stream, so as not
to let it drift by the island, and commenced paddling across. He had
gone twenty rods or thereabouts when he was discovered by the Indians,
and one of them raised his rifle and took aim at him.

"Quick, Tim, drop down, or you'll be shot!" called out Howard, forgetful
of his own danger in the single hope of saving his friend from a violent
death.

At the same instant that this cry was uttered the terrified boy saw a
puff of smoke issue from the Indian rifle, and simultaneous with the
sharp crack Tim O'Rooney was seen to fall flat in the canoe.

"He is shot!" called out Elwood.

"It is time then for us to do some of the same kind of business,"
replied Howard, sighting his own gun at the savage upon the shore. The
distance was too great and his skill too slight to guide the ball with
anything like certainty, but it skipped over the water at their very
feet, and so alarmed them that they immediately dodged back under the
shelter of the rocks and trees.

"What is the use?" asked Elwood gloomily. "Poor Tim is killed and there
is no chance for us."

"Look! he is not dead!" whispered Howard.

The head of the Irishman was seen to rise stealthily from the bottom of
the canoe, and to peer around, and then to dash down again as though
fearful of another shot.

"I don't believe he has been struck!" added Howard. "He dropped down so
as to save himself."

"Oh! I hope so, for we need him bad enough. See! he is fixing the body
of the animal so that it shall be between him and the Indians' guns."

Such was the case. Tim was arranging and placing the carcass so that it
might shield his own body while he managed the paddle. This completed he
turned his face toward his young friends and called across the water:

"Be aisy, me darlings! The owld bullet come close, but not a hair of Tim
O'Rooney's head was touched, and thanks be to heaven for it!"




CHAPTER XXIII.

DRIFTING AWAY.


The bullet of the treacherous Indian had indeed whizzed harmlessly by
the head of Tim O'Rooney and when he fell to the bottom of the canoe it
was for the purpose of preventing any more of their missiles passing too
near him.

The savages, hastily driven to shelter by the unexpected shot from the
island, did not by any means relinquish their designs upon the
unfortunate white man in the canoe. He who had taken the quick aim and
fired saw that his bullet missed, but he understood the disadvantage of
his enemy, and was confident that he would still fall into their hands.

As we have shown, when the Irishman was thus suddenly interrupted, he
was but a short distance from the shore. So abruptly compelled to
relinquish his paddle and simply shelter his person, the current carried
him quite rapidly down the stream.

Tim did not become sensible of his disadvantage until he had drifted
below the island, and then upon partly rising to use his paddle the
crack of a gun from the shore told him that he was watched by vigilant
eyes, and that _that_ occupation was vetoed most unmistakably.

Forced thus to act entirely on the defensive, he carefully drew out his
rifle and resting it on the body of his game waited his chance to avenge
himself upon the unrelenting savages. He could tell from the faint blue
smoke that curled upward where they were concealed, but could not catch
sight of them.

Had they shown themselves, the Irishman knew it was about impossible for
him to harm them at such a distance, while their dexterity in the use of
the gun made it too dangerous for him to expose himself to their fire.
He watched them until he had floated quite a way below, when he began to
hope that they had given up their designs upon him, and he might make
his way back to his friends upon the island in safety.

But when on the point of rising to a sitting position he saw them whisk
