met other Indians on their way to the same great river, which abounded
with salmon.  These told them that they would soon reach a river,
neither large nor long, which entered an arm of the sea, and where a
great wooden canoe with white people was said to be frequently seen!

"Here is encouragement for us; let us push on," said Mackenzie.  "Push
on," echoed Reuben and Lawrence and some of the other men; but some
grumbled at the hardships they had to endure, and the short allowance of
provisions, while the Indians threatened to desert them.

Mackenzie must have had something very peculiar in his look and manner,
for he seemed to possess the faculty of saying little in reply to his
men, and yet of constraining them to follow him.  Doubtless, had some
one else written his journal we should have learned the secret.  It
seems as if, when rebellion was looking blackest and the storm about to
burst, instead of commanding or disputing, he calmly held his tongue and
went off to take an observation of the sun, and on that process being
completed, he almost invariably found his men in a more tractable
condition!  Occasionally we read of quiet remonstrance or grave
reasoning, and frequently of hearty encouragement and wise counsel, but
_never_ of violence, although he was sorely tried.  Perchance they knew
that he was dangerous to trifle with!  We cannot tell, but certainly he
seems to have been a splendid manager of men.

At last they reached an Indian village where they were hospitably
entertained, and presented with as much roasted salmon as they required.
These people lived almost exclusively on fish and berries; were more
cleanly than other tribes, and apparently less addicted to war or
hunting.  Here two new guides were obtained, and the people conciliated
with gifts of beads, knives, and other trinkets.

Leaving them they spent a wretched night on the shores of a lake,
deluged with rain and tormented with sandflies and mosquitoes--the
former being perhaps the greatest pests of the country.  Soon the guides
grew tired of their mode of travelling, and the allowance of provisions
had to be still further reduced.  Fearing that they might run short
altogether, Mackenzie ordered Reuben and his son to fall behind, bury
some pemmican in reserve for their return, and make a fire over the spot
to conceal the fact that it had been dug into.  They were now on
two-thirds of their regular allowance.  Soon afterwards they came to a
river too deep to ford, but one of their guides swam across and brought
over a raft that lay on the other side.  This ferried most of them over,
but Swiftarrow and some of the others preferred to swim across.

At length, after many days of suffering and toil they crossed the last
range of mountains and began to descend.  Here magnificent cedars and
other trees were seen, some of the former being fully eighteen feet in
circumference.  The natives whom they met with were sometimes stern,
sometimes kind, but always suspicious at first.  The soothing effects of
gifts, however, were pretty much the same in all.  Still the party had
several narrow escapes.

On one occasion Mackenzie, when alone, was surrounded and seized, but he
soon freed himself, and just at that moment when his life seemed to hang
on a hair, Reuben Guff happened to come up, and the natives took to
flight.  Some of these natives were very expert canoe-men, caught salmon
by means of weirs, dwelt in wooden houses elevated on poles, boiled
their food in water-tight baskets by putting red-hot stones into them,
made cakes of the inner rind of the hemlock sprinkled with oil, and
seemed to have a rooted antipathy to flesh of every kind.  Some of the
salmon they caught were fully forty pounds' weight.  The chief of one
tribe said that, ten years before, he had gone down to the sea in a
large canoe, and there had met with two large vessels full of white men
who treated him very kindly.  These, Mackenzie concluded, must have been
the ships of Captain Cook, an opinion which was strengthened by the
discovery that the chief's canoe was ornamented with sea-otters' teeth,
which bear some resemblance to human teeth, for which they had been
mistaken by the great navigator.  At last, on the 20th of July, the
heroic perseverance of Mackenzie met with its reward.  On that day he
obtained a canoe, and descending a river, entered an arm of the Pacific!
He did not himself, indeed, deem the object of the expedition attained
until he had battled on for a couple of days longer--in the face of the
opposition of his own men and hostility of the natives--and had obtained
reliable observations which settled beyond all dispute, his exact
position on the globe.  But to all intents and purposes he had
accomplished his great object on that day,--namely, the crossing of the
American Wilderness to the Pacific Ocean.

Even in the midst of his triumph this long-enduring man was worried by
petty trials, for one of the Indian guides took it into his head to
desert.  As he was the son of a chief, and, it was to be feared, might
prejudice the natives against them, Reuben Guff was directed to pursue
him.  That worthy took with him Swiftarrow, and exerting his long sinewy
legs to the utmost, soon overtook the fugitive and brought him back.
But it was no part of Mackenzie's plan to tyrannise over men.  He
received the deserter kindly, gave him a pair of moccasins, some
provisions, a silk handkerchief, and some good advice, and then sent him
back to his friends.  The other Indian who remained with them succeeded
about the same time in killing a large porcupine, which was very
acceptable to all--especially to its captor, who ate so largely of it as
to be obliged to undergo a prolonged period of repose in order to sleep
it off.

At length, being in a state of semi-starvation, with a leaky canoe, and
unfriendly natives around, Mackenzie took a last observation, which gave
52 degrees 20 minutes 48 second North latitude and 128 degrres 2 minutes
West longitude.

Then he turned his face eastward.  Before quitting the coast, however, a
smooth rock was selected and thereon was written, in large letters,
with a mixture of melted grease and vermilion, this brief
memorial--"Alexander Mackenzie, from Canada, by land, the twenty-second
of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-three."

The return journey was scarcely less arduous than the outward, but they
undertook it with the knowledge that every step carried them nearer
home, and with the exhilarating consciousness that their labours had
been crowned with success.  Besides this, they now knew what lay before
them each day--as far as the route was concerned--and at the various
places where provisions had been secreted the party was strengthened and
enabled to advance with greater vigour.  On arriving at the Great River
they found their canoe, goods, and provisions just as they had left them
about five weeks before.  Here they made preparations for proceeding to
the head-waters of the Columbia River, crossing over to those of the
Peace River, and so returning by the way they had come.  In order to
mark this happy point in the expedition, Mackenzie treated himself and
men to a dram, "but,"--observe that I quote his words, reader,--"we had
been so long without tasting any spirituous liquor, that we had _Lost
all relish for it_!"  Rejoice in _that_ testimony, ye teetotallers.
Think of it, ye topers.  Put it in your pipes, ye smokers--and make the
most of it!

"Nearing home at last, boys," said Mackenzie many weeks afterwards, as,
having descended the turbulent Peace River, they rounded a point of land
and came in sight of their old winter-quarters; "shake out the flag, and
give them a volley and a cheer."

The men obeyed, and were in such high spirits, and made such active use
of their paddles, that they reached the landing-place before the two men
who had been left there in the spring, could recover their senses
sufficiently to answer their questions!  But _this_ was not home yet.
Some days had still to elapse ere these toil-worn men could lay aside
their paddles and rest their wearied limbs.

At last, after an absence of eleven months, they reached Fort Chipewyan,
where their leader resumed the duties of the fur-trade, and Swiftarrow
once more kissed the brown cheek of Darkeye, who filled his heart with
grim delight by placing in his paternal arms a soft, round, fat, little
brown female baby, with eyes as dark and bright as her own, and a nose
which was a miniature facsimile of its father's.

One week after their arrival, Reuben and Lawrence, Swiftarrow and
Darkeye, entered Mackenzie's room to bid him farewell.

"I'm sorry you are bent on leaving me," said their former leader; "but
you have the satisfaction of knowing that you have contributed greatly
to the success of our two expeditions.  You have indeed proved
yourselves able pioneers."

"Thank'ee, sir," said Reuben, while a quiet smile of satisfaction
lighted up his grave features.  "It was all along a hobby o' mine, an'
of Lawrence too, to do a bit o' diskivery; an' now we're content--for it
ain't possible, I fancy, to do much more in that line than push your
canoe into the Frozen Sea on the one hand, or the Pacific on the other.
It's harder work than I thowt it would be--though I didn't expect
child's play neither; an' it's our opinion, sir, that you are the only
man in the country as could have done it at all.  We intend now to go
back to the settlements.  As for the red-skin," he added, glancing at
Swiftarrow, "he ha'n't got no ambition one way or another as to
diskivery; but he's a good and true man, nevertheless, you'll allow.
And now, sir, farewell.  May a blessing from above rest on you and
yours."

Saying this the bold backwoodsman shook Mackenzie by the hand and left
the room.  Every one in the fort was on the bank to bid them farewell.
Silently they stepped into their canoe, and in a few minutes had paddled
out of sight into the great wilderness of wood and water.

Reader, our tale, if such it may be styled, _is_ told.  As for the hero
whose steps for a time we have so closely followed, he became one of the
most noted traders, as he was now one of the most celebrated
discoverers, in North America.  He afterwards became for a time the
travelling companion in America of the Duke of Kent, father of Queen
Victoria; was knighted in acknowledgment of his great and important
achievements; married one of Scotland's fair daughters; and finally died
in the midst of his native Highland hills, leaving behind him a volume
which--as we said at the beginning--proves him to have been one of the
most vigorous, persevering, manly, and successful pioneers that ever
traversed the continent of North America.

THE END.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

EXTRACT OF LETTER REFERRED TO ON PAGE 85.

From William Mackenzie, Esquire, of Gairloch, to George Mackenzie,
Esquire, of Avoch, dated Leamington, 24th May 1856.

When in Stockholm in 1824, Lord Blomfield, our Minister there, did me
the honour of presenting me to the King, _Bernadotte_, father of the
present King of Sweden.

At the King's special request, the audience was a private one, and I was
further especially requested to oblige by coming in my full Highland
dress.  The audience lasted fully an hour.  Such an interest did
Napoleon's first and most fortunate Marshal take in everything that was
Highland, not even the skiandhu escaped him.

I now come to _your_ family portion of the audience.

As we chatted on, old Bernadotte (leaning familiarly upon my O'Keachan
claymore) was pleased to say in that _suaviter in modo_ for which his
eagle eye so fitted him, "Yes, I repeat it, you Highlanders are
deservedly proud of your country.  Your forefathers and your people are
a race apart, distinct from all the rest of Britain in high moral as
well as martial bearing, and long, I hope, may you feel and show it
outwardly by this noble distinction in dress.  But allow me to observe,
Sir, that in your family name, in the name of Mackenzie, there is a very
predominant lustre, which shall never be obliterated from my mind.
Pray, are you connected in any way with Sir Alexander Mackenzie, the
celebrated North American traveller, whose name and researches are
immortalised by his discoveries in the Arctic Ocean, and of the river
which since then does honour to his name?"  I informed His Majesty that
as a boy I had known him well, and that our family and his were nearly
connected.  This seemed to give me still greater favour with him, for,
familiarly putting his hand on my shoulder-brooch, he replied that _on
that account alone_ his making my acquaintance gave him greater
satisfaction.  He then proceeded to tell Lord Blomfield and me how your
father's name had become familiar to him, and so much valued in his
eyes.  He said that at one time Napoleon had arranged to distract the
affairs of Britain by attacking her in her Canadian possessions--not by
a direct descent upon them, but by a route which men expected would take
England quite by surprise and prove infallible.

That route was to be up the Mississippi, Ohio, etcetera, up to our
Canadian border lakes.  For this arrangements were to be made with
America, New Orleans occupied as a _pied a terre_ by France, etcetera,
etcetera.  The organisation and command of this gigantic enterprise, as
Bernadotte said, "was given to me by the Emperor, with instructions to
make myself master of every work which could bear upon it, and the
facilities the nature of the country afforded.  Foremost amongst these
the work of your namesake (Sir Alexander Mackenzie) was recommended, but
how to get at it, with all communications with England interdicted, all
knowledge of English unknown to me, seemed a difficulty not easily to be
got over.  However, as every one knows, my _then_ master, l'Empereur,
was not the man to be overcome by such small difficulties.  The _book_,
a huge quarto, was procured through the smugglers, and in an
inconceivably short space of time most admirably translated into French
for my especial use.  [A copy of this translation was found in
Napoleon's library at St. Helena.] I need hardly say with what interest
I perused and reperused that admirable work, till I had made myself so
thoroughly master of it that I could almost fancy myself," this he said
laughing heartily, "taking your Canadas _en revers_ from the upper
waters; and ever since I have never ceased to look upon the name and
think of the author with more than ordinary respect and esteem."

After a short pause and a long-drawn breath, almost amounting to a sigh,
accompanied by a look at Blomfield and a most expressive "Ah, milord,
que de changes depuis ces jours-la," Bernadotte concluded by saying that
the Russian campaign had knocked that of Canada on the head until Russia
was crushed! but it had pleased God to ordain it otherwise, "et
maintenant me voila Roi de Suede"--his exact words as he concluded these
compliments to your father.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pioneers, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIONEERS ***

***** This file should be named 21691.txt or 21691.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/6/9/21691/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works
