
"Then daddy will be scalped too," said Big Tim--"an' so will I, for I'm
bound to keep daddy company."

"It is to be hoped your gloomy expectations will not be realised,"
returned the preacher.  "But tell me, where is your father just now?"

"Out hunting, not far off," replied the youth, with an anxious look.
"To say truth, I don't feel quite easy about him, for he's bin away
longer than usual, or than there's any occasion for.  If he doesn't
return soon, I'll have to go an' sarch for him."

As the hunter spoke the hooting of an owl was distinctly heard outside.
The preacher looked up inquiringly, for he was too well acquainted with
the ways of Indians not to know that the cry was a signal from a biped
without wings.  He saw that Big Tim and his bride were both listening
intently, with expressions of joyful expectation on their faces.

Again the cry was heard, much nearer than before.

"Whitewing!" exclaimed the hunter, leaping up and hastening to the door.

Softswan did not move, but continued silently to stir the soup in the
pot on the fire.

Presently many footsteps were heard outside, and the sound of men
conversing in low tones.  Another moment, and a handsome middle-aged
Indian stood in the doorway.  With an expression of profound sorrow, he
gazed for one moment at the wounded man; then, striding forward, knelt
beside him and grasped his hand.

"My white father!" he said.

"Whitewing!" exclaimed the preacher; "I little expected that our meeting
should be like this!"

"Is the preacher badly hurt?" asked the Indian in a low voice.

"It may be so; I cannot tell.  My feelings lead me to--to doubt--I was
going to say fear, but I have nothing to fear.  `He doeth all things
well.'  If my work on earth is not done, I shall live; if it is
finished, I shall die."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

NETTING A GRIZZLY BEAR.

As it is at all times unwise as well as disagreeable to involve a reader
in needless mystery, we may as well explain here that there would have
been no mystery at all in Little Tim's prolonged absence from his
fortress, if it had not been that he was aware of the intended visit of
his chum and brother-in-law, Whitewing, and his old friend the
pale-faced missionary, and that he had promised to return on the evening
of the day on which he set off to hunt or on the following morning at
latest.

Moreover, Little Tim was a man of his word, having never within the
memory of his oldest friend been known to break it.  Thus it came to
pass that when three days had passed away, and the sturdy little hunter
failed to return, Big Tim and his bride first became surprised and then
anxious.  The attack on the hut, however, and the events which we have
just related, prevented the son from going out in search of the father;
but now that the Blackfeet had been effectually repulsed and the
fortress relieved by the arrival of Whitewing's party, it was resolved
that they should organise a search for the absentee without an hour's
delay.

"Leetil Tim," said Whitewing decisively, when he was told of his old
friend's unaccountable absence, "must be found."

"So say I," returned Big Tim.  "I hope the Blackfoot reptiles haven't
got him.  Mayhap he has cut himself with his hatchet.  Anyhow, we must
go at once.  You won't mind our leaving you for a bit?" he added,
turning to the missionary; "we will leave enough o' redskins to guard
you, and my soft one will see to it that you are comfortable."

"Think not of me," replied the preacher.  "All will go well, I feel
assured."

Still further to guard the reader from supposing that there is any
mystery connected with the missionary's name or Little Tim's surname, we
think it well to state at once that there is absolutely none.  In those
outlandish regions, and among that primitive people, the forming of
names by the mere combination of unmeaning syllables found small favour.
They named people according to some striking quality or characteristic.
Hence our missionary had been long known among the red men of the West
as the Preacher, and, being quite satisfied with that name, he accepted
it without making any attempt to bamboozle the children of the woods and
prairies with his real name, which was--and is--a matter of no
importance whatever.  Tim likewise, being short of stature, though very
much the reverse of weak or diminutive, had accepted the name of "Little
Tim" with a good grace, and made mention of no other; his son naturally
becoming "Big Tim" when he outgrew his father.

A search expedition having been quickly organised, it left the little
fortress at once, and defiled into the thick woods, led by Whitewing and
Big Tim.

In order that the reader may fully understand the cause of Little Tim's
absence, we will take the liberty of pushing on in advance of the search
party, and explain a few matters as we go.

It has already been shown that our little hunter possessed a natural
ingenuity of mind.  This quality had, indeed, been noticeable when he
was a boy, but it did not develop largely till he became a man.  As he
grew older his natural ingenuity seemed to become increasingly active,
until his thirst for improving on mechanical contrivances and devising
something new became almost a passion.  Hence he was perpetually
occupied in scheming to improve--as he was wont to say--the material
condition of the human race, as well as the mental.

Among other things, he improved the traps of his Indian friends, and
also their dwellings.  He invented new traps, and, as we have seen, new
methods of defending dwellings, as well as of escaping when defence
failed.  His name, of course, became well known in the Indian country,
and as some of his contrivances proved to be eminently useful, he was
regarded far and near as a great medicine-man, who could do whatever he
set his mind to.  Without laying claim to such unlimited powers, Little
Tim was quite content to leave the question of his capacity to scheme
and invent as much a matter of uncertainty in the minds of his red
friends as it was in his own mind.

One day there came to the Indian village, in which he dwelt at the time
with his still pretty though matronly wife Brighteyes, one of the agents
of a man whose business it was to collect wild animals for the
menageries of the United States and elsewhere.  Probably this man was an
ancestor of Barnum, for he possessed a mind which seemed to be capable
of conceiving anything and sticking at nothing.  He found a man quite
after his own heart when he discovered Little Tim.

"I want a grizzly b'ar," he said, on being introduced to the hunter.

"There's plenty of 'em in these parts," said Tim, who was whittling a
piece of wood at the time.

"But I want a full-grown old 'un," said the agent.

"Well," remarked Tim, looking up with an inquiring glance for a moment,
"I should say there's some thousands, more or less, roamin' about the
Rockies, in all stages of oldness--from experienced mammas to
great-grandmothers, to say nothin' o' the old gentlemen; but you'll find
most of 'em powerful sly an' uncommon hard to kill."

"But I don't want to kill 'em; I want one of 'em alive," said the agent.

At this Little Tim stopped whittling the bit of stick, and looked hard
at the man.

"You wants to catch one alive?" he repeated.

"_Yes_, that's what's the matter with me exactly.  I want it for a show,
an' I'm prepared to give a good price for a big one."

"How much?" asked the hunter.

The stranger bent down and whispered in his ear.  Little Tim raised his
eyebrows a little, and resumed whittling.

"But," said he, after a few moments' vigorous knife-work, "what if I
should try, an' fail?"

"Then you get nothing."

"Won't do," returned the little hunter, with a slow shake of the head.
"I'm game to tackle difficulties for love _or_ money, but not for
nothin'.  You'll have to go to another shop, stranger."

"Well, what will you _try_ it for?" asked the agent, who was unwilling
to lose his man.

"For quarter o' the sum down, to be kep' whether I succeed or fail, the
balance to be paid when I hand over the goods."

"Well, stranger," returned the agent, with a grim smile, "I don't mind
if I agree to that.  You seem an honest man."

"Sorry I can't return the compliment," said Little Tim, holding out his
hand.  "So cash down, if you please."

The agent laughed, but pulled out a huge leathern bag, and paid the
stipulated sum in good undeniable silver dollars.

The hunter at once made preparation for his enterprise.  Meanwhile the
agent took up his abode in the Indian village to await the result.

After a night of profound meditation in the solitude of his wigwam,
Little Tim set to work and cut up several fresh buffalo hides into long
and strong lines with which he made a net of enormous mesh and strength.
He arranged it in such a way, with a line run round the circumference,
that he could draw it together like a purse.  With this gigantic affair
on his shoulder, he set off one morning at daybreak into the mountains.
He met the agent, who was an early riser, on the threshold of the
village.

"What! goin' out alone, Little Tim?" he said.

"Yes; b'ars don't like company, as a rule."

"Don't you think I might help you a bit?"

"No, I don't.  If you stop where you are, I'll very likely bring the
b'ar home to 'ee.  If you go with me, it's more than likely the b'ar
will take you home to her small family!"

"Well, well, have it your own way," returned the agent, laughing.

"I always do," replied the hunter, with a grin.

Proceeding a day's journey into the mountains, our adventurous hunter
discovered the track of a bear, which must, he thought be an uncommonly
large one.  Selecting a convenient tree, he stuck four slender poles
into the ground, under one of its largest branches.  Over these he
spread his net, arranging the closing rope--or what we may term the
purse-string--in such a way that he could pass it over the branch of the
tree referred to.  This done, he placed a large junk of buffalo-meat
directly under the net, and pegged it to the ground.

Thereafter Little Tim ascended the tree, crept out on the large limb
until he reached the spot where the line had been thrown over it,
directly above his net.  There, seating himself comfortably among the
branches, he proceeded to sup and enjoy himself, despite the unsavoury
smell that arose from the half-decayed buffalo-meat below.

The limb of the tree was so large and suitable that while a fork of it
was wide enough to serve for a table, a branch which grew upwards formed
a lean to the hunter's back, and another branch, doubling round most
conveniently, formed a rest for his right elbow.  At the same time an
abrupt curl in the same branch constituted a rest for his gun.  Thus he
reclined in a natural one-armed rustic chair, with his weapons handy,
and a good supper before him.

"What could a man wish more?" he muttered to himself, with a contented
expression of face, as he fixed a square piece of birch-bark in the fork
of the branch, and on this platter arranged his food, commenting thereon
as he proceeded: "Roast prairie hen.  Capital grub, with a bit o' salt
pork, though rather dry an' woodeny-like by itself.  Buffalo rib.
Nothin' better, hot or cold, except marrow-bones; but then, you see,
marrow-bones ain't just parfection unless hot, an' this is bound to be a
cold supper.  Hunk o' pemmican.  A safe stand-by at all times.  Don't
need no cookin', an' a just proportion o' fat to lean, but doesn't do
without appetite to make it go down.  Let me be thankful I've got that,
anyhow."

At this point Little Tim thought it expedient to make the line of his
net fast to this limb of the tree.  After doing so, he examined the
priming of his gun, made a few other needful arrangements, and then gave
himself up to the enjoyment of the hour, smiling benignly to the moon,
which happened to creep out from behind a mountain peak at the time, as
if on purpose to irradiate the scene.

"It has always seemed to me," muttered the hunter, as well as a large
mouthful of the prairie hen would permit--for he was fond of muttering
his thoughts when alone; it felt more sociable, you see, than merely
thinking them--"It has always seemed to me that contentment is a grand
thing for the human race.  Pity we hasn't all got it!"

Inserting at this point a mass of the hunk, which proved a little too
large for muttering purposes, he paused until the road was partially
cleared, and then went on--"Of course I don't mean that lazy sort o'
contentment that makes a man feel easy an' comfortable, an' quite
indifferent to the woes an' worries of other men so long as his own
bread-basket is stuffed full.  No, no.  I means that sort o' contentment
that makes a man feel happy though he hasn't got champagne an' taters,
pigeon-pie, lobscouse, plum-duff, mustard an' jam at every blow-out;
that sort o' contentment that takes things as they come, an' enjoys 'em
without grumpin' an' growlin' 'cause he hasn't got somethin' else."

Another hunk here stopping the way, a somewhat longer silence ensued,
which would probably have been broken as before by the outpouring of
some sage reflections, but for a slight sound which caused the hunter to
become what we may style a human petrifaction, with a half-chewed morsel
in its open jaws, and its eyes glaring.

A few seconds more, and the sound of breaking twigs gave evidence that a
visitor drew near.  Little Tim bolted the unchewed morsel, hastily
sheathed his hunting-knife, laid one hand on the end of his line, and
waited.

He had not to wait long, for out of the woods there sauntered a grizzly
bear of such proportions that the hunter at first thought the moonlight
must have deceived him.

"Sartinly it's the biggest that I've ever clapped eyes on," he thought
but he did not speak or move.  So anxious was he not to scare the
animal, that he hardly breathed.

Bruin seemed to entertain suspicions of some sort, for he sniffed the
tainted air once or twice, and looked inquiringly round.  Coming to the
conclusion, apparently, that his suspicions were groundless, he walked
straight up to the lump of buffalo-meat and sniffed it.  Not being
particular, he tried it with his tongue.

"Good!" said the bear--at least if he did not say so, he must have
thought so, for next moment he grasped it with his teeth.  Finding it
tethered hard and fast, he gathered himself together for the purpose of
exercising main force.

Now was Little Tim's opportunity.  Slipping a cord by which the net was
suspended to the four stakes, he caused it to descend like a curtain
over the bear.  It acted most successfully, insomuch that the animal was
completely enveloped.

Surprised, but obviously not alarmed, Bruin shook his head, sniffed a
little, and pawed the part of the net in front of him.  The hunter
wasted no time.  Seeing that the net was all right, he pulled with all
his might on the main rope, which partly drew the circumference of the
net together.  Finding his feet slightly trammelled, the grizzly tried
to move off, but of course trod on the net, tripped, and rolled over.
In so doing he caught sight of the hunter, who was now enabled to close
the mouth of the net-purse completely.
