is declared innocent.

Jack and Peterkin and I seized our weapons, and hurrying out, followed
our guide to the spot where this terrible tragedy was enacting.

"Don't fear, Mak," said Peterkin, as we ran along; "we'll save her
somehow.  I'm certain of that."

The negro made no reply, but I observed a more hopeful expression on his
countenance after the remark.  He evidently had immense faith in
Peterkin; which I must say was more than I had, for when I considered
our small numbers, my hope of influencing savages was very slight.

The scene that met our eyes was indescribably horrible.  In the centre
of a dense circle of negroes, who had wrought themselves up to a pitch
of ferocity that caused them to look more like wild beasts than men,
stood the king, and beside him the doctor or fetishman.  This latter was
ornamented with a towering headdress of feathers.  His face was painted
white, which had the effect of imparting to him an infinitely more
hideous and ghastly aspect than is produced in the white man when he is
painted black.  A stripe of red passed round his head, and another down
his forehead and nose.  His naked body was decked with sundry fantastic
ornaments, and altogether he looked more like a fiend than I had
believed it possible for man to appear.

The ground all round him was saturated with blood and strewn with arms,
fingers, cleft skulls, and masses of flesh that had been hewn from the
victims who had already fallen, one of whom, we afterwards learned, had
belonged to the royal family.  Two still remained--a young female and an
old man.  The emaciated frame and white woolly head of the latter showed
that in the course of nature his earthly career must soon terminate.  It
is probable that the poor old man had become a burden to his relations,
and the doctor took this opportunity of ridding the tribe of him.  The
girl was Okandaga, who stood weeping and trembling as she gazed upon the
butchery that had already taken place.

The old man had swallowed the poison shortly before we arrived, and he
was now struggling to maintain an erect position.  But he failed, his
quivering limbs sank beneath him, and before we could interfere the
bloody executioners had cut off his head, and then, in a transport of
passion, they literally hacked his body to pieces.

We rushed hastily forward to the king, and Jack, in an earnest voice,
implored him to spare the last victim.

"Surely," said he, "enough have been sacrificed already.--Tell him,
Makarooroo, that I will quit his village and never see him more if he
does not spare the life of that young girl."

The king appeared much perplexed by this unlooked-for interference on
our part.

"I cannot check the spirits of my people now," he replied.  "They are
roused.  The girl has bewitched me and many others.  She must die.  It
is our custom.  Let not my white men be offended.  Let them go to their
hut and sleep."

"We cannot sleep while injustice is done in the village," answered Jack,
in a lofty tone.  "Let not King Jambai do that which will make his
visitors ashamed of him.  Let the girl live till to-morrow at midnight.
Let the case be investigated, and if she be proved guilty then let her
die."

The king commenced a long reply in the same dignified manner and tone
which Jack had assumed.  While he was thus engaged Peterkin touched our
guide on the shoulder and whispered--

"I say, Mak, tell the doctor to back up Jack's request, and I'll give
him a gun."

The negro slipped at once to the side of the doctor, who had begun to
frown fiercely on Jack, and whispered a few words in his ear.  Instantly
his face assumed a calmer aspect, and presently he stepped up to the
king, and a whispering conversation ensued, in which the doctor,
carefully refraining from making any mention of the gun, commended the
wise advice of the white man, and suggested that the proposal should be
agreed to, adding, however, that he knew for certain that the girl was a
witch, but that the investigation would do good in the way of proving
that he, the doctor, was correct, and thus the girl should perish on the
following night, and the white men would be satisfied.

Having announced this to the multitude, the king ordered Okandaga to be
conducted back to her prison and carefully guarded; and we returned to
our hut--not, however, to sleep, but to consult as to what was to be
done next.

"I knew that you wanted a respite for her," said Peterkin, as we sat
round our fire, "that you might have time to consider how to act, and I
backed up your request accordingly, as you know.  But now, I confess,
I'm very much at a loss what to suggest.  It seems to me we have only
purchased a brief delay."

"True," answered Jack.  "The delay is not so brief, however, but that we
may plan some method of getting the poor girl out of this scrape.--What
say you, Mak?"

"If _you_ no can tink 'pon someting, I gib up all hope," replied our
guide sorrowfully.

"Come, Mak, cheer up," cried Peterkin.  "If the worst comes to the
worst, you can, at any rate, fight for your bride."

"Fight!" exclaimed the negro, displaying his white teeth like a mastiff,
rolling his eyes and clinching his fists convulsively.  Then in a calmer
tone he continued, "Ay, me can fight.  Me could kill all de guards an'
take Okandaga by de hand, an' run troo de bushes for eber.  But guards
no die widout hollerin' an' yellerin' like de gorilla; an' nigger mans
can run fasterer dan womans.  No, no, dat am dumpossobable."

"Nothing's `dumpossobable' to brave hearts and stout arms," replied
Jack.  "There are only four guards put over her, I believe.  Well, there
are just four of us--not that we require to be equal, by any means.
Peterkin and I could settle them easily; but we require to be equal in
numbers, in order to do it quietly.  I have a plan in my head, but
there's one hitch in it that I cannot unravel."

"And what may that be?"  If asked.

"Why, I don't see how, after getting clear off with Okandaga, we are to
avoid being pursued on suspicion and captured."

"Dere is one cave," remarked the guide, "not far off to here.  P'raps we
be safe if we git into 'im.  But I 'fraid it not do, cause him be
peepiled by fiends an' dead man's spirits."

"That's a grave objection," said Peterkin, laughing.

"Yes, an' de tribe neber go near dere; dey is most drefful terrorfied to
be cotched dere."

"Then, that will just do," cried Jack, with animation.  "The very thing.
And now I'll tell you what my plan is.  To-morrow morning early we will
tell the king that we wish to be off at once--that we have put off too
much time already, and wish to make no further delay.  Then we'll pack
up and start.  At night we will encamp in a quiet, out-of-the-way part
of the woods, and slip back to the village in the dark a short time
before midnight.  The whole village will at that time be assembled,
probably, at the spot where the execution is to take place; so we can
rush in, overpower the guard, free Okandaga, and make our escape to the
cave, where they will never think of looking for us."

Peterkin shook his head.  "There are two difficulties in your plan,
Jack.  First, what if the natives are _not_ assembled on the place of
execution, and we find it impossible to make our entrance into or exit
from the village quietly?"

"I propose," replied Jack, "that we shall undress ourselves, rub
ourselves entirely over with charcoal and grease, so that they shall not
recognise us, and dash in and carry the girl off by a _coup de main_.
In which case it will, of course, be neck or nothing, and a tremendous
race to the cave, where, if they follow us, we will keep them at bay
with our rifles."

"Umph! dashing, no doubt, but risky," said Peterkin--"extremely risky.
Yet it's worth trying.  Well, my second difficulty is--what if they
don't stick to their promise after we quit, and kill the poor thing
before midnight?"

"We must take our chance of that.  But I shall put the king on his
honour before leaving, and say that I will make particular inquiry into
the way in which the trial has been conducted on my return."

"Put the king on his honour!" observed Peterkin.  "I'm afraid that
you'll put his majesty on an extremely unstable foundation.  However, I
see nothing better that can be done."

"Have you any more difficulties?"

"Yes," said I.  "There is one other.  What do you propose to do with the
men who are to be supplied us by the king during these extremely
delicate and difficult manoeuvres?"

The countenances of my comrades fell at this question.

"I never thought of them," said Jack.

"Nor I," said Peterkin.

Makarooroo groaned.

"Well," said I, "if you will allow me to suggest, I would recommend that
we should, towards the close of the day, send them on ahead of us, and
bid them encamp at a certain place, saying that we shall spend the night
in hunting, and return to them in the morning."

"The very thing," said Jack.  "Now, comrades, to rest.  I will occupy
myself until I fall asleep in maturing my plans and thinking out the
details.  Do you the same, and if anything should occur to you let us
consult over it in the morning."

We were all glad to agree to this, being wearied more perhaps by
excitement than want of rest; so bidding each other good-night, we lay
down side by side to meditate, and for my part to dream of the difficult
and dangerous work that awaited us on the morrow.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

WE CIRCUMVENT THE NATIVES.

We arose on the following morning with the dawn of day, and began to
make preparation for our departure.

To our satisfaction we found the king quite willing that we should go;
so embarking our goods in one of the native canoes, we ordered our
negroes to embark, and commenced our journey amid the firing of guns and
the good wishes of the natives.  I must confess that I felt some
probings of conscience at the thought of the double part we were
compelled to play; but the recollection of the horrid fate that awaited
the poor negro girl put to flight such feelings, and induced a longing
for the time of action to arrive.

I have more than once referred to our goods.  Perhaps it may be as well
to explain that, when we first landed on the African coast, we made
inquiries of those who were best acquainted with the nature and
requirements of the country we were about to explore, as to what goods
we ought to purchase of the traders, in order to be in a position to pay
our way as we went along; for we could not, of course, expect the
savages to feed us and lodge us and help us on our way for nothing.
After mature consideration, we provided ourselves with a supply of such
things as were most necessary and suitable--such as tobacco, powder, and
shot, and ball, a few trade-guns, several pieces of brightly-coloured
cloth, packages of beads (some white enamelled, others of coloured
glass), coffee and tea, knives, scissors, rings, and a variety of other
knick-knacks.  These, with a little brandy to be used medicinally, our
blankets and camp cooking utensils, formed a heavy load for ten men;
but, of course, as we advanced, the load was lightened by the
consumption of our provisions and the giving away of goods.  The
additions which I made, however, in the shape of stuffed specimens,
began in the course of time to more than counterbalance this advantage.

Being resolved to impress the natives with a respect for our physical
powers, we made a point of each carrying a pretty heavy load on our
journeys--excepting, of course, when we went out a-hunting.  But to
return.

Our crew worked willingly and well, so that ere night closed in upon us
we were a considerable distance away from the village.  As the sun set
we landed, and ordering our men to advance in the canoe to a certain
bend in the river, and there encamp and await our return, we landed and
went off into the woods as if to search for game.

"Now, Makarooroo, quick march, and don't draw rein till we reach the
cave," said Jack when we were out of sight of the canoe.

Our guide obeyed in silence, and for the next two hours we travelled
through the woods at a sort of half trot that must have carried us over
the ground at the rate of five miles in hour.  The pace was indeed
tremendous, and I now reaped the benefit of those long pedestrian
excursions which for years past I had been taking, with scientific ends
in view, over the fields and hills of my native land.  Jack and Peterkin
seemed both to be made of iron, and incapable of suffering from fatigue.
But I have no doubt that the exciting and hazardous nature of the
expedition on which we had embarked had much to do with our powers of
endurance.

After running and doubling, gliding and leaping through the dense woods,
as I have said, for two hours, we arrived at a broken, rocky piece of
ground, over which we passed, and eventually came upon a thick jungle
that concealed a vast cliff almost entirely from view.  The cracking of
the bushes as we approached showed that we had disturbed the slumbers of
more than one of the wild beasts that inhabited the spot.  Here
Makarooroo paused, and although it was intensely dark I could observe
that he was trembling violently.

"Come, Mak," said I in a whisper, "surely you, who have received a
Christian education, do not really believe that devils inhabit this
spot?"

"Me don know, massa.  Eber since me was be a pikaniny me 'fraid--
horrobably 'fraid ob dat cave."

"Come, come," said Jack impatiently; "we have no time for fears of any
kind this night.  Think of Okandaga, Mak, and be a man."

This was sufficient.  The guide pushed boldly forward, and led us to the
mouth of a large cavern, at which he halted and pointed to the gloomy
interior.

"You have the matches, Peterkin; quick, strike a light.  It is getting
late," said Jack.

In another moment a light was struck, and with it we kindled three
goodly-sized torches with which we had provided ourselves.  Holding
these high over our heads, we entered the cavern--Jack first, Peterkin
second, I next, and the terrified negro in rear.

We had scarcely entered, and were peering upwards at the black vault
overhead, when an indescribable rushing sound filled the air of the
cavern, and caused the flame of our torches to flicker with such
violence that we could not see any object distinctly.  We all came to a
sudden pause, and I confess that at that moment a feeling of
superstitious dread chilled the blood in my veins.  Before we could
discover the cause of this strange effect, several large black objects
passed through the air near our heads with a peculiar muffled noise.
Next instant the three torches were extinguished.

Unable to command himself any longer, the negro uttered a cry of terror
and turned to fly; but Jack, whose wits seemed always prepared for any
emergency, had foreseen the probability of this, and springing quickly
after him, threw his arms round his neck and effectually prevented his
running away.

The noise caused by the scuffle seemed to arouse the fury of all the
evil spirits of the place, for a perfect hurricane of whirring sounds
raged around us for a few seconds.

"It's only bats," cried Jack.--"Look alive, Peterkin; another light."

In a few seconds the torches were rekindled, and we advanced into the
cavern; and Mak, after recovering from his fright and learning the cause
thereof, became much bolder.  The cave was about a hundred yards deep by
about fifty wide; but we could not ascertain its height, for the light
of our torches failed to penetrate the deep gloom overhead.  It was
divided into two natural chambers, the outer being large, the inner
small--a mere recess, in fact.  In this latter we planted our torches,
and proceeded with our hasty preparations.  Peterkin was ready first.
We endeavoured to make ourselves as like to the natives in all respects
as possible; and when I looked at my companions, I was obliged to
confess that, except in the full blaze of the torch-light, I could not
discern any point of difference between them and our guide.

"Now then, Jack," said Peterkin, "as you're not quite ready and I am, I
shall employ myself in preparing a little plan of my own which I intend
to put in force if the savages dare to venture into the cavern after
us."

"Very good; but see that you finish it in less than five minutes, for
I'll be ready in that time."

Peterkin immediately poured out a large quantity of powder on a flat
rock, and mingling with it a little water from a pool near by, converted
it into a semi-moist ball.  This he divided into three parts, and
forming each part into the shape of a tall cone, laid the whole
carefully aside.

"There!" said he, "lie you there until you are wanted."

At this moment, while Jack and I were bending down fastening the latchet
of our shoes, our ears were saluted with one of the most appalling yells
I ever listened to.  Makarooroo fell flat to the earth in his fright,
and my own heart chilled with horror, while Jack sprang up and
instinctively grasped the handle of his hunting-knife.

"Very good," said Peterkin, as he stood laughing at us quietly, and we
immediately perceived that it was he who uttered the cry.
