on Monday next in a suit of suitable clothes."

"Come, sir, none o' that in business hours," cried the captain, "and
heave that list overboard.  It would take us half the night to get
through with it.  Come to the plans, sir; open the plans."

Putting aside the list, the obedient secretary took up a large document,
and, unfolding it, spread it on the table.

"This," said Jeff, with business-like gravity, "is a plan of the Cranby
Swimming Bath.  The coast near the town being rocky, and in many ways
inconvenient for bathing, sea-water is to be pumped into this bath daily
by a steam-engine.  A professor of swimming is appointed to give
gratuitous instruction in his art.  The bath is to be in two parts--one
for ladies, one for gentlemen--and will have dressing-boxes all round,
besides diving-boards and every sort of convenience.  At certain hours
of the morning and evening it will be open free of charge to all comers;
so that there will be no excuse for any man, woman, or child in Cranby
being dirty or unable to swim."

"What a blessing it would be," exclaimed the enthusiastic Miss Millet,
"if such baths existed all over the kingdom!"

"It is a disgrace to the kingdom," said Jeff, "that a bath such as this
does _not_ exist in every town of the kingdom.  A mere tithe of the
money wasted on drink and tobacco," ("and tea," muttered the captain,
pushing in his cup for more), "would suffice to do it."

"Come, Jeff, clap a stopper on your long-winded lectures, and go ahead
wi' the next plan," said the captain, "and don't moralise if you can
help it."

"But, brother, can you afford all this?" asked Miss Millet.

"Afford it?  Of course I can.  It's wonderful, Molly, what men can
afford when they're willing to spend.  Why, I've known a man myself who
was so uncommon willin' to spend that he ruined his baker an' butcher
an' greengrocer before he had done spendin'.  If that's so with them as
hasn't got money to spend, surely it's for a man like me to do so who's
rollin' in four thousand a year, more or less.  Besides, I'm goin' to
invest some o' the capital in a way that'll pay back three or four
hundred per cent interest!  I'm not goin' to leave it all to my Rosebud.
A reasonable provision she shall have--not more.  You see, Molly, I'm
of opinion that whatever a man has--whether he makes it by the use of
his talents, or inherits it from his father, or has it sent to him
unexpected, like mine--he holds it all in trust, to be used for the
glory of God and the good of men.  Now, cut along, secretary."

"This," said Jeff, "is the plan of the People's Free Library.  The
purchase of the site was effected last week, and the building is to be
commenced next month."

"Ay, and the Prince of Wales is coming to lay the foundation stone,"
cried the captain; "leastwise I've asked him to do it, and no doubt
he'll come if he's got time.  But look here, Molly," he added, becoming
impatient and opening out all the plans at once--"here you've got the
lecture-hall an' the gymnasium, an' the church, an' the ragged school--
all ship-shape--an' what d'ye think this is?  Explain it, secretary."

"This is a plan of two cottages exactly the shape and size of this one
in which we sit, but with a few more rooms and out-houses behind.  The
empty space between them represents the site of this cottage.  The one
on the right is intended for Captain Millet.  That on the left for--"

"For the secretary and his wife," cried the captain again, taking up the
discourse.  "An' look here, what d'ye think the double lines in pencil
'tween your cottage an' mine means?"

"A wash-house, perhaps."

"A wash'us," repeated the captain, with contempt.  "No; that's a passage
from one house to the other, so as you an' I can visit comfortably in
wet weather.  There's a door in the middle with two locks, one on each
side; so that if either of us should chance to be in the dumps, we've
got only to turn the key on our own side.  But the passage ain't in the
plan, you see.  It's only a suggestion.  Then, Rosebud, what d'ye think
that thing is atop of my cottage?"

"It--it _looks_ like a--a pepper-box," replied Rose, with some
hesitation.

"Pepper-box!" repeated the captain, in disgust; "why, it's a plate-glass
outlook, where I can sweep the horizon with my glass all round, an'
smoke my pipe in peace and comfort, and sometimes have you up, my girl,
to have a chat about old times.  But that's not all, Molly.  Here's a
letter which you can put in your pocket an' read at your leisure.  It
says that the tin mine in which you have shares has become so prosperous
that you could sell at ten or twenty times the price of your original
shares; so,--you see, you are independent of me altogether as to your
livelihood.  Now, old girl, what d'ye think of all that?"

The captain threw himself back in his chair, wiped his brow and looked
at his sister with an air of thorough satisfaction.

"I think," returned Miss Millet slowly, "that God has been very good to
us all."

"He has, sister, He has; and yet the beginning of it all did not seem
very promising."

The captain cast a glance at Jeff as he spoke.  The youth met the glance
with a candid smile.

"I know what you think, father," he said.  "You and I are agreed on that
point now.  I admit that what appears to be evil may be made to work for
good."

"True, Jeff," returned the captain; "but I have lived long enough to
see, also, that the opposite holds good--that things which are
questionably good in themselves sometimes work out what appears to be
evil.  For instance, I have known a poor, respectable man become
suddenly and unexpectedly rich, and the result was that he went in for
extravagant expenditure and dissipation which ended in his ruin."

"But that," said Miss Millet quickly, "was because he did not accept the
gift as from God to be used in His service, but misused it."

"True, Molly, true; and such will be my fate if I am not kept by the
Holy Spirit from misusing what has been given to _me_."

The Rosebud opened not her lips, only her ears, while this conversation
was going on; but the next day, seated on a stool at Jeff's feet, with
her fair little hands clasped on his knee and looking up in his kind,
manly face, she said--

"I wonder, Jeff, what auntie would say if, instead of working out such
pleasant consequences to us, all these things had ended only in what we
term disaster, and bad luck, and poverty, and death--as happens so often
to many people."

"I wonder, too, my Rosebud," returned Jeff.  "Suppose we go and put the
question to her."

Accordingly they went, and found the quiet old lady busy, as usual,
knitting socks for the poor.

"Now, auntie," said Jeff, after stating the question, "if everything had
turned out apparently ill for us--according to what men usually call
ill--would you still hold that everything had really turned out well?"

"Certainly I would, Jeff, on the simple ground that God is good and
cannot err, though He has many and strange methods of bringing about His
ends.  You can prove it by taking an extreme case.  Go to one of the
early martyrs, who lost not only property, and health, and friends, and
liberty, but finally his life at the stake.  The unbeliever's view would
be that everything had gone against him; his own view, that God had put
on him great honour in counting him worthy to suffer and die for Jesus;
and you could not doubt his sincerity when you heard his hymns of praise
on the way to the stake--ay, even in the _fire_."

"Then, whatever happens--good or bad--auntie," said Rose, "you would
say, `All is well.'"

"I would believe it, dear, whether I had courage to say it or not.  If
strength were given, I would certainly acquiesce, and say, `Thy will be
done.'"

"Amen!  Long may we live to say that, Molly," said Captain Millet,
entering the cottage at that moment.  And the captain's prayer was
granted; for he and Molly--and the ex-coastguardsman with his Rosebud
lived many a year after that to see the completion of the swimming-bath,
and the people's' library, and the gymnasium, and the evening classes,
and the model houses, etcetera, and to experience the truth of that
blessed Word which tells us that "all things work together for good to
them that love God."

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Jeff Benson, or the Young
Coastguardsman, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JEFF BENSON ***

***** This file should be named 21743.txt or 21743.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/7/4/21743/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
