Campbell, Pender, and others, at once came forward.  Among these were
the contractors, Glass and Elliot, who agreed not only to make and lay a
new cable, but to pick up and complete the old one.  Cyrus Field
himself, besides energising like Hercules to push the matter on, was one
of ten subscribers who each contributed 10,000 pounds.  Thus 230,500
pounds were privately subscribed before a prospectus was issued.

Our little hero was at the laying of that (1866) cable, when the same
great ship, with the same captain and most of the engineers and
electricians who had gone out on the previous voyage, landed the end of
the 1820-mile rope on the shores of Newfoundland, on Friday, 27th July.
He cheered with the rest in wild enthusiasm when the Great Eastern
dropped anchor in "Heart's Content."  He accompanied Captain Anderson
and the officers of the fleet when they went in a body to the little
church there, to thank God for the successful completion of the great
enterprise.  He was present when the big ship, having received from
other ships 8000 tons of coal, and some six hundred miles of the old
cable, went back to mid-ocean to grapple for the lost cable of 1865.  He
assisted and watched with the deepest interest the amazing efforts of
scientific and mechanical power put forth in the mere matter of dragging
for the cable from the bottom, and observed with reverence, amounting
almost to awe, the great moving spirit of the whole affair, the
indomitable Mr Field, as he went to the bow and sat on the rope to feel
the quiver which told him it was dragging the bottom of the sea two
miles below.  He was present, with blazing cheeks and eyes and bated
breath, when, on the 17th of August, the cable was caught, dragged to
the surface, and actually seen, and broke and sank again as deep as
ever--though not so deep as the hearts of those who saw it go!  He
shared in the weary delays that followed, and in the final triumph when
the cable was fairly caught and at last brought on board, and carried to
the testing-room, amid intense excitement, lest it should prove to have
been damaged by its rough treatment; and his voice helped to swell the
roar of enthusiastic cheering that greeted the announcement that the old
cable was still alive!

But all this we must leave, and carry the reader back to old England
faster than the Great Eastern could have rushed--ay, faster than the
message on the flashing cable itself could have sped, for mind is more
subtle than matter, and thought is swifter than even the Atlantic
Telegraph.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

HOME!

"At last!" exclaimed Robin, bursting into his old home and seizing his
mother in his arms.

Robin had just returned home after the laying of the 1866 Atlantic
Cable, as briefly narrated in the last chapter.

It may be said with some truth that the old home became, during the next
few days, a private lunatic asylum, for its inmates went mildly mad with
joy.

Chief among the lunatics was uncle Rik, the retired sea-captain.  That
madman's case, however, was not temporary derangement, like the others'.
It was confirmed insanity, somewhat intensified just then by the
nephew's return.

"So, young man," he said, one evening at supper, when the family
traveller was dilating to open-eyed-and-mouthed listeners, "you actually
believe that these cables are goin' to work?"

"Of course I do, uncle.  They are working now, and have been working for
many years."

"Well, now, the gullibility o' some people is stupendous!" returned Rik.
"Don't you know, Robin, that everything a'most works for a time, and
then, sooner or later--usually sooner--the ridiculous thing bursts up?"

"But, uncle, you beg the question in classing submarine cables among
ridiculous things.  Besides, have not dozens of cables been working
satisfactorily for many years, without showing signs of bursting up as
yet?"

"Pooh! bah! boh!" replied uncle Rik, by which he meant to say that
though convinced against his will he was of the same opinion still.

At that moment cousin Sam Shipton entered with an eager, excited look.

"It's all settled," he said, taking Robin by the hand.

"What is settled?" asked Mrs Wright, somewhat anxiously.

"Mother, don't be angry," said Robin, laying his hand on his mother's
shoulder, and speaking tenderly, "I meant to have told you the moment I
came in to-day, but uncle Rik with his argumentative spirit drove it and
everything else except cables out of my head--"

"Well, but what is it?" interrupted Madge impatiently; "why do you keep
us in suspense?"

"I have some prospect, mother, of being appointed to go with a
telegraph-laying party to the East, but Sam is wrong when he says it is
all settled.  Whatever he may have to tell us, it is by no means settled
until I have your and father's opinion."

"Well, you horribly good but ungrateful boy," returned Sam, "it is at
least settled as far as I have do with it.  I have made application at
head-quarters, and they are willing to take you on my recommendation.
Moreover, I am myself going."

"You're joking, Sam!" exclaimed Robin, with a flush of joy; "I thought
you had neither intention nor desire to go far from home."

"You thought wrong, Robin.  I always had desire, and now have
intention--and I go as second in command.  So, Miss Mayland," he
continued, turning to Madge, "I shan't be able to continue those
electrical lectures which you were so fond of once, but have lately
seemed to grow tired of."

Madge was at that tender age of budding womanhood when sensitive girls
are apt to misunderstand a jest.  She blushed, stammered something, then
forced a laugh, and turned to speak to Robin; but Sam perceived that
tears rose to her eyes, and he instantly sank in his own estimation to
the condition of a loathsome reptile.

"Well, now, that is good news," cried Robin, applying himself to the
viands on the table with renewed zest.  "You cannot have the smallest
objection or anxiety, mother, I should think, when you know I shall be
under so able a guide."

"I have not yet thought it over, Robin."

"And you, father?"

"Go, my boy, and my blessing go with you," said Mr Wright, all but
choking the blessing with a huge oyster.

"Are any labourers to go with us?" asked Robin.

"One or two picked ones."

"Then you must allow me to pick one, Sam.  My friend Jim Slagg is at
present cast adrift with a considerable part of the Great Eastern's
crew.  He will be delighted to go, I know, and is a first-rate,
hard-working, willing, conscientious youth."

"He ought to be proud of having so warm a friend and advocate," said
Sam, "but I have no power to choose the men."

"O yes, you have, Sam.  If you could get me appointed, you can get him
appointed; and you must, for, if you don't, I won't go."

"You are hard on me, Robin, but I'll try."

"But you have not yet told us where it is that they are going to send
you," said Mrs Wright.

"Ah! that's not fixed," replied Sam; "they are laying down lines in
Turkey; and Egypt is talked of, and telegraph to India itself is even
hinted at.  All I know is that we shall be sent to the East somewhere."

"Bah! boo!  Why does nobody ask for _my_ opinion on the matter?" said
uncle Rik, as he gazed at the company over a goose drumstick, which was
obviously not tender.

"Your opinion, brother," said Mr Wright, "is so valuable, that no doubt
your nephew has been keeping it to the last as a sort of tit-bit--eh,
Robin?"

"Well, uncle; come, let us have it," said Robin.

"You don't deserve it," returned Rik, with a wrench at the drumstick,
"but you shall have it all the same, free, gratis.  Was this bird fed on
gutta-percha shavings, sister Nan?"

"Perhaps--or on violin strings, I'm not sure which," replied Mrs Wright
blandly.

"Well," continued the captain, "you youngsters will go off, I see, right
or wrong, and you'll get half-drowned in the sea, roasted in the East,
smothered in the desert, eaten alive by cannibals, used-up by the
plague, poisoned by serpents, and tee-totally ruined altogether.  Then
you'll come home with the skin of your teeth on--nothing more."

"I sincerely hope it will be summer at the time," said Sam, laughing;
"but we are grateful to you for prophesying that we shall return, even
though in such light clothing."

"That's what'll happen," continued the captain, regarding the other
drumstick with some hesitation; "you may take the word of an old salt
for it.  I've lived in the good old times, lads, and I know that all
these new-fangled notions are goin' to burst up--and _that's_ what'll
come of it."

Whether that was what came of it remains to be seen.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

A GREAT DYNAMO-ELECTRIC SEA-FIGHT.

A few weeks after the utterance of Captain Rik's famous prophecy, Robin,
Sam, Stumps, and Slagg found themselves on board of a large submarine
cable steam-ship, named the Triton, ploughing the billows of the
Southern Ocean.

A few weeks later and they were drawing near to that great concourse of
islands known as the Malay Archipelago, where nature is exceptionally
beautiful, but man is rather vile.  At all events, that region of the
ocean lying to the south of China has been long infamous for the number
and ferocity of its pirates, who, among the numerous islands, with their
various channels, creeks, and rivers, have found a suitable field for
their bloody and remorseless game.

"D'you know, I don't believe in pirates?" said Robin to Sam, as they
stood at the bow of the cable-ship, conversing about these sea-robbers.

"They believe in _you_ nevertheless, as you'd find out to your cost if
we came across one just now."

The voice that replied was not Sam's, but that of the captain, who had
come forward to get a clearer sweep of the horizon ahead with his glass.

"Do you think it likely, sir, that we may meet with any of the rascals?"
asked Sam.

"Not at all unlikely," replied the captain, fixing his glass and putting
it to his eye, "though I don't think it likely that we shall be
attacked, as we are large and don't look like a richly freighted
merchant-man.  However, there is no saying.  These scoundrels fear
nothing, and when hard up will attack anything but a man-of-war, I half
suspect that I am looking at one of them now."

This latter announcement, calmly uttered, threw all who heard it into
quite a flutter of excitement.

The captain was a big, dark-skinned, bearded man, with a quiet,
half-humorous, half-sarcastic expression of countenance.

"Do you really think it is a pirate?" asked Robin, eagerly.

"I really do," replied the captain, "and I fear we may have to run out
of our course to avoid her.  You see, I am a man of peace, and abhor
bloodshed, therefore I won't fight if I can help it."

Saying this he gave orders to have the course of the steamer changed.

Just then there occurred one of those _contretemps_ which don't often
happen, but which, when they do, are often prolific of disaster; an
important part of the machinery broke down, and the engine, for the
moment, was rendered useless.  It was most unfortunate, for the
suspicious craft lay to windward, and a light breeze was blowing carried
it steadily towards them, although all the sail the steamer possessed
was crowded on her.

"Come aft here, Mr Shipton, and tell your chief to come with you.  I
want to hold a council of war," said the captain.

Summoning the first mate and chief engineer, as well as the
electricians, the captain went to the after part of the quarter-deck,
where, seated on the taffrail, he deliberated with the extemporised
council measures for repelling an expected attack.

What these deliberations tended to, those not of the council could not
tell, but from the energy of the members, and an occasional burst of
laughter from the group, it was obvious, as Jim Slagg remarked, that
"mischief o' some sort was in the wind."

Presently the council broke up, and the members went actively below, as
men do who have a purpose to carry out promptly.

Meanwhile the pirate vessel came within range and fired a shot which
missed them.  The fire was not repeated.  Evidently they meant to get
within easy range before trying another shot.

In a few minutes the electricians came on deck with several large coils
of copper wire, which they uncoiled and distributed mysteriously about
the sides of the vessel.  At the same time several lengths of leathern
pump hose were laid along the deck, and fire-branches or nozzles
attached to them.

"Run out our stern-guns now," said the captain, with a grim smile, "and
give it 'em hot.  It won't do to seem to give in too easy.  Run up the
Union Jack.  Don't take aim.  I want more noise and smoke than
mischief--d'ye understand?"

The officer to whom this was addressed, said, "Ay, ay, sir," in the
usual tone of ready obedience, adding, however, in an undertoned growl,
"but I _don't_ understand, for all that!"

He obeyed the orders literally, being well disciplined, and the result
was a sudden and most furious cannonade, for the pirate replied with
vigour, using all the guns he could bring to bear; but no damage was
done on either side for some time, until at last a ball from the enemy
went crash through the smoke funnel of the Triton with a most sonorous
bang!

"That'll do now," cried the captain, "cease firing and haul down the
colours."

If the captain had said, "Cut away the rudder and heave the boilers
overboard," he could scarcely have caused more surprise in his crew,
who, by his orders, had assembled on deck, every man being armed with
musket, cutlass, and revolver.  His orders were strictly and promptly
obeyed, however.

By this time the light breeze had fallen and a dead calm prevailed, so
that the sails of the pirate flapped idly against her masts, and her
crew were seen busily lowering her boats.

"We could have soon got out of her way if our engines had not broke
down," growled the captain, as he went toward the front of the
quarter-deck and looked down on the armed men in the waist.  "My lads,"
he said, "the blackguards are Malay pirates.  They are lowering their
boats, and will be alongside in less than half an hour.  I don't need to
tell you what you'll have to expect if they take us.  We must beat 'em
off or _die_; for it's better to die sword in hand than to be tortured
or strangled.  Those of you, however, who prefer the latter modes of
going under may show the white feather and enjoy yourselves in your own
way.  Now, lads, you know me.  I expect obedience to orders to the
letter.  I hate fighting and bloodshed--so don't kill unless you can't
help it.  Also, take care that you don't touch these copper wires on the
sides with either finger or foot.  If you do you'll repent it, for
electricians don't like their gear handled."

Turning abruptly round, for the oars of the approaching boats could now
be distinctly heard, the captain asked Sam if his batteries were well
charged.

"Chock-full, sir," replied Sam with a broad grin; "there's not a bit of
iron all round the ship that a man could lay hold of without receiving
his due!"

"Good," said the captain, turning to the chief engineer; "are the hose
attached and the boilers hot?"

"Bubblin' up fit to burst, sir.  I've weighted the safety-valves to give
it force?"

Without another word the captain stepped to the port gangway, and took
off his hat to the advancing pirates.  The pirate captain, not to be
outdone in civility, took off his fez and bowed as the boat ranged
alongside.  The captain carefully held out one of the man-ropes to his
enemy.  He grasped it and seized the other.

An instantaneous yell of the most appalling nature issued from his
mouth, and never before, since ship-building began, were a couple of
man-ropes thrown off with greater violence!  The pirate captain fell
back into his boat, and the captain of the steamer stepped promptly back
to avoid the storm of bullets that were let fly at his devoted head.  At
the starboard gangway the chief mate performed the same ceremony to
another boat with a like result.

The pirates were amazed and enraged, but not cowed.  With a wild cheer
they made a simultaneous dash at the ship's sides all round.  With a
wilder yell they fell back into their boats,--shocked beyond expression!
A few of them, however, chanced to lay hold of ropes or parts of the
vessel that were not electrified.  These gained the bulwarks.

"Shove in some more acid," said the chief electrician in suppressed
