probably taken her case to God, and found Him faithful, for she had
said, before going away, `I know that God is the Father of the
fatherless, and the husband of the widow.'

"Again, another poor woman came.  Her husband had fallen sick.  Till
within a few days her children had been at a school and paid for, but
now the bread-winner was ill--might never recover--and had gone to the
hospital.  These children were at once admitted, and in each case
investigation was made to test the veracity of the applicants.

"Of course," continued the missionary, "I have spoken chiefly about the
agencies with which I happen to have come personally in contact, but it
must not be supposed that therefore I ignore or am indifferent to the
other grand centres of influence which are elsewhere at work in London;
such as, for instance, the various agencies set agoing and superintended
by Dr Barnardo, whose _Home for Working and Destitute Boys_, in Stepney
Causeway, is a shelter from which thousands of rescued little ones go
forth to labour as honest and useful members of society, instead of
dying miserably in the slums of London, or growing up to recruit the
ranks of our criminal classes.  These agencies, besides rescuing
destitute and neglected children, include _Homes for destitute girls_
and for _little boys_ in Ilford and Jersey, an _Infirmary for sick
children of the destitute classes_ in Stepney, _Orphan Homes, Ragged and
Day schools, Free dinner-table to destitute children, Mission Halls,
Coffee Palaces_, and, in short, a grand net-work of beneficent
agencies--Evangelistic, Temperance, and Medical--for the conduct of
which is required not far short of One Hundred Pounds a day!"

Even Sir Richard Brandon, with all his supposed financial capacities,
seemed struck with the magnitude of this sum.

"And where does Dr Barnardo obtain so large an amount?" he asked.

"From the voluntary gifts of those who sympathise with and consider the
poor," replied Seaward.

"Then," he added, "there is that noble work carried on by Miss Rye of
the _Emigration Home for Destitute Little Girls_, at the Avenue House,
Peckham, from which a stream of destitute little ones continually flows
to Canada, where they are much wanted, and who, if allowed to remain
here, would almost certainly be _lost_.  Strong testimony to the value
of this work has been given by the Bishops of Toronto and Niagara, and
other competent judges.  Let me mention a case of one of Miss Rye's
little ones, which speaks for itself.

"A little girl of six was deserted by both father and mother."

"Oh! _poor_ little thing!" exclaimed the sympathetic Di, with an amazing
series of pitiful curves about her eyebrows.

"Yes, poor indeed!" responded Seaward.  "The mother forsook her first;
then her father took her on the tramp, but the little feet could not
travel fast enough, so he got tired of her and offered her to a
workhouse.  They refused her, so the tramping was continued, and at last
baby was sold for three shillings to a stranger man.  On taking his
purchase home, however, the man found that his wife was unwilling to
receive her; he therefore sent poor little baby adrift in the streets of
London!"

"_What_ a shame!" cried Di, with flashing orbs.

"Was it not?  But, when father and mother cast this little one off, the
Lord cared for it.  An inspector of police, who found it, took it to his
wife, and she carried it to Miss Rye's Home, where it was at once
received and cared for, and, doubtless, this little foundling girl is
now dwelling happily and usefully with a Canadian family."

"How nice!" exclaimed Di, her eyes, lips, and teeth bearing eloquent
witness to her satisfaction.

"But no doubt you have heard of Miss Rye's work, as well as that of Miss
Annie Macpherson at the Home of Industry, and, perhaps, contributed
to--"

"No," interrupted Sir Richard, quickly, "I do not contribute; but pray,
Mr Seaward, are there other institutions of this sort in London?"

"Oh! yes, there are several, it would take me too long to go into the
details of the various agencies we have for succouring the poor.  There
is, among others, The Church of England `_Central Home for Waifs and
Strays_,' with a `Receiving House' for boys in Upper Clapton, and one
for girls in East Dulwich, with the Archbishop of Canterbury for its
President.  Possibly you may have heard of the `_Strangers' Rest_,' in
Saint George Street, Ratcliff Highway, where, as far as man can judge,
great and permanent good is being constantly done to the souls of
sailors.  A sailor once entered this `Rest' considerably the worse for
drink.  He was spoken to by Christian friends, and asked to sign the
pledge.  He did so, and has now been steadfast for years.  Returning
from a long voyage lately, he went to revisit the _Rest_, and there, at
the Bible-class, prayed.  Part of his prayer was--`God bless the
Strangers' Rest.  O Lord, we thank Thee for this place, and we shall
thank Thee to all eternity.'  This is a sample of the feeling with which
the place is regarded by those who have received blessing there.  In the
same street, only a few doors from this Rest, is the `_Sailor's Welcome
Home_.'  This is more of a home than the other, for it furnishes lodging
and unintoxicating refreshment, while its devoted soul-loving manager,
Miss Child, and her assistant workers, go fearlessly into the very dens
of iniquity, and do all they can to bring sailors to Jesus, and induce
them to take the pledge against strong drink, in which work they are,
through God's blessing, wonderfully successful.  These two missions
work, as it were, into each other's hands.  In the `Rest' are held
prayer-meetings and Bible-classes, and when these are dismissed, the
sailors find the open door of the `Welcome Home' ready to receive them,
and the inmates there seek to deepen the good influence that has been
brought to bear at the meetings--and this in the midst of one of the
very worst parts of London, where temptation to every species of evil is
rampant, on the right-hand and on the left, before and behind.

"But, Sir Richard, although I say that a grand and extensive work of
salvation to soul, body, and spirit is being done to thousands of men,
and women, and children, by the agencies which I have mentioned, and by
many similar agencies which I have not now time to mention, as well as
by the band of City Missionaries to which I have the honour to belong, I
would earnestly point out that these all put together only scratch the
surface of the vast mass of corruption which has to be dealt with in
this seething world of London, the population of which is, as you are
aware, equal to that of all Scotland; and very specially would I remark
that the work is almost exclusively carried on by the _voluntary
contributions_ of those who `consider the poor!'

"The little tract which I have given you will explain much of the
details of this great work, as carried on in the George Yard Mission.
When you have read that, if you desire it, I will call on you again.
Meanwhile engagements compel me to take my leave."

After luncheon, that day, Sir Richard drew his chair to the window, but
instead of taking up the newspaper and recommending his little one to
visit the nursery, he said:

"Come here, Di.  You and I will examine this pamphlet--this little
book--and I'll try to explain it, for reports are usually very dry."

Di looked innocently puzzled.  "Should reports always be wet, papa?"

Sir Richard came nearer to the confines of a laugh than he had reached
for a long time past.

"No, love--not exactly wet, but--hm--you shall hear.  Draw the stool
close to my knee and lay your head on it."

With his large hand on the golden tresses, Sir Richard Brandon began to
examine the record of work done in the George Yard Mission.

"What is this?" he said.  "_Toy Classes_,--why, this must be something
quite in your way, Di."

"Oh yes, I'm sure of that, for I adore toys.  Tell me about it."

"These toy classes are for the cheerless and neglected," said the
knight, frowning in a businesslike way at the pamphlet.  "Sometimes so
many as eighty neglected little ones attend these classes.  On one
occasion, only one of these had boots on, which were very old, much too
large, and both lefts.  When they were seated, toys and scrap-books were
lent to them.  There were puzzles, and toy-bricks, and many other things
which kept them quite happy for an hour.  Of course the opportunity was
seized to tell them about Jesus and His love.  A blessed lesson which
they would not have had a chance of learning at home--if they had homes;
but many of them had none.  When it was time to go they said--`Can't we
stay longer?'

"The beginning of this class was interesting," said Sir Richard,
continuing to read.  "The thought arose--`gather in the most forlorn and
wretched children; those who are seldom seen to smile, or heard to
laugh; there are many such who require Christian sympathy.'  The thought
was immediately acted on.  A little barefooted ragged boy was sent into
the streets to bring in the children.  Soon there was a crowd round the
school-door.  The most miserable among the little ones were admitted.
The proceedings commenced with prayer--then the toys were distributed,
the dirty little hands became active, and the dirty little faces began
to look happy.  When the toys were gathered up, some could not be found,
so, at the next meeting, some of the bigger children were set to watch
the smaller ones.  Presently one little detective said: `Please,
teacher, Teddy's got a horse in his pocket,' and another said that Sally
had an elephant in her pinafore!  Occasion was thus found to show the
evil of stealing, and teach the blessedness of honesty.  They soon gave
up pilfering, and they now play with the toys without desiring to take
them away."

"How nice!" said Di.  "Go on, papa."

"What can this be?" continued Sir Richard, quoting--"_Wild Flowers of
the Forest Day Nursery_.  Oh!  I see--very good idea.  I'll not read it,
Di, I'll tell you about it.  There are many poor widows, you must know,
and women whose husbands are bad, who have no money to buy food and
shelter for themselves and little ones except what they can earn each
day.  But some of these poor women have babies, and they can't work, you
know, with babies in their arms, neither can they leave the babies at
home with no one to look after them, except, perhaps, little sisters or
brothers not much older than themselves, so they take their babies to
this Cradle-Home, and each pays only twopence, for which small sum her
baby is taken in, washed, clothed, warmed, fed, and amused by kind
nurses, who keep it till the mother returns from her work to get it back
again.  Isn't that good?"

"Oh! yes," assented Di, with all her heart.

"And I read here," continued her father, "that thousands of the infants
of the poor die every year because they have not enough food, or enough
clothing to keep them warm."

"Oh _what_ a pity!" exclaimed Di, the tears of ready sympathy rushing
hot into her upturned eyes.

"So you see," continued Sir Richard, who had unconsciously, as it were,
become a pleader for the poor, "if there were a great many nurseries of
this kind all over London, a great many little lives would be saved."

"And why are there not a great many nurseries of that kind, papa?"

"Well, I suppose, it is because there are no funds."

"No what? papa."

"Not enough of money, dear."

"Oh! _what_ a pity!  I wish I had lots and lots of money, and then
wouldn't I have Cradle-Homes everywhere?"

Sir Richard, knowing that he had "lots and lots" of money, but had not
hitherto contributed one farthing to the object under consideration,
thought it best to change the subject by going on with the George Yard
Record.

But we will not conduct the reader through it all--interesting though
the subject certainly is.  Suffice it to say that he found the account
classed under several heads.  Under "_Feeding the Hungry_," for
instance, he learned that many poor children are entirely without food,
sometimes, for a whole day, so that only two courses are open to them--
to steal food and become criminals, or drift into sickness and die.
From which fate many hundreds are annually rescued by timely aid at
George Yard, the supplies for which are sent by liberal-minded
Christians in all ranks of life--from Mr Crackaby with his 150 pounds a
year, up through Mr Brisbane and his class to the present Earl of
Shaftesbury--who, by the way, has taken a deep interest and lent able
support to this particular Mission for more than a quarter of a century.
But the name of Sir Richard Brandon did not appear on the roll of
contributors.  He had not studied the "lower orders" much, except from a
politico-economical-argumentative after-dinner-port-winey point of view.

Under the head of "_Clothing necessitous Children_," he found that some
of the little ones presented themselves at the school-door in such a
net-work of rags, probably infected, as to be unfit even for a Ragged
School.  They were therefore taken in, had their garments destroyed, and
were supplied with new clothes.  Also, that about 1000 children between
the ages of three and fourteen years were connected with the
Institution--scattered among the various works of usefulness conducted
for the young.

Under "_Work among Lads_," he found that those big boys whom one sees
idling about corners of streets, fancying themselves men, smoking with
obvious dislike and pretended pleasure, and on the highroad to the jail
and the gallows--that those boys were enticed into classes opened for
carpentry, turning, fretwork, and other attractive industrial pursuits--
including even printing, at a press supplied by Lord Shaftesbury.  This,
in connection with evening classes for reading, writing, and
arithmetic--the whole leading up to the grand object and aim of all--the
salvation of souls.

Under other heads he found that outcast boys were received, sheltered,
sent to Industrial Homes, or returned to friends and parents; that
temperance meetings were held, and drunkards, male and female, sought
out, prayed for, lovingly reasoned with, and reclaimed from this perhaps
the greatest curse of the land; that Juvenile Bands of Hope were formed,
on the ground of prevention being better than cure; that lodging-houses,
where the poorest of the poor, and the lowest of the low do congregate,
were visited, and the gospel proclaimed to ears that were deaf to nearly
every good influence; that mothers' meetings were held--one of them at
that old headquarters of sin, the "Black Horse," where counsel and
sympathy were mingled with a Clothing Club and a Bible-woman; that there
were a Working Men's Benefit Society, Bible-Classes, Sunday-School, a
Sewing-Class, a Mutual Labour Loan Society, a Shelter for Homeless
Girls, a library, an Invalid Children's Dinner, a bath-room and
lavatory, a Flower Mission, and--hear it, ye who fancy that a penny
stands very low in the scale of financial littleness--a Farthing Bank!
All this free--conducted by an unpaid band of considerably over a
hundred Christian workers, male and female--and leavening the
foundations of society, without which, and similar missions, there would
be very few leavening influences at all, and the superstructure of
society would stand a pretty fair chance of being burst up or blown to
atoms--though the superstructure is not very willing to believe the
fact!

In addition to all this, Sir Richard learned, to his great amazement,
that the Jews won't light their fires on the Sabbath-day--that is, on
our Saturday--that they won't even poke it, and that this abstinence is
the immediate cause of a source of revenue to the un-Jewish poor, whom
the Jews hire to light and poke their fires for them.

And, lastly, Sir Richard Brandon learned that Mr George Holland, who
had managed that mission for more than quarter of a century, was
resolved, in the strength of the Lord, to seek out the lost and rescue
the perishing, even though he, Sir Richard, and all who resembled him,
should refuse to aid by tongue or hand in the glorious work of rescuing
the poor from sin and its consequences.



CHAPTER TEN.

BALLS, BOBBY, SIR RICHARD, AND GILES APPEAR ON THE STAGE.

As from the sublime to the ridiculous there is but a step, so, from the
dining-room to the kitchen there is but a stair.  Let us descend the
stair and learn that while Sir Richard was expounding the subject of
"the poor" to little Di, Mr Balls, the butler, was engaged on the same
subject in the servants' hall.

"I cannot tell you," said Balls, "what a impression the sight o' these
poor people made on me."

"La!  Mr Balls," said the cook, who was not unacquainted with low life
in London, having herself been born within sound of Bow-Bells, "you've
got no occasion to worrit yourself about it.  It 'as never bin
different."

"That makes it all the worse, cook," returned Balls, standing with his
back to the fireplace and his legs wide apart; "if it was only a
temporary depression in trade, or the repeal of the corn laws that did
it, one could stand it, but to think that such a state of things
_always_ goes on is something fearful.  You know I'm a country-bred man
myself, and ain't used to the town, or to such awful sights of squalor.
It almost made me weep, I do assure you.  One room that I looked into
had a mother and two children in it, and I declare to you that the
little boy was going about stark naked, and his sister was only just a
slight degree better."

"P'raps they was goin' to bed," suggested Mrs Screwbury.

"No, nurse, they wasn't; they was playing about evidently in their usual
costume--for that evenin' at least.  I would not have believed it if I
had not seen it.  And the mother was so tattered and draggled and
dirty--which, also, was the room."

"Was that in the court where the Frogs live?" asked Jessie Summers.

"It was, and a dreadful court too--shocking!"

"By the way, Mr Balls," asked the cook, "is there any chance o' that
brat of a boy Bobby, as they call him, coming here?  I can't think why
master has offered to take such a creeter into his service."

"No, cook, there is no chance.  I forgot to tell you about that little
matter.  The boy was here yesterday and he refused--absolutely declined
a splendid offer."

"I'm glad to hear it," returned the cook.

"Tell us about it, Mr Balls," said Jessie Summers with a reproachful
look at the other.  "I'm quite fond of that boy--he's such a smart
fellow, and wouldn't be bad-looking if he'd only wash his face and comb
his hair."

"He's smart enough, no doubt, but impudence is his strong point,"
rejoined the butler with a laugh.  The way he spoke to the master beats
everything.

"`I've sent for you, my boy,' said Sir Richard, in his usual dignified,
kindly way, `to offer you the situation of under-gardener in my
establishment.'"

"`Oh! that's wot you wants with me, is it?' said the boy, as bold as
brass; indeed I may say as bold as gun-metal, for his eyes an' teeth
glittered as he spoke, and he said it with the air of a dook.  Master
didn't quite seem to like it, but I saw he laid restraint on himself and
said: `You have to thank my daughter for this offer--'

"`Thank you, Miss,' said the boy, turnin' to Miss Di with a low bow,
imitatin' Sir Richard's manner, I thought, as much as he could.

"`Of course,' continued the master, rather sharply, `I offer you this
situation out of mere charity--'

"`Oh! you do, do you?' said the extraordinary boy in the coolest manner,
`but wot if I objec' to receive charity?  Ven I 'olds a 'orse I expecs
to be paid for so doin', same as you expecs to be paid w'en you attends
a board-meetin' to grin an' do nuffin.'
