"Tare an' ages!"  (from an Irishman), "an' I had only got to slaape yit!
but--yei a--a--ow!"

French and Irish yawns are very similar, the only difference being, that
whereas the Frenchman finishes the yawn resignedly, and springs to his
legs, the Irishman finishes it with an energetic gasp, as if he were
hurling it remonstratively into the face of Fate, turns round again and
shuts his eyes doggedly--a piece of bravado which he _knows_ is useless
and of very short duration.

"Leve! leve!! leve!!!"  There was no mistake this time in the tones of
Louis's voice.  "Embark, embark! vite, vite!"

The subdued sounds of rousing broke into a loud buzz of active
preparation, as the men busied themselves in bundling up blankets,
carrying down camp-kettles to the lake, launching the boats, kicking up
lazy comrades, stumbling over and swearing at fallen trees which were
not visible in the cold, uncertain light of the early dawn, searching
hopelessly, among a tangled conglomeration of leaves and broken branches
and crushed herbage, for lost pipes and missing tobacco-pouches.

"Hollo!" exclaimed Harry Somerville, starting suddenly from his sleeping
posture, and unintentionally cramming his elbow into Charley's mouth, "I
declare they're all up and nearly ready to start."

"That's no reason," replied Charley, "why you should knock out all my
front teeth, is it?"

Just then Mr Park issued from his tent, dressed and ready to step into
his boat.  He first gave a glance round the camp, to see that all the
men were moving; then he looked up through the trees, to ascertain the
present state, and, if possible, the future prospects of the weather.
Having come to a satisfactory conclusion on that head, he drew forth his
pipe and began to fill it, when his eye fell on the two boys, who were
still sitting up in their lairs, and staring idiotically at the place
where the fire had been, as if the white ashes, half-burned logs, and
bits of charcoal were a sight of the most novel and interesting
character, that filled them with intense amazement.

Mr Park could scarce forbear smiling.

"Hello, youngsters, precious voyageurs _you'll_ make, to be sure, if
this is the way you're going to begin.  Don't you see that the things
are all aboard, and we'll be ready to start in five minutes, and you
sitting there with your neckcloths off?"

Mr Park gave a slight sneer when he spoke of _neckcloths_, as if he
thought, in the first place, that they were quite superfluous portions
of attire, and, in the second place, that having once put them on, the
taking of them off at night was a piece of effeminacy altogether
unworthy of a Nor'-wester.

Charley and Harry needed no second rebuke.  It flashed instantly upon
them that sleeping comfortably under their blankets when the men were
bustling about the camp was extremely inconsistent with the heroic
resolves of the previous day.  They sprang up, rolled their blankets in
the oil-cloths, which they fastened tightly with ropes; tied the
neckcloths, held in such contempt by Mr Park, in a twinkling; threw on
their coats, and in _less_ than five minutes were ready to embark.  They
then found that they might have done things more leisurely, as the crews
had not yet got all their traps on board; so they began to look around
them, and discovered that each had omitted to pack up a blanket.

Very much crestfallen at their stupidity, they proceeded to untie the
bundles again, when it became apparent to the eyes of Charley that his
friend had put on his capote inside out; which had a peculiarly ragged
and grotesque effect.  These mistakes were soon rectified, and
shouldering their beds, they carried them down to the boat and tossed
them in.  Meanwhile Mr Park, who had been watching the movements of the
boys with a peculiar smile, that filled them with confusion, went round
the different camps to see that nothing was left behind.  The men were
all in their places with oars ready, and the boats floating on the calm
water, a yard or two from shore, with the exception of the guide's boat,
the stern of which still rested on the sand awaiting Mr Park.

"Who does this belong to?" shouted that gentleman, holding up a cloth
cap, part of which was of a mottled brown and part deep blue.

Harry instantly tore the covering from his head, and discovered that
among his numerous mistakes he had put on the head-dress of one of the
Indians who had brought him to the camp.  To do him justice, the cap was
not unlike his own, excepting that it was a little more mottled and
dirty in colour, besides being decorated with a gaudy but very much
crushed and broken feather.

"You had better change with our friend here, I think," said Mr Park,
grinning from ear to ear, as he tossed the cap to its owner, while Harry
handed the other to the Indian, amid the laughter of the crew.

"Never mind, boy," added Mr Park, in an encouraging tone; "you'll make
a voyageur yet.--Now then, lads, give way;" and with a nod to the
Indians, who stood on the shore watching their departure, the trader
sprang into the boat and took his place beside the two boys.

"Ho! sing, mes garcons," cried the guide, seizing the massive sweep and
directing the boat out to sea.

At this part of the lake there occurs a deep bay or inlet, to save
rounding which travellers usually strike straight across from point to
point, making what is called in voyageur parlance a _traverse_.  These
traverses are subjects of considerable anxiety and frequently of delay
to travellers, being sometimes of considerable extent, varying from four
to five, and in such immense seas as Lake Superior to fourteen miles.
With boats, indeed, there is little to fear, as the inland craft of the
fur-traders can stand a heavy sea, and often ride out a pretty severe
storm; but it is far otherwise with the bark canoes that are often used
in travelling.  These frail craft can stand very little sea--their
frames being made of thin, flat slips of wood and sheets of bark, not
more than a quarter of an inch thick, which are sewed together with the
fibrous roots of the pine (called by the natives _wattape_), and
rendered water-tight by means of melted gum.  Although light and
buoyant, therefore, and extremely useful in a country where portages are
numerous, they require very tender usage; and when a traverse has to be
made, the guides have always a grave consultation, with some of the most
sagacious among the men, as to the probability of the wind rising or
falling--consultations which are more or less marked by anxiety and
tediousness in proportion to the length of the traverse, the state of
the weather, and the courage or timidity of the guides.

On the present occasion there was no consultation, as has been already
seen.  The traverse was a short one, the morning fine, and the boats
good.  A warm glow began to overspread the horizon, giving promise of a
splendid day, as the numerous oars dipped with a plash and a loud hiss
into the water, and sent the boats leaping forth upon the white wave.

"Sing, sing!" cried the guide again, and clearing his throat, he began
the beautiful, quick-tuned canoe-song "Rose Blanche," to which the men
chorused with such power of lungs that a family of plovers, which up to
that time had stood in mute astonishment on a sandy point, tumbled
precipitately into the water, from which they rose with a shrill,
inexpressibly wild, plaintive cry, and fled screaming away to a more
secure refuge among the reeds and sedges of a swamp.  A number of ducks,
too, awakened by the unwonted sound, shot suddenly out from the
concealment of their night's bivouac with erect heads and startled
looks, sputtered heavily over the surface of their liquid bed, and
rising into the air, flew in a wide circuit, with whistling wings, away
from the scene of so much uproar and confusion.

The rough voices of the men grew softer and softer as the two Indians
listened to the song of their departing friends, mellowing down and
becoming more harmonious and more plaintive as the distance increased,
and the boats grew smaller and smaller, until they were lost in the
blaze of light that now bathed both water and sky in the eastern
horizon, and began rapidly to climb the zenith, while the sweet tones
became less and less audible as they floated faintly across the still
water, and melted at last into the deep silence of the wilderness.

The two Indians still stood with downcast heads and listening ears, as
if they loved the last echo of the dying music, while their grave,
statue-like forms added to, rather than detracted from, the solitude of
the deserted scene.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

CHARLEY AND HARRY BEGIN THEIR SPORTING CAREER, WITHOUT MUCH SUCCESS--
WHISKY-JOHN CATCHING.

The place in the boats usually allotted to gentlemen in the Company's
service while travelling is the stern.  Here the lading is so arranged
as to form a pretty level hollow, where the flat bundles containing
their blankets are placed, and a couch is thus formed that rivals
Eastern effeminacy in luxuriance.  There are occasions, however, when
this couch is converted into a bed, not of thorns exactly, but of
corners; and really it would be hard to say which of the two is the more
disagreeable.  Should the men be careless in arranging the cargo, the
inevitable consequence is that "monsieur" will find the leg of an iron
stove, the sharp edge of a keg, or the corner of a wooden box occupying
the place where his ribs should be.  So common, however, is this
occurrence that the clerks usually superintend the arrangements
themselves, and so secure comfort.

On a couch, then, of this kind, Charley and Harry now found themselves
constrained to sit all morning--sometimes asleep, occasionally awake,
and always earnestly desiring that it was time to put ashore for
breakfast, as they had now travelled for four hours without halt, except
twice for about five minutes, to let the men light their pipes.

"Charley," said Harry Somerville to his friend, who sat beside him, "it
strikes me that we are to have no breakfast at all to-day.  Here have I
been holding my breath and tightening my belt, until I feel much more
like a spider or a wasp than a--a--"

"_Man_, Harry; out with it at once, don't be afraid," said Charley.

"Well, no, I wasn't going to have said _that_ exactly, but I was going
to have said a voyageur; only I recollected our doings this morning, and
hesitated to take the name until I had won it."

"It's well that you entertain so modest an opinion of yourself," said
Mr Park, who still smoked his pipe as if he were impressed with the
idea that to stop for a moment would produce instant death.  "I may tell
you for your comfort, youngsters, that we shan't breakfast till we reach
yonder point."

The shores of Lake Winnipeg are flat and low, and the point indicated by
Mr Park lay directly in the light of the sun, which now shone with such
splendour in the cloudless sky, and flashed on the polished water, that
it was with difficulty they could look towards the point of land.

"Where is it?" asked Charley, shading his eyes with his hand; "I cannot
make out anything at all."

"Try again, my boy; there's nothing like practice."

"Ah, yes!  I make it out now; a faint shadow just under the sun.  Is
that it?"

"Ay, and we'll break our fast _there_."

"I would like very much to break your head _here_," thought Charley, but
he did not say it, as, besides being likely to produce unpleasant
consequences, he felt that such a speech to an elderly gentleman would
be highly improper; and Charley had _some_ respect for grey hairs for
their own sake, whether the owner of them was a good man or a goose.

"What shall we do, Harry?  If I had only thought of keeping out a book."

"I know what _I_ shall do," said Harry, with a resolute air:

"I'll go and shoot!"

"Shoot!" cried Charley.  "You don't mean to say that you're going to
waste your powder and shot by firing at the clouds! for, unless you take
_them_, I see nothing else here."

"That's because you don't use your eyes," retorted Harry.  "Will you
just look at yonder rock ahead of us, and tell me what you see."

Charley looked earnestly at the rock, which to a cursory glance seemed
as if composed of whiter stone on the top.  "Gulls, I declare!" shouted
Charley, at the same time jumping up in haste.

Just then one of the gulls, probably a scout sent out to watch the
approaching enemy, wheeled in a circle overhead.  The two youths dragged
their guns from beneath the thwarts of the boat, and rummaged about in
great anxiety for shot-belts and powder-horns.  At last they were found;
and having loaded, they sat on the edge of the boat, looking out for
game with as much--ay, with _more_ intense interest than a Blackfoot
Indian would have watched for a fat buffalo cow.

"There he goes," said Harry; "take the first shot, Charley."

"Where? where is it?"

"Right ahead.  Look out!"

As Harry spoke, a small white gull, with bright-red legs and beak, flew
over the boat so close to them that, as the guide remarked, "he could
see it wink!"  Charley's equanimity, already pretty well disturbed, was
entirely upset at the suddenness of the bird's appearance; for he had
been gazing intently at the rock when his friend's exclamation drew his
attention in time to see the gull within about four feet of his head.
With a sudden "Oh!"  Charley threw forward his gun, took a short,
wavering aim, and blew the cocktail feather out of Baptiste's hat; while
the gull sailed tranquilly away, as much as to say, "If _that's_ all you
can do, there's no need for me to hurry!"

"Confound the boy!" cried Mr Park.  "You'll be the death of some one
yet; I'm convinced of that."

"Parbleu! you may say that, c'est vrai," remarked the voyageur, with a
rueful gaze at his hat, which, besides having its ornamental feather
shattered, was sadly cut up about the crown.

The poor lad's face became much redder than the legs or beak of the gull
as he sat down in confusion, which he sought to hide by busily reloading
his gun; while the men indulged in a somewhat witty and sarcastic
criticism of his powers of shooting, remarking, in flattering terms, on
the precision of the shot that blew Baptiste's feather into atoms, and
declaring that if every shot he fired was as truly aimed he would
certainly be the best in the country.

Baptiste also came in for a share of their repartee.  "It serves you
right," said the guide, laughing, "for wearing such things on the
voyage.  You should put away such foppery till you return to the
settlement, where there are _girls_ to admire you."  (Baptiste had
continued to wear the tall hat, ornamented with gold cords and tassels,
with which he had left Red River.)

"Ah!" cried another, pulling vigorously at his oar, "I fear that Marie
won't look at you, now that all your beauty's gone."

"'Tis not quite gone," said a third; "there's all the brim and half a
tassel left, besides the wreck of the remainder."

"Oh, I can lend you a few fragments," retorted Baptiste, endeavouring to
parry some of the thrusts.  "They would improve you vastly."

"No, no, friend, gather them up and replace them; they will look more
picturesque and becoming now.  I believe if you had worn them much
longer all the men in the boat would have fallen in love with you."

"By St. Patrick," said Mike Brady, an Irishman who sat at the oar
immediately behind the unfortunate Canadian, "there's more than enough
o' rubbish scattered over mysilf nor would do to stuff a fither-bed
with."

As Mike spoke, he collected the fragments of feathers and ribbons with
which the unlucky shot had strewn him, and placed them slyly on the top
of the dilapidated hat, which Baptiste, after clearing away the wreck,
had replaced on his head.

"It's very purty," said Mike, as the action was received by the crew
with a shout of merriment.

Baptiste was waxing wrathful under this fire, when the general attention
was drawn again towards Charley and his friend, who, having now got
close to the rock, had quite forgotten their mishap in the excitement of
expectation.

This excitement in the shooting of such small game might perhaps
surprise our readers, did we not acquaint them with the fact that
neither of the boys had, up to that time, enjoyed much opportunity of
shooting.  It is true that Harry had once or twice borrowed the
fowling-piece of the senior clerk, and had sallied forth with a beating
heart to pursue the grouse which are found in the belt of woodland
skirting the Assiniboine River near to Fort Garry.  But these
expeditions were of rare occurrence, and they had not sufficed to rub
off much of the bounding excitement with which he loaded and fired at
anything and everything that came within range of his gun.  Charley, on
the other hand, had never fired a shot before, except out of an old
horse-pistol; having up to this period been busily engaged at school,
except during the holidays, which he always spent in the society of his
sister Kate, whose tastes were not such as were likely to induce him to
take up the gun, even if he had possessed such a weapon.  Just before
leaving Red River, his father presented him with his own gun, remarking,
as he did so, with a sigh, that _his_ day was past now; and adding, that
the gun was a good one for shot or ball, and if he (Charley) brought
down _half_ as much game with it as he (Mr Kennedy) had brought down in
the course of his life, he might consider himself a crack shot
undoubtedly.

It was not surprising, therefore, that the two friends went nearly mad
with excitation when the whole flock of gulls rose into the air like a
white cloud, and sailed in endless circles and gyrations above and
around their heads--flying so close at times that they might almost have
been caught by the hand.  Neither was it surprising that innumerable
shots were fired, by both sportsmen, without a single bird being a whit
the worse for it, or themselves much the better; the energetic efforts
made to hit being rendered abortive by the very eagerness which caused
them to miss.  And this was the less extraordinary, too, when it is
remembered that Harry in his haste loaded several times without shot,
and Charley rendered the right barrel of his gun _hors de combat_ at
last, by ramming down a charge of shot and omitting powder altogether,
whereby he snapped and primed, and snapped and primed again, till he
grew desperate, and then suspicious of the true cause, which he finally
rectified with much difficulty.

Frequently the gulls flew straight over the heads of the youths,--which
produced peculiar consequences, as in such cases they took aim while the
birds were approaching; but being somewhat slow at taking aim, the gulls
were almost perpendicularly above them ere they were ready to shoot, so
that they were obliged to fire hastily in _hope_, feeling that they were
losing their balance, or give up the chance altogether.

Mr Park sat grimly in his place all the while, enjoying the scene, and
smoking.

"Now then, Charley," said he, "take that fellow."

"Which? where?  Oh, if I could only get _one_!" said Charley, looking up
eagerly at the screaming birds, at which he had been staring so long, in
their varying and crossing flight, that his sight had become hopelessly
unsteady.

"There!  Look sharp: fire away!"

Bang went Charley's piece, as he spoke, at a gull which flew straight
towards him, but so rapidly that it was directly above his head; indeed,
he was leaning a little backwards at the moment, which caused him to
miss again, while the recoil of the gun brought matters to a climax, by
toppling him over into Mr Park's lap, thereby smashing that gentleman's
pipe to atoms.  The fall accidentally exploded the second barrel,
causing the butt to strike Charley in the pit of his stomach--as if to
ram him well home into Mr Park's open arms--and hitting with a stray
shot a gull that was sailing high up in the sky in fancied security.  It
fell with a fluttering crash into the boat while the men were laughing
at the accident.

"Didn't I say so?" cried Mr Park, wrathfully, as he pitched Charley out
of his lap, and spat out the remnants of his broken pipe.

Fortunately for all parties, at this moment the boat approached a spot
on which the guide had resolved to land for breakfast; and seeing the
unpleasant predicament into which poor Charley had fallen, he assumed
the strong tones of command with which guides are frequently gifted, and
called out,--"Ho, ho! a terre! a terre! to land! to land!  Breakfast, my
boys; breakfast!"--at the same time sweeping the boat's head shoreward,
and running into a rocky bay, whose margin was fringed by a growth of
small trees.  Here, in a few minutes, they were joined by the other
boats of the brigade, which had kept within sight of each other nearly
the whole morning.

While travelling through the wilds of North America in boats, voyageurs
always make a point of landing to breakfast.  Dinner is a meal with
which they are unacquainted, at least on the voyage, and luncheon is
likewise unknown.  If a man feels hungry during the day, the
pemmican-bag and its contents are there; he may pause in his work at any
time, for a minute, to seize the axe and cut off a lump, which he may
devour as he best can; but there is no going ashore--no resting for
dinner.  Two great meals are recognised, and the time allotted to their
preparation and consumption held inviolable--breakfast and supper: the
first varying between the hours of seven and nine in the morning; the
second about sunset, at which time travellers usually encamp for the
night.  Of the two meals it would be difficult to say which is more
agreeable.  For our own part, we prefer the former.  It is the meal to
which a man addresses himself with peculiar gusto, especially if he has
been astir three or four hours previously in the open air.  It is the
time of day, too, when the spirits are freshest and highest, animated by
the prospect of the work, the difficulties, the pleasures, or the
adventures of the day that has begun; and cheered by that cool, clear
_buoyancy_ of Nature which belongs exclusively to the happy morning
hours, and has led poets in all ages to compare these hours to the first
sweet months of spring or the early years of childhood.

Voyageurs, not less than poets, have felt the exhilarating influence of
the young day, although they have lacked the power to tell it in
sounding numbers; but where words were wanting, the sparkling eye, the
beaming countenance, the light step, and hearty laugh, were more
powerful exponents of the feelings within.  Poet, and painter too, might
have spent a profitable hour on the shores of that great sequestered
lake, and as they watched the picturesque groups clustering round the
blazing fires, preparing their morning meal, smoking their pipes,
examining and repairing the boats, or sunning their stalwart limbs in
wild, careless attitudes upon the greensward--might have found a subject
worthy the most brilliant effusions of the pen or the most graphic
touches of the pencil.
