the dancing waves when Joe and Luke "swarmed" into her, had the oars out
and were sweeping off so as to intercept Peter's vessel They soon
reached her, received a packet wrapped up in a bit of newspaper, and
quickly returned.

The packet contained two letters--one for the skipper, the other for the
mate--from their respective wives.

"Joe," said the skipper, when he had perused his letter, "come down
below.  I want to speak to 'ee."

"That's just what I was goin' to say to yourself, for the letter from my
missis says somethin' that consarns you."

When master and mate were alone together in the cabin, each read to the
other his letter.

"My missis," said the skipper, unfolding his letter and regarding it
with a puzzled expression, "although she's had a pretty good edication,
has paid little attention to her pot-hooks--but this is how it runs--
pretty near.  `Dear old man,' (she's always been an affectionate woman,
Joe, though I do treat her badly when I'm in liquor), `I hope you are
having a good time of it and that darling Billy likes the sea, and is a
good boy.  My reason for writing just now is to tell you about that dear
sweet creature, Miss Ruth Dotropy.  She has been down at Yarmouth again
on a visit, and of course she has been over to see me and Mrs Davidson,
in _such_ a lovely blue--' (ah! well, Joe, there's no need to read you
that bit; it's all about dress--as if dress could make Miss Ruth better
or worse!  But women's minds will run on ribbons an' suchlike.  Well,
after yawin' about for a bit, she comes back to the pint, an' steers a
straight course again.  She goes on, after a blot or two that I can't
make nothin' of), `You'll be surprised to hear, David, that she's been
making some particular inquiries about you and me; which I don't
understand at all, and looking as if she knew a deal more than she cared
to tell.  She's been asking Mrs Davidson too about it, and what puzzles
me most is--' There's another aggrawatin' blot here, Joe, so that I
can't make out what puzzles her.  Look here.  Can you spell it out?"

Joe tried, but shook his head.

"It's a puzzler to _her_," he said, "an' she's took good care to make it
a puzzler to everybody else, but go on."

"There's nothin' else to go on wi', Joe, for after steerin' past the
blot, she runs foul o' Miss Ruth's dress again, and the only thing worth
mentionin' is a post-script, where she says, `I think there's something
wrong, dear David, and I wish you was here.'  That's all."

"Now, that is strange, for my missis writes about the wery same thing,"
said Joe, "only she seems to have gone in for a little more confusion
an' blots than your missis, an' that blessed little babby of ours is
always gittin' in the way, so she can't help runnin' foul of it, but
that same puzzler crops up every now an' then.  See, here's what she
writes:--

"`Darlin' Joe,' (a touch more affectionate than yours--eh! skipper?) `if
our dear darlin' babby will let me, I'm a-goin' to write you a letter--
there, I know'd she wouldn't.  She's bin and capsized the wash-tub,
though, as you know, she can't walk yet, but she rolls about most awful,
Joe, just what you say the _Evening Star_ does in a gale on the North
Sea.  An' she's got most dreadful heels--oh! you've no idear!  Whativer
they comes down upon goes--' There's a big blot here," said Joe, with a
puzzled look, "`goes--whativer they comes down upon goes--' No, I can't
make it out."

"`Goes to sticks an' stivers,' p'raps," said the skipper.

"No, my Maggie never uses words like that," said Joe with decision.

"`Goes all to smash,' then," suggested the skipper.

"No, nor it ain't that; my Maggie's too soft-tongued for that."

"Well, you know, things must go somewhere, or somehow, Joe, when such a
pair o' heels comes down on 'em--but steer clear o' the blot and the
babby, an' see what comes next."

"`Well,'" continued Joe, reading on, "`I was goin' to tell you, when
babby made that last smash, ("I _told_ you it was a smash," said David,
softly), that dear Miss Ruth has bin worritin' herself--if babby would
only keep quiet for two minutes--worritin' herself about Mrs Bright in
a way that none of us can understand.  She's anxious to make inquiries
about her and her affairs in a secret sort o' way, but the dear young
lady is so honest--there's babby again!  Now, I've got her all right.
It was the milk-can this time, but there warn't much in it, an' the
cat's got the benefit.  Well, darlin' Joe, where was I--oh, the dear
young lady's so honest an' straitfor'ard, that even a child could see
through her, though none of us can make out what she's drivin' at.
Yesterday she went to see Mrs Bright, an' took a liar with her--'"

"Hallo!  Joe, surely she'd niver do that," said the skipper in a
remonstrative tone.

"She means a lawyer," returned Joe, apologetically, "but Maggie niver
could spell that word, though I've often tried to teach 'er--`Maggie,'
says I, `you mustn't write _liar_, but _law-yer_.'

"`La! yer jokin',' says she.

"`No,' says I, `I'm not, that's the way to spell it,' an' as Maggie's a
biddable lass, she got to do it all right, but her memory ain't over
strong, so, you see, she's got back to the old story.  Howsever, she
don't really mean it, you know."

"Just so," returned the skipper, "heave ahead wi' the letter, Joe."

Knitting his brows, and applying himself to the much-soiled and crumpled
sheet, the mate continued to read:--

"`An' the liar he puzzled her with all sorts o' questions, just as if he
was a schoolmaster and she a school-girl.  He bothered her to that
extent she began to lose temper, ("he better take care," muttered the
skipper, chuckling), but Miss Ruth she sees that, an' putt a stop to it
in her own sweet way, ("lucky for the liar," muttered the skipper), an'
so they went away without explainin'.  We've all had a great talk over
it, an' we're most of us inclined to think--oh! that babby, she's bin an
rammed her darlin' futt into the tar-bucket! but it ain't much the
worse, though it's cost about half-a-pound o' butter to take it off, an'
that ain't a joke wi' butter at 1 shilling, 4 pence a pound, an' times
so bad--well, as I was goin' to say, if that blessed babby would only
let me, we're all inclined to think it must have somethin' to do wi'
that man as David owes money to, who said last year that he'd sell his
smack an' turn him an' his family out o' house an' home if he didn't pay
up, though what Miss Ruth has to do wi' that, or how she come for to
know it we can't make out at all.'"

"The blackguard!" growled the skipper, fiercely, referring to `that
man,' "if I only had his long nose within three futt o' my fist, I'd let
him feel what my knuckles is made of!"

"Steamer in sight, father," sang out Billy at that moment down the
companion-hatch.

The conference being thus abruptly terminated, the skipper and mate of
the _Evening Star_ went on deck to give orders for the immediate hauling
up of the trawl and to "have a squint" at the steamer, which was seen at
that moment like a little cloud on the horizon.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

DANGERS, DIFFICULTIES, AND EXCITEMENTS OF THE TRAFFIC; LOADING THE
STEAMER.

Bustling activity of the most vigorous kind was now the order of the day
in the Short Blue fleet, for the arrival of the carrying-steamer, and
the fact that she was making towards the admiral, indicated that she
meant to return to London in a few hours, and necessitated the hauling
of the trawls, cleaning the fish, and packing them; getting up the
"trunks" that had been packed during the night, launching the boats, and
trans-shipping them in spite of the yet heavy sea.

As every one may understand, such perishable food as fish must be
conveyed to market with the utmost possible despatch.  This is
accomplished by the constant running of fast steamers between the fleets
and the Thames.  The fish when put on board are further preserved by
means of ice, and no delay is permitted in trans-shipment.  As we have
said, the steamers are bound to make straight for the admiral's smack.
Knowing this, the other vessels keep as near to the admiral as they
conveniently can, so that when the steamer is preparing to return, they
may be ready to rush at her like a fleet of nautical locusts, and put
their fish on board.

Hot haste and cool precision mark the action of the fishermen in all
that is done, for they know well that only a limited time will be
allowed them, and if any careless or wilful stragglers from the fleet
come up when the time is nearly past, they stand a chance of seeing the
carrier steam off without their fish, which are thus left to be shipped
the following day, and to be sold at last as an inferior article, or,
perhaps, condemned and thrown away as unfit for human food.

The _Evening Star_ chanced to be not far from the admiral when the
steamer appeared.  It was one of the fleet of steam-carriers owned by
the well-known fish firm of Messrs. Hewett and Company of London.  When
it passed David Bright's smack the crew had got in the trawl and were
cleaning and packing the catch--which was a good one--as if their very
lives depended on their speed.  They immediately followed in the wake of
the carrier toward the admiral.

As all the smacks were heading towards the same centre, they came in on
every tack, and from all points of the compass.

"Look sharp, boys," said David Bright, who was steering, "we must git
every fish aboard.  It's now eight o'clock, an' she won't wait beyond
eleven or twelve, you may be sure."

There was no need for the caution.  Every man and boy was already doing
his utmost.

It fell to Billy's lot to help in packing the trunks, and deftly he did
it,--keeping soles, turbot, and halibut separate, to form boxes, or
"trunks of prime," and packing other fish as much as possible according
to their kind, until he came to roker, dabs, gurnets, etcetera, which he
packed together under the name of "offal."  This does not mean refuse,
but only inferior fish, which are bought by hawkers, and sold to the
poor.  The trunks were partly open on top, but secured by cords which
kept the fish from slipping out, and each trunk was labelled with the
name of the smack, to which it belonged, and the party to whom it was
consigned.

As the fleet converged to the centre, the vessels began to crowd
together and friends to recognise and hail each other, so that the scene
became very animated, while the risk of collision was considerable.
Indeed, it was only by consummate skill, judgment and coolness that, in
many cases, collisions were avoided.

"There's the _Sparrow_," said Billy to Trevor, eagerly, as he pointed to
a smack, whose master, Jim Frost, he knew and was fond of.  It bore down
in such a direction as to pass close under the stern of the _Evening
Star_.

"What cheer! what cheer!" cried Billy, holding one of his little hands
high above his head.

"What cheer!" came back in strong, hearty tones from the _Sparrow's_
deck.

"What luck, Jim?" asked David Bright, as the vessel flew past.

"We fouled an old wreck this mornin', an' tore the net all to pieces,
but we got a good haul last night--praise the Lord."

"Which piece o' luck d'ye praise the Lord for?" demanded David, in a
scoffing tone.

"For both," shouted Frost, promptly.  "It might have bin worse.  We
might have lost the gear, you know--or one o' the hands."

When this reply was finished, the vessels were too far apart for further
intercourse.

"Humph!" ejaculated Gunter, "one o' the psalm-singin' lot, I suppose."

"If it's the psalm-singin'," said Spivin, "as makes Jim Frost bear his
troubles wi' good temper, an' thank God for foul weather an' fair, the
sooner you take to it the better for yourself."

"Ay, an' for his mates," added Zulu, with a broad grin.

"Shove out the boat now, lads," said the skipper.

At this order the capacious and rather clumsy boat, which had hitherto
lain on the deck of the _Evening Star_ like a ponderous fixture, was
seized by the crew.  A vigorous pull at a block and tackle sent it up on
the side of the smack.  A still more vigorous shove by the men--some
with backs applied, some with arms, and all with a will--sent it
stern-foremost into the sea.  It took in a few gallons of water by the
plunge, but was none the worse for that.

At the same moment Zulu literally tumbled into it.  No stepping or
jumping into it was possible with the sea that was running.  Indeed the
fishermen of the North Sea are acrobats by necessity, and their tumbling
is quite as wonderful, though not quite so neat, as that of
professionals.  Perchance if the arena in which the latter perform were
to pitch about as heavily as the _Evening Star_ did on that occasion,
they might be beaten at their own work by the fishermen!

Zulu was followed by Ned Spivin, while Gunter, taking a quick turn of
the long and strong painter round a belaying-pin, held on.

The _Evening Star_ was now lying-to, not far from the steam-carrier.
Her boat danced on the waves like a cork, pitching heavily from side to
side, with now the stern and now the bow pointing to the sky; at one
moment leaping with its gunwale above the level of the smack's bulwarks;
at the next moment eight or ten feet down in the trough of the waves;
never at rest for an instant, always tugging madly at its tether, and
often surging against the vessel's side, from actual contact with which
it was protected by strong rope fenders.  But indeed the boat's great
strength of build seemed its best guarantee against damage.

To one unaccustomed to such work it might have seemed utterly impossible
to put anything whatever on board of such a pitching boat.  Tying a
mule-pack on the back of a bouncing wild horse may suggest an equivalent
difficulty to a landsman.  Nevertheless the crew of the _Evening Star_
did it with as much quiet determination and almost as much speed as if
there was no sea on at all.  Billy and Trevor slid the trunks to the
vessel's side; the mate and Gunter lifted them, rested them a moment on
the edge; Zulu and Spivin stood in the surging boat with outstretched
arms and glaring eyes.  A mighty swing of the boat suggested that the
little craft meant to run the big one down.  They closed, two trunks
were grappled, let go, deposited, and before the next wave swung them
alongside again, Spivin and Zulu were glaring up--ready for more--while
Joe and Gunter were gazing down--ready to deliver.

When the boat was loaded the painter was cast off and she dropped
astern.  The oars were shipped, and they made for the steamer.  From the
low deck of the smack they could be seen, now pictured against the sky
on a wave's crest, and then lost to view altogether for a few seconds in
the watery valley beyond.

By that time quite a crowd of little boats had reached the steamer, and
were holding on to her, while their respective smacks lay-to close by,
or sailed slowly round the carrier, so that recognitions, salutations,
and friendly chaff were going on all round--the confusion of masts, and
sails, and voices ever increasing as the outlying portions of the fleet
came scudding in to the rendezvous.

"There goes the _Boy Jim_," said Luke Trevor, pointing towards a smart
craft that was going swiftly past them.

"Who's the _Boy Jim_?" growled Gunter, whose temper, at no time a good
one, had been much damaged by the blows he had received in the fall of
the previous night.

"He's nobody--it's the name o' that smack," answered Luke.

"An' her master, John Johnston, is one o' my best friends," said Billy,
raising his fist on high in salutation.  "What cheer, John! what cheer,
my hearty!"

The master of the _Boy Jim_ was seen to raise his hand in reply to the
salutation, and his voice came strong and cheerily over the sea, but he
was too far off to be heard distinctly, so Billy raised his hand again
by way of saying, "All right, my boy!"

At the same time a hail was heard at the other side of the vessel.  The
crew turned round and crossed the deck.

"It's our namesake--or nearly so--the _Morning Star_," said Trevor to
Gunter, for the latter being a new hand knew little of the names of
either smacks or masters.

"Is her skipper a friend o' yours too?" asked Gunter of Billy.

"Yes, Bowers _is_ a friend o' mine--an' a first-rate fellow too; which
is more than you will ever be," retorted Billy, again stretching up the
ready arm and hand.  "What cheer, Joseph, what cheer!"

"What cheer!  Billy--why, I didn't know you, you've grow'd so much,"
shouted the master of the _Morning Star_, whose middle-sized, but broad
and powerful frame was surmounted by a massive countenance, with good
humour in the twinkling eyes, and kindly chaff often in the goodly-sized
mouth.

"Yes, I've grow'd," retorted Billy, "an' I mean to go on growin' till
I'm big enough to wallop _you_."

"Your cheek has been growin' too, Billy."

"So it has, but nothin' like to your jaw, Joseph."

"What luck?" shouted David as the _Morning Star_ was passing on.

"Fifteen trunks.  What have _you_ got?"

The skipper held up his hand to acknowledge the information, and shouted
"nineteen," in reply.

"You seem to have a lot o' friends among the skippers, Billy," said
Gunter, with a sneer, for he was fond of teasing the boy, who, to do him
justice, could take chaff well, except when thrown at him by ill-natured
fellows.

