over, and after every conceivable question had been asked four or five
times--"now, comrades, it remains for us to fix what we'll do."

"To the Fort," said Larry O'Dowd abruptly.

"Ay--home!" cried Walter.

"Oh yes--home--home!" exclaimed Roy and Nelly in the same breath.

"Ditto," observed Obadiah Stiff.

Slugs and the Black Swan, being men of few words, said nothing, but
nodded approval.

"Well, it's quite plain that we're all of one mind," resumed Robin;
"nevertheless, there are one or two points to which I ax yer attention.
In the first place, it's now near the end of November.  Fort Enterprise,
in a straight line, is more nor three weeks' march from hereaway.  Our
provisions is low.  When I left the Fort provisions was low there too,
an' if my brother Jeff ha'nt had more nor his usual luck in huntin'
they'll be lower yet before long.  Now, I think it would be better to go
back to Silver Lake for a week or so, hunt an' fish there till we've got
a good supply, make noo sleds, load 'em chock full, an' then--ho! for
home.  What say ye to that, comrades?"

As every one assented readily to this plan, they proceeded at once to
carry it into execution.  At first, indeed, Nelly looked a little
disappointed, saying that she wanted to get to her darling mother
without delay; but, on Walter pointing out to her that it would only
delay matters a week or so, and that it would enable the whole party to
rest and recruit, and give Wapaw time to recover thoroughly from his
wounds, she became reconciled, and put on her snow-shoes to return to
Silver Lake with some degree of cheerfulness; and when, in the course of
that day's walk, she began to tell her father of all the beauties and
wonders of Silver Lake, she was not only reconciled but delighted to
return.

"O father!" said she, as they walked briskly through the forest, "you've
no notion what a beautiful place Silver Lake is.  It's so clear, and
so--so--oh!  I don't know how to tell you; so like the fairy places
Walter used to tell us of, with clear water and high cliffs, and the
clouds shining up at the clouds shining down, and two suns--one below
and another above.  And then the hut! we made it all ourselves."

"What! made the trees and all?" said Robin, with a smile.

"No, of course not the trees; but we _cut_ the trees and piled 'em up,
and spread the brush-wood, and--and--then the fish! we caught _such_ big
ones."

"How big, Nelly?"

"Oh, ever so big!"

"How big may that be?"

"Well, some were so long," (measuring off the size on her arm,) "an'
some near as long as my leg--an' they were good to eat too--no good!
you've no notion; but you'll see and taste 'em too.  Then there's the
shooskin'!  Did you ever shoosk, father?"

"No, lass--leastways I don't remember, if I did."

"But you know what it is?"

"To be sure, Nelly; ha'nt I seed ye do it often on the slopes at Fort
Enterprise?"

"Well, the shooskin' here is far, _far_ better.  The first time Roy did
it, he said it nearly banged all his bones to pieces--yes, he said he
felt as if his backbone was shoved up into his brain; and I sometimes
thought it would squeeze all my ribs together.  Oh, it is _so_ nice!
You shall try it, father."

Robin laughed heartily at this, and remarked that he would be very glad
to try it, though he had no particular desire to have his ribs squeezed
together, or his backbone shoved up into his brain!

Then Nelly went on with great animation and volubility to tell of the
trapping of the bear, and the snaring of rabbits, and the catching of
fish, and of Roy's peculiar method of wading into the lake for ducks,
and many other things.

Roy, meanwhile, entertained Walter and Larry O'Dowd with a somewhat
similar account of their doings during the months of their residence in
that wild region; and thus the journey was beguiled, so that the time
seemed to pass on swallows' wings.

Towards evening the party approached the spot where Silver Lake had
first burst upon the enraptured gaze of the wandering pair.  As they
drew near, Roy and Nelly hurried on in advance, and, mounting the fallen
tree on which they had formerly rested, waved to the others to come on,
and shouted for glee.  And well might they shout, for the evening
happened to be brighter and calmer, if possible, than the one on which
they first saw the lake.  The rolling clouds were whiter, too, and the
waters looked more silvery than ever.

The exclamations of delight, and the looks of admiration with which the
glorious scene was greeted by the hunters when they came up, gratified
the hearts of Roy and Nelly very much.

"Oh, _how_ I wish mother was here to see it!" cried Nelly.

"Ain't _that_ a place for a king to live in, daddy?" said Roy,
enthusiastically.

"So 'tis, lad, so 'tis--leastwise it's a goodish spot for a hunter.  How
say you, Slugs?"

Slugs smiled grimly, and nodded his head.

"Would the red man like to pitch his wigwam there?" said Robin,
addressing the Black Swan.

"He has pitched his wigwam here before," replied the Black Swan softly.
"When he first took the White Swan home to be his mate, he came to hunt
here."

"Och! is it the honeymoon ye spint here?" broke in Larry.  "Faix, it's a
purty spot for courtin', and no mistake.  Is that a beehive over there?"
he added, pointing across the lake.

"Why that's our hut--our _palace_," cried Nell, with gleeful look.

"Then the sooner we get down to it, and have supper, the better,"
observed Walter, "for we'll have to work hard to-morrow."

"Come along, then," cried Robin, "an' go you ahead, Roy; beat the track,
and show us the way."

Roy accepted the position of honour.  Nelly followed him, and the whole
band marched off in single file along the shores of Silver Lake.  They
soon reached the hut, and here again Nelly found many interesting points
to dilate upon.  She poured her words into willing and sympathetic ears,
so that she monopolised nearly all the talk during the time that Larry
O'Dowd was preparing supper.

When that meal was being eaten the conversation became more general.
Plans were discussed as to the intended procedure on the morrow, and
various courses of action fixed.  After that, as a matter of course, the
pipes came out, and while these were being smoked, only the talkative
members of the party kept up the conversation at intervals.  Roy and
Nelly having exhausted all they had to say, began to feel desperately
sleepy, and the latter, having laid her head on her father's knee, fell
sound asleep in that position.  Soon the pipes were smoked out, the fire
was replenished, the blankets unrolled; and in a very brief period of
time the whole party was in a state of happy unconsciousness, with the
exception of poor Wapaw, whose wounds made him rather restless, and the
Black Swan, whose duty it was to take the first watch; for it was,
deemed right to set a watch, lest by any chance the Indians should have
followed the hunters' tracks, though this was not probable.

Next morning Robin aroused the sleepers somewhat abruptly by shooting a
grey hen with his rifle from the tent door.

"There's breakfast for you and me, Nelly, at any rate," remarked the
hunter, as he went down to the lake to secure his bird.

"An' won't there be the bones and feathers for the rest of us?" observed
Larry, yawning, "so we won't starve this day, anyhow."

In a few minutes every man was actively engaged in work of some sort or
other.  Robin and Walter prepared fishing-lines from some pieces of
buckskin parchment; Black Swan and Slugs went out to cut wood for making
sledges; Stiff repaired the snow-shoes of the party, or rather assisted
Nelly in this operation; and Larry attended to the preparation of
breakfast.  Wapaw was the only one who lay still, it being thought
better to make him rest, and get strong for the approaching journey.

During the course of the day the lines were tried, and a good number of
fish caught.  Slugs also went off in search of deer, and returned in the
evening with a large stag on his broad shoulders.  This raised the
spirits of the party greatly, and they feasted that night, with much
rejoicing, on venison, marrowbones, and broiled fish!

Thus they spent their time for several days.  One party went regularly
every morning to fish in the ice-holes; another party roamed the woods,
and returned with grouse, or rabbits, and sometimes with deer; while
some remained, part of the day at least, in the hut, mending snow-shoes
and moccasins, and making other preparations.

In the midst of all this busy labour, the shoosking was not forgotten.
One day Robin said to his little daughter, at breakfast, that as they
had got nearly enough of provisions for the journey they would take a
holiday and go and have a shoosk.  The proposal was hailed with delight,
and the whole party went off with the new sledges, and spent the
forenoon in sliding and tumbling down the hills like very children.

At last everything was ready for a start.  The provisions were tightly
fastened on the sledges, which were to be drawn by each of the men in
turn.  Snow-shoes were put on, guns and bows looked to and shouldered,
and on a bright, frosty December morning the hunters left the hut,
struck into the woods, and set out for Fort Enterprise.

At the top of the slope, beside the fallen tree, they stopped with one
consent and gazed back; and there Nelly took her last sad look at Silver
Lake, and sorrowfully said her last farewell.



CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE HAPPIEST MEETING OF ALL.

The snow was driving through the forests and over the plains of the
North American wilderness; the wind was shrieking among the tree-tops,
and whirling the drift in great clouds high up into the frosty air; and
the sun was setting in a glow of fiery red, when, on the last day of the
year, Robin Gore and his followers came to an abrupt halt, and, with one
consent, admitted that "the thing was impossible."

"We can't do it, boys," said Robin, resting his rifle against a tree;
"so it's o' no use to try.  The Fort is good ten miles off, an' the
children are dead beat--"

"No they ain't," interrupted Roy, whose tone and aspect, however, proved
that his father's statement was true; "at least _I'm_ not beat yet--I'm
game for two or three hours more."

"Well, lad, p'raps ye are, but Nelly ain't; so we'll camp here, an' take
'em by surprise in the morning early."

Nelly, who had been carried on the backs of those who had broadest
shoulders during the last dozen miles, smiled faintly when spoken to,
and said she was "ve-y s'eepy!"

So they set to work in the usual style, and were soon comfortably seated
in their snowy encampment.

Next morning before dawn Robin awoke them.

"Ho!" he cried, "get up, lads, look alive!  A happy New Year to 'ee all,
young an' old, red an' white.  Kiss me, Nell, dear--a shake o' yer paw,
Roy.  An' it's a good New Year's day, too, in more ways than one, praise
the Almighty for that."

The whole party was astir immediately, and that feeling of kindly
brotherhood which usually pervades the hearts of men on the first day of
a new year, induced them to shake hands heartily all round.

"You'll eat your New Year's dinner at home, after all," said Walter to
Nelly.

"Sure, an' it's a happy 'ooman yer mother'll be this good day," said
Larry, as he stirred up the embers of the fire, and blew them into a
flame.

The kettle was boiled, and a good breakfast eaten, because, although it
is usually the custom for hunters to start on their day's journey, and
accomplish a good many miles of it before breakfast, they had
consideration for Roy and Nelly, both of whom were still suffering a
little from the fatigue of the previous day.  They hoped to be at Fort
Enterprise in about four hours, and were anxious to arrive fresh.

The sun was rising when they reached the top of a ridge, whence they
could obtain a distant view of the Fort.

"Here we are _at home_, Nelly," said Robin, stooping down to kiss his
child on the forehead.

"Darling, _darling_ mother!" was all that poor Nelly could say, as she
tried in vain to see the Fort though the tears which sprang to her eyes.

"Don't you see it, Nell?" said Roy, passing his arm round his sister's
waist.

"No, I don't," cried Nelly, brushing the tears away; "oh, _do_ let us go
on!"

Robin patted her on the had, and at once resumed the march.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

That morning Mrs Gore rose from her bed about the saddest woman in the
land.  Her mind flew back to the last New Year's day, when her children
were lost to her, as she feared, for ever.  The very fact that people
are usually more jocose, and hearty, and happy, on the first day of the
year, was sufficient to make her more sorrowful than usual; so she got
up and sighed, and then, not being a woman of great self-restraint, she
wept.

In a few minutes she dried her eyes, and took up her Bible, and, as she
read its blessed pages, she felt comfort--such as the world can neither
give nor take away--gradually stealing over her soul.  When she met her
kinsman and his friends at breakfast she was comparatively cheerful, and
returned their hearty salutation with some show of a reciprocal spirit.

"Jeff," said Mrs Gore, with a slight sigh, "it's a year, this day,
since my two darlings were lost in the snow."

"D'ye say so?" observed Jeff, as he sat down to his morning meal, and
commenced eating with much voracity.

Jeff was not an unkind man, but he was very stupid.  He said nothing
more for some time, but, after consuming nearly a pound of venison
steak, he observed suddenly--

"Wall, I guess it wor a bad business that--worn't it, missus?"

"It was," responded Mrs Gore; and, feeling that she had no hope of
meeting with sympathy from Jeff, she relapsed into silence.  After a
time, she said--

"But we must get up a feast, Jeff.  It won't do to let New Year's day
pass without a good dinner."

"That's true as gosp'l," said Jeff.  "Feed up is my motto, always.  It
don't much matter wot turns up, if ye don't feed up yer fit for nothin';
but, contrairy-wise, if ye do feed up, why yer ready for anythin' or
nothin', as the case may be."

Having given vent to this sentiment, Jeff finished his meal with a
prolonged draught of tea.

"Wall, now," said he, filling his pipe, "we've got enough o' deer's meat
an' other things to make a pretty fair feast, missus, but my comrades
and we will go an' try to git somethin' fresh for dinner.  If we git
nothin' else we'll git a appetite and that's worth a good long march any
day; so, lads, if--"

Jeff's speech was interrupted here by a sudden and tremendous outburst
of barking on the part of the dogs of the establishment.  He sprang up
and hastened to the door, followed by his companions and Mrs Gore.

"Injuns, mayhap; see to your guns, boys, we can niver be sure o' the
reptiles."

"They're friendly," observed one of Jeff's friends, as they stood at the
Fort gate; "enemies never come on in that straightforward fashion."

"Not so sure o' that," said Jeff.  "I've seen redskins do somethin' o'
that kind when they meant mischief; but, if my eyes ain't telling lies,
I'd say there were white men there."

"Ay, an' young folk, too," remarked one of the others.

"Young folk!" exclaimed Mrs Gore, as she shaded her eyes from the sun
with her hand, and gazed earnestly at the band which was approaching.

Suddenly one of them ran a little in advance of the rest, and waved a
handkerchief.  The figure was a small one.  A faint cheer was heard in
the distance.  It was followed, or rather accompanied, by a loud, manly,
and well-known shout.

Mrs Gore grew pale, and would have fallen to the ground had not Jeff
caught and supported her.

"Why, I _do_ declare it's Robin--an'--eh! if there beant the children
wi' 'im!"

The advancing party broke into a run as he spoke, another loud cheer
burst forth, and in a few seconds Nelly was locked once more in her dear
mother's arms.



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

CONCLUSION.

It is not necessary to say that there was joy--powerful, inexpressible--
within the wooden walls of Fort Enterprise on that New Year's morning,
and a New Year's hymn of praise welled up continually from the glad
mother's heart, finding expression sometimes in her voice, but oftener
in her eyes, as she gazed upon the faces of her dear ones, the lost and
found.

The flag at Fort Enterprise, which had not flaunted its red field from
the flagstaff since the sad day--that day twelve months exactly--when
the children were lost, once more waved gaily in the frosty air, and
glowed in the beams of the wintry sun.  The sound of joyful revelry,
which had not been heard within the walls of the Fort for a long, long
year, once again burst forth with such energy that one might have been
led to suppose its being pent up so long had intensified its power.

The huge fireplace roared, and blazed, and crackled, with a log so
massive that no other Yule log in the known world could have held a
candle to it; and in, on, and around that fire were pots, pans, and
goblets innumerable, all of which hissed, and spluttered, and steamed at
Larry O'Dowd, as if with glee at the sight of his honest face once again
presiding over his own peculiar domain.  And the parlour of Fort
Enterprise--that parlour which we have mentioned as being Robin's
dining-room and drawing-room, besides being his bedroom and his
kitchen--was converted into a leafy bower by means of pine branches and
festooned evergreens, and laid out for a feast the like of which had not
been seen there for many a day, and which was transcendently more
magnificent than that memorable New Year's day dinner which had been
cooked, but not eaten, just three hundred and sixty-five days before.

In short, everything in and about Fort Enterprise bore evidence that its
inmates meant to rejoice and make merry on that first day of a new year,
as it was meet they should do under such favourable circumstances.

Jeff Gore had shot a deer not many days before, and one of its fat
haunches was to be the great dish of the feast; but Robin said that it
was not enough: so, after the first congratulations were over, he and
Walter, and Slugs, and Black Swan, set off into the forest, and ere long
returned with several brace of grouse, and a few rabbits.  Roy, with a
very sly look, had asked leave to go and have a walk on snow-shoes in
the woods with Nelly before dinner, but his father threatened to lock
him up in the cellar, so he consented to remain at home for that day and
assist his mother.

"Now, Nelly, you and Roy will come help me to prepare the feast," said
Mrs Gore, whose eyes were swollen with joyful weeping till they looked
like a couple of inflamed oysters; "not that there's much to do, for,
now that Larry is come back, we'll leave everything to him except the
pl-plum--poo--poo--ding--oh! _my_ darling!"

Here Mrs Gore broke down for the fifteenth time, and, catching Nelly to
her bosom, hugged her.

"Darling mother!" sighed Nelly.

"Och! but it's a sight good for sore eyes, anyhow," exclaimed Larry,
looking up from his occupation among the steaming pots and pans.

Wapaw, who was the only other member of the party who chose to remain in
the house during the forenoon of that day, sat smoking his pipe in the
chimney corner, and regarded the whole scene with that look of stoical
solemnity which is peculiar to North American Indians.

"Come, I say, this'll never do, mother," cried Roy, going to the
flour-barrel which stood in a corner.  "If we're to help you wi' that
'ere poodin', let's have at it at once."

Thus admonished, Mrs Gore and her recovered progeny set to work and
fabricated a plum-pudding, which was nearly as hard, almost as heavy as,
and much larger than a sixty-four pound cannon ball.  It would have
killed with indigestion half a regiment of artillery, but it could not
affect the hardened frames of these men of the backwoods!

In course of time the board was spread, the viands smoked upon it, and
the united party set to work.  Mrs Gore sat at the head of the table,
with Nelly on one side and Roy on the other.  Robin sat at the foot,
supported by the White Swan on his right, and Wapaw on his left.  Ranged
between these were Walter, Slugs, the Black Swan, Jeff Gore, Obadiah
Stiff, the two other strangers who came with Jeff, and Larry O'Dowd--for
Larry acted the part of cook only, and did not pretend to "wait."  After
he had placed the viands on the table, he sat down with the rest.  These
backwoodsmen ignored waiters.  They passed their plates from hand to
hand, and when anything was wanted by any one he rose to fetch it
himself.

After the plates were cleared away, the tea-kettle was put on the table.
In some parts of the backwoods spirits are (fortunately) so difficult
to procure, that hunters and trappers live for many months without
tasting a drop, and get into the habit of doing entirely without
intoxicating drink of any kind.  Robin had no spirits except animal
spirits, but he had plenty of tea.  When it was poured out into huge
cups, which might have been styled small slop-basins, and sweetened and
passed round, Robin applied his knuckles to the table to command
silence.

"Friends," said he, "I niver wos much o' a speechifier, but I could
always manage to blurt out my meanin' somehow.  Wot I've got to say to
you this day is, I'm thankful to the Almighty for givin' me back my
childer, an' I'm right glad to see ye all under my roof this Noo Year's
