surprise mingled with alarm.

"Eh! what, where?" cried Glynn, throwing forward his musket--for he had
taken the precaution to carry one with him, not knowing what he might
meet with on such a coast.

"The snake! look--oh!"

At that moment a huge black snake, about ten feet long, showed itself in
the grass.  Glynn took aim at once, but the piece, being an old
flint-lock, missed fire.  Before he could again take aim the
loathsome-looking reptile had glided into the underwood, which in most
places was so overgrown with the rank and gigantic vegetation of the
tropics as to be quite impenetrable.

"Ha! he's gone, Ailie!" cried Glynn, in a tone of disappointment, as he
put fresh priming into the pan of his piece.  "We must be careful in
walking here, it seems.  This wretched old musket!  Lucky for us that
our lives did not depend on it.  I wonder if it was a poisonous
serpent?"

"Perhaps it was," said Ailie, with a look of deep solemnity, as she took
her companion's left hand, and trotted along by his side.  "Are not all
serpents poisonous?"

"Oh dear, no.  Why, there are some kinds that are quite harmless.  But
as I don't know which are and which are not, we must look upon all as
enemies until we become more knowing."

Presently they came to the mouth of a river--one of those sluggish
streams on the African coast, which suggest the idea of malaria and the
whole family of low fevers.  It glided through a mangrove swamp, where
the tree seemed to be standing on their roots, which served the purpose
of stilts to keep them out of the mud.  The river was oily, and
sluggish, and hot-looking, and its mud-banks were slimy and liquid, so
that it was not easy to say whether the water of the river was mud, or
the mud on the bank was water.  It was a place that made one
involuntarily think of creeping monsters, and crawling objects, and
slimy things!

"Look! oh! oh! such a darling pet!" exclaimed Ailie, as they stood near
the banks of this river wondering what monster would first cleave the
muddy waters, and raise its hideous head.  She pointed to the bough of a
dead tree near which they stood, and on which sat the "darling pet"
referred to.  It was a very small monkey with white whiskers; a dumpy
little thing, that looked at them with an expression of surprise quite
equal in intensity to their own.

Seeing that it was discovered, the "darling pet" opened its little
mouth, and uttered a succession of "Ohs!" that rendered Ailie's
exclamations quite insignificant by comparison.  They were sharp and
short, and rapidly uttered, while, at the same time, two rows of most
formidable teeth were bared, along with the gums that held them.

At this Ailie and her companion burst into a fit of irrepressible
laughter, whereupon the "darling pet" put itself into such a passion--
grinned, and coughed, and gasped, and shook the tree, and writhed, and
glared, to such an extent that Glynn said he thought it would burst, and
Ailie agreed that it was very likely.  Finding that this terrible
display of fury had no effect on the strangers, the "darling pet" gave
utterance to a farewell shriek of passion, and, bounding nimbly into the
woods, disappeared.

"Oh, _what_ a funny beast," said Ailie, sitting down on a stone, and
drying her eyes, which had filled with tears from excessive laughter.

"Indeed it was," said Glynn.  "It's my opinion that a monkey is the
funniest beast in the world."

"No, Glynn; a kitten's funnier," said Ailie, with a degree of emphasis
that showed she had considered the subject well, and had fully made up
her mind in regard to it long ago.  "I think a kitten's the _very_
funniest beast in all the whole world."

"Well, perhaps it is," said Glynn thoughtfully.

"Did you ever see _three_ kittens together?" asked Ailie.

"No; I don't think I ever did.  I doubt if I have seen even two
together.  Why?"

"Oh! because they are so very, very funny.  Sit down beside me, and I'll
tell you about three kittens I once had.  They were very little--at
least they were little before they got big."

Glynn laughed.

"Oh, you know what I mean.  They were able to play when they were very
little, you know."

"Yes, yes, I understand.  Go on."

"Well, two were grey, and one was white and grey, but most of it was
white; and when they went to play, one always hid itself to watch, and
then the other two began, and came up to each other with little jumps,
and their backs up and tails curved, and hair all on end, glaring at
each other, and pretending that they were so angry.  Do you know, Glynn,
I really believe they sometimes forgot it was pretence, and actually
became angry.  But the fun was, that, when the two were just going to
fly at each other, the third one, who had been watching, used to dart
out and give them _such_ a fright--a _real_ fright, you know--which made
them jump, oh! three times their own height up into the air, and they
came down again with a _fuff_ that put the third one in a fright too; so
that they all scattered away from each other as if they had gone quite
mad.  What's that?"

"It's a fish, I think," said Glynn, rising and going towards the river,
to look at the object that had attracted his companion's attention.
"It's a shark, I do believe."

In a few seconds the creature came so close that they could see it quite
distinctly; and on a more careful inspection, they observed that the
mouth of the river was full of these ravenous monsters.  Soon after they
saw monsters of a still more ferocious aspect; for while they were
watching the sharks, two crocodiles put up their snouts, and crawled
sluggishly out of the water upon a mud-bank, where they lay down,
apparently with the intention of taking a nap in the sunshine.  They
were too far off, however, to be well seen.

"Isn't it strange, Glynn, that there are such ugly beasts in the world?"
said Ailie.  "I wonder why God made them?"

"So do I," said Glynn, looking at the child's thoughtful face in some
surprise.  "I suppose they must be of some sort of use."

"Oh! yes, _of course_ they are," rejoined Ailie quickly.  "Aunt Martha
and Aunt Jane used to tell me that every creature was made by God for
some good purpose; and when I came to the crocodile in my book, they
said it was certainly of use too, though they did not know what.  I
remember it very well, because I was _so_ surprised to hear that Aunt
Martha and Aunt Jane did not know _everything_."

"No doubt Aunt Martha and Aunt Jane were right," said Glynn, with a
smile.  "I confess, however, that crocodiles seem to me to be of no
other use than to kill and eat up everything that comes within the reach
of their terrible jaws.  But, indeed, now I think of it, the very same
may be said of man, for _he_ kills and eats up at least everything that
he _wants_ to put into his jaws."

"So he does," said Ailie; "isn't it funny?"

"Isn't what funny?" asked Glynn.

"That we should be no better than crocodiles--at least, I mean about
eating."

"You forget, Ailie, we cook our food."

"Oh! so we do.  I did not remember to think of that.  That's a great
difference, indeed."

Leaving Glynn and his little charge to philosophise on the resemblance
between men and crocodiles, we shall now return to Tim Rokens and Phil
Briant, whom we left in the trader's cottage.

The irate Irishman had been calmed down by reason and expostulation, and
had again been roused to great indignation several times since we left
him, by the account of things connected with the slave-trade, given him
by the trader, who, although he had no interest in it himself, did not
feel very much aggrieved by the sufferings he witnessed around him.

"You don't mane to tell me, now, that _whalers_ comes in here for
slaves, do ye?" said Briant, placing his two fists on his two knees, and
thrusting his head towards the trader, who admitted that he meant to say
that; and that he meant, moreover, to add, that the thing was by no
means of rare occurrence--that whaling ships occasionally ran into that
very port on their way south, shipped a cargo of negroes, sold them at
the nearest slave-buying port they could make on the American coast, and
then proceeded on their voyage, no one being a whit the wiser.

"You don't mean it?" remarked Tim Rokens, crossing his legs and devoting
himself to his pipe, with the air of a man who mourned the depravity of
his species, but did not feel called upon to disturb his equanimity very
much because of it.

Phil Briant clenched his teeth, and glared.

"Indeed I do mean it," reiterated the trader.  "Would you believe it,
there was one whaler put in here, and what does he do but go and invite
a lot o' free blacks aboard to have a blow-out; and no sooner did he get
them down into the hold then he shut down the hatches, sailed away, and
sold 'em every one."

"Ah! morther, couldn't I burst?" groaned Phil; "an' ov coorse they left
a lot o' fatherless children and widders behind 'em."

"They did; but all the widders are married again, and most of the
children are grown up."

Briant looked as if he did not feel quite sure whether he ought to
regard this as a comforting piece of information or the reverse, and
wisely remained silent.

"And now you must excuse me if I leave you to ramble about alone for
some time, as I have business to transact; meanwhile I'll introduce you
to a nigger who will show you about the place, and one who, if I mistake
not, will gladly accompany you to sea as steward's assistant."

The trader opened a door which led to the back part of his premises, and
shouted to a stout negro who was sawing wood there, and who came forward
with alacrity.

"Ho!  Neepeelootambo, go take these gentlemen round about the village,
and let them see all that is to be seen."

"Yes, massa."

"And they've got something to say to you about going to sea--would you
like to go?"

The negro grinned, and as his mouth was of the largest possible size, it
is not exaggeration to say that the grin extended from ear to ear, but
he made no other reply.

"Well, please yourself.  You're a free man--you may do as you choose."

Neepeelootambo, who was almost naked, having only a small piece of cloth
wrapped round his waist and loins, grinned again, displaying a double
row of teeth worthy of a shark in so doing, and led his new friends from
the house.

"Now," said Tim Rokens, turning to the negro, and pointing along the
shore, "we'll go along this way and jaw the matter over.  Business
first, and pleasure, if ye can get it, arterwards--them's my notions,
Nip--Nip--Nippi--what's your name?"

"Coo Tumble, I think," suggested Briant.

"Ay, Nippiloo Bumble--wot a jaw-breaker! so git along, old boy."

The negro, who was by no means an "old boy," but a stalwart man in the
prime of life, stepped out, and as they walked along, both Rokens and
Briant did their best to persuade him to ship on board the _Red Eric_,
but without success.  They were somewhat surprised as well as chagrined,
having been led to expect that the man would consent at once.  But no
alluring pictures of the delights of seafaring life, or the pleasures
and excitements of the whale-fishery, had the least effect on their
sable companion.  Even sundry shrewd hints, thrown out by Phil Briant,
that "the steward had always command o' the wittles, and that his
assistant would only have to help himself when convanient," failed to
move him.

"Well, Nippi-Boo-Tumble," cried Tim Rokens, who in his disappointment
unceremoniously contracted his name, "it's my opinion--private opinion,
mark'ee--that you're a ass, an' you'll come for to repent of it."

"Troth, Nippi-Bumble, he's about right," added Briant coaxingly.  "Come
now, avic, wot's the raisin ye won't go?  Sure we ain't blackguards
enough to ax ye to come for to be sold; it's all fair and above board.
Why won't ye, now?"

The negro stopped, and turning towards them, drew himself proudly up;
then, as if a sudden thought had occurred to him, he advanced a step and
held up his forefinger to impose silence.

"You no tell what I go to say? at least, not for one, two day."

"Niver a word, honour bright," said Phil, in a confidential tone, while
Rokens expressed the same sentiment by means of an emphatic wink and
nod.

"You mus' know," said the negro, earnestly, "me expec's to be made a
king!"

"A wot?" exclaimed both his companions in the same breath, and very much
in the same tone.

"A king."

"Wot?" said Rokens; "d'ye mean, a ruler of this here country?"

Neepeelootambo nodded his head so violently that it was a marvel it
remained on his shoulders.

"Yis.  Ho! ho! ho! 'xpec's to be a king."

"And when are ye to be crowned, Bumble?" inquired Briant, rather
sceptically, as they resumed their walk.

"Oh, me no say me _goin'_ to be king; me only _'xpec's_ dat."

"Werry good," returned Rokens; "but wot makes ye for to expect it?"

"Aha!  Me berry clebber fellow--know most ebbery ting.  Me hab doo'd
good service to dis here country.  Me can fight like one leopard, and me
hab kill great few elephant and gorilla.  Not much mans here hab shoot
de gorilla, him sich terriferick beast; 'bove five foot six tall, and
bigger round de breast dan you or me--dat is a great true fact.  Also,
me can spok Englis'."

"An' so you expec's they're goin' to make you a king for all that?"

"Yis, dat is fat me 'xpec's, for our old king be just dead; but dey
nebber tell who dey going to make king till dey do it.  I not more sure
ob it dan the nigger dat walk dare before you."

Neepeelootambo pointed as he spoke to a negro who certainly had a more
kingly aspect than any native they had yet seen.  He was a perfect
giant, considerably above six feet high, and broad in proportion.  He
wore no clothing on the upper part of his person, but his legs were
encased in a pair of old canvas trousers, which had been made for a man
of ordinary stature, so that his huge bony ankles were largely exposed
to view.

Just as Phil and Rokens stopped to take a good look at him before
passing on, a terrific yell issued from the bushes, and instantly after,
a negro ran towards the black giant and administered to him a severe
kick on the thigh, following it up with a cuff on the side of the head,
at the same time howling something in the native tongue, which our
friends of course did not understand.  This man was immediately followed
by three other blacks, one of whom pulled the giant's hair, the other
pulled his nose, and the third spat in his face!

It is needless to remark that the sailors witnessed this unprovoked
assault with unutterable amazement.  But the most remarkable part of it
was, that the fellow, instead of knocking all his assailants down, as he
might have done without much trouble, quietly submitted to the
indignities heaped upon him; nay, he even smiled upon his tormentors,
who increased in numbers every minute, running out from among the bushes
and surrounding the unoffending man, and uttering wild shouts as they
maltreated him.

"Wot's he bin doin'?" inquired Rokens, turning to his black companion.
But Rokens received no answer, for Neepeelootambo was looking on at the
scene with an expression so utterly woe-begone and miserable that one
would imagine he was himself suffering the rough usage he witnessed.

"Arrah! ye don't appear to be chairful," said Briant, laughing, as he
looked in the negro's face.  "This is a quare counthrie, an' no
mistake;--it seems to be always blowin' a gale o' surprises.  Wot's
wrong wid ye, Bumble?"

The negro groaned.

"Sure that may be a civil answer, but it's not o' much use.  Hallo! what
air they doin' wid the poor cratur now?"

As he spoke the crowd seized the black giant by the arms and neck and
hair, and dragged him away towards the village, leaving our friends in
solitude.

"A very purty little scene," remarked Phil Briant when they were out of
sight; "very purty indade, av we only knowed wot it's all about."

If the surprise of the two sailors was great at what they had just
witnessed, it was increased tenfold by the subsequent behaviour of their
negro companion.

That eccentric individual suddenly checked his groans, gave vent to a
long, deep sigh, and assuming a resigned expression of countenance, rose
up and said--"Ho!  It all ober now, massa."

"I do believe," remarked Rokens, looking gravely at his shipmate, "that
the feller's had an attack of the mollygrumbles, an's got better all of
a suddint."

"No, massa, dat not it.  But me willin' to go wid you now to de sea."

"Eh? willin' to go?  Why, Nippi-Too-Cumble, wot a rum customer you are,
to be sure!"

"Yis, massa," rejoined the negro.  "Me not goin' to be king now, anyhow;
so it ob no use stoppin' here.  Me go to sea."

"Not goin' to be king?  How d'ye know that?"

"'Cause dat oder nigger, him be made king in a berry short time.  You
mus' know, dat w'en dey make wan king in dis here place, de peeple
choose de man; but dey not let him know.  He may guess if him please--
like me--but p'raps him guess wrong--like me!  Ho! ho!  Den arter dey
fix on de man, dey run at him and kick him, as you hab seen dem do, and
