The Bu'ster came down on it like lightning with the blot-sheet, and
squashed it into an irregular mass bigger than half-a-crown.

For this he received another open-hander on the ear, and was summarily
dismissed to the sea-beach.

By this time the family tea-hour had arrived, so Mrs Gaff proposed an
adjournment until after tea.  Tottie, who was now blotting the letter
with an occasional tear, seconded the motion, which was carried by
acclamation.  While the meal was being prepared, Gaff fondled Tottie
until she was restored to her wonted equanimity, so that after tea the
task was resumed with spirit.  Words and ideas seemed to flow more
easily, and the letter was finally concluded, amid many sighs of relief,
about bed-time.

Much blotted, and almost unreadable though it was, I think it worthy of
being presented to my readers without correction.

"I beggs to stait that ittle bee for yoor int'rest for to look arter
that air gurl cald Eme as was left yoor doar sum dais bak, if yoo doant
ittle bee wors for yer, yood giv yer eer an noas too to no wot i nos
abowt that gurl, it's not bostin nor yet threttenin I am, no, I'm in
Downrite arnist wen I sais as yool bee sorrie if yoo doant do it."

(This part was at first written, "if you doant look arter the gurl," but
by the advice of Mrs Gaff the latter part was cut out, and "doant do
it" substituted as being more hambigoo-ous and alarming!  The letter
continued:--)

"Now sur, i must cloas, not becaws my papers dun, no nor yet my idees,
but becaws a nods as good as a wink--yoo no the rest.  Wot ive said is
troo as gospl it's of no use tryn to find owt hoo _i_ am, caws whi--yoo
kant, and if yoo cood it wood doo yoo no good.

"Yoors to comand,

"The riter."

When this letter was placed in Mr Stuart's hands the following morning
he was in the act of concluding a conversation with Haco Barepoles.

"Well, Haco," he said, regarding the ill-folded and dirty epistle with
suspicion, as it lay on the table before him; "of course I have no wish
that men should risk their lives in my service, so you may lay up the
sloop in dock and have her overhauled; but I have always been under the
impression until now that you were a fearless seaman.  However, do as
you please."

Mr Stuart knew well the character of the man with whom he had to do,
and spoke thus with design.  Haco fired at once, but he displayed no
temper.

"Very likely I _am_ gittin' summat fusty an' weak about the buzzum," he
said, almost sadly.  "A man can't expect to keep young and strong for
ever, Mr Stuart.  Hows'ever, I'll look at her bottom again, an' if she
can float, I'll set sail with the first o' the ebb day arter to-morrow.
Good-day, sir."  Haco bowed and left the room quite modestly, for he
hated the very appearance of boasting; but when he was in the passage
his teeth snapped together like nut-crackers as he compressed his lips,
and on gaining the street he put on his hat with a bang that would have
ruinously crushed it had it not been made of some glazed material that
was evidently indestructible.

Going straight to the docks he gave orders to the carpenter to have all
tight before next morning--this in a tone that the carpenter knew from
experience meant, "fail if you dare."

Then he went up to the Home, and ordered his men and the Russians to get
ready for sea.  Thereafter he went away at full speed to Cove, with his
red locks and his huge coat-tails flowing in the breeze.  Rapping at the
door he was bid to enter.

"How are 'ee, lad?" said Haco to Uncle John, who was seated at the
fireside smoking.

"Thank'ee, rather shaky.  I must ha' bin pretty nigh finished that
night; but I feel as if I'd be all taught and ready for sea in a few
days."

"That's right!" said Haco heartily.  "Is Gaff hereabouts to-day?"

The man in request entered at the moment.

"Good-day, skipper," said Gaff, "I seed 'ee comin'.  Ony news?"

"Ay, the `Coffin' starts day arter to-morrow.  I just run down to let
you know.  Sink or swim, fair or foul, it's up anchor with the first o'
the mornin' ebb.  I'm goin' up to see Cap'n Bingley now.  Not a moment
to spare."

"Avast heavin'," said Gaff, pulling on a pilot coat; "I'm goin' with
'ee.  Goin' to jine the Shipwrecked Mariners' Society.  Since my last
swim I've bin thinkin' that three shillin's a year is but a small sum,
and the good that they'd do to my widder and childer, if I was drownded,
would be worth while havin'."

"Right, lad, right; every sailor and fisherman should jine it.  But come
along; no time for talkin' here.  My respects to the missus.  Good-bye,
lad."

Shaking hands with Uncle John, the restless skipper once more put on the
imperishable hat with inconceivable violence and left the hut, followed
by his friend.

Returning to Mr Stuart, we find him perusing the ambiguous letter.  His
first glance at the contents called forth a look of indignation, which
was succeeded by one of surprise, and that was followed by a smile of
contempt, mingled with amusement.

"Kenneth," he said, tossing the letter to his son, who entered at the
moment, "can you make anything of that?"

"Not much," replied Kenneth, who at once guessed that it came from Gaff.
"The persons who left the child here would appear to be mad, and
anxious to get rid of their own offspring.  But I came to tell you of
sad forebodings that fill my breast, father."

"Don't give way to forebodings, Kenneth," said the father gravely; "it
is unmanly, unreasonable."

"Well, suspicions, if you think the word more appropriate.  I fear much,
_very_ much, that my dear sister and poor Tom Graham were lost in the
last storm--"

"Why do you omit the child?" asked Mr Stuart quietly, almost coldly.

"I was thinking only of those whom I had known and loved when I spoke,"
replied Kenneth with some emotion.

"There is no _certainty_ that they are lost," observed Mr Stuart.

Kenneth thought there was a slight tremor in his father's voice, but, on
glancing at his stern features, he felt that he must have been mistaken.

"We know that the ship was telegraphed as having been seen in the
Channel; we have heard that they were passengers in her, and nothing has
been heard or seen of her since the night of the storm."

"There is no _certainty_ in all that," reiterated the other; "they may
not have come in that vessel; if they did, some of them may have
escaped.  We cannot tell."

Mr Stuart looked so cold and so sternly immovable as he said this,
while carelessly turning over some papers, that Kenneth, who had come
prepared to reveal all, resolved to keep his secret, believing that
there was no pity left in his father's breast.

As he lay awake and sorrowing that night he heard his father's step
pacing to and fro incessantly during the whole night, and hoped that the
loss he had in all probability sustained would break up the ice; but
next morning at breakfast he was as cold as ever.  He looked very pale,
indeed, but he was sterner and even more irascible than usual in regard
to the merest trifles, so Kenneth's resolution not to confide in his
father was confirmed.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE BU'STER WILLS TO ACCOMPLISH MISCHIEF, AND GETS INTO TROUBLE.

"At sea."--How differently do human beings regard that phrase!  To one
it arouses feelings akin to rapture; to another it is suggestive of
heavings and horror.  To him whose physical condition is easily and
disagreeably affected by aquatic motion, "at sea" savours of bad smells
and misery.  To him who sings of the intensity of his love for "a ride
on the fierce, foaming, bursting tide," "at sea" sounds like the sweet
ringing of a silver bell floating towards him, as if from afar, fraught
with the fragrance and melody of distant climes--such as coral isles,
icy mountains, and golden sands.

Let us regard the phrase in its pleasant aspect just now, good reader.

I have always loved the sea myself, from the hour I first set foot on
board a man-of-war and skylarked with the middies, to that sad and
memorable day when, under the strong--I might almost say irresistible--
influence of my strong-minded wife, I bade adieu to the royal navy for
ever, and retired into private life.  Alas!  But what is the use of
sighing?  If a man _will_ get born in his wrong century, he ought to lay
his account with being obliged to suffer much from the strange, I had
almost said childish, fallacies, follies, and inconsistencies peculiar
to the more early period in which his lot has been cast by mistake.

You see, reader, I have accepted my position.  There is a bare
possibility that those who have assigned it to me may be wrong, but I
have long ago ceased to dispute that point.

At sea!  Haco's sloop is there now, just out of sight of land, although
not far from it, and resting on as glassy a sheet of water as is ever
presented by the ocean in a deep dead calm.  Haco himself, big, hairy,
jovial, ruddy, is seated on the after skylight, the sole occupant of the
deck.

To look at him one might fancy that Neptune having found a deserted
ship, had clambered upon deck and sat him down to take a complacent view
of his wide domains, and enjoy a morning pipe.

It is early morning, and the other inhabitants of that floating house
are asleep below.

The "Coal-Coffin," albeit an unseaworthy vessel, is a picturesque
object.  Its dirty sails are of a fine rich colour, because of their
very dirtiness.  Its weather-worn and filthy spars, and hull and
rigging, possess a harmony of _tone_ which can only be acquired by age.
Its cordage being rotten and very limp, hangs, on that account, all the
more gracefully in waving lines of beauty and elegant festoons; the reef
points hang quite straight, and patter softly on the sails--in short,
the _tout ensemble_ of the little craft is eminently picturesque--
draped, as it were, with the mellowness of antiquity; and the whole--
hull, spars, sails, cordage, and reef points,--clearly and sharply
reflected in the depths below.

"Wot a splendid mornin'!" said Stephen Gaff, putting his head and
shoulders out of the after hatchway, and yawning violently.

"So 'tis, shipmet," responded the skipper, "a'most too butiful for this
world."

Both men spoke in subdued tones, as if unwilling to disturb the
delightful stillness of nature.  Gaff, having slowly raised himself out
of the hole in the deck which served as a door to the bandbox, termed,
out of courtesy, the cabin, looked up at the mast-head to see if the
vane indicated any wind; then he gazed slowly round the horizon.
Meeting with nothing particular there to arrest his eyes, he let them
fall on Haco, who was gazing dreamily at the bowl of his German pipe.

"Dead calm," said Gaff.

"Won't last long," said Haco.

"Won't it?"

"No.  Glass fallin' fast."

This seemed to be as much mental food as Gaff could comfortably digest
at that time, for he made no rejoinder, but, drawing a short black pipe
from his vest-pocket, sat down beside his friend, and filled and smoked
it in silence.

"How's the Roosians?" he inquired, after a long pause.

"All square," said the skipper, who was addicted somewhat to figurative
language and hyperbole in the form of slang, "another week in the
doctor's hands, an' the grub of the London Home, will set 'em up taught
an' trim as ever."

"Goin' to blow hard, think 'ee?" asked Gaff.

"Great guns," said Haco, puffing a cloud of smoke from his mouth, which
was at that time not a bad imitation of a _little_ gun.

"Soon?" inquired Gaff.

"P'r'aps yes, p'r'aps no."

Once more the seamen relapsed into a silence which was not again broken
until two of the crew and several Russians came on deck.

Haco gave orders to have the topsail reefed, and then commencing to pace
to and fro on the small deck, devoted himself entirely to smoke and
meditation.

Soon after, there was a loud cheer from Billy Gaff.  The Bu'ster had
suddenly awakened from an unbroken sleep of twelve hours, tumbled
incontinently out of his berth, rushed up the ladder, thrust his head
above the hatchway, and, feeling the sweet influences of that lovely
morning, vented his joy in the cheer referred to.

Billy had begged hard to be taken to London, and his father, thinking
that, the sooner he began the seafaring life to which he was destined,
the better, had consented to take him.

Billy willed to accomplish a great number of pieces of mischief during
the five minutes which he spent in gazing breathlessly round the ship
and out upon the glittering sea; but he was surrounded by so many
distracting novelties, and the opportunities for mischief were so
innumerable, that, for the first time in his life, he felt perplexed,
and absolutely failed to accomplish anything for a considerable time.

This calm, however, like the calm of nature, was not destined to last
long.

"Daddy," said the cherub suddenly, "I'm a-goin' up the shrouds."

"Very good, my lad," said Gaff, "ye'll tumble down likely, but it don't
much matter."

Billy clambered up the side, and seized the shrouds, but missing his
foothold at the first step, he fell down sitting-wise, from a height of
three feet.

There was a sounding thud on the deck, followed by a sharp gasp, and the
boy sat staring before him, considering, apparently, whether it were
necessary or not to cry in order to relieve his feelings.  Finding that
it was not, he swallowed his heart with an effort, got up, and tried it
again.

The second effort was more successful.

"That'll do, lad, come down," said Gaff, when his son had got half-way
up the mast, and paused to look down, with a half-frightened expression.

Contrary to all precedent, Billy came down, and remained quiet for ten
minutes.  Then he willed to go out on the bowsprit, but, being observed
in a position of great danger thereon, was summarily collared by a
sailor, and hauled inboard.  He was about to hurl defiance in the teeth
of the seaman, and make a second effort on the bowsprit, when Haco
Barepoles thrust his red head up the after-hatch, and sang
out--"breakfast!"

"Breakfast, Billy," repeated Gaff.

To which the cherub responded by rushing aft with a cheer, and
descending the square hole after his father.

Having been horribly sea-sick the first day of his voyage, and having
now quite recovered, Billy was proportionably ravenous, and it was a
long time before he ceased to demand and re-demand supplies of biscuit,
butter, and tea.  With appetite appeased at last, however, he returned
to the deck, and, allowing quarter of an hour for digestion and
reflection, began to consider what should next be done.

The opportunity for some bold stroke was a rare one, for the crew,
consisting of five men and a boy, were all forward, earnestly
endeavouring to pick acquaintance by means of signs with the
convalescent Russians, while Gaff and Haco were still below at
breakfast, so that Billy had the after part of the sloop all to himself.

He began operations by attempting to get at the needle of the compass,
but finding that this was secured powerfully by means of glass and
brass, he changed his mind, and devoted himself heart and soul to the
wheel.  Turning it round until the helm was hard down, he looked up at
the sails, and with some curiosity awaited the result, but the vessel
having no motion no result followed.

Failing in this he forced the wheel round with all his might and let it
go suddenly, so that it spun round with the recoil, and narrowly missed
knocking him down!

This was a pleasant source of amusement, uniting, as it did,
considerable effort and some danger, with the prospect of a smash in
some of the steering tackle, so Billy prepared to indulge himself; but
it struck him that the frequent recurrence of the accompanying noise
would bring the skipper on deck and spoil the fun, so on second thoughts
he desisted, and glanced eagerly about for something else, afraid that
the golden opportunity would pass by unimproved.

Observing something like a handle projecting from a hole, he seized it,
and hauled out a large wooden reel with a log-line on it.  With this he
at once began to play, dipping the log into the sea and hauling it up
repeatedly as though he were fishing, but there was want of variety in
this.  Looking about him he espied a lead-line near the binnacle; he cut
the lead from this, and fastening it to the end of the log-line, began
forthwith to take deep-sea soundings.  This was quite to his taste, for
