"Oh! bad luck to ye!"

"Clumsy fellow!" ejaculated Ned.  "Off with you to the creek, and refill
it."

Larry obeyed promptly, but the mischance, after all, was trifling, for
the fire was fierce enough to have boiled a twenty-gallon caldron in a
quarter of an hour.  Besides, the contents of the iron pot had to be
discussed before the tea was wanted.  In a few minutes supper was ready,
and all were about to begin, when it was discovered that O'Neil was
missing.

"Ho!  Larry, come to supper!" shouted one.

"Hi! where are you?" cried another.

But there was no reply, until the captain put both hands to his mouth,
and gave utterance to the nautical halloo with which, in days gone by,
he was wont to hail the look-out at the main-top.

"Ay, ay, comin' sir-r," floated back on the night wind; and, shortly
afterwards, the Irishman stumbled into camp with his hands, his face,
and his clothes plentifully bedaubed with mud.

"Why, what have you been about?" inquired Ned.

"Diggin' for goold, sure.  I've made a hole in the banks o' the creek
with me two hands that ye might bury a young buffalo in, an' sorrow a
bit o' goold have I got for me pains."

A general laugh greeted the enthusiastic digger, as he wiped his hands
and sat down to supper.

"Musha! av I didn't git goold, I've dug up a mortial big appetite,
anyhow.  Hand me the wooden spoon, Mister Collins; it's more the gauge
o' me pratie-trap than the pewter wans.  D'ye know, comrades, I'm a'most
sure I seed an Injun in the bush.  Av it wasn't, it was a ghost."

"What like was he?"

"Look there, and judge for yourselves," cried O'Neil, jumping suddenly
to his feet, and pointing towards the wood, where a solitary figure was
seen dimly against the dark background.

Every man leaped up and seized his weapons.

"Who goes there?" shouted Ned, advancing towards the edge of the circle
of light.

"A friend," was the reply, in English.

Relieved to find that he was not the advance-guard of a band of savages,
Ned invited the stranger to approach, and immediately he stepped within
the sacred circle of the camp-fire's light.  This unexpected addition to
the party was by no means a pleasant one.  His complexion was
exceedingly dark, and he wore a jet-black beard.  In manners he was
coarse and repulsive--one of those forbidding men who seem to be born
for the purpose of doing evil, in whatever position of life or part of
the world they happen to be placed.  The rude garments of the miner
harmonised with the rugged expression of his bearded and bronzed face,
and the harsh voice in which he addressed the party corresponded
therewith.

"I s'pose ye'll not object to let me rest by yer fire, strangers?" he
said, advancing and seating himself without waiting for a reply.

"You're welcome," answered Ned, curtly, for he neither liked the manners
nor the aspect of the man.

"Ye might ha' wished us the top o' the mornin', I think," suggested
Larry.  "Here, try an' soften yer sperrits with a sup," he added,
pushing a pewter plate of soup and a spoon towards him.

The man made no reply, but ate ravenously, as if he had been starving.
When he had finished, he lighted his pipe, and drew his knees up to his
chin as he warmed his hands before the blaze.  Little information of any
kind could be drawn out of this taciturn wanderer.  To Ned's questions,
he replied that he had been at the diggings on the Yuba River, which he
described as being rich; that he had made enough gold to satisfy all his
wants, and was on his way to San Francisco, where he intended to ship
for England.  His name, he said, was Smith.

He carried a short rifle, with a peculiarly large bore, and a heavy
hunting-knife, the point of which was broken off.  This last Bill Jones
observed, as the man laid it down, after cutting up some tobacco,
preparatory to refilling his pipe.

"A good knife!  How did ye break it?" inquired Bill, taking up the
weapon and examining it.

"Never you mind," answered the man, snatching it rudely from him, and
sheathing it.

At this O'Neil regarded him with an angry expression.

"Faix, av ye wasn't livin', so to spake, in me own house, I'd make ye
change yer tone."

"I don't mean no offence," said Smith, endeavouring to speak a little
less gruffly.  "The fact is, gents, I'm out o' sorts, 'cos I lost a
grizzly bar in the hills an hour or two agone.  I shot him dead, as I
thought, and went up and drove my knife into his side, but it struck a
rib and broke the pint, as ye see; and a'most afore I could get up a
tree, he wos close up behind me.  He went away after a while, and so I
got clear off."

To the immense satisfaction of every one, this disagreeable guest arose
after finishing his pipe, knocked the ashes out, shouldered his rifle,
and, bidding his entertainers good-night, re-entered the forest, and
disappeared.

"You're well away," remarked Tom Collins, looking after him; "I couldn't
have slept comfortably with such a fellow in camp.  Now, then, I'm going
to turn in."

"So am I," said Maxton, rolling himself in a blanket, and pillowing his
head on a saddle, without more ado.

In a few minutes the camp was as silent as it had previously been noisy.
Captain Bunting's plethoric breathing alone told that human beings
rested on that wild spot; and this, somewhat incongruously united with
the tinkling of the rivulet hard by, and the howling of coyotes,
constituted their lullaby.  During the night the most of the travellers
were awakened once or twice by a strange and very peculiar sensation,
which led them to fancy the earth on which they reposed was possessed of
life.  The lazy members of the party lay still, and dreamily wondered
until they fell asleep; those who were more active leaped up, and,
lifting their blankets, gazed intently at the sward, which darkness
prevented them from seeing, and felt it over with their hands, but no
cause for the unwonted motion could be discovered, until the light of
dawn revealed the fact that they had made their beds directly above the
holes of a colony, of ground-squirrels, which little creatures, poking
upwards with their noses in vain attempts to gain the upper world, had
produced the curious sensations referred to.

Rough travelling, however, defies almost all disadvantages in the way of
rest.  Tired and healthy men will sleep in nearly any position, and at
any hour, despite all interruptions, so that when our friends rose at
daybreak to resume their journey, they were well refreshed and eager to
push on.



CHAPTER TEN.

GAME AND COOKERY--ARRIVAL AT THE DIGGINGS--LITTLE CREEK--LAW AND ORDER
IN THE MINES--NOONING AT LITTLE CREEK--HARD-UP--OUR ADVENTURERS GET
CREDIT AND BEGIN WORK--A YANKEE OUTWITTED.

Deer, hares, crows, blackbirds, magpies, and quails, were the creatures
that bounded, scampered, hopped, and flew before the eyes of the
travellers at every step, as they wended their way pleasantly, beneath a
bright morning sun, over the hills and through the lesser valleys of the
great vale of the Sacramento.  And all of these creatures, excepting the
crows and magpies, fell before the unerring and unexpectedly useful
blunderbuss of Captain Bunting, passed a temporary existence in the maw
of the big iron pot, and eventually vanished into the carnivorous jaws
of Ned Sinton and his friends.

Crows were excluded from their bill of fare, because the whole party had
an unconquerable antipathy to them; and Larry said he had "aiten many
pies in his lifetime, but he had niver aiten magpies, and he'd be shot
av he wos goin' to begin now."

The duties of chief hunter devolved upon the captain,--first, because he
was intensely fond of shooting; and, secondly, because game was so
plentiful and tame, that it was difficult to avoid hitting _something_,
if one only fired straight before one.  For the same reasons the
blunderbuss proved to be more effectual than the rifle.  The captain
used to load it with an enormous charge of powder and a handful of
shot--swan-shot, two sizes of duck-shot, and sparrow-hail, mixed, with
an occasional rifle-ball dropped in to the bargain.  The recoil of the
piece was tremendous, but the captain was a stout buffer--if we may be
permitted the expression--and stood the shock manfully.

Stewed squirrels formed one of their favourite dishes, it was frequently
prepared by Tom Collins, whose powers in the culinary department proved
to be so great that he was unanimously voted to the office of _chef de
cuisine_--Bill Jones volunteering, (and being accepted), to assist in
doing the dirty work; for it must be borne in mind that the old
relations of master and man no longer subsisted amongst any of the
travellers now--excepting always the native vaquero.  All were equal at
starting for the diggings, and the various appointments were made by,
and with the consent of the whole party.

Little Creek diggings were situated in a narrow gorge of the mountains,
through which flowed a small though turbulent stream.  The sides of the
hills were in some places thickly clothed with trees, in others they
were destitute not only of vegetation but of earth, the rock on the
steeper declivities of the hills having been washed bare by the
periodical heavy rains peculiar to those regions.  Although wild and
somewhat narrow, this little valley was, nevertheless, a cheerful spot,
in consequence of its facing almost in a southerly direction: while,
towards the east, there were several wide and picturesque gaps in the
hills which seemed to have been made for the express purpose of letting
the sun shine the greater part of the day upon the diggers while they
were at work--an advantage, no doubt, when the weather was cool, but
rather the reverse when it was hot.

The entrance to Little Creek was about two miles wide, undulating, and
beautifully diversified, resembling pleasure grounds rather than a
portion of the great wilderness of the far west; but the vale narrowed
abruptly, and, about three miles further into the mountains, became a
mere gap or ravine through which the streamlet leaped and boiled
furiously.

It was an hour before noon when our travellers came suddenly upon the
wide entrance to the valley.

"How beautiful!" exclaimed Ned, as he reined up to gaze in admiration
over the flowering plain, with its groups of noble trees.

"Ay," said Maxton, enthusiastically, "you may well say that.  There may
be, perchance, as grand, but I am certain there is not a grander country
in the world than America--the land of the brave and free."

Ned did not assent at once to the latter part of this proposition.

"You forget," he said, hesitatingly, as if disinclined to hurt the
feelings or prejudices of his new friend, "you forget that it is the
land of _slaves_!"

"I confess that I did forget that at the moment," answered Maxton, while
the blood mounted to his forehead.  "It is the foulest blot upon my
country's honour; but I at least am guiltless of upholding the accursed
institution, as, also, are thousands of my countrymen.  I feel assured,
however, that the time is coming when that blot shall be wiped away."

"I am glad, my friend," said Ned, heartily, "to hear you speak thus; to
be frank with you, I could not have prevailed upon myself to have held
out to you the hand of intimate friendship had you proved to be a
defender of slavery."

"Then you'll form few friendships in this country," said Tom Collins,
"for many of the Yankees here have been slave-holders in their day, and
almost all defend the custom."

The conversation was interrupted at this point by Larry O'Neil uttering
a peculiarly Hibernian exclamation, (which no combination of letters
will convey,) and pointing in an excited manner to an object a few
hundred yards in advance of them.

"What d'ye see, lad!" inquired Bill Jones, shading his eyes with his
hand.

The whole party came to a halt, and gazed earnestly before them for a
few minutes in silence.

"Och!" said O'Neil, slowly, and with trembling earnestness, "av me two
eyes are spakin' truth, it's--it's a _goold digger_!--the first o' the
goold-diggers!"--and Larry followed up the discovery with a mingled
cheer and war-whoop of delight that rang far and wide over the valley.

At such an unwonted, we might almost say, appalling, sound, the "first
o' the goold-diggers,"--who was up to his waist in a hole, quietly and
methodically excavating the earth on the river's bank with a pick-axe--
raised his head, and, leaning on the haft of his pick, scrutinised the
new arrivals narrowly.

"Hooray, my hearty!" shouted Larry, as he advanced at a gallop, followed
by his laughing comrades.  "The top o' the mornin' to ye--it's good luck
I'm wishin' ye, avic.  How are ye gittin' on in the goold way, honey?"

The rough-looking, dusty, and bearded miner, smiled good-humouredly, as
he replied, in a gentle tone of voice that belied his looks--"Pretty
well, friend; though not quite so well as some of my neighbours.  I
presume that you and your friends have just arrived at the mines?"

"Tear an' ages! it's a gintleman, I do belave," cried Larry, turning to
his companions with a look of surprise.

The miner laughed at the remark, and, leaping out of the hole, did his
best to answer the many questions that were put to him in a somewhat
excited tone by the party.

"Where's the gold?" inquired Jones, gravely, going down on his knees at
the side of the excavation, and peering into it.  "I don't see none,
wotsomediver."

"The dust is very fine here," answered the miner, "and not easily
detected until washed.  Occasionally we come upon nuggets and pockets in
the dry parts of the river's bed, and the _canons_ of the hills, but I
find it most profitable to work steadily down here where the whole
earth, below the surface, is impregnated with fine particles of gold.
Many of the diggers waste their time in _prospecting_, which word, I
suppose you know, means looking out for new diggings; but, according to
the proverb of my country, I prefer to remain `contented wi' little, and
cantie wi' mair.'"

"Are we far-distant from the other miners in this creek?" inquired Ned.

"No; you are quite close.  You will come upon the colony after passing
that bluff of trees ahead of you," answered the Scotchman; "but come, I
will shew you the way; it is not far from nooning-time, when I usually
cease work for a couple of hours."

So saying, the miner threw his pick-axe and shovel into the hole, and
led the way towards the colony of Little Creek.

"Ain't you afraid some of the bad-looking scoundrels in these parts may
take a fancy to your pick and shovel?" inquired the captain, as they
rode along at a foot pace.

"Not in the least.  Time was when I would have feared to leave them; for
at one time neither life nor property was safe here, where so many
ruffians congregated from all parts of the world; but the evil wrought
its own cure at last.  Murders and robberies became so numerous, that
the miners took to Lynch law for mutual protection.  Murderers and
thieves were hanged, or whipped almost to death, with such promptitude,
that it struck terror into the hearts of evil-doers; and the consequence
is, that we of this valley are now living in a state of perfect peace
and security, while in other districts, where the laws of Judge Lynch
are not so well administered, murders and thefts are occasionally heard
of.  Here, if a man takes a fancy to go prospecting for a time, he has
only to throw his pick and shovel into his claim, or upon his heap of
dirt, [see note 1] and he will be sure to find them there untouched on
his return, even though he should be absent several weeks.  Our tents,
too, are left unwatched, and our doors unfastened, with perfect safety,
though it is well-known that hundreds and thousands of dollars in
gold-dust lie within.  I do not mean to assert that we have attained to
absolute perfection--a murder and a theft do occasionally occur, but
such are the exceptions, security is the rule."

"Truly," said Ned Sinton, "you seem to live in a golden age in all
respects."

"Not in all," answered the Scot; "the terrors of the law deter from open
violence, but they do not enforce morality, as the language and
deportment of miners generally too plainly shew.  But here we are at the
colony of Little Creek."

They rounded the projecting spur of one of the hills as he spoke, and
the whole extent of the little valley opened up to view.  It was indeed
a romantic and curious sight.  The vale, as we have said, was narrow,
but by no means gloomy.  The noontide sun shed a flood of light over the
glistening rocks and verdant foliage of the hills on the left, and cast
the short, rounded shadows of those on the right upon the plain.
Through the centre of this the Little Creek warbled on its course; now
circling round some wooded knoll, until it almost formed an island; anon
dropping, in a quiet cascade, over the edge of a flat rock; in some
places sweeping close under the base of a perpendicular cliff; in others
shooting out into a lake-like expanse of shallow water across a
bright-green meadow, as it murmured on over its golden bed towards the
Sacramento.

Higher up the valley the cliffs were more abrupt.  Dark pines and
cedars, in groups or singly, hung on their sides, and gave point to the
landscape, in the background of which the rivulet glittered like a
silver thread where the mountains rose in peaks towards the sky.

Along the whole course of this rivulet, as far as the eye could trace
it, searchers for gold were at work on both banks, while their white
tents, and rude wooden shanties, were scattered, singly or in clusters
of various extent, upon the wooded slopes, in every pleasant and
suitable position.  From the distance at which our party first beheld
the scene, it appeared as if the miners were not men, but little animals
grubbing in the earth.  Little or no sound reached their ears; there was
no bustle, no walking to and fro, as if the hundreds there assembled had
various and diverse occupations.  All were intently engaged in one and
the same work.  Pick-axe and shovel rose and fell with steady regularity
as each individual wrought with ceaseless activity within the narrow
limits of his own particular claim, or rocked his cradle beside it.
Dig, dig, dig; rock, rock, rock; shovel, shovel, shovel, was the order
of the day, as long as day lasted; and then the gold-hunters rested
until recruited strength and dawning light enabled them again to go down
into the mud and dig, and rock, and shovel as before.

Many, alas! rocked themselves into a fatal sleep, and dug and shovelled
their own graves among these golden hills.  Many, too, who, although
they dug and toiled for the precious metal, had neither made it their
god nor their chief good, were struck down in the midst of their heavy
toils, and retired staggering to their tents, and there, still clad in
their damp garments, laid their fevered heads on their saddles--not
unfrequently on their bags of gold-dust--to dream of the distant homes
and the loved faces they were doomed to see no more; and thus, dreaming
in solitude, or watched, mayhap, by a rough though warm-hearted mate,
breathed out their spirits to Him who gave them, and were laid in their
