sociable, if it had not been for Elder Holloway and Miss Glidden, who
seemed determined to prevent her from being overlooked.  All those who
had called upon Mrs. Murdoch knew that Mary had had something to do
with that extraordinary number of the _Eagle_, and they told others,
but Mrs. Murdoch escaped all discussion about the _Eagle_ by saying she
had not read it, and referring every one to Miss Ogden.

Mary was glad when the evening was over.  After hearing the comments of
the public, there was something about their way of editing the paper
that seemed almost dishonest.

Jack was still up when she came home.

"I've used my time better than if I'd gone to the party," he said.
"I've studied the map of New York.  I'd know just how to go around, if
I was there.  I am going to study it all the time I'm here."

Mr. Murdoch was better.  He had had a comfortable night, and felt able
to think of business again.

"Now, my dear," he said to his wife, "I'm ready to take a look at the
_Eagle_.  I am glad it was a good number."

"They talked about it all last evening at the sociable," she answered,
as she handed him a copy.

He was even cheerful, when he began; and he studied the paper as Jack
had studied the map.  It was a long time before he said a word.

"My account of the flood is really capital," he said, at last, "and all
that about Crofield matters.  The report of things in Mertonville is
good; that about the logs, the dam, the burglary--a very extraordinary
occurrence, by the way--it's a blessing they didn't kill Mrs. McNamara.
The story is good; funny-column good.  But--oh, gracious!  Oh, Mary
Ogden!  Oh my stars!  What's this?"

He had begun on the editorials, and he groaned and rolled about while
he was reading them.

"They'll mob the _Eagle_!" he said at last.  "I must get up!  Oh, but
this is dreadful!  She's pitched into everything there is!  I must get
up at once!"

Those editorials were a strong tonic, or else Mr. Murdoch's illness was
over.  He dressed himself, and walked out into the kitchen.  His wife
had not heard him say he would get up, but she seemed almost to have
expected it.

"It's the way you always do," she said.  "I'm never much scared about
you.  You'll never die till your time comes.  I think Mary is over at
the office."

"I'm going there, now," he said, excitedly.  "If this work goes on, I
shall have the whole town about my ears."

He was right.  Mary had been at her table promptly that morning to make
a beginning on the next number; Jack was down in the engine-room; Mr.
Black was busy, and Mr. Bones was out, when a party of very red-faced
men filed in, went through the front office, and climbed the stairs.

"We'll show him!" said one.

"It'll be a lesson he won't forget!" remarked another, fiercely.

"He'll take it back, or there will be broken bones!" added another; and
these spoke for the rest.  They had sticks, and they tramped heavily as
they marched to the "sanctum."  The foremost opened the door, without
knocking, and his voice was deep, threatening, and husky as he began:

"Now, Mr. Editor--"

"I'm the editor, sir.  What do you wish of me?"

[Illustration: _"I'm the Editor, sir."_]

Mary Ogden stood before him, looking him straight in the face without a
quiver.

He was a big man; but, oddly enough, it occurred to him that Mary
seemed larger than he was.

"Bob!" exclaimed a harsh whisper behind him, "howld yer tongue! it's
only a gir-rl!  Don't ye say a har-rd word to the loikes o' her!"

Other whispers and growls came from the hall, but the big man stood
like a stone post for several seconds.

"You're the editor?" he gasped.  "Is old Murdoch dead,--or has he run
away?"

"He's at home, and ill," said Mary.  "What is your errand?"

"I keep a decent hotel, sir,--ma'am--madam--I do,--we all do,--it's the
_Eagle_, you know,--and there's no kind of disorder,--and there was
never any complaint in Mertonville--"

"Howld on, Bob!" exclaimed the prompter behind him.  "You're no good at
all; coom along, b'ys.  Be civil,--Mike Flaherty will never have it
said he brought a shillalah to argy wid a colleen.  I'm aff!"

Away he went, stick and all, and the other five followed promptly,
leaving Mary Ogden standing still in amazement.  She was trying to
collect her thoughts when Mr. Black marched in from the other room,
followed by the two typesetters; and Mr. Bones tumbled up-stairs, out
of breath.

Mary had hardly any explanation to make about what Mr. Bones
frantically described as "the riot," and she was inclined to laugh at
it.  Just then Mr. Murdoch himself came to the door.

Jack stopped the engine, exclaiming, "Mr. Murdoch! you here?"

"What is it?  What is it?" he exclaimed.  "I saw them go out.  Did they
break anything?"

"Miss Ogden scared 'em off in no time," said Mr. Black.

Mary resigned the editorial chair to Mr. Murdoch.  Bones brought in two
office chairs; Mr. Black appeared with a very high stool that usually
stood before one of his typecases; Mary preferred one of the office
chairs, and there she sat a long time, replying to Mr. Murdoch's
questions and remarks.  She had plenty to tell, after all she had heard
at the sociable, and Mr. Murdoch groaned at times, but still he thanked
her for her efforts.  Meanwhile Mr. Black went to the engine-room with
an errand for Jack that sent him over to the other side of the village.
Jack looked in the little cracked mirror in the front room as he went
out.

"Ink enough; they'll never know me," said Jack.  "I'm safe enough.
Besides, Mrs. McNamara wasn't robbed at all.  She was yelling because
she thought robbers were coming."

He loitered along on his way back, with his eyes open and his ears
ready to catch any bit of stray news, and paused a moment to peer into
a small shoe-shop.

It was only a momentary glance, but a hammer ceased tapping upon a
lapstone, and a tall man straightened up suddenly and very straight, as
he untied his leather apron.

"That's the fellow!" he exclaimed under his breath, but Jack heard him.

"He knew me!  He knew me!  I can't stay in Mertonville!" thought Jack.
"There'll be trouble now."

He started at a run, but it was so early that he attracted little
attention.

His return to the _Eagle_ office was so quick that Mr. Black opened his
eyes in surprise.

"I've got to see Mr. Murdoch," Jack said hurriedly, and up-stairs he
darted, to break right in upon the conference between the editors.

Jack told his story, and Mr. Murdoch felt it was only another blow
added to the many already fallen upon him and his _Eagle_.  "Perhaps
you will be better satisfied to leave town," said Mr. Murdoch, uneasily.

"I've enough money to take me to the city, and I'll go.  I'm off for
New York!" said Jack, eagerly.

"New York?" exclaimed Mr. Murdoch.  "That's the thing!  Go to the house
and get ready.  I'll buy you a ticket to Albany, and you can go down on
the night boat.  They're taking passengers for half a dollar.  You
mustn't be caught!  No doubt they are hunting for you now."

Mr. Murdoch was right.  At that very moment the cobbler was in the
grocery kept by Deacon Abrams, shouting, "We've got him again, Deacon!
He's in town.  He works in a paint shop--had paint on his face.  Or
else he's a blacksmith, or he works in coal, or something black--or
dusty.  We can run him down now."

While they went for the two others who knew Jack's face, he was putting
on his Sunday clothes and packing up.  When he came down, there was no
ink upon his face, his collar was clean, his hair was brushed, and he
was a complete surprise to Mr. Black and the rest.

"I can get a new boy," said Mr. Murdoch, as if he were beginning to
recover his spirits; "and I can run the engine myself now I'm well.  I
can say in the next _Eagle_ that you are gone to the city, and that
will help me out of my troubles."

Neither Jack nor Mary quite understood what he meant, and, in fact,
they were not thinking about him just then.  Mr. Murdoch had said that
there was only time to catch the express-train, and they were saying
good-by.  Mary was crying for the moment, and Jack was telling her what
to write to his mother and father and those at home in Crofield.

"It's so sudden, Jack!" said Mary.  "But I'm glad you're going.  I wish
I could go, too."

"I wish you could," said Jack, heartily; "but I'll write.  I'll tell
you everything.  Good-by, Mr. Murdoch's waiting.  Good-by!"

The _Eagle_ editor was indeed waiting, and he was very uneasy.  "What a
calamity it would be," he thought, "to have my own 'devil' arrested for
burglary.  The _Inquirer_ would enjoy that!  It isn't Jack's fault, but
I can't bear everything!"

Meanwhile Mary sat at the table and pretended to look among the papers
for a new story, but really she was trying to keep from crying over
Jack's departure.  Mr. Murdoch and Jack had gone to the station.

There was cunning in the plans of the pursuers of Mrs. McNamara's
burglar this time.  Three of them, each aided by several eager
volunteers, dashed around Mertonville, searching every shop in which
any sort of face-blacking might be used, and Deacon Abrams himself went
to the station with a justice of the peace, a notary-public, a
constable, and the man that kept the village pound.

"He won't get by _me_," said the deacon wisely, as Mr. Murdoch and a
neatly dressed young gentleman passed him, arm in arm.

"Good morning, Mr. Murdoch.  The _Eagle's_ improving.  You did me
justice.  We're after that same villain now.  We'll get him this time,
too."

"Deacon," said the editor, gripping Jack's arm hard, "I'll mention your
courage and public spirit again.  Tie him tighter next time."

"We will," said the deacon; "and I've got some new subscribers for you,
and a column advertisement."

Mr. Murdoch hurried to the ticket-window, and Jack patiently looked
away from Deacon Abrams all the while.

"There," said Mr. Murdoch, "jump right in.  Keep your satchel with you.
I'm going back to the office."

[Illustration: _"There," said Mr. Murdoch, "jump right in."_]

"Good-by," said Jack, pocketing his ticket and entering the car.

He took a seat by the open window, just as the train started.

"Jack's gone, Mary," exclaimed Mr. Murdoch, under his breath, as he
re-entered the _Eagle_ office.  "Have those men been here again?"

"No," said Mary.  "But the chairmen of the two central committees have
both been here.  Elder Holloway said they would.  They will call again."

"What did you say?" the editor asked.

"Why," replied Mary, "I told them you were just getting well."

"So I am," said Mr. Murdoch.  "There's a great demand for that number
of the _Eagle_.  Forty-six old subscribers have stopped their papers,
but a hundred and twenty-seven new ones have come in.  I can't guess
where this will end.  Are you going to the house?"

"I think I'd better," said Mary.  "If there's anything more I can do--"

"No, no, no!  Don't spoil your visit," said he, hastily.  "You've had
work enough.  Now you must be free to rest a little, and meet your
friends."

He would not say he was afraid to have her in the _Eagle_ office, to
stir up storms for him.  But Mary made no objection--she was very
willing to give up the work.

Mr. Murdoch came home in a more hopeful state of mind, but soon went to
his room and lay down.

"My dear," he said to his wife, "the paper's going right along; but I'm
too much exhausted to see anybody.  Tell 'em all I'm not well."

Mary was uneasy about Jack, but she need not have worried.  The moment
the train was in motion, he forgot even Deacon Abrams and Mrs. McNamara
in the grand thought that he was actually on his way to the city.

"This train's an express train," he said to himself.  "Doesn't she go!
I said I'd get there some day, and now I'm really going!  Hurrah for
New York!  It's good I learned something about the streets--I'll know
what to do when I get there."

He had nine dollars in his pocket for capital, but he knew more or less
of several businesses and trades.

In the seat in front of him were two gentlemen, who must have been
railway men, he thought, from what they said, and it occurred to Jack
that he would like to learn how to build a railway.

The train stopped at last, after a long journey, and a well-dressed man
got in, came straight to Jack's seat, took the hitherto empty half of
it, and began to talk with the men in front as if he had come on board
for the purpose.  At first Jack paid little attention, but soon they
began to mention places he knew.

"So far, so good," remarked the man at his side; "but we're going to
have trouble in getting the right of way through Crofield.  We'll have
to pay a big price for that hotel if we can't use the street."

"I think not," said Jack, with a smile.  "There isn't much hotel left
in Crofield, now.  It was burned down last Sunday."

"What?" exclaimed one of the gentlemen in front.  "Are you from
Crofield?"

"I live there," said Jack.  "Your engineer was there about the time of
the fire.  The old bridge is down.  I heard him say that your line
would cross just below it."

The three gentlemen were all attention, and the one who had not before
spoken said:

"I know.  Through the old Hammond property."

"It used to belong to Mr. Hammond," replied Jack, "but it belongs to my
father now."

"Can you give me a list of the other owners of property?" asked the
railway man with some interest.

"I can tell you who owns every acre around Crofield, boundary lines and
all," answered Jack.  "I was born there.  You don't know about the
people, though.  They'll do almost anything to have the road there.  My
father will help all he can.  He says the place is dead now."

"What's his name?" asked the first speaker, with a notebook and a
pencil in his hand.

"His is John Ogden.  Mine's Jack Ogden.  My father knows every man in
the county," replied Jack.

"Ogden," said the gentleman in the forward seat, next the window.  "My
name's Magruder; we three are directors in the new road.  I'm a
director in this road.  Are you to stay in Albany?"

"I go by the night boat to New York," said Jack, almost proudly.

"Can you stay over a day?  We'll entertain you at the Delavan House if
you'll give us some information."

"Certainly; I'll be glad to," said Jack; and so when the train stopped
at Albany, Jack was talking familiarly enough with the three railway
directors.


Mary Ogden had a very clear idea that Mr. Murdoch preferred to make up
the next paper without any help from her, and even Mrs. Murdoch was
almost glad to know that her young friend was to spend the next week
with Mrs. Edwards.

One peculiar occurrence of that day had not been reported at the
_Eagle_ office, and it had consequences.  The Committee of Six, who had
visited the sanctum so threateningly, went away beaten, but recounted
their experience.  They did so in the office of the Mertonville Hotel,
and Mike Flaherty had more than a little to say about "that gurril,"
and about "the black eyes of her," and the plucky way in which she had
faced them.

One little old gentleman whose eyes were still bright, in spite of his
gray hair, stood in the door and listened, with his hand behind his ear.

"Gentlemen," exclaimed this little old man, turning to the men behind
him.  "Did you hear 'em?  I guess I know what we ought to do.  Come on
into Crozier's with me--all of you.  We must give her a testimonial for
her pluck."

"Crozier's?" asked a portly, well-dressed man.  "Nothing there but
dry-goods."

"Come, Jeroliman.  You're a banker and you're needed.  I dare you to
come!" said the little old man, jokingly, leading the way.

Seven of them reached the dress-goods counter of the largest store in
Mertonville, and here the little old gentleman bought black silk for a
dress.

"You brought your friends, I see, General Smith," said the merchant,
laughing.  "One of your jokes, eh?"

"No joke at all, Crozier; a testimonial of esteem,"--and three
gentlemen helped one another to tell the story.

"I'll make a good reduction, for my share," exclaimed the merchant, as
he added up the figures of the bill.  "Will that do, General?"

"I'll join in," promptly interposed Mr. Jeroliman, the banker,
laughing.  "I won't take a dare from General Smith.  Come, boys."

They were old enough boys, but they all "chipped in," and General
Smith's dare did not cost him much, after all.

Mary Ogden had the map of New York out upon the table that evening, and
was examining it, when there came a ring at the door-bell.

"It's a boy from Crozier's with a package," said Mrs. Murdoch; "and
Mary, it's for you!"

