if they saw that water was already short, they would be encouraged
to continue to beleaguer the place. Will was unable to explain his
reasons to the chief; but the latter, seeing how great was the
advantage that they had already gained, by following the counsel of
their white visitors in the matter of the hedge, acquiesced at once
in their wishes.

Will then ascended to one of the huts, and carefully reconnoitered
the whole ground. There was, he saw, at the end farthest from the
stream, a slight dip in the land extending into the forest.
Beckoning the chief to join him, he made signs that, at night, the
warriors should issue silently from the village at this point, and
make noiselessly through the wood. They would then take a wide
circuit, till they came upon the stream; and would then, working up
it, fall upon the enemy in the rear.

The chief was dubious; but Will made an imperative gesture and the
chief, in a humble manner, agreed to do as he was ordered. The day
passed slowly and, before nightfall, the supply of water was
entirely finished. Once or twice scouts had gone out, to see if the
enemy were still round the village; but returned, each time, with
the news that they were there.

The last time, just before nightfall, Will directed two or three of
them to take water buckets, and to go in the direction of the
stream; signing to them, however, to return the moment they saw
signs of the enemy. They were soon back and, as Will had expected,
the sight of the water buckets showed the enemy that the garrison
of the village were badly supplied, in that respect; and taunting
shouts arose from the woods, asking them why they did not go down
to drink.

Will felt certain that the Malays would now draw the greater part
of their number down to the side of the stream; and that there
would therefore be the more chance of the garrison making their way
out, at the other end of the village. Three hours after it was
dark, the chief mustered all his men. They were about five-and-forty,
in all. Will signed that each should take with him a water basket or
large gourd so that, in case they failed in defeating the enemy, and
breaking up the blockade, they might at least be able to bring a
supply of water into the village. Will then, with much difficulty,
explained to the chief that the old men, boys, and women remaining in
the village were, the moment they heard the sound of the attack upon
the enemy's rear, to shout and yell their loudest, and to shoot
arrows in the direction of the enemy.

A few sticks had already been pulled up at the point of the hedge
through which Will intended to make a sally, and the band now
passed noiselessly out. The chief himself led the way, the white
boys following behind him. Lying upon their stomachs, they crawled
noiselessly along down the little depression and, in ten minutes,
were well in the wood; without having met with an enemy, although
they had several times heard voices among the trees, near them.

They now rose to their feet and, making a wide detour, came down,
after a quarter of an hour's walk, upon the stream. Here the gourds
and baskets were filled; and then, keeping along by the waterside,
they continued their march. Presently they saw a number of fires,
round which many Malays were sitting. They crept noiselessly up
until within a few yards and then, with a yell, burst upon the
enemy. Numbers were cut down at once; and the rest, appalled by
this attack on their rear, and supposing that the inhabitants of
some other village must have arrived to the assistance of those
they were besieging, at once fled in all directions. Those
remaining in the village had seconded the attack by wild shouts, so
loud and continuous that their besiegers had no reason to suppose
that their number had been weakened.

For a few minutes the pursuit was kept up; then the chief recalled
his followers, with a shout. The water baskets--many of which had
been thrown down in the attack--were refilled, and the party made
their way up to the village, where they were received with shouts
of triumph.

The panic of the Malays had been, in no slight degree, caused by
the appearance of the two boys; who had purposely stripped to the
waist, and had shouted at the top of their voices as, waving the
krisses which they had borrowed, they fell upon the foe. The idea
that white devils were leagued with the enemies against them had
excited the superstitious fear of the Malays to the utmost; and
when, in the morning, scouts again sallied from the village, they
found that the enemy had entirely gone--the fact that they had not
even returned to carry off the effects which had been abandoned, in
the first panic, showing that they had continued their flight,
without stopping, to their distant villages.

The chief, like an able politician, took advantage of the
impression which his white visitors had created and, the same day,
sent off messengers to the villages which had combined in the
attack against them, saying that the white men--his guests--were
very angry; and that, unless peace was made, and a solemn promise
given that there should be no renewal of the late attempts, they
were going to lay a dreadful spell upon the villages. Women and
children would be seized by disease, and the right arms of the
warriors wither up.

This terrible threat carried consternation into the Malay villages.
The women burst into prolonged wailings, and the bravest of the men
trembled. The messenger said that the white men had consented to
abstain from using their magical powers until the following day;
and that the only chance to propitiate them was for deputations
from the villages to come in, early the next morning, with promises
of peace and offerings for the offended white men.

It was not for some time afterwards that the lads learned enough of
the language to understand what had been done; but they guessed,
from the exultation of the chief, and the signs which he made that
their late enemies would shortly come in, in an attitude of
humiliation, that he had in some way succeeded in establishing a
scare among them.

On the following morning deputations--consisting of six warriors, and
women bearing trays with fruit, birds, and other offerings--arrived at
the village. The men were unarmed. At their approach, the chief made
signs to the boys to take a seat at the foot of the principal tree; and
then, accompanied by his leading warriors, led the deputation--with much
ceremony--before them. The women placed their trays at their feet, and the
men addressed them in long speeches, and with many signs of submission.

The boys played their part well. As soon as they saw what was
required of them they signified, with an air of much dignity, that
they accepted the offerings; and then went through the ceremony of
shaking hands, solemnly, with each of the warriors. Then they made
a speech in which, with much gesticulation, they signified to the
visitors that a terrible fate would befall them, should they again
venture to meddle with the village.

Much awed and impressed, the Malays withdrew. The boys made a
selection, from the baskets of fruit, for their own eating; and
then signified, to the chief, that he should divide the rest among
the inhabitants of the village. When this was done, the boys
ascended to their tree and passed the day there quietly; the
villagers indulging in feasting, singing, and rejoicing over their
victory.

"The worst of all this is," Will said to Hans, "that the more they
reverence us, and the more useful they find us, the more anxious
they will be to keep us always with them. However, there is one
comfort: we are safe, as long as we choose to remain here; and that
is more than we could have hoped for, when we first landed from the
wreck. It is curious that the Malays, who have no hesitation in
attacking English ships, and murdering their crews, have yet a sort
of superstitious dread of us. But I suppose it is something the
same way as it was in England, in the days of the persecution of
old women as witches: they believed that, if left to themselves,
they could cast deadly spells, and yet they had no hesitation in
putting them to death. I suppose that it is something of the same
feeling, here."



Chapter 7: The Fight With The Prahus.


Very frequently, in the days that followed, William Gale and his
friend Hans talked over the possibility of effecting an escape; but
the difficulties appeared almost invincible. The various villages
which, so far as the boys could understand, were scattered at some
distance apart, had little dealings with each other; and indeed,
were frequently engaged in feuds. The particular people with whom
they lived had nothing whatever to do with the sea. They used--at
least so the boys understood, by their signs--to fish, at one time;
but they had been robbed of their boats, and maltreated, by some of
the cruising tribes who lived in villages on the coast, or on
creeks and rivers.

The possibility of escape seemed small, indeed. To escape they must
get on board a ship and, to do this, they must first go out to sea;
and this could only be done in a boat of their own, or in one of
the piratical prahus. The latter course could not be thought of,
for the coast pirates were bloodthirsty in the extreme and, even
could they change their residence to one of the seaside villages,
and gain the friendship of the inhabitants, they would be no nearer
to their end. For as these go out to attack, and not to trade with
European ships, there would be no chance of escaping in that way.

Upon the other hand, they might build a boat of their own; but they
considered it improbable that the Malays would allow them to
depart, for they evidently regarded their presence as a prodigy;
and revered them as having miraculously arrived, at the moment when
a great danger threatened the village. But, even should they be
allowed to build a boat and depart, they knew not whither to go.
They knew nothing of navigation, and were ignorant of the geography
of the Archipelago; and the chances of their striking upon the one
or two spots, where, alone they could land with safety, were so
small that it would be madness to undertake the voyage.

For six months they lived quietly in the Malay village. The people
instructed them in the use of their blowguns, in which they are
wonderfully skilful; being able to bring down a bird, sitting on a
lofty bough of a tree, with almost an unerring accuracy. They also
taught them to shoot with the bow and arrow, and they found that
the natives used the roots of various kinds of plants for food. The
time did not pass unpleasantly and, had they known that it would
last but a few months, only, they would have enjoyed it much.

At last, after much deliberation, they determined that they
would--as a first step towards escape--construct a little boat,
under pretense of wanting to fish. Accordingly one day, when out
with the chief and two or three of his men in the direction of the
sea, they pointed there, and signified that they wished to go
there--for they had picked up a good many Malay words. The chief
shook his head, but they insisted in so authoritative a manner that
he gave way, and followed them.

When they reached the shore, they made signs that they wanted to
construct a boat. Again the chief shook his head vehemently; and
enforced his meaning by pointing along shore, and going through the
action first of rowing, then of fighting--intimating that they
would certainly be killed, if they ventured out, by the fierce
coast tribes. The boys nodded, to show that they understood what he
wished to say but, pointing to the water a few yards from shore,
went through the action of fishing; then, burdening themselves with
imaginary fish, they pointed to the village, and showed that they
would supply it with food.

The Malays talked for some time among themselves. They had so vast
a respect for the white men that they did not like to thwart their
wishes. The thought, too, of a supply of fish--of which they had
been long deprived owing to their feuds with some of the coast
villages--also operated strongly in favor of their yielding an
assent and, at last, the chief made signs that he agreed and,
pointing to the village, intimated that assistance should be given
in building a boat.

The next day, accordingly, ten or twelve men came down to the shore
with them. A tree was felled, the ends were pointed, and the whole
formed roughly into the shape of a canoe. Fires were lighted on the
top and, by dint of flame and ax, a hollow was dug out. The
operation lasted three days, the men having brought provisions with
them, so as to avoid making the journey--two and a half hours
long--to and from the village each day. The boat, when finished,
was but a rough construction; and would have excited the mockery of
any of the coast villagers, as they are expert boat builders.
Still, it was amply sufficient for the purpose for which it was
intended--namely, for fishing inside the line of reefs.

It was heavy, and paddled slowly; and the lads had a strong
suspicion that the Malays had purposely made it more clumsy and
unseaworthy than need be, in order that they should have no
temptation to attempt a distant journey in it.

There was no difficulty about lines, the Malays being skilled in
making string and ropes from the fibers of trees. The hooks were
more difficult but, upon searching very carefully along the shore,
the lads found some fragments of one of the ship boats; and in
these were several copper nails which, hammered and bent, would
serve their purpose well. The lines were ready on the day the canoe
was finished and, as soon as she was launched, the chief and one of
the other Malays, and the boys, took their seats in her.

The natives paddled her out nearly to the edge of the reef. Four
lines, baited with pieces of raw birds' flesh, were thrown
overboard. A few minutes passed--rather anxiously for the lads, who
were most desirous that the fishing should be successful, so as to
afford them an excuse for frequently pursuing it. Then there was a
bite; and Hans, who held the line, found that it taxed his strength
to haul in the fish which tugged and strained upon it. When it was
got into the boat, it proved to be some fourteen pounds in weight.
By this time two of the other baits had been taken and, in less
than an hour, they had caught upwards of thirty fish, most of them
of considerable size.

The natives were delighted and, paddling to shore, the burden was
distributed among the whole party, with the exception of the chief
and the two whites. Before starting, a young tree was cut down and
chopped into lengths of a few feet each; and on these rollers the
canoe was hauled high up the beach. Then the party set out for the
village; where their arrival, with so large a supply of food,
occasioned great rejoicing.

After this, the boys went down regularly, every day, to fish. At
first three or four of the natives always accompanied them, under
pretense of carrying back the fish; but really, as they thought, to
keep a watch over them. To lessen their hosts' suspicions,
sometimes one or other stayed in the village. As time went on, the
suspicion of the Malays abated. The number of the guard was
lessened and, finally, as the men disliked so long a tramp, some of
the boys were told off to accompany the white men, and assist in
bringing back their fish. They were in the habit of starting soon
after daybreak, and of not returning till late in the evening;
accounting for their long absence by pointing to the sun.

The fishing was always performed immediately they reached the
coast. When they had caught as many as they and the boys could
carry, these were placed in a large covered basket; which was sunk
in the water close to the shore, to keep the fish in good condition
until they started. Then they would paddle about within the reef
or, during the extreme heat of the day, lie in the boat, shaded by
bunches of palm leaves. The Malay boys--who were set on shore after
the fishing--were left alone; and amused themselves by bathing, or
passed the time asleep under the trees.

After the first day or two, it had struck the boys that it was
dangerous to leave the canoe high on the sand; as it would be
observed, even at a distance, by a passing prahu. Consequently a
deep trench had been dug from the sea, far enough up to allow the
canoe, when floating in it, to lie below the level of the beach.
Before leaving her she was, each day, roughly covered with seaweed;
and might, therefore, escape observation by any craft passing at a
short distance from the shore.

In their expeditions along the reef, the boys discovered a passage
through it. It was of about double the width of a ship, and of
amply sufficient depth to allow a vessel of any size to cross. At
all other points, for a distance of a mile or two either way--which
was the extent of their excursions--the reef came very near to the
surface; its jagged points, for the most part, showing above it.

Several months passed, and still no sail which promised a hope of
deliverance had shown over the surface of the sea. Scarce a day
passed without their seeing the Malay prahus passing up and down
the coast; but these always kept some distance out, and caused no
uneasiness to the fishermen. They had, during this time, completed
the hollowing out of the boat; until her sides were extremely thin,
and she was so light that she could be paddled at a high rate of
speed.

They were both now expert with the paddle; and felt that if, in a
light wind, a vessel should be seen off the coast, they would be
enabled to row out and reach her. It might be, they knew, months or
even years before such a ship could be seen. Still, as there were
many vessels trading among the islands, at any moment an occurrence
might arise.

One afternoon, they had been dozing under their leafy shade when
Will, who first awoke, sat up and uttered a cry. Almost abreast of
them, and but a quarter of a mile outside the reef, was a large
brig. The wind was light and, with every stitch of canvas set, she
was making but slow progress through the water. Hans leaped up,
echoed the cry and, seizing their paddles, they rowed with all
