
Mrs Blewcome did not like this point-blank questioning.  She fidgetted
in her chair and said nothing.  Mr Campbell repeated his question.  Mrs
Blewcome repeated her movements, expressive of unwillingness to reply.

"Very well," said Mr Campbell, good-humouredly; "as you won't tell me,
I'll tell you.  You found him, two years ago, about three miles outside
Wilton, a small village on the Bristol Channel.  He had run away from
school.  He told you a long tale about himself, and, among other
things, that he had a father at sea.  I am his father.  I only landed
here last night, and, by a mere chance, have thus stumbled across my
boy.  Had I hunted for him, I dare say I never should have found him."

Mrs Blewcome sat in astonishment.  After she had somewhat recovered,
she burst out--

"Well, there, to be sure, I am so glad; dear boy; but I don't know what
I shall do without 'im.  I don't know what I shall do, to be sure; and
Blewcome getting that hindolentlike!"

This good-natured, believing speech, touched Alan's heart.  There was
no indignation at her prize being carried off by one who was a mere
stranger to her.  There was no doubting or disbelieving his reality as
the boy's father, but only unselfish joy that Harry found his own again
at last!

"You are a good soul," said Mr Campbell, quite affected.  "I cannot
thank you enough for all your care of my boy.  It's been a strange home
for him, but that's no fault of yours.  I shall never forget you.  Here
is a card; and if you are ever in need, write to me, and I will do all
I can for you."

"So I s'pose I must say good-bye to 'im, sir," asked Mrs Blewcome, with
trembling voice.

"Well, yes," meditated Mr Campbell, "I suppose you must."

And the parting on both sides convinced him how truly kind the good
woman had been to his boy, and how she had completely won his heart.

"Don't be offended, Mrs Blewcome," he added; "but here's a trifle for
you, it'll help you to paint up your caravans.  I dare say they'll be
none the worse for a fresh bit of colour."

"Thank you, sir, thank you," said Mrs Blewcome, with open eyes and
hands.  "I'm not a-going to be proud;" and she didn't look as if she
were, as she slipped Alan's ill-spared ten-pound note into her pocket.

"Good-bye, sir.  Good-bye, my dear boy!  Here's a ticket for the show,
sir, if I may make so bold; we've got some werry fine beastesses, sir.
Good-bye, dear!"  And Mrs Blewcome curtsied herself from the room, with
moist eyes and a heart genuinely saddened, for Harry had grown very
dear to her during their two years' strange acquaintance.




CHAPTER XIX.

AT WILTON ONCE MORE.

"Vengeance" still--Driving to Wilton--At the farm--In the
churchyard--The grammar-school--Wilton left again--Life's business.


Shortly after the departure of Mrs Blewcome, a large parcel was brought
into the room, containing clothes for Harry; and how glad he was when,
in the course of about half-an-hour, he stood fully arrayed before the
looking-glass in his father's bedroom at the hotel.  Once more he was
in his rightful position; he was with his father, an outcast no more;
no longer dependent on the doubtful fortunes of two show-people.  But
the revengeful feeling had not been stricken down within him.  On the
contrary, he only thought to himself, that now more possible than ever
was revenge; now more than ever would there be a chance of his meeting
with Egerton.  You see, he was such a mere child still, and knew so
little of the world, that he thought everything was easy.

His father soon noticed the change in his tone whenever Egerton's name
was mentioned--the flushing cheeks, the eyes that lit up with anger;
and though he himself was far, very far, from palliating Egerton's
conduct, yet he felt obliged to speak seriously to his boy.  But though
Harry listened, and promised to try and crush out his passion, he could
not rid himself of it; it still clung to him; and when once the chiding
words of his father ceased, he again brooded over his purpose of
revenge.

The following morning they left the hotel.  The waiters were now
abjectly admiring, and in the most mellifluous tones that signified
their "great expectations," expressed to the heedless Mr Campbell their
congratulations on the discovery of his son.  They could scarcely
believe their eyes at the sight of Harry, the fine handsome boy, with
curling sunny hair and gentlemanly bearing, when they thought of the
untidy, raggedly-clad lad, upon whom they had been obliged to wait, the
previous night.

But then, these sort of people only estimate a gentleman by the
grandeur of his dress, and in the present day it is reasonably to be
expected they make many and serious mistakes.

It was not long before Harry and his father were both seated in the
train that was to carry them to Wilton.  A wearisome journey it was,
that hot dusty day, and Harry was very tired, when, about half-past
seven, they reached the nearest station to Wilton, a small town called
Oldwell.

From this place they took a cab and drove to Wilton; and how familiar
it was to them both as they bowled along the leafy summer lanes in the
June twilight, and into the well-remembered village!

By Alan's direction, the cabman drove them to the farm; and there,
having deposited them and their luggage, turned his horse's head, and
departed.

The meeting may easily be imagined.  Two years had not made much
difference in the good Mrs Valentine, though that time had done so much
for Harry.  And the two years of doubt and anxiety for "her boy," as
she called him, had only increased her affection.  But it was a sad,
sad pleasure, this meeting; a sad pleasure this, their return to the
little farm where there had been so much of gladness and so much of
sorrow for them all.  And lips quivered, and eyes were red with
starting tears, and scarcely a word was uttered.

While his father wandered from room to room, lingering over each spot
that he associated with her, his dead, loved wife, Harry sat in the
window-seat of the oak-panelled parlour, and, pressing his face against
the glass, looked out across the churchyard, and remembered how he sat
thus on that far-off evening when his father said good-bye for ever to
her who slept yonder near the ivied church-porch.

Presently Alan entered the room, and taking Harry's hand, walked with
him to the churchyard.  And there, over the grave carefully, lovingly
tended by Mrs Valentine, they stood, father and son, and not a word was
said.  Was not their sorrow too great for words?  And, as of old, the
twilight breezes crept in and out among the leaves of the lime-trees,
and round the grey church tower.

The next morning was one of excitement to Harry.  There was first a
visit to Mr and Mrs Bromley, who were as delighted as they were
surprised to see the two.  And then came the visit to the school.
Never, as long as he lived, did Harry forget that morning.  How the
Doctor's sternness all vanished; how he welcomed him and his father as
if they had been his own flesh and blood; how he conducted them to the
big school-room, and told the boys who it was (for Harry was so
altered, scarcely any one knew him); how the room rung with deafening
cheers; how the masters shook hands with them; and how he left, as the
school's hero, he who, but two days since, had been roaming about the
country with a travelling menagerie.

Yes! it was a grand time for Harry.  Yet even this joy, even his sorrow
and loneliness at his mother's grave, did not banish from his heart the
wish for revenge.  He had shut his ears to the words--"Vengeance is
mine: I will repay, saith the Lord."

Mr Campbell had soon made up his mind with regard to Harry's future.
The two years he had been away from school were, at his age, a most
serious loss to him; and all idea of his going to Oxford must be
abandoned.  There was not time for him to make progress sufficient to
enable him to do well there; and unless he could do well, and help
himself by gaining a scholarship, his father could not afford to send
him to the University.

So he arranged that he should remain four years with a well-to-do
farmer of his acquaintance in Herefordshire, and learn farming; at the
end of that time, he should go to Australia, and try his fortune there,
where so many were filling their pockets and returning to England rich
men.

Within a week of the visit to Wilton, Harry was at his new abode in
Herefordshire, and his father once more had joined his vessel.

It had been a sad parting from Wilton.  But they had work before them
both; and though their hearts sorely ached at saying good-bye to that
grassy mound in Wilton churchyard, Alan spoke to his boy (feeling,
himself, the truth of what he spoke), in the words of the noble-hearted
American poet:

  "Life is real, life is earnest,
    And the grave is not its goal!"

And again,

  "Let us then be up doing,
    With a heart for any fate,
  Still achieving, still pursuing,
    Learn to labour and to wait."




CHAPTER XX.

AVENGED AT LAST.

Homeward bound--Man overboard--Self-sacrifice--Noble revenge.


Fifteen years since Harry Campbell landed in Australia, a fine,
stalwart, young man of nineteen!  Fifteen years of toil, crowned by
success, and he was on his way to England; home to his father, a quiet,
grey, old man of some three score years; home to Wilton, where the
sailor had taken up his abode, near his loved one's grave, in the farm,
still kept by Mrs Valentine!

Full of hope and eagerness was Harry (one must call him by his boyish
name still, though he is now a man of thirty-four), on his homeward
voyage, over the running waves.

He had not seen much of the other passengers; in fact, he had kept
almost entirely to himself, only entering into conversation with the
captain, or any of the ship's crew that took his fancy.  And many were
the eyes of disappointment that in vain sought the friendship of the
reserved, wealthy, homeward-bound Englishman.

He was talking to the man at the helm, when his eye caught sight of
some one sitting, carelessly smoking, in a dangerous position near an
open part of the ship's bulwarks.  He abruptly ended his conversation,
and walking across the deck, said--

"Excuse me, sir, but you are not in a very safe place."

The man addressed started, and as he turned hastily, as if to see who
had presumed to dictate to him, slipped, and, clutching fruitlessly at
Harry's outstretched arms, fell headlong into the sea.  It was the work
of a second, but in that second Harry had recognised Egerton's face!

"Man overboard! man overboard!" was the cry.

The vessel was running at a rapid pace through the water, so that she
had already left the struggler in the waves, far behind.

"'Bout ship!" came the word of command; but long before the vessel
answered to the helm, Harry had flung off his coat and hat, and leapt
from the stern, down into the roaring waves, and striking out
vigorously, reached Egerton.

It was a hard battle he had there with the waters, and he thought the
boat, that speedily left the ship, would never reach them.  With one
hand he held up Egerton's head, while with the other he kept himself
afloat.  But the seconds, that seemed like hours, went on, and the boat
did not come.

He was growing weaker, he knew it; his arm was stiffening, and Egerton
struggling in the water with all the agony of a drowning man, hampered
his movements and well nigh bore him under.

Would the boat never come?  He raised himself with an effort and sent
his voice along the trough of the waves, "Boat ahoy!"

That shout was heard, but it had robbed him of his remaining strength.
His eyes were dim; his brain swam; he was losing consciousness, his
gallant arm fell from beneath the head it had supported, and he sank!

A few seconds afterwards the half-drowned body of Egerton was dragged
into the boat that, guided by Harry's shout, had found and reached the
spot.  In the confusion of rescuing the one, the other had drifted
away; and with heavy hearts the sailors rowed back to the ship.  The
life that had just been snatched from the waters must not be sacrificed
by delay.  Restoratives, care, and watching did their work, and
Egerton's life was spared.

But where was he who rescued him?  The drowned body was picked up the
following day; for the captain tacked about, and would not leave till
it was recovered.  And one quiet evening the noble body that met death
to save a foe, was lowered over the vessel's side, into its most
fitting resting-place, the waves it had battled with, there to lie
until the sea shall give up her dead.

And this was Harry Campbell's revenge!







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Wilton School, by Fred E. Weatherly

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WILTON SCHOOL ***

***** This file should be named 22183.txt or 22183.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/2/2/1/8/22183/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
