added Captain Hall impressively. "I'll keep to the road. If a searcher
finds anything that he regards as a clue, let him pass the word along to
me as rapidly as possible. Then we'll halt the whole line, on each side,
until that clue has been investigated. Don't any of you boys--or men,
either, for that matter--get any idea that he's just tramping for
pleasure. There is no telling who may have the luck to find a clue that
will soon lead to the end of the search. Now, forward!"

It was with a sincere good will and much straining of eyes that the hunt
started. It proved to be slow work. Every now and then some seeker came
across what he thought might prove a clue, and then the line halted.

Many times footprints were the cause of halting the line. One set of
footprints that a man found, and on which he passed the signal, proved,
when measured by Captain Hall's tape measure, to be the prints of a pair
of number-ten boots.

"Greg Holmes, a thirteen-year-old boy, hadn't feet of that size,"
remarked the militia officer almost sharply. "We know that young Holmes
wears a number four boot."

Still the line dragged on. Noon came, finding the searching party about
a mile above Payson's and in wilder country. Some of the men were
decidedly hungry, as were also all of the boys.

Captain Hall's whistle blew sharply, bringing in his forces.

"We never thought, of course, of provisioning this expedition," said the
officer, with a smile. "Do you see that farmhouse ahead? Spread out your
line again, and look for me to signal when we come up with that
farmhouse. If the folks living there have any food that they will sell,
I'll pay for it, and we'll halt a few minutes to stoke up for more
steam."

There was a cheer at this announcement, after which the line spread out
again. Ten minutes later a halt was made at the farmhouse, and the
flanks of the searching party came in. The farmer's wife, it turned out,
had an assortment of food that she was willing to sell at a rather good
price. On this assorted stuff the searchers fed, washing it all down
with glasses of milk. Then the search was taken up once more.

"We're moving about a mile an hour now," Dave called across to Dick, as
the Grammar School boys, away out on the right flank, tramped through a
stretch of woods. "Greg may be a hundred miles from here at this minute.
Question--what day in the week shall we have the luck to come up with
him?"

"We're doing the best we can," Dick called back.

"Don't pass along that old chestnut that 'angels can do no better,'"
grimaced Dave.

"Well, could they?"

"I don't know. But do you expect that we'll ever find Greg, moving along
in this fashion?"

"Honestly, I don't," Dick called across. "But we're following the scheme
laid down by wiser and older heads than ours, and I haven't any better
plan to suggest. Have you?"

"I----" began Dave, but finished with: "Hang that branch! It flew back
and hit me!"

"Look where you're going," called Prescott, as he climbed over a wall.
"For your information, Dave, I'll say that we're coming to a road now."

Tom Reade, on Dick's right hand, and Harry Hazelton, on Dave's left,
were also jumping into the road, which they started to cross hurriedly.

"Halt!" cried Prescott, and stood like one transfixed, staring down at
the ground.

"What have you found?" jeered Tom. "A gold mine?"

"Better--I believe!" cried Dick joyously. "Hustle here, fellows!
No--don't crowd too close or you'll trample it out."

"What do you see?" demanded Hazelton.

"This," answered Prescott, pointing down to the ground. His chums
peered, too, and made out a very distinct footprint in the soft soil of
this wild, little-used road through the woods.

"There's been a horse and wagon along here, too," Dick went on
excitedly. "See the fresh wheeltracks, and the marks of the horse's
hoofs?"

"But only that one bootprint," objected Tom. "It doesn't seem to me that
it means much."

Dick gazed reproachfully at his grouped chums, his eyes blazing with
excitement in the meantime.

"Say, don't you fellows remember how Greg ripped off the lower part of
his left bootheel at football practice Friday afternoon?"

"Yes," admitted Dan Dalzell. "But how does this print prove----"

"I see!" broke in Dave Darrin tremulously. "This print, at the rear end,
is from the same sort of heel."

"It surely is," nodded Dick. "Dan, you wear a number-four shoe like
Greg's. Come here and let me measure the length of your left shoe with
this string. Sit down first."

Young Prescott took the measure with his string, then applied it to the
print in the ground.

"Same length, you see," flashed Dick triumphantly. "Fellows, that's Greg
Holmes's footprint! You see, the print looks old, as though it had been
made a couple of days ago. Yet there's been no rain and it isn't washed
away. The footprint looks just about as old as the horse's hoof mark."

"Then you think that Greg took a carriage as far as here?" demanded Tom
Reade dubiously.

"He was brought here in some sort of wagon!"

"Go on and read the rest of the page to us," begged Dan Dalzell, still
skeptical.

"This was as far as Dexter, or whoever had Greg, wanted to bring him in
the wagon," Dick continued, still scanning the ground, while employing
his hands to wave away whichever of his chums attempted to come too
close. "Probably Greg was taken somewhere not far from here. He may be
mighty close to us now, fellows. Let's see. The footprint points
straight ahead of us."

"Why isn't there more than one print?" insisted Harry Hazelton.

"Because Greg was probably lifted, so that he wouldn't leave too much of
a trail."

"Then why aren't there more prints, especially of the man or men who
lifted Greg?" questioned Dave.

"The men didn't intend to leave any trail at all," replied Dick,
thinking hard. "Probably the first man down from the wagon landed on
that hummock of grass there." Dick moved forward. "Yes, siree! Just look
here, fellows--don't crowd too close to it and blot it out. See, there
isn't a sharply lined footprint here, but there's a pressing down of the
grass, as if some considerable weight had been pressed upon it."

Dick now moved slowly forward, the others on his flanks.

"Here's another footprint--the right foot, but Greg's size," he soon
called.

Not one of the Grammar School boys but felt the full force of the
excitement now.

"Say!" exploded Tom Reade suddenly. "We've plumb forgotten to pass the
signal along to the others in the line."

"It's too late now. They're too far ahead of us," Dick announced.
"Besides, if Greg isn't far from here, and if his captors are with him,
we don't want to raise too much of a racket and scare the captors away."

"I wish they'd go away, the captors, if they're around here," grinned
Dalzell. "Maybe they have guns, and would be cranky enough to use 'em on
us, sooner'n give Greg up."

"If you're afraid, Dan, turn around and go back," advised Dick quietly,
as he moved slowly forward. "The rest of you keep a sharp lookout for
more prints around here."

"Who's afraid?" snapped Dan, his grin fading.

"Here's another footprint!" called Reade, who had ranged slightly ahead
of the others.

Dick was quickly at the spot.

"That was made by Greg's left shoe," Prescott swiftly declared.

"Correct," nodded Tom Reade. "Say, fellows, we are on Greg's trail!"

The enthusiasm was "catching" by this time. The little line narrowed and
the Grammar School boys pressed forward, tingling with the mystery and
excitement of this problem written on the face of old Mother Earth!




CHAPTER XI

DAN SEES BEARS--IN HIS MIND


In twenty minutes, studying the ground harder than any one of the five
had ever scanned a problem in arithmetic, the Grammar School boys had
advanced some three hundred feet. Their course had taken them into the
woods on the further side of the bridle path.

"I don't see any footprints around here," half grumbled Tom Reade.

"No," Dick replied, "because the ground is hard and stony here. This
isn't the place to look for prints. But we may find some other sign at
any----"

"Stop right where you are!" ordered Dave excitedly.

All halted at once, gazing up the hillside, where Dave pointed.

"Fellows, there's a big rock cropping up, and do you see that hole
leading into it?"

"Looks like a bear's hole," suggested Dan, with another grin.

"Cheer up!" advised Dick, smiling. "There haven't been any bears in this
part of the country in a century. But come on, fellows! That place is
worth looking into."

Willingly enough all trotted up the slope to the hole in the rock,
though, truth to tell, all the boys were rather footsore by this time.

The hole in the wall of rock proved to be some three feet in diameter.
Dick struck a match and peered in.

"This tunnel seems to go in as far as I can see with the help of the
match," young Prescott announced. "Fellows, some of us will have to
crawl in here and see what we can find."

"Better not," advised Dan. "Greg isn't in there. And if that hole isn't
the home of a bear then it's snakes. Ugh!"

"I'll go in with you, Dick," agreed Dave. "As for Dan, you stay
out--'fraidcat'!"

"No more afraid than you are!" retorted Dalzell, stung into sudden
spirit. "If you rascals are going to crawl in there, then I'm going with
you. Can't take 'no' for an answer."

"If Dalzell finds any wild animals in that hole he'll feel like Daniel
in the lions' den," chuckled Reade.

"I wish we had something to make a torch of," grumbled Dick. "It's slow
work and a lot of nuisance to be lighting two or three matches every
minute."

"Do I get a chance to go in there with you?" demanded Dan.

"I don't know whether you do or not," grimaced Dick. "You're such a
scared-cat that----"

"Say that again, and you don't get--this," grinned Dalzell, hauling an
object out into daylight. It proved to be a pocket electric lamp.

"Oh, you jewel!" glowed Dick.

"Am I a scared-cat?" insisted Dan, returning the lamp to his pocket.

"Nothing of the sort!" Dick declared readily.

"How about you, Dave?" demanded Dan, wheeling upon his other tormentor.

"I never admired any one's courage as much as I do yours, Danny boy,"
laughed Darrin.

"All right, then. You can use the lamp," conceded Dalzell, bringing it
forth from his pocket and handing it over to Dick.

"Let's all hurry and get in there," proposed Tom Reade.

"Nothing like it!" rejoined Dick. "Wouldn't it be fine if we all crawled
in there and Dexter and Driggs really happened to be in the
neighborhood? They might come along and pen us all in there! Tom, you
and Harry will have to stay outside on guard--and keep your eyes wide
open."

"Hazelton can keep his ears wide open," suggested Reade. "His ears are
the generous, wide-open kind, anyway."

Dick had already thrown himself on his knees, and, holding the lamp
ahead of him, he crawled in as fast as he could over the rough, rocky
floor of the tunnel.

Dave Darrin was right behind the leader. Third in line came Dan Dalzell,
who comforted himself with the thought that, if Dick and Dave
encountered anything dangerous, he (Dan) would have loads of time to
crawl out again before the danger could assail him.

For more than a dozen feet the tunnel ran irregularly into the rock.
Suddenly Dick uttered an excited shout.

"Whh-a-at's the matter?" almost chattered Dalzell. "What's hit you?"

"There's a regular cave here," Dick called back. "A fine, big place!"

At this moment Dave, too, straightened up as he stepped into the cave
proper.

"What's going on in there?" Tom Reade called in through the tunnel.

"Stay where you are," Dalzell called back, "and don't let us get bagged
in here by any one."

Then Dan straightened up on his feet and took several curious looks
about him while Dick flashed the light.

"Say, this is bigger'n a barn in here, only not so high!" gasped Dan.

"I wonder why nobody ever knew of this dandy place before?" mused Dave.
"And the air's good in here, too."

"The air's good enough," Dick assented hurriedly. "But what we came here
for was to see whether we can find Greg. Come on, fellows--be quick."

"This leads to nothing, after all," sighed Dave Darrin at last.

"There may be other parts to the cave that we haven't found yet,"
advanced young Prescott. "Now, halt, everyone! Quiet! Greg?"

Dick's voice echoed in the place. Away off in one corner something
seemed to be stirring.

"What's that?" asked Dick quickly.

"Time to beat it!" muttered Dan. "We've disturbed some animal that lives
here."

"Sh!" ordered Prescott, holding up one hand. "Greg!"

Against their ear-drums came again, rather faintly, the sound of
something moving.

"If you're Greg, you keep on making the noise until I locate you," urged
Dick. "Fellows, you stay right where you are. Don't move."

Once more that sound of something moving came to the boys, and Dick, on
tip-toe, moving softly, ranged toward the direction from which he
believed the noise had come. As Dick moved away from them with the
light, Dave and Dan found themselves in comparative darkness.

"If that's you, Greg, keep on making all the noise you can," directed
young Prescott, as he neared one of the jutting ledges of rock.

A distant snort came as though in answer.

"If that's you, Greg, you can do it again," cried Dick in a low, eager
voice. "If it's you, do it just four times."

Then Dick halted, realizing in the stillness that he could hear his own
heart beating rapidly.

Again came the snort--one, two, three--four times. Then it stopped.

"Dave! Dan!" quivered Dick's voice. "Come running! It's Greg."

There was a sound of running feet--then a thump. Dave Darrin was still
coming, but Dan had tripped over some little obstacle and had fallen
flat.

"Hold on, there, you two!" howled Dan. "I've hurt my knee. Wait until I
reach you."

But Dave and Dick paid no heed. Once more they had heard the snorts, and
had made a dash for a low ledge of rock, from behind which they believed
the sounds to have come.

Then both young leaders of the Grammar School boys gave a joyous whoop,
mingled with dismay.




CHAPTER XII

THE BOY WITH THE OAKUM TASTE


"Hustle, Dan! We've found him!" rang Dave Darrin's voice, echoing
through the rock-bound spaces.

"Greg, old fellow, you've had us worried," gasped Dick Prescott, sinking
to the stone floor beside his friend.

Greg lay on the floor, tightly bound hand and foot, a gag of oakum stuck
in his mouth and securely held there by cloth tightly strapped in place.

"Get your knife open, Dave, while I hold the light," ordered Dick.
"We've got to have Greg free at once. See how white and sick he looks."

Slash! Dave cut away the gag first of all, picking out all he could of
the gag.

"Ugh!" sputtered young Holmes, spitting out shreds of oakum. "You bet
I'm sick!"

"How do you feel?" Dick asked anxiously, as Dave rolled Greg over and
began to cut away the cords at the lad's wrists.

"Sick!" muttered Greg. "Sick of the very taste of that oakum stuff. Did
you ever eat any oakum?"

"Can't say that I did," laughed Dick merrily, now that he knew at last
that his chum was safe.

"You haven't missed much," growled Greg.

"There, your hands are free," announced practical Dave. "How long have
you been here, Holmesy?"

