never go home. None of the wise men ever heard of such things. What
shall we do?"

"It is easy enough to wrap fire in paper," answered the voice. "Here is
a piece of paper. Now watch." They watched, and the strangest thing in
all the world happened right before their eyes. There was no one to be
seen, but a piece of paper appeared on the ground and folded itself into
a Japanese lantern. "Now put a candle inside," said the voice, "and you
have paper holding fire. What more could you ask?"

Then the older woman was happy, but the younger was still sad. She saw
now that fire could be carried in paper, but surely no one could carry
wind. "O dear voice," she cried, "can any one carry wind in paper?"

"That is much easier than to carry fire," replied the voice, "for wind
does not burn holes. Watch."

They watched eagerly. Another piece of paper came all by itself and lay
on the ground between them. There was a picture on it of a tree covered
with white blossoms. Two women stood under the tree, gathering the
blossoms.

"The two women are yourselves," said the voice, "and the blossoms are
the gifts that the father-in-law will give you when you go home."

"But I cannot go home," the younger wailed, "for I cannot carry wind
wrapped in paper."

"Here is the paper, and there is always plenty of wind. Why not take
them?"

"Indeed, I do not know how," the younger woman answered sorrowfully.

"This way, of course," said the voice. Some long, light twigs flew to
the paper. It folded itself, over, under, together. It opened and
closed, and it waved itself before the tearful face of the younger
woman. "Does not the wind come to your face?" asked the voice, "and is
it not the fan that has brought it? The lantern carries fire wrapped in
paper, and the fan carries wind wrapped in paper."

Then, indeed, the two young women were happy, and when they came to the
home of their father-in-law, he was as glad as they. He gave them
beautiful gifts of gold and silver, and he said, "No one ever had such
marvels before as the lantern and the fan, but in my home there are two
more precious things than these, and they are my two dear daughters."




VOCABULARY OF THE BOOK OF NATURE MYTHS.


NOTE.--This vocabulary is supplementary to that of THE HIAWATHA PRIMER.
Nouns and verbs which are inflected regularly are entered under but one
form.

_Pages 1-4_
first
humming-bird
ago
know
flames
last
people

_Pages 4-7_
again
fled

_Pages 7-9_
grew

_Pages 10-12_
butterflies
stones
some
would
men
could
beauty
life

_Pages 13-15_
woodpecker
man
cake
put
bake
large
small

_Pages 15-19_
magician
fever
breath
shot
fight
ever
wound
head
crest
another
blood

_Pages 19-23_
serpent
hissed
cat
shut
quick
always
fall

_Pages 23-28_
swallow
tail
forked
animals
year
meet
mosquito
whose
tore
tongue

_Pages 28-31_
hares
snowflakes
feet
firebrand

_Pages 31-34_
magpie
time
home
warm
brought
merrily
sorry
eggs
busy
taking
care
well

_Pages 34-36_
raven
thief
happened
wood-worm
only
himself
pieces

_Pages 36-40_
more
gone
get
let
any
wolf
pond
near
bat
rain
quickly

_Pages 40, 41_
catch
caught
tried
curled
throw

_Pages 41, 42_
fast
hand
soon

_Pages 43-46_
quail
snipe
never
crept
carrying
pulled
bill
legs
mole

_Pages 47-49_
sheds
grandfather
marsh
drink
drank
burst
done
off

_Pages 50-52_
dove
manito
brave
crying
Hoots
too
known
most

_Pages 52-56_
parrot
repeats
truth
ox
owner
yes
villagers
punish
next
think
jar
even
storm
thunder
mocking-bird
replied

_Pages 56-59_
cunning
baby
voices
owned
own
mock

_Pages 60-64_
fox
sheep
cows
fields
growl
should
Mr.
eaten
cream

_Pages 64-67_
girl
whom
treated
sister
happy
please
covered
really

_Pages 68-70_
troubles
lies
remember
dies
lip
split

_Pages 70-72_
peetweet
flies
eagerly
lakes
hollows
thirsty

_Pages 72-75_
short
fish
such
easy
ice
frozen
hole
worse
slowly
angrily
wish

_Pages 76-78_
wren
king
choose
which
wise
than
eagle
wisest

_Pages 79-82_
often
does
wicked
strange
knife
sharpen
harm

_Pages 83-86_
grasshopper
country
Tithonus
goddess
Aurora
begged
speak
roamed
fairest
immortal

_Pages 86-89_
oriole
power
ruler
master
yield
clouds
lightning
may
hornet

_Pages 89-93_
peacock
Juno
queen
world
played
tricks
Argus
hundred
Mercury
belonged

_Pages 93-95_
bees
tribes
while
honey

_Pages 96-98_
rich
poor
sowed
ground
seed
mine

_Pages 98-102_
ants
full
almost
house
sense
smell
pearl
lost
dire
named
bag
box
bagged

_Pages 103-106_
face
after
top
gaze
side
far-away

_Pages 107-110_
diamonds
chief
enemies
stolen
search
mourned
wife
Moneta
mother
tears
indeed

_Pages 111-114_
Runoia
shyly
true
sweet
kinds
harp
touched
strings
wailing

_Pages 114-117_
emeralds
vase
precious
air
India
roll
waves
deepest

_Pages 118-122_
flown
berries
broken
might
spring
willow
spruce
juniper

_Pages 122-125_
aspen
guides
swarm
reason
despise
both
anywhere
places

_Pages 125-128_
heather
plants
contented
violet
fragrance
daisy
chose

_Pages 128-132_
flax
sight
hall
sparkling
gift
spin
weave
linen
Holda

_Pages 133-135_
cranberries
meadow
cranberry
woods
hominy

_Pages 135-138_
salt
Frothi
millstones
grind
gate
rest
weary
ship
else
bottom

_Pages 138-141_
crane
hold
bitterly
witch
obey
surely
taken

_Pages 142-145_
Turtle
fierce
dare
ready
sure
shields
breast
arms
just
declared

_Pages 145-150_
crocodile
wide
mouth
kingdom
calm
swim
suddenly
dragged
open
anything
carried
sword
able

_Pages 150-154_
Japan
picture
changing
dragon
island
mean
used
tell
moment

_Pages 155-159_
pass
perhaps
brooks
better
followed
course
hurt
