
"How do you think he does it?" asked Mrs. Bickford in astonishment.

"I give it up," said the blacksmith.

"He's a smart critter. Do you think they pay him?"

"I reckon he gets two or three dollars a week, but he hain't no business
to hire out to the circus folks. He's going back with us to-night, and
I'll turn him out a blacksmith in two years."

When Kit had finished his act, he went to the dressing room and changed
his clothes.

"I wonder whether the old fellow is after me!" he thought. "What could
have put it into his head that I was here?"

As he emerged from the dressing room he met Mr. Barlow, the proprietor
of the circus, who advanced towards him, and shook his hand cordially.

"Bravo, my young friend!" he said. "You did yourself great credit. Are
you sure you have never performed in a circus before?"

"Quite sure, sir."

"You went through your act like an old professional. You did as well as
either of the other two."

"Thank you, sir. I am glad you are satisfied."

"I ought to be. I regard you as a decided acquisition to my show. Keep
on doing your best, and I can assure you that your efforts will be
appreciated. How much did I agree to pay you?"

"Ten dollars a week, sir."

"That isn't enough. I raise your salary at once to twenty-five."

Kit was dazzled by his good fortune. What! Twenty-five dollars a week
and traveling expenses for a boy of sixteen! It seemed marvelous.

"I am afraid I am dreaming, Mr. Barlow," he said. "I can't believe that
I am really to receive so handsome a salary."

"You will realize it to-night when you collect your first week's pay."

"But this won't be a full week, sir."

"Never mind! You shall receive full pay. Do you think I forget your
heroic act at Smyrna?"

"Thank you, sir. I hope nothing will prevent my continuing in your
employ."

"What should prevent?" asked Mr. Barlow, quickly. "Have you had an offer
from another show?"

"No, sir; I am not well known enough for that; but I saw a man in the
audience who would probably like to get me away."

"Who is it?"

"A blacksmith from Oakford."

"I don't understand. What have you to do with a blacksmith?"

Kit explained briefly.

"When do you think he will try to recover possession of you?" asked the
circus proprietor.

"Just after the show is over."

"Has he any papers?"

"Not one."

"Then he has no claim on you. If he makes any trouble let me know."

"I will, Mr. Barlow."




CHAPTER XVII.

KIT'S STRATAGEM.


Kit, when dressed, sought the part of the house where he knew that
William Morris was seated.

"How did I do, Will?" he asked.

"Splendidly!" answered the boy enthusiastically. "I felt proud of you."

"I think I have a right to be satisfied myself. I have had my pay
raised."

"You don't mean to say you are to get more than ten dollars?" said his
friend, opening his eyes in amazement.

"I am raised to twenty-five."

"You don't mean to say you are to get twenty-five dollars a week, Kit?"

"Yes, I do."

"And your board?"

"And my board and traveling expenses," added Kit, with a smile.

"I wish I were in your shoes, Kit," said William. "Think of me with only
one dollar a week."

"Would you be willing to go through my acts for the money I am going to
receive?"

William shook his head.

"I couldn't do it, Kit," he replied. "It always makes me dizzy when I
have my head down. I don't believe I could ever do anything in a
circus."

"Well, William, I won't forget you. If I save money, as I am sure to do,
I'll see if I can't do something for you by and by. By the way, did you
see Mr. and Mrs. Bickford?"

"No, you don't mean to say they are here?"

"Look over there!"

William followed the direction of Kit's finger, and he easily discovered
the blacksmith and his wife.

"By gracious! You're right!" he said. "It's the first money I've known
old Bickford to pay for any amusement for years."

"They came after me, William."

"You won't go back with them?"

"Not much. I don't care to give up twenty-five dollars a week for the
privilege of learning the trade of a blacksmith."

"Suppose they try to carry you off?"

"That gives me an idea. With your help I'll try to play a trick on them.
It'll be capital fun."

"Go ahead and tell me what it is, Kit. I'm with you!"

"My plan is that you should ride home with Mr. Bickford," said Kit.

"I don't understand," said William, looking puzzled.

"I'll tell you my idea. Bickford has come here with the intention of
taking me back with him to Oakford."

"But you don't mean to go?"

"Of course not, but when the show is over I shall put myself in his way,
and after a little objection agree to go. I will ask for five minutes to
get ready. In that time I will change hats with you, and as it is dark
you can easily pass yourself off for me."

"Capital!" exclaimed William, laughing. "Won't the old man look foolish
when he finds out who is with him?"

"Don't let him know till you arrive, or he would force you to leave the
carriage, and walk home alone, and a six mile walk is no joke."

"All right Kit! I understand, and I think I can carry out your idea. I
haven't much love for the old man or his wife either, and I am glad of a
chance to get even with them."

The performance continued till ten o'clock. The blacksmith and his wife
enjoyed it beyond their anticipations. Amusements of any kind were new
to them, and their pleasure was like that of children.

"I begin to think, Sarah, we shall get our money's worth," said Aaron
cautiously, as the entertainment neared its end; "this is a great show."

"So it is, Aaron. I don't begrudge the money myself, though fifty cents
is a pretty high price to pay. Then, besides, you'll have a chance to
carry the boy home."

"That's so, Sarah. Just as soon as the show is over, foller me, and
we'll try to find him."

At length the last act was ended, and the crowd of spectators began
pouring from the tent.

Mr. Bickford hurriedly emerged from the audience, and began to look
around for Kit. He had but little trouble in finding him, for the boy
purposely put himself in his way. Aaron Bickford strode up to him.

"Well, I've caught you at last!" he said, putting his hand on the boy's
shoulder.

"What do you want of me, Mr. Bickford?" said Kit.

"What do I want of you? Well, I want you to go home with me, of
course."

"Won't you let me stay with the circus a week?" asked Kit, in a subdued
tone.

"No, I won't. I've got the wagon here, and I'm goin' to take you back
with me to-night."

"If you really think my uncle wishes it, perhaps I had better go," said
Kit, in what appeared to be a wavering tone.

Mr. Bickford was quite elated. He feared he should have trouble in
persuading Kit to accompany him. He would not have been surprised if the
boy had disappeared, and given him trouble to find him, and his
unexpected submissiveness was an agreeable surprise.

"Well, boy, it's time to be goin'. Oakford's six miles off, and we won't
get home before midnight unless we start right off."

"I'll go and get my things, Mr. Bickford. Where is your horse and
wagon?"

"Out by the entrance. It's hitched to a tree."

"All right! You go and unhitch the horse, and I'll be right along."

"But suppose you give me the slip? You'd better go along now."

"I'll bring him with me, Mr. Bickford," said the giant. "I'm sorry he
isn't going to stay with us, and I'll see him off."

Achilles Henderson spoke in so straightforward a manner that Mr.
Bickford was deceived.

"Very well," he said. "I'll go along with Mrs. Bickford. Don't keep me
waitin', for it's gettin' late."

The blacksmith and his wife took up their march to the place where their
team had been hitched. They found it safe, and untied the horse.

"We're goin' to have a dark ride home, mother," he said.

"Yes, Aaron, but you've done a good evening's work."

"That's so, Sarah. I expected I'd have more trouble with the boy."

"There's nothing like being firm, Aaron. When he saw you were in
earnest, he gave up."

"I mean to keep a tight rein on him, Sarah. He's a boy that likes to
have his own way, if I ain't greatly mistaken. We must break his will."

The horse was unhitched, and still Kit had not arrived. Mr. Bickford
began to fear that he had been tricked after all, when two figures,
contrasting strongly with each other, appeared. One was the giant, in
his ample height, and the other was a boy.

"There they are, Aaron!" said Mrs. Bickford, who was the first to descry
the oddly assorted pair.

"Where is the boy to sit?" asked Achilles.

"In the back seat. Mother and I will sit in front."

"All right! There you are!" said Mr. Henderson, lifting the boy in his
arms, as easily as if he were a kitten, and putting him on the rear
seat.

"Good-by, Kit!" he said. "I'm sorry you're going to leave us. Perhaps
Mr. Bickford will let you off if we show anywhere near here."

"The boy will be at work, and can't be let off," said the blacksmith,
stiffly. "But it is time we were off."

"Good-by, then, Kit!"

"Good-by!" said the supposed Kit, in a low tone, for he feared that the
difference in his voice would be recognized. But Mr. Bickford had no
suspicions. He was anxious to get started, for he and his wife were
always in bed by this time ordinarily.

So the team started, and Achilles Henderson, suppressing a laugh,
strode away to the circus cars, which were already being prepared for a
midnight journey to the next place. It may be explained here that the
circus of to-day generally owns its own cars, which are used for the
conveyance of all connected with it, their luggage, the tents, the
animals, and all the paraphernalia of the show. As soon as the show is
ended, the canvas men set to work to take down and fold up the tents.
All the freight is conveyed to the cars, and the razorbacks, already
referred to, set about loading them. The performers, ticketmen, and
candy butchers seek their berths in the sleeping cars and are often in
the land of dreams before the train starts.

While Mr. Bickford was driving in the darkness to Oakford with the
supposed Kit on the back seat, the real Kit was in his berth in the
circus cars, preparing for a refreshing night's rest.




CHAPTER XVIII.

MR. BICKFORD'S MORTIFYING DISCOVERY.


Mr. Bickford was in excellent spirits. He had enjoyed the evening, and
although he had been compelled to disburse a dollar for two circus
tickets, a sum which to him seemed large, he was disposed to acknowledge
that he had received his money's worth. Besides, and this seemed to him
the greatest triumph of all, he had recovered his runaway apprentice, or
thought he had. He inwardly resolved that Kit should smart for his past
insubordination, though he had not yet decided in what way he would get
even with him. The unexpected submissiveness shown by Kit elated him,
and confirmed him in the idea he had long entertained that he could
manage boys a good deal better than the average of men.

"Talk about hard cases," he said one day to his wife. "I'd like to see
the boy that can get the start of Aaron Bickford. He'll have to get up
unusually airly in the mornin'."

Mr. Bickford felt a little like crowing over his captive, and turned his
head partly round to survey the boy on the back seat. Fortunately for
William the darkness was so great that there was small chance of his
detecting the imposture.

"I reckon you didn't expect to be ridin' back to Oakford along of me
this evenin'," he observed.

"No, sir," muttered William in a voice scarcely audible.

"Ho, ho, you feel kind of grouty, eh?" said the blacksmith. "Well, I
ain't much surprised. You thought you could have your own way with Aaron
Bickford, but you're beginnin' to see your mistake, I reckon?"

"Yes, sir," replied the supposed Kit, in a meek voice.

"Ho, ho! That's the way boys ginerally come out when they try to buck
agin' their elders. Not but you might have succeeded with some men, but
you didn't know the man you had to deal with this time."

There was a sort of gurgle, for William was trying hard not to laugh, as
he was picturing to himself the rage and mortification of Mr. Bickford
when he discovered the deceit that had been practiced upon him. But the
blacksmith misunderstood the sound, and thought Kit was sobbing.

"You needn't take on!" he said, magnanimously. "It ain't so bad as it
might be. You'll be a good deal better off learnin' a good trade than
trampin' round the country with the circus. I hope this'll be a lesson
to you. You'd better not try to run away ag'in, for it won't be no use.
You won't always have that long-legged giant to help you. If I'd done
right, I should have had him took up for 'sault and battery. He needn't
think because he's eight feet high, more or less, that he can defy the
laws of the land. I reckon he got a little skeered of what he done, or
he wouldn't have acted so different this evening."

William did not reply to this. He was rather in hopes Mr. Bickford would
stop addressing him, for he did not like to run the risk of answering,
as it might open the eyes of the blacksmith to the fact that he had the
wrong boy in the wagon.

The distance to Oakford steadily diminished, though Mr. Bickford's horse
was a slow one. At length it had dwindled to half a mile.

"Now I don't care if he does find out who I am," thought William. "It
ain't but a little way home now, and I shouldn't mind walking." Still
his own house was rather beyond Mr. Bickford's, and it was just as well
to ride the whole way, if he could escape detection so long.

"Where did you learn them circus performances, Christopher?" suddenly
asked the blacksmith, turning once more in his seat.

By this time they were within a few rods of the blacksmith's yard, and
William became bold, now that he had nothing to lose by it.

"My name isn't Christopher," he answered in his usual tone.

"Your name isn't Christopher? That's what your uncle told me."

"I think you are mistaken," said William quietly.

"What's got into the boy? Is he goin' to deny his own name? What is your
name, then?"

"My name is William Morris," was the distinct response.

"What!" exclaimed the blacksmith in amazement.

"I think you ought to know me, Mr. Bickford. I worked for you some time,
you know."

"Take off your hat, and let me look at your face!" said Aaron Bickford,
sternly.

William laughed as he complied with the request. It was now rather
lighter, and the blacksmith, peering into his face, saw that it was
indeed true--that the boy on the back seat was not Kit Watson at all,
but his ex-apprentice, William Morris.

"It's Bill Morris, by the living jingo!" he exclaimed. "What do you say
to that, Sarah?"

"You're a master hand at managing boys, Aaron," said his wife
sarcastically.

"How came you in the wagon, Bill Morris?" demanded Bickford, not caring
to answer his wife.

"The giant put me in," answered William.

