
"We are glad to see you Mr. Kent," said Ferguson. "Tom and I were
discussing our plans, but we've plenty of time for that. Come in. Here's
a place for you."

"I hear that you are going to leave us, you two?"

"Yes, Tom has some business in San Francisco, and I want to see a little
more of the country."

"How are you going?"

"We'll take the cars if we can find any," answered Tom. "If we can't
we'll foot it."

"That's what I came to see you about. You know I've got a horse and
wagon."

"Yes."

"Why don't you buy it? You'll go easier and quicker."

"We can't afford it," said Ferguson. "Poor men must walk."

"You don't see the point. When you get through with the team, you can
easily sell them for more than you gave. It will be a good speculation."

"That will depend on how much we give," said the Scotchman, shrewdly.

"To be sure, Mr. Ferguson. Now about that, I'll be easy. They ain't any
good to me here. I'll take--let me see--four hundred dollars cash.
You'll maybe double your money inside of a month."

The team did seem cheap at this price, as prices of all articles in a
new country are very much enhanced.

"Tom and I will talk it over and let you know to-morrow morning," said
Ferguson.

"That's all right. It's a good chance for you."

When Kent was gone Tom asked, "What do you think of his offer, Mr.
Ferguson?"

"I think it will be a good investment, Tom, and that we shall be less
likely to be robbed than if we carried gold-dust with us. You know how
John Miles got robbed."

"I have only a hundred dollars," said Tom, doubtfully.

"I have enough to add to it, but I think we can get the team cheaper. I
don't want to beat the man down, but a bargain is a bargain, and we must
look out for our own interest."

"You know more about such things than I do, Mr. Ferguson; I will agree
to anything you say."

"Very well, my lad, I shall be sure to consult your interest as well as
my own. It will be very comfortable for us to have a team of our own."

"It will seem strange to me," said Tom, laughing. "What will they think
at home when they hear that I have set up a carriage?"

"They might think it imprudent to invest all you had in that way; but
we'll make money out of it yet, or I am sorely mistaken."

The next morning, while Tom and Ferguson were at work, Kent came up to
them.

"What have you decided about the team?" he asked.

"We are not willing to pay four hundred dollars," said Ferguson.

"That's a fair price."

"It may be, but it will take all the money Tom and I can raise. You know
it wouldn't be quite prudent for us to part with all our funds."

"I will take a note for part of the money," said Kent.

"That's very considerate of you, but scarcely prudent."

"Then don't you want it at all?" asked Kent, disappointed.

"Yes; we are prepared with an offer. We'll give you three hundred
dollars."

Kent shook his head.

"That's too little," he said.

Ferguson remained silent. He wished to give Kent time to reflect upon
his offer.

"Have you sold these claims of yours?" asked Kent, after a pause.

"No."

"Then add them to your offer, and I accept it."

This proposal struck Ferguson favorably. They could not carry away their
claims, and very possibly no other purchaser might offer, as, except as
regards location, other places along the river-bank could be had without
cost.

"What do you say, Tom?" asked Ferguson.

"I agree if you do, Mr. Ferguson."

"Then it's a bargain, Mr. Kent. I hope it'll prove satisfactory to both
of us."

"I don't think you'll regret it. It's a good speculation."

When the two friends had settled for their purchase, Tom paying one
hundred and Ferguson two hundred dollars, our hero found himself left
with twenty dollars, or its equivalent in gold-dust, while his companion
had about one hundred and fifty left over.

"We shall go off in style," said Tom; "riding in our own carriage. But
there's one thing I have been thinking of. I want to send a hundred
dollars home as soon as I get the chance. Suppose we can't sell the
team?"

"Have no fears about that, Tom. I'll lend you the money if that is the
case; but, mark my word, we shan't have it left on our hands, of that
you may be sure."

The night before they were to start Lawrence Peabody dropped in. He was
looking down in the mouth.

"How does the world use you, Mr. Peabody?" inquired Tom.

"Fortune is against me," said Peabody. "I'm tired of River Bend."

Tom glanced at his companion. He could guess what was coming.

"Won't you take me with you, Tom?" entreated the young Bostonian.

"You must ask Mr. Ferguson. He is the head of our party."

Peabody looked appealingly towards Ferguson, but the Scotchman shook his
head.

"You mustn't be offended, Mr. Peabody," he said, "when I tell you that
you are responsible for your own bad luck. You have had just as good a
chance as Tom or I."

"Your claim was better."

"There was no difference that I can see, except that we worked, and you
didn't. You don't expect gold to come to you?"

"You and Tom are more used to hard work than I," murmured Peabody.

"If you did not feel able to work, you should not have come to
California. A man must work harder here than at home, and then he stands
a chance of succeeding better."

"Then you won't take me?" asked Peabody, sadly.

"Are you in debt to Captain Fletcher for board?"

Peabody reluctantly admitted that he was, but had no idea how much he
owed.

"Fletcher tells me that he shall not trust you any longer."

Lawrence Peabody looked frightened.

"What shall I do?" he faltered. "I shall starve."

"You can't blame the captain; he knows that you spend the little money
you do earn at the saloon. But he will give you a chance. There is no
one to wash clothes in the camp, and we have all observed that you keep
yours looking well. If you will set up a laundry, you can make more
money than in any other way."

"But then I should be a common washer-woman," objected Peabody. "What
would my friends in Boston say?"

"They won't hear of it. Besides, a man can do here what he would not do
at home."

It may be stated here that Peabody, finding work absolutely needful,
went into partnership with a Chinaman, who arrived at the camp a day or
two later, and succeeded in making a fair living, which hitherto he had
been unable to do. After he was employed, his visits to the saloon
became less frequent. At times he was disturbed by the fear that his
friends at home might learn the character of his employment; apart from
this he found his new business, with the income it yielded, not
distasteful.




CHAPTER XIV.

A NEW ACQUAINTANCE.


Having made all necessary preparations, Ferguson and Tom set out on
their way. They took a course differing somewhat from that chosen by
John Miles, one object being to survey the country, and find, if
possible, a suitable place for continuing their search for gold. After
their three months' steady work both of our travellers were prepared to
enjoy the journey. Their road was difficult at times, from its
steepness, and more than once they found it necessary, out of
consideration for the horse, to get out and walk. But this only added to
the romantic charm of the trip.

"It's like a constant picnic," said Tom. "I should like to travel this
way for a year, if I did not feel the need of working."

"We might tire of it after a while," suggested Ferguson,--"in the rainy
season, for example."

"That would not be so pleasant, to be sure," Tom admitted. "Do you have
such fine scenery in Scotland, Mr. Ferguson?"

"Our mountains are not so high, my lad, nor our trees so gigantic; but
it's the associations that make them interesting. Every hill has a
legend connected with it, and our great novelist, Walter Scott, has
invested them with a charm that draws pilgrims from all parts of the
world to see them. Now this is a new country--beautiful, I grant, but
without a history. Look around you, and you will see nothing to remind
you of man. It is nature on a grand scale, I admit, but the soul is
wanting."

"I like mountains," said Tom, thoughtfully. "There is something grand
about them."

"There are some famous mountains in your native State, New Hampshire,
are there not, Tom?"

"Yes; but I have only seen them from a distance. They are not above
thirty miles away from where I was born; but poor people don't travel in
search of scenery, Mr. Ferguson."

"No, my lad, and there's another thing I have noticed. We don't care
much for the curiosities that are near us. The people about here, if
there are any settled inhabitants, care nothing about the mountains, I
doubt."

"That is true. In our village at home there is an old man nearly eighty
years old who has never visited the mountains, though he has lived near
them all his life."

"I can well believe it, my lad. But what is that?"

The sound which elicited this exclamation was a loud "Hollo!" evidently
proceeding from some one in their rear.

Both Tom and the Scotchman turned, and their eyes rested on a horseman
evidently spurring forward to overtake them. Tom, who was driving,
reined in the horse, and brought him to a stop. The horseman was soon
even with them.

He was evidently a Yankee. All Yankees do not carry about with them an
unmistakable certificate of their origin, but Ebenezer Onthank was a
typical New Englander. His face was long and thin, his expression shrewd
and good-natured, his limbs were long and ungainly. In later life, with
the addition of forty or fifty pounds of flesh, he would be much
improved in appearance.

"Good-morning, gentlemen," said he. "It seems kinder good to see a human
face again. It ain't very populous round here, is it?"

"We haven't seen any large towns," said Tom, smiling.

"Where are you steerin'?" inquired the Yankee. "I'm expectin' to fetch
up at San Francisco some time, if I don't get lost in the woods."

"That is our destination, my friend," returned Ferguson.

"Would you mind my joining your party?" asked Onthank. "It's lonesome
travelin' by one's self without a soul to speak to."

"We shall be glad of your company," said the Scotchman, sincerely, for,
though naturally cautious, he could not suspect the new-comer of
anything which would make him an undesirable companion.

"Perhaps you'd like to know who I am," said the new acquaintance. "My
name is Ebenezer Onthank, from Green Mountain Mills, in Vermont. My
father is deacon of the Baptist Church at home."

"I suppose you will take his place when you get older," said Tom,
gravely.

"No, I guess not. I wonder what Susan Jones would say to my bein' a
deacon!" and Ebenezer burst into a loud laugh.

"Is Miss Jones a particular friend of yours?" asked Tom, slyly.

"I should say she was. Why, I expect to marry her when I get home."

"I congratulate you."

"Don't be too fast. We ain't hitched yet. Say, boy, where do you come
from?"

"From Vernon, in New Hampshire."

"You don't say! Why, that ain't more'n fifty miles from Green Mountain
Mills; cu'rus we should meet so fur away from hum, ain't it? When did
you start?"

"Seven or eight months ago."

"I've been in California six months. Does that gentleman come from your
town?"

"My friend," answered the Scotchman, not without a touch of pride, "I am
not an American; I am from the Highlands of Scotland."

"You be? Sho! Well, of course you can't help that."

"Help it, sir? I am proud of hailing from the land of Scott and Burns."

"Well, I guess it's a pretty nice sort of country," said Mr. Onthank,
patronizingly. "I guess you'll like America best, though."

"I am by no means sure of that, my friend," said Ferguson, a little
nettled. "America's all very well, but--"

"Why, you could put Scotland into its waist-coat pocket, and there'd be
plenty of room left," said Ebenezer, energetically.

"I admit that, as regards size, Scotland cannot compare with this
country."

"Say, have you got mountains as high as them, or trees as high as that?"
pointing to a gigantic redwood.

"No; but size is not everything."

