the negative pole, and oxygen at the positive pole. These gases will
escape upwardly, so that they will be trapped in their respective
compartments, and may be drawn off by means of the pipes.

PURIFYING WATER.--Advantage is taken of this electrolytic action, to
purify water. Oxygen is the most wonderful chemical in nature. It is
called the acid-maker of the universe. The name is derived from two
words, _oxy_ and _gen_; one denoting oxydation, and the other that it
generates. In other words, it is the _generator of oxides_. It is the
element which, when united with any other element, produces an acid, an
alkali or a neutral compound.

RUST.--For instance, iron is largely composed of ferric acid. When
oxygen, in a free or gaseous state, comes into contact with iron, it
produces ferrous oxide, which is recognized as rust.

OXYGEN AS A PURIFIER.--But oxygen is also a purifier. All low forms of
animal life, like bacteria or germs in water, succumb to free oxygen. By
_free oxygen_ is meant oxygen in the form of gas.

COMPOSITION OF WATER.--Now, water, in which harmful germs live, is
one-third oxygen. Nevertheless, the germs thrive in water, because the
oxygen is in a compound state, and, therefore, not an active agent. But
if oxygen, in the form of gas, can be forced through water, it will
attack the germs, and destroy them.

COMMON AIR NOT A GOOD PURIFIER.--Water may be purified, to a certain
extent, by forcing common air through it, and the foulest water, if run
over rocks, will be purified, in a measure, because air is intermingled
with it. But common air is composed of four-fifths nitrogen, and only
one-fifth oxygen, and, as nitrogen is the staple article of food for
bacteria, the purifying method by air is not effectual.

PURE OXYGEN.--When, however, oxygen is generated from water, by means of
electrolysis, it is pure; hence is more active and is not tainted by a
life-giving substance for germs, such as nitrogen.

The mechanism usually employed for purifying water is shown in Fig. 90.

A WATER PURIFIER.--The case (A, Fig. 90) may be made of metal or of an
insulating material. If made of metal it must be insulated within with
slate, glass, marble or hard rubber, as shown at B. The case is provided
with exterior flanges (C, D), with upper and lower ends, and it is
mounted upon a base plate (E) and affixed thereto by bolts. The upper
end has a conically-formed cap (F) bolted to the flanges (C), and this
has an outlet to which a pipe (G) is attached. The water inlet pipe (H)
passes through the lower end of the case (A). The electrodes (I, J) are
secured, vertically, within the case, separated from each other
equidistant, each alternate electrode being connected up with one wire
(K), and the alternate electrodes with a wire (L).

[Illustration: _Fig. 90._ ELECTRIC WATER PURIFIER]

When the water passes upwardly, the decomposed or gaseous oxygen
percolates through the water and thus attacks the germs and destroys
them.

THE USE OF HYDROGEN IN PURIFICATION.--On the other hand, the hydrogen
also plays an important part in purifying the water. This depends upon
the material of which the electrodes are made. Aluminum is by far the
best material, as it is one of nature's most active purifiers. All clay
contains aluminum, in what is known as the sulphate form, and water
passing through the clay of the earth thereby becomes purified, because
of this element.

ALUMINUM ELECTRODES.--When this material is used as the electrodes in
water, hydrate of aluminum is formed, or a compound of hydrogen and
oxygen with aluminum. The product of decomposition is a flocculent
matter which moves upwardly through the water, giving it a milky
appearance. This substance is like gelatine, so that it entangles or
enmeshes the germ life and prevents it from passing through a filter.

If no filter is used, this flocculent matter, as soon as it has given
off the gases, will settle to the bottom and carry with it all
decomposed matter, such as germs and other organic matter attacked by
the oxygen, which has become entangled in the aluminum hydrate.

ELECTRIC HAND PURIFIER.--An interesting and serviceable little purifier
may be made by any boy with the simplest tools, by cutting out three
pieces of sheet aluminum. Hard rolled is best for the purpose. It is
better to have one of the sheets (A), the middle one, thicker than the
two outer plates (B).

[Illustration: _Fig. 91._ PORTABLE ELECTRIC PURIFIER]

Let each sheet be 1-1/2 inches wide and 5-1/2 inches thick. One-half
inch from the upper ends of the two outside plates (B, B) bore bolt
holes (C), each of these holes being a quarter of an inch from the edge
of the plate. The inside plate (A) has two large holes (D) corresponding
with the small holes (C) in the outside plates. At the upper end of this
plate form a wing (E), 1/2 inch wide and 1/2 inch long, provided with a
small hole for a bolt. Next cut out two hard-rubber blocks (F), each
1-1/2 inches long, 1 inch wide and 3/8 inch thick, and then bore a hole
(G) through each, corresponding with the small holes (C) in the plates
(B). The machine is now ready to be assembled. If the inner plate is 1/8
inch thick and the outer plates each 1/16 inch thick, use two small
eighth-inch bolts 1-1/4 inches long, and clamp together the three
plates with these bolts. One of the bolts may be used to attach thereto
one of the electric wires (H), and the other wire (I) is attached by a
bolt to the wing (E).

[Illustration: _Figs. 92-95._ DETAILS OF PORTABLE PURIFIER]

Such a device will answer for a 110-volt circuit, in ordinary water. Now
fill a glass nearly full of water, and stand the purifier in the glass.
Within a few minutes the action of electrolysis will be apparent by the
formation of numerous bubbles on the plates, followed by the
decomposition of the organic matter in the water. At first the
flocculent decomposed matter will rise to the surface of the water, but
before many minutes it will settle to the bottom of the glass and leave
clear water above.

PURIFICATION AND SEPARATION OF METALS.--This electrolytic action is
utilized in metallurgy for the purpose of producing pure metals, but it
is more largely used to separate copper from its base. In order to
utilize a current for this purpose, a high ampere flow and low voltage
are required. The sheets of copper, containing all of its impurities,
are placed within a tank, parallel with a thin copper sheet. The impure
sheet is connected with the positive pole of an electroplating dynamo,
and the thin sheet of copper is connected with the negative pole. The
electrolyte in the tank is a solution of sulphate of copper. The action
of the current will cause the pure copper in the impure sheet to
disintegrate and it is then carried over and deposited upon the thin
sheet, this action continuing until the impure sheet is entirely eaten
away. All the impurities which were in the sheet fall to the bottom of
the tank.

Other metals are treated in the same way, and this treatment has a very
wide range of usefulness.

ELECTROPLATING.--The next feature to be considered in electrolysis is a
most interesting and useful one, because a cheap or inferior metal may
be coated by a more expensive metal. Silver and nickel plating are
brought about by this action of a current passing through metals, which
are immersed in an electrolyte.

PLATING IRON WITH COPPER.--We have room in this chapter for only one
concrete example of this work, which, with suitable modifications, is an
example of the art as practiced commercially. Iron, to a considerable
extent, is now being coated with copper to preserve it from rust. To
carry out this work, however, an electroplating dynamo, of large
amperage, is required, the amperage, of course, depending upon the
surface to be treated at one time. The pressure should not exceed 5
volts.

The iron surface to be treated should first be thoroughly cleansed, and
then immediately put into a tank containing a cyanide of copper
solution. Two forms of copper solution are used, namely, the cyanide,
which is a salt solution of copper, and the sulphate, which is an acid
solution of copper. Cyanide is first used because it does not attack the
iron, as would be the case if the sulphate solution should first come
into contact with the iron.

A sheet of copper, termed the anode, is then placed within the tank,
parallel with the surface to be plated, known as the cathode, and so
mounted that it may be adjusted to or from the iron surface, or cathode.
A direct current of electricity is then caused to flow through the
copper plate and into the iron plate or surface, and the plating
proceeded with until the iron surface has a thin film of copper
deposited thereon. This is a slow process with the cyanide solution, so
it is discontinued as soon as possible, after the iron surface has been
completely covered with copper. This copper surface is thoroughly
cleaned off to remove therefrom the saline or alkaline solution, and it
is then immersed within a bath, containing a solution of sulphate of
copper. The current is then thrown on and allowed so to remain until it
has deposited the proper thickness of copper.

DIRECTION OF CURRENT.--If a copper and an iron plate are put into a
copper solution and connected up in circuit with each other, a primary
battery is thereby formed, which will generate electricity. In this
case, the iron will be positive and the copper negative, so that the
current within such a cell would flow from the iron (in this instance,
the anode) to the negative, or cathode.

The action of electroplating reverses this process and causes the
current to flow from the copper to the iron (in this instance, the
cathode).




CHAPTER XIV

ELECTRIC HEATING, THERMO ELECTRICITY


GENERATING HEAT IN A WIRE.--When a current of electricity passes through
a conductor, like a wire, more or less heat is developed in the
conductor. This heat may be so small that it cannot be measured, but it
is, nevertheless, present in a greater or less degree. Conductors offer
a resistance to the passage of a current, just the same as water finds a
resistance in pipes through which it passes. This resistance is measured
in ohms, as explained in a preceding chapter, and it is this resistance
which is utilized for electric heating.

RESISTANCE OF SUBSTANCES.--Silver offers less resistance to the passage
of a current than any other metal, the next in order is copper, while
iron is, comparatively, a poor conductor.

The following is a partial list of metals, showing their relative
conductivity:

Silver              1.
Copper              1.04 to 1.09
Gold                1.38 to 1.41
Aluminum            1.64
Zinc                3.79
Nickel              4.69
Iron                6.56
Tin                 8.9
Lead               13.2
German Silver      12.2 to 15

From this table it will be seen that, for instance, iron offers six and
a half times the resistance of silver, and that German silver has
fifteen times the resistance of silver.

This table is made up of strands of the different metals of the same
diameters and lengths, so as to obtain their relative values.

SIZES OF CONDUCTORS.--Another thing, however, must be understood. If two
conductors of the same metal, having different diameters, receive the
same current of electricity, the small conductor will offer a greater
resistance than the large conductor, hence will generate more heat. This
can be offset by increasing the diameter of the conductor. The metal
used is, therefore, of importance, on account of the cost involved.

COMPARISON OF METALS.--A conductor of aluminum, say, 10 feet long and of
the same weight as copper, has a diameter two and a quarter times
greater than copper; but as the resistance of aluminum is 50 per cent.
more than that of silver, it will be seen that, weight for weight,
copper is the cheaper, particularly as aluminum costs fully three times
as much as copper.

[Illustration: _Fig. 96._ SIMPLE ELECTRIC HEATER]

The table shows that German silver has the highest resistance. Of
course, there are other metals, like antimony, platinum and the like,
which have still higher resistance. German silver, however, is most
commonly used, although there are various alloys of metal made which
have high resistance and are cheaper.

The principle of all electric heaters is the same, namely, the
resistance of a conductor to the passage of a current, and an
illustration of a water heater will show the elementary principles in
all of these devices.

A SIMPLE ELECTRIC HEATER.--In Fig. 96 the illustration shows a cup or
holder (A) for the wire, made of hard rubber. This may be of such
diameter as to fit upon and form the cover for a glass (B). The rubber
should be 1/2 inch thick. Two holes are bored through the rubber cup,
and through them are screwed two round-headed screws (C, D), each screw
being 1-1/2 inches long, so they will project an inch below the cap.
Each screw should have a small hole in its lower end to receive a pin
(E) which will prevent the resistance wire from slipping off.

The resistance wire (F) is coiled for a suitable length, dependent upon
the current used, one end being fastened by wrapping it around the screw
(C). The other end of the wire is then brought upwardly through the
interior of the coil and secured in like manner to the other screw (D).

Caution must be used to prevent the different coils or turns from
touching each other. When completed, the coil may be immersed in water,
the current turned on, and left so until the water is sufficiently
heated.

[Illustration: _Figs. 97-98._ RESISTANCE DEVICE]

HOW TO ARRANGE FOR QUANTITY OF CURRENT USED.--It is difficult to
determine just the proper length the coil should be, or the sizes of the
wire, unless you know what kind of current you have. You may, however,
rig up your own apparatus for the purpose of making it fit your heater,
by preparing a base of wood (A) 8 inches long, 3 inches wide and 1 inch
thick. On this mount four electric lamp sockets (B). Then connect the
inlet wire (C) by means of short pieces of wire (D) with all the sockets
on one side. The outlet wire (E) should then be connected up with the
other sides of the sockets by the short wires (F). If, now, we have one
16-candlepower lamp in one of the sockets, there is a half ampere going
through the wires (C, F). If there are two lamps on the board you will
have 1 ampere, and so on. By this means you may readily determine how
much current you are using and it will also afford you a means of
finding out whether you have too much or too little wire in your coil to
do the work.

[Illustration: _Fig. 99._ PLAN VIEW OF ELECTRIC IRON]

AN ELECTRIC IRON.--An electric iron is made in the same way. The upper
side of a flatiron has a circular or oval depression (A) cast therein,
and a spool of slate (B) is made so it will fit into the depression and
the high resistance wire (C) is wound around this spool, and insulating
material, such as asbestos, must be used to pack around it. Centrally,
the slate spool has an upwardly projecting circular extension (D) which
passes through the cap or cover (E) of the iron. The wires of the
resistance coil are then brought through this circular extension and
are connected up with the source of electrical supply. Wires are now
sold for this purpose, which are adapted to withstand an intense heat.

[Illustration: _Fig. 100._ SECTION OF ELECTRIC IRON]

The foregoing example of the use of the current, through resistance
wires, has a very wide application, and any boy, with these examples
before him, can readily make these devices.

THERMO ELECTRICITY.--It has long been the dream of scientists to convert
heat directly into electricity. The present practice is to use a boiler
to generate steam, an engine to provide the motion, and a dynamo to
convert that motion into electricity. The result is that there is loss
in the process of converting the fuel heat into steam; loss to change
the steam into motion, and loss to make electricity out of the motion
of the engine. By using water-power there is less actual loss; but
water-power is not available everywhere.

CONVERTING HEAT DIRECTLY INTO ELECTRICITY.--Heat may be converted
directly into electricity without using a boiler, an engine or a dynamo,
but it has not been successful from a commercial standpoint. It is
interesting, however, to know and understand the subject, and for that
reason it is explained herein.

METALS; ELECTRIC POSITIVE-NEGATIVE.--To understand the principle, it may
be stated that all metals are electrically positive-negative to each
other. You will remember that it has hereinbefore been stated that if,
for instance, iron and copper are put into an acid solution, a current
will be created or generated thereby. So with zinc and copper, the usual
primary battery elements. In all such cases an electrolyte is used.

Thermo-electricity dispenses with the electrolyte, and nothing is used
but the metallic elements and heat. The word thermo means heat. If, now,
we can select two strips of different metals, and place them as far
apart as possible--that is, in their positive-negative relations with
each other, and unite the end of one with one end of other by means of a
rivet, and then heat the riveted ends, a current will be generated in
the strips. If, for instance, we use an iron in conjunction with a
copper strip, the current will flow from the copper to the iron, because
