"Is that all?" said Annie.

"Yes, that's all," replied Kitty. "I did keep the secret."

"I understand," said Annie. "I should have come back, of course. I did
not remember that I might get you into trouble, Kitty; it did not occur
to me that you were the plucky sort of child you are."

"Plucky?" echoed Guy with some scorn. "I don't call it plucky to be
just decently _honourable_. We don't tell lies. Kitty would have told a
lie if she had broken her word."

"And I promised to come back, and I broke my word," said Annie. "Yes, I
fully understand; it's just like me."

She turned away as she spoke, and, plunging into the shrubbery, was lost
to view.

"Leave her alone, children," said Hester to the astonished children, who
were preparing to follow her. "I knew it would cut her to the heart, but
it can't be helped. She'll be all right by-and-by, but she can't stand
any of you now; you must leave her alone."

Boris came up to Kitty, put his arms round her neck, and kissed her. His
kiss was of the deepest consolation to her; she walked away with him
slowly, and Nell took Hester's hand. Nell's face was like a little white
sheet; she was trembling in her agitation.

"Oh, what is the matter?" she gasped. "Is Nonie awfully hurt? Is it
dangerous? Oh, Hetty, it's worse than the colts! Oh, I felt bad this
morning, but it was nothing to this--nothing! May I stay with you for
the present, Hetty?"

"Yes, darling," said Hester in her kindest voice. "Come into the house
with me. We are all very anxious until we get the doctor's opinion. Your
father and mother are both with Nora; and Dr. Jervis is there and Jane.
Everything is being done that can be done, and we know nothing at
present. Come, Nell, we must be brave--and here is Molly; she is just as
anxious as you."

Nell looked at Molly, who was standing in the porch; she flew to her
eldest sister's side, clasped her arms round her neck, and shed a few
of those silent, rare tears which only came to her now and then, for
Nell was no ordinary child, and rarely showed her deepest feelings.

"I don't know how I'm to live through this suspense," said poor Molly.

But even as she spoke it came to an end.

Mr. Lorrimer came out of the study, closing the door softly behind him.
He strode quickly through the hall, and entered the porch where the
three girls were standing. Molly stepped forward quickly and seized his
arm.

"Well?" she asked.

He gave her a quick look; his face was very pale, and a sudden
contraction of pain flitted across his brow.

"Well, my loves," he said, "we must all try to be as cheerful as we can
and not break down; there isn't a bit of use in breaking down."

"But how is she, father?" asked Molly. "What does Dr. Jervis say?"

"He says, Molly, that poor Nora is very seriously hurt; but it is
impossible to form a reliable opinion on her case so soon. He wishes us
to get Dr. Bentinck from London to see her, and I am going to drive to
Nortonbury to telegraph to him to come at once. Now, don't keep me, my
dears. By the way, Molly, mother says you had better take the children
home as soon as ever you can."

"Oh, may I not stay?" asked Molly.

"No, my dear, I think not; there must be some head at home. Jane
Macalister will stay and help your mother to-night until we can get the
services of a proper nurse. Take the children back as soon as you can,
Molly. God bless you, my love."

The Squire stepped into the doctor's brougham and was driven rapidly
away. Molly raised her hand to her forehead.

"I feel stunned," she said. "Nora was the gayest and the brightest and
the prettiest of us all. Nothing ever seemed to happen to Nora, and now
she is so ill that I may not even see her."

"She will be better to-morrow, I am sure," said Hester.

"Oh, Hetty, if I could only stay here," cried poor Molly.

"I wish you could, Molly, with all my heart."

"We'll know nothing of how she's getting on at the Towers," continued
Molly. "I think it will drive me mad not to know."

"I'll come over very early in the morning and tell you, and perhaps
something may be arranged to-morrow so that you can stay here."

"I might stay instead of Jane. I know I could help mother far better
than Jane can. But there, I suppose I must have patience. Come, Nell."




CHAPTER X.

AN AWFULLY FRIVOLOUS GIRL.


Dr. Bentinck, the great London surgeon, arrived early on the following
morning. Poor Nora was quite conscious now, and in great pain. This
pain, however, was considered rather a good sign than otherwise, for had
the spine been much injured the little girl would have been numbed and
stupid. Dr. Bentinck examined his little patient with great tenderness
and care. His opinion, when it was given, was a great deal more
favourable than anyone dared to hope. He thought that Nora would
eventually be as well as ever again; but although he was sure that there
was no permanent injury to the spine, there was a great deal of present
distress and discomfort to be got through. The little girl must lie
perfectly still on her back for many weeks, and it would be many a long
day before the dancing, romping Nora of old would return to the Towers.

After the night of suspense and terror, however, which poor Mrs.
Lorrimer, by Nora's bedside, and Molly in her lonely little bedroom at
the Towers, had undergone, the great London doctor's news seemed all
that was delightful. Hester hurried to the Towers to put Molly's anxious
heart at rest, and Mrs. Lorrimer returned to the room where Nora was
lying very white and still.

Nora had received a shock the day before which must influence her during
all the remainder of her days. It seemed to shake all her little
artificial affected nature off and to reveal the real Nora, who was
frightened and weak and silly, and yet who had somewhere beneath her
frivolous exterior a real little heart of gold. If there was one person
whom Nora really adored, and in whose presence she was ever her truest
and best, it was her mother. She looked at her mother now as she
re-entered the room.

"Stoop down and tell me," she said in a whisper.

Mrs. Lorrimer bent over her.

"Yes, my love," she said. "What do you want to know?"

"Am I going to die, mother?"

"Die? not a bit of it, my darling. Dr. Bentinck has given us quite a
cheerful opinion of you. He says there is no very serious injury, and
that you will be your usual self by-and-by."

Nora's eyes brightened.

"I am very glad," she said. "I didn't want to die. I don't think I'm
quite fit."

"My little daughter will have learnt a severe lesson by this accident,"
said Mrs. Lorrimer; "but now you must lie still, love, and think of
nothing but how quickly you can get well again."

Nora closed her eyes, and Mrs. Lorrimer sat down in an easy chair by the
bedside.

The next day the little girl was considerably better, and Mrs. Lorrimer
proposed that she and Jane should return to the Towers and send Molly to
look after Nora. A good surgical nurse had arrived from town the evening
before; Molly's services, therefore, would only be of the lightest.

Mrs. Lorrimer went into the morning room, where Hester and Annie were
sitting together.

The moment she did so Annie jumped up and came to her.

"How is Nora?" she asked.

"She is much better, my dear; in fact, almost quite like her old self
to-day. She cannot, of course, move without the greatest pain, but when
she lies perfectly still she is tolerably easy."

"Then I may go to see her, may I not?" asked Annie.

"If you will promise to be very quiet. It would not do to excite her in
any way."

"There never was such a good nurse as Annie," exclaimed Hester. "She has
a soothing influence over sick people which is quite marvellous. Did I
ever tell you how she saved Nan's life years ago at Lavender House?"

"Oh, that's an old story," said Annie, laughing and reddening. "Well,
granted that I possess a sort of mesmerism, may I use it for Nora's
benefit?"

"Certainly, my love," said Mrs. Lorrimer, smiling affectionately at
Annie's bright face.

She ran off, singing as she went.

Nora was lying perfectly flat on the little bed which had been hastily
improvised for her in the study. The room was now turned into a
comfortable bedroom, but was also in part a sitting-room. A large screen
effectually shut away the bedroom part of the furniture and partly
screened Nora also.

Annie had not gone straight to the sick room. She had rushed first into
the conservatory and made frantic mad havoc amongst the roses there. The
choicest blooms, any quantity of unopened buds, were cut by her reckless
fingers. She gathered a whole quantity of maidenhair to mix with the
roses, and then, a tender colour on her own cheeks, her dark eyes bright
as well as soft, she appeared like a radiant vision before the tired,
sad eyes of the sick child.

Nora was just well enough to feel the monotony of her present position,
to think longingly of the life of active movement which was hers at the
Towers. Even lessons in the old schoolroom, even that hateful darning
and mending to which she had to devote a portion of her time each day,
seemed delightful in contrast to her present inertia. She was thinking
of Friar's Wood and of Annie's bright face just when Annie herself,
looking like a bit of the summer morning, appeared in view.

"Now, don't get excited," said Annie smiling at her. "You'll see such a
lot of me during the next few weeks that you need not get into a state
just because I've come into the room. I feel that in a certain fashion I
am to blame for your accident, so I am going to take your amusements
upon my shoulders; and if you just allow me to manage matters, I'll
promise that you shan't have a dull time while you are getting well.
Have you a headache?"

"No, not a bit."

"That's all right; then you won't mind my talking. Are you fond of
pretty things?"

"Yes, very fond."

"Well, I'll sit here, just where you can comfortably see the flowers and
me. I expect we'll make a very pretty picture, but you need not say so.
I wonder where there's a looking-glass. Oh, yes, in that corner,
decently covered with an antimacassar. Well, then, glass, you have got
to uncover for my benefit. I wish to see whether I look pretty or not."

Annie danced up to the glass; Nora could watch her each movement.

Her steps were as light as a sylph's, nothing rattled in the sick-room
as she moved about it. She took up a comb and re-arranged her dark,
curling hair. She placed a rose in her belt, nodded to her own bright
image, and then, seating herself before a small table, began to arrange
the flowers. "Nora, you can't think what a mass of roses there are in
the green-house this morning. Of course the garden is full, too, but I
did not wait to go to the garden to get these for you. You can watch me
just as long as you fancy and then shut your eyes. These half-open buds
are to be placed on a table close to you, where you can smell them. The
other flowers we'll put here and there about the room. It's a good
thing you were brought into this pretty study, for from where you lie
you can fancy you are in a sitting-room, and that you are just having a
stretch on the sofa to rest yourself. Fancy goes a long way, doesn't
it?"

"I don't know," replied Nora. "I'm afraid I can't fancy that."

Tears filled her eyes as she spoke.

"How cool you look," she said presently, "and--and active and happy."

"It wouldn't do for me to look unhappy when I am with you, would it?"
asked Annie. "Now tell me, do you like this dress?"

"Yes, it's very pretty. What stuff is it?"

"Only pink cambric, trimmed with pink embroidery. Would you like me to
make you one?"

"What do you mean?"

Nora's eyes brightened perceptibly.

"What I say," replied Annie. "I made this dress for myself. I make all
my dresses, for I am not at all well off; in short, I am poor, and Mrs.
Willis is so sweet and dear that she gives me a couple of hours every
day to devote to needlework. In consequence I have got some pretty
things, although they cost next to nothing. Now, I think you and I are
something alike. We are both dark, and we have both got bright colour.
Oh, I don't mean that you have a bright colour just now, you poor little
darling; but when you are well, you are sweet, like a wild rose. Suppose
I make you a pink cambric frock, and a white one and a blue one? I have
got a white and a blue. When you're well again you'll look quite lovely
in them, Nora. What do you say?"

"I'd like it awfully," said Nora. "You are very good, very good; but I
haven't got any money. I--I am even poorer than you."

"Are you? How delightful. I adore _poor lady_ girls, because they are
always contriving, and that's so interesting. We'll make the dresses out
of odds and ends, and they shan't cost you a penny."

"It's very good of you," said Nora. She was too weak to argue and
protest, and the vision of her pretty little self in alternate dresses
of pink and white and blue cambric was decidedly refreshing.

She lay and looked at Annie and acknowledged to herself that she made a
pretty, a beautiful, picture, and the discontented lines round her mouth
vanished, and the time did not seem long.

That evening Molly, excited and in high spirits, arrived on the scene.

Molly was absolutely trembling as she came into the room where Nora was
lying; but although her love was ten times deeper, she had not Annie's
marvellous tact, and soon contrived to tire poor Nora dreadfully. The
nurse seeing this sent her away, and Molly came back to Hester with a
very crestfallen expression of face.

"I can't make out how it is," she said; "but Nora does not seem a bit
glad to see me."

"Oh, nonsense," said Hester; "what do you mean?"

Annie was sitting in a corner of the room busily engaged over Henry
Kingsley's novel, "Geoffrey Hamlyn." She did not raise her eyes, but
bent her curly head still lower over the fascinating pages. Nan had gone
to spend a few days at the Towers, and the great house at the Grange
seemed very quiet and still.

Molly sank down into a chair near Hester.

"I have been so excited about this meeting," she said. "Nora is almost
my twin-sister, and I have suffered so terribly about her. I cannot tell
you the relief and joy of being allowed to come here to look after her,
but now I fear I shall be next to no good."

"Well, you'll be no end of good to me," said Hester; "and, of course,
Nora will like to have you by-and-by, but she is still very weak and
cannot bear the least excitement."
