
"What in all the world is he doin'?" asked Hockins of the guide in a low
tone.

"He is taking snuff."

"I always s'posed," remarked Ebony, "dat snuff was tooken by de nose!"

"So it is, they tell me, in England; but we have a different fashion
here, as you see, and quite as foolish."

"You don't mean that it's tobacco he treats in that way?" exclaimed
Mark.

"Not pure tobacco, but tobacco mixed with other things--something like
the cheap cigars which you English are said to smoke!" replied Ravonino
with something of a humorous twinkle in his eyes.  "But we don't smoke.
We only snuff.  In making our snuff we first dry the tobacco leaves and
grind them to powder.  Then to this we add the ashes of the leaves of a
sweet-smelling herb, the mixture being twice as much tobacco as ashes; a
small quantity of potash or salt is added, and then it is considered fit
for use."

"Don't your people smoke at all?" asked Hockins.

"Not much, and never tobacco--except those on the coast who have been
corrupted by Europeans.  Some of us used to smoke _rongona_, a kind of
hemp.  It is a powerful stimulant, and used to be taken by warriors
before going out to battle, because it drove them nearly mad, and so
fitted them for their bloody work.  Government has lately forbidden its
use--but it is still used in secret."

"They've got baccy, an' don't smoke!" murmured Hockins to himself in a
kind of meditative surprise, as though he had just been told that the
natives possessed food and did not eat.

"But _you_ don't smoke?" remarked the guide.

"That's 'cause I hain't got baccy nor pipe.  You give me pipe and baccy
an' I'll smoke you into fits in no time."

"Do you feel the want of it much?"

"Not much.  At first I did, most awful, but now I'm gettin' over it."

The guide was silent.  He might have remarked, "Yet now, if you had the
chance, you would enslave yourself _again_!" but, not being of an
argumentative turn of mind, he merely shook his head and changed the
subject.  It was well, for Hockins was one of those people who, "if
convinced against their will, remain of the same opinion still."

After breakfast, while the young men of the tribe armed themselves and
made preparation for the expedition, Ravonino took his friends through
the village, the inhabitants of which were evidently as deeply
interested in seeing the white men as the latter were in seeing the
brown; for each were objects of curiosity to the other.

During the stroll our friends saw the weaving of the _lamba_--the large
plaid-like garment of hempen cloth worn extensively in the island.  The
looms were rude and simple, but the fabrics produced were wonderfully
good in appearance and texture, some being made of a kind of coarse
silk.  Many of them were ornamented, and rendered very heavy with
immense quantities of small leaden beads fastened to the garment either
in straight or curved rows, the lead having been procured from traders
at the coast, and the beads having been manufactured by themselves.
These natives wore but little clothing--merely a cloth round the loins,
and sometimes a jacket made of coarse material.  The _lamba_ is usually
worn over the shoulders in the cool of the morning, but at the time we
write of most of the men who used the garment, had bound it tightly
round their waists.

Our travellers were made acquainted at this time with a game which
interested them greatly--especially arousing the enthusiasm of the
negro.  It was a kicking game, played by some of the more active among
the young men, who, having got ready for the field quickly, were waiting
for their slower companions.  The chief peculiarity of the game
consisted in the mode of kicking, namely backwards, in the horse or
donkey fashion.  The guide explained that the name of the game, when
literally translated, was, "striking blue with the sole of the foot!"
It is a desperate game, and when played, as it frequently is, by
hundreds of active and powerful young men, the results are sometimes
sprained ankles, broken legs, etcetera.

"Oh! das de game for me!" cried the enthusiastic Ebony, who could hardly
be restrained from joining.  "De sole ob my foot's awrful broad, an' I
could strike black as well as blue.  Do let me try, massa!"

Fortunately, perhaps, for our negro, the chief came out of his hut at
that moment and gave the signal for the hunters to advance, thus
bringing the game and Ebony's aspirations to an abrupt end.  The young
men at once fell to the rear, and the whole party sallied forth into the
forest.

It was magnificent weather, with just cloud enough to prevent the sun
being overpoweringly hot, and the tract of country over which they
passed was surpassingly beautiful.  To Mark Breezy it seemed as if all
the winged insects in the island had come forth to welcome him.  There
were butterflies of various sizes and brilliant colours flitting to and
fro among the wild-flowers, besides dragon-flies, grasshoppers of
exquisite beauty, spiders with coats of gold and silver, caterpillars
half-a-foot long in gorgeous array of black, scarlet, and yellow, and
many other creatures which we may not pause to describe here, though
Mark and the guide frequently paused to look at them, insomuch that they
were often left a considerable way behind.  One of the butterflies which
Mark caught at that time was very beautiful, and a slow flier.  It
actually measured eight inches across the extended wings.

Of larger animals they saw none; and it may be as well to remark here
that there are no large carnivora in Madagascar--no lions, tigers,
leopards panthers, or creatures of that sort--nothing larger than a
wild-cat and a wolf being known.  Neither are there elephants, giraffes,
rhinoceroses, hippopotami, antelope, nor deer; the only large animals
being two species of ox, and the wild-boar, goats and sheep, and
crocodiles.  There are also huge bats, an animal of the monkey tribe
called the lemur, hedgehogs, and rabbits.

The lemurs are very pretty little things, and, being gentle affectionate
creatures, are sometimes tamed and kept as pets.

The scenery, we have said, was beautiful.  At one turn of the road in
particular a landscape of such beauty appeared suddenly before them that
Mark was arrested as if spell-bound; it was such a gorgeous combination
of luxuriant foliage--ferns and palms and bamboos, interlaced with
creepers, and enlivened by streams which brawled and tumbled in
picturesque cascades, over which hundreds of butterflies sported in the
sunshine.  From the height of land on which they stood a wide,
well-watered plain was seen to extend far below them.  It was hemmed in
on either side by wooded hills and backed by the interior highlands.
Far down the hill-side their companions could be seen wending their way
through the tangled shrubbery, just in rear of the native hunters, led
by their energetic chief Voalavo.  As the men carried spears, the points
of which glittered in the sun, the party had quite a martial aspect.

To our young student the whole scene was enchanting.  It had the effect
of subduing and solemnising his feelings in a way which he had never
before experienced.  The earnest, religious cast of his companion's
spirit also tended not a little to deepen this feeling and induce him
for the first time in his life to understand that "nature's God" was in
very truth present with him.

"Is not the hand of the Master here?" said Ravonino, after a long
silence.

"Truly, my friend, it is," replied the young man, "and your remark puts
me to shame.  For many a time, through the microscope and the human
frame and the surrounding world, might I have seen this Master-hand
everywhere--if my eyes had been open."

The guide turned on Mark an earnest, inquiring look.

"Friend," he said, impressively, "if this be so, you are now very
specially awakened to the Truth.  If you have passed through and seen so
much without recognising God in his creatures, you have been brought for
the first time to know yourself.  Turn now--now--to the Saviour, and you
will henceforth see a glory in all things that you never saw before.
Turn, my friend--for `now is the accepted time.'"

Ravonino spoke with such an earnest look and tone that the youth could
not doubt the sincerity of his belief in the Saviour whom he so
affectionately held up to his view.

"Ravonino, I believe you are right.  God help me to turn!"

"He _has_ helped you already," said the guide.  "That prayer, _if true_,
never yet came from an unrenewed heart."

As he spoke a shout from those further down the hill-side stopped the
conversation and obliged the friends to resume the descent.

"That is the plain, I am told," said Ravonino, "where they expect to
find wild cattle, and where we shall have to encamp, no doubt, till
night enables us to hunt."

"Not a very cheerful time to go sporting," said Mark.

"They do not count it sport," remarked his comrade, gravely.  "They are
short of meat, and hunt for food."

A few minutes later and the party was encamped in the thick woods that
bordered the plain.



CHAPTER TEN.

TELLS OF A GRAND HUNT AND OTHER THINGS.

While the party of hunters awaited the approach of night, (for the wild
cattle feed chiefly at night), they kept as quiet as possible.  The
scouts had brought news that a large herd was feeding on a part of the
plain which was not far distant, although concealed from view by the
formation of the land.

Still thinking of the recent conversation which he had had with the
guide, Mark Breezy retired a little from the rest of the party and flung
himself on the ground under a tree to rest and meditate.

He was not left long, however, in solitude, for Hockins and Ebony soon
discovered his retreat.  Each of these worthies was armed with a spear.

"Hallo, Doctor," exclaimed the former, as he came up, "are you not
supplied with a weapon?"

"Yes, I am," replied Mark, pointing to a native spear which lay at his
side, "but I think I won't use it."

"Why not, massa?" asked Ebony.

"Because I don't yet know how to go about this style of hunting, and if
I were to attempt anything I might spoil the sport.  I intend merely to
look on."

"Right you are, sir," remarked the sailor.  "P'r'aps it'll be as well
for all of us to keep in the background."

"Pooh!" ejaculated Ebony, turning up his nose--a needless action, as it
was well-turned up already--"pooh!  I not keep in de background!  You're
all wrong.  W'en you knows nuffin, jest you wait till you knows
suffin'--ebber so little--an' den go at 'im."

"That's just what I said I should do, Ebony.  I will merely look on at
first."

"But how long does you prepose to look on, massa?  Ain't five or six
minits enuff?  Dis is what I's a-gwine to do.  I'll foller close on de
chief--what you call 'im?--Vollyvo--an' w'en I sees him stick one hox,
das nuff for me.  I den go at 'im on my own hook, an' stick away right
an' left!"

"I'll give you a wide berth, then, for it's as like as not that you'll
stick some o' the hunters in the dark," said Hockins, rising, for just
then there was a stir in the camp as if preparation was being made to go
out.

A few minutes later and Laihova came to them with the news that he had
heard the chief say they were getting ready, as it was necessary to make
a long round through the woods to get well to leeward of the cattle.

This process of getting ready consisted in every man stripping and
washing himself all over in order to get rid of the smell of the smoke
of their huts.  Even the guests were obliged to conform to the custom.
Then they set off in profound silence, every man being armed with a
couple of spears, excepting the guests, who were allowed only one spear
each, it being feared that if they carried two they might chance to
rattle them together and thus alarm the game, for the kind of cattle
they were about to attack are exceedingly active and suspicious--always
on the alert, continually snuffing and snorting at the bare idea, as it
were, of an approaching enemy.  Unlike the tame cattle of the island,
these animals have no hump, but strongly resemble the ordinary cattle of
England, save that their horns are shorter and their bellowings deeper.
They are, however, very savage, and when wounded or annoyed are apt to
attack their enemies with terrible ferocity.

To Mark Breezy and his companions the expedition proved to be full of
excitement, for, apart from the novelty of the situation, and
uncertainty as to what lay before them or was expected of them, the
extreme darkness of the night, and the quick silent stealthy motion of
the almost invisible hunters, filled their minds with--if we may say
so--awfully pleasurable anticipations!

The whole band followed their chief in single file, and as he was
intimately familiar with the topography of the region, the only anxiety
of each man was to tread carefully in his footsteps.

As for Ebony, his whole soul and spirit were in the enterprise, as well
as his black body, and the varying expression of his mobile features
would have charmed the heart of a physiognomist, had such a man been
there with light enough to enable him to see.  As there was no
physiognomist, and no light, the reader must fall back on imagination.

Intent on carrying out his pre-arranged plans, our negro walked close
behind the chief--so close indeed, that he inadvertently brought his
spear down rather heavily on the left shoulder of that fiery person, for
which he received a buffet on the ear, and an order to keep further
back.  In other circumstances the plucky spirit of Ebony would have been
roused to indignation--perhaps to retaliation; but a sense of justice
was strong in that negro's breast.  Overwhelmed with shame at his
clumsiness, and eager to rectify the error--yet not daring to speak, for
silence had been strictly enjoined--he raised the spear over his
shoulder and turned the point backwards, thereby bringing it down on the
head of the man in the rear.

Doubly shocked at this, he raised his weapon to the perpendicular, and
knocked some tropical bird violently off the lower branches of a tree.
It fluttered screeching to the ground, and bounced angrily into the
bushes.

The whole band of hunters came to a sudden and breathless halt, but no
word was uttered.  In a few moments the chief resumed his silent march,
and the ghostly column moved on--Ebony, greatly subdued but by no means
crushed, keeping his weapon at such a slope as would prevent its doing
damage to birds above or men below.

Thus they proceeded for nearly an hour, at the end of which time they
could hear the wild cattle roaring and bellowing not far-off.

When the hunters had got completely to leeward, and were beginning to
draw quite near to the feeding-ground, they advanced with increased
caution, and some of the men began to pull the tops of the grass with
their hands, as they went, in order to mimic as nearly as possible the
noise made by an ox grazing.

The instant this sound reached the ears of the cattle they became
absolutely silent, neither bellowing nor feeding!  It was evident that
they were listening with the utmost attention.  Understanding this, the
hunters stood quite still, without a whisper, but a few of those who
were adepts at the art continued their imitation of cropping the grass.
After listening for a time the animals appeared to arrive at the
conclusion that it was a false alarm, for they re-commenced feeding, and
the hunters continued their stealthy approach.

Soon they came to the thinly scattered shrubbery which marked the
termination of the woods and the beginning of the plain.  And now,
profoundly dark though the night was, they could faintly perceive the
forms of their game looming black against the dark sky beyond--
themselves being quite invisible, however, owing to their background of
forest.

Nearer and nearer the men moved, still cropping the grass as they
advanced, until they fairly got up to the herd, and were less liable to
disturb them, for, being almost invisible, they were, no doubt, mistaken
for members of the family!

As the hunters now scattered, Ebony had some difficulty in keeping close
enough to the chief to observe his movements.  Voalavo himself was too
intent upon his work to think of anything else, or to care who was near
him.

Gradually he approached close enough to an animal to thrust his spear
deep into its side.  It sprang from the ground and made a noise as if
hurt by the horn of a comrade, but this is so common an event that the
rest of the cattle were in no way disturbed by it.

The chief saw by the staggering of the animal that it was mortally
wounded, and that there was no need to follow it up, as it could be
easily tracked and found in daylight.  He therefore turned to attack
another animal that was close at hand.

"Now den," said Ebony to himself mentally, "your time's come.  Go at
'im!"

Lowering his weapon to the charge, he glanced round and observed the
indistinct form of an animal on his right.  It was apparently a little
one.

"Weal is as good as beef," thought Ebony, as he made a silent but
furious rush, scarcely able to restrain a shout of anticipated victory.

The spear-point missed the animal, just grazing its back, and went deep
into the ground, while the negro plunged with crushing violence on the
back of John Hockins, who had been trying to approach his game _a la_
Red Indian!

To say that poor Ebony was filled with horror, as well as shame and
self-abhorrence, is but a feeble statement.

"Don't speak, you black monster!" whispered the seaman in his ear, as he
seized him by the throat.

The rush of apology which had sprung from Ebony's heart was checked
abruptly at the lips.

Hockins released him, picked up his spear, and resumed his creeping way.
By this time several of the hunters had dealt silent death around them,
but still the herd failed to take alarm!

Being left alone Ebony's courage returned, and with it his enthusiasm.

"Come," he muttered, mentally, as he drew the spear from the ground,
"'Ockins not killed yet.  Das one good job.  No use to cry for not'ing.
You try again, Ginjah.  Better luck nixt time."

Greatly encouraged by these thoughts he advanced on tip-toe--spear at
the charge--eyes glancing sharply all round.  Suddenly a tall form
