Again the missionary laughed, and, offering his arm to his wife, turned
towards the village, saying--

"Come, Mr Osten--you see I know your name, having heard of you from
your friend Buchanan--come, I will show you what we have been about
while you were absent; but first--tell me--how fares it with your
comrades?"

Will Osten at once entered into a full account of the doings of himself
and his friends, and had just concluded, when he was once more rendered
speechless by the sight of the missionary's cottage.  It was almost the
realisation of the waking dream which had captivated him so much on the
evening when the storm arose that proved fatal to the _Foam_.  He was
still gazing at it in silent admiration, listening to an enthusiastic
account of the zeal and kindness of the natives who helped to build it,
when a young girl, apparently bordering on seventeen or eighteen years
of age, with nut-brown curls, rosy cheeks, and hazel eyes, sprang out
and hastened to meet them.

"Oh, father," she exclaimed, while the colour of her face came and went
fitfully, "I'm so glad you have come!  The natives have been so--so--"

"Not rude to you, Flora, surely?" interrupted the missionary.

"No, not exactly rude, but, but--"

Flora could not explain!  The fact turned out to be that, never having
seen any woman so wonderfully and bewitchingly beautiful before, the
natives had crowded uninvited into the cottage, and there, seated on
their hams round the walls, quietly gazed at her to their hearts'
content--utterly ignorant of the fact that they were violating the rules
of polite society!

Will Osten, to his disgrace be it said, violated the same rules in much
the same way, for he continued to gaze at Flora in rapt admiration until
Mr Westwood turned to introduce her to him.

That same evening Bukawanga, accompanied by Thackombau, went to the
mountain-cave, and, having explained to its occupants the altered state
of things at the village, brought them down to the mission-house where
they took up their abode.

It need scarcely be said that they were hospitably received.  Mr
Westwood had not met with countrymen for many months, and the mere sight
of white faces and the sound of English voices were pleasant to him.  He
entertained them with innumerable anecdotes of his experiences and
adventures as a missionary, and on the following morning took them out
to see the church, which had just been begun.

"Already," said Mr Westwood, as they were about to set forth after
breakfast, "my wife and Flora have got up a class of women and girls, to
whom they teach needle-work, and we have a large attendance of natives
at our meetings on the Sabbath.  A school also has been started, which
is managed by a native teacher who came with me from the island of
Raratonga, and most of the boys in the village attend it."

"But it does seem to me, sir," said Captain Dall, as they sauntered
along, "that needle-work and book-learning can be of no use to such
people."

"Not of much just now, captain, but these are only means to a great end.
Already, you see, they are beginning to be clothed--fantastically
enough at present, no doubt--and I hope ere long to see them in their
right mind, through the blessed influence of the Bible.  Look there," he
added, pointing to an open space in the forest, where the four walls of
a large wooden building were beginning to rise; "there is evidence of
what the gospel of Jesus Christ can do.  The labourers at that building
are, many of them, bitter enemies to each other.  Only yesterday we
succeeded in getting some of the men of the neighbouring village to come
and help us.  After much persuasion they agreed, but they work with
their weapons in their hands, as you see."

This was indeed the case.  The men who had formerly been enemies were
seen assisting to build the same church.  They took care, however, to
work as far from each other as possible, and were evidently distrustful,
for clubs and spears were either carried in their hands, or placed
within reach, while they laboured.

Fortunately, however, they restrained their passions at that time, and
it is due to them to add that before that church was finished their
differences were made up, and they, with all the others, ultimately
completed the work in perfect harmony, without thinking it necessary to
bring their clubs or spears with them.

The reader must not suppose that all missionary efforts in the South
Seas have been as quickly successful as this one.  The records of that
interesting region tell a very different tale; nevertheless there are
many islands in which the prejudices of the natives were overcome almost
at the commencement, and where heathen practices seemed to melt away at
once before the light of the glorious gospel.

During two months, Wandering Will and the wrecked seamen remained here
assisting the missionary in his building and other operations.  Then an
event occurred which sent them once more afloat, and broke the spell of
their happy and busy life among the islanders.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

CONTAINS MORE THAN ONE SURPRISE, AND TOUCHES ON "LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM."

One quiet and beautiful Sabbath morning, the inhabitants of the South
Sea Island village wended their way to the House of God which they had
so recently erected.  Among them were Will Osten and his friends, with
the clergyman's wife and daughter.

Poor Wandering Will was very unhappy.  The sunshine was bright, the
natives were blithe, and the birds were joyous, but our hero was
despondent!  The fact was that he had fallen head and ears in love with
Flora Westwood, and he felt that he might as well have fallen in love
with the moon--as far as any chance of getting married to her was
concerned.  Will was therefore very miserable, and, like all ardent and
very youthful lovers, he hugged his misery to his bosom--rather enjoyed
it, in fact, than otherwise.  In short, if truth must be told, he took
pleasure in being miserable _for her sake_!  When he allowed himself to
take romantic views of the subject, and thought of the heights of bliss
that _might_ be attained, he was, so to speak, miserably happy.  When he
looked the stern realities in the face, he was miserably sad.

That Sabbath morning poor Will felt more impressed than ever with the
hopelessness of his case, as he walked slowly and silently to church
beside the modest Flora and her mother.  He also became impressed with
the ridiculousness of his position, and determined to "overcome his
weakness."  He therefore looked at Flora with the intention of cutting a
joke of some sort, but, suddenly recollecting that it was Sunday, he
checked himself.  Then he thought of getting into a serious talk, and
was about to begin, when his eye happened to fall on Thackombau, who, in
honour of the day, had got himself up with unusual care, having covered
his shoulders with a cotton jacket, his loins with a lady's shawl, and
his head with a white night-cap--his dark tatooed legs forming a curious
and striking contrast to the whole.

Before Will could think of another mode of opening the conversation,
they had arrived at the church, and here, in front of the open door,
there lay the most singular contribution that ever was offered to the
cause of Christianity.  Many dozens of church-door plates rolled into
one enormous trencher would have been insufficient to contain it, for it
was given not in money (of course) but in kind.  There were a number of
lengths of hollow bamboo containing cocoa-nut oil, various fine mats and
pieces of native cloth, and sundry articles of an ornamental character,
besides a large supply of fruits and vegetables, with four or five baked
pigs, cold and ready for table!  The entire pile was several feet in
diameter and height, and was a freewill offering of the natives to the
church--the beginning of a liberality which was destined in future years
to continue and extend--a species of liberality which is by no means
uncommon among the South Sea Islanders, for there are some of those who
were savage idolators not many years ago who now give annually and
largely to the support of the missions with which their churches are
connected.

Larry O'Hale had just made a remark in reference to "the plate" which
was not conducive to the gravity of his companions, when the echoes of
the mountains were awakened by a cannon-shot, and a large ship was seen
to round the point of land that stretched out to the westward of the
island.  Instantly the natives poured out of the church, rushed down to
the shore, launched their canoes and paddled over the lagoon to meet the
vessel, which, running before a stiff breeze, soon entered the natural
gateway in the reef.  The congregation having dispersed thus
unceremoniously, the clergyman and his friends were compelled to
postpone service for a time.

The ship which had created such a sensation in the village, was also the
means of causing great disturbance in sundry breasts, as shall be seen.
She had called for water.  Being in a hurry, her captain had resolved
not to waste time by conciliating the natives, but, rather, to frighten
them away by a cannonade of blank cartridge, land a strong party to
procure water while they were panic-stricken, and then up anchor and
away.  His surprise was great, therefore, when the natives came
fearlessly off to him (for he had been warned to beware of them), and he
was about to give them a warm reception, when he caught a glimpse of the
small spire of the new church, which at once explained the cause of the
change.

With rollicking good humour--for he was a strong healthy man with a
sleeping conscience--Captain Blathers, on landing, swaggered up to the
clergyman and shook him heartily and gratefully by the hand, exclaiming,
with a characteristic oath, that he had not much opinion of religion in
his own country, but he was bound to say it was "a first-rate
institootion in the South Seas."

Mr Westwood rebuked the oath and attempted to correct the erroneous
opinion, but Captain Blathers laughed, and said he knew nothing about
these matters, and had no time for anything but getting fresh water just
then.  He added that he had "a batch of noosepapers, which he'd send
ashore for the use of all and sundry."

Accordingly, off he went about his business, and left the clergyman and
natives to return to church, which they all did without delay.

That night the missionary went on board the ship to see the captain and
preach to the crew.  While he was thus engaged, our friends, Captain
Dall, Mr Cupples, O'Hale, Muggins, and Wandering Will, in a retired
part of the forest, held an earnest conversation as to whether they
should avail themselves of the arrival of the ship to quit the island.
Captain Dall had already spoken with Captain Blathers, who said he was
quite willing to let them work their passage to England.

"Now, you see, comrades," said Captain Dall, thrusting his right fist
into his left palm, "the only trouble is, that he's not goin' direct
home--got to visit the coast of South America and San Francisco first,
an' that will make it a long voyage."

"But, sure," said Larry, "it won't be so long as waitin' here till next
year for the missionary schooner, and then goin' a viage among the
islands before gettin' a chance of boording a homeward-bound ship?"

"That's so," said Muggins, with a nod of approval.  "I says go, ov
coorse."

Mr Cupples also signified that this was his opinion.

"And what says the doctor?" asked Captain Dall, turning to Will Osten
with an inquiring look.

"Eh? well, ah!" exclaimed Will, who had been in a reverie, "I--I don't
exactly see my way to--that is--if we only could find out if she is--is
to remain here _always_, or hopes some day to return to England--"

Poor Will stopped in sudden confusion and blushed, but as it was very
dark that did not matter much.

"What _does_ the man mean?" exclaimed Captain Dall.  "How _can_ she
remain here always when she's to be off at daybreak--?"

"True, true," interrupted Will hurriedly, not sorry to find that his
reference to Flora was supposed to be to the ship.  "The fact is, I was
thinking of other matters--of _course_ I agree with you.  It's too good
an opportunity to be missed, so, good-night, for I've enough to do to
get ready for such an abrupt departure."

Saying this, he started up and strode rapidly away.

"Halloo!" shouted Larry after him; "don't be late--be on the baich at
daybreak.  Arrah he's gone mad intirely."

"Ravin'," said Muggins, with a shake of his head as he turned the quid
in his cheek.

Meanwhile Wandering Will rushed he knew not whither, but a natural
impulse led him, in the most natural way, to the quiet bay, which he
knew to be Flora's favourite walk on moonlight nights!  The poor youth's
brain was whirling with conflicting emotions.  As he reached the bay,
the moon, strange to say, broke forth in great splendour, and revealed--
what!--could it be?--yes, the graceful figure of Flora!  "Never
venture," thought Will, "never--"

In another moment he was by her side; he seized her hand; she started,
suppressed a scream, and tried to free her hand, but Will held it fast.
"Forgive me, Flora, dearest girl," he said in impassioned tones, "I
would not dare to act thus, but at daybreak I leave this island, perhaps
for ever! yet I _cannot_ go without telling you that I love you to
distraction, that--that--oh! say tell me--"

At that moment he observed that Flora blushed, smiled in a peculiar
manner, and, instead of looking in his face, glanced over his shoulder,
as if at some object behind him.  Turning quickly round, he beheld
Thackombau, still decked out in his Sunday clothes, gazing at them in
open-mouthed amazement.

Almost mad with rage, Will Osten rushed at him.  The astonished savage
fled to the woods, Will followed, and in a few minutes lost himself!
How he passed that night he never could tell; all that he could be sure
of was that he had wandered about in distraction, and emerged upon the
shore about daybreak.  His appointment suddenly recurring to him, he ran
swiftly in the direction of the village.  As he drew near he observed a
boat pushing off from the shore.

"Howld on!" shouted a well-known voice; "sure it's himself after all."

"Come along, young sir, you're late, and had well-nigh lost your
passage," growled Captain Blathers.

Will jumped into the boat and in a few minutes found himself on board
the _Rover_, which, by the time he reached it, was under weigh and
making for the opening in the reef.

Another hour, and the island was a mere speck on the horizon.  Gradually
it faded from view; and the good ship, bending over to the freshening
breeze, bounded lightly away over the billows of the mighty sea.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sunk at Sea, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUNK AT SEA ***

***** This file should be named 23271.txt or 23271.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/2/7/23271/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

