
As he spoke he raised a plank of the deck in front of the foremost hole,
and disclosed a sort of narrow box about six feet long by six inches
broad.  The plank was hinged at one end and fastened with a hook at the
other so as to form a lid to the box.  The hole thus disclosed was not
an opening into the interior of the canoe, but was a veritable
watertight box just under the deck, so that even if it were to get
filled with water not a drop could enter the canoe itself.  But the
plank-lid was so beautifully fitted, besides shutting tightly down on
india-rubber, that the chance of leakage through that source was very
remote.  Although very narrow, this box was deep, and contained a
variety of useful implements; among them a slender mast and tiny sail,
which could be rendered still smaller by means of reef-points.  All
these things were fitted into their respective places with so keen an
eye to economy of space that the arrangement cannot be better described
than by the familiar phrase--_multum in parvo_.

"We don't use the sails much; we depend chiefly on this," said the
hermit, as he seated himself in the front hole and laid the long, heavy,
double-bladed paddle on the saddle in front of him.  "Moses uses a
single-blade, partly because it is handier for steering and partly
because he has been accustomed to it in his own land.  You are at
liberty to use which you prefer."

"Thanks, I will follow the lead of Moses, for I also have been
accustomed to the single-blade and prefer it--at least while I am one of
three.  If alone, I should prefer the double-blade."

"Now, Moses, are you ready?" asked the hermit.

"All ready, massa."

"Get in then and shove off.  Come along, Spinkie."

The monkey, which all this time had been seated on a rock looking on
with an expression of inconsolable sorrow, at once accepted the
invitation, and with a lively bound alighted on the deck close to the
little mast, which had been set up just in front of Nigel, and to which
it held on when the motions of the canoe became unsteady.

"You need not give yourself any concern about Spinkie," said the hermit,
as they glided over the still water of the little cove in which the
canoe and boat were harboured.  "He is quite able to take care of
himself."

Rounding the entrance to the cove and shooting out into the ocean under
the influence of Van der Kemp's powerful strokes, they were soon clear
of the land, and proceeded eastward at a rate which seemed unaccountable
to our hero, for he had not sufficiently realised the fact that in
addition to the unusual physical strength of Van der Kemp as well as
that of Moses, to say nothing of his own, the beautiful fish-like
adaptation of the canoe to the water, the great length and leverage of
the bow-paddle, and the weight of themselves as well as the cargo, gave
this canoe considerable advantage over other craft of the kind.

About a quarter of an hour later the sun arose in cloudless splendour on
a perfectly tranquil sea, lighted up the shores of Java, glinted over
the mountains of Sumatra, and flooded, as with a golden haze, the
forests of Krakatoa--emulating the volcanic fires in gilding the volumes
of smoke that could be seen rolling amid fitful mutterings from
Perboewatan, until the hermit's home sank from view in the western
horizon.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

CANOEING ON THE SEA--A MYSTERIOUS NIGHT--SURPRISE AND SUDDEN FLIGHT.

At first the voyagers paddled over the glassy sea in almost total
silence.

Nigel was occupied with his own busy thoughts; speculating on the
probable end and object of their voyage, and on the character, the
mysterious life, and unknown history of the man who sat in front of him
wielding so powerfully the great double-bladed paddle.  Van der Kemp
himself was, as we have said, naturally quiet and silent, save when
roused by a subject that interested him.  As for Moses, although quite
ready at any moment to indulge in friendly intercourse, he seldom
initiated a conversation, and Spinkie, grasping the mast and leaning
against it with his head down, seemed to be either asleep or brooding
over his sorrows.  Only a few words were uttered now and then when Nigel
asked the name of a point or peak which rose in the distance on either
hand.  It seemed as if the quiescence of sea and air had fallen like a
soft mantle on the party and subdued them into an unusually sluggish
frame of mind.

They passed through the Sunda Straits between Sumatra and Java--not more
at the narrowest part than about thirteen miles wide--and, in course of
time, found themselves in the great island-studded archipelago beyond.

About noon they all seemed to wake up from their lethargic state.  Van
der Kemp laid down his paddle, and, looking round, asked Nigel if he
felt tired.

"Not in the least," he replied, "but I feel uncommonly hungry, and I
have just been wondering how you manage to feed when at sea in so small
a craft."

"Ho! ho!" laughed Moses, in guttural tones, "you soon see dat--I 'spose
it time for me to get out de grub, massa?"

"Yes, Moses--let's have it."

The negro at once laid down his steering paddle and lifted a small
square hatch or lid in the deck which was rendered watertight by the
same means as the lid in front already described.  From the depths thus
revealed he extracted a bird of some sort that had been shot and baked
the day before.  Tearing off a leg he retained it, and handed the
remainder to Nigel.

"Help you'self, Massa Nadgel, an' pass 'im forward."  Without helping
himself he passed it on to Van der Kemp, who drew his knife, sliced off
a wing with a mass of breast, and returned the rest.

"Always help yourself _before_ passing the food in future," said the
hermit; "we don't stand on ceremony here."

Nigel at once fell in with their custom, tore off the remaining
drumstick and began.

"Biskit," said Moses, with his mouth full, "an' look out for Spinkie."

He handed forward a deep tray of the sailor's familiar food, but Nigel
was too slow to profit by the warning given, for Spinkie darted both
hands into the tray and had stuffed his mouth and cheeks full almost
before a man could wink!  The negro would have laughed aloud, but the
danger of choking was too great; he therefore laughed internally--an
operation which could not be fully understood unless seen.  "'Splosions
of Perboewatan," may suggest the thing.

Sorrow, grief--whatever it was that habitually afflicted that monkey--
disappeared for the time being, while it devoted itself heart and soul
to dinner.

Feelings of a somewhat similar kind animated Nigel as he sat leaning
back with his mouth full, a biscuit in one hand, and a drumstick in the
other, and his eyes resting dreamily on the horizon of the still
tranquil sea, while the bright sun blazed upon his already bronzed face.

To many men the fierce glare of the equatorial sun might have proved
trying, but Nigel belonged to the salamander type of humanity and
enjoyed the great heat.  Van der Kemp seemed to be similarly moulded,
and as for Moses, he was in his native element--so was Spinkie.

Strange as it may seem, sea-birds appeared to divine what was going on,
for several specimens came circling round the canoe with great
outstretched and all but motionless wings, and with solemn sidelong
glances of hope which Van der Kemp evidently could not resist, for he
flung them scraps of his allowance from time to time.

"If you have plenty of provisions on board, I should like to do that
too," said Nigel.

"Do it," returned the hermit.  "We have plenty of food for some days,
and our guns can at any time replenish the store.  I like to feed these
creatures," he added, "they give themselves over so thoroughly to the
enjoyment of the moment, and _seem_ to be grateful.  Whether they are so
or not, of course, is matter of dispute.  Cynics will tell us that they
only come to us and fawn upon us because of the memory of past favours
and the hope of more to come.  I don't agree with them."

"Neither do I," said Nigel, warmly.  "Any man who has ever had to do
with dogs knows full well that gratitude is a strong element of their
nature.  And it seems to me that the speaking eyes of Spinkie, to whom I
have just given a bit of biscuit, tell of a similar spirit."

As he spoke, Nigel was conveying another piece of biscuit to his own
mouth, when a small brown hand flashed before him, and the morsel, in
the twinkling of an eye, was transferred to the monkey's already swollen
cheek--whereat Moses again became suddenly "'splosive" and red, as well
as black in the face, for his capacious mouth was inordinately full as
usual.

Clear water, from one of the casks, and poured into a tin mug, washed
down their cold collation, and then, refreshed and reinvigorated, the
trio resumed their paddles, which were not again laid down till the sun
was descending towards the western horizon.  By that time they were not
far from a small wooded islet near the coast of Java, on which Van der
Kemp resolved to spend the night.

During the day they had passed at some distance many boats and _prahus_
and other native vessels, the crews of which ceased to row for a few
moments, and gazed with curiosity at the strange craft which glided
along so swiftly, and seemed to them little more than a long plank on
the water, but these took no further notice of our voyagers.  They also
passed several ships--part of that constant stream of vessels which pass
westward through those straits laden with the valuable teas and rich
silks of China and Japan.  In some cases a cheer of recognition, as
being an exceptional style of craft, was accorded them, to which the
hermit replied with a wave of the hand--Moses and Nigel with an
answering cheer.

There is something very pleasant in the rest which follows a day of hard
and healthful toil.

Our Maker has so ordained it as well as stated it, for is it not
written, "The sleep of the labouring man is sweet"? and our travellers
experienced the truth of the statement that night in very romantic
circumstances.

The small rocky islet, not more than a few hundred yards in diameter,
which they now approached, had several sheltered sandy bays on its
shore, which were convenient for landing.  The centre was clothed with
palm-trees and underwood, so that fuel could be procured, and
cocoa-nuts.

"Sometimes," said the hermit, while he stooped to arrange the fire,
after the canoe and cargo had been carried to their camping-place at the
edge of the bushes,--"sometimes it is necessary to keep concealed while
travelling in these regions, and I carry a little spirit-lamp which
enables me to heat a cup of tea or coffee without making a dangerous
blaze; but here there is little risk in kindling a fire."

"I should not have thought there was any risk at all in these peaceful
times," said Nigel, as he unstrapped his blanket and spread it on the
ground under an overhanging bush.

"There are no peaceful times among pirates," returned the hermit; "and
some of the traders in this archipelago are little better than pirates."

"Where I puts your bed, massa?" asked Moses, turning his huge eyes on
his master.

"There--under the bush, beside Nigel."

"An' where would _you_ like to sleep, Massa Spinkie?" added the negro,
with a low obeisance to the monkey, which sat on the top of what seemed
to be its favourite seat--a water-cask.

Spinkie treated the question with calm contempt, turned his head
languidly to one side, and scratched himself.

"Unpurliteness is your k'racter from skin to marrow, you son of a
insolent mother!" said Moses, shaking his fist, whereat Spinkie,
promptly making an O of his mouth, looked fierce.

The sagacious creature remained where he was till after supper, which
consisted of another roast fowl--hot this time--and ship's-biscuit
washed down with coffee.  Of course Spinkie's portion consisted only of
the biscuit with a few scraps of cocoa-nut.  Having received it he
quietly retired to his native wilds, with the intention of sleeping
there, according to custom, till morning; but his repose was destined to
be broken, as we shall see.

After supper, the hermit, stretching himself on his blanket, filled an
enormous meerschaum, and began to smoke.  The negro, rolling up a little
tobacco in tissue paper, sat down, tailor-wise, and followed his
master's example, while our hero--who did not smoke--lay between them,
and gazed contemplatively over the fire at the calm dark sea beyond,
enjoying the aroma of his coffee.

"From what you have told me of your former trading expeditions," said
Nigel, looking at his friend, "you must have seen a good deal of this
archipelago before you took--excuse me--to the hermit life."

"Ay--a good deal."

"Have you ever travelled in the interior of the larger islands?" asked
Nigel, in the hope of drawing from him some account of his experiences
with wild beasts or wild men--he did not care which, so long as they
were wild!

"Yes, in all of them," returned the hermit, curtly, for he was not fond
of talking about himself.

"I suppose the larger islands are densely wooded?" continued Nigel
interrogatively.

"They are, very."

"But the wood is not of much value, I fancy, in the way of trade,"
pursued our hero, adopting another line of attack which proved
successful, for Van der Kemp turned his eyes on him with a look of
surprise that almost forced him to laugh.

"Not of much value in the way of trade!" he repeated--"forgive me, if I
express surprise that you seem to know so little about us--but, after
all, the world is large, and one cannot become deeply versed in
everything."

Having uttered this truism, the hermit resumed his meerschaum and
continued to gaze thoughtfully at the embers of the fire.  He remained
so long silent that Nigel began to despair, but thought he would try him
once again on the same lines.

"I suppose," he said in a careless way, "that none of the islands are
big enough to contain many of the larger wild animals."

"My friend," returned Van der Kemp, with a smile of urbanity, as he
refilled his pipe, "it is evident that you do not know much about our
archipelago.  Borneo, to the woods and wild animals of which I hope ere
long to introduce you, is so large that if you were to put your British
islands, including Ireland, down on it they would be engulfed and
surrounded by a sea of forests.  New Guinea is, perhaps, larger than
Borneo.  Sumatra is only a little smaller.  France is not so large as
some of our islands.  Java, Luzon, and Celebes are each about equal in
size to Ireland.  Eighteen more islands are, on the average, as large as
Jamaica, more than a hundred are as large as the Isle of Wight, and the
smaller isles and islets are innumerable.  In short, our archipelago is
comparable with any of the primary divisions of the globe, being full
4000 miles in length from east to west and about 1,300 in breadth from
north to south, and would in extent more than cover the whole of
Europe."

It was evident to Nigel that he had at length succeeded in opening the
flood-gates.  The hermit paused for a few moments and puffed at the
meerschaum, while Moses glared at his master with absorbed interest, and
pulled at the cigarette with such oblivious vigour that he drew it into
his mouth at last, spat it out, and prepared another.  Nigel sat quite
silent and waited for more.

"As to trade," continued Van der Kemp, resuming his discourse in a lower
tone, "why, of gold--the great representative of wealth--we export from
Sumatra alone over 26,000 ounces annually, and among other gold regions
we have a Mount Ophir in the Malay Peninsula from which there is a
considerable annual export."

Continuing his discourse, Van der Kemp told a great deal more about the
products of these prolific islands with considerable enthusiasm--as one
who somewhat resented the underrating of his native land.

"Were you born in this region, Van der Kemp?" asked Nigel, during a
brief pause.

"I was--in Java.  My father, as my name tells, was of Dutch descent.  My
mother was Irish.  Both are dead."

He stopped.  The fire that had been aroused seemed to die down, and he
continued to smoke with the sad absent look which was peculiar to him.

"And what about large game?" asked Nigel, anxious to stir up his
friend's enthusiasm again, but the hermit had sunk back into his usual
condition of gentle dreaminess, and made no answer till the question had
been repeated.

"Pardon me," he said, "I was dreaming of the days that are gone.  Ah!
Nigel; you are yet too young to understand the feelings of the old--the
sad memories of happy years that can never return: of voices that are
hushed for ever.  No one can _know_ till he has _felt_!"

"But you are not old," said Nigel, wishing to turn the hermit's mind
from a subject on which it seemed to dwell too constantly.

"Not in years," he returned; "but old, _very_ old in experience, and--
stay, what was it that you were asking about?  Ah, the big game.  Well,
we have plenty of that in some of the larger of the islands; we have the
elephant, the rhinoceros, the tiger, the puma, that great man-monkey the
orang-utan, or, as it is called here, the mias, besides wild pigs, deer,
and innumerable smaller animals and birds--"

The hermit stopped abruptly and sat motionless, with his head bent on
one side, like one who listens intently.  Such an action is always
infectious.  Nigel and the negro also listened, but heard nothing.

By that time the fire had died down, and, not being required for warmth,
had not been replenished.  The faint light of the coming moon, which,
however, was not yet above the horizon, only seemed to render darkness
visible, so that the figure of Moses was quite lost in the shadow of the
bush behind him, though the whites of his solemn eyes appeared like two
glow-worms.

"Do you hear anything?" asked Nigel in a low tone.

"Oars," answered the hermit.

"I hear 'im, massa," whispered the negro, "but das not su'prisin'--
plenty boats about."

"This boat approaches the island, and I can tell by the sound that it is
a large _prahu_.  If it touches here it will be for the purpose of
spending the night, and Malay boatmen are not always agreeable
neighbours.  However, it is not likely they will ramble far from where
they land, so we may escape observation if we keep quiet."

As he spoke he emptied the remains of the coffee on the dying fire and
