the man, Ben took up the umbrella, and pointing to the beautifully
carved handle said--

"You see it's all but finished, and I'm very anxious to git it done, so
if you'll let me keep it by me all to-night, I'll work as long as I can
see, and be at it the first thing in the morning."

The man, pleased at the unusual interest which Ben took in the worn-out
piece of goods, agreed to let him keep it by him.  After carrying away
all the other materials, and looking round to see that all was right, he
locked them up for the night.

Left to themselves, they at once began to prepare for action.  They drew
forth all the different parts of the parachute (for such it really was,
although the machine so named had never been seen, but only heard of, by
the seamen), and disposed them in such a manner beside the hole in the
floor as to be ready at a moment's notice, either to be fitted on to the
umbrella or thrust back into the place of concealment.

Their manacles had been taken off at the time they began to work, so
that these were no longer impediments in the way.

"Now, Bill, are the bars sure to give way, d'ye think?"

"Sartin sure," said Bill; "they're holdin' by nothin' thicker than a
pin."

"Very good, then, let's go to work.  In an hour or so it will be dark
enough to try our flyin' machine, and then good-bye to France--or to the
world.  It's neck or nothin', d'ye see?"

"All right," answered Bill.

They sat down to work in good earnest.  The spreading rim of canvas,
instead of being tagged on as on former occasions, was now sewn securely
to the umbrella, and when the latter was expanded, the canvas hung down
all round it, and the numerous stays hung quite loose.  Ben expected
that the rapidity of the descent would suddenly expand this appendage,
and check the speed.  The ends of the loose cords were gathered up and
fastened to the handle, as was also the binding-cord before referred
to--all of which was done with that thoroughness of workmanship for
which sailors are celebrated.

Then a stout cord was fastened to one of the stanchions of the window,
which had been left uncut for the purpose.

When everything was ready the adventurous sailors began to experience
all the anxiety which is inseparable from an action involving much
danger, liability to frustration, and requiring the utmost caution
combined with energy.

They waited until they thought the night was at its darkest.  When all
sounds around them had ceased, they took off their shoes and carefully
lifted the bench to the wall under the window.  Ben went up first by
mounting on Bill's shoulders.  With one powerful wrench he pulled the
iron framework of the window into the room, and handed it down to Bill,
who stooped a little and placed it gently against the wall.  His comrade
then thrust his head and shoulders out at the window, and while in that
awkward position spread his jacket over the sill.  This was intended to
protect the cord which was fastened to the top of the umbrella, and by
which it was to be drawn up after his descent.

When this was done, Bill clambered up by the cord which hung from the
uncut stanchion, and pushed the umbrella past Ben's body until he got
hold of the end of it, and drew it out altogether.  Bill then descended
into the cell, having the small cord in his hand, and watched the
motions of his comrade with intense anxiety.

The window was so small that Ben could barely get his head and shoulders
through it.  There was no possibility of his getting on his feet or his
knees to make a leap.  The only course that remained for him, therefore,
was to expand the umbrella, hold on tight, and then wriggle out until he
should lose his balance and fall head foremost!  It was an awful
position.  Bold though the seaman was, and desperate the circumstances,
his strong frame quivered when he gazed down and felt himself gradually
toppling.  The height he knew to be little short of sixty feet, but in
the dark night it appeared an abyss of horrible profundity.  A cold
sweat broke out upon him, and for one moment he felt an almost
irresistible tendency to let go the umbrella and clutch the window-sill,
but he was too late.  Like lightning he shot down for a couple of yards;
then the parachute expanded and checked him with such violence, as he
swung round, that he nearly lost his hold and was thrown into a
horizontal position--first on one side, then on the other.  Finally, he
reached the ground with a shock that almost took away his breath.  He
sat still for a moment or two, then rose slowly and shook himself, to
ascertain whether he were still alive and sound!  Immediately after he
examined the parachute, found it all right, and gave his comrade the
signal--a couple of tugs at the cord--to haul up.

Bill was scarcely less agitated than his friend.  He had seen Ben's legs
disappear with a suddenness that told eloquently of his having taken
flight, and stood in the cell above listening intently, while large
drops of perspiration coursed down his face.  On feeling the tug at the
string, a mountain appeared to be lifted off his chest.  Carefully he
pulled up the umbrella.  When it showed its point above the window-sill
he clambered up and went through the same terrible ordeal.  He was not,
however, so fortunate as his friend, for, when he jumped, three of the
stays gave way, which had the effect of slightly deranging the motion of
the umbrella, and he came to the ground with such violence that he lay
stunned and motionless, leading his horrified comrade to fear that he
was killed.  In a few minutes, however, he revived, and, on examination,
found that no bones had been broken.

"Now, Ben, what next?" said Bill, getting up, and giving himself a
shake.

"The wall," said Ben, "can't be far from where we stand.  If there wos
only a bit of moonshine it would help us."

"Better as it is," whispered Bill, groping about, for the night was so
intensely dark that it was scarcely possible to see a yard.  "I knows
the way to the harbour, if we only manage to get out.--Ah, here's the
wall, but it's an oncommon high one!"

This was indeed too true.  The top of the wall was faintly visible like
a black line across the dark sky, and when Ben mounted on Bill's
shoulders, it was found that he could only reach to within three feet of
the bristling iron spikes with which it was surmounted.  For
half-an-hour they groped about, and made the discovery that they were in
a small enclosure with bare walls of fifteen feet in height around them,
and not a projection of any kind large enough for a mouse to lay hold
of!  In these circumstances many men would have given way to despair;
but that was a condition of mind which neither of our tars ever thought
of falling into.  In the course of their explorations they came against
each other, and immediately began an animated conversation in whispers,
the result of which was that they groped for the umbrella, and, having
found it, cut off all the cords about it, with which they proceeded to
plait a rope strong enough to bear their weight.  They sat down in
silence to the work, leaning against the prison wall, and wrought for a
full hour with the diligence of men whose freedom depends on their
efforts.  When finished, the rope was found to be about a yard too short
for their purpose; but this defect was remedied by means of the canvas
of their parachute, which they tore up into strips, twisted into an
additional piece of rope, and spliced it to the other.  A large loop was
made on the end of it.  Going once more to the wall, Ben mounted on
Bill's shoulders, and threw the loop over the top of the wall; it
caught, as had been expected, on one of the iron spikes.  Ben then
easily hauled himself up, hand over hand, and, getting hold of two
spikes, raised himself so that he could see over the wall.  Immediately
after he descended.

"I sees nothin', Bill, so we must just go over and take our chance."

Bill agreed.  Ben folded his coat, and ascending again, spread it over
the spikes, so that he could lean on them with his chest without being
pierced.  Having re-ascended, Bill followed; the rope was then hauled
up, and lowered on the other side.  In another moment they slipped down,
and stood on the ground.

"Now, the question is, where are we!" whispered Bill.  "P'r'aps we're
only in another yard after all."

The sound of footsteps pacing slowly towards them was heard at that
moment.

"I do believe," whispered Bill, in an excited tone, "that we've got into
the street, an' that's the sentry.  Let's bolt."

"We can't bolt," said Ben, "'cause, if I took my bearin's right, he's
between us an' the shore, an' it would be of no manner o' use boltin'
into the country to be hunted down like a couple of foxes."

"Then we'll floor him to begin with," whispered Bill.

"That's so," said Ben.

The sentry approached, and the sailors drew up close against the wall.
Presently his dark form became faintly visible.  Bill rushed at him at
once, and delivered a blow that might have felled an ox at the spot
where he supposed his chest was, sending the man back almost heels over
head, while his arms rattled on the pavement.  Instantly there were
heard the sounds of opening locks, bolts, and bars.  The two friends
fled, and shouts were heard behind them, while lights flashed in various
directions.

"This way, Bill," cried Ben, turning down a narrow lane to avoid a lamp
which came in sight when they turned a corner.  A couple of belated and
drunken French fishermen happened to observe them, and gave chase.
"Hold on, Ben, let's drop, and trip 'em up," said Bill.

"All right," replied Ben; "down with 'e."

They stopped suddenly, and squatted as low as possible.  The lane was
very narrow; the fishermen were close behind; they tumbled right over
them, and fell heavily on their faces.  While they were rising, our
heroes knocked them both insensible, and hastily appropriating their
coats and red caps put them on as they ran.  By this time a crowd of
fishermen, sailors, and others, among whom were a few soldiers and
turnkeys with lanterns, were pursuing the fugitives as fast as was
possible in so dark a night.  Bill suggested that they should turn into
a dark corner, and dodge them.  The suggestion was acted on at once.
They dashed round the first corner they came to, and then, instead of
continuing their flight, turned sharp to the left, and hid in a doorway.
The pursuers came pouring round the corner, shouting wildly.  When the
thickest of the crowd was opposite their place of concealment, Bill and
Ben rushed into the midst of them with a shout, imitating the tones of
the Frenchmen as nearly as possible, but taking care to avoid the use of
word, and thus they joined in the pursuit!  Gradually they fell behind,
as if out-run, and, when they found themselves in rear, turned about,
and made off in the opposite direction, then, diverging to the left,
they headed again towards the shore, ran down to the beach, and leaped
into the first boat they came to.

It happened to be a very small one,--a sort of dinghy.  Ben thought it
was too small, and was about to leap out and search for a larger, when
lights suddenly appeared, and the shouts of the pursuers--who had
discovered the _ruse_--were heard as they approached.

"Shove off, Ben!"

"Hurrah, my hearties!" cried the seaman with a stentorian shout as he
seized an oar.

Next moment the little boat was flying over the smooth water of the
port, the silence of which was now broken by exclamations and cries from
the shipping in reply to those from the shore; while the splashing of
oars were heard in all directions as men leaped into boats and rowed
about at random.  Darkness favoured the Englishmen, but it also proved
the cause of their being very nearly re-captured; for they were within
two yards of the battery at the mouth of the harbour before they
observed it, and swerved aside just in time to avoid a collision.  But
they had been seen, and a random discharge of musketry followed.  This
was succeeded by the sudden blaze of a blue light, which revealed the
whole port swarming with boats and armed men,--a sight which acted so
powerfully on the warlike spirits of the sailors that they started up
simultaneously, flung their red caps into the air, and gave vent to a
hearty British cheer, which Ben Bolter followed up as they resumed the
oars, with "Old England for ever! farewell, Mounseers!"

The blue light went out and left everything in darkness thicker than
ever, but not before a rapid though ineffective discharge of musketry
had been made from the battery.  Another blue light, however, showed
that the fugitives were getting rapidly out to sea beyond the range of
musketry, and that boats were leaving the port in chase.  Before the
light expired a cloud of smoke burst from the battery, and the roar of a
heavy gun rushed over the sea.  An instant later and the water was torn
up by grape-shot all round the little boat; but not a ball touched them
save one, which struck Bill Bowls on the left hand and cut off his
thumb.

"I think there's a mast and sail in the bottom of the boat, and here
comes a breeze," said Ben; "give me your oar, and try to hoist it,
Bill."

Without mentioning his wound, our hero did as he was bid; and not until
the boat was leaping over the ruffled sea did he condescend to bind up
the wounded hand with his necktie.  Soon they were beyond the range of
blue lights and artillery.

"Have 'e any notion what course we're steerin'?" inquired Bill.

"None wotsomediver," answered Ben.

Soon after that, however, the sky cleared a little, and Bill got sight
of part of the constellation of the Great Bear.  Although the pole-star
was not visible, he guessed pretty nearly its position, and thus
ascertained that the breeze came from the south-west.  Trimming the
lug-sail accordingly, the tars turned the prow of the little craft to
the northward, and steered for the shores of old England.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

About a year after this stirring incident, a remarkably noisy party was
assembled at tea in the prim little parlour of Mrs Blyth's cottage in
Fairway.  Besides the meek old soul herself, there were present on that
occasion our old friends Ben Bolter and Tom Riggles, the latter of whom
flourished a wooden stump instead of a right leg, and wore the garb of a
Greenwich pensioner.  His change of circumstances did not appear to have
decreased his love for tobacco.  Ben had obtained leave of absence from
his ship for a day or two, and, after having delighted the heart of his
old mother by a visit, had called at the cottage to pay his respects to
his old messmate, little thinking that he would find Tom Riggles there
before him.  Miss Bessy Blunt was also present; and it was plain, from
the expression of her speaking countenance, that she had not forgiven
Ben, but tolerated him under protest.  Our hero and sweet Nelly Blyth
were not of the party, however, because they happened just then to
prefer a quiet chat in the summer-house in the back-garden.  We will not
presume to detail much of the conversation that passed between them.
One or two of the concluding sentences must suffice.

"Yes, Bill," said Nelly, in reply to something that her companion had
whispered in her ear, "you know well enough that I am glad to-morrow is
our wedding-day.  I have told you so already, fifty times at least."

"Only thrice, Nell, if so often," said Bill.  "Well, that _was_ the
luckiest shot the Frenchmen ever fired at me; for if I hadn't had my
thumb took off I couldn't have left the sarvice, d'ye see; and that
would have delayed my marriage with you, Nell.  But now, as the old song
says--

  "`No more I'll roam
  Away from home,
  Across the stormy sea.
  I'll anchor here,
  My Nelly dear,
  And live for love and thee.'"






End of Project Gutenberg's The Battle and the Breeze, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BATTLE AND THE BREEZE ***

***** This file should be named 23370.txt or 23370.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/7/23370/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
