"Shush!" exclaimed Lockley, with eyes also glued to his book, holding up
his hand as if to check interruption.  "There's somethin' in this,
although I can't quite see it yet."

A roar of laughter on deck announced that Bob Lumsden had found
something quite to his taste.  "First-rate--ha! ha!  I wonder if it's
all true."

"Hold your noise there," cried Hawkson; "who d'ee think can learn off a
hymn wi' you shoutin' like a bo'sun's mate an' Duffy snortin' like a
grampus?"

"Ah, just so," chimed in Stubley, looking up from his board.  "Why don't
you let it out, David?  You'll bu'st the b'iler if you don't open a
bigger safety-valve than your nose."

"Smack on the weather beam, that looks like the Gospel ship, sir," said
the mate, looking down the hatchway.

The skipper closed his book at once and went on deck, but the night was
so dark, and the smack in question so far off, that they were unable to
make her out among the numerous lights of the fleet.

In another part of that fleet, not far distant, floated the _Cormorant_.
Here too, as in many other smacks, the effects of the _Sunbeam's_
beneficent influence had begun to tell.  Groggy Fox's crew was noted as
one of the most quarrelsome and dissipated in the fleet.  On this
particular Saturday night, however, all was quiet, for most of the men
were busy with books, pamphlets, and tracts.  One who had, as his mate
said, come by a broken head, was slumbering in his berth, scientifically
bandaged and convalescent, and Groggy himself, with a pair of
tortoiseshell glasses on his nose, was deep in a book which he
pronounced to be "one o' the wery best wollums he had ever come across
in the whole course of his life," leaving it to be inferred, perhaps,
that he had come across a very large number of volumes in his day.

While he was thus engaged one of the men whispered in his ear, "A
_coper_ alongside, sir."

The skipper shut the "wery best wollum" at once, and ordered out the
boat.

"Put a cask o' oysters in her," he said.

Usually his men were eager to go with their skipper, but on this night
some of them were so interested in the books they were reading that they
preferred to remain on board.  Others went, and, with their skipper, got
themselves "fuddled" on the proceeds of the owner's oysters.  If oysters
had not been handy, fish or something else would have been used instead,
for Skipper Fox was not particular--he was still clinging to "the poor
old stranded wreck."

It was dawn when, according to their appropriate phrase, they "tumbled"
over the side of the _coper_ into their boat.  As they bade the Dutchman
good night they observed that he was looking "black as thunder" at the
horizon.

"W-wat's wrong, ol' b-boy?" asked Groggy.

The Dutchman pointed to the horizon.  "No use for me to shtop here, mit
_dat_ alongside!" he replied.

The fishermen turned their drunken eyes in the direction indicated, and,
after blinking a few seconds, clearly made out the large blue flag, with
its letters MDSF, fluttering in the light breeze that had risen with the
sun.

With curses both loud and deep the Dutchman trimmed his sails, and
slowly but decidedly vanished from the scene.  Thus the tide began to
turn on the North Sea!

The light breeze went down as the day advanced, and soon the mission
vessel found herself surrounded by smacks, with an ever-increasing tail
of boats at her stern, and an ever-multiplying congregation on her deck.
It was a busy and a lively scene, for while they were assembling, Fred
Martin took advantage of the opportunity to distribute books and
medicines, and to bind up wounds, etcetera.  At the same time the
pleasant meeting of friends, who never met in such numbers anywhere
else--not even in the _copers_--and the hearty good wishes and shaking
of hands, with now and then expressions of thankfulness from believers--
all tended to increase the bustle and excitement, so that the two
invalid clergymen began at once to experience the recuperative influence
of glad enthusiasm.

"There is plenty to do here, both for body and soul," remarked one of
these to Fred during a moment of relaxation.

"Yes, sir, thank God.  We come out here to work, and we find the work
cut out for us.  A good many surgical cases, too, you observe.  But we
expect that.  In five of the fleets there were more than two thousand
cases treated last year aboard of the mission smacks, so we look for our
share.  In fact, during our first eight weeks with this fleet we have
already had two hundred men applying for medicine or dressing of
wounds."

"Quite an extensive practice, Dr Martin," said the clergyman, with a
laugh.

"Ay, sir; but ours is the medical-missionary line.  The body may be
first in time, but the soul is first in importance with us."

In proof of this, as it were, the skipper now stopped all that had been
going on, and announced that the _real_ work of the day was going to
begin; whereupon the congregation crowded into the hold until it was
full.  Those who could not find room clustered on deck round the open
hatch and listened--sometimes craned their necks over and gazed.

It was a new experience for the invalid clergymen, who received another
bath of recuperative influence.  Fervour, interest, intelligence seemed
to gleam in the steady eyes of the men while they listened, and thrilled
in their resonant voices when they sang.  One of the clergymen preached
as he had seldom preached before, and then prayed, after which they all
sang; but the congregation did not move to go away.  The brother
clergyman therefore preached, and, modestly fearing that he was keeping
them too long, hinted as much.

"Go on, sir," said the Admiral, who was there; "it ain't every day we
gets a chance like this."

A murmur of assent followed, and the preacher went on; but we will not
follow him.  After closing with the hymn, "How sweet the name of Jesus
sounds in a believer's ear," they all went on deck, where they found a
glory of sunshine flooding the _Sunbeam_, and glittering on the still
tranquil sea.

The meeting now resolved itself into a number of groups, among whom the
peculiar work of the day was continued directly or indirectly.  It was
indeed a wonderful condition of things on board of the Gospel ship that
Sunday--wheels within wheels, spiritual machinery at work from stem to
stern.  A few, whose hearts had been lifted up, got out an accordion and
their books, and "went in for" hymns.  Among these Bob Lumsden and his
friend Pat Stiver took an active part.  Here and there couples of men
leaned over the side and talked to each other in undertones of their
Saviour and the life to come.  In the bow Manx Bradley got hold of Joe
Stubley and pleaded hard with him to come to Jesus, and receive power
from the Holy Spirit to enable him to give up all his evil ways.  In the
stern Fred Martin sought to clear away the doubts and difficulties of
Ned Bryce.  Elsewhere the two clergymen were answering questions, and
guiding several earnest souls to a knowledge of the truth, while down in
the cabin Jim Freeman prevailed on several men and boys to sign the
temperance pledge.  Among these last was Groggy Fox, who, irresolute of
purpose, was still holding back.

"'Cause why," said he; "I'll be sure to break it again.  I can't keep
it."

"I know that, skipper," said Fred, coming down at the moment.  "In your
own strength you'll _never_ keep it, but in God's strength you shall
conquer _all_ your enemies.  Let's pray, lads, that we may all be
enabled to keep to our good resolutions."

Then and there they all knelt down, and Skipper Fox arose with the
determination once again to "Leave the poor old stranded wreck, and pull
for the shore."

But that was a memorable Sunday in other respects, for towards the
afternoon a stiff breeze sprang up, and an unusually low fall in the
barometer turned the fishermen's thoughts back again to wordly cares.
The various boats left the _Sunbeam_ hurriedly.  As the _Lively Poll_
had kept close alongside all the time, Stephen Lockley was last to think
of leaving.  He had been engaged in a deeply interesting conversation
with one of the clergymen about his soul, but at last ordered his boat
to be hauled alongside.

While this was being done, he observed that another smack--one of the
so-called "ironclads"--was sailing so as to cross the bows of his
vessel.  The breeze had by that time increased considerably, and both
smacks, lying well over, were rushing swiftly through the water.
Suddenly some part of the ironclad's tackling about the mainsail gave
way, the head of the vessel fell to leeward; next moment she went
crashing into the _Lively Poll_, and cut her down to the water's edge.
The ironclad seemed to rebound and tremble for a moment, and then passed
on.  The steersman at once threw her up into the wind with the intention
of rendering assistance, but in another minute the _Lively Poll_ had
sunk and disappeared for ever, carrying Peter Jay and Hawkson along with
her.

Of course several boats pushed off at once to the rescue, and hovered
about the spot for some time, but neither the men nor the vessel were
ever seen again.

There was a smack at some distance, which was about to quit the fleet
next morning and return to port.  The skipper of it knew well which
vessel had been run down, but, not being near enough to see all that
passed, imagined that the whole crew had perished along with her.
During the night the breeze freshened to a gale, which rendered fishing
impossible.  This vessel therefore left the fleet before dawn, and
carried the news to Gorleston that the _Lively Poll_ had been run down
and sunk with all her crew.

It was Fred Martin's wife who undertook to break this dreadful news to
poor Mrs Lockley.

Only those who have had such duty to perform can understand the struggle
it cost the gentle-spirited Isa.  The first sight of her friend's face
suggested to Mrs Lockley the truth, and when words confirmed it she
stood for a moment with a countenance pale as death.  Then, clasping her
hands tightly together, the poor woman, with a cry of despair, sank
insensible upon the floor.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE LAST.

But the supposed death of Stephen Lockley did not soften the heart of
his wife.  It only opened her eyes a little.  After the first stunning
effect had passed, a hard, rebellious state of mind set in, which
induced her to dry her tears, and with stern countenance reject the
consolation of sympathisers.  The poor woman's heart was breaking, and
she refused to be comforted.

It was while she was in this condition that Mrs Mooney, of all people,
took it into her head to visit and condole with her neighbour.  That
poor woman, although a sot, was warm-hearted, and the memory of what she
had suffered when her own husband perished seemed to arouse her
sympathies in an unusual degree.  She was, as her male friends would
have said, "screwed" when she knocked at Mrs Lockley's door.

The poor creature was recovering from a burst of passionate grief, and
turned her large dark eyes fiercely on the would-be comforter as she
entered.

"My dear Mrs Lockley," began Mrs Mooney, with sympathy beaming on her
red countenance, "it do grieve me to see you like this--a'most as much
as wen my--"

"You're drunk!" interrupted Mrs Lockley, with a look of mingled
sternness and indignation.

"Well, my dear," replied Mrs Mooney, with a deprecatory smile, "that
ain't an uncommon state o' things, an' you've no call to be 'ard on a
poor widdy like yourself takin' a little consolation now an' then when
she can get it.  I just thought I'd like to comfort--"

"I don't want no comfort," cried Mrs Lockley in a sharp tone.  "Leave
me.  Go away!"

There was something so terrible in the mingled look of grief and anger
which disturbed the handsome features of the young wife, that Mrs
Mooney, partly awed and partly alarmed, turned at once and left the
house.  She did not feel aggrieved, only astonished and somewhat
dismayed.  After a few moments of meditation she set off, intending to
relieve her feelings in the "Blue Boar."  On her way she chanced to meet
no less a personage than Pat Stiver, who, with his hands in his pockets
and his big boots clattering over the stones, was rolling along in the
opposite direction.

"Pat, my boy!" exclaimed the woman in surprise, "wherever did you come
from?"

"From the North Sea," said Pat, looking up at his questioner with an
inquiring expression.  "I say, old woman, drunk again?"

"Well, boy, who denyses of it?"

"Ain't you ashamed of yourself?"

"No, I ain't.  Why should I?  Who cares whether I'm drunk or sober?"

"Who cares, you unnat'ral old bundle o' dirty clo'es?  Don't Eve care?
An' don't Fred Martin an' Bob Lumpy care?  An' don't _I_ care, worse
than all of 'em put together, except Eve?"

"You, boy?" exclaimed the woman.

"Yes, me.  But look here, old gal; where are you goin'?  To have a
drink, I suppose?"

"Jus' so.  That's 'xactly where I'm a-steerin' to."

"Well, now," cried Pat, seizing the woman's hand, "come along, an' I'll
give you somethin' to drink.  Moreover, I'll treat you to some noos
as'll cause your blood to curdle, an' your flesh to creep, an' your eyes
to glare, an your hair to stand on end!"

Thus adjured, and with curiosity somewhat excited, Mrs Mooney suffered
herself to be led to that temperance coffee-tavern in Gorleston to which
we have already referred.

"Ain't it comf'r'able?" asked the boy, as his companion gazed around
her.  "Now then, missis," he said to the attendant, with the air of an
old frequenter of the place, "coffee and wittles for two--hot.  Here,
sit down in this corner, old lady, where you can take in the beauties o'
the place all at one squint."

Almost before he had done speaking two large cups of hot coffee and two
thick slices of buttered bread lay before them.

"There you are--all ship-shape.  Now drink, an' no heel-taps."

Mrs Mooney drank in dumb surprise, partly at the energy and cool
impudence of the boy, and partly at the discovery that there was more
comfort in hot coffee than she had expected.

"You've heard, in course, that the _Lively Poll_ is at the bottom of the
North Sea?" said Pat.

Mrs Mooney set down her cup with a sigh and a sudden expression of woe
mingled with reproof, while she remarked that there was no occasion to
be lighthearted on such a subject.

"That's all _you_ know," retorted Pat.  "Of course we was told the
moment we came alongside the wharf this mornin', that somebody had bin
blowin' half a gale o' lies about it, but Stephen Lockley ain't
drownded, not he, an' don't mean to be for some time.  He was aboard of
the _Sunbeam_ at the time his wessel went down an' all the rest of 'em,
except poor Jay an' Hawkson, an' we've brought 'em all ashore.  You see
we got so damaged in a gale that came on to blow the wery next day that
we've bin forced to run here for repairs.  Skipper Lockley's away up at
this here minit to see his wife--leastwise, he's waitin' outside till
one o' the parsons goes and breaks the noos to her.  The skipper didn't
see no occasion for that, an' said he could break the noos to her
hisself, but the parson said he didn't know what the consikences might
be, so Stephen he gave in, an'--.  Now, old girl, if you keep openin' of
your mouth an' eyes at that rate you'll git lockjaw, an' never be able
to go to sleep no more."

There was, indeed, some ground for the boy's remark, for his "noos" had
evidently overwhelmed Mrs Mooney--chiefly with joy, on account of her
friend Mrs Lockley, to whom, even when "in liquor", she was tenderly
attached.  She continued to gaze speechless at Pat, who took advantage
of the opportunity to do a little private business on his own account.

Taking a little bit of blue ribbon with a pin attached to it from his
pocket, he coolly fixed it on Mrs Mooney's breast.

"There," said he gravely, "I promised Bob that I'd make as many conwerts
as I could, so I've conwerted _you_!"

Utterly regardless of her conversion, Mrs Mooney suddenly sprang from
her seat and made for the door.

"Hallo, old gal! where away now!" cried the boy, seizing her skirt and
following her out, being unable to stop her.

"I'm a-goin' to tell Eve, an' _won't_ she be glad, for she was awful
fond o' Lockley!"

"All right, I'm with 'ee.  Cut along."

"Mother!" exclaimed Eve, when the poor woman stood before her with eager
excitement flushing her face to a ruddy purple.  "Have you _really_ put
on the blue ribbon?"

The poor child's thin pretty little race flushed with hope for a moment.

"Oh, it ain't that, dear," said Mrs Mooney, "but Lockley ain't drownded
arter all!  He's--he's--"

Here Pat Stiver broke in, and began to explain to the bewildered girl.
He was yet in the midst of his "noos," when the door was flung open, and
Mrs Lockley hurried in.

"Forgive me, Mrs Mooney," she cried, grasping her friend's hand, "I
shouldn't have spoke to you as I did, but my heart was very sore.  Oh,
it is breakin'!"

She sat down, covered her face with both hands, and sobbed violently.
Her friends stood speechless and helpless.  It was obvious that she must
have left her house to make this apology before the clergyman who was to
break the news had reached it.  Before any one could summon courage to
speak, a quick step was heard outside, and Lockley himself entered.  He
had been waiting near at hand for the clergyman to summon him, when he
caught sight of his wife entering the hut.

Mrs Lockley sprang up--one glance, a wild shriek, but not of despair--
and she would have fallen to the ground had not her husband's strong
arms been around her.

It is believed that joy seldom or never kills.  At all events it did not
kill on this occasion, for Mrs Lockley and her husband were seen that
same evening enjoying the hospitality of Mrs Martin, while their little
one was being fondled on the knees of the old granny, who pointed
through the attic window, and tried to arouse the child's interest in
the great sea.

When Mrs Mooney succeeded in turning her attention to the blue ribbon
on her breast, she laughed heartily at the idea of such a decoration--
much to the sorrow of Eve, who had prayed for many a day, not that her
mother might put on that honourable badge, but that she might be brought
to the Saviour, in whom are included all things good and true and
strong.  Nevertheless, it is to be noted that Mrs Mooney did not put
the blue ribbon off.  She went next day to have a laugh over it with
Mrs Lockley.  But the fisherman's wife would not laugh.  She had found
that while sorrow and suffering may drive one to despair in regard to
God and self and all terrestrial things, joy frequently softens.

Surely it is the "goodness of God that leadeth to repentance."  This
life, as it were, from the dead proved to be life from death to herself,
and she talked and prayed with her drunken friend until that friend gave
her soul to Jesus, and received the Spirit of power by which she was
enabled to "hold the fort,"--to adopt and keep the pledge of which her
ribbon was but the emblem.

Although we have now described the end of the _Lively Poll_, it must not
be supposed that the crew of that ill-fated smack was dispersed and
swallowed up among the fishing fleets of the North Sea.  On the
contrary, though separated for the time, they came together again,--ay,
and held together for many a long day thereafter.  And this is how it
came about.

One morning, a considerable time after the events we have just narrated,
Stephen Lockley invited his old comrades to meet him in the Gorleston
coffee-tavern, and, over a rousing cup of "hot, with," delivered to them
the following oration:

"Friends and former messmates.  I ain't much of a speaker, so you'll
excuse my goin' to the pint direct.  A noble lady with lots o' tin an' a
warm heart has presented a smack all complete to our Deep-Sea Fishermen
Institootion.  It cost, I'm told, about 2000 pounds, and will be ready
to start as a Gospel ship next week.  For no reason that I knows on,
'xcept that it's the Lord's will, they've appointed me skipper, with
directions to choose my own crew.  So, lads, I've got you here to ask if
you're willin' to ship with me."

"_I'm_ willin', of _course_," cried Pat Stiver eagerly, "an so's Bob
