the trusting little creatures. Cotton doesn't fancy that sort of joke.
Nor does it like too much wet weather, for then the cotton gets damp
and sodden and cannot be picked. Should it be gathered in this
condition it would mold and mildew, and become a wreck."

"It sounds to me as if cotton raising was pretty hard work," sighed
Tim.

"Oh, no harder than are most other things, Timmie," returned Uncle
Frederick. "Generally speaking cotton plants sail along safely enough
unless a pest attacks them. That is their greatest menace. When a pest
descends on the crop the grower does lose courage, I can tell you. It
is queer to think what damage a crowd of tiny insects can do, isn't it?
Some of them will bore through the pods as if in pure spite and spoil
the cotton fiber at the time it is just beginning to form--a detestable
trick! Others, fattening on the tender green leaves near the top of the
plant, will turn into caterpillars, creep down the stalk, and devour
every leaf as they go along. This leaves the roots of the plant
unprotected from the sun and speedily every particle of moisture on
which the growth is so dependent is dried up. So the plants shrivel and
die. Then there are beetles, locusts, grasshoppers, and all the rest of
the army of trouble-makers who wait to steal a march on the unwatchful
planter. All these rebels must be kept their distance if you would
harvest a big cotton crop."

"I guess I never would have any cotton," remarked the disheartened Tim.

"Oh, yes, you would, son," laughed his uncle. "Surely you wouldn't let
yourself be beaten by a lot of bugs and worms, would you? Should you
live in a climate where cotton could be raised you would pitch in,
fight the pests, and be as proud of your snowy field as many another
man is. For when the pods are ready for gathering there is no prettier
sight. It is like a huge bowl of popcorn."

"I'd like to see a cotton field," ventured Mary.

"You'd have to go to India, the southern part of your own country,
Australia, Brazil, Egypt, or the South Sea Islands then," Captain
Dillingham responded. "That is, if you wanted to see the best of
it--that which is strongest of fiber."

"But isn't cotton all alike?" queried the girl, with parted lips.

"No, indeed, child! There are many different kinds of cotton. Some have
seeds of one color, some of another; some seeds come out easily, some
do not; some cotton is strong fibered, some is weak and snaps at a
touch; some has long fibers and some short. Each variety has its name
and is peculiar to a given country."

"Oh!" came in chorus from his audience.

"For instance, the most delicate or fine quality of thread is produced
from the Sea Island cotton, and usually this type is quite expensive;
it has so many seeds and they take up so much room in the pod that
after they have been removed only a small quantity of cotton remains
and that makes it costly. Almost every other kind gives more lint (or
picked cotton) than does this variety. The Egyptian cotton is somewhat
on this same order. India, China, Arabia, Persia, Asia Minor, Africa,
and the Coromandel Coast all have a common type of plant which probably
first grew in the latter place and was transplanted from there to the
other countries.

"In Cuba a sort of cotton vine is found that has very large pods and a
great number of seeds. Some of the fibers of this plant are long and
some short. It is not a very good kind of cotton to cultivate because
the long fibers get tangled up with the seeds and often break when
being separated. Moreover the short fibers are all mixed in with the
long.

"This gives you some notion of the different species of cotton. Were I
to tell you of all the kinds you would be tired hearing about them. I
myself get interested because I carry so much cotton in my ship--bales
upon bales of it. Sometimes I take cotton out from America to countries
that either do not have any, or do not have as much as they want;
sometimes I bring back here varieties that we cannot raise in the
South."

"What kind of cotton do we raise in the United States?" Mary asked.

"The bulk of our cotton is long-stapled and is called Georgian Upland,"
was the response. "The whole plant is rough and hairy--leaf, branch,
and pod. Some persons think that originally it came from Mexico.
However that may be, here it is, and although we raise some little of
other sorts we have far more of this than anything else. We can thank
it, too, for much of the wealth of this country of ours for Texas,
Georgia, Alabama, North and South Carolina, Mississippi, Louisiana and
Arkansas are all big cotton-growing States. Florida, Tennessee, Indian
Territory, Missouri, Virginia, Kentucky, Kansas, and Oklahoma also lie
in the cotton belt and ship substantial crops."

The little man rose.

"I could go on talking cotton forever," jested he. "Think of a sacred
cotton tree often as high as twenty feet, growing along the coast of
the Indian Ocean, the cotton from which is used only for weaving cloth
for the turbans of Hindoo priests! And think of still another
exquisitely fine Indian cotton called Dacca cotton that is spun and
woven into fragile oriental muslins and Madras Long Cloth. It almost
makes your mouth water to grow cotton, doesn't it?"

"Well, at least you can go and see it grown, Uncle Frederick, and that
is more than we can do," piped Tim.

"True, sonny," nodded the captain. "But still you who stay at home and
do not see it grown have your share in its benefits. You wear, use, and
eat cotton products."

"How?" questioned the wondering Tim.

"Don't you have cotton cloth for clothing, bedding, and no end of other
comforts? Of course you do."

"But--eating cotton----" faltered Tim. "I don't do that."

"There are medicines made from the cotton root; cottonseed oil for
cooking and to use on salads, you may not be aware, comes from the
meaty kernel inside the cotton seed."

"I didn't know that," Tim answered.

"Oh, cotton has many by-products," returned his uncle. "The lint that
cannot be used for spinning is made into cotton wadding to pad quilts,
skirts, and coat linings; and cotton waste is excellent for cleaning
machinery. Ripe cotton fiber furnishes an almost pure cellulose, too."

"Cotton certainly seems to do its part in the world," Mary murmured
thoughtfully. "But I'm not sure," added she, with a mischievous little
smile, "that I know just what cellulose is."




CHAPTER IX

NORTH AND SOUTH


"Where do you and the _Charlotte_ go when you leave here, Frederick?"
his sister inquired as the family sat at breakfast the next morning.

"New Orleans, I suppose; we touch there for a cargo of cotton," was the
reply.

"Then you'll see the crop gathered, won't you, Uncle Frederick?" Mary
put in.

"Hardly that, lassie," replied her uncle kindly. "All the work will be
done before I arrive. However, I shall not mind that for I have seen
southern cotton fields in their prime before now."

"It grows everywhere in the South, doesn't it?" Mary ventured.

"One could hardly say that, my dear," Captain Dillingham responded with
a mild shake of his head. "On the contrary the cotton belt of the
United States is comparatively small considering the vast crops it
yields."

"Why don't they make it bigger and plant more cotton?" questioned Tim.

"Cotton, as I told you, sonny, has its own ideas as to where it will
grow. Let it be planted farther north than forty-five degrees and it
will only thrive under glass; or try to cultivate it farther south than
the thirty-five degree line and it will also balk. This, you see,
leaves a rather narrow zone that answers its demands in the way of
temperature and soil. For the kind of soil cotton likes has to be
considered also. If the land is too sandy the moisture will soon dry up
and the plants shrivel; or if there is an undue proportion of clay the
excess moisture will not drain off and the plants will run to wood and
leaves. Therefore you have the problem of getting the right proportions
of clay, loam and sand in a climate where the temperature holds
practically even."

"Why, I shouldn't think any spot on earth would fill that bill,"
grinned Carl.

"We do succeed in getting just such areas, however," returned Captain
Dillingham. "North and South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana,
Texas, Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee, Indian Territory, Missouri,
Virginia, Kentucky, Kansas, and Oklahoma all contrive to answer the
requirements to a greater or less degree. These States boast soils that
are blends of clay, sand, and loam in the desired proportions; and
while some of them are better than others both soil and temperature are
such that cotton can be grown in them. Given these two assets the rest
of the conundrum is up to the planter."

"I should think most of it was answered for him when he has these two
important factors," Mrs. McGregor asserted.

"But to have climate and land is not enough," protested her brother.
"Once he possesses the land the owner must take care of it. It cannot
be allowed to run out but must be plowed up, fertilized, and the crop
tended like any other farm product. Before cotton growers realized
this, not much attention was paid to these laws and in consequence the
crop of many a southern plantation suffered. Now cotton-raising is done
far more scientifically. The old stalks are gathered and destroyed; the
land is plowed and fertilized, and afterward seed-planting machines go
up and down the rows, scattering five or six seeds into each hole, with
a space of not more than a foot between the holes. Then the seeds are
covered over lightly and left to sprout."

"How long is it before they come up?" interrogated Carl.

"About ten or twelve days," was the reply. "A couple of days later the
first leaf appears and then trouble begins. April sees the Carolina
planters thinning their shoots in order to have sturdy plants from
which to select the ones eventually allowed to grow. States farther
south get at the task earlier. After the thinning process is over the
plants are hilled up like potatoes and the spaces between the rows,
where the last season's crop previously grew, is plowed to keep the
soil open and free for drainage. Men afterward travel through the open
rows hoeing up the loose soil and heaping it around the young plants to
strengthen and protect them; then, since nothing more can be done
immediately everybody takes a rest and waits."

"Then what happens?" piped Tim.

"Oh, after a time the same process is repeated. The earth by this time
has become crusted over and must be opened up again; the hauling, too,
takes place once more. Hauling is the name given to bedding up the
plants with loose earth. Often there are four or five _haulings_. By
July the plants have grown sufficiently to show which one in each hill
is to be the most thrifty and this one is left to grow while the other
shoots are pulled up. After that, given sunny days and occasional light
showers, the crop should prosper. Should there, however, be too much
heat, or too great a quantity of rain, things will not move so
successfully."

"How long does cotton have to grow before it is ready for picking?"
asked Carl.

"The plants bloom approximately the middle of June--sometimes earlier,
sometimes later, according to the climates of the various States. Two
months after that the crop is ready to be gathered. You must not,
however, run away with the notion that cotton-picking is a hurried
process. Often it goes on from the end of August until into November or
December. It is a long-drawn-out, tedious, monotonous task. Whole
families join in the harvesting for since there is always some low and
some tall cotton (some annual and some perennial varieties) the
children can share with their elders in the work and thus earn quite a
sum of money. In fact, in the old days before child labor laws
protected the kiddies, and while cotton-picking was done by slaves,
many a poor little mite toiled cruelly long in the fields. Even the
older negroes were driven with whips and compelled to keep at work
until utterly exhausted."

His audience gasped.

"Yes," nodded their uncle, "I am afraid that urged forward by the
desire to garner a big crop before rain should fall and spoil it, the
cotton growers practiced much cruelty. No doubt, too, the same tyranny
reigned in India. Wherever work must be done by hand and labor is cheap
and plentiful, human beings come to be classed to a great extent as
machines. Plantation owners become so interested in the money they are
to make that they forget everything else. Of course labor was never as
cheap in our Southern States even during slave days as in India and
therefore until the advent of the cotton gin cotton was not one of our
valuable crops."

"You mean because the seeds had to be picked out by hand?" Carl said.

"Yes. There was, to be sure, the primitive kind of gin resorted to in
India for cleaning certain black-seed varieties. Two kinds of this
black-seed, or long-stapled cotton, grew in the Sea Islands and along
the coast from Delaware to Georgia; but it could not be made to thrive
away from the moist ocean climate. Hence on inland plantations a
different and more vigorous variety of plant (one having green seeds
and short staples) was propagated. This kind was known as Upland
cotton. It was a troublesome product for the planters, I assure you,
for its many seeds clung so tightly to the lint that it was almost out
of the question to remove them. The simple little gin copied from India
and successfully used on the black seed variety was entirely
impracticable on this Upland growth since it tore the fibers all to
bits."

"They did need a cotton gin, didn't they!" Carl ejaculated.

"Very badly, indeed," agreed Captain Dillingham. "Well, the only
substitute for machinery was fingers; and when I tell you that it often
took an entire day to get out of a three-pound batch of cotton a pound
or so that was clear of seeds you will understand what a slow process
it was."

"At that rate I shouldn't think it would have paid anybody to raise
cotton," sniffed Carl.

"It didn't," returned his uncle. "Moreover it rendered the product very
expensive, for it required a great number of slaves to clean any
considerable quantity of cotton. I often think of the toil and misery
that went into the cotton-growing of those slavery days. After working
for a long stretch of hours in the blazing sun the negroes came in at
night worn out. But were they allowed to rest? Perhaps some of them who
had considerate owners were; but many, many others less fortunate were
set to picking out seeds and lest they fall asleep at their task
overseers prodded them with whips."

"Gee!"

"That was slavery, son," declared Captain Dillingham. "Do you wonder
that Abraham Lincoln thought it would be worth even a war to rid this
country of such an evil? Understand, I am not condemning all slave
owners. Undoubtedly there were kind and humane ones just as there are
to this day employers who are fair with their help. But urged on by
commercial greed the temptation of the planters was to force the slaves
to do more than was right, and as a result a great deal of cruelty was
practiced. Had the primitive method of picking cotton by hand continued
it is probable that slavery might have died a natural death without
recourse to war, for many of the Southerners were reaching a point
where the returns from cotton and tobacco were not sufficient to feed
the army of slaves that swarmed over the plantations. To use a common
phrase the slaves were eating their heads off. It was just at this
juncture, however, that Eli Whitney came along with his cotton gin and
in a twinkling the South became revolutionized and the problem of the
legion of idle, profitless slaves was settled. They would now be idle
and profitless no longer. Vast quantities of cotton could henceforth be
planted and the negroes could cultivate and gather it. With Eli
Whitney's gin to do the slow and hindering part of the process
cotton-raising could be made a paying industry."

"Mr. Whitney bobbed up in the very nick of time, didn't he?" smiled
Mary.

"For the financial prosperity of the South he did," her uncle
responded. "But to the welfare of the negroes his advent was a fatal
stroke. Slaves immediately were more in demand than they ever had been
before. No mechanical device could take their place. Cotton must be
planted, cultivated, and harvested by hand and the larger the cotton
fields became, the harder the slaves were worked. The cotton crop
became the staple product of the South. Many a Southerner who took up
arms against the Union did so because he honestly believed that to free
the slaves would mean the economic ruin of his section of the country."

"I never thought of that side of the question before," Mrs. McGregor
murmured thoughtfully.

"Nor I," rejoined Carl.

"Nevertheless it is a fact none of us here in the North should forget,"
continued Captain Dillingham. "To the southern planter our point of
view appeared unfair and grossly one-sided. It was easy enough for the
North to say the slaves should be freed. They had no cotton fields and
their prosperity was not dependent on the negroes. But to let the
slaves go meant ruin for the South. It was not alone, you see, that
their owners wished the profit derived from buying and selling them;
they needed them to work. Never had the South had such an opportunity
to coin wealth as that now opening. What wonder its residents were
angry at having this dazzling prospect for fortune-making snatched
away? Remember and take these facts into consideration when you think
harshly of those who took up arms to defend slavery."

There was an instant's pause.

"Of course, however, none of this justifies slavery or makes it more
right. The entire principle of it was wrong; it was un-Christian,
unjust, and cruel, and the only honorable thing to do was to bring it
to an end in this country. But that is another story altogether. What
we are talking about now is the cotton itself; and to get a big view of
this subject it is well to consider what was happening in the world
just at this time, and why cotton was such a desirable commodity.

"Over across the ocean James Watts's steam engine, combined with the
flying shuttle of John Kay, the spinning jenny of Hargreaves, the
water-frame of Arkwright, and the self-acting loom of Crompton, was
working as great a revolution in England's cloth-making industry as Eli
Whitney's cotton gin had done in the South. In other words the hand
loom had been supplanted by the more modern device of the steam-driven
spinning mill. This meant that in future cloth would no longer be made
in small quantities in the homes, women of the families spinning the
thread and weaving it whenever they could steal a bit of time from
other household duties. No! Cloth was to be made in factories on a much
larger scale, and sold to the public."

"No wonder the fact set everybody to raising cotton!" declared Mrs.
McGregor.

"No wonder indeed!" nodded her brother. "From a vintage so small that
even President Jefferson scarcely knew America had a cotton crop at all
this product of the South leaped forward by bounds. The year preceding
Eli Whitney's invention the United States exported less than one
hundred and forty thousand bales; but the year afterward the shipment
had soared to nearly half a million. The following year it was a
million and a half; the year after that six million."

"Gee whizz!" commented Carl. "That was some record, wasn't it?"

"Rather!" agreed his uncle.

"How much do we export now, Uncle Frederick?" Mary asked.

"From nine to twelve million bales of five-hundred pounds each are
raised annually in the South," returned Captain Dillingham. "Of this
about ninety per cent. is Upland cotton, the green seeds of which have
to be taken out by a gin similar to the one Eli Whitney invented.
Approximately about half this vast crop is exported."

"I had no idea we raised so much cotton," mused Carl.

"We raise quantities of it, son," Uncle Frederick said. "Now you can
understand better why the South was so resentful at being compelled to
free the slaves. With cotton so much in demand the prices of slaves had
greatly increased. The planters had untold wealth almost within their
grasp. It was all very well for the North to assert that slavery was a
barbarous practise. Who was to tend the cotton fields when the slaves
were gone?"

"The South did have something on its side, didn't it?" Mary ventured.
