back to escape the carriage.

"Here, boy, you take this bag, and follow the owner to the hotel, and he
will give you something," said Noddy to a ragged boy at the corner of
the street.

Without waiting for an answer, he darted down the cross street, and made
his best time in the rush for liberty.

The boy, to whom Noddy had given the bag, ran over the street, and
placed himself behind Mr. Grant, whom he judged to be the owner of the
baggage.

"Where is the other boy?" demanded Mr. Grant.

"Gone down State Street to find ten cents he lost there," replied the
wicked boy. "I'll carry your bag, sir."

"But I want the boy! Which way did he go?" said Mr. Grant, in hurried
tones.

"Down there, sir. His mother'll lick him if he don't find the ten cents
he lost. I'll carry the bag."

But Mr. Grant was unwilling to trust his property to the hands of such a
boy, and he immediately reclaimed it.

"I want that boy!" exclaimed Mr. Grant, in great agitation. "Which way
did he go?"

"Down there," replied the ragged boy, pointing down a street in exactly
the opposite direction from that taken by the fugitive.

But Mr. Grant was too wise a man to follow. He was in search of a
policeman just then. As these worthy functionaries are never at hand
when they are wanted, of course he did not find one. He called a
carriage, and ordered the driver to convey him with all speed, and at
double fare, to the police office. On his arrival, he immediately stated
his business, and in a few hours the whole police force of the city were
on the lookout for poor Noddy Newman.

The object of all this friendly solicitude was unconscious of the
decided steps taken by Mr. Grant; but he ran till he had placed a safe
distance between himself and his potent oppressor. He saw plenty of
policemen in his flight, but he paid no attention to them, nor even
thought what a powerful combination they formed against a weak boy like
himself. He was satisfied, however, that he must leave the city; and
when he was out of breath with running, he walked as nearly on a
straight course as the streets would permit, till he reached the
outskirts of the city.

"Stop that heifer!" shouted a man, who was chasing the animal.

Noddy headed her off, and she darted away in another direction. Our
refugee was interested in the case at once; for he could not permit any
horned beast to circumvent him. He ran as though he had not run before
that evening, and brought the wayward animal up in a corner when the man
came to his assistance.

"You are a smart boy," said the drover.

"That's so," puffed Noddy, modestly.

"If you haven't got nothin' better to do, I'll make it wuth your while
to help drive these cattle down to the keers," added the man.

As Noddy had nothing better to do, he at once accepted the offer,
without even stipulating the price. They started the heifer again, and
she concluded to join the drove which was in the adjoining street. It
was no easy matter to drive the animals, which were not accustomed to
the ways of the city, through the streets, and Noddy won a great deal of
credit for the vigor and agility with which he discharged his duty. They
reached the ferry boat, and crossing, came to the "keers," into which
the young drover assisted in loading the cattle.

His employer gave him a quarter of a dollar, which hardly came up to
Noddy's expectations; for it seemed to him like working very hard, and
winning very little for it. The man asked him some questions about his
home. Noddy told as much of the truth as suited his purpose, and
concluded by saying he wanted to get to Boston, where he could find
something to do.

"O, you want sunthin to do--do ye?" replied the drover. "Well, I'll give
you your victuals, and what clothes you want, to help me drive."

This was not exactly Noddy's idea of "work and win," and he told the
drover he wanted to go to sea.

"I'll tell you what I'll do. You may go down to Brighton, and help take
keer of the cattle in the keers, and I'll take keer of you on the way."

Noddy was more than satisfied with all these "keers," and he promptly
accepted the offer. In half an hour the train started, and he was on the
way to Brighton, which is only a few miles from Boston.




CHAPTER X.

POOR MOLLIE.


Noddy's duty on the journey to Brighton was to assist in keeping the
cattle on their feet. When the poor animals become weary, they are
disposed to lie down; but they are so closely packed that this is not
possible for more than one or two in a car; and if one lies down he is
liable to be trampled to death by the others. The persons in charge of
the cattle, therefore, are obliged to watch them, and keep them on their
feet.

The train occasionally stopped during the night, and was several times
delayed, so that it did not reach its destination till the middle of the
following forenoon. The drover provided him a hearty breakfast in the
morning, and Noddy was in no haste. The future was still nothing but a
blank to him, and he was in no hurry to commence the battle of life.

When he arrived at Brighton he assisted in driving the cattle to the
pens; and then, with half a dollar, which the drover gave him for his
extra services, he started for Boston, whose spires he could even then
see in the distance. He reached the city, and from the Mill Dam--the
long bridge he had just crossed--he walked to the Common. Being quite
worn out by two nights of hard work, and the long walk he had just
taken, he seated himself on one of the stone benches near the Frog Pond.
It was a warm and pleasant day, and he watched the sports of the happy
children who were at play, until his eyelids grew heavy, and he hardly
knew the State House from the Big Tree.

For a boy of his age he had undergone a severe experience. The exciting
circumstances which surrounded him had kept him wide awake until his
physical nature could endure no more. Leaving the seat he had occupied,
he sought out the quietest place he could find, and stretching himself
on the grass, went to sleep.

It was nearly sunset when he awoke; but he felt like a new being, ready
now to work and win at any business which might offer. He wandered about
the streets of the city for two hours, and then ate a hearty supper at a
restaurant. It was too late to do anything that night, and he asked a
policeman to tell him where he could sleep. The officer, finding he was
a friendless stranger, gave him a bed at the station-house.

In the morning he made his way to the wharves, and during the long day
he went from vessel to vessel in search of a berth as cabin-boy. He
asked for this situation, because he had frequently heard the term; but
he was willing to accept any position he could obtain. No one wanted a
cabin-boy, or so small a sailor as he was. Night came on again, with a
hopeless prospect for the future; and poor Noddy began to question the
wisdom of the course he had taken. A tinker's shop, with plenty to eat,
and a place to sleep, was certainly much better than wandering about the
streets.

He could not help thinking of Woodville, and the pleasant room he had
occupied in the servants' quarters; of the bountiful table at which he
had sat; and, above all, of the kindness and care which Miss Bertha had
always bestowed upon him. With all his heart he wished he was there; but
when he thought of the court-house and the prison, he was more
reconciled to his fate, and was determined to persevere in his efforts
to obtain work.

It was the close of a long summer day. He had been wandering about the
wharves at the north part of the city; and as the darkness came on, he
walked up Hanover Street in search of a policeman, who would give him
permission to sleep another night in the station-house. As he did not
readily find one, he turned into another street. It made but little
difference to him where he went, for he had no destination, and he was
as likely to find a policeman in one place as another.

He had gone but a short distance before he saw a crowd of ragged boys
pursuing and hooting at a drunken man who was leading a little girl ten
or eleven years of age,--or rather, she was trying to lead him. Under
ordinary circumstances, we are afraid that Noddy would have joined the
ragamuffins and enjoyed the senseless sport as well as any of them; but
his own sorrows raised him above this meanness in the present instance,
and he passed the boys without a particle of interest in the fun.

He was going by the drunken man and the little girl, when one of the
boldest of the pursuers rushed up and gave the man a push, which caused
him to fall on the pavement. The young vagabonds raised a chorus of
laughter, and shouted with all their might. The little girl, who was
evidently the drunkard's daughter, did not desert him. She bent over
him, and used all her feeble powers to assist him to his feet again.

"My poor father!" sobbed she; and her heart seemed to be broken by the
grief and peril which surrounded her.

The tones with which these words were spoken touched the heart of Noddy;
and without stopping to consider any troublesome questions, he sprang to
the assistance of the girl. The man was not utterly helpless; and with
the aid of Noddy and his daughter he got upon his feet again. At that
moment another of the unruly boys, emboldened by the feat of the first,
rushed up and grasped the arm of the little girl, as if to pull her away
from her father's support.

"Don't touch me! Don't touch me!" pleaded the grief-stricken girl, in
tones so full of sorrow that our wanderer could not resist them, if her
vagabond persecutor could.

He sprang to her assistance, and with one vigorous and well-directed
blow, he knocked the rude assailant halfway across the street, and left
him sprawling on the pavement. Noddy did not wait to see what the boy
would do next, but turned his attention to the poor girl, whose
situation, rather than that of her father, had awakened his sympathy.

"What is your father's name?" asked Noddy, who proceeded as though he
had a sovereign remedy for the miseries of the situation.

"Captain McClintock," sobbed the little girl, still clinging to her
father, with no sting of reproach in her words or her manner.

"Don't cry, little girl; I will do what I can for you," said Noddy,
warmly. "I can lick those boys, if I can't do anything more."

"Thank you!" replied the afflicted daughter. "If I can only get him down
to the vessel, I shall be so glad!"

"Want to fight?" shouted the young ruffian, whom Noddy had upset, coming
as near the party as he dared.

"I'll give you fight, if you come near me again," replied the champion
of the poor girl.

"Come on, if you want to fight," cried the little bully, who had not the
pluck to approach within twenty feet of his late assailant.

The crowd of boys still shouted, and some of them carried their
hostility so far as to throw sticks and stones at the little party; but
as long as they kept at a respectful distance, Noddy did not deem it
wise to meddle with them, though he kept one eye on them, and stood
ready to punish those who ventured too near.

"Come, Captain McClintock," said he, as he attempted to lead the drunken
father, "let's go on board."

"Heave ahead, my hearty!" replied the captain, as he pressed forward,
though his steps were so uncertain that his two feeble supporters could
hardly keep him on his feet.

The remarkable trio passed down Fleet Street, and, after many
difficulties and much "rough weather," reached the head of the wharf,
where the little girl said her father's vessel lay. They were still
closely followed by the merciless ragamuffins, who had pelted them with
stones and sticks, until the patience of Noddy was severely tried.

"Come, my boy, now we'll--hic--now we'll go and--hic--go and take
something 'fore we go on board," said the drunken captain, suddenly
coming to a dead halt in the middle of the street.

"O, no, father!" cried the daughter; "let us go on board."

"Something to take, Mollie, and you shall--hic--you shall have
some--hic--some soda water."

"I don't want any, father. Do come on board."

"You are a good girl, Mollie, and you shall--hic--you shall have some
cake."

"Not to-night, father. We will get it in the morning," pleaded poor
Mollie, trembling with apprehension for the consequences which must
follow another glass of liquor.

"Come, Captain McClintock, let's go on board," said Noddy.

"Who are you?" demanded the inebriated man.

"I'm the best fellow out; and I want to see your vessel."

"You shall see her, my boy. If you are--hic--the best fellow out, come
and take something with me," stammered the captain.

"Let's see the vessel first," replied Noddy, tugging away at the arm of
the drunken man.

"She's a very fine--hic--fine vessel."

"Let me see her, then."

"Heave ahead, my jolly roebuck. I've got some of the best--hic--on board
zever you tasted. Come along."

Noddy and Mollie kept him going till they reached the part of the wharf
where the captain's vessel was moored; and the end of their troubles
seemed to be at hand, when the boys, aware that their sport was nearly
over, became very bold and daring. They pressed forward, and began to
push the drunken man, until they roused his anger to such a degree that
he positively refused to go on board till he chastised them as they
deserved. He had broken away from his feeble protectors, and in
attempting to pursue them, had fallen flat upon the planks which covered
the wharf.

Mollie ran to his assistance; and as she did so, one of the boys pushed
her over upon him. Noddy's blood was up in earnest, for the little
girl's suffering made her sacred in his eyes. He leaped upon the rude
boy, bore him down, and pounded him till he yelled in mortal terror.
Some of the boldest of the ragamuffins came to his relief when they
realized how hard it was going with him, and that he was in the hands of
only one small boy.

Noddy was as quick as a flash in his movements, and he turned upon the
crowd, reckless of consequences. One or two of the boys showed fight;
but the young lion tipped them over before they could make up their
minds how to attack him. The rest ran away. Noddy gave chase, and in
his furious wrath felt able to whip the whole of them. He pursued them
only a short distance; his sympathy for poor Mollie got the better even
of his anger, and he hastened back to her side. As he turned, the
cowardly boys turned also, and a storm of such missiles as the wharf
afforded was hurled after him.

By this time two men from the vessel had come to the assistance of the
captain, and raised him to his feet. He was still full of vengeance, and
wanted to chastise the boys. The young ruffians followed Noddy down the
wharf, and he was compelled, in self-defence, to turn upon them again,
and in presence of the drunken man he punished a couple of them pretty
severely. One of the sailors came to his aid, and the foe was again
vanquished. The appearance of a policeman at the head of the wharf now
paralyzed their efforts, and they disbanded and scattered.

"You are a good fellow!" exclaimed Captain McClintock, extending his
hand to Noddy as he returned to the spot.

"The best fellow out," replied the little hero, facetiously, as he took
the offered hand.

"So you be! Now come on board, and--hic--and take something."

"Thank you, captain. I should like to go on board of your vessel."
