to see him, that is, if you know the way?"

"Oh, yes, I live here. Won't you come up with me?"

"Perhaps I had better," said Frank, and followed his companion through a
door in the rear, and up a dark and narrow staircase to the street
floor.

"It'll be a hard job to get him away," thought Frank; "but, for his
mother's sake, I will do my best."




CHAPTER XIII.

A TIMELY RESCUE.


As Frank entered the room he hastily took in the scene before him. Round
a table sat three young men, of not far from twenty, the fourth side
being occupied by Fred Vivian. They were playing cards, and sipping
drinks as they played. Fred Vivian's handsome face was flushed, and he
was nervously excited. His hands trembled as he lifted the glass, and
his wandering, uncertain glances showed that he was not himself.

"It's your play, Fred," said his partner.

Fred picked up a card without looking at it, and threw it down on the
table.

"That settles it," said another. "Fred, old boy, you've lost the game.
You're another five dollars out."

Fred fumbled in his pocket for a bill, and it was quickly taken from his
hand before he could well see of what value it was. Frank, however,
quickly as it was put away, saw that it was a ten. It was clear that
Fred was being cheated in the most barefaced manner.

Frank's entrance was evidently unwelcome to most of the company.

"What are you bringing in that boy for, John?" demanded a low-browed
fellow, with a face like a bull-dog.

"He is a friend of Fred," answered John.

"He's a telegraph boy. He comes here a spy. Fred don't know him. Clear
out, boy!"

Frank took no notice of this hostile remark, but walked up to Fred
Vivian.

"Fred," said he, thinking it best to speak as if he knew him, "it is
getting late, and your mother is anxious about you. Won't you come home
with me?"

"Who are you?" asked Fred, with drunken gravity. "You aint my mother."

"I come from your mother. Don't you know me? I am Frank Kavanagh."

"How do, Frank? Glad to see you, ol' feller. Take a drink. Here, you
boy, bring a drink for my frien', Frank Kavanagh."

The three others looked on disconcerted. They were not ready to part
with Fred yet, having secured only a part of his money.

"You don't know him, Fred," said the one who had appropriated the
ten-dollar bill. "He's only a telegraph boy."

"I tell you he's my frien', Frank Kav'nagh," persisted Fred, with an
obstinacy not unusual in one in his condition.

"Well, if he is, let him sit down, and have a glass of something hot."

"No, I thank you," said Frank, coldly. "Fred and I are going home."

"No, you're not," exclaimed the other, bringing his fist heavily down
upon the table. "We won't allow our friend Fred to be kidnapped by a boy
of your size,--not much we won't, will we, boys?"

"No! no!" chimed in the other two.

Fred Vivian looked at them undecided.

"I guess I'd better go," he stammered "There's something the matter with
my head."

"You need another drink to brace you up. Here, John, bring up another
punch for Fred."

Frank saw that unless he got Fred away before drinking any more, he
would not be in a condition to go at all. It was a critical position,
but he saw that he must be bold and resolute.

"You needn't bring Fred anything more," he said. "He has had enough
already."

"I have had enough already," muttered Fred, mechanically.

"Boys, are we going to stand this?" said the low-browed young man. "Are
we going to let this telegraph boy interfere with a social party of
young gentlemen? I move that we throw him downstairs."

He half rose as he spoke, but Frank stood his ground.

"You'd better not try it," he said quietly, "unless you want to pass the
night in the station-house."

"What do you mean, you young jackanapes?" said the other angrily. "What
charge can you trump up against us?"

"You have been cheating Fred out of his money," said Frank, firmly.

"It's a lie! We've been having a friendly game, and he lost. If we'd
lost, we would have paid."

"How much did he lose?"

"Five dollars."

"And you took ten from him."

"It's a lie!" repeated the other; but he looked disconcerted.

"It is true, for I noticed the bill as you took it from him. But it's
not much worse than playing for money with him when he is in no
condition to understand the game. You'd better give him back that
ten-dollar bill."

"I've a great mind to fling you downstairs, you young scamp!"

"You are strong enough to do it," said Frank, exhibiting no trace of
fear, "but I think you would be sorry for it afterwards. Come, Fred."

Though Frank was so much younger and smaller, there was something in his
calm, self-possessed manner that gave him an ascendency over the weak,
vacillating Fred. The latter rose, and, taking our hero's arm, turned to
leave the room.

"Let him go," said the leader, who had been made uneasy by Frank's
threat, and saw that it was politic to postpone his further designs upon
his intended victim. "If he chooses to obey a small telegraph boy, he
can."

"Don't mind him, Fred," said Frank. "You know I'm your friend."

"My friend, Frank Kavanagh!" repeated Fred, drowsily. "I'm awful sleepy,
Frank. I want to go to bed."

"You shall go to bed as soon as you get home, Fred."

"I say, boy," said the leader, uneasily, "that was all a lie about the
ten-dollar bill. You didn't see straight. Did he, Bates?"

"Of course he didn't."

"One lies and the other swears to it," thought Frank.

"Nothing will be done about it," he said, "if you will let Fred alone
hereafter. The money you have won from him belongs to his mother, and,
unless you keep away from him, she will order your arrest."

"You're altogether too smart for a boy of your size," sneered the other.
"Take your friend away. We don't care to associate with a milksop, who
allows himself to be ordered around by women and children."

Fortunately Fred was too drowsy to pay heed to what was being said; in
fact he was very sleepy, and was anxious to go to bed. Frank got him
into a cab, and in twenty minutes they safely reached his mother's house
in Thirty-eighth street.

Mrs. Vivian was anxiously awaiting the return of the prodigal.

"O Fred," she said, "how could you stay away so, when you know how
worried I get? You have been drinking, too."

"This is my friend, Frank Kavanagh," hiccoughed Fred.

"Shall I go up and help put him to bed?" asked Frank.

"Does he require help?" asked Mrs. Vivian, sorrowfully.

"He has been drinking a good deal."

"Yes, you may go up. I will lead the way to his chamber. Afterwards I
want to speak to you."

"All right."

"Where did you find him?" asked Mrs. Vivian, when Frank with some
difficulty had prepared his charge for bed.

"In the billiard-saloon to which you directed me. He was upstairs
playing cards for money. They were cheating him in the most outrageous
manner."

"I suppose they got all his money."

"Not all; but they would soon have done so. Here is his pocket-book,
which I just took from his pocket."

"There are twenty dollars left," said 'Mrs. Vivian, after an
examination. "They must have secured the rest. O my poor boy! Would that
I could shield you from these dangerous companions!"

"I don't think they will trouble him again, Mrs. Vivian."

"Why not? You do not know them."

"I told them that, if they came near him, hereafter, you would have them
arrested for swindling your son out of money belonging to you."

"Will that have any effect upon them?"

"Yes, because they know that I am ready to appear as a witness against
them."

"Did Fred show any unwillingness to come with you?"

"No; I made him think I was an old acquaintance of his. Besides, he was
feeling sleepy."

"You have acted with great judgment for so young a lad," said Mrs.
Vivian. "I wish Fred had a companion like you to influence him for good.
Where do you live?"

"At the Newsboys Lodging-House. I cannot afford to hire a room."

Mrs. Vivian looked thoughtful.

"Give me your name and address," she said.

These she noted down.

"I won't keep you any longer to-night," she said, "for you must be
tired. You will hear from me again."

"Oh," said Frank, "I nearly forgot. Here is the balance of the money you
handed me for expenses."

"Keep it for yourself," said Mrs. Vivian, "and accept my thanks
besides."

Though Frank had paid for the cab, there was a balance of nearly two
dollars in his hands which he was very glad to keep.




CHAPTER XIV.

FRANK MAKES AN EVENING CALL.


The next day Frank chanced to meet Mrs. Vivian in the street. She
recognized him at once.

"I see you are kept busy," she said, pleasantly.

"Yes," answered Frank. "Our business is pretty good just now. How is
your son?"

"He slept well, and woke much refreshed this morning. He is a good boy
naturally, but unable to withstand temptation. I have decided to send
him to the country for a few weeks, to visit a cousin of about his own
age. There he will be secure from temptation, and will have a chance to
ride. I would have sent him away before, but that it would leave me
alone in the house. You told me last evening that you had no
boarding-place."

"My only home is at the lodging-house," said Frank.

"How would you like to occupy a room at my house while my son is away?"

"Very much," said Frank, promptly.

"I shall find it convenient to have you in the house, and shall feel
safer."

"I am afraid I shouldn't be a match for an able-bodied burglar," said
Frank, smiling.

"Perhaps not; but you could summon a policeman. When can you come and
see me about this arrangement?"

"I am off duty to-night."

"Very well; I will expect you. Fred will not go away till to-morrow, and
you will have a chance to see him under more favorable circumstances
than last evening."

"Thank you very much for your kind invitation," said Frank, politely.

Mrs. Vivian bade him good-morning, very favorably impressed with his
manners and deportment.

Frank looked upon the proposal made him by Mrs. Vivian as a piece of
great good-fortune. In his new position, excellent as were the beds at
the lodging-house, he found it inconvenient to go there to sleep. Once
or twice, on account of the late hour at which he was released from
duty, he was unable to secure admittance, and had to pay fifty cents for
a bed at a hotel on the European system. He had for some time been
thinking seriously of hiring a room; but the probable expense deterred
him. At Mrs. Vivian's he would have nothing to pay.

In the evening he changed his uniform for the neat suit given him by Mr.
Bowen, and about eight o'clock rang the bell of the house in
Thirty-eighth street.

He was at once ushered into the presence of Mrs. Vivian and her son.

"I am glad to see you, my young friend," said Mrs. Vivian, glancing with
approval at the neat appearance of her young visitor. "Fred, this is the
young man who brought you home last night."

"I am much obliged to you," said Fred Vivian, offering his hand to
Frank. "I am ashamed of having been found in such a place."

"I don't think the young men with you were very much your friends," said
Frank; "I detected one in cheating you."

"You mean at cards?"

"I don't mean that, though I presume they did; but you handed a
ten-dollar bill to one of them, and he took it as a five."

"Are you sure of that?" asked Fred, his face flushing with indignation.

"Yes, I saw the number of the bill, though he put it away very quickly."

"And I had been treating that fellow all the afternoon! I gave him a
good dinner, too."

"Are you surprised at such treatment from such a person?" asked his
mother. "I should have expected it."

"I will never notice the fellow again as long as I live," said Fred, who
seemed a good deal impressed by his companion's treachery. "Why, it's
nothing better than robbery."

"You have given it the right name, Fred," said his mother, quietly.

"He ought to give the money back," said Fred.

"Let it go, my son. I am willing to lose it, if it severs all
acquaintance between you and your unworthy companions."

"Have I ever met you before?" asked Fred, turning to Frank.

"Not before last evening."

