The next bird that caught our notice was a fly-catcher. It was sitting
on a bramble catching bees and flies, and so intently was it watching
for them, that it did not even notice our presence, till Harry tried to
put his hand on it, but then away it flew with a fine chattering.

We now left the wood, and taking the foot-path to the left, went along
till we came to the road. Just by the stile sat a girl, who had been
gathering dried sticks in the wood, where her father was cutting down
trees. She had tied up the sticks into a bundle, and was sitting on them
to rest herself, because they were so heavy. She asked me to help her to
put them on her head; this I did, and then she thanked me, and trudged
on, singing as merrily as a lark in the sky.

[Illustration]

Now we came to a bridge over a wide river. I mounted Harry astride the
parapet, and there we stopped for some minutes to look at the boats as
they passed under us, and to watch two swans which were sailing up the
river with their great wings spread out for sails, and their necks so
proudly bent that they looked like the king and queen of the river.
Harry would have stayed for hours to look at them, but we could not stop
long.

[Illustration]

We next turned down the pathway by the river-side, and soon we came to
the wide marshes, which are only two miles off the sea. There we were
standing under a willow, watching for the fish which were swimming down
the river in little shoals, when we heard a splash on the opposite bank;
it was an otter that had dived into the river, and caught a fish, with
which we saw it climb on to the bank again. Men used to hunt the otter
with dogs and spears; and sometimes otters have been trained to catch
fish and bring them to land, but we do not often find them in England.

[Illustration]

As we walked on by the river-side, we noticed a hawk flying swiftly over
us; afterwards we saw him balance himself on his wings, and keep for
many minutes in exactly the same place. Presently, with a loud scream,
he darted down into some rushes a little way before us, and then we
heard a most furious quacking, as if there were fifty ducks there. We
ran on and saw a drake flying at the hawk and pecking at its wings, and
the duck, quacking in the utmost alarm, tried to get all her little
ducklings under her wings; but, alas! one little truant ran into the
weeds, and the hawk caught it in his claws, and, in spite of all the
efforts of the poor drake, flew away with it.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Harry was greatly excited at this scene, and cried to see the hawk carry
away the poor little duck; but he soon laughed again, for as he watched
the robber in his flight through the air, he saw a number of little
birds fly after him,--sparrows, swallows, finches, all chirping at him
and mocking him; then a tribe of bigger birds, blackbirds, magpies,
rooks, and jays, flew after him also; and as the hawk could not fly fast
with the duckling in his claws, they soon overtook him, and we saw them
peck at his wings and his tail, and pull his feathers out; and they all
screamed and chattered at him till at last the hawk let the poor
duckling down into the marsh, and then, rising much higher than the
other birds, flew away so quickly that he was out of sight in a minute.
Harry clapped his hands with delight to see the hawk thus treated, and
said that he was rightly served.

[Illustration]

Now we walked on again by the river-side. The swallows skimmed along
the surface of the water, and caught the insects that hovered over it,
and now and then a sea-gull came with its great wings, and diving into
the river, bore away a poor fish in its beak to swallow at its leisure.

[Illustration]

Then we came close to a solemn-looking heron, who stood so still that
we could hardly tell if he were alive, till we saw him suddenly dive his
head in a pool of water and pull out a frog, which he swallowed at one
mouthful; and then he stood as still and solemn as ever. He flew away
when we walked near him, flapping his immense wings slowly, and giving a
mournful cry.

Then we turned away from the river, and took a path across the meadows,
where Harry ran about and gathered cowslips and buttercups until he was
quite tired; therefore it happened very luckily that just as we reached
the gate into the high-road, who should we see but Uncle George driving
past in his gig! He stopped his horse when he saw us, and both Harry and
I were very glad to have a nice ride home with him.

In the evening Harry and I went for a stroll in the fields near home,
and presently we came to one where the sheep were feeding. The shepherd
was just calling them home to be put in the fold, and we were very much
amused to see the antics of some of the young lambs that would skip
about instead of going to bed with their mothers. This put me in mind to
tell Harry Mrs. Barbauld's story about


THE SILLY LITTLE LAMB.

There was once a shepherd, who had a great many sheep and lambs. He took
a great deal of care of them, and gave them sweet fresh grass to eat,
and clear water to drink; and if they were sick he was very good to
them; and when they climbed up a steep hill, and the lambs were tired,
he used to carry them in his arms; and when they were all eating their
suppers in the field, he used to sit upon a stile, and play them a
tune, and sing to them. And so they were the happiest sheep and lambs in
the whole world. But every night this shepherd used to pen them up in a
fold. Do you know what a sheepfold is? Well, I will tell you. It is a
place like the court; but instead of pales there are hurdles, which are
made of sticks that will bend, such as osier twigs; and they are twisted
and made very fast, so that nothing can creep in, and nothing can get
out. Well, and so every night, when it grew dark and cold, the shepherd
called all his flock, sheep and lambs, together, and drove them into the
fold, and penned them up, and there they lay as snug and warm and
comfortable as could be, and nothing could get in to hurt them, and the
dogs lay round on the outside to guard them, and to bark if any body
came near; and in the morning the shepherd unpenned the fold, and let
them all out again.

[Illustration]

Now they were all very happy, as I told you, and loved the shepherd
dearly that was so good to them--all except one foolish little lamb. And
this lamb did not like to be shut up every night in the fold; and she
came to her mother, who was a wise old sheep, and said to her, "I wonder
why we are shut up so every night? the dogs are not shut up, and why
should we be shut up? I think it is very hard, and I will get away if I
can, I am resolved; for I like to run about where I please, and I think
it is very pleasant in the woods by moonlight." Then the old sheep
said to her, "You are very silly, you little lamb, you had better stay
in the fold. The shepherd is so good to us, that we should always do as
he bids us; and if you wander about by yourself, I dare say you will
come to some harm." "I dare say not," said the little lamb. And so when
the evening came, and the shepherd called them all to come into the
fold, she would not come, but crept slily under a hedge and hid herself;
and when the rest of the lambs were all in the fold and fast asleep,
she came out, and jumped, and frisked, and danced about; and she got out
of the field, and got into a forest full of trees, and a very fierce
wolf came rushing out of a cave and howled very loud. Then the silly
lamb wished she had been shut up in the fold, but the fold was a great
way off. And the wolf saw her and seized her, and carried her away to a
dismal den; and there the wolf had two cubs, and the wolf said to them,
"Here, I have brought you a young fat lamb." And so the cubs took her,
and growled over her a little while, and then ate her up.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

Harry said that was a very naughty lamb.

It now began to be quite dark, so Harry and I returned home. Then we had
a long talk about what we had seen during the day; and then Harry had
his bread and milk for supper, and then he said his prayers and went to
bed.


       *       *       *       *       *


PLEASURE BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE,

BEAUTIFULLY ILLUSTRATED BY

JOHN ABSOLON, EDWARD WEHNERT, AND HARRISON WEIR.

PRICE SIXPENCE EACH PLAIN,

OR

ONE SHILLING EACH COLOURED.


  THE HISTORY OF LITTLE BO-PEEP.
  THE HOUSE THAT JACK BUILT.
  THE WEDDING OF COCK ROBIN AND JENNY WREN.
  THE CAT AND THE MOUSE.
  THE DEATH AND BURIAL OF COCK ROBIN.
  THE OLD DAME AND HER SILVER SIXPENCE.
  THE LIFE AND DEATH OF JENNY WREN.
  THE STORY OF OLD MOTHER HUBBARD.
  THE LITTLE MAN AND THE LITTLE MAID.
  THE STORY OF THE THREE BEARS.
  THE FOX AND THE GEESE.
  THE HISTORY OF LITTLE GOODY TWO-SHOES.
  THE UGLY DUCK'S STORY.
  THE CHARMED FAWN OF THE FOREST.
  THE STORY OF LUCKY HANS.
  THE HISTORY OF PUSS IN BOOTS.
  THE FAMOUS HISTORY OF ROBIN HOOD.
  THE STORY OF RIP VAN WINKLE.


       *       *       *       *       *


LITTLE MARY'S BOOKS,


PRICE SIXPENCE EACH,

ADORNED WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS.

  LITTLE MARY'S PRIMER.
  LITTLE MARY'S READING BOOK.
  LITTLE MARY'S SPELLING-BOOK.
  LITTLE MARY'S ENGLISH HISTORY.
  LITTLE MARY'S SCRIPTURE HISTORY.
  LITTLE MARY'S FIRST BOOK OF POETRY.
  LITTLE MARY'S SECOND BOOK OF POETRY.
  LITTLE MARY'S BABES IN THE WOOD.

INDESTRUCTIBLE BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.

PRINTED ON A PATENT CLOTH,

_Price One Shilling each,_

THE

PATENT INDESTRUCTIBLE ALPHABET,

WITH TWENTY-SIX ILLUSTRATIONS BY JOHN ABSOLON.

THE

PATENT INDESTRUCTIBLE PRIMER,

WITH FORTY ILLUSTRATIONS.


       *       *       *       *       *


HARRY'S BOOKS.

PRICE SIXPENCE EACH PLAIN, ONE SHILLING COLOURED.

  HARRY'S HORN-BOOK, with 58 Pictures.
  HARRY'S PICTURE-BOOK, with 46 Pictures.
  HARRY'S NURSERY SONGS, with 35 Pictures.
  HARRY'S NURSERY TALES, with 35 Pictures.
  HARRY'S SIMPLE STORIES, with 28 Pictures.
  HARRY'S COUNTRY WALKS, with 21 Pictures.

_Or Bound in One Volume, complete_,

HARRY'S LADDER TO LEARNING,

WITH TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY ILLUSTRATIONS,

_Price 3s. 6d. Plain, 6s. Coloured._

_In One Volume bound, price 2s., or in Three Parts, price 6d. each_,

A CHILD'S FIRST LESSON-BOOK,

IN PROGRESSIVE LESSONS,

CHIEFLY IN WORDS OF ONE SYLLABLE,

ILLUSTRATED WITH SIXTY PICTURES BY BIRKET FOSTER AND HARRISON WEIR.


       *       *       *       *       *


_New Edition, price 21s. handsomely bound,_

THE BABES IN THE WOOD,

ILLUSTRATED WITH

TEN BEAUTIFUL DRAWINGS BY THE MARCHIONESS OF WATERFORD.

Printed in Colours in exact Imitation of the Originals.


Illuminated Edition.

THE PEACOCK AT HOME,

BY MRS. DORSET.

PRINTED WITH TWELVE HIGHLY ILLUMINATED BORDERS,

WITH THE

QUADRUPEDS, BIRDS, AND INSECTS, IN THEIR NATURAL COLOURS.

_Price 3s. 6d._


Illustrated Edition.

RIP VAN WINKLE,

BY WASHINGTON IRVING.

ILLUSTRATED WITH

SIX OUTLINES BY FELIX DARLEY OF NEW YORK.

_Handsomely bound, price 5s._

Printed by G. BARCLAY, Castle St. Leicester Sq.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Harry's Ladder to Learning, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARRY'S LADDER TO LEARNING ***

***** This file should be named 24644.txt or 24644.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/4/24644/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
