other boys," answered the artful damsel.

Mac looked pleased and leaned forward, saying more affably, "Name it,
and be sure I'll grant it if I can."

"Go with me to Mrs. Hope's party tomorrow night."

"What!" And Mac recoiled as if she had put a pistol to his head.

"I've left you in peace a long time, but it is your turn now, so do your
duty like a man and a cousin."

"But I never go to parties!" cried the unhappy victim in great dismay.

"High time you began, sir."

"But I don't dance fit to be seen."

"I'll teach you."

"My dress coat isn't decent, I know."

"Archie will lend you one he isn't going."

"I'm afraid there's a lecture that I ought not to cut."

"No, there isn't I asked Uncle."

"I'm always so tired and dull in the evening."

"This sort of thing is just what you want to rest and freshen up your
spirits."

Mac gave a groan and fell back vanquished, for it was evident that
escape was impossible.

"What put such a perfectly wild idea into your head?" he demanded,
rather roughly, for hitherto he had been left in peace and this sudden
attack decidedly amazed him.

"Sheer necessity, but don't do it if it is so very dreadful to you. I
must go to several more parties, because they are made for me, but after
that I'll refuse, and then no one need be troubled with me."

Something in Rose's voice made Mac answer penitently, even while he knit
his brows in perplexity. "I don't mean to be rude, and of course I'll go
anywhere if I'm really needed. But I don't understand where the sudden
necessity is, with three other fellows at command, all better dancers
and beaus than I am."

"I don't want them, and I do want you, for I haven't the heart to drag
Uncle out anymore, and you know I never go with any gentleman but those
of my own family."

"Now look here, Rose if Steve has been doing anything to tease you,
just mention it and I'll attend to him," cried Mac, plainly seeing that
something was amiss and fancying that Dandy was at the bottom of it, as
he had done escort duty several times lately.

"No, Steve has been very good, but I know he had rather be with Kitty
Van, so of course I feel like a marplot, though he is too polite to hint
it."

"What a noodle that boy is! But there's Archie he's steady as a church
and has no sweetheart to interfere," continued Mac, bound to get at the
truth and half suspecting what it was.

"He is on his feet all day, and Aunt Jessie wants him in the evening.
He does not care for dancing as he used, and I suppose he really does
prefer to rest and read." Rose might have added, "And hear Phebe sing,"
for Phebe did not go out as much as Rose did, and Aunt Jessie often came
to sit with the old lady when the young folks were away and, of course,
dutiful Archie came with her, so willingly of late!

"What's amiss with Charlie? I thought he was the prince of cavaliers.
Annabel says he dances 'like an angel,' and I know a dozen mothers
couldn't keep him at home of an evening. Have you had a tiff with Adonis
and so fall back on poor me?" asked Mac, coming last to the person of
whom he thought first but did not mention, feeling shy about alluding to
a subject often discussed behind her back.

"Yes, I have, and I don't intend to go with him any more for some time.
His ways do not suit me, and mine do not suit him, so I want to be
quite independent, and you can help me if you will," said Rose, rather
nervously spinning the big globe close by.

Mac gave a low whistle, looking wide awake all in a minute as he said
with a gesture, as if he brushed a cobweb off his face: "Now, see here,
Cousin, I'm not good at mysteries and shall only blunder if you put me
blindfold into any nice maneuver. Just tell me straight out what you
want and I'll do it if I can. Play I'm Uncle and free your mind come
now."

He spoke so kindly, and the honest eyes were so full of merry goodwill,
that Rose thought she might confide in him and answered as frankly as
he could desire: "You are right, Mac, and I don't mind talking to you
almost as freely as to Uncle, because you are such a reliable fellow
and won't think me silly for trying to do what I believe to be right.
Charlie does, and so makes it hard for me to hold to my resolutions. I
want to keep early hours, dress simply, and behave properly no matter
what fashionable people do. You will agree to that, I'm sure, and stand
by me through thick and thin for principle's sake."

"I will, and begin by showing you that I understand the case. I don't
wonder you are not pleased, for Charlie is too presuming, and you do
need someone to help you head him off a bit. Hey, Cousin?"

"What a way to put it!" And Rose laughed in spite of herself, adding
with an air of relief, "That is it, and I do want someone to help me
make him understand that I don't choose to be taken possession of in
that lordly way, as if I belonged to him more than to the rest of the
family. I don't like it, for people begin to talk, and Charlie won't see
how disagreeable it is to me."

"Tell him so," was Mac's blunt advice.

"I have, but he only laughs and promises to behave, and then he does
it again when I am so placed that I can't say anything. You will never
understand, and I cannot explain, for it is only a look, or a word, or
some little thing but I won't have it, and the best way to cure him is
to put it out of his power to annoy me so."

"He is a great flirt and wants to teach you how, I suppose. I'll speak
to him if you like and tell him you don't want to learn. Shall I?" asked
Mac, finding the case rather an interesting one.

"No, thank you that would only make trouble. If you will kindly play
escort a few times, it will show Charlie that I am in earnest without
more words and put a stop to the gossip," said Rose, coloring like a
poppy at the recollection of what she heard one young man whisper to
another as Charlie led her through a crowded supper room with his most
devoted air, "Lucky dog! He is sure to get the heiress, and we are
nowhere."

"There's no danger of people gossiping about us, is there?" And Mac
looked up with the oddest of all his odd expressions.

"Of course not you're only a boy."

"I'm twenty-one, thank you, and Prince is but a couple of years older,"
said Mac, promptly resenting the slight put upon his manhood.

"Yes, but he is like other young men, while you are a dear old bookworm.
No one would ever mind what you did, so you may go to parties with me
every night and not a word would be said or, if there was, I shouldn't
mind since it is 'only Mac,'" answered Rose, smiling as she quoted a
household phrase often used to excuse his vagaries.

"Then I am nobody?" he said, lifting his brows as if the discovery
surprised and rather nettled him.

"Nobody in society as yet, but my very best cousin in private, and I've
just proved my regard by making you my confidant and choosing you for my
knight," said Rose, hastening to soothe the feelings her careless words
seemed to have ruffled slightly.

"Much good that is likely to do me," grumbled Mac.

"You ungrateful boy, not to appreciate the honor I've conferred upon
you! I know a dozen who would be proud of the place, but you only care
for compound fractures, so I won't detain you any longer, except to ask
if I may consider myself provided with an escort for tomorrow night?"
said Rose, a trifle hurt at his indifference, for she was not used to
refusals.

"If I may hope for the honor." And, rising, he made her a bow which was
such a capital imitation of Charlie's grand manner that she forgave him
at once, exclaiming with amused surprise: "Why, Mac! I didn't know you
could be so elegant!"

"A fellow can be almost anything he likes if he tries hard enough," he
answered, standing very straight and looking so tall and dignified
that Rose was quite impressed, and with a stately courtesy she retired,
saying graciously: "I accept with thanks. Good morning, Dr. Alexander
Mackenzie Campbell."

When Friday evening came and word was sent up that her escort had
arrived, Rose ran down, devoutly hoping that he had not come in a
velveteen jacket, top-boots, black gloves, or made any trifling mistake
of that sort. A young gentleman was standing before the long mirror,
apparently intent upon the arrangement of his hair, and Rose paused
suddenly as her eye went from the glossy broadcloth to the white-gloved
hands, busy with an unruly lock that would not stay in place.

"Why, Charlie, I thought--" she began with an accent of surprise in her
voice, but got no further, for the gentleman turned and she beheld Mac
in immaculate evening costume, with his hair parted sweetly on his brow,
a superior posy at his buttonhole, and the expression of a martyr on his
face.

"Ah, don't you wish it was? No one but yourself to thank that it isn't
he. Am I right? Dandy got me up, and he ought to know what is what,"
demanded Mac, folding his hands and standing as stiff as a ramrod.

"You are so regularly splendid that I don't know you."

"Neither do I."

"I really had no idea you could look so like a gentleman," added Rose,
surveying him with great approval.

"Nor that I could feel so like a fool."

"Poor boy! He does look rather miserable. What can I do to cheer him up
in return for the sacrifice he is making?"

"Stop calling me a boy. It will soothe my agony immensely and give me
courage to appear in a low-necked coat and curl on my forehead, for I'm
not used to such elegancies and I find them no end of a trial."

Mac spoke in such a pathetic tone, and gave such a gloomy glare at the
aforesaid curl, that Rose laughed in his face and added to his woe
by handing him her cloak. He surveyed it gravely for a minute, then
carefully put it on wrong side out and gave the swan's-down hood a good
pull over the head, to the utter destruction of all smoothness to the
curls inside.

Rose uttered a cry and cast off the cloak, bidding him learn to do it
properly, which he meekly did and then led her down the hall without
walking on her skirts more than three times on the way. But at the door
she discovered that she had forgotten her furred overshoes and bade Mac
get them.

"Never mind it's not wet," he said, pulling his cap over his eyes and
plunging into his coat, regardless of the "elegancies" that afflicted
him.

"But I can't walk on cold stones with thin slippers, can I?" began Rose,
showing him a little white foot.

"You needn't, for there you are, my lady." And, unceremoniously picking
her up, Mac landed her in the carriage before she could say a word.

"What an escort!" she exclaimed in comic dismay, as she rescued her
delicate dress from a rug in which he was about to tuck her up like a
mummy.

"It's 'only Mac,' so don't mind," and he cast himself into an
opposite corner with the air of a man who had nerved himself to the
accomplishment of many painful duties and was bound to do them or die.

"But gentlemen don't catch up ladies like bags of meal and poke them
into carriages in this way. It is evident that you need looking after,
and it is high time I undertook your society manners. Now, do mind what
you are about and don't get yourself or me into a scrape if you can help
it," besought Rose, feeling that on many accounts she had gone further
and fared worse.

"I'll behave like a Turveydrop see if I don't."

Mac's idea of the immortal Turveydrop's behavior seemed to be a peculiar
one; for, after dancing once with his cousin, he left her to her own
devices and soon forgot all about her in a long conversation with
Professor Stumph, the learned geologist. Rose did not care, for one
dance proved to her that that branch of Mac's education had been sadly
neglected, and she was glad to glide smoothly about with Steve, though
he was only an inch or two taller than herself. She had plenty of
partners, however, and plenty of chaperons, for all the young men were
her most devoted, and all the matrons beamed upon her with maternal
benignity.

Charlie was not there, for when he found that Rose stood firm, and had
moreover engaged Mac as a permanency, he would not go at all and retired
in high dudgeon to console himself with more dangerous pastimes. Rose
feared it would be so, and even in the midst of the gaiety about her an
anxious mood came over her now and then and made her thoughtful for a
moment. She felt her power and wanted to use it wisely, but did not know
how to be kind to Charlie without being untrue to herself and giving him
false hopes.

"I wish we were all children again, with no hearts to perplex us and no
great temptations to try us," she said to herself as she rested a minute
in a quiet nook while her partner went to get a glass of water. Right
in the midst of this half-sad, half-sentimental reverie, she heard
a familiar voice behind her say earnestly: "And allophite is the new
hydrous silicate of alumina and magnesia, much resembling pseudophite,
which Websky found in Silesia."

"What is Mac talking about!" she thought, and, peeping behind a great
azalea in full bloom, she saw her cousin in deep conversation with the
professor, evidently having a capital time, for his face had lost its
melancholy expression and was all alive with interest, while the elder
man was listening as if his remarks were both intelligent and agreeable.

"What is it?" asked Steve, coming up with the water and seeing a smile
on Rose's face.

She pointed out the scientific tete-a-tete going on behind the azalea,
and Steve grinned as he peeped, then grew sober and said in a tone
of despair: "If you had seen the pains I took with that fellow, the
patience with which I brushed his wig, the time I spent trying to
convince him that he must wear thin boots, and the fight I had to get
him into that coat, you'd understand my feelings when I see him now."

"Why, what's the matter with him?" asked Rose.

"Will you take a look and see what a spectacle he has made of himself.
He'd better be sent home at once or he will disgrace the family by
looking as if he'd been in a row."

Steve spoke in such a tragic tone that Rose took another peep and did
sympathize with Dandy, for Mac's elegance was quite gone. His tie was
under one ear, his posy hung upside down, his gloves were rolled into a
ball, which he absently squeezed and pounded as he talked, and his hair
looked as if a whirlwind had passed over it, for his ten fingers set
it on end now and then, as they had a habit of doing when he studied or
talked earnestly. But he looked so happy and wide awake, in spite of his
dishevelment, that Rose gave an approving nod and said behind her fan:
"It is a trying spectacle, Steve yet, on the whole, I think his own odd
ways suit him best and I fancy we shall be proud of him, for he knows
more than all the rest of us put together. Hear that now." And Rose
paused that they might listen to the following burst of eloquence from
Mac's lips: "You know Frenzal has shown that the globular forms of
silicate of bismuth at Schneeburg and Johanngeorgenstadt are not
isometric, but monoclinic in crystalline form, and consequently he
separates them from the old eulytite and gives them the new name
Agricolite."

"Isn't it awful? Let us get out of this before there's another avalanche
or we shall be globular silicates and isometric crystals in spite of
ourselves," whispered Steve with a panic-stricken air, and they fled
from the hailstorm of hard words that rattled about their ears, leaving
Mac to enjoy himself in his own way.

But when Rose was ready to go home and looked about for her escort, he
was nowhere to be seen, for the professor had departed, and Mac with
him, so absorbed in some new topic that he entirely forgot his cousin
and went placidly home, still pondering on the charms of geology. When
this pleasing fact dawned upon Rose her feelings may be imagined. She
was both angry and amused it was so like Mac to go mooning off and leave
her to her fate. Not a hard one, however; for, though Steve was gone
with Kitty before her plight was discovered, Mrs. Bliss was only too
glad to take the deserted damsel under her wing and bear her safely
home.

Rose was warming her feet and sipping the chocolate which Phebe always
had ready for her, as she never ate supper, when a hurried tap came
at the long window whence the light streamed and Mac's voice was heard
softly asking to be let in "just for one minute."

Curious to know what had befallen him, Rose bade Phebe obey his call
and the delinquent cavalier appeared, breathless, anxious, and more
dilapidated than ever, for he had forgotten his overcoat; his tie was at
the back of his neck now; and his hair as rampantly erect as if all the
winds of heaven had been blowing freely through it, as they had, for
he had been tearing to and fro the last half hour, trying to undo the
dreadful deed he had so innocently committed.

