a sympathizing tone about his enforced stay in the church. To all her
questions Paul answered in a modest yet manly fashion, so as to produce
a decidedly favorable impression upon his entertainer.

Our hero was a handsome boy. Just at present he was somewhat thin, not
having entirely recovered from the effects of his sickness and poor fare
while a member of Mr. Mudge's family; but he was well made, and bade
fair to become a stout boy. His manner was free and unembarrassed, and
he carried a letter of recommendation in his face. It must be admitted,
however that there were two points in which his appearance might have
been improved. Both his hands and face had suffered from the dust of
travel. His clothes, too, were full of dust.

A single glance told Hester all this, and she resolved to remedy it.

She quietly got some water and a towel, and requested Paul to pull off
his jacket, which she dusted while he was performing his ablutions.
Then, with the help of a comb to arrange his disordered hair, he seemed
quite like a new boy, and felt quite refreshed by the operation.

"Really, it improves him very much," said Hester to herself.

She couldn't help recalling a boy of her own,--the only child she ever
had,--who had been accidentally drowned when about the age of Paul.

"If he had only lived," she thought, "how different might have been our
lives."

A thought came into her mind, and she looked earnestly at Paul.

"I--yes I will speak to Hugh about it," she said, speaking aloud,
unconsciously.

"Did you speak to me?" asked Paul.

"No,--I was thinking of something."

She observed that Paul was looking rather wistfully at a loaf of bread
on the table.

"Don't you feel hungry?" she asked, kindly.

"I dare say you have had no breakfast."

"I have eaten nothing since yesterday afternoon."

"Bless my soul! How hungry you must be!" said the good woman, as she
bustled about to get a plate of butter and a knife.

She must have been convinced of it by the rapid manner in which the
slices of bread and butter disappeared.

At one o'clock the sexton came home. Dinner was laid, and Paul partook
of it with an appetite little affected by his lunch of the morning. As
he rose from the table, he took his cap, and saying, "Good-by, I thank
you very much for your kindness!" he was about to depart.

"Where are you going?" asked the sexton, in surprise.

"I don't know," answered Paul.

"Stop a minute. Hester, I want to speak to you."

They went into the sitting-room together.

"This boy, Hester," he commenced with hesitation.

"Well, Hugh?"

"He has no home."

"It is a hard lot."

"Do you think we should be the worse off if we offered to share our home
with him?"

"It is like your kind heart, Hugh. Let us go and tell him."

"We have been talking of you, Paul," said the sexton. "We have thought,
Hester and myself, that as you had no home and we no child, we should
all be the gainers by your staying with us. Do you consent?"

"Consent!" echoed Paul in joyful surprise. "How can I ever repay your
kindness?"

"If you are the boy we take you for, we shall feel abundantly repaid.
Hester, we can give Paul the little bedroom where--where John used to
sleep."

His voice faltered a little, for John was the name of his boy, who had
been drowned.




XVI.

YOUNG STUPID.


Paul found the sexton's dwelling very different from his last home, if
the Poorhouse under the charge of Mr. and Mrs. Mudge deserved such a
name. His present home was an humble one, but he was provided with every
needful comfort, and the atmosphere of kindness which surrounded him,
gave him a feeling of peace and happiness which he had not enjoyed for a
long time.

Paul supposed that he would be at once set to work, and even then would
have accounted himself fortunate in possessing such a home.

But Mr. Cameron had other views for him.

"Are you fond of studying?" asked the sexton, as they were all three
gathered in the little sitting room, an evening or two after Paul first
came.

"Very much!" replied our hero.

"And would you like to go to school?"

"What, here in New York?"

"Yes."

"Oh, very much indeed."

"I am glad to hear you say so, my lad. There is nothing like a good
education. If I had a son of my own, I would rather leave him that
than money, for while the last may be lost, the first never can be. And
though you are not my son, Paul, Providence has in a manner conducted
you to me, and I feel responsible for your future. So you shall go to
school next Monday morning, and I hope you will do yourself much credit
there."

"Thank you very much," said Paul. "I feel very grateful, but----"

"You surely are not going to object?" said the sexton.

"No, but----"

"Well, Paul, go on," seeing that the boy hesitated.

"Why," said our hero, with a sense of delicacy which did him credit,
"If I go to school, I shall not be able to earn my board, and shall be
living at your expense, though I have no claim upon you."

"Oh, is that all?" said the sexton cheerfully, "I was afraid that it was
something more serious. As to that, I am not rich, and never expect to
be. But what little expense you will be will not ruin me. Besides, when
you are grown up and doing well, you can repay me, if I ever need it."

"That I will," said Paul.

"Mind, if I ever need it,--not otherwise. There, now, it's a bargain on
that condition. You haven't any other objection," seeing that Paul still
hesitated.

"No, or at least I should like to ask your advice," said Paul. "Just
before my father died, he told me of a debt of five hundred dollars
which he had not been able to pay. I saw that it troubled him, and I
promised to pay it whenever I was able. I don't know but I ought to go
to work so as to keep my promise."

"No," said the sexton after a moment's reflection, "the best course will
be to go to school, at present. Knowledge is power, and a good education
will help you to make money by and by. I approve your resolution, my
lad, and if you keep it resolutely in mind I have no doubt you will
accomplish your object. But the quickest road to success is through the
schoolroom. At present you are not able to earn much. Two or three years
hence will be time enough."

Paul's face brightened as the sexton said this. He instinctively felt
that Mr. Cameron was right. He had never forgotten his father's dying
injunction, and this was one reason that impelled him to run away from
the Almshouse, because he felt that while he remained he never would
be in a situation to carry out his father's wishes. Now his duty was
reconciled with his pleasure, and he gratefully accepted the sexton's
suggestions.

The next Monday morning, in accordance with the arrangement which had
just been agreed upon, Paul repaired to school. He was at once placed in
a class, and lessons were assigned him.

At first his progress was not rapid. While living in Wrenville he had
an opportunity only of attending a country school, kept less than six
months in the year, and then not affording advantages to be compared
with those of a city school. During his father's sickness, besides, he
had been kept from school altogether. Of course all this lost time could
not be made up in a moment. Therefore it was that Paul lagged behind his
class.

There are generally some in every school, who are disposed to take
unfair advantage of their schoolmates, or to ridicule those whom they
consider inferior to themselves.

There was one such in Paul's class. His name was George Dawkins.

He was rather a showy boy, and learned easily. He might have stood a
class above where he was, if he had not been lazy, and depended too much
on his natural talent. As it was, he maintained the foremost rank in his
class.

"Better be the first man in a village than the second man in Rome,"
he used to say; and as his present position not only gave him the
pre-eminence which he desired, but cost him very little exertion to
maintain, he was quite well satisfied with it.

This boy stood first in his class, while Paul entered at the foot.

He laughed unmercifully at the frequent mistakes of our hero, and
jeeringly dubbed him, "Young Stupid."

"Do you know what Dawkins calls you?" asked one of the boys.

"No. What does he call me?" asked Paul, seriously.

"He calls you 'Young Stupid.'"

Paul's face flushed painfully. Ridicule was as painful to him as it is
to most boys, and he felt the insult deeply.

"I'd fight him if I were you," was the volunteered advice of his
informant.

"No," said Paul. "That wouldn't mend the matter. Besides, I don't know
but he has some reason for thinking so."

"Don't call yourself stupid, do you?"

"No, but I am not as far advanced as most boys of my age. That isn't my
fault, though. I never had a chance to go to school much. If I had been
to school all my life, as Dawkins has, it would be time to find out
whether I am stupid or not."

"Then you ain't going to do anything about it?"

"Yes, I am."

"You said you wasn't going to fight him."

"That wouldn't do any good. But I'm going to study up and see if I can't
get ahead of him. Don't you think that will be the best way of showing
him that he is mistaken?"

"Yes, capital, but----"

"But you think I can't do it, I suppose," said Paul.

"You know he is at the head of the class, and you are at the foot."

"I know that," said Paul, resolutely. "But wait awhile and see."

In some way George Dawkins learned that Paul had expressed the
determination to dispute his place. It occasioned him considerable
amusement.

"Halloa, Young Stupid," he called out, at recess.

Paul did not answer.

"Why don't you answer when you are spoken to?" he asked angrily.

"When you call me by my right name," said Paul, quietly, "I will answer,
and not before."

"You're mighty independent," sneered Dawkins. "I don't know but I may
have to teach you manners."

"You had better wait till you are qualified," said Paul, coolly.

Dawkins approached our hero menacingly, but Paul did not look in the
least alarmed, and he concluded to attack him with words only.

"I understand you have set yourself up as my rival!" he said, mockingly.

"Not just yet," said Paul, "but in time I expect to be."

"So you expect my place," said Dawkins, glancing about him.

"We'll talk about that three months hence," said Paul.

"Don't hurt yourself studying," sneered Dawkins, scornfully.

To this Paul did not deign a reply, but the same day he rose one in his
class.

Our hero had a large stock of energy and determination. When he had once
set his mind upon a thing, he kept steadily at work till he accomplished
it. This is the great secret of success. It sometimes happens that a man
who has done nothing will at once accomplish a brilliant success by one
spasmodic effort, but such cases are extremely rare.

"Slow and sure wins the race," is an old proverb that has a great deal
of truth in it.

Paul worked industriously.

The kind sexton and his wife, who noticed his assiduity, strove to
dissuade him from working so steadily.

"You are working too hard, Paul," they said.

"Do I look pale?" asked Paul, pointing with a smile to his red cheeks.

"No, but you will before long."

"When I am, I will study less. But you know, Uncle Hugh," so the sexton
instructed him to call him, "I want to make the most of my present
advantages. Besides, there's a particular boy who thinks I am stupid. I
want to convince him that he is mistaken."

"You are a little ambitious, then, Paul?"

"Yes, but it isn't that alone. I know the value of knowledge, and I want
to secure as much as I can."

"That is an excellent motive, Paul."

"Then you won't make me study less?"

"Not unless I see you are getting sick."

Paul took good care of this. He knew how to play as well as to study,
and his laugh on the playground was as merry as any. His cheerful,
obliging disposition made him a favorite with his companions. Only
George Dawkins held out; he had, for some reason, imbibed a dislike for
Paul.

Paul's industry was not without effect. He gradually gained position in
his class.

"Take care, Dawkins," said one of his companions--the same one who had
before spoken to Paul--"Paul Prescott will be disputing your place with
you. He has come up seventeen places in a month."

"Much good it'll do him," said Dawkins, contemptuously.

"For all that, you will have to be careful; I can tell you that."

"I'm not in the least afraid. I'm a little too firm in my position to be
ousted by Young Stupid."

"Just wait and see."

Dawkins really entertained no apprehension. He had unbounded confidence
in himself, and felt a sense of power in the rapidity with which he
could master a lesson. He therefore did not study much, and though he
could not but see that Paul was rapidly advancing, he rejected with
scorn the idea that Young Stupid could displace him.

This, however, was the object at which Paul was aiming. He had not
forgotten the nickname which Dawkins had given him, and this was the
revenge which he sought,--a strictly honorable one.

At length the day of his triumph came. At the end of the month the
master read off the class-list, and, much to his disgust, George Dawkins
found himself playing second fiddle to Young Stupid.




XVII.

BEN'S PRACTICAL JOKE.


Mrs. Mudge was in the back room, bending over a tub. It was washing-day,
and she was particularly busy. She was a driving, bustling woman, and,
whatever might be her faults of temper, she was at least industrious and
energetic. Had Mr. Mudge been equally so, they would have been better
off in a worldly point of view. But her husband was constitutionally
lazy, and was never disposed to do more than was needful.

Mrs. Mudge was in a bad humor that morning. One of the cows had got
into the garden through a gap in the fence, and made sad havoc among the
cabbages. Now if Mrs. Mudge had a weakness, it was for cabbages. She
was excessively fond of them, and had persuaded her husband to set out
a large number of plants from which she expected a large crop. They were
planted in one corner of the garden, adjoining a piece of land, which,
since mowing, had been used for pasturing the cows. There was a weak
place in the fence separating the two inclosures, and this Mrs. Mudge
had requested her husband to attend to. He readily promised this, and
Mrs. Mudge supposed it done, until that same morning, her sharp eyes had
detected old Brindle munching the treasured cabbages with a provoking
air of enjoyment. The angry lady seized a broom, and repaired quickly to
the scene of devastation. Brindle scented the danger from afar, and beat
a disorderly retreat, trampling down the cabbages which she had hitherto
spared. Leaping over the broken fence, she had just cleared the gap as
the broom-handle, missing her, came forcibly down upon the rail, and was
snapped in sunder by the blow.

Here was a new vexation. Brindle had not only escaped scot-free, but the
broom, a new one, bought only the week before, was broken.

"It's a plaguy shame," said Mrs. Mudge, angrily. "There's my best broom
broken; cost forty-two cents only last week."

She turned and contemplated the scene of devastation. This yielded her
little consolation.

"At least thirty cabbages destroyed by that scamp of a cow," she
exclaimed in a tone bordering on despair. "I wish I'd a hit her. If I'd
broken my broom over her back I wouldn't a cared so much. And it's all
Mudge's fault. He's the most shiftless man I ever see. I'll give him a
dressing down, see if I don't."

Mrs. Mudge's eyes snapped viciously, and she clutched the relics of the
broom with a degree of energy which rendered it uncertain what sort of a
dressing down she intended for her husband.

Ten minutes after she had re-entered the kitchen, the luckless man made
his appearance. He wore his usual look, little dreaming of the storm
that awaited him.

"I'm glad you've come," said Mrs. Mudge, grimly.

"What's amiss, now?" inquired Mudge, for he understood her look.

"What's amiss?" blazed Mrs. Mudge. "I'll let you know. Do you see this?"

She seized the broken broom and flourished it in his face.

"Broken your broom, have you? You must have been careless."

"Careless, was I?" demanded Mrs. Mudge, sarcastically. "Yes, of course,
it's always I that am in fault."

"You haven't broken it over the back of any of the paupers, have you?"
asked her husband, who, knowing his helpmeet's infirmity of temper,
thought it possible she might have indulged in such an amusement.

"If I had broken it over anybody's back it would have been yours," said
the lady.

"Mine! what have I been doing?"

"It's what you haven't done," said Mrs. Mudge. "You're about the laziest
and most shiftless man I ever came across."

"Come, what does all this mean?" demanded Mr. Mudge, who was getting a
little angry in his turn.

"I'll let you know. Just look out of that window, will you?"

"Well," said Mr. Mudge, innocently, "I don't see anything in
particular."

"You don't!" said Mrs. Mudge with withering sarcasm. "Then you'd better
