"Yes," said Graves, with a smile; "I am going to board him here a
while."

"What's it all about? What are you going to gain by it?"

"I'll tell you all I know. I've known something of the family for a long
time. John Wade employed me long ago. The old millionaire had a son
who went abroad and died there. His cousin, John Wade, brought home his
son--a mere baby--the old man's grandson, of course, and sole heir, or
likely to be, to the old man's wealth, if he had lived. In that case,
John Wade would have been left out in the cold, or put off with a small
bequest."

"Yes. Did the boy live?"

"No; he died, very conveniently for John Wade, and thus removed the only
obstacle from his path."

"Very convenient. Do you think there was any foul play?"

"There may have been."

"But I should think the old man would have suspected."

"He was away at the time. When he returned to the city, he heard from
his nephew that the boy was dead. It was a great blow to him, of course.
Now, I'll tell you what," said Graves, sinking his voice so that Frank
found it difficult to hear, "I'll tell you what I've thought at times."

"I think the grandson may have been spirited off somewhere. Nothing
more easy, you know. Murder is a risky operation, and John Wade is
respectable, and wouldn't want to run the risk of a halter."

"You may be right. You don't connect this story of yours with the boy
you've brought here, do you?"

"I do," answered Graves, emphatically. "I shouldn't be surprised if this
was the very boy!"

"What makes you think so?"

"First, because there's some resemblance between the boy and the old
man's son, as I remember him. Next, it would explain John Wade's anxiety
to get rid of him. It's my belief that John Wade has recognized in this
boy the baby he got rid of fourteen years ago, and is afraid his uncle
will make the same discovery."

Frank left the crevice through which he had received so much information
in a whirl of new and bewildering thoughts.

"Was it possible," he asked himself, "that he could be the grandson of
Mr. Wharton, his kind benefactor?"



CHAPTER XX

THE ESCAPE


It was eight o'clock the next morning before Frank's breakfast was
brought to him.

"I am sorry you have had to wait," the housekeeper said, as she appeared
at the door with a cup of coffee and a plate of beefsteak and toast, "I
couldn't come up before."

"Have the men gone away?" said Frank.

"Yes."

"Then I have something to tell you. I learned something about myself
last night. I was in the closet, and heard the man who brought me here
talking to another person. May I tell you the story?"

"If you think it will do any good," said the housekeeper, "but I can't
help you if that is what you want."

He told the whole story. As he proceeded, the housekeeper betrayed
increased, almost eager interest, and from time to time asked him
questions in particular as to the personal appearance of John Wade. When
Frank had described him as well as he could, she said, in an excited
manner:

"Yes, it is--it must be the same man."

"The same man!" repeated our hero, in surprise.

"Do you know anything about him?"

"I know that he is a wicked man. I am afraid that I have helped him
carry out his wicked plan, but I did not know it at the time, or I never
would have given my consent."

"I don't understand you," said our hero, puzzled.

"Will you tell me what you mean?"

"Fourteen years ago I was very poor--poor and sick besides. My husband
had died, leaving me nothing but the care of a young infant, whom it was
necessary for me to support besides myself. Enfeebled by sickness, I was
able to earn but little, but we lived in a wretched room in a crowded
tenement house. My infant boy was taken sick and died. As I sat
sorrowfully beside the bed on which he lay dead, I heard a knock at the
door. I opened it, and admitted a man whom I afterward learned to be
John Wade. He very soon explained his errand. He agreed to take my
poor boy, and pay all the expenses of his burial in Greenwood Cemetery,
provided I would not object to any of his arrangements. He was willing
besides to pay me two hundred dollars for the relief of my necessities.
Though I was almost beside myself with grief for my child's loss, and
though this was a very favorable proposal, I hesitated. I could not
understand why a stranger should make me such an offer. I asked him the
reason."

"'You ask too much,' he answered, appearing annoyed. 'I have made you
a fair offer. Will you accept it, or will you leave your child to have a
pauper's funeral?'

"That consideration decided me. For my child's sake I agreed to his
proposal, and forebore to question him further. He provided a handsome
rosewood casket for my dear child, but upon the silver plate was
inscribed a name that was strange to me--the name of Francis Wharton."

"Francis Wharton!" exclaimed Frank.

"I was too weak and sorrowful to make opposition, and my baby was buried
as Francis Wharton. Not only this, but a monument is erected over him at
Greenwood, which bears this name."

She proceeded after a pause:

"I did not then understand his object. Your story makes it clear. I
think that you are that Francis Wharton, under whose name my boy was
buried."

"How strange!" said Frank, thoughtfully. "I cannot realize it. But how
did you know the name of the man who called upon you?"

"A card slipped from his pocket, which I secured without his knowledge."

"How fortunate that I met you," said Frank. "I mean to let Mr. Wharton
know all that I have learned, and then he shall decide whether he will
recognize me or not as his grandson."

"I have been the means of helping to deprive you of your just rights,
though unconsciously. Now that I know the wicked conspiracy in which I
assisted, I will help undo the work."

"Thank you," said Frank. "The first thing is to get out of this place."

"I cannot open the door of your room. They do not trust me with the
key."

"The windows are not very high from the ground. I can get down from the
outside."

"I will bring you a clothesline and a hatchet."

Frank received them with exultation.

"Before I attempt to escape," he said, "tell me where I can meet you in
New York. I want you to go with me to Mr. Wharton's. I shall need you to
confirm my story."

"I will meet you to-morrow at No. 15 B--Street."

"Then we shall meet to-morrow. What shall I call your name?"

"Mrs. Parker."

"Thank you. I will get away as quickly as possible, and when we are in
the city we will talk over our future plans."

With the help of the hatchet, Frank soon demolished the lower part of
the window. Fastening the rope to the bedstead, he got out of the window
and safely descended to the ground.

A long and fatiguing walk lay before him. But at last he reached the
cars, and half an hour later the ferry at Jersey City.

Frank thought himself out of danger for the time being, but he was
mistaken.

Standing on the deck of the ferryboat, and looking back to the pier from
which he had just started, he met the glance of a man who had intended
to take the same boat, but had reached the pier just too late. His
heart beat quicker when he recognized in the belated passenger his late
jailer, Nathan Graves.

Carried away by his rage and disappointment, Nathan Graves clenched his
fist and shook it at his receding victim.

Our hero walked into the cabin. He wanted a chance to deliberate. He
knew that Nathan Graves would follow him by the next boat, and it was
important that he should not find him. Where was he to go?

Fifteen minutes after Frank set foot on the pier, his enemy also landed.
But now the difficult part of the pursuit began. He had absolutely no
clew as to the direction which Frank had taken.

For an hour and a half he walked the streets in the immediate
neighborhood of the square, but his labor was without reward. Not a
glimpse could he catch of his late prisoner.

"I suppose I must go to see Mr. Wade," he at last reluctantly decided.
"He may be angry, but he can't blame me. I did my best. I couldn't stand
guard over the young rascal all day."

The address which the housekeeper had given Frank was that of a
policeman's family in which she was at one time a boarder. On giving
his reference, he was hospitably received, and succeeded in making
arrangements for a temporary residence.

About seven o'clock Mrs. Parker made her appearance. She was fatigued by
her journey and glad to rest.

"I was afraid you might be prevented from coming," said Frank.

"I feared it also. I was about to start at twelve o'clock, when, to my
dismay, one of the men came home. He said he had the headache. I was
obliged to make him some tea and toast. He remained about till four
o'clock, when, to my relief, he went upstairs to lie down. I was afraid
some inquiry might be made about you, and your absence discovered,
especially as the rope was still hanging out of the window, and I was
unable to do anything more than cut off the lower end of it. When the
sick man retired to his bed I instantly left the house, fearing that the
return of some other of the band might prevent my escaping altogether."

"Suppose you had met one of them, Mrs. Parker?"

"I did. It was about half a mile from the house."

"Did he recognize you?"

"Yes. He asked in some surprise where I was going. I was obliged to
make up a story about our being out of sugar. He accepted it without
suspicion, and I kept on. I hope I shall be forgiven for the lie. I was
forced to it."

"You met no further trouble?"

"No."

"I must tell you of my adventure," said Frank.

"I came across the very man whom I most dreaded--the man who made me a
prisoner."

"Since he knows that you have escaped, he is probably on your track,"
said Mrs. Parker. "It will be hardly safe for you to go to Mr.
Wharton's."

"Why?"

"He will probably think you likely to go there, and be lying in wait
somewhere about."

"But I must go to Mr. Wharton," said Frank. "I must tell him this
story."

"It will be safer to write."

"The housekeeper, Mrs. Bradley, or John Wade, will get hold of the
letter and suppress it. I don't want to put them on their guard."

"You are right. It is necessary to be cautious."

"You see I am obliged to call on my grandfather, that is, on Mr.
Wharton."

"I can think of a better plan."

"What is it?"

"Go to a respectable lawyer. Tell him your story, and place your case
in his hands. He will write to your grandfather, inviting him to call at
his office on business of importance, without letting him know what
is the nature of it. You and I can be there to meet him, and tell our
story. In this way John Wade will know nothing, and learn nothing, of
your movements."

"That is good advice, Mrs. Parker, but there is one thing you have not
thought of," said our hero.

"What is that?"

"Lawyers charge a great deal for their services, and I have no money."

"You have what is as good a recommendation--a good case. The lawyer
will see at once that if not at present rich, you stand a good chance of
obtaining a position which will make you so. Besides, your grandfather
will be willing, if he admits your claim, to recompense the lawyer
handsomely."

"I did not think of that. I will do as you advise to-morrow."



CHAPTER XXI

JOHN WADE'S DISAPPOINTMENT


Mr. Wharton sat at dinner with his nephew and the housekeeper. He
had been at home for some time, and of course on his arrival had been
greeted with the news of our hero's perfidy. But, to the indignation of
Mrs. Bradley and John, he was obstinately incredulous.

"There is some mistake, I am sure," he said. "Such a boy as Frank is
incapable of stealing. You may be mistaken after all, John. Why did you
not let him stay till I got back? I should like to have examined him
myself."

"I was so angry with him for repaying your kindness in such a way that I
instantly ordered him out of the house."

"I blame you, John, for your haste," said his uncle. "It was not just to
the boy."

"I acted for the best, sir," he forced himself to say in a subdued tone.

"Young people are apt to be impetuous, and I excuse you; but you should
have waited for my return. I will call at Gilbert & Mack's, and inquire
of Frank himself what explanation he has to give."

"Of course, sir, you will do what you think proper," said his nephew.

This ended the conversation, and Mr. Wharton, according to his declared
intention, went to Gilbert & Mack's. He returned disappointed with the
information that our hero was no longer in the store.

I now return to Mr. Wharton at dinner.

"Here is a letter for you, sir," said the housekeeper. "It was brought
by the postman this afternoon."

Mr. Wharton adjusted his spectacles and read as follows:

"No.-- Wall Street.

"Dear Sir: Will you have the kindness to call at my office to-morrow
morning at eleven o'clock, if it suits your convenience? I have an
important communication to make to you, which will, I think be of an
agreeable character. Should the time named not suit you, will you have
the kindness to name your own time?

"Yours respectfully,

"MORRIS HALL."


"Read that, John," said his uncle, passing him the letter.

"Morris Hall is a lawyer, I believe, sir," said John.

"Have you any idea of the nature of the communication he desires to
make?"

"No idea at all."

"If it would relieve you, sir, I will go in your place," said John,
whose curiosity was aroused.

"Thank you, John, but this is evidently a personal matter. I shall go
down there to-morrow at the appointed time."

John was far from suspecting that the communication related to Frank,
though he had heard the day previous from Nathan Graves of the boy's
escape. He had been very much annoyed, and had given his agent a severe
scolding, with imperative orders to recapture the boy, if possible.

It was not without a feeling of curiosity that Mr. Wharton entered the
law office of Mr. Hall. He announced himself and was cordially welcomed.

"You have a communication to make to me," said Mr. Wharton.

"I have."

"Tell me all without delay."

"I will, sir. This is the communication I desire to make."

The story of John Wade's treachery was told, and the means by which
he had imposed upon his uncle, but the lawyer carefully abstained from
identifying the lost grandson with Frank Fowler.

When the story was concluded, Mr. Wharton said:

"Where is my grandson--my poor George's boy? Find him for me, and name
your own reward."

"I will show him to you at once, sir. Frank!"

At the word, Frank, who was in an inner office, entered. Mr. Wharton
started in amazement.

"Frank!" he exclaimed. "My dear boy, is it you who are my grandson?"

"Grandfather!"

Mr. Wharton held out his arms, and our hero, already attached to him for
his kindness, was folded in close embrace.

"Then you believe I am your grandson?" said Frank.

"I believe it without further proof."

"Still, Mr. Wharton," said the lawyer, "I want to submit my whole proof.
Mrs. Parker!"

Mrs. Parker entered and detailed her part in the plot, which for
fourteen years had separated Frank from his family.

"Enough!" said Mr. Wharton. "I am convinced--I did not believe my
nephew capable of such baseness. Mrs. Parker, you shall not regret your
confession. I will give you a pension which will relieve you from all
fear of want. Call next week on Mr. Hall, and you shall learn what
provision I have made for you. You, Frank, will return with me."

"What will Mr. John say?" asked Frank.

"He shall no longer sleep under my roof," said Mr. Wharton, sternly.

Frank was taken to a tailor and fitted out with a handsome new suit,
ready-made for immediate use, while three more were ordered.

When Mr. Wharton reached home, he entered the library and rang the bell.

To the servant who answered he said:

"Is Mr. John at home?"

"Yes, sir; he came in ten minutes ago."

"Tell him I wish to see him at once in the library. Summon the
housekeeper, also."

Surprised at the summons, John Wade answered it directly. He and Mrs.
Bradley met at the door and entered together. Their surprise and dismay
may be conjectured when they saw our hero seated beside Mr. Wharton,
dressed like a young gentleman.

"John Wade," said his uncle, sternly, "the boy whom you malign, the boy
you have so deeply wronged, has found a permanent home in this house."

"What, sir! you take him back?"

"I do. There is no more fitting place for him than the house of his
grandfather."

"His grandfather!" exclaimed his nephew and the housekeeper, in chorus.

"I have abundant proof of the relationship. This morning I have listened
to the story of your treachery. I have seen the woman whose son,
represented to me as my grandson, lies in Greenwood Cemetery. I have
learned your wicked plans to defraud him of his inheritance, and I tell
you that you have failed."

"I shall make my will to-morrow, bequeathing all my property to my
grandson, excepting only an annual income of two thousand dollars to
yourself. And now I must trouble you to find a boarding place. After
what has passed I do not desire to have you in the family."

"I do not believe he is your grandson," said John Wade, too angry to
heed prudential considerations.

"Your opinion is of little consequence."

"Then, sir, I have only to wish you good-morning. I will send for my
