round Joe Wheeler's neck--confound him!--and his arms were round her
waist, both of them. They didn't see me, and I stood for a minute
and looked at them, and but for what I'd swore to Amelia I believe I
should have taken Wheeler by the throat and shaken the life out of
him then and there. But I had swore, and I turned sharp and walked
away, and I never went up to Teesdale's nor to my father's farm, but
I went straight back to Pound's, the man I was bound to, and I wrote
a letter to Jenny and one to Amelia, and in Amelia's I only said--


'DEAR AMELIA,--Thank you very much; you were quite right.

TOM.'


And in the other I said--


Jenny, I've had pretty well enough of you; you can go to the devil
your own way. So no more at present from your sincere well-wisher
TOM.

'P.S.--I'm going for a soldier.'


And I left everything: my master that I was bound to, and my trade
and my father. And I went straight off to London. And I should have
been a soldier right enough but that I fell in with a fireman, and
he persuaded me to go in for that business, which is just as
exciting as a soldier's, and a great deal more dangerous, most
times. And a fireman I was for six or eight years, but I never cared
to walk out with another girl when I thought of Jenny. I didn't tell
my folks where I'd gone, and for years I heard nothing from them.

And one night there was a fire in a street off the Borough--a high
house it was,--and I went up the ladder to a window where there was
a woman screaming, and directly I see her face I see it was Jenny.

I fetched her down the ladder right enough, and she clung round my
neck (she didn't know me from Adam), and said: 'Oh, go back and
fetch my husband.' And I knew it was Wheeler I'd got to go and find.

Then I went back and I looked for Wheeler.

There he was, lying on the bed, drunk.

Then the devil says to me, 'What call have you to go and find him,
the drunken swine? Leave him be, and you can marry Jenny, and let
bygones be bygones'; and I stood there half a minute, quite still,
with the smoke getting thick round me. Then, the next thing I knew,
there was a cracking under my feet and the boards giving way, and I
sprang across to Wheeler all in a minute, as anxious to save him as
if he'd been my own twin brother. There was no waking him, it was
lift him or leave him, and somehow or other I got him out; but that
minute I'd given to listening to Satan had very nearly chucked us
both to our death, and we only just come off by the skin of our
teeth. The crowd cheered like mad when I dragged him out.

I was burned awfully bad, and such good looks as I'd had burnt off
me, and I didn't know nothing plainly for many a long day.

And when I come to myself I was in a hospital, and there was a
sweet-faced charity sister sitting looking at me, and, by the Lord,
if it wasn't Amelia! And she fell on her knees beside me, and she
says, 'Tom, I must tell you.

Ever since I found religion I've known what a wicked girl I was. O
Tom, to see you lying there, so ill! O Tom, forgive me, or I shall
go mad, I know I shall!'

And, with that, she told me straight out, holding nothing back, that
what she'd said to me that night eight years ago was a lie, no
better; and that who I'd seen in the church porch with young Wheeler
was not Jenny at all, but Amelia herself, dressed in Jenny's things.

'Oh, forgive me, Tom!' says Amelia, the tears runnin' over her nun's
dress. 'Forgive me, Tom, for I can never forgive myself! I knew
Jenny didn't rightly care about you, Tom, and I loved you so dear.
And Wheeler wanted Jenny, and so I was tempted to play off that
trick on you; I thought you would come round to me after.'

I was weak still with my illness, but I put my hand on hers, and I
says, 'I do forgive you, Amelia, for, after all, you done it for
love of me. And are you a nun, my dear?' says I.

'No,' says she, 'I'm only on liking as it were; if I don't like them
or they don't like me, I can leave any minute.'

'Then leave, for God's sake,' says I, 'if you've got a bit of love
for me left. Let bygones be bygones, and marry me as soon as I come
out of this, for it's worth something to be loved as you've loved
me, Amelia, and I was always fond of you.'

'What?' says she. 'Me marry you, and be happy after all the harm
I've done? You run away from your articles and turned fireman, and
Jenny married to a drunken brute--no, Tom, no! I don't deserve to be
happy; but, if you forgive me, I shan't be as miserable as I was.'

'Well,' says I, 'if ever you think better of it let me know.'

And the curious thing is that, within two years, she did think
better of it--for why? That fire had sobered Wheeler more than
twenty thousand temperance tracts, and all the Sons of the Phoenix
and Bands of Hope rolled into one. He never touched a drop of drink
since that day, and Jenny's as happy as her kind ever is. I hear she
didn't fret over me more than a month, though perhaps that's only
what I deserved, writing to her as I did. And then Amelia she
said--'No such harm done then after all.' So she married me.

Now, you see, if I'd listened to Satan and hadn't pulled Wheeler
out, I shouldn't have got burned, and I shouldn't have got into the
hospital, and I shouldn't have found Amelia again, and then where
should I have been? Whereas now, we're farming the same bit of land
that my father farmed before us. And if this was a made-up story,
Amelia would have had to drowned herself or something, and I should
have gone a-weeping and a-wailing for Jenny all my born days; but as
it's true and really happened, Amelia and me have been punished
enough, I think; for eight years of unhappiness is only a few words
of print in a story-book, but when you've got to live them, every
day of them, eight years is eight years, as Amelia and I shall
remember till our dying day; and eight years unhappiness is enough
punishment for most of the wrong things a man can do, or a woman
either for that matter.




COALS OF FIRE


ALL my life I've lived on a barge. My father, he worked a barge from
London to Tonbridge, and 'twas on a barge I first see the light when
my mother's time come. I used to wish sometimes as I could 'ave
lived in a cottage with a few bits of flowers in the front, but I
think if I'd been put to it I should have chose the barge rather
than the finest cottage ever I see. When I come to be grown up and
took a husband of my own it was a bargeman I took, of course. He was
a good sort always, was my Tom, though not particular about Sundays
and churchgoings and such like, as my father always was. It used to
be a sorrow to me in my young married days to think as Tom was so
far from the Lord, and I used to pray that 'is eyes might be opened
and that 'e might be led to know the truth like me, which was vanity
on my part, for I've come to see since that like as not 'e was
nearer the Lord nor ever I was.

We worked the William and Mary, did Tom and me, and I used to think
no one could be 'appier than we was them first two years. Tom was as
kind as kind, and never said a hard word to me except when he was in
liquor; and as to liftin' his 'and to me, no, never in his life. But
after two years we got a little baby of our own, and then I knew as
I hadn't known what 'appiness was before. She was such a pretty
little thing, with yellow hair, soft and fluffy all over her head,
the colour of a new-hatched duck, and blue eyes and dear little
hands that I used to kiss a thousand times a day.

My mother had married beneath her, they said, for she'd been to
school and been in service in a good family, and she taught me to
read and write and cipher in the old days, when I was a little kid
along of 'er in the barge. So we named our little kid Mary to be
like our boat, and as soon as she was big enough, I taught 'er all
my mother had taught me, and when she was about eight year old my
Tom's great-uncle James, who was a tinsmith by trade, left us a bit
of money--over L 200 it were.

'Not a penny of it shall I spend,' says my Tom when he heard of it;
'we'll send our Mary to school with that, we will; and happen she'll
be a lady's-maid and get on in the world.'

So we put her to boarding-school in Maidstone, and it was like
tearing the heart out of my body. And she'd been away from us a
fortnight, and the barge was like hell without her, Tom said, and I
felt it too though I couldn't say it, being a Christian woman; and
one night we'd got the barge fast till morning in Stoneham Lock, and
we were a-settin' talking about her.

'Don't you fret, old woman,' says Tom, with the tears standin' in
his eyes, 'she's better off where she is, and she'll thank us for it
some day. She's 'appier where she is,' says 'e, 'nor she would be in
this dirty old barge along of us.'

And just as he said it, I says, ''Ark! what's that?' And we both
listened, and if it wasn't that precious child standing on the bank
callin' 'Daddy,' and she'd run all the way from Maidstone in 'er
little nightgown, and a waterproof over it.

P'raps if we'd been sensible parents, we should 'ave smacked 'er and
put 'er back next day; but as it was we hugged 'er, and we hugged
each other till we was all out o' breath, and then she set up on 'er
daddy's knee, and 'ad a bit o' cold pork and a glass of ale for 'er
supper along of us, and there was no more talk of sendin' 'er back
to school. But we put by the bit of money to set 'er up if she
should marry or want to go into business some day.

And she lived with us on the barge, and though I ses it there wasn't
a sweeter girl nor a better girl atwixt London and Tonbridge.

When she was risin' seventeen, I looked for the young men to be
comin' after 'er; and come after 'er they did, and more than one and
more than two, but there was only one as she ever give so much as a
kind look to, and that was Bill Jarvis, the blacksmith's son at
Farleigh. Whenever our barge was lyin' in the river of a Sunday, he
would walk down in 'is best in the afternoon to pass the time of day
with us, and presently it got to our Mary walking out with 'im
regular.

'Blest if it ain't going to be "William and Mary" after all,' says
my old man.

'He was pleased, I could see, for Bill Jarvis, he'd been put to his
father's trade, and 'e might look to come into his father's business
in good time, and barrin' a bit of poaching, which is neither here
nor there, in my opinion there wasn't a word to be said against 'im.

And so things went along, and they was all jolly except me, but I
had it tugging at my heart day and night, that the little gell as
'ad been my very own these seventeen years wouldn't be mine no
longer soon, and, God forgive me, I hated Bill Jarvis, and I
wouldn't 'ave been sorry if I'd 'eard as 'arm 'ad come to him.

The wedding was fixed for the Saturday; we was to 'ave a nice little
spread at the Rose and Crown, and the young folks was to go 'ome and
stay at old Jarvis's at Farleigh, and I was to lose my Pretty. And
on the Friday night, my old man, 'e went up to the Rose and Crown to
see about things and to get a drink along of 'is mates, and when 'e
come back I looked to see 'im a little bit on maybe, as was only
natural, the night before the weddin' and all. But 'e come back
early, and 'e come back sober, but with a face as white as my apron.

'Bess,' says 'e to me, 'where's the girl?'

'She's in 'er bunk asleep,' says I, 'lookin' as pretty as a picture.
She's been out with 'er sweet'eart,' says I. 'O Tom, this is the
last night she'll lay in that little bunk as she's laid in every
night of 'er life, except that wicked fortnight we sent 'er to
school.'

'Look 'ere,' says 'e, speaking in a whisper, 'I've 'eard summat up
at the Rose and Crown: Bank's broke, and all our money's gone. I see
it in the paper, so it must be true.'

'You don't mean it, Tom,' says I; 'it can't be true.'

''Tis true, though, by God,' says 'e, ''ere, don't take on so, old
girl,' for I'd begun to cry. 'More's been lost on market-days, as
they say: our little girl's well provided for, for old Jarvis, 'e's
a warm man.'

'She won't 'ave a day's peace all 'er life,' says I, 'goin'
empty-'anded into that 'ouse. I know old Mother Jarvis--a cat: we'd
best tell the child, p'raps she won't marry 'im if she knows she's
nothing to take to 'im,' and, God forgive me, my 'eart jumped up at
the thought.

'No, best leave it be,' says my old man, 'they're fair sweet on each
other.'

And so the next morning we all went up to the church, me cryin' all
the way as if it was 'er buryin' we was a-goin' to and not 'er
marryin'. The parson was at the church and a lot of folks as knew
us, us 'avin' bin in those parts so long; but none of the
bridegroom's people was there, nor yet the bridegroom.

And we waited and we waited, my Pretty as pale as a snowdrop in her
white bonnet. And when it was a hour past the time, Tom, 'e ups and
says out loud in the church, for all the parson and me said ''Ush!'
'I'm goin' back 'ome,' says 'e; 'there won't be no weddin' to-day;
'e shan't 'ave 'er now,' says my old man, 'not if 'e comes to fetch
'er in a coach and six cram full of bank-notes,' says 'e.

And with that 'e catches 'old of Mary in one and and me in the
other, and turns to go out of church, and at the door, who should we
meet but old Mother Jarvis, 'er that I'd called a cat in my wicked
spite only the day before. The tears was runnin' down her fat
cheeks, and as soon as she saw my Pretty, she caught 'er in 'er arms
and 'ugged 'er like as if she'd been 'er own. 'God forgive 'im,'
says she, 'I never could, for all he's my own son. He's gone off for
a soldier, and 'e left a letter sayin' you wasn't to think any more
of 'im, for 'e wasn't a marryin' man.'

'It's that dam money,' says my goodman, forgettin' 'e was in church;
'that was all 'e wanted, but it ain't what he'll get,' says 'e. 'You
keep 'im out of my way, for it 'ull be the worse for 'im if 'e comes
within the reach of my fisties.'

And with that we went along 'ome, the three of us. And the sun kept
a-shinin' just as if there was nothin' wrong, and the skylarks
a-singin' up in the blue sky till I would a-liked to wring their
necks for them.

And we 'ad to go on up and down the river as usual, for it was our
livin', you see, and we couldn't get away from the place where
everybody knew the slight that had been put upon my Pretty. You'd
think p'raps that was as bad as might be, but it wasn't the worst.

We was beginnin' June then, and by the end of August I knew that
what my Pretty 'ad gone through at the church was nothin' to what
she'd got to go through. Her face got pale and thin, and she didn't
fancy 'er food.

I suppose I ought to 'ave bin angry with her, for we'd always kept
ourselves respectable; and I know if you spare the rod you spoil the
child, and I felt I ought to tell her I didn't 'old with such
wickedness; so one night when 'er father, 'e was up at the Rose and
Crown, and she, a-settin' on the bank with 'er elbows on 'er knees
and 'er chin in 'er 'ands, I says to 'er, 'You can't 'ide it no
longer, my girl: I know all about it, you wicked, bad girl, you.'

And then she turned and looked at me like a dog does when you 'it
it. 'O mother,' says she, 'O mother!' And with that I forgot
everything about bein' angry with 'er, and I 'ad 'er in my arms in a
minute, and we was 'oldin' each other as hard as hard.

'It was the night before the weddin',' says she, in a whisper. 'O
mother, I didn't think there was any harm in it, and us so nearly
man and wife.'

'My Pretty,' says I, for she was cryin' pitiful, 'don't 'e take on
so, don't: there'll be the little baby by-and-by, and us 'ull love
it as dear as if you'd been married in church twenty times over.'

'Ah, but father,' says she; 'he'll kill me when 'e knows.'

Well, I put 'er to bed and I made 'er a cup of strong tea, and I
kissed 'er and covered 'er up with my heart like lead, and nobody as
ain't a mother can know what a merry-go-round of misery I'd got in
my head that night. And when my old man come 'ome I told 'im, and
'Don't be 'ard on the girl, for God's sake,' says I, 'for she's our
own child and our only child, and it was the night before the
weddin' as should 'ave bin.'

''Ard on 'er?' says 'e, and I'd never 'eard 'is voice so soft, not
even when 'e was courtin' me, or when my Pretty was a little un, and
'e hushin' her to sleep. ''Ard on 'er? 'Ard on my precious lamb? It
ain't us men who is 'ard on them things, it's you wimmen-folk; the
day before 'er weddin', too!'

Then 'e was quiet for a bit--then 'e takes 'is shoes off so as not
to make a clatter on the steps near where she slept, and 'e comes
out in a minute with my Bible in 'is 'and.

'Now,' says 'e, very quiet, 'you needn't be afraid of my bein' 'ard
on 'er, but if ever I meet 'im, I'll 'ave 'is blood, if I swing for
it, and I'm goin' to swear it on this 'ere Bible--so help me God!'

He looked like a mad thing; his eyes was a-shinin' like lanterns,
and 'is face all pulled out of its proper shape; and 'e plumps down
on 'is knees there, on the deck, with the Bible in 'is 'ands. And
before I knew what I was doin', I'd caught the book out of 'is
'ands, and chucked it into the river, my own Bible, that my own
mother had given me when I was a little kid, and I threw my arms
round his neck, and held his head against my bosom, so that his
mouth was shut, and 'e couldn't speak.

'No, no, no, Tom,' says I, 'you mustn't swear it, and you shan't.
Think of the girl, think of your poor old woman, think of the poor
little kid that's comin', what ud us all do without you? And you
hanged for the sake of such trash as that! Why, 'e ain't worth it,'
says I, tryin' to laugh.

Then 'e got 'is 'ead out of my arms and stood lookin' about 'im,
like a man that's 'ad a bad dream and 'as just waked up. Then 'e
smacks me on the back, 'All right, old woman,' says 'e, 'we won't
swear nothin', but it'll be a bad day for him when 'e comes a-nigh
the William and Mary.'

So no more was said. And we got through the winter somehow, and the
baby was born, as fine a gell as ever you see; and what I said come
true, for we couldn't none of us 'ave loved the baby more if its
father and mother 'ad been married by an archbishop in Westminster
Abbey. And the folks we knew along the banks would have been kind to
my Pretty, but she wouldn't never show her face to any of them.
'I've got you, mother, and I've got father and the baby, and I don't
want no one else,' says she.

My Tom, he wasn't never the same man after that night 'e 'd got out
the Bible to swear. He give up the drink, but it didn't make 'im no
cheerfuller, and 'e went to church now and then, a thing I'd never
known 'im do since we was married. And time went on, and it was
August again, with a big yellow moon in the sky.

My Pretty and the baby was in bed, and the old man and me, we was
just a-turnin' in, when we 'eard some one a-runnin' along the
tow-path. My old man puts 'is 'ead out to see who's there, and as 'e
looked a man come runnin' along close by where we was moored, and 'e
jumped on to our barge, not stoppin' to look at the name, and, 'For
God's sake, hide me!' says 'e, and it was a soldier in a red coat
with a scared face, as I see by the light of the moon. And it was
Bill Jarvis what 'ad brought our girl to shame and run away and left
'er on 'er weddin' morn; and I looked to see my old man take 'im by
the shoulder and chuck 'im into the water. And Jarvis didn't see
whose barge he'd come aboard of.

'I've got in a row,' says 'e; 'I knocked a man down and he's dead.
Oh, for God's sake, hide me! I've run all the way from Chatham.'

Then my old man, he steps out on the deck, and Jarvis, 'e see who it
was, and--'O my God!' says 'e, and 'e almost fell back in the water
in 'is fright.

Then my old man, 'e took that soldier by the arm, and 'e open the
door of the little cabin where my Pretty and 'er baby were. Then 'e
slammed it to again. 'No, I can't,' says 'e, 'by God, I can't.' And
before the soldier could speak, he'd dragged him down our cabin
stairs, and shoved 'im into 'is own bunk and chucked the covers over
'im. Then 'e come up to where I was standin' in the moonlight.

'What ever you done that for?' says I. 'Why not 'a give 'im up to
serve 'im out for what 'e done to our Pretty?'

He looked at me stupid-like. 'I don't know why,' says 'e, 'but I
can't'; and we stood there in the quiet night, me a-holding on to
'is arm, for I was shivering, so I could hardly stand.

And presently half a dozen soldiers come by with a sergeant.

'Hullo!' cries the sergeant, 'see any redcoat go this way?'

'He's gone up over the bridge,' says Tom, not turnin' a 'air, 'im
that I'd never 'eard tell a lie in his life before,--'You'll catch
'im if you look slippy; what's 'e done?'

'Only murder and desertion,' says the sergeant, as cheerful as you
please.

'Oh, is that all?' says my old man; 'good-night to you.'

'Good-night,' says the sergeant, and off they went.

They didn't come back our way. We was a-goin' down stream, and we
passed Chatham next mornin'.

Bill Jarvis, 'e lay close in the bunk, and my Pretty, she wouldn't
come out of 'er cabin; and at Chatham, my old man, 'e says, 'I'm
goin' ashore for a bit, old woman; you lay-to and wait for me.' And
he went.

Then I went in to my Pretty and I told her all about it, for she
knew nothin' but that Jarvis was aboard; and when I'd told 'er, she
said, 'I couldn't 'a' done it, no, not for a kingdom.'

'No more couldn't I,' ses I. 'Father's a better chap nor you and me,
my Pretty.'

Presently my old man come back from the town, and he goes down to
the bunk where Bill Jarvis is lying, and 'e says, 'Look 'ere, Bill,'
says 'e, 'you didn't kill your man last night, and after all, it was
in a fair rough-and-tumble. The man's doing well. You take my tip
and go back and give yourself up; they won't be 'ard on you.'

And Bill 'e looked at 'im all of a tremble. 'By God,' says 'e,
'you're a good man!'

'It's more than you are, then, you devil,' says Tom. 'Get along, out
of my sight,' says 'e, 'before I think better of it.'

And that soldier was off that barge before you could say 'knife,'
and we didn't see no more of 'im.

But we was up at Hamsted Lock the next summer. The baby was
beginnin' to toddle about now; we'd called her Bessie for me. She
and her mother was a-settin' in the meadow pickin' the daisies, when
I see a soldier a-comin' along the meadow-path, and if it wasn't
