things close at hand.  It has been as if I was under a spell.  The woman
in the room below--the woman lying dead!"  He stopped a second, and then
went on:  "There is too much that is crying out aloud.  A man such as I
am--it has FORCED itself upon me--cannot leave such things and give
himself to the dust.  I cannot explain clearly because I am not thinking
as I am accustomed to think.  A change has come upon me.  I shall not
use the pistol--as I meant to use it."

Glad made a friendly clutch at the sleeve of his shabby coat.

"Right O!" she cried.  "That's it!  You buck up sime as I told yer. Y'
ain't stony broke an' there's 'allers to-morrer."

Antony Dart's expression was weirdly retrospective.

"I did not think so this morning," he answered.

"But there is," said the girl. "Ain't there now, curick?  There's a lot
o' work in yer yet; yer could do all sorts o' things if y' ain't too
proud.  I'll 'elp yer.  So 'll the curick.  Y' ain't found out yet what
a little folks can live on till luck turns.  Me, I'm goin' to try Miss
Montaubyn's wye.  Le's both try.  Le's believe things is comin'. Le's
get 'er to talk to us some more."

The curate was thinking the thing over deeply.

"Yer see," Glad enlarged cheerfully, "yer look almost like a gentleman.
P'raps yer can write a good 'and an' spell all right.  Can yer?"

"Yes."

"I think, perhaps," the curate began reflectively, "particularly if you
can write well, I might be able to get you some work."

"I do not want work," Dart answered slowly.  "At least I do not want the
kind you would be likely to offer me."

The curate felt a shock, as if cold water had been dashed over him.
Somehow it had not once occurred to him that the man could be one of the
educated degenerate vicious for whom no power to help lay in any hands--
yet he was not the common vagrant--and he was plainly on the point of
producing an excuse for refusing work.

The other man, seeing his start and his amazed, troubled flush, put out
a hand and touched his arm apologetically.

"I beg your pardon," he said. "One of the things I was going to tell
you--I had not finished--was that I AM what is called a gentleman. I am
also what the world knows as a rich man.  I am Sir Oliver Holt."

Each member of the party gazed at him aghast.  It was an enormous name
to claim.  Even the two female creatures knew what it stood for.  It was
the name which represented the greatest wealth and power in the world of
finance and schemes of business. It stood for financial influence which
could change the face of national fortunes and bring about crises.  It
was known throughout the world.  Yesterday the newspaper rumor that its
owner had mysteriously left England had caused men on 'Change to discuss
possibilities together with lowered voices.

Glad stared at the curate.  For the first time she looked disturbed and
alarmed.

"Blimme," she ejaculated, "'e's gone off 'is nut, pore chap!--'e's
gone off it!"

"No," the man answered, "you shall come to me"--he hesitated a second
while a shade passed over his eyes--"TO-MORROW.  And you shall see."

He rose quietly to his feet and the curate rose also.  Abnormal as the
climax was, it was to be seen that there was no mistake about the
revelation.  The man was a creature of authority and used to carrying
conviction by his unsupported word. That made itself, by some clear,
unspoken method, plain.

"You are Sir Oliver Holt!  And a few hours ago you were on the point
of--"

"Ending it all--in an obscure lodging.  Afterward the earth would have
been shovelled on to a work-house coffin.  It was an awful thing." He
shook off a passionate shudder. "There was no wealth on earth that could
give me a moment's ease--sleep--hope--life.  The whole world was full
of things I loathed the sight and thought of.  The doctors said my
condition was physical.  Perhaps it was--perhaps to-day has strangely
given a healthful jolt to my nerves--perhaps I have been dragged away
from the agony of morbidity and plunged into new intense emotions which
have saved me from the last thing and the worst--SAVED me!"

He stopped suddenly and his face flushed, and then quite slowly turned
pale.

"SAVED ME!" he repeated the words as the curate saw the awed blood
creepingly recede.  "Who knows, who knows!  How many explanations one is
ready to give before one thinks of what we say we believe. Perhaps it
was--the Answer!"

The curate bowed his head reverently.

"Perhaps it was."

The girl Glad sat clinging to her knees, her eyes wide and awed and with
a sudden gush of hysteric tears rushing down her cheeks.

"That's the wye!  That's the wye!" she gulped out.  "No one won't
never believe--they won't, NEVER.  That's what she sees, Miss Montaubyn.
You don't, 'E don't," with a jerk toward the curate.  "I ain't nothin'
but ME, but blimme if I don't--blimme!"

Sir Oliver Holt grew paler still. He felt as he had done when Jinny
Montaubyn's poor dress swept against him.  His voice shook when he
spoke.

"So do I," he said with a sudden deep catch of the breath; "it was the
Answer."

In a few moments more he went to the girl Polly and laid a hand on her
shoulder.

"I shall take you home to your mother," he said.  "I shall take you
myself and care for you both.  She shall know nothing you are afraid of
her hearing.  I shall ask her to bring up the child.  You will help
her."

Then he touched the thief, who got up white and shaking and with eyes
moist with excitement.

"You shall never see another man claim your thought because you have not
time or money to work it out. You will go with me.  There are to-morrows
enough for you!"

Glad still sat clinging to her knees and with tears running, but the
ugliness of her sharp, small face was a thing an angel might have paused
to see.

"You don't want to go away from here," Sir Oliver said to her, and she
shook her head.

"No, not me.  I told yer wot I wanted.  Lemme do it."

"You shall," he answered, "and I will help you."

The things which developed in Apple Blossom Court later, the things
which came to each of those who had sat in the weird circle round the
fire, the revelations of new existence which came to herself, aroused no
amazement in Jinny Montaubyn's mind.  She had asked and believed all
things--and all this was but another of the Answers.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAWN OF A TO-MORROW***


******* This file should be named 460.txt or 460.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/6/460



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
