The selfish nature of Jonas was cropping out, and his mother felt, with
a pang, that he would be reconciled to part with her forever for
the sake of the brilliant prospects and the large fortune which Mr.
Granville could offer him.

She was outwardly cold, but such affection as she was capable of she
expended on this graceless and ungrateful boy.

"You seem to forget that I may have some feeling in the matter," said
Mrs. Brent coldly, but with inward pain. "If the result of this plan
were to be that we should be permanently separated, I would never
consent to it."

"Just as you like, mother," said Jonas, with an ill grace. "I don't look
much like Phil."

"No, there will be a difficulty. Still Mr. Granville has never seen
Philip since he was three years old, and that is in our favor. He thinks
I am Mr. Brent's first wife."

"Shall you tell him?"

"I don't know. I will be guided by circumstances. Perhaps it may be
best. I wouldn't like to have it discovered that I had deceived him in
that."

"How are you going to manage about this place, mother?"

"I am going to write to your Uncle Jonas to take charge of it. I will
let him have it at a nominal rent. Then, if our plan miscarries we shall
have a place to come back to."

"Were you ever in Philadelphia, mother?"

"No; but there will be no trouble in journeying there. I shall pack
your clothes and my own to-night. Of course, Jonas, when you meet Mr.
Granville you must seem to be fond of him. Then you must tell him how
kind I have been to you. In fact, you must act precisely as Philip might
be expected to do."

"Yes, mother; and you must be careful not to call me Jonas. That will
spoil all, you know."

"Rest assured that I shall be on my guard. If you are as careful as I
am, Philip----"

Jonas burst into a guffaw at the new name.

"It's just like play-acting, mother," he said.

"But it will pay better," said Mrs. Brent quietly. "I think it will be
best for me to begin calling you Philip at once--that is, as soon as we
have left town--so that we may both get accustomed to it."

"All right, mother. You've got a good headpiece."

"I will manage things properly. If you consent to be guided by me, all
will be right."

"Oh, I'll do it mother. I wish we were on our way."

"You can go to bed if you like. I must stay up late to-night. I have to
pack our trunks."

The next day the pair of adventurers left Gresham. From the earliest
available point Mrs. Brent telegraphed to Mr. Granville that she was on
her way, with the son from whom he had so long been separated.



CHAPTER XVIII.

THE CONSPIRACY SUCCEEDS.

In a handsome private parlor at the Continental Hotel a man of about
forty-five years of age sat in an easy-chair. He was of middle height,
rather dark complexion, and a pleasant expression. His right foot was
bandaged, and rested on a chair. The morning Daily Ledger was in his
hand, but he was not reading. His mind, judging from his absorbed look,
was occupied with other thoughts.

"I can hardly realize," he said half-aloud, "that my boy will so soon
be restored to my arms. We have been separated by a cruel fate, but we
shall soon be together again. I remember how the dear child looked when
I left him at Fultonville in the care of the kind inn-keeper. I am
sorry he is dead, but his widow shall be suitably repaid for her kind
devotion."

He had reached this point when a knock was heard at the door.

"Come in!" said Mr. Granville.

A servant of the hotel appeared.

"A lady and a boy are in the parlor below, sir. They wish to see you."

Though Mr. Granville had considerable control over his feelings, his
heart beat fast when he heard these words.

"Will you show them up at once?" he said, in a tone which showed some
trace of agitation.

The servant bore the message to Mrs. Brent and Jonas, who were sitting
in the hotel parlor.

If Mr. Granville was agitated, the two conspirators were not wholly at
their ease. There was a red spot on each of Mrs. Brent's cheeks--her
way of expressing emotion--and Jonas was fidgeting about uneasily in his
chair, staring about him curiously.

"Mind what I told you," said his mother, in a low voice. "Remember to
act like a boy who has suddenly been restored to his long-lost father.
Everything depends on first impressions."

"I wish it was all over; I wish I was out of it," said Jonas, wiping the
perspiration from his face. "Suppose he suspects?"

"He won't if you do as I tell you. Don't look gawky, but act naturally."

Just then the servant reappeared.

"You are to come up-stairs," he said. "The gentleman will see you."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Brent, rising. "Come."

Jonas rose, and with the manner of a cur that expected a whipping,
followed his mother and the servant.

"It's only one flight," said the servant, "but we can take the
elevator."

"It is of no consequence," Mrs. Brent began, but Jonas said eagerly:

"Let's ride on the elevator, ma!"

"Very well, Philip," said Mrs. Brent.

A minute later the two stood at the door of Mr. Granville's room. Next
they stood in his presence.

Mr. Granville, looking eagerly toward the door, passed over Mrs. Brent,
and his glance rested on the boy who followed her. He started, and there
was a quick feeling of disappointment. He had been picturing to himself
how his lost boy would look, but none of his visions resembled the
awkward-looking boy who stood sheepishly by the side of Mrs. Brent.

"Mr. Granville, I presume," said the lady.

"Yes, madam. You are----"

"Mrs. Brent, and this," pointing to Jonas, "is the boy you left at
Fultonville thirteen years ago. Philip, go to your father."

Jonas advanced awkwardly to Mr. Granville's chair, and said in
parrot-like tones:

"I'm so glad to see you, pa!"

"And you are really Philip?" said Mr. Granville slowly.

"Yes, I'm Philip Brent; but I suppose my name is Granville now."

"Come here, my boy!"

Mr. Granville drew the boy to him, and looked earnestly in his face,
then kissed him affectionately.

"He has changed since he was a little child, Mrs. Brent," he said, with
a half-sigh.

"That's to be expected, sir. He was only three years old when you left
him with us."

"But it seems to me that his hair and complexion are lighter."

"You can judge of that better than I," said Mrs. Brent plausibly. "To
me, who have seen him daily, the change was not perceptible."

"I am greatly indebted to you for your devoted care--to you and your
husband. I am grieved to hear that Mr. Brent is dead."

"Yes, sir; he left me six months since. It was a grievous loss. Ah, sir,
when I give up Philip also, I shall feel quite alone in the world," and
she pressed a handkerchief to her eyes. "You see, I have come to look
upon him as my own boy!"

"My dear madam, don't think that I shall be so cruel as to take him from
you. Though I wish him now to live with me, you must accompany him. My
home shall be yours if you are willing to accept a room in my house and
a seat at my table."

"Oh, Mr. Granville, how can I thank you for your great kindness? Ever
since I received your letter I have been depressed with the thought
that I should lose dear Philip. If I had a child of my own it would be
different; but, having none, my affections are centered upon him."

"And very naturally," said Mr. Granville. "We become attached to those
whom we benefit. Doubtless he feels a like affection for you. You love
this good lady, Philip, who has supplied to you the place of your own
mother, who died in your infancy, do you not?"

"Yes, sir," answered Jonas stolidly. "But I want to live with my pa!"

"To be sure you shall. My boy, we have been separated too long already.
Henceforth we will live together, and Mrs. Brent shall live with us."

"Where do you live, pa?" asked Jonas.

"I have a country-seat a few miles from Chicago," answered Mr.
Granville. "We will go there as soon as I am well enough. I ought to
apologize, Mrs. Brent, for inviting you up to my room, but my rheumatism
makes me a prisoner."

"I hope your rheumatism will soon leave you, sir."

"I think it will. I have an excellent physician, and already I am much
better. I may, however, have to remain here a few days yet."

"And where do you wish Philip and I to remain in the meantime?"

"Here, of course. Philip, will you ring the bell?"

"I don't see any bell," answered Jonas, bewildered.

"Touch that knob!"

Jonas did so.

"Will that ring the bell?" he asked curiously.

"Yes, it is an electric bell."

"By gosh!" ejaculated Jonas.

"Don't use such language, Philip!" said Mrs. Brent hastily. "Your father
will be shocked. You see, Mr. Granville, Philip has associated with
country boys, and in spite of my care, he has adopted some of their
language."

Mr. Granville himself was rather disturbed by this countrified
utterance, and it occurred to him that his new-found son needed
considerable polishing.

"Ah, I quite understand that, Mrs. Brent," he said courteously. "He is
young yet, and there will be plenty of time for him to get rid of any
objectionable habits and phrases."

Here the servant appeared.

"Tell the clerk to assign this lady and the boy rooms on this floor if
any are vacant. Mrs. Brent, Philip may have a room next to you for the
present. When I am better I will have him with me. John, is dinner on
the table?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then, after taking possession of your rooms, you and Philip had better
go to dinner. I will send for him later."

"Thank you, sir."

As Mrs. Brent was ushered into her handsome apartment her face was
radiant with joy and exultation.

"All has gone well!" she said. "The most difficult part is over."



CHAPTER XIX.

A NARROW ESCAPE FROM DETECTION.

The conspiracy into which Mrs. Brent had entered was a daring one, and
required great coolness and audacity. But the inducements were great,
and for her son's sake she decided to carry it through. Of course it
was necessary that she should not be identified with any one who could
disclose to Mr. Granville the deceit that was being practiced upon him.
Circumstances lessened the risk of detection, since Mr. Granville was
confined to his room in the hotel, and for a week she and Jonas went
about the city alone.

One day she had a scare.

She was occupying a seat in a Chestnut Street car, while Jonas stood
in front with the driver, when a gentleman whom she had not observed,
sitting at the other end of the car, espied her.

"Why, Mrs. Brent, how came you here?" he asked, in surprise, crossing
over and taking a seat beside her.

Her color went and came as, in a subdued tone, she answered.

"I am in Philadelphia on a little visit, Mr. Pearson."

"Are you not rather out of your latitude?" asked the gentleman.

"Yes, perhaps so."

"How is Mr. Brent?"

"Did you not hear that he was dead?"

"No, indeed! I sympathize with you in your sad loss."

"Yes," sighed the widow. "It is a great loss to us."

"I suppose Jonas is a large boy now," said the other. "I haven't seen
him for two or three years."

"Yes, he has grown," said the widow briefly. She hoped that Mr. Pearson
would not discover that Jonas was with her, as she feared that the boy
might betray them unconsciously.

"Is he with you?"

"Yes."

"Do you stay long in Philadelphia?"

"No, I think not," answered Mrs. Brent.

"I go back to New York this afternoon, or I would ask permission to call
on you."

Mrs. Brent breathed more freely. A call at the hotel was by all means to
be avoided.

"Of course I should have been glad to see you," she answered, feeling
quite safe in saying so. "Are you going far?"

"I get out at Thirteenth Street."

"Thank Heaven!" said Mrs. Brent to herself. "Then he won't discover
where we are."

The Continental Hotel is situated at the corner of Chestnut and Ninth
Streets, and Mrs. Brent feared that Jonas would stop the car at that
point. As it was, the boy did not observe that his mother had met an
acquaintance, so intent was he on watching the street sights.

When they reached Ninth Street mother and son got out and entered the
hotel.

"I guess I'll stay down stairs awhile," said Jonas.

"No, Philip, I have something to say to you. Come up with me."

"I want to go into the billiard-room," said Jonas, grumbling.

"It is very important," said Mrs. Brent emphatically.

Now the curiosity of Jonas was excited, and he followed his mother into
the elevator, for their rooms were on the third floor.

"Well, mother, what is it?" asked Jonas, when the door of his mother's
room was closed behind them.

"I met a gentleman who knew me in the horse-car," said Mrs. Brent
abruptly.

"Did you? Who was it?"

"Mr. Pearson."

"He used to give me candy. Why didn't you call me?"

"It is important that we should not be recognized," said his mother.
"While we stay here we must be exceedingly prudent. Suppose he had
called upon us at the hotel and fallen in with Mr. Granville. He might
have told him that you are my son, and that your name is Jonas, not
Philip."

"Then the fat would be in the fire!" said Jonas.

"Exactly so; I am glad you see the danger. Now I want you to stay here,
or in your own room, for the next two or three hours."

"It'll be awfully tiresome," grumbled Jonas.

"It is necessary," said his mother firmly. "Mr. Pearson leaves for New
York by an afternoon train. It is now only two o'clock. He left the
car at Thirteenth Street, and might easily call at this hotel. It is a
general rendezvous for visitors to the city. If he should meet you down
stairs, he would probably know you, and his curiosity would be aroused.
He asked me where I was staying, but I didn't appear to hear the
question."

"That's pretty hard on me, ma."

"I am out of all patience with you," said Mrs. Brent. "Am I not working
for your interest, and you are doing all you can to thwart my plans. If
you don't care anything about inheriting a large fortune, let it go! We
can go back to Gresham and give it all up."

"I'll do as you say, ma," said Jonas, subdued.

The very next day Mr. Granville sent for Mrs. Brent. She lost no time in
waiting upon him.

"Mrs. Brent," he said, "I have decided to leave Philadelphia to-morrow."

"Are you quite able, sir?" she asked, with a good assumption of
sympathy.

"My doctor tells me I may venture. We shall travel in Pullman cars,
you know. I shall secure a whole compartment, and avail myself of every
comfort and luxury which money can command."

"Ah, sir! money is a good friend in such a case."

"True, Mrs. Brent. I have seen the time when I was poorly supplied with
it. Now I am happily at ease. Can you and Philip be ready?"

"Yes, Mr. Granville," answered Mrs. Brent promptly. "We are ready
to-day, for that matter. We shall both be glad to get started."

"I am glad to hear it. I think Philip will like his Western home.
I bought a fine country estate of a Chicago merchant, whose failure
compelled him to part with it. Philip shall have his own horse and his
own servants."

"He will be delighted," said Mrs. Brent warmly. "He has been used to
none of these things, for Mr. Brent and I, much as we loved him, had not
the means to provide him with such luxuries."

"Yes, Mrs. Brent, I understand that fully. You were far from rich. Yet
you cared for my boy as if he were your own."

"I loved him as much as if he had been my own son, Mr. Granville."

"I am sure you did. I thank Providence that I am able to repay to some
extent the great debt I have incurred. I cannot repay it wholly, but
I will take care that you, too, shall enjoy ease and luxury. You shall
have one of the best rooms in my house, and a special servant to wait
upon you."

"Thank you, Mr. Granville," said Mrs. Brent, her heart filled with proud
anticipations of the state in which she should hereafter live. "I do not
