barn, to make absolutely sure that there was no danger near. When he was
quite sure, he silently flew down into the henyard as he had done many
times before. He pretended to be looking for scattered grains of corn,
but all the time he was edging nearer and nearer to the open door of
the henhouse. At last he could see the box with the hay in it. He walked
right up to the open door and peered inside. There was nothing to be
afraid of that he could see. Still he hesitated. He did hate to go
inside that door, even for a minute, and that is all it would take to
fly up to that nest and get one of those eggs.

Blacky closed his eyes for just a second, and when he did that he seemed
to see himself eating one of those eggs. "What are you afraid of?" he
muttered to himself as he opened his eyes. Then with a hurried look in
all directions, he flew up to the edge of the box. There lay the two
eggs!



CHAPTER XXXI: An Egg That Wouldn't Behave

   If you had an egg and it wouldn't behave
    Just what would you do with that egg, may I ask?
   To make an egg do what it don't want to do
    Strikes me like a difficult sort of a task.

All of which is pure nonsense. Of course. Who ever heard of an egg
either behaving or misbehaving? Nobody. That is, nobody that I know,
unless it be Blacky. It is best not to mention eggs in Blacky's presence
these days. They are a forbidden topic when he is about. Blacky is apt
to be a little resentful at the mere mention of an egg. I don't know as
I wholly blame him. How would you feel if you knew you knew all there
was to know about a thing, and then found out that you didn't know
anything at all? Well, that is the way it is with Blacky the Crow.

If any one had told Blacky that he didn't know all there is to know
about eggs, he would have laughed at the idea. Wasn't he, Blacky,
hatched from an egg himself? And hadn't he, ever since he was big
enough, hunted eggs and stolen eggs and eaten eggs? If he didn't know
about eggs, who did? That is the way he would have talked before his
visit to Farmer Brown's henhouse. It is since then that it has been
unwise to mention eggs.

When Blacky saw the two eggs in the nest in Farmer Brown's henhouse how
Blacky did wish that he could take both. But he couldn't. One would be
all that he could manage. He must take his choice and go away while the
going was good. Which should he take?

It often happens in this life that things which seem to be unimportant,
mere trifles in themselves, prove to be just the opposite. Now, so far
as Blacky could see, it didn't make the least difference which egg he
took, excepting that one was a little bigger than the other. As a matter
of fact, it made all the difference in the world. One was brown and very
good to look at. The other, the larger of the two, was white and also
very good to look at. In fact, Blacky thought it the better of the
two to look at, for it was very smooth and shiny. So, partly on this
account, and partly because it was the largest, Blacky chose the white
egg. He seized it in his claws and started to fly with it, but somehow
he could not seem to get a good grip on it. He fluttered to the ground
just outside the door, and there he got a better grip. Just as old
Dandy-cock the Rooster, with head down and all the feathers on his neck
standing out with anger, came charging at him, Blacky rose into the air
and started over the Old Orchard toward the Green Forest.

Never had Blacky felt more like cawing at the top of his lungs. You see,
he felt that he had been very smart, and I suspect that he also felt
that he had been very brave. He would have liked to boast a little. But
he didn't. He wisely held his tongue. It would be time enough to do his
boasting after he had reached a place of safety and had eaten that egg.
He was halfway across the Old Orchard when he felt that egg beginning to
slip. Now at best it isn't easy to carry an egg without breaking it. You
know how very careful you have to be. Just imagine how Blacky felt when
that egg began to slip. Do what he would, he couldn't get a better
grip on it. It slipped a wee bit more. Blacky started down towards the
ground. But he wasn't quick enough. Striped Chipmunk, watching Blacky
from the old stone wall, saw something white drop from Blacky's claws.
He saw Blacky dash after it and clutch at it only to miss it. Then the
white thing struck a branch of an old apple tree, bounced off and fell
to the ground. Blacky followed it.

Striped Chipmunk stole very softly through the grass to see what Blacky
was doing. Blacky was standing close beside a white thing that
looked very much like an egg. He was looking at it with the queerest
expression.

Now and then he would reach out and rap it sharply with his bill, and
then look as if he didn't know what to make of it. He didn't. That egg
wasn't behaving right. It should have broken when it hit the branch of
the apple tree. Certainly it should have broken when he struck it that
way with his bill. However was he to eat that egg, if he couldn't break
the shell? Blacky didn't know.



CHAPTER XXXII: What Blacky Did With The Stolen Egg

Blacky was puzzled. He didn't know what to make of that egg he had
stolen from Farmer Brown's henhouse. It wasn't like any egg he ever had
seen or even heard of. It was a beautiful-looking egg, and he had been
sure that it would taste as good, quite as good as it looked. Even now
he wasn't sure that if he could only taste it, it would be all that he
had hoped. But how could he taste it, when he couldn't break that shell?
He never had heard of such a shell. He doubted if anybody else ever had,
either. He had hammered at it with his stout bill until he was afraid
that he would break that, instead of the egg. The more he tried to break
into it and couldn't, the hungrier he grew, and the more certain that
nothing else in all the world could possibly taste so good. But the
Old Orchard was not the place for him to work on that egg. In the first
place, it was too near Farmer Brown's house. This made Blacky uneasy.
You see, he had something of a guilty conscience. Not that he felt at
all a sense of having done wrong. To his way of thinking, if he were
smart enough to get that egg, he had just as much right to it as any one
else, particularly Farmer Brown's boy. Yet he wasn't at all sure that
Farmer Brown's boy would look at the matter quite that way. In fact,
he had a feeling that Farmer Brown's boy would call him a thief if he
should be discovered with that egg. Then, too, there were too many sharp
eyes in the Old Orchard. He wanted to get away where he could be sure of
being alone. Then if he couldn't break that shell, no one would be
the wiser. So he picked up the egg and flew straight over to the Green
Forest, and this time he managed to get there without dropping it.

Now you would never suspect Blacky the Crow, he of the sharp wits and
crafty ways, of being amused by bright things, would you? But he is. In
fact, Blacky is quite like a little child in this matter. Anything that
is bright and shiny interests Blacky right away. If he finds anything of
this kind, he will take it away to a certain secret place, and there he
will admire it and play with it and finally hide it. If I didn't know
that it isn't so, because it couldn't possibly be so, I should think
that Blacky was some relation to certain small boys I know. Always their
pockets are filled with all sorts of useless odds and ends which they
have picked up here and there. Blacky has no pockets, so he keeps his
treasures of this kind in a secret hiding-place, a sort of treasure
storehouse. He visits this secretly every day, uncovers his treasures,
and gloats over them and plays with them, then carefully covers them up
again. First Blacky took this egg over near his home, and there he
once more tried and tried and tried to break the shell. But the shell
wouldn't break, not even when Blacky quite lost his temper and hammered
at it for all he was worth. Then he gave the thing up as a bad matter
and flew up to his favorite roost in the top of a tall pine-tree,
leaving the egg on the ground. But from where he sat on his favorite
roost in the tall pine-tree he could see that provoking egg, a little
spot of shining white. When a Jolly Little Sunbeam found it and rested
on it, it was so very bright and shiny that Blacky couldn't keep his
eyes off it.

Little by little he forgot that it was an egg. At least, he forgot that
he wanted to eat it. He began to find pleasure in just looking at it. It
might not satisfy his stomach, but it certainly was very satisfying to
his eyes. He forgot to think of it as a thing to eat, but began to think
of it wholly as a thing to look at and admire. He was glad he hadn't
been able to break that shell.

Once more he spread his black wings and flew down to the egg. He cocked
his head to one side and looked at it. He cocked his head to the other
side and looked at it. He walked all around it, chuckling and saying to
himself, "Pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty and all mine, mine, mine, mine!
Pretty, pretty, and all mine!"

Than he craftily looked all about to make sure that no one was watching
him. Having made quite sure, he rolled the egg over and turned it around
and admired it to his heart's content. At last he picked it up and
carried it to his treasure-house and covered it over very carefully. And
there that china nest-egg, for that is what he had stolen, is still his
chief treasure to this day, and Blacky still sometimes wonders what kind
of a hen laid such a hard-shelled egg.

Blacky has had very many other adventures, but it would take another
book to tell about all of them. That would be hardly fair to some of the
other little people who also have had adventures and want them told to
you. One of these is a beautiful little fellow who lives in the Green
Forest, and so the next book will be Whitefoot the Wood Mouse.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Blacky the Crow, by Thornton W. Burgess

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BLACKY THE CROW ***

***** This file should be named 4979.txt or 4979.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/7/4979/

Produced by Kent Fielden

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
