church.

The congregation streamed in, the choir followed; the doors between
the chapel and ante-chapel were shut, the curtains were dropped and
the service began.

There is no better musical service in England than that which Sunday
after Sunday is conducted at St. Hilda's Chapel at Kingsdene. The
harmony and the richness of the sounds which fill that old chapel can
scarcely be surpassed. The boys send up notes clear and sweet as
nightingales into the fretted arches of the roof; the men's deeper
notes swell the music until it breaks on the ears in a full tide of
perfect harmony; the great organ fills in the breaks and pauses. This
splendid service of song seems to reach perfection. In its way earth
cannot give anything more perfect.

Maggie Oliphant did not come very often to St. Hilda's. At one time
she was a constant worshiper there, but that was a year ago, before
something happened which changed her. Then Sunday after Sunday two
lovely girls used to walk up the aisle side by side. The verger knew
them and reserved their favorite stalls for them. They used to kneel
together and listen to the service, and, what is more, take part in
it.

But a time came when one of the girls could never return to St.
Hilda's and the other, people said, did not care to sit in the old
seat without her. They said she missed her friend and was more cut up
than any one else at the sudden death of one so fair and lovely.

When Maggie took her place in the old stall to-day more than one
person turned to look at her with interest.

Maggie always made a picturesque effect; she wore a large hat, with a
drooping plume of feathers; her dress was very rich and dark; her fair
face shone in the midst of these surroundings like an exquisite
flower.

The service went on. During the prayers Maggie wept, but, when a great
wave of song filled the vast building, she forgot all her sorrow; her
voice rose with the other singers, clear, sweet and high. Her soul
seemed to go up on her voice, for all the sadness left her face; her
eyes looked jubilant.

Prissie had never been in any place like St. Hilda's before. It had
been one of her dreams to go to the cathedral at Exeter, but year
after year this desire of hers had been put off and put off, and this
was the first time in her life that she had ever listened to cathedral
music. She was impressed, delighted, but not overpowered.

"The organ is magnificent," she said to herself, "but not grander than
the sea. The sea accompanies all the service at the dear little old
church at home."

People met and talked to one another in the green quadrangle outside
the chapel. Several other St. Benet girls had come to the afternoon
service. Among them was Miss Day and that fair, innocent-looking
little girl, Rosalind Merton.

Miss Day and Miss Merton were together. They were both stepping back
to join Maggie and Prissie, when a tall, dark young man came hastily
forward, bowed to Rosalind Merton, and, coming up to Maggie Oliphant,
shook hands with her.

"I saw you in chapel," he said. "Are you coming to the Marshall's to
tea?"

"I am. Let me introduce to you my friend, Miss Peel. Miss Peel, this
is Mr. Hammond."

Hammond raised his hat to Prissie, said a courteous word to her and
then turned to speak again to Maggie.

The three walked through the gates of the quadrangle and turned up the
narrow, picturesque High Street. It would soon be dusk; a wintry light
was over everything. Rosalind Merton and Miss Day followed behind.
Maggie, who was always absorbed with the present interest, did not
heed or notice them, but Priscilla heard one or two ill-bred giggles.

She turned her head with indignation and received scornful glances
from both girls. The four met for a moment at a certain corner. Maggie
said something to Annie Day and introduced Mr. Hammond to her. As she
did so, Rosalind took the opportunity to come up to Priscilla and
whisper to her:

"You're not wanted, you know. You had much better come home with us."

"What do you mean?" replied Prissie in her matter-of-fact voice. "Miss
Oliphant has asked me to go with her to the Marshalls'."

"Oh, well-- if you care to be in the----" resumed Rosalind.

Maggie suddenly flashed round on her.

"Come, Miss Peel, we'll be late," she said. "Goodby." She nodded to
Rosalind; her eyes were full of an angry fire; she took Prissie's hand
and hurried down the street.

The two girls walked away, still giggling; a deep color mantled
Maggie's cheeks. She turned and began to talk desperately to Mr.
Hammond. Her tone was flippant; her silvery laughter floated in the
air. Priscilla turned and gazed at her friend. She was seeing Maggie
in yet another aspect. She felt bewildered.

The three presently reached a pleasant house standing in its own
grounds. They were shown into a large drawing-room, full of young
people. Mrs. Marshall, a pretty old lady, with white hair, came
forward to receive them. Maggie was swept away amid fervent embraces
and handshakes to the other end of the room. Mrs. Marshall saw that
Priscilla looked frightened; she took her under her wing, sat down by
her on a sofa and began to talk.

Prissie answered in a sedate voice. Mrs. Marshall had a very gentle
manner. Prissie began to lose her shyness; she almost imagined that
she was back again with Aunt Raby.

"My dear, you will like us all very much," the old lady said. "No life
can be so absolutely delightful as that of a girl graduate at St.
Benet's. The freedom from care, the mixture of study with play, the
pleasant social life, all combine to make young women both healthy and
wise. Ah, my love, we leave out the middle of the old proverb. The
girls at St. Benet's are in that happy period of existence when they
need give no thought to money-making."

"Some are," said Prissie. She sighed and the color rushed into her
cheeks. Mrs. Marshall looked at her affectionately.

"Helen," she called to her granddaughter who was standing near, "bring
Miss Peel another cup of tea-- and some cake, Helen-- some of that
nice cake you made yesterday. Now, my love, I insist. You don't look
at all strong. You really must eat plenty."

Helen Marshall supplied Prissie's wants, was introduced to her, and,
standing near, joined in the talk.

"I am so glad you know Miss Oliphant," said Mrs. Marshall. "She will
make a delightful friend for you."

"And isn't she lovely?" said Helen Marshall. "I don't think I know any
one with such a beautiful face. You ought to be very proud to have her
as a friend. Aren't you very proud?"

"No," said Prissie, "I don't know that I am. I am not even sure that
she is my friend."

"Of course she is-- she wrote most affectionately of you to
grandmother. You can't think how nicely she spoke. We were glad, we
were delighted, because Maggie-- dear Maggie-- has had no great
friends lately. Now, if you have had your tea, Miss Peel, I'll take
you about the room and introduce you to one or two people."

Priscilla rose from her seat at once, and the two girls began to move
about the crowded drawing-room. Helen Marshall was very slight and
graceful; she piloted Prissie here and there without disturbing any
one's arrangements. At last the two girls found themselves in an
immense conservatory, which opened into the drawing-room at one end.

A great many of the guests were strolling about here. Priscilla's eyes
sparkled at the sight of the lovely flowers. She forgot herself and
made eager exclamations of ecstasy. Helen, who up to now had thought
her a dull sort of girl, began to take an interest in her.

"I'll take you into our fern-house, which is just beyond here," she
said. "We have got such exquisite maidenhairs and such a splendid
Killarney fern. Come; you shall see."

The fern-house seemed to be deserted. Helen opened the door first and
ran forward. Prissie followed. The fern-house was not large; they had
almost reached the end when a girl stood up suddenly and confronted
them. The girl was Maggie Oliphant. She was sitting there alone. Her
face was absolutely colorless and tears were lying wet on her
eyelashes.

Maggie made a swift remark, a passing jest, and hurried past the two
into the conservatory.

Priscilla could scarcely tell why, but at that moment she lost all
interest in both ferns and flowers. The look of misery on Maggie's
face seemed to strike her own heart like a chill.

"You look tired," said Helen Marshall, who had not noticed Maggie's
tearful eyes.

"Perhaps I am," answered Prissie.

They went back again into the drawing-room. Prissie still could see
nothing but Miss Oliphant's eyes and the look of distress on her pale
face.

Helen suddenly made a remark.

"Was there ever such a merry creature as Maggie?" she said. "Do look
at her now."

Prissie raised her eyes. Miss Oliphant was the center of a gay group,
among whom Geoffrey Hammond stood. Her laugh rang out clear and
joyous; her smile was like sunshine, her cheeks had roses in them and
her eyes were as bright as stars.

  CHAPTER XI

 CONSPIRATORS

ANNIE DAY and her friend Rosalind ceased to laugh as soon as they
turned the corner. Annie now turned her eyes and fixed them on
Rosalind, who blushed and looked uncomfortable.

"Well," said Annie, "you are a humbug, Rose! What a story you told me
about Mr. Hammond-- how he looked at you and was so anxious to make
use of you. Oh, you know all you said. You told me a charming story
about your position as gooseberry.' You expected a little fun for
yourself, didn't you, my friend? Well, it seems to me that if any one
is to have the fun, it is Priscilla Peel."

Rosalind had rather a nervous manner. She bit her lips now; her
baby-blue eyes looked angry, her innocent face wore a frown. She
dropped her hold of Annie Day's arm.

Miss Day was one of the most commonplace girls at Heath Hall. She had
neither good looks nor talent; she had no refinement of nature nor had
she those rugged but sterling qualities of honesty and integrity of
purpose which go far to cover a multitude of other defects.

"I wish you wouldn't speak to me in that way," said Rosalind with a
little gasp. "I hate people to laugh at me, and I can't stand sneers."

"Oh, no! you're such a dear little innocent baby. Of course, I can
quite understand. And does she suppose I'll ruffle her pretty little
feathers? No, not I. I'd rather invent a new cradle song for you,
Rosie, dear."

"Don't, don't!" said Rosalind. "Look here, Annie, I must say
something-- yes, I must. I hate Maggie Oliphant!"

"You hate Miss Oliphant?" Annie Day stood still, turned round and
stared at her companion. "When did this revolution take place, my
dear? What about Rose and Maggie sitting side by side at dinner? And
Rose creeping away all by herself to Maggie's room and angling for an
invitation to cocoa, and trying hard, very hard, to become a member of
the Dramatic Society, just because Maggie acts so splendidly. Has it
not been Maggie-- Maggie-- ever since the term began, until we girls,
who were not in love with this quite too charming piece of perfection,
absolutely hated the sound of her name? Oh, Rose, what a fickle baby
you are. I am ashamed of you!"

"Don't!" said Rose again. She linked her hand half timidly in Miss
Day's arm. Miss Day was almost a head and shoulders above the little,
delicate, fairy-like creature. "I suppose I can't help changing my
mind," she said. "I did love Maggie, of course I loved her-- she
fascinated me; but I don't care for her-- no, I hate her now!"

"How vehemently you pronounce that naughty word, my fair Rosalind. You
must give me some reasons for this grievous change in your feelings."

"She snubbed me," said Rosalind; "she made little of me. I offered to
do her a kindness and she repulsed me. Who cares to be made little of
and repulsed?"

Who, truly, Rosie?-- not even an innocent baby. Now then, my love, let
me whisper a little secret to you. I have never loved Miss Oliphant. I
have never been a victim to her charms. Time was when she and Miss
Lee-- poor Annabel!-- ruled the whole of our hall. Those two girls
carried everything before them. That was before your day, Rose. Then
Miss Lee died. She caught a chill, and had a fever, and was dead in a
couple of days. Yes, of course, it was shocking. They moved her to the
hospital, and she died there. Oh, there was such excitement, and such
grief-- even I was sorry; for Annabel had a way about her, I can't
describe it, but she could fascinate you. It was awfully interesting
to talk to her, and even to look at her was a pleasure. We usedn't to
think much about Maggie when Annabel was by; but now, what with Maggie
and her mystery, and Maggie and her love affair, and Maggie and her
handsome face, and her wealth, and her expectations, why she bids fair
to be more popular even than the two were when they were together.
Yes, little Rose, I don't want her to be popular any more than you do.
I think it's a very unhealthy sign of any place to have all the girls
sighing and groaning about one or two-- dying to possess their
autographs, and kissing their photographs, and framing them, and
putting them up in their rooms. I hate that mawkish kind of nonsense,"
continued Miss Day, looking very virtuous, "and I think Miss Heath
ought to know about it, and put a stop to it. I do, really."

Rosalind was glad that the gathering darkness prevented her sharp
companion from seeing the blush on her face, for among her own sacred
possessions she kept an autograph letter of Maggie's, and she had
passionately kissed Maggie's beautiful face as it looked at her out of
a photograph, and, until the moment when all her feelings had
undergone such a change, was secretly saving up her pence to buy a
frame for it. Now she inquired eagerly:

"What is the mystery about Miss Oliphant? So many people hint about
it, I do wish you would tell me, Annie."

"If I told you, pet, it would cease to be a mystery."

"But you might say what you know. Do, Annie!"

"Oh, it isn't much-- it's really nothing; and yet-- and yet--"

"You know it isn't nothing, Annie!"

"Well, when Annabel died, people said that Maggie had more cause than
any one else to be sorry. I never could find out what that cause was;
but the servants spread some reports. They said they had found Maggie
and Annabel together; Annabel had fainted; and Maggie was in an awful
state of misery-- in quite an unnatural state, they said; she went
into hysterics, and Miss Heath was sent for, and was a long time
soothing her. There was no apparent reason for this, although, somehow
or other, little whispers got abroad that the mystery of Annabel's
illness and Maggie's distress was connected with Geoffrey Hammond. Of
course, nothing was known, and nothing is known; but, certainly, the
little whisper got into the air. Dear me, Rosalind, you need not eat
me with your eyes. I am repeating mere conjectures, and it is highly
probable that not the slightest notice would have been taken of this
little rumor but for the tragedy which immediately followed. Annabel,
