
As soon as Jip awoke he ran upstairs and poked his nose in the air.
Then he got most frightfully excited and rushed down again to wake the
Doctor up.

"Doctor!" he cried.  "I've got it!  Doctor! Doctor!  Wake up!  Listen!
I've got it! The wind's from the West and it smells of nothing but
snuff.  Come upstairs and start the ship--quick!"

So the Doctor tumbled out of bed and went to the rudder to steer the
ship.

"Now I'll go up to the front," said Jip; "and you watch my
nose--whichever way I point it, you turn the ship the same way.  The
man cannot be far off--with the smell as strong as this.  And the
wind's all lovely and wet.  Now watch me!"

So all that morning Jip stood in the front part of the ship, sniffing
the wind and pointing the way for the Doctor to steer; while all the
animals and the little boy stood round with their eyes wide open,
watching the dog in wonder.

About lunch-time Jip asked Dab-Dab to tell the Doctor that he was
getting worried and wanted to speak to him.  So Dab-Dab went and
fetched the Doctor from the other end of the ship and Jip said to him,

"The boy's uncle is starving.  We must make the ship go as fast as we
can."

"How do you know he is starving?" asked the Doctor.

"Because there is no other smell in the West wind but snuff," said Jip.
"If the man were cooking or eating food of any kind, I would be bound
to smell it too.  But he hasn't even fresh water to drink.  All he is
taking is snuff--in large pinches.  We are getting nearer to him all
the time, because the smell grows stronger every minute.  But make the
ship go as fast as you can, for I am certain that the man is starving."

"All right," said the Doctor; and he sent Dab-Dab to ask the swallows
to pull the ship, the same as they had done when the pirates were
chasing them.

So the stout little birds came down and once more harnessed themselves
to the ship.

And now the boat went bounding through the waves at a terrible speed.
It went so fast that the fishes in the sea had to jump for their lives
to get out of the way and not be run over.

And all the animals got tremendously excited; and they gave up looking
at Jip and turned to watch the sea in front, to spy out any land or
islands where the starving man might be.

But hour after hour went by and still the ship went rushing on, over
the same flat, flat sea; and no land anywhere came in sight.

And now the animals gave up chattering and sat around silent, anxious
and miserable.  The little boy again grew sad.  And on Jip's face there
was a worried look.

At last, late in the afternoon, just as the sun was going down, the
owl, Too-Too, who was perched on the tip of the mast, suddenly startled
them all by crying out at the top of his voice,

"Jip!  Jip!  I see a great, great rock in front of us--look--way out
there where the sky and the water meet.  See the sun shine on it--like
gold!  Is the smell coming from there?"

And Jip called back,

"Yes.  That's it.  That is where the man is.--  At last, at last!"

And when they got nearer they could see that the rock was very
large--as large as a big field. No trees grew on it, no grass--nothing.
The great rock was as smooth and as bare as the back of a tortoise.

Then the Doctor sailed the ship right round the rock.  But nowhere on
it could a man be seen.  All the animals screwed up their eyes and
looked as hard as they could; and John Dolittle got a telescope from
downstairs.

But not one living thing could they spy--not even a gull, nor a
star-fish, nor a shred of sea-weed.

They all stood still and listened, straining their ears for any sound.
But the only noise they heard was the gentle lapping of the little
waves against the sides of their ship.

Then they all started calling, "Hulloa, there!--HULLOA!" till their
voices were hoarse. But only the echo came back from the rock.

And the little boy burst into tears and said,

"I am afraid I shall never see my uncle any more!  What shall I tell
them when I get home!"

But Jip called to the Doctor,

"He must be there--he must--HE MUST! The smell goes on no further.  He
must be there, I tell you!  Sail the ship close to the rock and let me
jump out on it."

So the Doctor brought the ship as close as he could and let down the
anchor.  Then he and Jip got out of the ship on to the rock.

Jip at once put his nose down close to the ground and began to run all
over the place.  Up and down he went, back and forth--zig-zagging,
twisting, doubling and turning.  And everywhere he went, the Doctor ran
behind him, close at his heels--till he was terribly out of breath.

At last Jip let out a great bark and sat down. And when the Doctor came
running up to him, he found the dog staring into a big, deep hole in
the middle of the rock.

"The boy's uncle is down there," said Jip quietly.  "No wonder those
silly eagles couldn't see him!--It takes a dog to find a man."

So the Doctor got down into the hole, which seemed to be a kind of
cave, or tunnel, running a long way under the ground.  Then he struck a
match and started to make his way along the dark passage with Jip
following behind.

The Doctor's match soon went out; and he had to strike another and
another and another.

At last the passage came to an end; and the Doctor found himself in a
kind of tiny room with walls of rock.

And there, in the middle of the room, his head resting on his arms, lay
a man with very red hair--fast asleep!

Jip went up and sniffed at something lying on the ground beside him.
The Doctor stooped and picked it up.  It was an enormous snuff-box. And
it was full of Black Rappee!




THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER

THE FISHERMAN'S TOWN

GENTLY then--very gently, the Doctor woke the man up.

But just at that moment the match went out again. And the man thought
it was Ben Ali coming back, and he began to punch the Doctor in the
dark.

But when John Dolittle told him who it was, and that he had his little
nephew safe on his ship, the man was tremendously glad, and said he was
sorry he had fought the Doctor.  He had not hurt him much
though--because it was too dark to punch properly.  Then he gave the
Doctor a pinch of snuff.

And the man told how the Barbary Dragon had put him on to this rock and
left him there, when he wouldn't promise to become a pirate; and how he
used to sleep down in this hole because there was no house on the rock
to keep him warm.

And then he said,

"For four days I have had nothing to eat or drink.  I have lived on
snuff."

"There you are!" said Jip.  "What did I tell you?"

So they struck some more matches and made their way out through the
passage into the daylight; and the Doctor hurried the man down to the
boat to get some soup.

When the animals and the little boy saw the Doctor and Jip coming back
to the ship with a red-headed man, they began to cheer and yell and
dance about the boat.  And the swallows up above started whistling at
the top of their voices--thousands and millions of them--to show that
they too were glad that the boy's brave uncle had been found.  The
noise they made was so great that sailors far out at sea thought that a
terrible storm was coming.  "Hark to that gale howling in the East!"
they said.

And Jip was awfully proud of himself--though he tried hard not to look
conceited. When Dab-Dab came to him and said, "Jip, I had no idea you
were so clever!" he just tossed his head and answered,

"Oh, that's nothing special.  But it takes a dog to find a man, you
know.  Birds are no good for a game like that."

Then the Doctor asked the red-haired fisherman where his home was.  And
when he had told him, the Doctor asked the swallows to guide the ship
there first.

And when they had come to the land which the man had spoken of, they
saw a little fishing-town at the foot of a rocky mountain; and the man
pointed out the house where he lived.

And while they were letting down the anchor, the little boy's mother
(who was also the man's sister) came running down to the shore to meet
them, laughing and crying at the same time. She had been sitting on a
hill for twenty days, watching the sea and waiting for them to return.

And she kissed the Doctor many times, so that he giggled and blushed
like a school-girl.  And she tried to kiss Jip too; but he ran away and
hid inside the ship.

"It's a silly business, this kissing," he said. "I don't hold by it.
Let her go and kiss Gub-Gub--if she MUST kiss something."

The fisherman and his sister didn't want the Doctor to go away again in
a hurry.  They begged him to spend a few days with them.  So John
Dolittle and his animals had to stay at their house a whole Saturday
and Sunday and half of Monday.

And all the little boys of the fishing-village went down to the beach
and pointed at the great ship anchored there, and said to one another
in whispers,

"Look!  That was a pirate-ship--Ben Ali's--the most terrible pirate
that ever sailed the Seven Seas!  That old gentleman with the high hat,
who's staying up at Mrs. Trevelyan's, HE took the ship away from The
Barbary Dragon--and made him into a farmer.  Who'd have thought it of
him--him so gentle--like and all!... Look at the great red sails!
Ain't she the wicked-looking ship--and fast?--My!"

All those two days and a half that the Doctor stayed at the little
fishing-town the people kept asking him out to teas and luncheons and
dinners and parties; all the ladies sent him boxes of flowers and
candies; and the village-band played tunes under his window every night.

At last the Doctor said,

"Good people, I must go home now.  You have really been most kind.  I
shall always remember it.  But I must go home--for I have things to do."

Then, just as the Doctor was about to leave, the Mayor of the town came
down the street and a lot of other people in grand clothes with him.
And the Mayor stopped before the house where the Doctor was living; and
everybody in the village gathered round to see what was going to happen.

After six page-boys had blown on shining trumpets to make the people
stop talking, the Doctor came out on to the steps and the Mayor spoke.

"Doctor John Dolittle," said he: "It is a great pleasure for me to
present to the man who rid the seas of the Dragon of Barbary this
little token from the grateful people of our worthy Town."

And the Mayor took from his pocket a little tissue-paper packet, and
opening it, he handed to the Doctor a perfectly beautiful watch with
real diamonds in the back.

Then the Mayor pulled out of his pocket a still larger parcel and said,

"Where is the dog?"

Then everybody started to hunt for Jip.  And at last Dab-Dab found him
on the other side of the village in a stable-yard, where all the dogs
of the country-side were standing round him speechless with admiration
and respect.

When Jip was brought to the Doctor's side, the Mayor opened the larger
parcel; and inside was a dog-collar made of solid gold!  And a great
murmur of wonder went up from the village-folk as the Mayor bent down
and fastened it round the dog's neck with his own hands.

For written on the collar in big letters were these words: "JIP-THE
CLEVEREST DOG IN THE WORLD."

Then the whole crowd moved down to the beach to see them off.  And
after the red-haired fisherman and his sister and the little boy had
thanked the Doctor and his dog over and over and over again, the great,
swift ship with the red sails was turned once more towards Puddleby and
they sailed out to sea, while the village-band played music on the
shore.



THE LAST CHAPTER

HOME AGAIN

MARCH winds had come and gone; April's showers were over; May's buds
had opened into flower; and the June sun was shining on the pleasant
fields, when John Dolittle at last got back to his own country.

But he did not yet go home to Puddleby. First he went traveling through
the land with the pushmi-pullyu in a gipsy-wagon, stopping at all the
country-fairs.  And there, with the acrobats on one side of them and
the Punch-and-Judy show on the other, they would hang out a big sign
which read, "COME AND SEE THE MARVELOUS TWO-HEADED ANIMAL FROM THE
JUNGLES OF AFRICA.  Admission SIXPENCE."

And the pushmi-pullyu would stay inside the wagon, while the other
animals would lie about underneath.  The Doctor sat in a chair in front
taking the sixpences and smiling on the people as they went in; and
Dab-Dab was kept busy all the time scolding him because he would let
the children in for nothing when she wasn't looking.

And menagerie-keepers and circus-men came and asked the Doctor to sell
them the strange creature, saying they would pay a tremendous lot of
money for him.  But the Doctor always shook his head and said.

"No.  The pushmi-pullyu shall never be shut up in a cage.  He shall be
free always to come and go, like you and me."

Many curious sights and happenings they saw in this wandering life; but
they all seemed quite ordinary after the great things they had seen and
done in foreign lands.  It was very interesting at first, being sort of
part of a circus; but after a few weeks they all got dreadfully tired
of it and the Doctor and all of them were longing to go home.

But so many people came flocking to the little wagon and paid the
sixpence to go inside and see the pushmi-pullyu that very soon the
Doctor was able to give up being a showman.

And one fine day, when the hollyhocks were in full bloom, he came back
to Puddleby a rich man, to live in the little house with the big garden.

And the old lame horse in the stable was glad to see him; and so were
the swallows who had already built their nests under the eaves of his
roof and had young ones.  And Dab-Dab was glad, too, to get back to the
house she knew so well--although there was a terrible lot of dusting to
be done, with cobwebs everywhere.

And after Jip had gone and shown his golden collar to the conceited
collie next-door, he came back and began running round the garden like
a crazy thing, looking for the bones he had buried long ago, and
chasing the rats out of the tool-shed; while Gub-Gub dug up the
horseradish which had grown three feet high in the corner by the
garden-wall.

And the Doctor went and saw the sailor who had lent him the boat, and
he bought two new ships for him and a rubber-doll for his baby; and he
paid the grocer for the food he had lent him for the journey to Africa.
And he bought another piano and put the white mice back in it--because
they said the bureau-drawer was drafty.

Even when the Doctor had filled the old money-box on the dresser-shelf,
he still had a lot of money left; and he had to get three more
money-boxes, just as big, to put the rest in.

"Money," he said, "is a terrible nuisance. But it's nice not to have to
worry."

"Yes," said Dab-Dab, who was toasting muffins for his tea, "it is
indeed!"

And when the Winter came again, and the snow flew against the
kitchen-window, the Doctor and his animals would sit round the big,
warm fire after supper; and he would read aloud to them out of his
books.

But far away in Africa, where the monkeys chattered in the palm-trees
before they went to bed under the big yellow moon, they would say to
one another,

"I wonder what The Good Man's doing now--over there, in the Land of the
White Men! Do you think he ever will come back?"

And Polynesia would squeak out from the vines,

"I think he will--I guess he will--I hope he will!"

And then the crocodile would grunt up at them from the black mud of the
river,
