
In the meantime Joe had sold his boat. With all of his money in his
pocket he called at the Talmadge house to see if Ned had returned from
the trip to the west.

"Just got back yesterday," said Ned, who came to greet him. "Had a
glorious trip. I wish you had been along. I like traveling better than
staying at home all the time."

"I am going to do a bit of traveling myself, Ned."

"Where are you going?"

"To Philadelphia--to try my luck in that city."

"Going to leave Mr. Mallison?"

"Yes,--the season is at an end."

"Oh, I see. So you are going to the Quaker City, as pa calls it. I wish
you luck. You'll have to write to me, Joe, and let me know how you are
getting along."

"I will,--and you must write to me."

"Of course."

On the following day Joe rowed along the lake to where his old home dock
had been located and made a trip to what was left of the cabin. He spent
another hour in hunting for the blue box, but without success.

"I suppose I'll never find that box," he sighed. "I may as well give up
thinking about it."

From Andrew Mallison our hero had obtained his letter of recommendation
and also a good pocket map of Philadelphia. The hotel man had also
made him a present of a neat suit case, in which he packed his few
belongings.

Ned Talmadge came to see him off at the depot. The day was cool and
clear, and Joe felt in excellent spirits.

Soon the train came along and our hero got aboard, along with a dozen
or fifteen others. He waved a hand to Ned and his friend shouted out
a good-bye. Then the train moved on, and the town was soon left in the
distance.

The car that Joe had entered was not more than quarter filled and he
easily found a seat for himself by a window. He placed his suit case at
his feet and then gave himself up to looking at the scenery as it rushed
past.

Joe had never spent much of his time on the railroad, so the long ride
had much of novelty in it. The scenery was grand, as they wound in and
out among the hills and mountains, or crossed brooks and rivers and
well-kept farms. Numerous stops were made, and long before Philadelphia
was gained the train became crowded.

"Nice day for riding," said a man who sat down beside our hero. He
looked to be what he was, a prosperous farmer.

"It is," answered Joe.

"Goin' to Philadelphy, I reckon," went on the farmer.

"Yes, sir."

"That's where I'm going, too. Got a little business to attend to."

"I am going there to try my luck," said Joe, he felt he could talk to
the old man with confidence.

"Goin' to look fer a job, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

"Wot kin ye do, if I might ask?"

"Oh, I'm willing to do most anything. I've been taking care of rowboats
and working around a summer hotel, at Lake Tandy."

"Well, ye won't git many boats to look at down to Philadelphy!" and the
old farmer chuckled.

"I suppose not. Maybe I'll strike a job at one of the hotels."

"Perhaps. They tell me some hotels down there is monsterous--ten an'
twelve stories high. Ye don't catch me goin' to no sech place. In case
o' fire, it's all up with ye, if you're on the twelfth story."

"Are you going to Philadelphia to stay, Mr.----"

"Bean is my name--Josiah Bean. I'm from Haydown Center, I am. Got a farm
there o' a hundred acres."

"Oh, is that so!"

"Wot's your handle, young man?"

"My name is Joe Bodley. I came from Riverside."

"Proud to know you." And Josiah Bean shook hands. "No, I ain't going
to stay in Philadelphy. I'm a-going on business fer my wife. A relative
left her some property an' I'm a-goin' to collect on it."

"That's a pleasant trip to be on," was our hero's comment.

"I'll feel better when I have the six hundred dollars in my fist. I'm
afraid it ain't goin' to be no easy matter to git it."

"What's the trouble!"

"I ain't known in Philadelphy an' they tell me a feller has got to be
identified or somethin' like thet--somebody has got to speak for ye wot
knows ye."

"I see. Perhaps you'll meet some friend."

"Thet's wot I'm hopin' fer."

The train rolled on and presently Joe got out his map and began to study
it, so that he might know something of the great city when he arrived
there.

"Guess I'll git a drink o' water," said Josiah Bean, and walked to the
end of the car to do so. Immediately a slick looking man who had been
seated behind the farmer arose and followed him.



CHAPTER XIV.


A SCENE ON THE TRAIN.


The slick-looking individual had listened attentively to all that passed
between our hero and the farmer.

He waited until the latter had procured his drink of water and then
rushed up with a smile on his face.

"I declare!" he exclaimed. "How do you do?" And he extended his hand.

"How do you do?" repeated the farmer, shaking hands slowly. He felt much
perplexed, for he could not remember having met the other man before.

"How are matters up on the farm?" went on the stranger.

"Thank you, very good."

"I--er--I don't think you remember me, Mr. Bean," went on the
slick-looking individual.

"Well, somehow I think I know your face," answered the old farmer,
lamely. He did not wish to appear wanting in politeness.

"You ought to remember me. I spent some time in Haydown Center year
before last, selling machines."

"Oh, you had them patent reapers, is that it?"

"You've struck it."

"I remember you now. You're a nephew of Judge Davis."

"Exactly."

"O' course! O' course! But I can't remember your name nohow."

"It's Davis, too--Henry Davis."

"Oh, yes. I'm glad to meet you, Mr. Davis."

"I saw you in the seat with that boy," went on the man we shall call
Henry Davis. "I thought I knew you from the start, but I wasn't dead
sure. Going to Philadelphia with us?"

"Yes, sir."

"Good enough. Mr. Bean, won't you smoke with me? I was just going into
the smoker."

"Thanks, but I--er--I don't smoke much."

"Just one mild cigar. That won't hurt you, I'm sure. I love to meet old
friends," continued Henry Davis.

In the end the old farmer was persuaded to walk into the smoking car and
here the slick-looking individual found a corner seat where they would
be undisturbed.

"I expect to spend a week or more in Philadelphia, Mr. Bean," said the
stranger; "if I can be of service to you during that time, command me."

"Well, perhaps ye can be of service to me. Do ye know many folks in the
city?"

"Oh, yes, a great many. Some are business friends and some are folks in
high society."

"I don't care for no high society. But I've got to collect six hundred
dollars an' I want somebody to identify me."

"Oh, I can do that easily, Mr. Bean."

"Kin ye?" The farmer grew interested at once. "If ye kin I'll be much
obliged to ye."

"Where must you be identified?"

"Down to the office of Barwell & Cameron, on Broad street. Do ye know
'em?"

"I know of them, and I can find somebody who does know them, so there
will not be the least trouble."

"It's a load off my mind," said Josiah Bean, with a sigh. "Ye see, the
money is comin' to my wife. She writ to 'em that I was comin' to collect
an' they writ back it would be all right, only I would have to be
identified. Jest as if everybody in Haydown Center don't know I'm Josiah
Bean an' a piller in the Union Church down there, an' a cousin to Jedge
Bean o' Lassindale."

"Well, they have to be mighty particular when they pay out any money in
the city. There are so many sharpers around."

"I ain't no sharper."

"To be sure you are not, and neither am I. But I once had trouble
getting money."

"Is thet so?"

"Yes. But after I proved who I was the folks were pretty well ashamed of
themselves," went on Henry Davis, smoothly.

So the talk ran on and at the end of half an hour the old farmer and the
slick-looking individual were on exceedingly friendly terms. Henry
Davis asked much about the old man and gathered in a good stock of
information.

When Philadelphia was gained it was dark, and coming out of the big
railroad station Joe at first knew not which way to turn. The noise and
the crowd of people confused him.

"Have a cab? Carriage?" bawled the hackmen.

"Paper!" yelled a newsboy. "All the evenin' papers!"

"Smash yer baggage!" called out a luggage boy, not near as tall as our
hero.

Looking ahead, Joe saw Josiah Bean and the slick-looking individual
moving down the street and without realizing it, our hero began to
follow the pair.

"He must be some friend," said our hero to himself.

He wondered where they were going and his curiosity getting the better
of him he continued to follow them for half a dozen blocks. At last they
came to a halt in front of a building displaying the sign:

JOHNSON'S QUAKER HOTEL

MODERATE TERMS FOR ALL.

"This hotel is all right and the prices are right, too," Joe heard the
slick-looking man tell the old farmer.

"Then thet suits me," answered Josiah Bean. "I'll go in an' git a room
fer the night."

"I think I might as well do the same," said Henry Davis. "I don't care
to go away over to my boarding house at Fairmount Park."

The pair walked into the hotel, and Joe saw them register and pass down
the corridor in the company of a bell boy. Then our hero entered the
place.

"Can I get a room here for the night?" he asked of the clerk behind the
desk.

"Certainly."

"What is the charge?"

"Seventy-five cents."

"That suits me."

The register was shoved forward and Joe wrote down his name. Then he
was shown to a small room on the third floor. The building was but four
stories high.

Joe was tired and soon went to bed. In the next room he heard a murmur
of voices and made out that the old farmer and his friend were talking
earnestly.

"They must be very friendly," was his comment, and thinking the matter
over he fell asleep.

Bright and early in the morning our hero arose, dressed himself, and
went below. He had breakfast in the restaurant attached to the hotel
and was just finishing up when the old farmer and the slick-looking
individual came in.

"Hullo!" cried Josiah Bean. "What are you doin' here?"

"I got a room overnight," answered our hero.

"We're stopping here, too. This is my friend, Mr. Henry Davis."

"Good morning," said the slick-looking man. He did not seem to fancy
meeting Joe.

They sat down close at hand and, while eating, the farmer asked Joe half
a dozen questions.

He spoke about his own business until Henry Davis nudged him in the
side.

"I wouldn't tell that boy too much," he said in a low tone.

"Oh, he's all right," answered the old farmer.

Joe heard the slick-looking individual's words and they made his face
burn. He looked at the man narrowly and made up his mind he was not a
fellow to be desired for an acquaintance.

Having finished, our hero paid his bill and left the restaurant.
He scarcely knew which way to turn, but resolved to look over the
newspapers first and see if any positions were offered.

While in the reading room he saw Josiah Bean and his acquaintance leave
the hotel and walk in the direction of Broad street.

A little later Joe took from the paper he was reading the addresses of
several people who wanted help, and then he, too, left the hotel.

The first place he called at was a florist's establishment, but the pay
was so small he declined the position.

"I could not live on three dollars per week," he said.

"That is all we care to pay," answered the proprietor, coldly. "It is
more than other establishments pay."

"Then I pity those who work at the other places," returned Joe, and
walked out.



CHAPTER XV.


WHAT HAPPENED TO JOSIAH BEAN.


In the meantime Josiah Bean and the slick-looking individual turned into
Broad street and made their way to a certain establishment known as the
Eagle's Club.

Here Henry Davis called another man aside.

"Say, Foxy, do you know anybody down to Barwell & Cameron's?" he asked,
in a low tone, so that the old farmer could not hear.

"Yes--a clerk named Chase."

"Then come down and introduce me."

"What's the game?"

"Never mind--there's a tenner in it for you if it works."
