
We looked at her with a slightly incredulous awe. To us, in those years,
Europe seemed almost as remote and unreachable as the moon. It was
hard to believe that one of US should ever go there. But Aunt Julia had
gone--and SHE had been brought up in Carlisle on this very farm. So it
was possible that the Story Girl might go too.

"What will you do there?" asked Peter practically.

"I shall learn how to tell stories to all the world," said the Story
Girl dreamily.

It was a lovely, golden-brown evening; the orchard, and the farm-lands
beyond, were full of ruby lights and kissing shadows. Over in the east,
above the Awkward Man's house, the Wedding Veil of the Proud Princess
floated across the sky, presently turning as rosy as if bedewed with her
heart's blood. We sat there and talked until the first star lighted a
white taper over the beech hill.

Then I remembered that I had forgotten to take my dose of magic seed,
and I hastened to do it, although I was beginning to lose faith in it. I
had not grown a single bit, by the merciless testimony of the hall door.

I took the box of seed out of my trunk in the twilit room and swallowed
the decreed pinch. As I did so, Dan's voice rang out behind me.

"Beverley King, what have you got there?"

I thrust the box hastily into my trunk and confronted Dan.

"None of your business," I said defiantly.

"Yes, 'tis." Dan was too much in earnest to resent my blunt speech.
"Look here, Bev, is that magic seed? And did you get it from Billy
Robinson?"

Dan and I looked at each other, suspicion dawning in our eyes.

"What do you know about Billy Robinson and his magic seed?" I demanded.

"Just this. I bought a box from him for--for--something. He said he
wasn't going to sell any of it to anybody else. Did he sell any to you?"

"Yes, he did," I said in disgust--for I was beginning to understand that
Billy and his magic seed were arrant frauds.

"What for? YOUR mouth is a decent size," said Dan.

"Mouth? It had nothing to do with my mouth! He said it would make me
grow tall. And it hasn't--not an inch! I don't see what you wanted it
for! You are tall enough."

"I got it for my mouth," said Dan with a shame-faced grin. "The girls in
school laugh at it so. Kate Marr says it's like a gash in a pie. Billy
said that seed would shrink it for sure."

Well, there it was! Billy had deceived us both. Nor were we the only
victims. We did not find the whole story out at once. Indeed, the summer
was almost over before, in one way or another, the full measure of that
shameless Billy Robinson's iniquity was revealed to us. But I shall
anticipate the successive relations in this chapter. Every pupil of
Carlisle school, so it eventually appeared, had bought magic seed, under
solemn promise of secrecy. Felix had believed blissfully that it would
make him thin. Cecily's hair was to become naturally curly, and Sara Ray
was not to be afraid of Peg Bowen any more. It was to make Felicity as
clever as the Story Girl and it was to make the Story Girl as good a
cook as Felicity. What Peter had bought magic seed for remained a secret
longer than any of the others. Finally--it was the night before what we
expected would be the Judgment Day--he confessed to me that he had taken
it to make Felicity fond of him. Skilfully indeed had that astute Billy
played on our respective weaknesses.

The keenest edge to our humiliation was given by the discovery that
the magic seed was nothing more or less than caraway, which grew in
abundance at Billy Robinson's uncle's in Markdale. Peg Bowen had had
nothing to do with it.

Well, we had all been badly hoaxed. But we did not trumpet our wrongs
abroad. We did not even call Billy to account. We thought that least
said was soonest mended in such a matter. We went very softly indeed,
lest the grown-ups, especially that terrible Uncle Roger, should hear of
it.

"We should have known better than to trust Billy Robinson," said
Felicity, summing up the case one evening when all had been made known.
"After all, what could you expect from a pig but a grunt?"

We were not surprised to find that Billy Robinson's contribution to the
library fund was the largest handed in by any of the scholars. Cecily
said she didn't envy him his conscience. But I am afraid she measured
his conscience by her own. I doubt very much if Billy's troubled him at
all.



CHAPTER X. A DAUGHTER OF EVE

"I hate the thought of growing up," said the Story Girl reflectively,
"because I can never go barefooted then, and nobody will ever see what
beautiful feet I have."

She was sitting, the July sunlight, on the ledge of the open hayloft
window in Uncle Roger's big barn; and the bare feet below her print
skirt WERE beautiful. They were slender and shapely and satin smooth
with arched insteps, the daintiest of toes, and nails like pink shells.

We were all in the hayloft. The Story Girl had been telling us a tale

    "Of old, unhappy, far-off things,
    And battles long ago."

Felicity and Cecily were curled up in a corner, and we boys sprawled
idly on the fragrant, sun-warm heaps. We had "stowed" the hay in the
loft that morning for Uncle Roger, so we felt that we had earned the
right to loll on our sweet-smelling couch. Haylofts are delicious
places, with just enough of shadow and soft, uncertain noises to give
an agreeable tang of mystery. The swallows flew in and out of their nest
above our heads, and whenever a sunbeam fell through a chink the air
swarmed with golden dust. Outside of the loft was a vast, sunshiny gulf
of blue sky and mellow air, wherein floated argosies of fluffy cloud,
and airy tops of maple and spruce.

Pat was with us, of course, prowling about stealthily, or making
frantic, bootless leaps at the swallows. A cat in a hayloft is a
beautiful example of the eternal fitness of things. We had not heard of
this fitness then, but we all felt that Paddy was in his own place in a
hayloft.

"I think it is very vain to talk about anything you have yourself being
beautiful," said Felicity.

"I am not a bit vain," said the Story Girl, with entire truthfulness.
"It is not vanity to know your own good points. It would just be
stupidity if you didn't. It's only vanity when you get puffed up about
them. I am not a bit pretty. My only good points are my hair and eyes
and feet. So I think it's real mean that one of them has to be covered
up the most of the time. I'm always glad when it gets warm enough to go
barefooted. But, when I grow up they'll have to covered all the time. It
IS mean."

"You'll have to put your shoes and stockings on when you go to the magic
lantern show to-night," said Felicity in a tone of satisfaction.

"I don't know that. I'm thinking of going barefooted."

"Oh, you wouldn't! Sara Stanley, you're not in earnest!" exclaimed
Felicity, her blue eyes filling with horror.

The Story Girl winked with the side of her face next to Felix and me,
but the side next the girls changed not a muscle. She dearly loved to
"take a rise" out of Felicity now and then.

"Indeed, I would if I just made up my mind to. Why not? Why not bare
feet--if they're clean--as well as bare hands and face?"

"Oh, you wouldn't! It would be such a disgrace!" said poor Felicity in
real distress.

"We went to school barefooted all June," argued that wicked Story Girl.
"What is the difference between going to the schoolhouse barefooted in
the daytime and going in the evening?"

"Oh, there's EVERY difference. I can't just explain it--but every one
KNOWS there is a difference. You know it yourself. Oh, PLEASE, don't do
such a thing, Sara."

"Well, I won't, just to oblige you," said the Story Girl, who would
have died the death before she would have gone to a "public meeting"
barefooted.

We were all rather excited over the magic lantern show which an
itinerant lecturer was to give in the schoolhouse that evening. Even
Felix and I, who had seen such shows galore, were interested, and the
rest were quite wild. There had never been such a thing in Carlisle
before. We were all going, Peter included. Peter went everywhere with us
now. He was a regular attendant at church and Sunday School, where his
behaviour was as irreproachable as if he had been "raised" in the caste
of Vere de Vere. It was a feather in the Story Girl's cap, for she took
all the credit of having started Peter on the right road. Felicity was
resigned, although the fatal patch on Peter's best trousers was still
an eyesore to her. She declared she never got any good of the singing,
because Peter stood up then and every one could see the patch. Mrs.
James Clark, whose pew was behind ours, never took her eye off it--or so
Felicity averred.

But Peter's stockings were always darned. Aunt Olivia had seen to that,
ever since she heard of Peter's singular device regarding them on his
first Sunday. She had also given Peter a Bible, of which he was so proud
that he hated to use it lest he should soil it.

"I think I'll wrap it up and keep it in my box," he said. "I've an old
Bible of Aunt Jane's at home that I can use. I s'pose it's just the
same, even if it is old, isn't it?"

"Oh, yes," Cecily had assured him. "The Bible is always the same."

"I thought maybe they'd got some new improvements on it since Aunt
Jane's day," said Peter, relieved.

"Sara Ray is coming along the lane, and she's crying," announced Dan,
who was peering out of a knot-hole on the opposite side of the loft.

"Sara Ray is crying half her time," said Cecily impatiently. "I'm sure
she cries a quartful of tears a month. There are times when you can't
help crying. But I hide then. Sara just goes and cries in public."

The lachrymose Sara presently joined us and we discovered the cause of
her tears to be the doleful fact that her mother had forbidden her to
go to the magic lantern show that night. We all showed the sympathy we
felt.

"She SAID yesterday you could go," said the Story Girl indignantly. "Why
has she changed her mind?"

"Because of the measles in Markdale," sobbed Sara. "She says Markdale is
full of them, and there'll be sure to be some of the Markdale people at
the show. So I'm not to go. And I've never seen a magic lantern--I've
never seen ANYTHING."

"I don't believe there's any danger of catching measles," said Felicity.
"If there was we wouldn't be allowed to go."

"I wish I COULD get the measles," said Sara defiantly. "Maybe I'd be of
some importance to ma then."

"Suppose Cecily goes down with you and coaxes your mother," suggested
the Story Girl. "Perhaps she'd let you go then. She likes Cecily. She
doesn't like either Felicity or me, so it would only make matters worse
for us to try."

"Ma's gone to town--pa and her went this afternoon--and they're not
coming back till to-morrow. There's nobody home but Judy Pineau and me."

"Then," said the Story Girl, "why don't you just go to the show anyhow?
Your mother won't ever know, if you coax Judy to hold her tongue."

"Oh, but that's wrong," said Felicity. "You shouldn't put Sara up to
disobeying her mother."

Now, Felicity for once was undoubtedly right. The Story Girl's
suggestion WAS wrong; and if it had been Cecily who protested, the Story
Girl would probably have listened to her, and proceeded no further
in the matter. But Felicity was one of those unfortunate people whose
protests against wrong-doing serve only to drive the wrong-doer further
on her sinful way.

The Story Girl resented Felicity's superior tone, and proceeded to tempt
Sara in right good earnest. The rest of us held our tongues. It was, we
told ourselves, Sara's own lookout.

"I have a good mind to do it," said Sara, "but I can't get my good
clothes; they're in the spare room, and ma locked the door, for fear
somebody would get at the fruit cake. I haven't a single thing to wear,
except my school gingham."

"Well, that's new and pretty," said the Story Girl. "We'll lend you
some things. You can have my lace collar. That'll make the gingham quite
elegant. And Cecily will lend you her second best hat."

"But I've no shoes or stockings. They're locked up too."

"You can have a pair of mine," said Felicity, who probably thought that
since Sara was certain to yield to temptation, she might as well be
garbed decently for her transgression.

Sara did yield. When the Story Girl's voice entreated it was not easy
to resist its temptation, even if you wanted to. That evening, when
we started for the schoolhouse, Sara Ray was among us, decked out in
borrowed plumes.

"Suppose she DOES catch the measles?" Felicity said aside.

"I don't believe there'll be anybody there from Markdale. The lecturer
is going to Markdale next week. They'll wait for that," said the Story
Girl airily.

It was a cool, dewy evening, and we walked down the long, red hill in
the highest of spirits. Over a valley filled with beech and spruce was
a sunset afterglow--creamy yellow and a hue that was not so much red as
the dream of red, with a young moon swung low in it. The air was sweet
with the breath of mown hayfields where swaths of clover had been
steeping in the sun. Wild roses grew pinkly along the fences, and the
roadsides were star-dusted with buttercups.

Those of us who had nothing the matter with our consciences enjoyed our
walk to the little whitewashed schoolhouse in the valley. Felicity
and Cecily were void of offence towards all men. The Story Girl walked
uprightly like an incarnate flame in her crimson silk. Her pretty feet
were hidden in the tan-coloured, buttoned Paris boots which were the
secret envy of every school girl in Carlisle.

But Sara Ray was not happy. Her face was so melancholy that the Story
Girl lost patience with her. The Story Girl herself was not altogether
at ease. Probably her own conscience was troubling her. But admit it she
would not.

"Now, Sara," she said, "you just take my advice and go into this with
all your heart if you go at all. Never mind if it is bad. There's no
use being naughty if you spoil your fun by wishing all the time you were
good. You can repent afterwards, but there is no use in mixing the two
things together."

"I'm not repenting," protested Sara. "I'm only scared of ma finding it
out."

"Oh!" The Story Girl's voice expressed her scorn. For remorse she
had understanding and sympathy; but fear of her fellow creatures was
something unknown to her. "Didn't Judy Pineau promise you solemnly she
wouldn't tell?"

"Yes; but maybe some one who sees me there will mention it to ma."

"Well, if you're so scared you'd better not go. It isn't too late.
Here's your own gate," said Cecily.

But Sara could not give up the delights of the show. So she walked on,
a small, miserable testimony that the way of the transgressor is never
easy, even when said transgressor is only a damsel of eleven.

The magic lantern show was a splendid one. The views were good and the
lecturer witty. We repeated his jokes to each other all the way home.
Sara, who had not enjoyed the exhibition at all, seemed to feel more
cheerful when it was over and she was going home. The Story Girl on the
contrary was gloomy.

"There WERE Markdale people there," she confided to me, "and the
Williamsons live next door to the Cowans, who have measles. I wish I'd
never egged Sara on to going--but don't tell Felicity I said so. If Sara
Ray had really enjoyed the show I wouldn't mind. But she didn't. I could
see that. So I've done wrong and made her do wrong--and there's nothing
to show for it."

The night was scented and mysterious. The wind was playing an eerie
fleshless melody in the reeds of the brook hollow. The sky was dark and
starry, and across it the Milky Way flung its shimmering misty ribbons.

"There's four hundred million stars in the Milky Way," quoth Peter, who
frequently astonished us by knowing more than any hired boy could be
expected to. He had a retentive memory, and never forgot anything he
heard or read. The few books left to him by his oft-referred-to Aunt
Jane had stocked his mind with a miscellaneous information which
sometimes made Felix and me doubt if we knew as much as Peter after all.
Felicity was so impressed by his knowledge of astronomy that she dropped
back from the other girls and walked beside him. She had not done so
before because he was barefooted. It was permissible for hired boys to
go to public meetings--when not held in the church--with bare feet, and
