asked the boatman:

'Can you take us, can you take us to the kingdom of the peacocks?'

But he answered:

'Oh no! oh no!'

Then she said:

'You must take us, you must take us.'

And he answered:

'Very soon, very soon.'

Then the nurse said:

'Will you take us? will you take us?'

And the boatman answered:

'Yes, yes.'

Then she whispered in his ear:

'Do you want to make your fortune?'

And he said:

'Certainly I do.'

'I can tell you how to get a bag of gold,' said she.

'I ask nothing better,' said the boatman.

'Well,' said the nurse, 'to-night, when the Princess is asleep, you must
help me to throw her into the sea, and when she is drowned I will put
her beautiful clothes upon my daughter, and we will take her to the King
of the Peacocks, who will be only too glad to marry her, and as your
reward you shall have your boat full of diamonds.'

The boatman was very much surprised at this proposal, and said:

'But what a pity to drown such a pretty Princess!'

However, at last the nurse persuaded him to help her, and when the night
came and the Princess was fast asleep as usual, with Frisk curled up
on his own cushion at the foot of her bed, the wicked nurse fetched the
boatman and her daughter, and between them they picked up the Princess,
feather bed, mattress, pillows, blankets and all, and threw her into
the sea, without even waking her. Now, luckily, the Princess's bed was
entirely stuffed with phoenix feathers, which are very rare, and have
the property of always floating upon water, so Rosette went on swimming
about as if she had been in a boat. After a little while she began
to feel very cold, and turned round so often that she woke Frisk, who
started up, and, having a very good nose, smelt the soles and herrings
so close to him that he began to bark. He barked so long and so
loud that he woke all the other fish, who came swimming up round the
Princess's bed, and poking at it with their great heads. As for her, she
said to herself:

'How our boat does rock upon the water! I am really glad that I am not
often as uncomfortable as I have been to-night.'

The wicked nurse and the boatman, who were by this time quite a long way
off, heard Frisk barking, and said to each other:

'That horrid little animal and his mistress are drinking our health in
sea-water now. Let us make haste to land, for we must be quite near the
city of the King of the Peacocks.'

The King had sent a hundred carriages to meet them, drawn by every
kind of strange animal. There were lions, bears, wolves, stags, horses,
buffaloes, eagles, and peacocks. The carriage intended for the Princess
Rosette had six blue monkeys, which could turn summer-saults, and dance
on a tight-rope, and do many other charming tricks. Their harness was
all of crimson velvet with gold buckles, and behind the carriage walked
sixty beautiful ladies chosen by the King to wait upon Rosette and amuse
her.

The nurse had taken all the pains imaginable to deck out her daughter.
She put on her Rosette's prettiest frock, and covered her with diamonds
from head to foot. But she was so ugly that nothing could make her
look nice, and what was worse, she was sulky and ill-tempered, and did
nothing but grumble all the time.

When she stepped from the boat and the escort sent by the King of the
Peacocks caught sight of her, they were so surprised that they could not
say a single word.

'Now then, look alive,' cried the false Princess. 'If you don't bring me
something to eat I will have all your heads cut off!'

Then they whispered one to another:

'Here's a pretty state of things! she is as wicked as she is ugly. What
a bride for our poor King! She certainly was not worth bringing from the
other end of the world!'

But she went on ordering them all about, and for no fault at all would
give slaps and pinches to everyone she could reach.

As the procession was so long it advanced but slowly, and the nurse's
daughter sat up in her carriage trying to look like a Queen. But the
peacocks, who were sitting upon every tree waiting to salute her, and
who had made up their minds to cry, 'Long live our beautiful Queen!'
when they caught sight of the false bride could not help crying instead:

'Oh! how ugly she is!'

Which offended her so much that she said to the guards:

'Make haste and kill all these insolent peacocks who have dared to
insult me.'

But the peacocks only flew away, laughing at her.

The rogue of a boatman, who noticed all this, said softly to the nurse:

'This is a bad business for us, gossip; your daughter ought to have been
prettier.'

But she answered:

'Be quiet, stupid, or you will spoil everything.'

Now they told the King that the Princess was approaching.

'Well,' said he, 'did her brothers tell me truly? Is she prettier than
her portrait?'

'Sire,' they answered, 'if she were as pretty that would do very well.'

'That's true,' said the King; 'I for one shall be quite satisfied if she
is. Let us go and meet her.' For they knew by the uproar that she had
arrived, but they could not tell what all the shouting was about. The
King thought he could hear the words:

'How ugly she is! How ugly she is!' and he fancied they must refer to
some dwarf the Princess was bringing with her. It never occurred to him
that they could apply to the bride herself.

The Princess Rosette's portrait was carried at the head of the
procession, and after it walked the King surrounded by his courtiers. He
was all impatience to see the lovely Princess, but when he caught sight
of the nurse's daughter he was furiously angry, and would not advance
another step. For she was really ugly enough to have frightened anybody.

'What!' he cried, 'have the two rascals who are my prisoners dared to
play me such a trick as this? Do they propose that I shall marry this
hideous creature? Let her be shut up in my great tower, with her nurse
and those who brought her here; and as for them, I will have their heads
cut off.'

Meanwhile the King and the Prince, who knew that their sister must have
arrived, had made themselves smart, and sat expecting every minute to
be summoned to greet her. So when the gaoler came with soldiers, and
carried them down into a black dungeon which swarmed with toads and
bats, and where they were up to their necks in water, nobody could have
been more surprised and dismayed than they were.

'This is a dismal kind of wedding,' they said; 'what can have happened
that we should be treated like this? They must mean to kill us.'

And this idea annoyed them very much. Three days passed before they
heard any news, and then the King of the Peacocks came and berated them
through a hole in the wall.

'You have called yourselves King and Prince,' he cried, 'to try and make
me marry your sister, but you are nothing but beggars, not worth the
water you drink. I mean to make short work with you, and the sword is
being sharpened that will cut off your heads!'

'King of the Peacocks,' answered the King angrily, 'you had better take
care what you are about. I am as good a King as yourself, and have a
splendid kingdom and robes and crowns, and plenty of good red gold to
do what I like with. You are pleased to jest about having our heads cut
off; perhaps you think we have stolen something from you?'

At first the King of the Peacocks was taken aback by this bold speech,
and had half a mind to send them all away together; but his Prime
Minister declared that it would never do to let such a trick as that
pass unpunished, everybody would laugh at him; so the accusation was
drawn up against them, that they were impostors, and that they had
promised the King a beautiful Princess in marriage who, when she
arrived, proved to be an ugly peasant girl.

This accusation was read to the prisoners, who cried out that they had
spoken the truth, that their sister was indeed a Princess more beautiful
than the day, and that there was some mystery about all this which they
could not fathom. Therefore they demanded seven days in which to prove
their innocence, The King of the Peacocks was so angry that he would
hardly even grant them this favour, but at last he was persuaded to do
so.

While all this was going on at court, let us see what had been happening
to the real Princess. When the day broke she and Frisk were equally
astonished at finding themselves alone upon the sea, with no boat and
no one to help them. The Princess cried and cried, until even the fishes
were sorry for her.

'Alas!' she said, 'the King of the Peacocks must have ordered me to be
thrown into the sea because he had changed his mind and did not want to
marry me. But how strange of him, when I should have loved him so much,
and we should have been so happy together!'

And then she cried harder than ever, for she could not help still loving
him. So for two days they floated up and down the sea, wet and shivering
with the cold, and so hungry that when the Princess saw some oysters she
caught them, and she and Frisk both ate some, though they didn't like
them at all. When night came the Princess was so frightened that she
said to Frisk:

'Oh! Do please keep on barking for fear the soles should come and eat us
up!'

Now it happened that they had floated close in to the shore, where a
poor old man lived all alone in a little cottage. When he heard Frisk's
barking he thought to himself:

'There must have been a shipwreck!' (for no dogs ever passed that way by
any chance), and he went out to see if he could be of any use. He soon
saw the Princess and Frisk floating up and down, and Rosette, stretching
out her hands to him, cried:

'Oh! Good old man, do save me, or I shall die of cold and hunger!'

When he heard her cry out so piteously he was very sorry for her, and
ran back into his house to fetch a long boat-hook. Then he waded into
the water up to his chin, and after being nearly drowned once or twice
he at last succeeded in getting hold of the Princess's bed and dragging
it on shore.

Rosette and Frisk were joyful enough to find themselves once more on
dry land, and the Princess thanked the old man heartily; then, wrapping
herself up in her blankets, she daintily picked her way up to the
cottage on her little bare feet. There the old man lighted a fire of
straw, and then drew from an old box his wife's dress and shoes,
which the Princess put on, and thus roughly clad looked as charming as
possible, and Frisk danced his very best to amuse her.

The old man saw that Rosette must be some great lady, for her bed
coverings were all of satin and gold. He begged that she would tell him
all her history, as she might safely trust him. The Princess told him
everything, weeping bitterly again at the thought that it was by the
King's orders that she had been thrown overboard.

'And now, my daughter, what is to be done?' said the old man. 'You are a
great Princess, accustomed to fare daintily, and I have nothing to offer
you but black bread and radishes, which will not suit you at all. Shall
I go and tell the King of the Peacocks that you are here? If he sees you
he will certainly wish to marry you.'

'Oh no!' cried Rosette, 'he must be wicked, since he tried to drown me.
Don't let us tell him, but if you have a little basket give it to me.'

The old man gave her a basket, and tying it round Frisk's neck she said
to him: 'Go and find out the best cooking-pot in the town and bring the
contents to me.'

Away went Frisk, and as there was no better dinner cooking in all the
town than the King's, he adroitly took the cover off the pot and brought
all it contained to the Princess, who said:

'Now go back to the pantry, and bring the best of everything you find
there.'

So Frisk went back and filled his basket with white bread, and red wine,
and every kind of sweetmeat, until it was almost too heavy for him to
carry.

When the King of the Peacocks wanted his dinner there was nothing in the
pot and nothing in the pantry. All the courtiers looked at one another
in dismay, and the King was terribly cross.

'Oh well! 'he said, 'if there is no dinner I cannot dine, but take care
that plenty of things are roasted for supper.'

When evening came the Princess said to Frisk:

'Go into the town and find out the best kitchen, and bring me all the
nicest morsels that are being roasted upon the spit.'

Frisk did as he was told, and as he knew of no better kitchen than the
King's, he went in softly, and when the cook's back was turned took
everything that was upon the spit, As it happened it was all done to
a turn, and looked so good that it made him hungry only to see it. He
carried his basket to the Princess, who at once sent him back to the
pantry to bring all the tarts and sugar plums that had been prepared for
the King's supper.

The King, as he had had no dinner, was very hungry and wanted his supper
early, but when he asked for it, lo and behold it was all gone, and he
had to go to bed half-starved and in a terrible temper. The next day the
same thing happened, and the next, so that for three days the King got
nothing at all to eat, because just when the dinner or the supper
was ready to be served it mysteriously disappeared. At last the Prime
Minister began to be afraid that the King would be starved to death,
so he resolved to hide himself in some dark corner of the kitchen, and
never take his eyes off the cooking-pot. His surprise was great when
he presently saw a little green dog with one ear slip softly into the
kitchen, uncover the pot, transfer all its contents to his basket,
and run off. The Prime Minister followed hastily, and tracked him all
through the town to the cottage of the good old man; then he ran back
to the King and told him that he had found out where all his dinners
and suppers went. The King, who was very much astonished, said he should
like to go and see for himself. So he set out, accompanied by the Prime
Minister and a guard of archers, and arrived just in time to find the
old man and the Princess finishing his dinner.

The King ordered that they should be seized and bound with ropes, and
Frisk also.

When they were brought back to the palace some one told the King, who
said:

'To-day is the last day of the respite granted to those impostors; they
shall have their heads cut off at the same time as these stealers of
my dinner.' Then the old man went down on his knees before the King and
begged for time to tell him everything. While he spoke the King for the
first time looked attentively at the Princess, because he was sorry to
see how she cried, and when he heard the old man saying that her name
was Rosette, and that she had been treacherously thrown into the sea, he
turned head over heels three times without stopping, in spite of being
quite weak from hunger, and ran to embrace her, and untied the ropes
which bound her with his own hands, declaring that he loved her with all
his heart.

Messengers were sent to bring the Princes out of prison, and they came
very sadly, believing that they were to be executed at once: the nurse
and her daughter and the boatman were brought also. As soon as they
came in Rosette ran to embrace her brothers, while the traitors threw
themselves down before her and begged for mercy. The King and the
Princess were so happy that they freely forgave them, and as for the
good old man he was splendidly rewarded, and spent the rest of his days
in the palace. The King of the Peacocks made ample amends to the
King and Prince for the way in which they had been treated, and did
everything in his power to show how sorry he was.

The nurse restored to Rosette all her dresses and jewels, and the bushel
of gold pieces; the wedding was held at once, and they all lived happily
ever after--even to Frisk, who enjoyed the greatest luxury, and never
had anything worse than the wing of a partridge for dinner all the rest
of his life.(7)

(7) Madame d'Aulnoy.


THE ENCHANTED PIG

ONCE upon a time there lived a King who had three daughters. Now it
happened that he had to go out to battle, so he called his daughters and
said to them:

'My dear children, I am obliged to go to the wars. The enemy is
approaching us with a large army. It is a great grief to me to leave you
all. During my absence take care of yourselves and be good girls; behave
well and look after everything in the house. You may walk in the garden,
and you may go into all the rooms in the palace, except the room at the
back in the right-hand corner; into that you must not enter, for harm
would befall you.'

'You may keep your mind easy, father,' they replied. 'We have never
been disobedient to you. Go in peace, and may heaven give you a glorious
victory!'

When everything was ready for his departure, the King gave them the keys
of all the rooms and reminded them once more of what he had said. His
daughters kissed his hands with tears in their eyes, and wished him
prosperity, and he gave the eldest the keys.

Now when the girls found themselves alone they felt so sad and dull that
they did not know what to do. So, to pass the time, they decided to
work for part of the day, to read for part of the day, and to enjoy
themselves in the garden for part of the day. As long as they did this
all went well with them. But this happy state of things did not last
long. Every day they grew more and more curious, and you will see what
the end of that was.

'Sisters,' said the eldest Princess, 'all day long we sew, spin, and
read. We have been several days quite alone, and there is no corner of
the garden that we have not explored. We have been in all the rooms of
our father's palace, and have admired the rich and beautiful furniture:
why should not we go into the room that our father forbad us to enter?'

Sister,' said the youngest, 'I cannot think how you can tempt us to
break our father's command. When he told us not to go into that room
he must have known what he was saying, and have had a good reason for
saying it.'

'Surely the sky won't fall about our heads if we DO go in,' said the
second Princess. 'Dragons and such like monsters that would devour us
will not be hidden in the room. And how will our father ever find out
that we have gone in?'

While they were speaking thus, encouraging each other, they had reached
the room; the eldest fitted the key into the lock, and snap! the door
stood open.

The three girls entered, and what do you think they saw?

The room was quite empty, and without any ornament, but in the middle
stood a large table, with a gorgeous cloth, and on it lay a big open
book.

Now the Princesses were curious to know what was written in the book,
especially the eldest, and this is what she read:

'The eldest daughter of this King will marry a prince from the East.'

Then the second girl stepped forward, and turning over the page she
read:

'The second daughter of this King will marry a prince from the West.'

The girls were delighted, and laughed and teased each other.

But the youngest Princess did not want to go near the table or to open
the book. Her elder sisters however left her no peace, and will she,
nill she, they dragged her up to the table, and in fear and trembling
she turned over the page and read:

'The youngest daughter of this King will be married to a pig from the
North.'

Now if a thunderbolt had fallen upon her from heaven it would not have
frightened her more.

She almost died of misery, and if her sisters had not held her up, she
would have sunk to the ground and cut her head open.

When she came out of the fainting fit into which she had fallen in her
terror, her sisters tried to comfort her, saying:

'How can you believe such nonsense? When did it ever happen that a
king's daughter married a pig?'

'What a baby you are!' said the other sister; 'has not our father enough
soldiers to protect you, even if the disgusting creature did come to woo
you?'

The youngest Princess would fain have let herself be convinced by her
sisters' words, and have believed what they said, but her heart was
heavy. Her thoughts kept turning to the book, in which stood written
that great happiness waited her sisters, but that a fate was in store
for her such as had never before been known in the world.

Besides, the thought weighed on her heart that she had been guilty of
disobeying her father. She began to get quite ill, and in a few days she
was so changed that it was difficult to recognise her; formerly she had
been rosy and merry, now she was pale and nothing gave her any pleasure.
She gave up playing with her sisters in the garden, ceased to gather
flowers to put in her hair, and never sang when they sat together at
their spinning and sewing.

In the meantime the King won a great victory, and having completely
defeated and driven off the enemy, he hurried home to his daughters, to
whom his thoughts had constantly turned. Everyone went out to meet him
with cymbals and fifes and drums, and there was great rejoicing over his
victorious return. The King's first act on reaching home was to thank
Heaven for the victory he had gained over the enemies who had risen
against him. He then entered his palace, and the three Princesses
stepped forward to meet him. His joy was great when he saw that they
were all well, for the youngest did her best not to appear sad.

In spite of this, however, it was not long before the King noticed that
his third daughter was getting very thin and sad-looking. And all of a
sudden he felt as if a hot iron were entering his soul, for it flashed
through his mind that she had disobeyed his word. He felt sure he
was right; but to be quite certain he called his daughters to him,
questioned them, and ordered them to speak the truth. They confessed
everything, but took good care not to say which had led the other two
into temptation.

The King was so distressed when he heard it that he was almost overcome
by grief. But he took heart and tried to comfort his daughters, who
looked frightened to death. He saw that what had happened had happened,
and that a thousand words would not alter matters by a hair's-breadth.

Well, these events had almost been forgotten when one fine day a prince
from the East appeared at the Court and asked the King for the hand of
his eldest daughter. The King gladly gave his consent. A great wedding
banquet was prepared, and after three days of feasting the happy pair
were accompanied to the frontier with much ceremony and rejoicing.

After some time the same thing befell the second daughter, who was wooed
and won by a prince from the West.
