felt that she could gad shoreward with a clear conscience.  Many and
delightful had been her shore rambles, sometimes with Gilbert,
sometimes with Captain Jim, sometimes alone with her own thoughts and
new, poignantly-sweet dreams that were beginning to span life with
their rainbows.  She loved the gentle, misty harbor shore and the
silvery, wind-haunted sand shore, but best of all she loved the rock
shore, with its cliffs and caves and piles of surf-worn boulders, and
its coves where the pebbles glittered under the pools; and it was to
this shore she hied herself tonight.

There had been an autumn storm of wind and rain, lasting for three
days.  Thunderous had been the crash of billows on the rocks, wild the
white spray and spume that blew over the bar, troubled and misty and
tempest-torn the erstwhile blue peace of Four Winds Harbor.  Now it was
over, and the shore lay clean-washed after the storm; not a wind
stirred, but there was still a fine surf on, dashing on sand and rock
in a splendid white turmoil--the only restless thing in the great,
pervading stillness and peace.

"Oh, this is a moment worth living through weeks of storm and stress
for," Anne exclaimed, delightedly sending her far gaze across the
tossing waters from the top of the cliff where she stood.  Presently
she scrambled down the steep path to the little cove below, where she
seemed shut in with rocks and sea and sky.

"I'm going to dance and sing," she said.  "There's no one here to see
me--the seagulls won't carry tales of the matter.  I may be as crazy as
I like."

She caught up her skirt and pirouetted along the hard strip of sand
just out of reach of the waves that almost lapped her feet with their
spent foam.  Whirling round and round, laughing like a child, she
reached the little headland that ran out to the east of the cove; then
she stopped suddenly, blushing crimson; she was not alone; there had
been a witness to her dance and laughter.

The girl of the golden hair and sea-blue eyes was sitting on a boulder
of the headland, half-hidden by a jutting rock.  She was looking
straight at Anne with a strange expression--part wonder, part sympathy,
part--could it be?--envy.  She was bare-headed, and her splendid hair,
more than ever like Browning's "gorgeous snake," was bound about her
head with a crimson ribbon.  She wore a dress of some dark material,
very plainly made; but swathed about her waist, outlining its fine
curves, was a vivid girdle of red silk.  Her hands, clasped over her
knee, were brown and somewhat work-hardened; but the skin of her throat
and cheeks was as white as cream.  A flying gleam of sunset broke
through a low-lying western cloud and fell across her hair.  For a
moment she seemed the spirit of the sea personified--all its mystery,
all its passion, all its elusive charm.

"You--you must think me crazy," stammered Anne, trying to recover her
self-possession.  To be seen by this stately girl in such an abandon of
childishness--she, Mrs. Dr. Blythe, with all the dignity of the matron
to keep up--it was too bad!

"No," said the girl, "I don't."

She said nothing more; her voice was expressionless; her manner
slightly repellent; but there was something in her eyes--eager yet shy,
defiant yet pleading--which turned Anne from her purpose of walking
away.  Instead, she sat down on the boulder beside the girl.

"Let's introduce ourselves," she said, with the smile that had never
yet failed to win confidence and friendliness.  "I am Mrs. Blythe--and
I live in that little white house up the harbor shore."

"Yes, I know," said the girl.  "I am Leslie Moore--Mrs. Dick Moore,"
she added stiffly.

Anne was silent for a moment from sheer amazement.  It had not occurred
to her that this girl was married--there seemed nothing of the wife
about her.  And that she should be the neighbor whom Anne had pictured
as a commonplace Four Winds housewife!  Anne could not quickly adjust
her mental focus to this astonishing change.

"Then--then you live in that gray house up the brook," she stammered.

"Yes.  I should have gone over to call on you long ago," said the
other.  She did not offer any explanation or excuse for not having gone.

"I wish you WOULD come," said Anne, recovering herself somewhat.
"We're such near neighbors we ought to be friends.  That is the sole
fault of Four Winds--there aren't quite enough neighbors.  Otherwise it
is perfection."

"You like it?"

"LIKE it!  I love it.  It is the most beautiful place I ever saw."

"I've never seen many places," said Leslie Moore, slowly, "but I've
always thought it was very lovely here.  I--I love it, too."

She spoke, as she looked, shyly, yet eagerly.  Anne had an odd
impression that this strange girl--the word "girl" would persist--could
say a good deal if she chose.

"I often come to the shore," she added.

"So do I," said Anne.  "It's a wonder we haven't met here before."

"Probably you come earlier in the evening than I do.  It is generally
late--almost dark--when I come.  And I love to come just after a
storm--like this.  I don't like the sea so well when it's calm and
quiet.  I like the struggle--and the crash--and the noise."

"I love it in all its moods," declared Anne.  "The sea at Four Winds is
to me what Lover's Lane was at home.  Tonight it seemed so free--so
untamed--something broke loose in me, too, out of sympathy.  That was
why I danced along the shore in that wild way.  I didn't suppose
anybody was looking, of course.  If Miss Cornelia Bryant had seen me
she would have forboded a gloomy prospect for poor young Dr. Blythe."

"You know Miss Cornelia?" said Leslie, laughing.  She had an exquisite
laugh; it bubbled up suddenly and unexpectedly with something of the
delicious quality of a baby's.  Anne laughed, too.

"Oh, yes.  She has been down to my house of dreams several times."

"Your house of dreams?"

"Oh, that's a dear, foolish little name Gilbert and I have for our
home.  We just call it that between ourselves.  It slipped out before I
thought."

"So Miss Russell's little white house is YOUR house of dreams," said
Leslie wonderingly.  "_I_ had a house of dreams once--but it was a
palace," she added, with a laugh, the sweetness of which was marred by
a little note of derision.

"Oh, I once dreamed of a palace, too," said Anne.  "I suppose all girls
do.  And then we settle down contentedly in eight-room houses that seem
to fulfill all the desires of our hearts--because our prince is there.
YOU should have had your palace really, though--you are so beautiful.
You MUST let me say it--it has to be said--I'm nearly bursting with
admiration.  You are the loveliest thing I ever saw, Mrs. Moore."

"If we are to be friends you must call me Leslie," said the other with
an odd passion.

"Of course I will.  And MY friends call me Anne."

"I suppose I am beautiful," Leslie went on, looking stormily out to
sea.  "I hate my beauty.  I wish I had always been as brown and plain
as the brownest and plainest girl at the fishing village over there.
Well, what do you think of Miss Cornelia?"

The abrupt change of subject shut the door on any further confidences.

"Miss Cornelia is a darling, isn't she?" said Anne.  "Gilbert and I
were invited to her house to a state tea last week.  You've heard of
groaning tables."

"I seem to recall seeing the expression in the newspaper reports of
weddings," said Leslie, smiling.

"Well, Miss Cornelia's groaned--at least, it creaked--positively.  You
couldn't have believed she would have cooked so much for two ordinary
people.  She had every kind of pie you could name, I think--except
lemon pie.  She said she had taken the prize for lemon pies at the
Charlottetown Exhibition ten years ago and had never made any since for
fear of losing her reputation for them."

"Were you able to eat enough pie to please her?"

"_I_ wasn't.  Gilbert won her heart by eating--I won't tell you how
much.  She said she never knew a man who didn't like pie better than
his Bible.  Do you know, I love Miss Cornelia."

"So do I," said Leslie.  "She is the best friend I have in the world."

Anne wondered secretly why, if this were so, Miss Cornelia had never
mentioned Mrs. Dick Moore to her.  Miss Cornelia had certainly talked
freely about every other individual in or near Four Winds.

"Isn't that beautiful?" said Leslie, after a brief silence, pointing to
the exquisite effect of a shaft of light falling through a cleft in the
rock behind them, across a dark green pool at its base.  "If I had come
here--and seen nothing but just that--I would go home satisfied."

"The effects of light and shadow all along these shores are wonderful,"
agreed Anne.  "My little sewing room looks out on the harbor, and I sit
at its window and feast my eyes.  The colors and shadows are never the
same two minutes together."

"And you are never lonely?" asked Leslie abruptly.  "Never--when you
are alone?"

"No.  I don't think I've ever been really lonely in my life," answered
Anne.  "Even when I'm alone I have real good company--dreams and
imaginations and pretendings.  I LIKE to be alone now and then, just to
think over things and TASTE them.  But I love friendship--and nice,
jolly little times with people.  Oh, WON'T you come to see me--often?
Please do.  I believe," Anne added, laughing, "that you'd like me if
you knew me."

"I wonder if YOU would like ME," said Leslie seriously.  She was not
fishing for a compliment.  She looked out across the waves that were
beginning to be garlanded with blossoms of moonlit foam, and her eyes
filled with shadows.

"I'm sure I would," said Anne.  "And please don't think I'm utterly
irresponsible because you saw me dancing on the shore at sunset.  No
doubt I shall be dignified after a time.  You see, I haven't been
married very long.  I feel like a girl, and sometimes like a child,
yet."

"I have been married twelve years," said Leslie.

Here was another unbelievable thing.

"Why, you can't be as old as I am!" exclaimed Anne.  "You must have
been a child when you were married."

"I was sixteen," said Leslie, rising, and picking up the cap and jacket
lying beside her.  "I am twenty-eight now.  Well, I must go back."

"So must I.  Gilbert will probably be home.  But I'm so glad we both
came to the shore tonight and met each other."

Leslie said nothing, and Anne was a little chilled.  She had offered
friendship frankly but it had not been accepted very graciously, if it
had not been absolutely repelled.  In silence they climbed the cliffs
and walked across a pasture-field of which the feathery, bleached, wild
grasses were like a carpet of creamy velvet in the moonlight.  When
they reached the shore lane Leslie turned.

"I go this way, Mrs. Blythe.  You will come over and see me some time,
won't you?"

Anne felt as if the invitation had been thrown at her.  She got the
impression that Leslie Moore gave it reluctantly.

"I will come if you really want me to," she said a little coldly.

"Oh, I do--I do," exclaimed Leslie, with an eagerness which seemed to
burst forth and beat down some restraint that had been imposed on it.

"Then I'll come.  Good-night--Leslie."

"Good-night, Mrs. Blythe."

Anne walked home in a brown study and poured out her tale to Gilbert.

"So Mrs. Dick Moore isn't one of the race that knows Joseph?" said
Gilbert teasingly.

"No--o--o, not exactly.  And yet--I think she WAS one of them once, but
has gone or got into exile," said Anne musingly.  "She is certainly
very different from the other women about here.  You can't talk about
eggs and butter to HER.  To think I've been imagining her a second Mrs.
Rachel Lynde!  Have you ever seen Dick Moore, Gilbert?"

"No.  I've seen several men working about the fields of the farm, but I
don't know which was Moore."

"She never mentioned him.  I KNOW she isn't happy."

"From what you tell me I suppose she was married before she was old
enough to know her own mind or heart, and found out too late that she
had made a mistake.  It's a common tragedy enough, Anne.

"A fine woman would have made the best of it.  Mrs. Moore has evidently
let it make her bitter and resentful."

"Don't let us judge her till we know," pleaded Anne.  "I don't believe
her case is so ordinary.  You will understand her fascination when you
meet her, Gilbert.  It is a thing quite apart from her beauty.  I feel
that she possesses a rich nature, into which a friend might enter as
into a kingdom; but for some reason she bars every one out and shuts
all her possibilities up in herself, so that they cannot develop and
blossom.  There, I've been struggling to define her to myself ever
since I left her, and that is the nearest I can get to it.  I'm going
to ask Miss Cornelia about her."



CHAPTER 11

THE STORY OF LESLIE MOORE

"Yes, the eighth baby arrived a fortnight ago," said Miss Cornelia,
from a rocker before the fire of the little house one chilly October
afternoon.  "It's a girl.  Fred was ranting mad--said he wanted a
boy--when the truth is he didn't want it at all.  If it had been a boy
he'd have ranted because it wasn't a girl.  They had four girls and
three boys before, so I can't see that it made much difference what
this one was, but of course he'd have to be cantankerous, just like a
man.  The baby is real pretty, dressed up in its nice little clothes.
It has black eyes and the dearest, tiny hands."

"I must go and see it.  I just love babies," said Anne, smiling to
herself over a thought too dear and sacred to be put into words.

"I don't say but what they're nice," admitted Miss Cornelia.  "But some
folks seem to have more than they really need, believe ME.  My poor
cousin Flora up at the Glen had eleven, and such a slave as she is!
Her husband suicided three years ago.  Just like a man!"

"What made him do that?" asked Anne, rather shocked.

"Couldn't get his way over something, so he jumped into the well.  A
good riddance!  He was a born tyrant.  But of course it spoiled the
well.  Flora could never abide the thought of using it again, poor
thing!  So she had another dug and a frightful expense it was, and the
water as hard as nails.  If he HAD to drown himself there was plenty of
water in the harbor, wasn't there?  I've no patience with a man like
that.  We've only had two suicides in Four Winds in my recollection.
The other was Frank West--Leslie Moore's father.  By the way, has
Leslie ever been over to call on you yet?"
