
Dorothy said nothing.  Oz had not kept the promise he made her, but he
had done his best, so she forgave him.  As he said, he was a good man,
even if he was a bad Wizard.

The first day's journey was through the green fields and bright flowers
that stretched about the Emerald City on every side.  They slept that
night on the grass, with nothing but the stars over them; and they
rested very well indeed.

In the morning they traveled on until they came to a thick wood.  There
was no way of going around it, for it seemed to extend to the right and
left as far as they could see; and, besides, they did not dare change
the direction of their journey for fear of getting lost.  So they
looked for the place where it would be easiest to get into the forest.

The Scarecrow, who was in the lead, finally discovered a big tree with
such wide-spreading branches that there was room for the party to pass
underneath.  So he walked forward to the tree, but just as he came
under the first branches they bent down and twined around him, and the
next minute he was raised from the ground and flung headlong among his
fellow travelers.

This did not hurt the Scarecrow, but it surprised him, and he looked
rather dizzy when Dorothy picked him up.

"Here is another space between the trees," called the Lion.

"Let me try it first," said the Scarecrow, "for it doesn't hurt me to
get thrown about."  He walked up to another tree, as he spoke, but its
branches immediately seized him and tossed him back again.

"This is strange," exclaimed Dorothy.  "What shall we do?"

"The trees seem to have made up their minds to fight us, and stop our
journey," remarked the Lion.

"I believe I will try it myself," said the Woodman, and shouldering his
axe, he marched up to the first tree that had handled the Scarecrow so
roughly.  When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped
at it so fiercely that he cut it in two.  At once the tree began
shaking all its branches as if in pain, and the Tin Woodman passed
safely under it.

"Come on!" he shouted to the others.  "Be quick!"  They all ran forward
and passed under the tree without injury, except Toto, who was caught
by a small branch and shaken until he howled.  But the Woodman promptly
chopped off the branch and set the little dog free.

The other trees of the forest did nothing to keep them back, so they
made up their minds that only the first row of trees could bend down
their branches, and that probably these were the policemen of the
forest, and given this wonderful power in order to keep strangers out
of it.

The four travelers walked with ease through the trees until they came
to the farther edge of the wood.  Then, to their surprise, they found
before them a high wall which seemed to be made of white china.  It was
smooth, like the surface of a dish, and higher than their heads.

"What shall we do now?" asked Dorothy.

"I will make a ladder," said the Tin Woodman, "for we certainly must
climb over the wall."




20.  The Dainty China Country


While the Woodman was making a ladder from wood which he found in the
forest Dorothy lay down and slept, for she was tired by the long walk.
The Lion also curled himself up to sleep and Toto lay beside him.

The Scarecrow watched the Woodman while he worked, and said to him:

"I cannot think why this wall is here, nor what it is made of."

"Rest your brains and do not worry about the wall," replied the
Woodman.  "When we have climbed over it, we shall know what is on the
other side."

After a time the ladder was finished.  It looked clumsy, but the Tin
Woodman was sure it was strong and would answer their purpose.  The
Scarecrow waked Dorothy and the Lion and Toto, and told them that the
ladder was ready.  The Scarecrow climbed up the ladder first, but he
was so awkward that Dorothy had to follow close behind and keep him
from falling off.  When he got his head over the top of the wall the
Scarecrow said, "Oh, my!"

"Go on," exclaimed Dorothy.

So the Scarecrow climbed farther up and sat down on the top of the
wall, and Dorothy put her head over and cried, "Oh, my!" just as the
Scarecrow had done.

Then Toto came up, and immediately began to bark, but Dorothy made him
be still.

The Lion climbed the ladder next, and the Tin Woodman came last; but
both of them cried, "Oh, my!" as soon as they looked over the wall.
When they were all sitting in a row on the top of the wall, they looked
down and saw a strange sight.

Before them was a great stretch of country having a floor as smooth and
shining and white as the bottom of a big platter.  Scattered around
were many houses made entirely of china and painted in the brightest
colors.  These houses were quite small, the biggest of them reaching
only as high as Dorothy's waist.  There were also pretty little barns,
with china fences around them; and many cows and sheep and horses and
pigs and chickens, all made of china, were standing about in groups.

But the strangest of all were the people who lived in this queer
country.  There were milkmaids and shepherdesses, with brightly colored
bodices and golden spots all over their gowns; and princesses with most
gorgeous frocks of silver and gold and purple; and shepherds dressed in
knee breeches with pink and yellow and blue stripes down them, and
golden buckles on their shoes; and princes with jeweled crowns upon
their heads, wearing ermine robes and satin doublets; and funny clowns
in ruffled gowns, with round red spots upon their cheeks and tall,
pointed caps.  And, strangest of all, these people were all made of
china, even to their clothes, and were so small that the tallest of
them was no higher than Dorothy's knee.

No one did so much as look at the travelers at first, except one little
purple china dog with an extra-large head, which came to the wall and
barked at them in a tiny voice, afterwards running away again.

"How shall we get down?" asked Dorothy.

They found the ladder so heavy they could not pull it up, so the
Scarecrow fell off the wall and the others jumped down upon him so that
the hard floor would not hurt their feet.  Of course they took pains
not to light on his head and get the pins in their feet.  When all were
safely down they picked up the Scarecrow, whose body was quite
flattened out, and patted his straw into shape again.

"We must cross this strange place in order to get to the other side,"
said Dorothy, "for it would be unwise for us to go any other way except
due South."

They began walking through the country of the china people, and the
first thing they came to was a china milkmaid milking a china cow.  As
they drew near, the cow suddenly gave a kick and kicked over the stool,
the pail, and even the milkmaid herself, and all fell on the china
ground with a great clatter.

Dorothy was shocked to see that the cow had broken her leg off, and
that the pail was lying in several small pieces, while the poor
milkmaid had a nick in her left elbow.

"There!" cried the milkmaid angrily.  "See what you have done!  My cow
has broken her leg, and I must take her to the mender's shop and have
it glued on again.  What do you mean by coming here and frightening my
cow?"

"I'm very sorry," returned Dorothy.  "Please forgive us."

But the pretty milkmaid was much too vexed to make any answer.  She
picked up the leg sulkily and led her cow away, the poor animal limping
on three legs.  As she left them the milkmaid cast many reproachful
glances over her shoulder at the clumsy strangers, holding her nicked
elbow close to her side.

Dorothy was quite grieved at this mishap.

"We must be very careful here," said the kind-hearted Woodman, "or we
may hurt these pretty little people so they will never get over it."

A little farther on Dorothy met a most beautifully dressed young
Princess, who stopped short as she saw the strangers and started to run
away.

Dorothy wanted to see more of the Princess, so she ran after her.  But
the china girl cried out:

"Don't chase me!  Don't chase me!"

She had such a frightened little voice that Dorothy stopped and said,
"Why not?"

"Because," answered the Princess, also stopping, a safe distance away,
"if I run I may fall down and break myself."

"But could you not be mended?" asked the girl.

"Oh, yes; but one is never so pretty after being mended, you know,"
replied the Princess.

"I suppose not," said Dorothy.

"Now there is Mr. Joker, one of our clowns," continued the china lady,
"who is always trying to stand upon his head.  He has broken himself so
often that he is mended in a hundred places, and doesn't look at all
pretty.  Here he comes now, so you can see for yourself."

Indeed, a jolly little clown came walking toward them, and Dorothy
could see that in spite of his pretty clothes of red and yellow and
green he was completely covered with cracks, running every which way
and showing plainly that he had been mended in many places.

The Clown put his hands in his pockets, and after puffing out his
cheeks and nodding his head at them saucily, he said:

  "My lady fair,
     Why do you stare
   At poor old Mr. Joker?
     You're quite as stiff
   And prim as if
     You'd eaten up a poker!"


"Be quiet, sir!" said the Princess.  "Can't you see these are
strangers, and should be treated with respect?"

"Well, that's respect, I expect," declared the Clown, and immediately
stood upon his head.

"Don't mind Mr. Joker," said the Princess to Dorothy.  "He is
considerably cracked in his head, and that makes him foolish."

"Oh, I don't mind him a bit," said Dorothy.  "But you are so
beautiful," she continued, "that I am sure I could love you dearly.
Won't you let me carry you back to Kansas, and stand you on Aunt Em's
mantel?  I could carry you in my basket."

"That would make me very unhappy," answered the china Princess.  "You
see, here in our country we live contentedly, and can talk and move
around as we please.  But whenever any of us are taken away our joints
at once stiffen, and we can only stand straight and look pretty.  Of
course that is all that is expected of us when we are on mantels and
cabinets and drawing-room tables, but our lives are much pleasanter
here in our own country."

"I would not make you unhappy for all the world!" exclaimed Dorothy.
"So I'll just say good-bye."

"Good-bye," replied the Princess.

They walked carefully through the china country.  The little animals
and all the people scampered out of their way, fearing the strangers
would break them, and after an hour or so the travelers reached the
other side of the country and came to another china wall.

It was not so high as the first, however, and by standing upon the
Lion's back they all managed to scramble to the top.  Then the Lion
gathered his legs under him and jumped on the wall; but just as he
jumped, he upset a china church with his tail and smashed it all to
pieces.

"That was too bad," said Dorothy, "but really I think we were lucky in
not doing these little people more harm than breaking a cow's leg and a
church.  They are all so brittle!"

"They are, indeed," said the Scarecrow, "and I am thankful I am made of
straw and cannot be easily damaged.  There are worse things in the
world than being a Scarecrow."




21.  The Lion Becomes the King of Beasts


After climbing down from the china wall the travelers found themselves
in a disagreeable country, full of bogs and marshes and covered with
tall, rank grass.  It was difficult to walk without falling into muddy
holes, for the grass was so thick that it hid them from sight.
However, by carefully picking their way, they got safely along until
they reached solid ground.  But here the country seemed wilder than
ever, and after a long and tiresome walk through the underbrush they
entered another forest, where the trees were bigger and older than any
they had ever seen.

"This forest is perfectly delightful," declared the Lion, looking
around him with joy.  "Never have I seen a more beautiful place."

"It seems gloomy," said the Scarecrow.

"Not a bit of it," answered the Lion.  "I should like to live here all
my life.  See how soft the dried leaves are under your feet and how
rich and green the moss is that clings to these old trees.  Surely no
wild beast could wish a pleasanter home."

"Perhaps there are wild beasts in the forest now," said Dorothy.

"I suppose there are," returned the Lion, "but I do not see any of them
about."

They walked through the forest until it became too dark to go any
farther.  Dorothy and Toto and the Lion lay down to sleep, while the
Woodman and the Scarecrow kept watch over them as usual.

When morning came, they started again.  Before they had gone far they
heard a low rumble, as of the growling of many wild animals.  Toto
whimpered a little, but none of the others was frightened, and they
kept along the well-trodden path until they came to an opening in the
wood, in which were gathered hundreds of beasts of every variety.
There were tigers and elephants and bears and wolves and foxes and all
the others in the natural history, and for a moment Dorothy was afraid.
But the Lion explained that the animals were holding a meeting, and he
judged by their snarling and growling that they were in great trouble.

As he spoke several of the beasts caught sight of him, and at once the
great assemblage hushed as if by magic.  The biggest of the tigers came
up to the Lion and bowed, saying:

"Welcome, O King of Beasts!  You have come in good time to fight our
enemy and bring peace to all the animals of the forest once more."

"What is your trouble?" asked the Lion quietly.

"We are all threatened," answered the tiger, "by a fierce enemy which
has lately come into this forest.  It is a most tremendous monster,
like a great spider, with a body as big as an elephant and legs as long
as a tree trunk.  It has eight of these long legs, and as the monster
crawls through the forest he seizes an animal with a leg and drags it
to his mouth, where he eats it as a spider does a fly.  Not one of us
is safe while this fierce creature is alive, and we had called a
meeting to decide how to take care of ourselves when you came among us."

The Lion thought for a moment.

"Are there any other lions in this forest?" he asked.

"No; there were some, but the monster has eaten them all.  And,
besides, they were none of them nearly so large and brave as you."

"If I put an end to your enemy, will you bow down to me and obey me as
King of the Forest?" inquired the Lion.

"We will do that gladly," returned the tiger; and all the other beasts
roared with a mighty roar: "We will!"

"Where is this great spider of yours now?" asked the Lion.

"Yonder, among the oak trees," said the tiger, pointing with his
forefoot.

"Take good care of these friends of mine," said the Lion, "and I will
go at once to fight the monster."

He bade his comrades good-bye and marched proudly away to do battle
with the enemy.

The great spider was lying asleep when the Lion found him, and it
looked so ugly that its foe turned up his nose in disgust.  Its legs
were quite as long as the tiger had said, and its body covered with
coarse black hair.  It had a great mouth, with a row of sharp teeth a
foot long; but its head was joined to the pudgy body by a neck as
slender as a wasp's waist.  This gave the Lion a hint of the best way
to attack the creature, and as he knew it was easier to fight it asleep
than awake, he gave a great spring and landed directly upon the
monster's back.  Then, with one blow of his heavy paw, all armed with
sharp claws, he knocked the spider's head from its body.  Jumping down,
he watched it until the long legs stopped wiggling, when he knew it was
quite dead.

The Lion went back to the opening where the beasts of the forest were
waiting for him and said proudly:

"You need fear your enemy no longer."

Then the beasts bowed down to the Lion as their King, and he promised
to come back and rule over them as soon as Dorothy was safely on her
way to Kansas.




22.  The Country of the Quadlings


The four travelers passed through the rest of the forest in safety, and
when they came out from its gloom saw before them a steep hill, covered
from top to bottom with great pieces of rock.

"That will be a hard climb," said the Scarecrow, "but we must get over
the hill, nevertheless."

So he led the way and the others followed.  They had nearly reached the
first rock when they heard a rough voice cry out, "Keep back!"

"Who are you?" asked the Scarecrow.

Then a head showed itself over the rock and the same voice said, "This
hill belongs to us, and we don't allow anyone to cross it."

"But we must cross it," said the Scarecrow.  "We're going to the
country of the Quadlings."

"But you shall not!" replied the voice, and there stepped from behind
the rock the strangest man the travelers had ever seen.

He was quite short and stout and had a big head, which was flat at the
top and supported by a thick neck full of wrinkles.  But he had no arms
at all, and, seeing this, the Scarecrow did not fear that so helpless a
creature could prevent them from climbing the hill.  So he said, "I'm
sorry not to do as you wish, but we must pass over your hill whether
you like it or not," and he walked boldly forward.

As quick as lightning the man's head shot forward and his neck
stretched out until the top of the head, where it was flat, struck the
Scarecrow in the middle and sent him tumbling, over and over, down the
hill.  Almost as quickly as it came the head went back to the body, and
the man laughed harshly as he said, "It isn't as easy as you think!"

A chorus of boisterous laughter came from the other rocks, and Dorothy
saw hundreds of the armless Hammer-Heads upon the hillside, one behind
every rock.

The Lion became quite angry at the laughter caused by the Scarecrow's
mishap, and giving a loud roar that echoed like thunder, he dashed up
the hill.

Again a head shot swiftly out, and the great Lion went rolling down the
hill as if he had been struck by a cannon ball.

Dorothy ran down and helped the Scarecrow to his feet, and the Lion
came up to her, feeling rather bruised and sore, and said, "It is
useless to fight people with shooting heads; no one can withstand them."

"What can we do, then?" she asked.

"Call the Winged Monkeys," suggested the Tin Woodman.  "You have still
the right to command them once more."

"Very well," she answered, and putting on the Golden Cap she uttered
the magic words.  The Monkeys were as prompt as ever, and in a few
moments the entire band stood before her.

"What are your commands?" inquired the King of the Monkeys, bowing low.

"Carry us over the hill to the country of the Quadlings," answered the
girl.

"It shall be done," said the King, and at once the Winged Monkeys
caught the four travelers and Toto up in their arms and flew away with
them.  As they passed over the hill the Hammer-Heads yelled with
vexation, and shot their heads high in the air, but they could not
reach the Winged Monkeys, which carried Dorothy and her comrades safely
over the hill and set them down in the beautiful country of the
Quadlings.

"This is the last time you can summon us," said the leader to Dorothy;
"so good-bye and good luck to you."

"Good-bye, and thank you very much," returned the girl; and the Monkeys
rose into the air and were out of sight in a twinkling.

The country of the Quadlings seemed rich and happy.  There was field
upon field of ripening grain, with well-paved roads running between,
and pretty rippling brooks with strong bridges across them.  The fences
and houses and bridges were all painted bright red, just as they had
been painted yellow in the country of the Winkies and blue in the
country of the Munchkins.  The Quadlings themselves, who were short and
fat and looked chubby and good-natured, were dressed all in red, which
showed bright against the green grass and the yellowing grain.

The Monkeys had set them down near a farmhouse, and the four travelers
walked up to it and knocked at the door.  It was opened by the farmer's
wife, and when Dorothy asked for something to eat the woman gave them
all a good dinner, with three kinds of cake and four kinds of cookies,
and a bowl of milk for Toto.

"How far is it to the Castle of Glinda?" asked the child.

"It is not a great way," answered the farmer's wife.  "Take the road to
the South and you will soon reach it."

Thanking the good woman, they started afresh and walked by the fields
and across the pretty bridges until they saw before them a very
beautiful Castle.  Before the gates were three young girls, dressed in
handsome red uniforms trimmed with gold braid; and as Dorothy
approached, one of them said to her:

"Why have you come to the South Country?"

"To see the Good Witch who rules here," she answered.  "Will you take
me to her?"

"Let me have your name, and I will ask Glinda if she will receive you."
They told who they were, and the girl soldier went into the Castle.
After a few moments she came back to say that Dorothy and the others
were to be admitted at once.




23.  Glinda The Good Witch Grants Dorothy's Wish


Before they went to see Glinda, however, they were taken to a room of
the Castle, where Dorothy washed her face and combed her hair, and the
Lion shook the dust out of his mane, and the Scarecrow patted himself
into his best shape, and the Woodman polished his tin and oiled his
joints.

When they were all quite presentable they followed the soldier girl
into a big room where the Witch Glinda sat upon a throne of rubies.

She was both beautiful and young to their eyes.  Her hair was a rich
red in color and fell in flowing ringlets over her shoulders.  Her
dress was pure white but her eyes were blue, and they looked kindly
upon the little girl.

"What can I do for you, my child?" she asked.

Dorothy told the Witch all her story: how the cyclone had brought her
to the Land of Oz, how she had found her companions, and of the
wonderful adventures they had met with.
