adorned with the most beautiful things-golden apples, sweet-meats, toys
and hundreds of candles.'

'And then?' asked the fir-tree, trembling in every limb with eagerness,
'and then? what happens then?'

'Oh, we haven't seen anything more than that. That was simply
matchless!'

'Am I too destined to the same brilliant career?' wondered the fir-tree
excitedly. 'That is even better than sailing over the sea! I am sick
with longing. If it were only Christmas! Now I am tall and grown-up like
those which were taken away last year. Ah, if I were only in the cart!
If I were only in the warm room with all the splendour and magnificence!
And then? Then comes something better, something still more beautiful,
else why should they dress us up? There must be something greater,
something grander to come--but what? Oh! I am pining away! I really
don't know what's the matter with me!'

'Rejoice in us,' said the air and sunshine, 'rejoice in your fresh youth
in the free air!'

But it took no notice, and just grew and grew; there it stood fresh and
green in winter and summer, and all who saw it said, 'What a beautiful
tree!' And at Christmas-time it was the first to be cut down. The axe
went deep into the pith; the tree fell to the ground with a groan; it
felt bruised and faint. It could not think of happiness, it was sad at
leaving its home, the spot where it had sprung up; it knew, too, that it
would never see again its dear old companions, or the little shrubs
and flowers, perhaps not even the birds. Altogether the parting was not
pleasant.

When the tree came to itself again it was packed in a yard with other
trees, and a man was saying, 'This is a splendid one, we shall only want
this.'

Then came two footmen in livery and carried the fir-tree to a large and
beautiful room. There were pictures hanging on the walls, and near the
Dutch stove stood great Chinese vases with lions on their lids; there
were armchairs, silk-covered sofas, big tables laden with picture-books
and toys, worth hundreds of pounds-at least, so the children said. The
fir-tree was placed in a great tub filled with sand, but no one could
see that it was a tub, for it was all hung with greenery and stood on a
gay carpet. How the tree trembled! What was coming now? On its
branches they hung little nets cut out of coloured paper, each full of
sugarplums; gilt apples and nuts hung down as if they were growing, over
a hundred red, blue, and white tapers were fastened among the branches.
Dolls as life-like as human beings--the fir-tree had never seen any
before were suspended among the green, and right up at the top was fixed
a gold tinsel star; it was gorgeous, quite unusually gorgeous!

'To-night,' they all said, 'to-night it will be lighted!'

'Ah!' thought the tree, 'if it were only evening! Then the tapers would
soon be lighted. What will happen then? I wonder whether the trees will
come from the wood to see me, or if the sparrows will fly against the
window panes? Am I to stand here decked out thus through winter and
summer?'

It was not a bad guess, but the fir-tree had real bark-ache from sheer
longing, and bark-ache in trees is just as bad as head-ache in human
beings.

Now the tapers were lighted. What a glitter! What splendour! The tree
quivered in all its branches so much, that one of the candles caught
the green, and singed it. 'Take care!' cried the young ladies, and they
extinguished it.

Now the tree did not even dare to quiver. It was really terrible! It was
so afraid of losing any of its ornaments, and it was quite bewildered by
all the radiance.

And then the folding doors were opened, and a crowd of children rushed
in, as though they wanted to knock down the whole tree, whilst the older
people followed soberly. The children stood quite silent, but only for
a moment, and then they shouted again, and danced round the tree, and
snatched off one present after another.

'What are they doing?' thought the tree. 'What is going to happen?' And
the tapers burnt low on the branches, and were put out one by one, and
then the children were given permission to plunder the tree. They rushed
at it so that all its boughs creaked; if it had not been fastened by the
gold star at the top to the ceiling, it would have been overthrown.

The children danced about with their splendid toys, and no one looked at
the tree, except the old nurse, who came and peeped amongst the boughs,
just to see if a fig or an apple had been forgotten.

'A story! a story!' cried the children, and dragged a little stout
man to the tree; he sat down beneath it, saying, 'Here we are in the
greenwood, and the tree will be delighted to listen! But I am only going
to tell one story. Shall it be Henny Penny or Humpty Dumpty who fell
downstairs, and yet gained great honour and married a princess?'

'Henny Penny!' cried some; 'Humpty Dumpty!' cried others; there was a
perfect babel of voices! Only the fir-tree kept silent, and thought, 'Am
I not to be in it? Am I to have nothing to do with it?'

But it had already been in it, and played out its part. And the man told
them about Humpty Dumpty who fell downstairs and married a princess. The
children clapped their hands and cried, 'Another! another!' They wanted
the story of Henny Penny also, but they only got Humpty Dumpty. The
fir-tree stood quite astonished and thoughtful; the birds in the wood
had never related anything like that. 'Humpty Dumpty fell downstairs and
yet married a princess! yes, that is the way of the world!' thought the
tree, and was sure it must be true, because such a nice man had told
the story. 'Well, who knows? Perhaps I shall fall downstairs and marry a
princess.' And it rejoiced to think that next day it would be decked out
again with candles, toys, glittering ornaments, and fruits. 'To-morrow
I shall quiver again with excitement. I shall enjoy to the full all my
splendour. To-morrow I shall hear Humpty Dumpty again, and perhaps Henny
Penny too.' And the tree stood silent and lost in thought all through
the night.

Next morning the servants came in. 'Now the dressing up will begin
again,' thought the tree. But they dragged it out of the room, and up
the stairs to the lumber-room, and put it in a dark corner, where no ray
of light could penetrate. 'What does this mean?' thought the tree. 'What
am I to do here? What is there for me to hear?' And it leant against the
wall, and thought and thought. And there was time enough for that, for
days and nights went by, and no one came; at last when some one did
come, it was only to put some great boxes into the corner. Now the tree
was quite covered; it seemed as if it had been quite forgotten.

'Now it is winter out-doors,' thought the fir-tree. 'The ground is hard
and covered with snow, they can't plant me yet, and that is why I am
staying here under cover till the spring comes. How thoughtful they are!
Only I wish it were not so terribly dark and lonely here; not even
a little hare! It was so nice out in the wood, when the snow lay all
around, and the hare leapt past me; yes, even when he leapt over me: but
I didn't like it then. It's so dreadfully lonely up here.'

'Squeak, squeak!' said a little mouse, stealing out, followed by a
second. They sniffed at the fir-tree, and then crept between its boughs.
'It's frightfully cold,' said the little mice. 'How nice it is to be
here! Don't you think so too, you old fir-tree?'

'I'm not at all old,' said the tree; 'there are many much older than I
am.'

'Where do you come from?' asked the mice, 'and what do you know?' They
were extremely inquisitive. 'Do tell us about the most beautiful
place in the world. Is that where you come from? Have you been in the
storeroom, where cheeses lie on the shelves, and hams hang from the
ceiling, where one dances on tallow candles, and where one goes in thin
and comes out fat?'

'I know nothing about that,' said the tree. 'But I know the wood, where
the sun shines, and the birds sing.' And then it told them all about
its young days, and the little mice had never heard anything like that
before, and they listened with all their ears, and said: 'Oh, how much
you have seen! How lucky you have been!'

'I?' said the fir-tree, and then it thought over what it had told them.
'Yes, on the whole those were very happy times.' But then it went on to
tell them about Christmas Eve, when it had been adorned with sweet-meats
and tapers.

'Oh!' said the little mice, 'how lucky you have been, you old fir-tree!'

'I'm not at all old' said the tree. 'I only came from the wood this
winter. I am only a little backward, perhaps, in my growth.'

'How beautifully you tell stories!' said the little mice. And next
evening they came with four others, who wanted to hear the tree's story,
and it told still more, for it remembered everything so clearly and
thought: 'Those were happy times! But they may come again. Humpty dumpty
fell downstairs, and yet he married a princess; perhaps I shall also
marry a princess!' And then it thought of a pretty little birch-tree
that grew out in the wood, and seemed to the fir-tree a real princess,
and a very beautiful one too.

'Who is Humpty Dumpty?' asked the little mice.

And then the tree told the whole story; it could remember every single
word, and the little mice were ready to leap on to the topmost branch
out of sheer joy! Next night many more mice came, and on Sunday even
two rats; but they did not care about the story, and that troubled the
little mice, for now they thought less of it too.

'Is that the only story you know?' asked the rats.

'The only one,' answered the tree. 'I heard that on my happiest evening,
but I did not realise then how happy I was.'

'That's a very poor story. Don't you know one about bacon or tallow
candles? a storeroom story?'

'No,' said the tree.

'Then we are much obliged to you,' said the rats, and they went back to
their friends.

At last the little mice went off also, and the tree said, sighing:
'Really it was very pleasant when the lively little mice sat round and
listened whilst I told them stories. But now that's over too. But now I
will think of the time when I shall be brought out again, to keep up my
spirits.'

But when did that happen? Well, it was one morning when they came to
tidy up the lumber-room; they threw it really rather roughly on the
floor, but a servant dragged it off at once downstairs, where there was
daylight once more.

'Now life begins again!' thought the tree. It felt the fresh air, the
first rays of the sun, and there it was out in the yard! Everything
passed so quickly; the tree quite forgot to notice itself, there was so
much to look at all around. The yard opened on a garden full of flowers;
the roses were so fresh and sweet, hanging over a little trellis,
the lime-trees were in blossom, and the swallows flew about, saying:
'Quirre-virre-vil, my husband has come home;' but it was not the
fir-tree they meant.

'Now I shall live,' thought the tree joyfully, stretching out its
branches wide; but, alas! they were all withered and yellow; and it was
lying in a corner among weeds and nettles. The golden star was still on
its highest bough, and it glittered in the bright sunlight. In the yard
some of the merry children were playing, who had danced so gaily round
the tree at Christmas. One of the little ones ran up, and tore off the
gold star.

'Look what was left on the ugly old fir-tree!' he cried, and stamped on
the boughs so that they cracked under his feet.

And the tree looked at all the splendour and freshness of the flowers in
the garden, and then looked at itself, and wished that it had been left
lying in the dark corner of the lumber-room; it thought of its fresh
youth in the wood, of the merry Christmas Eve, and of the little mice
who had listened so happily to the story of Humpty Dumpty.

'Too late! Too late!' thought the old tree. 'If only I had enjoyed
myself whilst I could. Now all is over and gone.'

And a servant came and cut the tree into small pieces, there was quite
a bundle of them; they flickered brightly under the great copper in
the brew-house; the tree sighed deeply, and each sigh was like a
pistol-shot; so the children who were playing there ran up, and sat in
front of the fire, gazing at it, and crying, 'Piff! puff! bang!' But
for each report, which was really a sigh, the tree was thinking of a
summer's day in the wood, or of a winter's night out there, when the
stars were shining; it thought of Christmas Eve, and of Humpty Dumpty,
which was the only story it had heard, or could tell, and then the tree
had burnt away.

The children played on in the garden, and the youngest had the golden
star on his breast, which the tree had worn on the happiest evening of
its life; and now that was past--and the tree had passed away--and the
story too, all ended and done with.

And that's the way with all stories!

Here our Danish author ends. This is what people call sentiment, and I
hope you enjoy it!




Hans, the Mermaid's Son

Translated from the Danish.


In a village there once lived a smith called Basmus, who was in a very
poor way. He was still a young man, and a strong handsome fellow to
boot, but he had many little children and there was little to be earned
by his trade. He was, however, a diligent and hard-working man, and when
he had no work in the smithy he was out at sea fishing, or gathering
wreckage on the shore.

It happened one time that he had gone out to fish in good weather,
all alone in a little boat, but he did not come home that day, nor the
following one, so that all believed he had perished out at sea. On the
third day, however, Basmus came to shore again and had his boat full
of fish, so big and fat that no one had ever seen their like. There
was nothing the matter with him, and he complained neither of hunger or
thirst. He had got into a fog, he said, and could not find land again.
What he did not tell, however, was where he had been all the time; that
only came out six years later, when people got to know that he had been
caught by a mermaid out on the deep sea, and had been her guest during
the three days that he was missing. From that time forth he went out no
more to fish; nor, indeed, did he require to do so, for whenever he went
down to the shore it never failed that some wreckage was washed up, and
in it all kinds of valuable things. In those days everyone took what
they found and got leave to keep it, so that the smith grew more
prosperous day by day.

When seven years had passed since the smith went out to sea, it happened
one morning, as he stood in the smithy, mending a plough, that a
handsome young lad came in to him and said, 'Good-day, father; my mother
the mermaid sends her greetings, and says that she has had me for six
years now, and you can keep me for as long.'

He was a strange enough boy to be six years old, for he looked as if he
were eighteen, and was even bigger and stronger than lads commonly are
at that age.

'Will you have a bite of bread?' said the smith.

'Oh, yes,' said Hans, for that was his name.

The smith then told his wife to cut a piece of bread for him. She did
so, and the boy swallowed it at one mouthful and went out again to the
smithy to his father.

'Have you got all you can eat?' said the smith.

'No,' said Hans, 'that was just a little bit.'

The smith went into the house and took a whole loaf, which he cut into
two slices and put butter and cheese between them, and this he gave to
Hans. In a while the boy came out to the smithy again.

'Well, have you got as much as you can eat?' said the smith.

'No, not nearly,' said Hans; 'I must try to find a better place than
this, for I can see that I shall never get my fill here.'

Hans wished to set off at once, as soon as his father would make a staff
for him of such a kind as he wanted.

'It must be of iron,' said he, 'and one that can hold out.'

The smith brought him an iron rod as thick as an ordinary staff, but
Hans took it and twisted it round his finger, so that wouldn't do. Then
the smith came dragging one as thick as a waggon-pole, but Hans bent it
over his knee and broke it like a straw. The smith then had to collect
all the iron he had, and Hans held it while his father forged for him a
staff, which was heavier than the anvil. When Hans had got this he said,
'Many thanks, father; now I have got my inheritance.' With this he set
off into the country, and the smith was very pleased to be rid of that
son, before he ate him out of house and home.

Hans first arrived at a large estate, and it so happened that the squire
himself was standing outside the farmyard.

'Where are you going?' said the squire.

'I am looking for a place,' said Hans, 'where they have need of strong
fellows, and can give them plenty to eat.'

'Well,' said the squire, 'I generally have twenty-four men at this time
of the year, but I have only twelve just now, so I can easily take you
on.'

'Very well,' said Hans, 'I shall easily do twelve men's work, but then I
must also have as much to eat as the twelve would.'

All this was agreed to, and the squire took Hans into the kitchen, and
told the servant girls that the new man was to have as much food as the
other twelve. It was arranged that he should have a pot to himself, and
he could then use the ladle to take his food with.

It was in the evening that Hans arrived there, so he did nothing more
that day than eat his supper--a big pot of buck-wheat porridge, which
he cleaned to the bottom and was then so far satisfied that he said he
could sleep on that, so he went off to bed. He slept both well and long,
and all the rest were up and at their work while he was still sleeping
soundly. The squire was also on foot, for he was curious to see how the
new man would behave who was both to eat and work for twelve.

But as yet there was no Hans to be seen, and the sun was already high in
the heavens, so the squire himself went and called on him.

'Get up, Hans,' he cried; 'you are sleeping too long.'

Hans woke up and rubbed his eyes. 'Yes, that's true,' he said, 'I must
get up and have my breakfast.'
