boot-heels and tops he could find, you know."

"Oh!" said the old gentleman, wondering if other revelations would come
to light about the early days of the Peppers.

"Isn't Dr. Fisher lovely?" cried Polly, with sparkling eyes, "just the
same as ever. Mamsie, I ought to do something for him.

"He is as good as gold," assented Mrs. Pepper heartily. "You've done
something, I'm sure, Polly. The medical books you bought out of your
pocket money, and sent him, pleased him more than anything you could
give him."

"But I want to do something now," said Polly. "Oh! just think how good
he was to us."

"May we never forget it!" exclaimed Mrs. Pepper, wiping her eyes.

"But he's very unwise," said Mr. King a trifle testily, "not to take up
with my offer to establish him in the town. A man like him could easily
hold a good practice, because the fellow's got ability."

"Oh! Dr. Fisher wouldn't leave Badgertown," cried all the Peppers in a
bunch. "And what would the poor people here do without him?" finished
Polly.

"Well, well, never mind, he won't come to town, and that's enough,"
said the old gentleman quickly. "Aside from that, he's a sensible chap,
and one quite to my liking."

"Oh, Polly!" cried Phronsie suddenly, and lifting her head, she
fastened her brown eyes on the face above her, "wasn't Mamsie's
birthday cake good?"

"The flowers were pretty, but the cake was heavy, don't you remember?"
said Polly, who hadn't recovered from that grief even yet.

"I thought it was just beautiful," cried Mrs. Pepper hastily. "No one
could have baked it better in the old stove you had. I'm sure we ate it
all up, every crumb."

"We kept it in the old cupboard," cried Joel, rushing over to the
corner to swing the door open. "And we never once peeked, Mamsie, so
afraid you'd suspect."

"You kept staring at the cupboard door all the evening, Joe, you know
you did," cried Ben; "you were just within a hair's breadth of letting
the whole thing out ever so many times. Polly and I had to drag you
away. We were glad enough when you went to bed, I can tell you."

"You were always sending me off to bed in those days," said Joel,
taking his head out of the cupboard to throw vindictive glances over to
the group around the stove.

"I wish we could do so now," said Ben.

"And those two," Joel went on, pointing to Polly and Ben, "used to go
whispering around a lot of old secrets, that they wouldn't tell us. Oh!
it was perfectly awful, wasn't it, Dave?" bestowing a small pinch on
that individual's shoulder.

"I liked the secrets best not to know them till Polly and Ben got ready
to tell us," said David slowly; "then they were just magnificent."

Phronsie had laid her head back in the waiting lap, and was crooning
softly to herself.

"I want to go and see dear good Mr. Beebe," she said presently, "and
nice Mrs. Beebe, can I, Mamsie?" looking over at her.

"To be sure," cried Mrs. Pepper, "you shall indeed, child."

"Beebe-Beebe, and who is he, pray?" demanded Mr. King.

"Oh! he keeps the shoe shop over in the Center," explained three or
four voices, "and Phronsie's new shoes were bought there, you know."

"And he gave me pink and white candy-sticks," said Phronsie, "and he
was very nice; and I like him very much."

"And Mrs. Beebe gave us doughnuts all around," communicated Joel; "I
don't know but that I liked those best. There was more to them."

"So you always bought your new shoes of the Beebes?" asked the old
gentleman, a question that brought all the five Peppers around his
chair at once.

"We didn't ever have new shoes that I can remember," said Joel quickly,
"except Phronsie's, and once Ben had a new pair. He had to, because he
was the oldest, you know."

"Oh!" said Mr. King.

"You see," said Phronsie, shaking her head gravely, while she laid one
hand on his knee, "we were very poor, Grandpapa dear. Don't you
understand?"

"Yes, yes, child," said old Mr. King; "there, get up here," and he took
her within his arms.

"No, no, you're not going to talk yet," seeing Percy and Van beginning
violent efforts to join in the conversation. "Let the Peppers have a
chance to talk over old times first. See how good Jasper is to wait."

"I would much prefer to hear the Peppers talk forever," said Jasper,
smiling down on the two Whitneys, "than to have the gates opened for a
general flood. Go on, do, Polly and Ben, and the rest of you."

"Oh! there is so much," said Polly despairingly, clasping her hands,
"we shouldn't get through if we talked ten years, should we, Ben?
Mamsie," and she rushed over to her, "can we have a baking time
to-morrow, just as we used to in the old days? Oh! do say yes."

"Yes, do say yes," echoed Jasper, also rushing to the side of the
little rocking-chair. "You will, won't you, Mrs. Pepper?"

"Hoh! hoh!" cried the two Whitneys derisively, "I thought you could
'hear the Peppers talk forever.' That's great, Jasper."

"Well, when it comes to hearing a proposal for a baking frolic, my
principles are thrown to the wind," said Jasper recklessly. "Why, boys,
that's the first thing I remember about the little brown house. Do say
yes, Mrs. Pepper!"




VIII

SOME BADGERTOWN CALLS


"Well, I declare!" exclaimed Grandma Bascom, opening the door and
looking in, "I never!"

"Come in," cried Mr. King sociably. His night over at the parsonage had
been a most fortunate experiment. "I haven't slept so finely in ten
years," he confided to Mrs. Whitney as they met at breakfast at the
minister's table. So now, his face wreathed with smiles, he repeated
his invitation. "Come in, do, Mrs. Bascom; we're glad to see you."

"I never!" said Grandma Bascom once more, for want of something better
to say, and coming close to the center of operations.

Jasper, attired in one of Mrs. Pepper's long aprons, which was fastened
in the style of the old days, by the strings around his neck, was
busily engaged in rolling out under Polly's direction, a thin paste,
expected presently under the genial warmth of the waiting stove, to
evolve into most toothsome cakes. Ben was similarly attired, and
similarly employed; while Joel and David were in a sticky state,
preparing their dough after their own receipt, over at the corner
table, their movements closely followed by the three Whitneys.

Phronsie, before a board laid across two chairs, was enlightening old
Mr. King who sat by her, into the mysteries of baking day.

"Do bake a gingerbread boy," he begged. "I never had anything half so
good as the one you sent over to Hingham."

"You were my poor sick man then," observed Phronsie, with slow, even
pats on her bit of dough. "Please, the rolling-pin now, Grandpapa dear."

"To be sure," cried the old gentleman; "here, Jappy, my boy, be so good
as to hand us over that article."

"And you see," continued Phronsie, receiving the rolling-pin, and
making the deftest of passes with it over the soft mass, "I couldn't
send you anything better, though I wanted to, Grandpapa dear."

"Better?" cried Mr. King. "I should think not; you couldn't have made
me anything that pleased me more, had you tried a thousand times."

Phronsie never tired of hearing this, and now humming a soft note of
thanks, proceeded with her task, declaring that she would make the best
gingerbread boy that could possibly be achieved.

Grandma Bascom was still reiterating "I never," and going slowly from
one group to another to inspect operations. When she came to Phronsie,
she stopped short, raising her hands in surprise. "Seems as ef 'twas
only yesterday when the Peppers went away, though land knows I've
missed 'em all most dretfully, 'an there sets that blessed child
baking, as big as any of 'em. I never!"

"Have you any more raisins to give us, Grandma?" shouted Joel across
the kitchen. "They were terribly hard," he added in his natural voice;
"almost broke our teeth."

"Hey?" called Grandma back again.

"Raisins, Grandma, or peppermints," cried Joel.

"Oh, Joe, for shame!" called Ben.

"I'm going to have the fun of going after them," declared Joel,
throwing down his dough-pat, and wiping his sticky fingers on his
apron; "just like old times--so there!"

"I'll go over and get 'em," said Grandma; "you come along with me,"
looking admiringly up at the tall boy; so the two, Joel laughing and
hopping by her side as if he were five years younger, disappeared,
well-pleased with each other.

"Now I shall take his dough," declared Dick, rushing around the end of
the table to Joel's deserted place.

"No such thing," declared Van, flying out of his chair. "Leave your
hands off, youngster! that's to be mine."

Polly looked up from the little cookies she was cutting with the top of
a tin baking powder box and their eyes met.

"I didn't promise not to have it out with Dicky," said Van stoutly.
"He's a perfect plague, and always under foot. I never thought of such
a thing as not making him stand around, Polly."

But the brown eyes did not return to their task, as Polly mechanically
stamped another cooky.

"I only promised not to have a bout with Percy," Van proceeded
uncomfortably. And in the same breath, "Go ahead, If you want it,
Dicky, I don't care."

"I do want it," declared Dick, clambering into Van's chair, while Van
returned to his own, "and I'm going to have it too. I guess you think
you'd better give it up now, sir; I'm getting so big."

"Softly there, Dicky," said Mrs. Whitney, over in the window-seat with
her fancy work; "if Van gives up, you should thank him; I think he is
very good to do it." And the bigger boy's heart warmed with the radiant
smile she sent him.

Dick gave several vicious thrusts to his dough, and looked up at last
to say very much against his will, "Thank you," and adding brightly,
"but you know I'm getting big, sir, and you'd better give up."

"All right," said Van, with that smile in his heart feeling equal to
anything.

"Now," cried Jasper, with a flourish of his baking apron, "mine are
ready. Here goes!" and he opened the oven door and pushed in a pan of
biscuit.

"Jappy's always ahead in everything," grumbled Percy, laboring away at
his dough. "How in the world do you make the thing roll out straight?
Mine humps up in the middle."

"Put some more flour on the board," said Polly, running over to him.
"There, now see, Percy, if that doesn't roll smooth." "It does with
you," said Percy, taking the rolling-pin again, to send it violently
over the long-suffering dough, "and--I declare, it's going to do with
me," he cried, in delight at the large flat cake staring up at him from
the board. "Now, says I, I'll beat you, Jappy!" And presently the whole
kitchen resounded with a merry din, as the several cakes and biscuits
were declared almost ready for their respective pans.

"But, I can tell you, this gingerbread boy is going in next," declared
Mr. King from Phronsie's baking-board. "It's almost done, isn't it,
child?"

"Not quite, Grandpapa," said Phronsie; "this eye won't stay in just
like the other. It doesn't look the same way, don't you see?" pointing
to the currant that certainly showed no inclination to do its duty, as
any well-bred eye should. "Wait just a moment, please; I'll pull it out
and stick it in again."

"Take another," advised the old gentleman, fumbling over the little
heap of currants on the saucer. "There, here's a good round one, and
very expressive, too, Phronsie."

"That's lovely," hummed Phronsie, accepting the new eye with very
sticky fingers. "Now, he's all ready," as she set it in its place, and
took the boy up tenderly. "Give me a pan, do, Polly."

"Did you cut that out?" cried Dick, turning around in his chair, and
regarding her enviously, "all alone by yourself? Didn't Grandpapa help
you just one teeny bit to make the legs and the hands?"

"No; she made it all herself," said the old gentleman, with justifiable
pride. "There, Phronsie, here's your pan," as Polly set it down before
her with a "You precious dear, that's perfectly elegant!"

Phronsie placed the boy within the pan, and gave it many a loving pat.
"Grandpapa sat here, and looked at it, and smiled," she said, turning
her eyes gravely on Dick, "and that helped ever so much. I couldn't
ever have made it so nice alone. Good-by; now bake like a good boy. Let
me put it in the oven all by myself, do, Polly," she begged.

So Phronsie, the old gentleman escorting her in mortal dread that she
would be burned, safely tucked her long pan into the warmest corner,
shut the door, and gravely consulted the clock. "If I look at it in
twenty-one minutes, I think it will be done," she said, "quite brown."

In twenty-one minutes the whole kitchen was as far removed from being
the scene of a baking exploit as was possible. Everything was cleared
away, and set up primly in its place, leaving only a row of fine little
biscuits and cookies, with Phronsie's gingerbread boy in the midst, to
tell the tale of what had been going on. Outside there was a great
commotion.

Deacon Brown's old wagon stood at the gate, for the Peppers and their
friends; and, oh! joy, not the old horse between the shafts, but a
newer and much livelier beast. And on the straw laid in the bottom of
the wagon, the seats being removed, disported all the merry group, Mr.
King alone having the dignity of a chair.

Deacon Brown, delighted with his scheme of bringing the wagon over as a
surprise for the Peppers to take a drive in, was on the side of the
narrow foot-path, chuckling and rubbing his hands together. "You won't
have to drive so easy as you used to, Ben," he called out, "this
fellow's chirk; give him his head. Sho! what you goin' that way for?"
as Ben turned off down the lane.

"To Grandma Bascom's," shouted two or three voices.

"Joel's over there," sang out Polly.

"We couldn't go without him, you know," chirped Phronsie, poking a
distressed little face up from the straw heap.
