
"You might if you were as young as Tommy, and had just come."

"Shall you take him under your wing?"

"Yes, if he needs it."

We now come to the few minutes preceding the return of Hector from his
walk, as indicated in the last chapter.

Tommy Cooper was sitting in the school yard, with a disconsolate look,
when Jim Smith, who was never happier than when he was bullying other
boys, espied him.

"What's the matter with you, young one?" he said, roughly, "Is your
grandmother dead?"

"No," answered Tommy, briefly.

"Come here and play."

"I would rather not."

"I am not going to have you sulking round here. Do you hear me?"

"Are you one of the teachers?" asked Tommy, innocently.

"You'll find out who I am," answered Jim, roughly. "Here, Palmer, do you
want a little fun with this young one?"

Palmer and Bates were Jim Smith's most devoted adherents.

"What are you going to do, Jim?" questioned Palmer.

"I'm going to stir him up a little," said Jim, with a malicious smile.
"Go and get a blanket."

"All right!" said Palmer.

"We'll toss him in a blanket. He won't look so sulky after we get
through with him."

There were two or three other boys standing by, who heard these words.

"It's a shame!" said one, in a low voice. "See the poor little chap, how
sad he looks! I felt just as he does when I first came to school."

"Jim ought not to do it," said the second. "It's a mean thing to do."

"Tell him so."

"No, thank you. He'd treat me the same way."

The two speakers were among the smaller boys, neither being over
fourteen, and though they sympathized with Tommy, their sympathy was not
likely to do him any good.

Out came Palmer with the blanket.

"Are there any teachers about?" asked Jim.

"No."

"That's good. We shan't be interfered with. Here, young one, come here."

"What for?" asked Tommy, looking frightened.

"Come here, and you'll find out."

But Tommy had already guessed. He had read a story of English school
life, in which a boy had been tossed in a blanket, and he was not slow
in comprehending the situation.

"Oh, don't toss me in a blanket!" said the poor boy, clasping his hands.

"Sorry to disturb you, but it's got to be done, young one," said Jim.
"Here, jump in. It'll do you good."

"Oh, don't!" sobbed the poor boy. "It'll hurt me."

"No, it won't! Don't be a cry baby. We'll make a man of you."

But Tommy was not persuaded. He jumped up, and tried to make his escape.
But, of course, there was no chance for him. Jim Smith overtook him in a
couple of strides, and seizing him roughly by the collar, dragged him
to the blanket, which by this time Palmer and one of the other boys, who
had been impressed into the service reluctantly, were holding.

Jim Smith, taking up Tommy bodily, threw him into the blanket, and then
seizing one end, gave it a violent toss. Up went the boy into the air,
and tumbling back again into the blanket was raised again.

"Raise him, boys!" shouted Jim. "Give him a hoist!"

Then it was that Tommy screamed, and Hector heard his cry for help.

He came rushing round the corner of the building, and comprehended, at a
glance, what was going on.

Naturally his hot indignation was much stirred.

"For shame, you brutes!" he cried. "Stop that!"

If there was anyone whom Jim Smith did not want to see at this moment,
it was Hector Roscoe. He would much rather have seen one of the ushers.
He saw that he was in a scrape, but his pride would not allow him to
back out.

"Keep on, boys!" he cried. "It's none of Roscoe's business. He'd better
clear out, or we'll toss him."

As he spoke he gave another toss.

"Save me, Hector!" cried Tommy, espying his friend's arrival with joy.

Hector was not the boy to let such an appeal go unheeded. He sprang
forward, dealt Jim Smith a powerful blow, that made him stagger, and let
go the blanket, and then helped Tommy to his feet.

"Run into the house. Tommy!" he said. "There may be some rough work
here."

He faced round just in time to fend off partially a blow from the angry
bully.

"Take that for your impudence!" shouted Jim Smith. "I'll teach you to
meddle with, me."

But Jim reckoned without his host. The blow was returned with interest,
and, in the heat of his indignation, Hector followed it up with such
a volley that the bully retreated in discomfiture, and was glad to
withdraw from the contest.

"I'll pay you for this, you scoundrel!" he said, venomously.

"Whenever you please, you big brute!" returned Hector, contemptuously.
"It is just like you to tease small boys. If you annoy Tommy Cooper
again, you'll hear from me."

"I'd like to choke that fellow!" muttered Jim. "Either he or I will have
to leave this school."




CHAPTER XVII. JIM SMITH'S REVENGE.



It would be natural to suppose that Jim Smith, relying upon his
influence with his uncle, would have reported this last "outrage," as he
chose to consider it, to the principal, thus securing the punishment of
Hector. But he was crafty, and considered that no punishment Hector was
likely to receive would satisfy him. Corporal punishment for taking the
part of an ill-used boy, Hector was probably too spirited to submit to,
and, under these circumstances, it would hardly have been inflicted.
Besides, Jim was aware that the offense for which Hector had attacked
him was not likely, if made known, to secure sympathy. Even his uncle
would be against him, for he was fond of money, and had no wish to lose
the new pupil, whose friends were well able to pay for him.

No! He decided that what he wanted was to bring Hector into disgrace.
The method did not immediately occur to him, but after a while he saw
his way clear.

His uncle's bedchamber was on the second floor, and Jim's directly over
it on the third story. Some of the other boys, including Hector, had
rooms also on the third floor.

Jim was going upstairs one day when, through the door of his uncle's
chamber, which chanced to be open, he saw a wallet lying on the bureau.
On the impulse of the moment, he walked in on tiptoes, secured the
wallet, and slipped it hurriedly into his pocket. Then he made all haste
upstairs, and bolted himself into his own room. Two other boys slept
there, but both were downstairs in the playground.

Jim took the wallet from his pocket and eagerly scanned the contents.
There were eight five-dollar bills and ten dollars in small bills,
besides a few papers, which may be accurately described as of no value
to anyone but the owner.

The boy's face assumed a covetous look. He, as well as his uncle, was
fond of money--a taste which, unfortunately, as he regarded it, he was
unable to gratify. His family was poor, and he was received at half
price by Socrates Smith on the score of relationship, but his allowance
of pocket money was less than that of many of the small boys. He made
up the deficiency, in part, by compelling them to contribute to his
pleasures. If any boy purchased candy, or any other delicacy, Jim, if he
learned the fact, required him to give him a portion, just as the feudal
lords exacted tribute from their serfs and dependents. Still, this was
not wholly satisfactory, and Jim longed, instead, for a supply of money
to spend as he chose.

So the thought came to him, as he scanned the contents of the wallet:
"Why shouldn't I take out one or two of these bills before disposing of
it? No one will lay it to me."

The temptation proved too strong for Jim's power of resistance. He
selected a five-dollar bill and five dollars in small bills, and
reluctantly replaced the rest of the money in the wallet.

"So far, so good!" he thought. "That's a good idea."

Then, unlocking the door, he passed along the entry till he came to the
room occupied by Hector. As he or one of the two boys who roomed with
him might be in the room, he looked first through the keyhole.

"The coast is clear!" he said to himself, in a tone of satisfaction.

Still, he opened the door cautiously, and stepped with catlike tread
into the room. Then he looked about the room. Hanging on nails were
several garments belonging to the inmates of the room. Jim selected a
pair of pants which he knew belonged to Hector, and hurrying forward,
thrust the wallet into one of the side pockets. Then, with a look of
satisfaction, he left the room, shutting the door carefully behind him.

"There," he said to himself, with exultation. "That'll fix him! Perhaps
he'll wish he hadn't put on quite so many airs."

He was rather annoyed, as he walked along the corridor, back to his
own room, to encounter Wilkins. He had artfully chosen a time when he
thought all the boys would be out, and he heartily wished that some
untoward chance had not brought Wilkins in.

"Where are you going, Jim?" asked Wilkins.

"I went to Bates' room, thinking he might be in, but he wasn't."

"Do you want him? I left him out on the playground."

"Oh, it's no matter! It'll keep!" said Jim, indifferently.

"I got out of that pretty well!" he reflected complacently.

Perhaps Jim Smith would not have felt quite so complacent, if he had
known that at the time he entered Hector's room it was occupied, though
he could not see the occupant. It so chanced that Ben Platt, one of
Hector's roommates, was in the closet, concealed from the view of anyone
entering the room, yet so placed that he could see through the partially
open door what wras passing in the room.

When he saw Jim Smith enter he was surprised, for he knew that that
young man was not on visiting terms with the boy who had discomfited and
humiliated him.

"What on earth can Jim want?" he asked himself.

He did not have long to wait for an answer though not a real one; but
actions, as men have often heard, speak louder than words.

When he saw Jim steal up to Hector's pants, and producing a wallet,
hastily thrust it into one of the pockets, he could hardly believe the
testimony of his eyes.

"Well!" he ejaculated, inwardly, "I would not have believed it if I
hadn't seen it. I knew Jim was a bully and a tyrant, but I didn't think
he was as contemptible as all that."

The wallet he recognized at once, for he had more than once seen
Socrates take it out of his pocket.

"It's old Sock's wallet!" he said to himself. "It's clear that Jim has
taken it, and means to have it found in Roscoe's possession. That's as
mean a trick as I ever heard of."

Just then Wilkins entered the room. Wilkins and Ben Platt were Hector's
two roommates.

"Hello, Wilkins! I'm glad you've come just as you have."

"What for, Platt? Do you want to borrow some money?"

"No; there is more money in this room now than there has been for a long
time."

"What do you mean? The governor hasn't sent you a remittance, has he?"

"No."

"Expound your meaning, then, most learned and mysterious chum."

"I will. Within five minutes Jim Smith has been here and left a wallet
of money."

"Jim been here? I met him in the corridor."

"I warrant he didn't say he had been here."

"No; he said he had been to Bates' room, but didn't find him there."

"That's all gammon! Wilkins, what will you say when I tell you that old
Sock's wallet is in this very room!"

"I won't believe it!"

"Look here, then!"

As he spoke, Ben went to Hector's pants and drew out the wallet.

Wilkins started in surprise and dismay.

"How did Roscoe come by that?" he asked; "surely he didn't take it?"

"Of course he didn't. You might know Roscoe better. Didn't you hear me
say just now that Jim brought it here?"

"And put it in Roscoe's pocket?"

"Yes."

"In your presence?"

"Yes; only he didn't know that I was present," said Platt.

"Where were you?"

"In the closet. The door was partly open, and I saw everything."

"What does it all mean?"

"Can't you see? It's Jim's way of coming up with Roscoe. You know he
threatened that he'd fix him."

"All I can say is, that it's a very mean way," said Wilkins in disgust.

He was not a model boy--far from it, indeed!--but he had a sentiment of
honor that made him dislike and denounce a conspiracy like this.

"It's a dirty trick," he said, warmly.

"I agree with you on that point." "What shall we do about it?"

"Lay low, and wait till the whole thing comes out. When Sock discovers
his loss, Jim will be on hand to tell him where his wallet is. Then we
can up and tell all we know."

"Good! There's a jolly row coming!" said Wilkins, smacking his lips.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE MISSING WALLET IS FOUND.



Socrates Smith was, ordinarily, so careful of his money, that it was a
very remarkable inadvertence to leave it on the bureau. Nor was it long
before he ascertained his loss. He was sitting at his desk when his
wife looked in at the door, and called for a small sum for some domestic
expenditure.

With an ill grace--for Socrates hated to part with his money--he put his
hand into the pocket where he usually kept his wallet.

"Really, Mrs. Smith," he was saying, "it seems to me you are always
wanting money--why, bless my soul!" and such an expression of
consternation and dismay swept over his face, that his wife hurriedly
inquired:

"What is the matter, Mr. Smith?"

"Matter enough!" he gasped. "My wallet is gone!"

"Gone!" echoed his wife, in alarm. "Where can you have left it?"

Mr. Smith pressed his hand to his head in painful reflection.

"How much money was there in it, Socrates?" asked his wife.

"Between forty and fifty dollars!" groaned Mr. Smith. "If I don't find
it, Sophronia, I am a ruined man!"

This was, of course, an exaggeration, but it showed the poignancy of the
loser's regret.

"Can't you think where you left it?"

Suddenly Mr. Smith's face lighted up.

"I remember where I left it, now," he said; "I was up in the chamber an
hour since, and, while changing my coat, took out my wallet, and laid it
on the bureau. I'll go right up and look for it."

"Do, Socrates."

Mr. Smith bounded up the staircase with the agility of a man of half
his years, and hopefully opened the door of his chamber, which Jim had
carefully closed after him. His first glance was directed at the bureau,
but despair again settled down sadly upon his heart when he saw that it
was bare. There was no trace of the missing wallet.

"It may have fallen on the carpet," said Socrates, hope reviving
faintly.

There was not a square inch of the cheap Kidderminster carpet that he
did not scan earnestly, greedily, but, alas! the wallet, if it had ever
been there, had mysteriously taken to itself locomotive powers, and
wandered away into the realm of the unknown and the inaccessible.

