
The invitation was cordially accepted, and, having given him directions
by which their lodgings could be found, the two friends took their
leave and returned home.




CHAPTER VI

A CITY MERCHANT


"Assuredly it is well that you should go," Sir Ralph said, when his son
had repeated the conversation they had had with the trader. "I know not
the name, for indeed I know scarce one among the citizens; but if he
trades with Venice and Genoa direct he must be a man of repute and
standing. It is always well to make friends; and some of these city
traders could buy up a score of us poor knights. They are not men who
make a display of wealth, and by their attire you cannot tell one from
another, but upon grand occasions, such as the accession or marriage of
a monarch, they can make a brave show, and can spend sums upon masques
and feastings that would well-nigh pay a king's ransom. After a great
victory they will set the public conduits running with wine, and every
varlet in the city can sit down at banquets prepared for them and eat
and drink his fill. It is useful to have friends among such men. They
are as proud in their way as are the greatest of our nobles, and they
have more than once boldly withstood the will of our kings, and have
ever got the best of the dispute."

"What shall we put on, sir," Albert asked his father the next morning,
"for this visit to Master Gaiton?"

"You had better put on your best suits," the knight said; "it will show
that you have respect for him as a citizen, and indeed the dresses are
far less showy than many of those I see worn by some of the young
nobles in the streets."

"And what is the young lady like?" Aline asked her brother.

"Methinks she is something like you, Aline, and is about the same age
and height; her tresses are somewhat darker than yours; methinks she is
somewhat graver and more staid than you are, as I suppose befits a
maiden of the city."

"I don't think that you could judge much about that, Albert," his
mother said, "seeing that, naturally, the poor girl was grievously
shaken by the events of the evening before, and would, moreover, say
but little when her father was conversing with two strangers. What
thought you of her, Edgar?"

"I scarce noticed her, my lady, for I was talking with her father, and
so far as I remember she did not open her lips after being introduced
to us. I did not notice the resemblance to your daughter that Albert
speaks of, but she seemed to me a fair young maid, who looked not, I
own, so heavy as she felt when I carried her."

"That is very uncourteous, Master Edgar," Dame Agatha laughed; "a good
knight should hold the weight of a lady to be as light as that of a
down pillow."

"Then I fear that I shall never be a true knight," Edgar said, with a
smile. "I have heard tales of knights carrying damsels across their
shoulder and outstripping the pursuit of caitiffs, from whom she had
escaped. I indeed had believed them, but assuredly either those tales
are false or I have but a small share of the strength of which I
believed myself to be possessed; for, in truth, my arm and shoulder
ached by the time I reached the hostelry more than it has ever done
after an hour's practice with the mace."

"Well, stand not talking," Sir Ralph said; "it is time for you to
change your suits, for these London citizens are, I have heard, precise
as to their time, and the merchant would deem it a slight did you not
arrive a few minutes before the stroke of the hour."

As soon as they came into Chepe they asked a citizen if he could direct
them to the house of Master Robert Gaiton.

"That can I," he said, "and so methinks could every boy and man in the
city. Turn to the right; his house stands in a courtyard facing the
Guildhall, and is indeed next door to the hall in the left-hand corner."

The house was a large one, each storey, as usual, projecting over the
one below it. Some apprentices were just putting up the shutters to the
shop, for at noon most of the booths were closed, as at that hour there
were no customers, and the assistants and apprentices all took their
meal together. There was a private entrance to the house, and Edgar
knocked at the door with the hilt of his dagger. A minute later a
serving-man opened it.

"Is Master Robert Gaiton within?" Albert asked. "He is, we believe,
expecting us."

"I have his orders to conduct you upstairs, sirs."

The staircase was broad and handsome, and, to the lads' surprise, was
covered with an Eastern carpet. At the top of the stairs the merchant
himself was awaiting them.

"Welcome to my house, gentlemen," he said; "the house that would have
been the abode of mourning and woe to-day, had it not been for your
bravery."

The merchant was dressed in very different attire to that in which he
had travelled. He wore a doublet of brown satin, and hose of the same
material and colour; on his shoulders was a robe of Genoa velvet with a
collar, and trimming down the front of brown fur, such as the boys had
never before seen. Over his neck was a heavy gold chain, which they
judged to be a sign of office. The landing was large and square, with
richly carved oak panelling, and, like the stairs, it was carpeted with
a thick Eastern rug. Taking their hands, he led them through an open
door into a large withdrawing-room. Its walls were panelled in a
similar manner to those of the landing, but the carpet was deeper and
richer. Several splendid armoires or cabinets similarly carved stood
against the walls, and in these were gold and silver cups exquisitely
chased, salt-cellars, and other silver ware.

The chairs were all in harmony with the room, the seats being of green
embossed velvet, and curtains of the same material and hue, with an
edging of gold embroidery, hung at the windows. But the lads' eyes
could not take in all these matters at once, being fixed upon the lady
who rose from her chair to meet them. She was some thirty-five years
old, and of singular sweetness of face. There was but little about her
of the stiffness that they had expected to find in the wife of a London
citizen. She was dressed in a loose robe of purple silk, with costly
lace at the neck and sleeves. By her side stood Ursula, who was
dressed, as became her age, in lighter colours, which, in cut and
material, resembled those of Aline's new attire.

"Dear sirs," she said, as her husband presented the visitors to her,
"with what words can I thank you for the service that you have rendered
me. But for you I should have been widowed and childless to-day!"

"It was but a chance, Mistress Gaiton," Edgar said. "We saw a stranger
in danger of his life from cut-throats, and as honest men should do, we
went to his succour. We are glad, indeed, to have been able to render
your husband such service, but it was only such an action as a soldier
performs when he strikes in to rescue a comrade surrounded by the
enemy, or carries off a wounded man who may be altogether a stranger to
him."

"That may be true from your point of view," the merchant said, "but
just as the man-at-arms rescued from a circle of foes, or the wounded
man carried off the field would assuredly feel gratitude to him who has
saved him, so do we feel gratitude to you, and naught that you can say
will lessen our feeling towards you both. And now let us to the table."

He opened a door leading into another apartment. Edgar glanced at
Albert, and as he saw the latter was looking at Ursula, he offered his
hand to Dame Gaiton. Albert, with a little start, did the same to the
girl. The merchant held aside the hangings of the door and then
followed them into the room where the table was laid. It was similar to
the room they had left, save that the floor was polished instead of
being carpeted. The table was laid with a damask cloth of snowy
whiteness and of a fineness of quality such as neither of the lads had
ever seen before. The napkins were of similar make. A great silver
ornament in the shape of a Venetian galley stood in the centre of the
table, flanked by two vases of the same metal filled with flowers. The
plates were of oriental porcelain, a contrast indeed to the rough
earthenware in general use; the spoons were of gold.

The meats were carved at a side table, and cut into such pieces that
there was little occasion for the use of the dagger-shaped knives
placed for the use of each. Forks were unknown in Europe until nearly
three centuries later, the food being carried to the mouth by the aid
of a piece of bread, just as it is still eaten in the East, the spoon
being only used for soups and sweetmeats. Two servitors, attired in
doublets of red and green cloth, waited. The wine was poured into
goblets of Venetian glass; and after several meats had been served
round, the lads were surprised at fresh plates being handed to them for
the sweetmeats. Before these were put upon the table, a gold bowl with
perfumed water was handed round, and all dipped their fingers in this,
wiping them on their napkins.

"Truly, Mistress Gaiton," Albert said, courteously, "it seems to me
that instead of coming to Court we country folk should come to the city
to learn how to live. All this is as strange to me as if I had gone to
some far land, by the side of whose people we were as barbarians."

"My husband has been frequently in Italy," she replied, "and he is much
enamoured of their mode of life, which he says is strangely in advance
of ours. Most of what you see here he has either brought with him
thence, or had it sent over to him, or it has been made here from
drawings prepared for him for the purpose. The carving of the wood-work
is a copy of that in a palace at Genoa; the furniture came by sea from
Venice; the gold and silver work is English, for although my husband
says that the Italians are great masters in such work and in advance of
our own, he holds that English gold and silversmiths can turn out work
equal to all but the very best, and he therefore thinks it but right to
give employment to London craftsmen. The drapery is far in advance of
anything that can be made here; as to the hangings and carpets,
although brought from Genoa or Florence, they are all from Eastern
looms."

"'Tis strange," the merchant added, "how far we are in most things
behind the Continent--in all matters save fighting, and, I may say, the
condition of the common people. Look at our garments. Save in the
matter of coarse fabrics, nigh everything comes from abroad. The finest
cloths come from Flanders; the silks, satins, and velvets from Italy.
Our gold work is made from Italian models; our finest arms come from
Milan and Spain; our best brass work from Italy. Maybe some day we
shall make all these things for ourselves. Then, too, our people--not
only those of the lowest class--are more rude and boorish in their
manners; they drink more heavily, and eat more coarsely. An English
banquet is plentiful, I own, but it lacks the elegance and luxury of
one abroad, and save in the matter of joints, there is no comparison
between the cooking. Except in the weaving of the roughest linen, we
are incomparably behind Flanders, France, or Italy, and although I have
striven somewhat to bring my surroundings up to the level of the
civilization abroad, the house is but as a hovel compared with the
palaces of the Venetian and Genoese merchants, or the rich traders of
Flanders and Paris."

"Truly, these must be magnificent indeed," Edgar said, "if they so far
surpass yours. I have never even thought of anything so comfortable and
handsome as your rooms. I say naught of those in my father's house, for
he is a scholar, and so that he can work in peace among his books and
in his laboratory he cares naught for aught else; but it is the same in
other houses that I have visited; they seem bare and cheerless by the
side of yours. I have always heard that the houses of the merchants of
London were far more comfortable than the castles of great nobles, but
I hardly conceived how great the difference was."

"They are built for different purposes," the merchant said. "The
castles are designed wholly with an eye to defence. All is of stone,
since that will not burn; the windows are mere slits, designed to shoot
from, rather than to give light. We traders, upon the other hand, have
not to spend our money on bands of armed retainers. We have our city
walls, and each man is a soldier if needs be. Then our intercourse with
foreign merchants and our visits to the Continent show us what others
are doing, and how vastly their houses are ahead of ours in point of
luxury and equipment. We have no show to keep up; and, at any rate,
when we go abroad it is neither our custom nor that of the Flemish
merchants to vie with the nobility in splendour of apparel or the
multitude of retainers and followers. Thus, you see, we can afford to
have our homes comfortable."

"May I ask, Master Gaiton, if your robe and chain are badges of
office?" Albert asked.

"Yes; I have the honour of being an alderman."

Albert looked surprised. "I thought, sir, that the aldermen were aged
men."

"Not always," the merchant said, with a smile, "though generally that
is the case. The aldermen are chosen by the votes of the Common Council
of each ward, and that choice generally falls upon one whom they deem
will worthily represent them, or upon one who shows the most devotion
to the interests of the ward and city. My father was a prominent
citizen before me, and I early learned from him to take an interest in
the affairs of the city. It chanced that, when on the accession of the
young king the Duke of Lancaster would have infringed some of our
rights and privileges, I was one of the speakers at a meeting of the
citizens, and being younger and perhaps more outspoken than others, I
came to be looked upon as one of the champions of the city, and thus,
without any merit of my own, was elected to represent my ward when a
vacancy occurred shortly afterwards."

"My husband scarce does himself justice, Master De Courcy," the
trader's wife said, "for it was not only because of his championship of
the city's rights, but as one of the richest and most enterprising of
our merchants, and because he spends his wealth worthily, giving large
gifts to many charities, and being always foremost in every work for
the benefit of the citizens. Maybe, too, the fact that he was one of
the eight citizens who jousted at the tournament, given at the king's
accession, against the nobles of the Court, and who overthrew his
adversary, had also something to do with his election."

"Nay, nay, wife! these are private affairs that are of little interest
to our guests, and you speak with partiality."

"At any rate, sir," Edgar said, courteously, "the fact that you so bore
yourself in the tournament suffices to explain how it was that you were
able to keep those cut-throats at bay until just before we arrived at
the spot."

"We are peaceful men in the city," the merchant said, "but we know that
if we are to maintain our rights, and to give such aid as behoves us to
our king in his foreign wars, we need knowledge as much as others how
to bear arms. Every apprentice as well as every free man throughout the
city has to practise at the butts, and to learn to use sword and
dagger. I myself was naturally well instructed; and as my father was
wealthy, there were always two or three good horses in his stables, and
I learned to couch a lance and sit firm in the saddle. As at Hastings
and Poictiers, the contingent of the city has ever been held to bear
itself as well as the best; and although we do not, like most men,
always go about the street with swords in our belts, we can all use
them if needs be. Strangely enough, it is your trading communities that
are most given to fighting. Look at Venice and Genoa, Milan and Pisa,
Antwerp, Ghent, and Bruges, and to go further back, Carthage and Tyre.
And even among us, look at the men of Sandwich and Fowey in Cornwall;
they are traders, but still more they are fighters; they are ever
harassing the ships of France, and making raids on the French coast."

"I see that it is as you say," Edgar said, "though I have never thought
of it before. Somehow one comes to think of the citizens of great towns
as being above all things peaceful."

"The difference between them and your knights is, that the latter are
always ready to fight for honour and glory, and often from the pure
love of fighting. We do not want to fight, but are ready to do so for
our rights and perhaps for our interests, but at bottom I believe that
there is little difference between the classes. Perhaps if we
understood each other better we should join more closely together. We
are necessary to each other; we have the honour of England equally at
heart. The knights and nobles do most of our fighting for us, while we,
on our part, import or produce everything they need beyond the common
necessities of life; both of us are interested in checking the undue
exercise of kingly authority; and if they supply the greater part of
the force with which we carry on the war with France, assuredly it is
we who find the greater part of the money for the expenses, while we
get no share of the spoils of battle."

"Have you any sisters, Master De Courcy?" the merchant's wife asked,
presently.

"I have but one; she is just about the same age as your daughter, and
methinks there is a strong likeness between them. She and my mother are
both here, having been sent for by my father on the news of the
troubles in our neighbourhood."

"In that case, wife," the merchant said, "it were seemly that you and
Ursula accompany me to-morrow when I go to pay my respects to Sir Ralph
De Courcy."

After dinner was over the merchant took his guests into a small room
adjoining that in which they had dined.

"Friends," he said, "we London merchants are accustomed to express our
gratitude not only by words but by deeds. At present, methinks, seeing
that, as you have told me, you have not yet launched out into the
world, there is naught that you need; but this may not be so always,
for none can tell what fortune may befall him. I only say that any
service I can possibly render you at any time, you have but to ask me.
I am a rich man, and, having no son, my daughter is my only heir. Had
your estate been different and your taste turned towards trade, I could
have put you in the way of becoming like myself, foreign merchants; but
even in your own profession of arms I may be of assistance.

"Should you go to the war later on and wish to take a strong following
with you, you have but to come to me and say how much it will cost to
arm and equip them and I will forthwith defray it, and my pleasure in
doing so will be greater than yours in being able to follow the king
with a goodly array of fighting men. One thing, at least, you must
permit me to do when the time comes that you are to make your first
essay in arms: it will be my pleasure and pride to furnish you with
horse, arms, and armour. This, however, is a small matter. What I
really wish you to believe is that under all circumstances--and one
cannot say what will happen during the present troubles--you can rely
upon me absolutely."

"We thank you most heartily, sir," Edgar said, "and should the time
come when, as you say, circumstances may occur in which we can take
advantage of your most generous offers, we will do so."

"That is well and loyally said," the merchant replied, "and I shall
hold you to it. You will remember that, by so doing, it will be you who
confer the favour and not I, for my wife and I will always be uneasy in
our minds until we can do something at least towards proving our
gratitude for the service that you have rendered."

A few minutes later, after taking leave of the merchant's wife and
daughter, the two friends left the house.

"Truly we have been royally entertained, Edgar. What luxury and
comfort, and yet everything quiet and in good taste. The apartments of
the king himself are cold and bare in comparison. I felt half inclined
to embrace his offer and to declare that I would fain become a trader
like himself."

Edgar laughed, "Who ever heard of such a thing as the son of a valiant
knight going into trade? Why the bare thought of such a thing would
make Sir Ralph's hair stand on end. You would even shock your gentle
mother."

"But why should it, Edgar? In Italy the nobles are traders, and no one
thinks it a dishonour. Why should not a peaceful trade be held in as
high esteem as fighting?"

"That I cannot say, Albert," Edgar replied, more seriously; "but
whatever may be the case in Venice, it assuredly is not so here. It may
be that some day when we reach as high a civilization as Genoa and
Venice possess, trade may here be viewed as it is there--as honourable
for even those of the highest birth. Surely commerce requires far more
brains and wisdom than the dealing of blows, and the merchants of
Venice can fight as earnestly as they can trade. Still, no one man can
stand against public opinion, and until trade comes to be generally
viewed as being as honourable a calling as that of war, men of gentle
blood will not enter upon it; and you must remember, Albert, that it is
but the exceptions who can gain such wealth as that of our host to-day,
