
"This is the only one that will pass. You will like Hans Andersen's
fairy tales, I know. Keep it as long as you please. I have many more."

"You're so good! I wish I had something for you," said the boy, quite
overcome by this sweet friendliness.

"Let me see one of _your_ books. They will be new to me. I'm tired of
all mine."

Quick as a flash, off went the cover of the old boiler, and out came
half-a-dozen of Johnny's best works, to be crammed through the wall,
with the earnest request,--

"Keep 'em all; they're not good for much, but they're the best I've got.
I'll do some prettier ones as soon as I can find more nice pictures and
pieces."

"They look very interesting. I thank you. I shall go and read them now,
and then come and talk again. Addio, Giovanni."

"Good-by, Miss."

Thus ended the first interview of little Pyramus and Thisbe through the
hole in the wall, while puss sat up above and played moonshine with her
yellow eyes.




PART II.


After that day a new life began for Johnny, and he flourished like a
poor little plant that has struggled out of some dark corner into the
sunshine. All sorts of delightful things happened, and good times
really seemed to have come. The mysterious papa made no objection to the
liberties taken with his wall, being busy with his own affairs, and glad
to have his little girl happy. Old Nanna, being more careful, came to
see the new neighbors, and was disarmed at once by the affliction of the
boy and the gentle manners of the mother. She brought all the curtains
of the house for Mrs. Morris to do up, and in her pretty broken English
praised Johnny's gallery and library, promising to bring Fay to see him
some day.

Meantime the little people prattled daily together, and all manner of
things came and went between them. Flowers, fruit, books, and bonbons
kept Johnny in a state of bliss, and inspired him with such brilliant
inventions that the Princess never knew what agreeable surprise would
come next. Astonishing kites flew over the wall, and tissue balloons
exploded in the flower-beds. All the birds of the air seemed to live in
that court; for the boy whistled and piped till he was hoarse, because
she liked it. The last of the long-hoarded cents came out of his tin
bank to buy paper and pictures for the gay little books he made for her.
His side of the wall was ravaged that hers might be adorned; and, as the
last offering his grateful heart could give, he poked the toad through
the hole, to live among the lilies and eat the flies that began to
buzz about her Highness when she came to give her orders to her devoted
subjects.

She always called the lad Giovanni, because she thought it a prettier
name than John; and she was never tired of telling stories, asking
questions, and making plans. The favorite one was what they would do
when Johnny came to see her, as she had been promised he should when
papa was not too busy to let them enjoy the charms of the studio;
for Fay was a true artist's child, and thought nothing so lovely as
pictures. Johnny thought so, too, and dreamed of the happy day when he
should go and see the wonders his little friend described so well.

"I think it will be to-morrow; for papa has a lazy fit coming on, and
then he always plays with me and lets me rummage where I like, while he
goes out or smokes in the garden. So be ready; and if he says you can
come, I will have the flag up early and you can hurry."

These agreeable remarks were breathed into Johnny's willing ear about
a fortnight after the acquaintance began; and he hastened to promise,
adding soberly, a minute after,--

"Mother says she's afraid it will be too much for me to go around and
up steps, and see new things; for I get tired so easy, and then the
pain comes on. But I don't care how I ache if I can only see the
pictures--and you."

"Won't you ever be any better? Nanna thinks you might."

"So does mother, if we had money to go away in the country, and eat nice
things; and have doctors. But we can't; so it's no use worrying." And
Johnny gave a great sigh.

"I wish papa was rich, then he would give you money. He works hard to
make enough to go back to Italy, so I cannot ask him; but perhaps I can
sell _my_ pictures also, and get a little. Papa's friends often offer me
sweets for kisses; I will have money instead, and that will help. Yes, I
shall do it." And Fay clapped her hands decidedly.

"Don't you mind about it. I'm going to learn to mend shoes. Mr. Pegget
says he'll teach me. That doesn't need legs, and he gets enough to live
on very well."

"It isn't pretty work. Nanna can teach you to braid straw as she did at
home; that is easy and nice, and the baskets sell very well, she says. I
shall speak to her about it, and you can try to-morrow when you come."

"I will. Do you really think I _can_ come, then?" And Johnny stood up to
try his legs; for he dreaded the long walk, as it seemed to him.

"I will go at once and ask papa."

Away flew Fay, and soon came back with a glad "Yes!" that sent Johnny
hobbling in to tell his mother, and beg her to mend the elbows of his
only jacket; for, suddenly, his old clothes looked so shabby he feared
to show himself to the neighbors he so longed to see.

"Hurrah! I'm really going to-morrow. And you, too, mammy dear," cried
the boy, waving his crutch so vigorously that he slipped and fell.

"Never mind; I'm used to it. Pull me up, and I'll rest while we talk
about it," he said cheerily, as his mother helped him to the bed, where
he forgot his pain in thinking of the delights in store for him.

Next day, the flag was flying from the wall, and Fay early at the
hole, but no Johnny came; and when Nanna went to see what kept him, she
returned with the sad news that the poor boy was suffering much, and
would not be able to stir for some days.

"Let me go and see him," begged Fay, imploringly.

"Cara mia, it is no place for you. So dark, so damp, so poor, it is
enough to break the heart," said Nanna, decidedly.

"If papa was here, he would let me go. I shall not play; I shall sit
here and make some plans for my poor boy."

Nanna left her indignant little mistress, and went to cook a nice bowl
of soup for Johnny; while Fay concocted a fine plan, and, what was more
remarkable, carried it out.

For a week it rained, for a week Johnny lay in pain, and for a week Fay
worked quietly at her little easel in the corner of the studio, while
her father put the last touches to his fine picture, too busy to take
much notice of the child. On Saturday the sun shone, Johnny was better,
and the great picture was done. So were the small ones; for as her
father sat resting after his work, Fay went to him, with a tired but
happy face, and, putting several drawings into his hand, told her
cherished plan.

"Papa, you said you would pay me a dollar for every good copy I made of
the cast you gave me. I tried very hard, and here are three. I want some
money very, very much. Could you pay for these?"

"They are excellent," said the artist, after carefully looking at them.
"You _have_ tried, my good child, and here are your well-earned dollars.
What do you want them for?"

"To help my boy. I want him to come in here and see the pictures, and
let Nanna teach him to plait baskets; and he can rest, and you will
like him, and he might get well if he had some money, and I have three
quarters the friends gave me instead of bonbons. Would that be enough to
send poor Giovanni into the country and have doctors?"

No wonder Fay's papa was bewildered by this queer jumble, because, being
absorbed in his work, he had never heard half the child had told him,
and had forgotten all about Johnny. Now he listened with half an ear,
studying the effect of sunshine upon his picture meantime, while Fay
told him the little story, and begged to know how much money it would
take to make Johnny's back well.

"Bless your sweet soul, my darling, it would need more than I can spare
or you earn in a year. By and by, when I am at leisure, we will see what
can be done," answered papa, smoking comfortably, as he lay on the sofa
in the large studio at the top of the house.

"You say that about a great many things, papa. 'By and by' won't be long
enough to do all you promise then. I like _now_ much better, and poor
Giovanni needs the country more than you need cigars or I new frocks,"
said Fay, stroking her father's tired forehead and looking at him with
an imploring face.

"My dear, I cannot give up my cigar, for in this soothing smoke I find
inspiration, and though you are a little angel, you must be clothed; so
wait a bit, and we will attend to the boy--later." He was going to say
"by and by" again, but paused just in time, with a laugh.

"Then _I_ shall take him to the country all myself. I cannot wait for
this hateful 'by and by.' I know how I shall do it, and at once. Now,
now!" cried Fay, losing patience; and with an indignant glance at the
lazy papa, who seemed going to sleep, she dashed out of the room, down
many stairs, through the kitchen, startling Nanna and scattering the
salad as if a whirlwind had gone by, and never paused for breath till
she stood before the garden wall with a little hatchet in her hand.

"This shall be the country for him till I get enough money to send him
away. I will show what _I_ can do. He pulled out two bricks. _I_ will
beat down the wall, and he _shall_ come in at once," panted Fay; and
she gave a great blow at the bricks, bent on having her will without
delay,--for she was an impetuous little creature, full of love and pity
for the poor boy pining for the fresh air and sunshine, of which she had
so much.

Bang, bang, went the little hatchet, and down came one brick after
another, till the hole was large enough for Fay to thrust her head
through; and being breathless by that time, she paused to rest and take
a look at Johnny's court.

Meanwhile Nanna, having collected her lettuce leaves and her wits, went
to see what the child was about; and finding her at work like a little
fury, the old woman hurried up to tell "the Signor," Fay's papa, that
his little daughter was about to destroy the garden and bury herself
under the ruins of the wall. This report, delivered with groans and
wringing of the hands, roused the artist and sent him to the rescue,
as he well knew that his angel was a very energetic one, and capable of
great destruction.

When he arrived, he beheld a cloud of dust, a pile of bricks among the
lilies, and the feet of his child sticking out of a large hole in the
wall, while her head and shoulders were on the other side. Much amused,
yet fearful that the stone coping might come down on her, he pulled
her back with the assurance that he would listen and help her now
immediately, if there was such need of haste.

But he grew sober when he saw Fay's face; for it was bathed in tears,
her hands were bleeding, and dust covered her from head to foot.

"My darling, what afflicts you? Tell papa, and he will do anything you
wish."

"No, you will forget, you will say 'Wait;' and now that I have seen
it all, I cannot stop till I get him out of that dreadful place. Look,
look, and see if it is not sad to live there all in pain and darkness,
and so poor."

As she spoke, Fay urged her father toward the hole; and to please her he
looked, seeing the dull court, the noisy street beyond, and close by
the low room, where Johnny's mother worked all day, while the poor boy's
pale face was dimly seen as he lay on his bed waiting for deliverance.

"Well, well, it _is_ a pitiful case; and easily mended, since Fay is so
eager about it. Hope the lad is all she says, and nothing catching about
his illness. Nanna can tell me."

Then he drew back his head, and leading Fay to the seat, took her on his
knee, all flushed, dirty, and tearful as she was, soothing her by saying
tenderly,--

"Now let me hear all about it, and be sure I'll not forget. What shall I
do to please you, dear, before you pull down the house about my ears?"

Then Fay told her tale all over again; and being no longer busy, her
father found it very touching, with the dear, grimy little face looking
into his, and the wounded hands clasped beseechingly as she pleaded for
poor Johnny.

"God bless your tender heart, child; you shall have him in here
to-morrow, and we will see what can be done for those pathetic legs of
his. But listen, Fay, I have an easier way to do it than yours, and a
grand surprise for the boy. Time is short, but it can be done; and to
show you that I am in earnest, I will go this instant and begin the
work. Come and wash your face while I get on my boots, and then we will
go together."

At these words Fay threw her arms about papa's neck and gave him many
grateful kisses, stopping in the midst to ask,--

"Truly, _now_?"

"See if it is not so." And putting her down, papa went off with great
strides, while she ran laughing after him, all her doubts set at rest by
this agreeable energy on his part.

If Johnny had not been asleep in the back room, he would have seen
strange and pleasant sights that afternoon and evening; for something
went on in the court that delighted his mother, amused the artist, and
made Fay the happiest child in Boston. No one was to tell till the next
day, that Johnny's surprise might be quite perfect, and Mrs. Morris sat
up till eleven to get his old clothes in order; for Fay's papa had been
to see her, and became interested in the boy, as no one could help being
when they saw his patient little face.

So hammers rang, trowels scraped, shovels dug, and wonderful changes
were made, while Fay danced about in the moonlight, like Puck intent
upon some pretty prank, and papa quoted _Snout_, [Footnote: A character
in Shakspeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream."] the tinker's parting words,
as appropriate to the hour,--

  "Thus have I, wall, my part discharged so;
  And, being done, thus wall away doth go."




PART III.


A lovely Sunday morning dawned without a cloud; and even in the dingy
court the May sunshine shone warmly, and the spring breezes blew freshly
from green fields far away. Johnny begged to go out; and being much
better, his mother consented, helping him to dress with such a bright
face and eager hands that the boy said innocently,--

"How glad you are when I get over a bad turn! I don't know what you'd do
if I ever got well."

"My poor dear, I begin to think you _will_ pick up, now the good weather
has come and you have got a little friend to play with. God bless her!"

Why his mother should suddenly hug him tight, and then brush his hair
so carefully, with tears in her eyes, he did not understand; but was in
such a hurry to get out, he could only give her a good kiss, and hobble
away to see how his gallery fared after the rain, and to take a joyful
"peek" at the enchanted garden.

Mrs. Morris kept close behind him, and it was well she did; for he
nearly tumbled down, so great was his surprise when he beheld the old
familiar wall after the good fairies Love and Pity had worked their
pretty miracle in the moonlight.

The ragged hole had changed to a little arched door, painted red. On
either side stood a green tub, with a tall oleander in full bloom;
from the arch above hung a great bunch of gay flowers; and before
the threshold lay a letter directed to "Signor Giovanni Morris," in a
childish hand. As soon as he recovered from the agreeable shock of this
splendid transformation scene, Johnny sank into his chair, where a soft
cushion had been placed, and read his note, with little sighs of rapture
at the charming prospect opening before him.

    DEAR GIOVANNI,--Papa has made this nice gate, so you can come
    in when you like and not be tired. We are to have two keys, and no one
    else can open it. A little bell is to ring when we pull the cord, and
    we can run and see what we want. The paint is wet. Papa did it,
    and the men put up the door last night. I helped them, and did not go
    in my bed till ten. It was very nice to do it so. I hope you will like
    it. Come in as soon as you can; I am all ready.

    Your friend,

    FAY.

"Mother, she must be a real fairy to do all that, mustn't she?" said
Johnny, leaning back to look at the dear door behind which lay such
happiness for him.

"Yes, my sonny, she is the right sort of good fairy, and I just wish
I could do her washing for love the rest of her blessed little life,"
answered Mrs. Morris, in a burst of grateful ardor.

"You shall! you shall! Do come in! I cannot wait another minute!" cried
an eager little voice as the red door flew open; and there stood Fay,
looking very like a happy elf in her fresh white frock, a wreath of
spring flowers on her pretty hair, and a tall green wand in her hand,
while the brilliant bird sat on her shoulder, and the little white dog
danced about her feet.

  "So she bids you to come in,
   With a dimple in your chin,
     Billy boy, Billy boy,"

sung the child, remembering how Johnny liked that song; and waving her
wand, she went slowly backward as the boy, with a shining face, passed
under the blooming arch into a new world, full of sunshine, liberty, and
sweet companionship.

Neither Johnny nor his mother ever forgot that happy day, for it was the
beginning of help and hope to both just when life seemed hardest and the
future looked darkest.

Papa kept out of sight, but enjoyed peeps at the little party as they
sat under the chestnuts, Nanna and Fay doing the honors of the garden to
their guests with Italian grace and skill, while the poor mother folded
her tired hands with unutterable content, and the boy looked like a
happy soul in heaven.

Sabbath silence, broken only by the chime of bells and the feet of
church-goers, brooded over the city; sunshine made golden shadows on
the grass; the sweet wind brought spring odors from the woods; and every
flower seemed to nod and beckon, as if welcoming the new playmate to
their lovely home.

While the women talked together, Fay led Johnny up and down her little
world, showing all her favorite nooks, making him rest often on the
seats that stood all about, and amusing him immensely by relating the
various fanciful plays with which she beguiled her loneliness.

"Now we can have much nicer ones; for you will tell me yours, and we
can do great things," she said, when she had displayed her big
rocking-horse, her grotto full of ferns, her mimic sea, where a fleet of
toy boats lay at anchor in the basin of an old fountain, her fairy-land
under the lilacs, with paper elves sitting among the leaves, her swing,
that tossed one high up among the green boughs, and the basket of white
kittens, where Topaz, the yellow-eyed cat, now purred with maternal
pride. Books were piled on the rustic table, and all the pictures Fay
thought worthy to be seen.

Here also appeared a nice lunch, before the visitors could remember it
was noon and tear themselves away. Such enchanted grapes and oranges
Johnny never ate before; such delightful little tarts and Italian messes
of various sorts; even the bread and butter seemed glorified because
served in a plate trimmed with leaves and cut in dainty bits. Coffee
that perfumed the air put heart into poor Mrs. Morris, who half starved
herself that the boy might be fed; and he drank milk till Nanna said,
laughing, as she refilled the pitcher,--

"He takes more than both the blessed lambs we used to feed for Saint
Agnes in the convent at home. And he is truly welcome, the dear child,
to the best we have; for he is as innocent and helpless as they."

"What does she mean?" whispered Johnny to Fay, rather abashed at having
forgotten his manners in the satisfaction which three mugfuls of good
milk had given him.

So, sitting in the big rustic chair beside him, Fay told the pretty
story of the lambs who are dedicated to Saint Agnes, with ribbons tied
to their snowy wool, and then raised with care till their fleeces are
shorn to make garments for the Pope. A fit tale for the day, the child
thought, and went on to tell about the wonders of Rome till Johnny's
head was filled with a splendid confusion of new ideas, in which Saint
Peter's and apple-tarts, holy lambs and red doors, ancient images and
dear little girls, were delightfully mixed. It all seemed like a
fairy tale, and nothing was too wonderful or lovely to happen on that
memorable day.

So when Fay's papa at last appeared, finding it impossible to keep away
from the happy little party any longer, Johnny decided at once that the
handsome man in the velvet coat was the king of the enchanted land, and
gazed at him with reverence and awe. A most gracious king he proved
to be; for after talking pleasantly to Mrs. Morris, and joking Fay on
storming the walls, he proposed to carry Johnny off, and catching him
up, strode away with the astonished boy on his shoulder, while the
little girl danced before to open doors and clear the way.

Johnny thought he couldn't be surprised any more; but when he had
mounted many stairs and found himself in a great room with a glass
roof, full of rich curtains, strange armor, pretty things, and pictures
everywhere, he just sat in the big chair where he was placed, and stared
in silent delight.

"This is papa's studio, and that the famous picture, and here is where
I work; and isn't it pleasant? and aren't you glad to see it?" said Fay,
skipping about to do the honors of the place.

"I don't believe heaven is beautifuller," answered Johnny, in a low
tone, as his eyes went from the green tree-tops peeping in at the
windows to the great sunny picture of a Roman garden, with pretty
children at play among the crumbling statues and fountains.

"I'm glad you like it, for we mean to have you come here a great deal. I
sit to papa very often, and get _so_ tired; and you can talk to me, and
then you can see me draw and model in clay, and then we'll go in the
garden, and Nanna will show you how to make baskets, and _then_ we'll
play."

Johnny nodded and beamed at this charming prospect, and for an hour
explored the mysteries of the studio, with Fay for a guide and papa for
an amused spectator. He liked the boy more and more, and was glad Fay
had so harmless a playmate to expend her energies and compassion upon.
He assented to every plan proposed, and really hoped to be able to help
these poor neighbors; for he had a kind heart, and loved his little
daughter even more than his art.

When at last Mrs. Morris found courage to call Johnny away, he went
without a word, and lay down in the dingy room, his face still shining
with the happy thoughts that filled his mind, hungry for just such
pleasures, and never fed before.

After that day everything went smoothly, and both children blossomed
like the flowers in that pleasant garden, where the magic of love and
pity, fresh air and sunshine, soon worked miracles. Fay learned patience
and gentleness from Johnny; he grew daily stronger on the better food
Nanna gave him, and the exercise he was tempted to take; and both spent
very happy days working and playing, sometimes under the trees, where
the pretty baskets were made, or in the studio, where both pairs of
small hands modelled graceful things in clay, or daubed amazing pictures
with the artist's old brushes and discarded canvases.

Mrs. Morris washed everything washable in the house, and did up Fay's
frocks so daintily that she looked more like an elf than ever when her
head shone out from the fluted frills, like the yellow middle of a daisy
with its white petals all spread.

As he watched the children playing together, the artist, having no great
work in hand, made several pretty sketches of them, and then had a fine
idea of painting the garden scene where Fay first talked to Johnny. It
pleased his fancy, and the little people sat for him nicely; so he made
a charming thing of it, putting in the cat, dog, bird, and toad as the
various characters in Shakspeare's lovely play, while the flowers were
the elves, peeping and listening in all manner of merry, pretty ways.

He called it "Little Pyramus and Thisbe," and it so pleased a certain
rich lady that she paid a large price for it; and then, discovering that
it told a true story, she generously added enough to send Johnny and his
mother to the country, when Fay and her father were ready to go.

But it was to a lovelier land than the boy had ever read of in his fairy
books, and to a happier life than mending shoes in the dingy court. In
the autumn they all sailed gayly away together, to live for years in
sunny Italy, where Johnny grew tall and strong, and learned to paint
with a kind master and a faithful young friend, who always rejoiced that
she found and delivered him, thanks to the wonderful hole in the wall.
