
He was then coaxed and worked back a short distance, when, with the
'leverage' thus gained, the feat was completed, and the steam man
stood with his face turned, ready to speed backward the moment that
the word might be given.

By this time, however, the day was gone, and darkness was settling
over the prairie. Quite a brisk breeze was blowing, and, as the
position of the party was sheltered against this annoyance, Hopkins
proposed that they should remain where they were until morning.

'We couldn't get a better place,' said Johnny Brainerd, who was quite
taken with the idea.

'It's a good place and it's a bad one,' replied the trapper, who had
not yet made up his mind upon the point.

They inquired what he meant by calling it a bad place.

'Ef a lot of the varmints should find we're hyar, don't you see what a
purty fix they'd have us in?'

'It would be something like the same box in which we caught them in
Wolf Ravine,' said young Brainerd.

'Jist the same, perzactly.'

'Not the same, either,' said Hopkins; 'we've got a better chance of
getting out than they had. We can jump into the wagon and travel,
while they can't; there's the difference.'

'S'pose they git down thar ahead of us, how ar' we goin' to git away
from them then?

'Run over them.'

'Don't know whether the younker has fixed he engine so it'll run over'
the skunks, ef it doesn't run up hill.'

'It can be made to do that, I think,' laughed young Brainerd.

'Afore we stay hyar, I'll take a look round to make sure that thar's
some show for us.'

The trapper ascended the bank, and, while his companions were occupied
in their preparations for encamping, he examined the whole horizon and
intervening space, so far as the human eye was capable of doing it.
Finding nothing suspicious, he announced to his companions that they
would remain where they were until morning.



                 CHAPTER XIX. THE DOINGS OF A NIGHT.

IT WAS soon found that the camping ground possessed another advantage
which, during the discussion, had been altogether overlooked.

During the afternoon they had shot a fine-looking antelope, cooking a
portion at the time upon the prairie. A goodly portion was left, and
they now had an opportunity of kindling their fire without the
liability of its being seen, as would have been the case had they
encamped in any other place.

This being agreed to, the fire was speedily kindled, and the trapper
himself began the culinary performance. It was executed with the
characteristic excellence of the hunter, and a luscious meal was thus
provided for all. At its conclusion, all stretched themselves upon the
ground for the purpose of smoking and chatting, as was their usual
custom at such times.

The evening whiled pleasantly away, and when it had considerably
advanced, the question of who should act as sentinel was discussed. Up
to this, young Brainerd had never once performed that duty at night,
although he had frequently solicited the privilege. He now-asked
permission to try his hand. After considerable talk it was agreed that
he might do. The trapper had lost so much sleep, that he was anxious
to secure a good night's rest, and the careful scrutiny which he had
taken of the surrounding prairie convinced him that no danger
threatened. So he felt little apprehension in acceding to the wish of
the boy.

At a late hour the two men stretched themselves upon the ground, with
their blankets gathered about them, and they were soon wrapped in
profound slumber, while Johnny, filled with the importance and
responsibility of his duty, felt as though he should never need
another hour's sleep. He was sure of being able to keep up an
unintermitting watch several days and nights, should it become
necessary.

Following the usual custom of sentinels, he shouldered his gun and
paced back and forth before the smoldering camp-fire, glancing in
every direction, so as to make sure that no enemy stole upon him
unawares.

It formed a curious picture, the small fire burning in the
valley, motionless forms stretched out before it, the huge steam man
silent and grim standing near, the dwarfed boy, pacing slowly back and
forth, and, above all, the moon shining down upon the silent prairie.
The moon was quite faint, so that only an indistinct view of objects
could be seen. Occasionally Johnny clambered up the bank and took a
survey of the surrounding plains; bat seeing nothing at all
suspicious, he soon grew weary of this, and confined his walks to the
immediate vicinity of the camp-fire, passing back and forth between
the narrow breadth of the valley.

As the hours dragged slowly by, the boy gradually fell into a reverie,
which made him almost unconscious of external things. And it was while
walking thus that he did not observe a large wolf advance to the edge
of the gully, look down, and then whisk back out of sight before the
sentinel wheeled in his walk and faced him.

Three separate times was this repeated, the wolf looking down in such
an earnest, searching way that it certainly would have excited the
remark and curiosity of any one observing it. The third glance
apparently satisfied the wolf; for it lasted for a few seconds, when
he withdrew, and lumbered away at an awkward rate, until a rod or two
had been passed, when the supposed wolf suddenly rose on its hind
legs, the skin and head were shifted to the arms of the Indian, and he
continued on at a leisurely gait until he joined fully fifty comrades,
who were huddled together in a grove, several hundred yards away.

In the meantime young Brainerd, with his rifle slung over his
shoulder, was pacing back and forth in the same deliberate manner, his
mind busily engaged on an 'improvement' upon the steam man, by which
he was to walk backward as well as forward, although he couldn't
satisfactorily determine how he was to go up and down hill with
safety.

Still occupied in the study of the subject, he took a seat by the
half-extinguished camp-fire and gazed dreamily into the embers. It had
been a habit with him, when at home, to sit thus for hours, on the
long winter evenings, while his mind was so busily at work that he was
totally oblivious to whatever was passing around him.

It must have been that the boy seated himself without any thought of
the inevitable result of doing so; for none knew better than he that
such a thing was fatal to the faithful performance of a sentinel's
duty: and the thought that his three companions, in one sense, had put
their safety in his hands, would have prevented anything like a
forgetfulness of duty.

Be that as it may, the boy had sat thus less than half an hour when a
drowsiness began stealing over him. Once he raised his head and
fancied he saw a large wolf glaring down upon him from the bank above,
but the head was withdrawn so quickly that he was sure it was only a
phantom of his brain.

So he did not rise from his seat, but sitting still he gradually sunk
lower, until in a short time he was sleeping as soundly as either of
the three around him.

Another hour wore away, and the fire smoldered lower and all was
still.

Then numerous heads peered over the edge of the ravine for a few
seconds, and as suddenly withdrew.

A few minutes later a curious sight might have been seen, a sight
somewhat resembling that of a parcel of school-boys making their
gigantic snow-balls. The fifty Indians, the greater portion of whom
had patiently waited in the adjoining grove, while their horses were
securely fastened near, issued like a swarm of locusts and began
rolling huge bowlders toward the valley. Some of them were so large
that half a dozen only succeeded in moving them with the greatest
difficulty.

But they persevered, working with a strange persistency and silence,
that gave them the appearance of so many phantoms engaged at their
ghostly labor. Not a word was exchanged, even in the most guarded of
tones, for each understood his part.

In time half a dozen of these immense stones reached the edge of the
ravine. They were ranged side by side, a few feet apart, so as not to
be in each other's way, and the Indians stood near, waiting until
their work should be completed.

Some signal was then made, and then one of these bowlders rolled down
in the ravine. Even this scarcely made any perceptible noise, the
yielding ground receiving it like a cushion, as it came to a halt near
the center of the valley.

When this was done a second followed suit, being so guided that it did
not grate against its companion, but came to rest very near it.

Then another followed, and then another and another, in the same
stealthy manner, until over a dozen were in the valley below.

This completed, the phantom-like figures descended like so many
shadows, and began tugging again at the bowlders.

Not a word was exchanged, for each knew what was required of him.
Fully an hour more was occupied, by which time the labor was finished.

The bowlders were arranged in the form of an impassable wall across
the narrow valley, and the steam man was so thoroughly imprisoned that
no human aid could ever extricate him.



               CHAPTER XX. THE CONCLUDING CATASTROPHE.

BALDY BICKNELL, the trapper, was the first to discover the peril of
himself and party.

When the Indians had completed their work it lacked only an hour of
daylight. Having done all that was necessary, the savages took their
stations behind the wall, lying flat upon the ground, where they were
invisible to the whites, but where every motion of theirs could be
watched and checkmated.

When the trapper opened his eyes he did not stir a limb, a way into
which he had got during his long experience on the frontiers. He
merely moved his head from side to side, so as to see anything that
was to be seen.

The first object that met his eye was the boy Brainerd, sound asleep.
Apprehensive then that something had occurred, he turned his startled
gaze in different directions, scanning everything as well as it could
be done in the pale moonlight.

When he caught sight of the wall stretched across the valley, he
rubbed his eyes, and looked at it again and again, scarcely able to
credit his senses. He was sure it was not there a few hours before,
and he could not comprehend what it could mean; but it was a verity,
and his experience told him that it could be the work of no one except
the Indians, who had outwitted him at last.

His first feeling was that of indignation toward the boy who had
permitted this to take place while he was asleep, but his mind quickly
turned upon the more important matter of meeting the peril, which,
beyond all doubt, was of the most serious character.

As yet he had not stirred his body, and looking toward the prison
wall, he caught a glimpse of the phantom-like figures, as they
occasionally flitted about, securing the best possible position,
before the whites should awake.

This glimpse made everything plain to the practical mind of Baldy
Bicknell. He comprehended that the red-skins had laid a plan to entrap
the steam man.  More than to entrap themselves, and that, so far as he
could judge, they had succeeded completely.

It was the tightest fix in which he had ever been caught, and his
mind, fertile as it was in expedients at such crises, could see no way
of meeting the danger.

He knew the Indians had horses somewhere at command, while neither he
nor his comrades had a single one. The steam man would be unable to
pass that formidable wall, as it was not to be supposed that he had
been taught the art of leaping.

Whatever plan of escape was determined upon, it was evident that the
steamer would have to be abandoned; and this necessitated, as an
inevitable consequence, that the whites would have to depend upon
their legs. The Missouri river was at no great distance, and if left
undisturbed they could make it without difficulty, but there was a
prospect of anything sooner than that they would be allowed to depart
in peace, after leaving the steam man behind.

The trapper, as had been his invariable custom, had carefully noted
the contour of the surrounding prairie, before they had committed the
important act of encamping in the gorge or hollow. He remembered the
grove at some distance, and was satisfied that the barbarians had left
their horses there, while they had gathered behind the wall to wait
the critical moment.

By the time these thoughts had fairly taken shape in his brain it was
beginning to grow light, and with a premonitary yawn and kick he rose
to his feet and began stirring the fire. He was well aware that
although he and his companions were a fair target for the rifles of
their enemies, yet they would not fire. Their plan of action did not
comprehend that, though it would have settled everything in their
favor without delay.

'I declare I have been asleep!' exclaimed Brainerd, as he began
rubbing his eyes.

'Yes. You're a purty feller to make a sentinel of, ain't you?' replied
the trapper, in disgust.

'I hope nothing has happened.' answered Johnny, feeling that he
deserved all the blame that could be laid upon him.

'Not much, exceptin' while yer war snoozin' the reds have come down
and got us all in a nice box.'

The boy was certain he was jesting until he saw the expression of his
face.

'Surely, Baldy, it is not as bad as that?'

'Do you see that ar?' demanded the trapper, pointing toward the wall,
which the youngster could not help observing.

'How comes that to be there?'

'The red-skins put it thar. Can yer steam man walk over that?'

'Certainly not; but we can remove them.'

'Do yer want to try it, younker?'

'I'm willing to help.'

'Do yer know that ar' somethin' less nor a hundred red-skins ahind
them, jist waitin' fur yer to try that thing?'

'Good heavens! can it be possible?'

'Ef you don't b'l'eve it, go out and look for yerself, that's all.'

The boy, for the first time, comprehends the peril in which he had
brought his friends by his own remissness, and his self-accusation was
so great, that, for a few moments, he forgot the fact that he was
exposed to the greatest danger of his life.

By this time Ethan and Mickey awoke, and were soon made to understand
their predicament. As a matter of course, they were all disposed to
blame the author of this; but when they saw how deeply he felt his own
shortcoming, all three felt a natural sympathy for him.

'There's no use of talkin' how we came to get hyar,' was the
philosophical remark of the trapper; 'it's 'nongh to know that we are
hyar, with a mighty slim chance of ever gettin' out ag'in.'

'It's enough to make a chap feel down in the mouth, as me friend Jonah
observed when he went down the throat of the whale,' said Mickey.

'How is it they don't shoot us?' asked Hopkins; 'we can't git out of
their way, and they've got us in fair range.'

'What's the use of doin' that? Ef they kill us, that'll be the end
on't; but ef they put thar claws on us, they've got us sure, and can
have a good time toastin' us while they yelp and dance around.'

All shuddered at the fearful picture drawn by the hunter.

'Jerusalem! don't I wish I was to hum in Connecticut!'

'And it's myself that would be plaised to be sitting in the parlor at
Ballyduff wid me own Bridget Moghlaghigbogh, listenin' while she
breathed swate vows, after making her supper upon praties and inions.'

'I think I'd ruther be hyar,' was the commentary of the trapper upon
the expressed wish of the Irishman.

'Why can't yees touch up the staammau, and make him hop owver them
shtones?' asked Mickey, turning toward the boy, whom, it was noted,
appeared to be in deep reverie again.

Not until he was addressed several times did he look up. Then he
merely shook his head, to signify that the thing was impossible.

'Any fool might know better than that.' remarked the Yankee, 'for if
he could jump over, where would be the wagon?'

'That 'ud foller, av coorse.'

'No; there's no way of getting the steam man out of here. He is a gone
case, sure, and it looks as though we were ditto. Jerusalem! I wish
all the gold was back in Wolf Ravine, and we war a thousand miles from
this place.'

'Wishing'll do no good; there's only one chance I see, and that ain't
no chance at all.'

All, including the boy, eagerly looked up to hear the explanation.

'Some distance from hyar is some timbers, and in thar the reds have
left their animals. Ef we start on a run for the timbers, git thar
ahead of the Ingins, mount thar hosses and put, thar'll be some
chance. Yer can see what chance thar is fur that.'

It looked as hopeless as the charge of the Light Brigade.

Young Brainerd now spoke.

'It was I who got you into trouble, and it is I, that, with the
blessing of Heaven, am going to get you out of it.'

The three now looked eagerly at him.

'Is there no danger of the Indians firing upon us?' he asked of the
hunter.

'Not unless we try to run away.'

'All right; it is time to begin.'

The boy's first proceeding was to kindle a fire in the boiler of the
steam man. When it was fairly blazing, he continued to heap in wood,
until a fervent heat was produced such as it had never experienced
before. Still he threw in wood, and kept the water low in the boiler,
until there was a most prodigious pressure of steam, making its escape
at half a dozen orifices.

When all the wood was thrown in that it could contain, and portions of
the iron sheeting could be seen becoming red-hot, he ceased this, and
began trying the steam.

'How much can he hold?' inquired Hopkins.

'One hundred and fifty pounds.'

'How much is on now?'

'One hundred and forty-eight, and rising.'

'Good heavens! it will blow up!' was the exclamation, as the three
shrunk back, appalled at the danger.

'Not for a few minutes; have you the gold secured, and the guns, so as
to be ready to run?'

They were ready to run at any moment; the gold was always secured
about their persons and it required but a moment to snatch up the
weapons.

'When it blows up, run!' was the admonition of the boy.

The steam man was turned directly toward the wall, and a full head of
steam let on. It started away with a bound, instantly reaching a speed
of forty miles an hour.

The next moment it struck the bowlders with a terrific crash, shot on
over its face, leaving the splintered wagon behind, and at the instant
of touching ground upon the opposite side directly among the
thunderstruck Indians, it exploded its boiler!

