a-boiling.'

When she had gone to attend to the potatoes the children looked at each
other. Could it be that old Nurse had so changed that she no longer
cared that they should have been away from home for twenty-four
hours--all night in fact--without any explanation whatever?

But the Psammead put its head out of its basket and said--

'What's the matter? Don't you understand? You come back through the
charm-arch at the same time as you go through it. This isn't tomorrow!'
'Is it still yesterday?' asked Jane.

'No, it's today. The same as it's always been. It wouldn't do to go
mixing up the present and the Past, and cutting bits out of one to fit
into the other.'

'Then all that adventure took no time at all?'

'You can call it that if you like,' said the Psammead. 'It took none of
the modern time, anyhow.'

That evening Anthea carried up a steak for the learned gentleman's
dinner. She persuaded Beatrice, the maid-of-all-work, who had given her
the bangle with the blue stone, to let her do it. And she stayed and
talked to him, by special invitation, while he ate the dinner.

She told him the whole adventure, beginning with--

'This afternoon we found ourselves on the bank of the River Nile,' and
ending up with, 'And then we remembered how to get back, and there we
were in Regent's Park, and it hadn't taken any time at all.'

She did not tell anything about the charm or the Psammead, because that
was forbidden, but the story was quite wonderful enough even as it was
to entrance the learned gentleman.

'You are a most unusual little girl,' he said. 'Who tells you all these
things?'

'No one,' said Anthea, 'they just happen.'

'Make-believe,' he said slowly, as one who recalls and pronounces a
long-forgotten word.

He sat long after she had left him. At last he roused himself with a
start.

'I really must take a holiday,' he said; 'my nerves must be all out of
order. I actually have a perfectly distinct impression that the little
girl from the rooms below came in and gave me a coherent and graphic
picture of life as I conceive it to have been in pre-dynastic Egypt.
Strange what tricks the mind will play! I shall have to be more
careful.'

He finished his bread conscientiously, and actually went for a mile walk
before he went back to his work.



CHAPTER 6. THE WAY TO BABYLON

   'How many miles to Babylon?
   Three score and ten!
   Can I get there by candle light?
   Yes, and back again!'

Jane was singing to her doll, rocking it to and fro in the house
which she had made for herself and it. The roof of the house was the
dining-table, and the walls were tablecloths and antimacassars hanging
all round, and kept in their places by books laid on their top ends at
the table edge.

The others were tasting the fearful joys of domestic tobogganing. You
know how it is done--with the largest and best tea-tray and the surface
of the stair carpet. It is best to do it on the days when the stair rods
are being cleaned, and the carpet is only held by the nails at the top.
Of course, it is one of the five or six thoroughly tip-top games that
grown-up people are so unjust to--and old Nurse, though a brick in many
respects, was quite enough of a standard grown-up to put her foot down
on the tobogganing long before any of the performers had had half enough
of it. The tea-tray was taken away, and the baffled party entered the
sitting-room, in exactly the mood not to be pleased if they could help
it.

So Cyril said, 'What a beastly mess!'

And Robert added, 'Do shut up, Jane!'

Even Anthea, who was almost always kind, advised Jane to try another
song. 'I'm sick to death of that,' said she.

It was a wet day, so none of the plans for seeing all the sights of
London that can be seen for nothing could be carried out. Everyone had
been thinking all the morning about the wonderful adventures of the day
before, when Jane had held up the charm and it had turned into an arch,
through which they had walked straight out of the present time and
the Regent's Park into the land of Egypt eight thousand years ago.
The memory of yesterday's happenings was still extremely fresh and
frightening, so that everyone hoped that no one would suggest another
excursion into the past, for it seemed to all that yesterday's
adventures were quite enough to last for at least a week. Yet each felt
a little anxious that the others should not think it was afraid, and
presently Cyril, who really was not a coward, began to see that it would
not be at all nice if he should have to think himself one. So he said--

'I say--about that charm--Jane--come out. We ought to talk about it,
anyhow.'

'Oh, if that's all,' said Robert.

Jane obediently wriggled to the front of her house and sat there.

She felt for the charm, to make sure that it was still round her neck.

'It ISN'T all,' said Cyril, saying much more than he meant because he
thought Robert's tone had been rude--as indeed it had.

'We ought to go and look for that Amulet. What's the good of having a
first-class charm and keeping it idle, just eating its head off in the
stable.'

'I'M game for anything, of course,' said Robert; but he added, with
a fine air of chivalry, 'only I don't think the girls are keen today
somehow.'

'Oh, yes; I am,' said Anthea hurriedly. 'If you think I'm afraid, I'm
not.'

'I am though,' said Jane heavily; 'I didn't like it, and I won't go
there again--not for anything I won't.'

'We shouldn't go THERE again, silly,' said Cyril; 'it would be some
other place.'

'I daresay; a place with lions and tigers in it as likely as not.'

Seeing Jane so frightened, made the others feel quite brave. They said
they were certain they ought to go.

'It's so ungrateful to the Psammead not to,' Anthea added, a little
primly.

Jane stood up. She was desperate.

'I won't!' she cried; 'I won't, I won't, I won't! If you make me I'll
scream and I'll scream, and I'll tell old Nurse, and I'll get her to
burn the charm in the kitchen fire. So now, then!'

You can imagine how furious everyone was with Jane for feeling what each
of them had felt all the morning. In each breast the same thought arose,
'No one can say it's OUR fault.' And they at once began to show Jane
how angry they all felt that all the fault was hers. This made them feel
quite brave.

   'Tell-tale tit, its tongue shall be split,
   And all the dogs in our town shall have a little bit,'

sang Robert.

'It's always the way if you have girls in anything.' Cyril spoke in a
cold displeasure that was worse than Robert's cruel quotation, and even
Anthea said, 'Well, I'M not afraid if I AM a girl,' which of course, was
the most cutting thing of all.

Jane picked up her doll and faced the others with what is sometimes
called the courage of despair.

'I don't care,' she said; 'I won't, so there! It's just silly going
to places when you don't want to, and when you don't know what they're
going to be like! You can laugh at me as much as you like. You're
beasts--and I hate you all!'

With these awful words she went out and banged the door.

Then the others would not look at each other, and they did not feel so
brave as they had done.

Cyril took up a book, but it was not interesting to read. Robert kicked
a chair-leg absently. His feet were always eloquent in moments of
emotion. Anthea stood pleating the end of the tablecloth into folds--she
seemed earnestly anxious to get all the pleats the same size. The sound
of Jane's sobs had died away.

Suddenly Anthea said, 'Oh! let it be "pax"--poor little Pussy--you know
she's the youngest.'

'She called us beasts,' said Robert, kicking the chair suddenly.

'Well, said Cyril, who was subject to passing fits of justice,
'we began, you know. At least you did.' Cyril's justice was always
uncompromising.

'I'm not going to say I'm sorry if you mean that,' said Robert, and the
chair-leg cracked to the kick he gave as he said it.

'Oh, do let's,' said Anthea, 'we're three to one, and Mother does so
hate it if we row. Come on. I'll say I'm sorry first, though I didn't
say anything, hardly.'

'All right, let's get it over,' said Cyril, opening the
door.'Hi--you--Pussy!'

Far away up the stairs a voice could be heard singing brokenly, but
still defiantly--

   'How many miles (sniff) to Babylon?
   Three score and ten! (sniff)
   Can I get there by candle light?
   Yes (sniff), and back again!'

It was trying, for this was plainly meant to annoy. But Anthea would not
give herself time to think this. She led the way up the stairs, taking
three at a time, and bounded to the level of Jane, who sat on the top
step of all, thumping her doll to the tune of the song she was trying to
sing.

'I say, Pussy, let it be pax! We're sorry if you are--'

It was enough. The kiss of peace was given by all. Jane being the
youngest was entitled to this ceremonial. Anthea added a special apology
of her own.

'I'm sorry if I was a pig, Pussy dear,' she said--'especially because
in my really and truly inside mind I've been feeling a little as if
I'd rather not go into the Past again either. But then, do think. If we
don't go we shan't get the Amulet, and oh, Pussy, think if we could only
get Father and Mother and The Lamb safe back! We MUST go, but we'll wait
a day or two if you like and then perhaps you'll feel braver.'

'Raw meat makes you brave, however cowardly you are,' said Robert, to
show that there was now no ill-feeling, 'and cranberries--that's
what Tartars eat, and they're so brave it's simply awful. I suppose
cranberries are only for Christmas time, but I'll ask old Nurse to let
you have your chop very raw if you like.'

'I think I could be brave without that,' said Jane hastily; she hated
underdone meat. 'I'll try.'

At this moment the door of the learned gentleman's room opened, and he
looked out.

'Excuse me,' he said, in that gentle, polite weary voice of his, 'but
was I mistaken in thinking that I caught a familiar word just now? Were
you not singing some old ballad of Babylon?'

'No,' said Robert, 'at least Jane was singing "How many miles," but I
shouldn't have thought you could have heard the words for--'

He would have said, 'for the sniffing,' but Anthea pinched him just in
time.

'I did not hear ALL the words,' said the learned gentleman. 'I wonder
would you recite them to me?'

So they all said together--

   'How many miles to Babylon?
   Three score and ten!
   Can I get there by candle light?
   Yes, and back again!'

'I wish one could,' the learned gentleman said with a sigh.

'Can't you?' asked Jane.

'Babylon has fallen,' he answered with a sigh. 'You know it was once a
great and beautiful city, and the centre of learning and Art, and now
it is only ruins, and so covered up with earth that people are not even
agreed as to where it once stood.'

He was leaning on the banisters, and his eyes had a far-away look in
them, as though he could see through the staircase window the splendour
and glory of ancient Babylon.

'I say,' Cyril remarked abruptly. 'You know that charm we showed you,
and you told us how to say the name that's on it?'

'Yes!'

'Well, do you think that charm was ever in Babylon?'

'It's quite possible,' the learned gentleman replied. 'Such charms have
been found in very early Egyptian tombs, yet their origin has not been
accurately determined as Egyptian. They may have been brought from Asia.
Or, supposing the charm to have been fashioned in Egypt, it might very
well have been carried to Babylon by some friendly embassy, or brought
back by the Babylonish army from some Egyptian campaign as part of the
spoils of war. The inscription may be much later than the charm. Oh yes!
it is a pleasant fancy, that that splendid specimen of yours was once
used amid Babylonish surroundings.' The others looked at each other, but
it was Jane who spoke.

'Were the Babylon people savages, were they always fighting and throwing
things about?' For she had read the thoughts of the others by the
unerring light of her own fears.

'The Babylonians were certainly more gentle than the Assyrians,' said
the learned gentleman. 'And they were not savages by any means. A very
high level of culture,' he looked doubtfully at his audience and went
on, 'I mean that they made beautiful statues and jewellery, and
built splendid palaces. And they were very learned--they had glorious
libraries and high towers for the purpose of astrological and
astronomical observation.'

'Er?' said Robert.

'I mean for--star-gazing and fortune-telling,' said the learned
gentleman, 'and there were temples and beautiful hanging gardens--'
