"Trust! Trust! Only trust the dear Lord!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now ten years since Sami entered the plane-tree estate. Whoever
passes by there on a beautiful Spring day will surely stand still at the
high iron gateway and listen for a little, for there is seldom heard such
a merry song as sounds from the thick branches of the planetrees. Up in
the tree sits the young gardener pruning the branches. At the same time
he sings continually, like the merriest finch, and carols loudest the end
of his song, accompanied by all the birds:

"Only trust the dear Lord!"

The young gardener is Sami. At first he received a good knowledge of
reading, writing and arithmetic with the children of the house; later,
according to his great wish, he was trained as a gardener of the estate.
But he is now not only gardener, he has much more to oversee about the
estate than any one would imagine. Arthur, who has just finished his
studies, is still an ardent sailor. Without Sami, no trip is possible,
and Arthur is apt to say:

"Without God's help and Sami's assistance I should have been drowned
twenty times."

When Karl comes from the university in his vacation, his first question
is, "Where is Sami?" and this he asks numberless times every day, for
without him he can never get ready. He alone knows where to find
everything Karl needs in vacation-time for his amusements, from his old
bow and quiver up to his riding whip and gun.

Edward has now given up his donkey cart and instead is interested in
strange animals, which have their dwelling-place in the back of the
courtyard and often make a great spectacle there. He owns two marmots,
two parrots and a monkey. No one could manage these and keep them in
order but Sami, and he does it so well and so successfully that Edward
often exclaims:

"Without Sami everything we have would go to ruin, animals and people,
the animals for want of proper care and the people from anger over it."

But Betti still remains Sami's greatest friend. She can call him at any
hour of the day she pleases, Sami is immediately on the spot, and Betti
knows he is more devoted than any one else and besides can keep secrets
like a stone. No one knows how many little notes he has to carry every
week to the neighbouring estates. Sami will not tell, for her brothers
would laugh at their sister Betti's endless correspondence which she has
with numerous girl friends around on all the estates. Sami is her most
devoted friend, for he would run through fire and water for her without
hesitation. He never forgets what persuasive words in his behalf Betti
used with her father, when, broken-hearted, he was going to fetch his
bundle and go away again.

The youngest, Ella, with golden curls, who has taken over the donkey and
cart from her brother Edward, is entrusted to Sami's especial care when
she desires to go for a drive. Whenever she brings out her white robe to
spread over her knees, Sami's eyes sparkle with delight and thankfulness
as he remembers how the proverb led him to his good fortune, and still
more at the memory of his grandmother, who brought about all this good,
and whom he never forgets.

When, recently, a lady, owning one of the neighbouring estates, proposed
to Herr von K. to transfer his merry gardener to her, merely because the
servants in her house had sullen faces, he replied:

"You can have him, just as much as you can have one of my own children,
if you should try to entice one away. Sami is the most faithful,
trustworthy, conscientious person who has ever come in my way. I can
leave my whole house and go wherever I will, I know that everything will
be taken care of, as if I stood by. This is so because Sami has another
Master besides me, before whose eyes he performs all his work. The dear
Lord himself sent my glad-hearted Sami to me, and I esteem him. He
belongs to my house, and it shall remain his home!"









End of Project Gutenberg's What Sami Sings with the Birds, by Johanna Spyri

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHAT SAMI SINGS WITH THE BIRDS ***

***** This file should be named 9482.txt or 9482.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/4/8/9482/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Mary Meehan, and Distributed Proofreaders

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
