What regiment were you in?" asked Saul, looking down from his lofty
height upon the slender gentleman, who answered briefly,--

"In none. I was abroad at the time."

"Sick?"

"No, busy with a novel."

"Took four years to write it?"

"I was obliged to travel and study before I could finish it. These
things take more time to work up than outsiders would believe."

"Seems to me our war was a finer story than any you could find in
Europe, and the best way to study it would be to fight it out. If you
want heroes and heroines you'd have found plenty of 'em there."

"I have no doubt of it, and shall be glad to atone for my seeming
neglect of them by hearing about your own exploits. Major."

Randal hoped to turn the conversation gracefully, but Saul was not
to be caught, and left the room, saying, with a gleam of fun in his
eye,--

"I can't stop now; heroes can wait, pigs can't."

The girls laughed at this sudden descent from the sublime to the
ridiculous, and Randal joined them, feeling his condescension had not
been unobserved.

As if drawn by the merry sound Aunt Plumy appeared, and being
established in the rocking-chair fell to talking as easily as if she
had known her guests for years.

"Laugh away, young folks, that's better for digestion than any of the
messes people use. Are you troubled with dyspepsy, dear? You didn't
seem to take your vittles very hearty, so I mistrusted you was
delicate," she said, looking at Emily, whose pale cheeks and weary
eyes told the story of late hours and a gay life.

"I haven't eaten so much for years, I assure you, Mrs. Basset; but
it was impossible to taste all your good things. I am not dyspeptic,
thank you, but a little seedy and tired, for I've been working rather
hard lately."

"Be you a teacher? or have you a 'perfessun,' as they call a trade
nowadays?" asked the old lady in a tone of kindly interest, which
prevented a laugh at the idea of Emily's being anything but a beauty
and a belle. The others kept their countenances with difficulty, and
she answered demurely,--

"I have no trade as yet, but I dare say I should be happier if I had."

"Not a doubt on't, my dear."

"What would you recommend, ma'am?"

"I should say dressmakin' was rather in your line, ain't it? Your
clothes is dreadful tasty, and do you credit if you made 'em
yourself." and Aunt Plumy surveyed with feminine interest the simple
elegance of the travelling dress which was the masterpiece of a French
modiste.

"No, ma'am, I don't make my own things, I'm too lazy. It takes so much
time and trouble to select them that I have only strength left to wear
them."

"Housekeepin' used to be the favorite perfessun in my day. It ain't
fashionable now, but it needs a sight of trainin' to be perfect in all
that's required, and I've an idee it would be a sight healthier and
usefuller than the paintin' and music and fancy work young women do
nowadays."

"But every one wants some beauty in their lives, and each one has a
different sphere to fill, if one can only find it."

"'Pears to me there's no call for so much art when nater is full of
beauty for them that can see and love it. As for 'spears' and so on,
I've a notion if each of us did up our own little chores smart and
thorough we needn't go wanderin' round to set the world to rights.
That's the Lord's job, and I presume to say He can do it without any
advice of ourn."

Something in the homely but true words seemed to rebuke the three
listeners for wasted lives, and for a moment there was no sound but
the crackle of the fire, the brisk click of the old lady's knitting
needles, and Ruth's voice singing overhead as she made ready to join
the party below.

"To judge by that sweet sound you have done one of your 'chores' very
beautifully, Mrs. Basset, and in spite of the follies of our day,
succeeded in keeping one girl healthy, happy and unspoiled," said
Emily, looking up into the peaceful old face with her own lovely one
full of respect and envy.

"I do hope so, for she's my ewe lamb, the last of four dear little
girls; all the rest are in the burying ground 'side of father. I don't
expect to keep her long, and don't ought to regret when I lose her,
for Saul is the best of sons; but daughters is more to mothers
somehow, and I always yearn over girls that is left without a broodin'
wing to keep 'em safe and warm in this world of tribulation."

Aunt Plumy laid her hand on Sophie's head as she spoke, with such a
motherly look that both girls drew nearer, and Randal resolved to put
her in a book without delay.

Presently Saul returned with little Ruth hanging on his arm and shyly
nestling near him as he took the three-cornered leathern chair in the
chimney nook, while she sat on a stool close by.

"Now the circle is complete and the picture perfect. Don't light the
lamps yet, please, but talk away and let me make a mental study
of you. I seldom find so charming a scene to paint," said Randal,
beginning to enjoy himself immensely, with a true artist's taste for
novelty and effect.

"Tell us about your book, for we have been reading it as it comes out
in the magazine, and are much exercised about how it's going to
end," began Saul, gallantly throwing himself into the breach, for a
momentary embarrassment fell upon the women at the idea of sitting for
their portraits before they were ready.

"Do you really read my poor serial up here, and do me the honor to
like it?" asked the novelist, both flattered and amused, for his work
was of the aesthetic sort, microscopic studies of character, and
careful pictures of modern life.

"Sakes alive, why shouldn't we?" cried Aunt Plumy. "We have some
eddication, though we ain't very genteel. We've got a town libry, kep
up by the women mostly, with fairs and tea parties and so on. We have
all the magazines reg'lar, and Saul reads out the pieces while Ruth
sews and I knit, my eyes bein' poor. Our winter is long and evenins
would be kinder lonesome if we didn't have novils and newspapers to
cheer 'em up."

"I am very glad I can help to beguile them for you. Now tell me what
you honestly think of my work? Criticism is always valuable, and I
should really like yours, Mrs. Basset," said Randal, wondering what
the good woman would make of the delicate analysis and worldly wisdom
on which he prided himself.

Short work, as Aunt Plumy soon showed him, for she rather enjoyed
freeing her mind at all times, and decidedly resented the insinuation
that country folk could not appreciate light literature as well as
city people.

"I ain't no great of a jedge about anything but nat'ralness of books,
and it really does seem as if some of your men and women was dreadful
uncomfortable creaters. 'Pears to me it ain't wise to be always
pickin' ourselves to pieces and pryin' into things that ought to
come gradual by way of experience and the visitations of Providence.
Flowers won't blow worth a cent ef you pull 'em open. Better wait and
see what they can do alone. I do relish the smart sayins, the odd ways
of furrin parts, and the sarcastic slaps at folkses weak spots. But
massy knows, we can't live on spice-cake and Charlotte Ruche, and I
do feel as if books was more sustainin' ef they was full of every-day
people and things, like good bread and butter. Them that goes to the
heart and ain't soon forgotten is the kind I hanker for. Mis Terry's
books now, and Mis Stowe's, and Dickens's Christmas pieces,--them is
real sweet and cheerin', to my mind."

As the blunt old lady paused it was evident she had produced a
sensation, for Saul smiled at the fire, Ruth looked dismayed at
this assault upon one of her idols, and the young ladies were both
astonished and amused at the keenness of the new critic who dared
express what they had often felt. Randal, however, was quite composed
and laughed good-naturedly, though secretly feeling as if a pail of
cold water had been poured over him.

"Many thanks, madam; you have discovered my weak point with surprising
accuracy. But you see I cannot help 'picking folks to pieces,' as you
have expressed it; that is my gift, and it has its attractions, as the
sale of my books will testify. People like the 'spice-bread,' and as
that is the only sort my oven will bake, I must keep on in order to
make my living."

"So rumsellers say, but it ain't a good trade to foller, and I'd chop
wood 'fore I'd earn my livin' harmin' my feller man. 'Pears to me I'd
let my oven cool a spell, and hunt up some homely, happy folks to
write about; folks that don't borrer trouble and go lookin' for holes
in their neighbors' coats, but take their lives brave and cheerful;
and rememberin' we are all human, have pity on the weak, and try to
be as full of mercy, patience and lovin' kindness as Him who made
us. That sort of a book would do a heap of good; be real warmin' and
strengthening and make them that read it love the man that wrote it,
and remember him when he was dead and gone."

"I wish I could!" and Randal meant what he said, for he was as tired
of his own style as a watch-maker might be of the magnifying glass
through which he strains his eyes all day. He knew that the heart was
left out of his work, and that both mind and soul were growing morbid
with dwelling on the faulty, absurd and metaphysical phases of life
and character. He often threw down his pen and vowed he would write no
more; but he loved ease and the books brought money readily; he was
accustomed to the stimulant of praise and missed it as the toper
misses his wine, so that which had once been a pleasure to himself and
others was fast becoming a burden and a disappointment.

The brief pause which followed his involuntary betrayal of discontent
was broken by Ruth, who exclaimed, with a girlish enthusiasm that
overpowered girlish bashfulness,--

"_I_ think all the novels are splendid! I hope you will write hundreds
more, and I shall live to read 'em."

"Bravo, my gentle champion! I promise that I will write one more at
least, and have a heroine in it whom your mother will both admire and
love," answered Randal, surprised to find how grateful he was for the
girl's approval, and how rapidly his trained fancy began to paint the
background on which he hoped to copy this fresh, human daisy.

Abashed by her involuntary outburst, Ruth tried to efface herself
behind Saul's broad shoulder, and he brought the conversation back to
its starting-point by saying in a tone of the most sincere interest,--

"Speaking of the serial, I am very anxious to know how your hero comes
out. He is a fine fellow, and I can't decide whether he is going to
spoil his life marrying that silly woman, or do something grand and
generous, and not be made a fool of."

"Upon my soul, I don't know myself. It is very hard to find new
finales. Can't you suggest something, Major? then I shall not be
obliged to leave my story without an end, as people complain I am
rather fond of doing."

"Well, no, I don't think I've anything to offer. Seems to me it isn't
the sensational exploits that show the hero best, but some great
sacrifice quietly made by a common sort of man who is noble without
knowing it. I saw a good many such during the war, and often wish I
could write them down, for it is surprising how much courage, goodness
and real piety is stowed away in common folks ready to show when the
right time comes."

"Tell us one of them, and I'll bless you for a hint. No one knows the
anguish of an author's spirit when he can't ring down the curtain on
an effective tableau," said Randal, with a glance at his friends to
ask their aid in eliciting an anecdote or reminiscence.

"Tell about the splendid fellow who held the bridge, like Horatius,
till help came up. That was a thrilling story, I assure you," answered
Sophie, with an inviting smile.

But Saul would not be his own hero, and said briefly:

"Any man can be brave when the battle-fever is on him, and it only
takes a little physical courage to dash ahead." He paused a moment,
with his eyes on the snowy landscape without, where twilight was
deepening; then, as if constrained by the memory that winter scene
evoked, he slowly continued,--

"One of the bravest things I ever knew was done by a poor fellow who
has been a hero to me ever since, though I only met him that night.
It was after one of the big battles of that last winter, and I was
knocked over with a broken leg and two or three bullets here and
there. Night was coming on, snow falling, and a sharp wind blew over
the field where a lot of us lay, dead and alive, waiting for the
ambulance to come and pick us up. There was skirmishing going on not
far off, and our prospects were rather poor between frost and fire. I
was calculating how I'd manage, when I found two poor chaps close by
who were worse off, so I braced up and did what I could for them. One
had an arm blown away, and kept up a dreadful groaning. The other
was shot bad, and bleeding to death for want of help, but never
complained. He was nearest, and I liked his pluck, for he spoke
cheerful and made me ashamed to growl. Such times make dreadful brutes
of men if they haven't something to hold on to, and all three of us
were most wild with pain and cold and hunger, for we'd fought all day
fasting, when we heard a rumble in the road below, and saw lanterns
bobbing round. That meant life to us, and we all tried to holler; two
of us were pretty faint, but I managed a good yell, and they heard it.

"'Room for one more. Hard luck, old boys, but we are full and must
save the worst wounded first. Take a drink, and hold on till we come
back,' says one of them with the stretcher.

"'Here's the one to go,' I says, pointin' out my man, for I saw by the
light that he was hard hit.

"'No, that one. He's got more chances than I, or this one; he's young
and got a mother; I'll wait,' said the good feller, touchin' my arm,
for he 'd heard me mutterin' to myself about this dear old lady. We
always want mother when we are down, you know."

Saul's eyes turned to the beloved face with a glance of tenderest
affection, and Aunt Plumy answered with a dismal groan at the
recollection of his need that night, and her absence.

"Well, to be short, the groaning chap was taken, and my man left. I
was mad, but there was no time for talk, and the selfish one went off
and left that poor feller to run his one chance. I had my rifle, and
guessed I could hobble up to use it if need be; so we settled back to
wait without much hope of help, everything being in a muddle. And wait
we did till morning, for that ambulance did not come back till next
day, when most of us were past needing it.

"I'll never forget that night. I dream it all over again as plain as
if it was real. Snow, cold, darkness, hunger, thirst, pain, and all
round us cries and cursing growing less and less, till at last only
the wind went moaning over that meadow. It was awful! so lonesome,
helpless, and seemingly God-forsaken. Hour after hour we lay there
side by side under one coat, waiting to be saved or die, for the wind
grew strong and we grew weak."

Saul drew a long breath, and held his hands to the fire as if he felt
again the sharp suffering of that night.

"And the man?" asked Emily, softly, as if reluctant to break the
silence.

"He _was_ a man! In times like that men talk like brothers and show
what they are. Lying there, slowly freezing, Joe Cummings told
me about his wife and babies, his old folks waiting for him, all
