a red rose to her lips with the hand upon which shone the frosty glitter
of Romney's diamond, looking at the graceful slope of her shoulder and
the splendid line of chin and throat with critical approval.

She noted, too, how well the gown became her eyes, bringing out all the
deeper colour in them. Lucinda had magnificent eyes. Once Romney had
written a sonnet to them in which he compared their colour to ripe
blueberries. This may not sound poetical to you unless you know or
remember just what the tints of ripe blueberries are--dusky purple in
some lights, clear slate in others, and yet again in others the misty
hue of early meadow violets.

"You really look very well," remarked the real Lucinda to the mirrored
Lucinda. "Nobody would think you were an old maid. But you are. Alice
Penhallow, who is to be married to-night, was a child of five when you
thought of being married fifteen years ago. That makes you an old maid,
my dear. Well, it is your own fault, and it will continue to be your own
fault, you stubborn offshoot of a stubborn breed!"

She flung her train out straight and pulled on her gloves.

"I do hope I won't get any spots on this dress to-night," she reflected.
"It will have to do me for a gala dress for a year at least--and I have
a creepy conviction that it is fearfully spottable. Bless Uncle Mark's
good, uncalculating heart! How I would have detested it if he had given
me something sensible and useful and ugly--as Aunt Emilia would have
done."

They all went to "young" John Penhallow's at early moonrise. Lucinda
drove over the two miles of hill and dale with a youthful second cousin,
by name, Carey Penhallow. The wedding was quite a brilliant affair.
Lucinda seemed to pervade the social atmosphere, and everywhere she went
a little ripple of admiration trailed after her like a wave. She was
undeniably a belle, yet she found herself feeling faintly bored and was
rather glad than otherwise when the guests began to fray off.

"I'm afraid I'm losing my capacity for enjoyment," she thought, a little
drearily. "Yes, I must be growing old. That is what it means when social
functions begin to bore you."

It was that unlucky Mrs. George who blundered again. She was standing on
the veranda when Carey Penhallow dashed up.

"Tell Lucinda that I can't take her back to the Grange. I have to
drive Mark and Cissy Penhallow to Bright River to catch the two o'clock
express. There will be plenty of chances for her with the others."

At this moment George Penhallow, holding his rearing horse with
difficulty, shouted for his wife. Mrs. George, all in a flurry, dashed
back into the still crowded hall. Exactly to whom she gave her message
was never known to any of the Penhallows. But a tall, ruddy-haired girl,
dressed in pale green organdy--Anne Shirley from Avonlea--told Marilla
Cuthbert and Rachel Lynde as a joke the next morning how a chubby little
woman in a bright pink fascinator had clutched her by the arm, and
gasped out: "Carey Penhallow can't take you--he says you're to look out
for someone else," and was gone before she could answer or turn around.

Thus it was that Lucinda, when she came out to the veranda step, found
herself unaccountably deserted. All the Grange Penhallows were gone;
Lucinda realized this after a few moments of bewildered seeking, and
she understood that if she were to get to the Grange that night she must
walk. Plainly there was nobody to take her.

Lucinda was angry. It is not pleasant to find yourself forgotten and
neglected. It is still less pleasant to walk home alone along a country
road, at one o'clock in the morning, wearing a pale green voile. Lucinda
was not prepared for such a walk. She had nothing on her feet save
thin-soled shoes, and her only wraps were a flimsy fascinator and a
short coat.

"What a guy I shall look, stalking home alone in this rig," she thought
crossly.

There was no help for it, unless she confessed her plight to some of the
stranger guests and begged a drive home. Lucinda's pride scorned such
a request and the admission of neglect it involved. No, she would walk,
since that was all there was to it; but she would not go by the main
road to be stared at by all and sundry who might pass her. There was a
short cut by way of a lane across the fields; she knew every inch of it,
although she had not traversed it for years.

She gathered up the green voile as trimly as possible, slipped around
the house in the kindly shadows, picked her way across the side lawn,
and found a gate which opened into a birch-bordered lane where the
frosted trees shone with silvery-golden radiance in the moonlight.
Lucinda flitted down the lane, growing angrier at every step as the
realization of how shamefully she seemed to have been treated came home
to her. She believed that nobody had thought about her at all, which was
tenfold worse than premeditated neglect.

As she came to the gate at the lower end of the lane a man who was
leaning over it started, with a quick intake of his breath, which, in
any other man than Romney Penhallow, or for any other woman than Lucinda
Penhallow, would have been an exclamation of surprise.

Lucinda recognized him with a great deal of annoyance and a little
relief. She would not have to walk home alone. But with Romney
Penhallow! Would he think she had contrived it so purposely?

Romney silently opened the gate for her, silently latched it behind her,
and silently fell into step beside her. Down across a velvety sweep of
field they went; the air was frosty, calm and still; over the world lay
a haze of moonshine and mist that converted East Grafton's prosaic hills
and fields into a shimmering fairyland. At first Lucinda felt angrier
than ever. What a ridiculous situation! How the Penhallows would laugh
over it!

As for Romney, he, too, was angry with the trick impish chance had
played him. He liked being the butt of an awkward situation as little as
most men; and certainly to be obliged to walk home over moonlit fields
at one o'clock in the morning with the woman he had loved and never
spoken to for fifteen years was the irony of fate with a vengeance.
Would she think he had schemed for it? And how the deuce did she come to
be walking home from the wedding at all?

By the time they had crossed the field and reached the wild cherry lane
beyond it, Lucinda's anger was mastered by her saving sense of humour.
She was even smiling a little maliciously under her fascinator.

The lane was a place of enchantment--a long, moonlit colonnade adown
which beguiling wood nymphs might have footed it featly. The moonshine
fell through the arching boughs and made a mosaic of silver light and
clear-cut shadow for the unfriendly lovers to walk in. On either side
was the hovering gloom of the woods, and around them was a great silence
unstirred by wind or murmur.

Midway in the lane Lucinda was attacked by a sentimental recollection.
She thought of the last time Romney and she had walked home together
through this very lane, from a party at "young" John's. It had been
moonlight then too, and--Lucinda checked a sigh--they had walked hand
in hand. Just here, by the big gray beech, he had stopped her and kissed
her. Lucinda wondered if he were thinking of it, too, and stole a look
at him from under the lace border of her fascinator.

But he was striding moodily along with his hands in his pockets, and his
hat pulled down over his eyes, passing the old beech without a glance
at it. Lucinda checked another sigh, gathered up an escaped flutter of
voile, and marched on.

Past the lane a range of three silvery harvest fields sloped down to
Peter Penhallow's brook--a wide, shallow stream bridged over in the
olden days by the mossy trunk of an ancient fallen tree. When Lucinda
and Romney arrived at the brook they gazed at the brawling water
blankly. Lucinda remembered that she must not speak to Romney just in
time to prevent an exclamation of dismay. There was no tree! There was
no bridge of any kind over the brook!

Here was a predicament! But before Lucinda could do more than
despairingly ask herself what was to be done now, Romney answered--not
in words, but in deeds. He coolly picked Lucinda up in his arms, as
if she had been a child instead of a full grown woman of no mean
avoirdupois, and began to wade with her through the water.

Lucinda gasped helplessly. She could not forbid him and she was so
choked with rage over his presumption that she could not have spoken
in any case. Then came the catastrophe. Romney's foot slipped on a
treacherous round stone--there was a tremendous splash--and Romney and
Lucinda Penhallow were sitting down in the middle of Peter Penhallow's
brook.

Lucinda was the first to regain her feet. About her clung in
heart-breaking limpness the ruined voile. The remembrance of all her
wrongs that night rushed over her soul, and her eyes blazed in the
moonlight. Lucinda Penhallow had never been so angry in her life.

"YOU D--D IDIOT!" she said, in a voice that literally shook with rage.

Romney meekly scrambled up the bank after her.

"I'm awfully sorry, Lucinda," he said, striving with uncertain success
to keep a suspicious quiver of laughter out of his tone. "It was
wretchedly clumsy of me, but that pebble turned right under my foot.
Please forgive me--for that--and for other things."

Lucinda deigned no answer. She stood on a flat stone and wrung the water
from the poor green voile. Romney surveyed her apprehensively.

"Hurry, Lucinda," he entreated. "You will catch your death of cold."

"I never take cold," answered Lucinda, with chattering teeth. "And it is
my dress I am thinking of--was thinking of. You have more need to hurry.
You are sopping wet yourself and you know you are subject to colds.
There--come."

Lucinda picked up the stringy train, which had been so brave and buoyant
five minutes before, and started up the field at a brisk rate. Romney
came up to her and slipped his arm through hers in the old way. For
a time they walked along in silence. Then Lucinda began to shake with
inward laughter. She laughed silently for the whole length of the field;
and at the line fence between Peter Penhallow's land and the Grange
acres she paused, threw back the fascinator from her face, and looked at
Romney defiantly.

"You are thinking of--THAT," she cried, "and I am thinking of it. And we
will go on, thinking of it at intervals for the rest of our lives. But
if you ever mention it to me I'll never forgive you, Romney Penhallow!"

"I never will," Romney promised. There was more than a suspicion of
laughter in his voice this time, but Lucinda did not choose to resent
it. She did not speak again until they reached the Grange gate. Then she
faced him solemnly.

"It was a case of atavism," she said. "Old Grandfather Gordon was to
blame for it."

At the Grange almost everybody was in bed. What with the guests
straggling home at intervals and hurrying sleepily off to their rooms,
nobody had missed Lucinda, each set supposing she was with some other
set. Mrs. Frederick, Mrs. Nathaniel and Mrs. George alone were up. The
perennially chilly Mrs. Nathaniel had kindled a fire of chips in the
blue room grate to warm her feet before retiring, and the three women
were discussing the wedding in subdued tones when the door opened
and the stately form of Lucinda, stately even in the dragged voile,
appeared, with the damp Romney behind her.

"Lucinda Penhallow!" gasped they, one and all.

"I was left to walk home," said Lucinda coolly. "So Romney and I came
across the fields. There was no bridge over the brook, and when he was
carrying me over he slipped and we fell in. That is all. No, Cecilia, I
never take cold, so don't worry. Yes, my dress is ruined, but that is of
no consequence. No, thank you, Cecilia, I do not care for a hot drink.
Romney, do go and take off those wet clothes of yours immediately. No,
Cecilia, I will NOT take a hot footbath. I am going straight to bed.
Good night."

When the door closed on the pair the three sisters-in-law stared at
each other. Mrs. Frederick, feeling herself incapable of expressing her
sensations originally, took refuge in a quotation:


"'Do I sleep, do I dream, do I wonder and doubt? Is things what they
seem, or is visions about?'"


"There will be another Penhallow wedding soon," said Mrs. Nathaniel,
with a long breath. "Lucinda has spoken to Romney AT LAST."

"Oh, WHAT do you suppose she said to him?" cried Mrs. George.

"My dear Cecilia," said Mrs. Frederick, "we shall never know."

They never did know.





VI. Old Man Shaw's Girl


"Day after to-morrow--day after to-morrow," said Old Man Shaw, rubbing
his long slender hands together gleefully. "I have to keep saying it
over and over, so as to really believe it. It seems far too good to be
true that I'm to have Blossom again. And everything is ready. Yes,
I think everything is ready, except a bit of cooking. And won't this
orchard be a surprise to her! I'm just going to bring her out here as
soon as I can, never saying a word. I'll fetch her through the
spruce lane, and when we come to the end of the path I'll step back
casual-like, and let her go out from under the trees alone, never
suspecting. It'll be worth ten times the trouble to see her big, brown
eyes open wide and hear her say, 'Oh, daddy! Why, daddy!'"

He rubbed his hands again and laughed softly to himself. He was a tall,
bent old man, whose hair was snow white, but whose face was fresh and
rosy. His eyes were a boy's eyes, large, blue and merry, and his mouth
had never got over a youthful trick of smiling at any provocation--and,
oft-times, at no provocation at all.

To be sure, White Sands people would not have given you the most
favourable opinion in the world of Old Man Shaw. First and foremost,
they would have told you that he was "shiftless," and had let his bit
of a farm run out while he pottered with flowers and bugs, or rambled
aimlessly about in the woods, or read books along the shore. Perhaps it
was true; but the old farm yielded him a living, and further than that
Old Man Shaw had no ambition. He was as blithe as a pilgrim on a pathway
climbing to the west. He had learned the rare secret that you must take
happiness when you find it--that there is no use in marking the place
and coming back to it at a more convenient season, because it will not
be there then. And it is very easy to be happy if you know, as Old Man
Shaw most thoroughly knew, how to find pleasure in little things. He
enjoyed life, he had always enjoyed life and helped others to enjoy it;
consequently his life was a success, whatever White Sands people might
think of it. What if he had not "improved" his farm? There are some
people to whom life will never be anything more than a kitchen garden;
and there are others to whom it will always be a royal palace with domes
and minarets of rainbow fancy.

The orchard of which he was so proud was as yet little more than the
substance of things hoped for--a flourishing plantation of young trees
which would amount to something later on. Old Man Shaw's house was on
the crest of a bare, sunny hill, with a few staunch old firs and spruces
behind it--the only trees that could resist the full sweep of the winds
that blew bitterly up from the sea at times. Fruit trees would never
grow near it, and this had been a great grief to Sara.

"Oh, daddy, if we could just have an orchard!" she had been wont to say
wistfully, when other farmhouses in White Sands were smothered whitely
in apple bloom. And when she had gone away, and her father had nothing
to look forward to save her return, he was determined she should find an
orchard when she came back.

Over the southward hill, warmly sheltered by spruce woods and sloping
to the sunshine, was a little field, so fertile that all the slack
management of a life-time had not availed to exhaust it. Here Old Man
Shaw set out his orchard and saw it flourish, watching and tending it
until he came to know each tree as a child and loved it. His neighbours
laughed at him, and said that the fruit of an orchard so far away from
the house would all be stolen. But as yet there was no fruit, and when
the time came for bearing there would be enough and to spare.

"Blossom and me'll get all we want, and the boys can have the rest, if
they want 'em worse'n they want a good conscience," said that unworldly,
unbusinesslike Old Man Shaw.

On his way back home from his darling orchard he found a rare fern in
the woods and dug it up for Sara--she had loved ferns. He planted it
at the shady, sheltered side of the house and then sat down on the old
bench by the garden gate to read her last letter--the letter that was
only a note, because she was coming home soon. He knew every word of
it by heart, but that did not spoil the pleasure of re-reading it every
half-hour.

Old Man Shaw had not married until late in life, and had, so White
Sands people said, selected a wife with his usual judgment--which, being
interpreted, meant no judgment at all; otherwise, he would never have
married Sara Glover, a mere slip of a girl, with big brown eyes like a
frightened wood creature's, and the delicate, fleeting bloom of a spring
Mayflower.

"The last woman in the world for a farmer's wife--no strength or get-up
about her."

Neither could White Sands folk understand what on earth Sara Glover had
married him for.

"Well, the fool crop was the only one that never failed."

Old Man Shaw--he was Old Man Shaw even then, although he was only
forty--and his girl bride had troubled themselves not at all about White
Sands opinions. They had one year of perfect happiness, which is always
worth living for, even if the rest of life be a dreary pilgrimage, and
then Old Man Shaw found himself alone again, except for little Blossom.
She was christened Sara, after her dead mother, but she was always
Blossom to her father--the precious little blossom whose plucking had
cost the mother her life.

Sara Glover's people, especially a wealthy aunt in Montreal, had
wanted to take the child, but Old Man Shaw grew almost fierce over the
suggestion. He would give his baby to no one. A woman was hired to look
after the house, but it was the father who cared for the baby in the
main. He was as tender and faithful and deft as a woman. Sara never
missed a mother's care, and she grew up into a creature of life and
light and beauty, a constant delight to all who knew her. She had a way
of embroidering life with stars. She was dowered with all the charming
characteristics of both parents, with a resilient vitality and activity
which had pertained to neither of them. When she was ten years old she
had packed all hirelings off, and kept house for her father for six
delightful years--years in which they were father and daughter, brother
and sister, and "chums." Sara never went to school, but her father saw
to her education after a fashion of his own. When their work was done
they lived in the woods and fields, in the little garden they had made
on the sheltered side of the house, or on the shore, where sunshine and
storm were to them equally lovely and beloved. Never was comradeship
more perfect or more wholly satisfactory.

"Just wrapped up in each other," said White Sands folk, half-enviously,
half-disapprovingly.

When Sara was sixteen Mrs. Adair, the wealthy aunt aforesaid, pounced
down on White Sands in a glamour of fashion and culture and outer
worldliness. She bombarded Old Man Shaw with such arguments that he had
to succumb. It was a shame that a girl like Sara should grow up in a
place like White Sands, "with no advantages and no education," said Mrs.
Adair scornfully, not understanding that wisdom and knowledge are two
entirely different things.

"At least let me give my dear sister's child what I would have given my
own daughter if I had had one," she pleaded tearfully. "Let me take
