looked round upon the party, making each individual in turn the object
of the sneer which invariably dwelt upon his countenance.

"So, fellow-pilgrims," said he, "here we are, seven wise men and one
fair damsel, who doubtless is as wise as any graybeard of the company.
Here we are, I say, all bound on the same goodly enterprise. Methinks,
now, it were not amiss that each of us declare what he proposes to do
with the Great Carbuncle, provided he have the good hap to clutch
it.--What says our friend in the bearskin? How mean you, good sir, to
enjoy the prize which you have been seeking the Lord knows how long
among the Crystal Hills?"

"How enjoy it!" exclaimed the aged Seeker, bitterly. "I hope for no
enjoyment from it: that folly has past long ago. I keep up the search
for this accursed stone because the vain ambition of my youth has
become a fate upon me in old age. The pursuit alone is my strength,
the energy of my soul, the warmth of my blood and the pith and marrow
of my bones. Were I to turn my back upon it, I should fall down dead
on the hither side of the notch which is the gateway of this
mountain-region. Yet not to have my wasted lifetime back again would I
give up my hopes of is deemed little better than a traffic with the
evil one. Now, think ye that I would have done this grievous wrong to
my soul, body, reputation and estate without a reasonable chance of
profit?"

"Not I, pious Master Pigsnort," said the man with the spectacles. "I
never laid such a great folly to thy charge."

"Truly, I hope not," said the merchant. "Now, as touching this Great
Carbuncle, I am free to own that I have never had a glimpse of it,
but, be it only the hundredth part so bright as people tell, it will
surely outvalue the Great Mogul's best diamond, which he holds at an
incalculable sum; wherefore I am minded to put the Great Carbuncle on
shipboard and voyage with it to England, France, Spain, Italy, or into
heathendom if Providence should send me thither, and, in a word,
dispose of the gem to the best bidder among the potentates of the
earth, that he may place it among his crown-jewels. If any of ye have
a wiser plan, let him expound it."

"That have I, thou sordid man!" exclaimed the poet. "Dost thou desire
nothing brighter than gold, that thou wouldst transmute all this
ethereal lustre into such dross as thou wallowest in already? For
myself, hiding the jewel under my cloak, I shall hie me back to my
attic-chamber in one of the darksome alleys of London. There night and
day will I gaze upon it. My soul shall drink its radiance; it shall be
diffused throughout my intellectual powers and gleam brightly in every
line of poesy that I indite. Thus long ages after I am gone the
splendor of the Great Carbuncle will blaze around my name."

"Well said, Master Poet!" cried he of the spectacles. "Hide it under
thy cloak, sayest thou? Why, it will gleam through the holes and make
thee look like a jack-o'-lantern!"

"To think," ejaculated the lord De Vere, rather to himself than his
companions, the best of whom he held utterly unworthy of his
intercourse--"to think that a fellow in a tattered cloak should talk
of conveying the Great Carbuncle to a garret in Grubb street! Have not
I resolved within myself that the whole earth contains no fitter
ornament for the great hall of my ancestral castle? There shall it
flame for ages, making a noonday of midnight, glittering on the suits
of armor, the banners and escutcheons, that hang around the wall, and
keeping bright the memory of heroes. Wherefore have all other
adventurers sought the prize in vain but that I might win it and make
it a symbol of the glories of our lofty line? And never on the diadem
of the White Mountains did the Great Carbuncle hold a place half so
honored as is reserved for it in the hall of the De Veres."

"It is a noble thought," said the cynic, with an obsequious sneer.
"Yet, might I presume to say so, the gem would make a rare sepulchral
lamp, and would display the glories of Your Lordship's progenitors
more truly in the ancestral vault than in the castle-hall."

"Nay, forsooth," observed Matthew, the young rustic, who sat hand in
hand with his bride, "the gentleman has bethought himself of a
profitable use for this bright stone. Hannah here and I are seeking it
for a like purpose."

"How, fellow?" exclaimed His Lordship, in surprise. "What castle-hall
hast thou to hang it in?"

"No castle," replied Matthew, "but as neat a cottage as any within
sight of the Crystal Hills. Ye must know, friends, that Hannah and I,
being wedded the last week, have taken up the search of the Great
Carbuncle because we shall need its light in the long winter evenings
and it will be such a pretty thing to show the neighbors when they
visit us! It will shine through the house, so that we may pick up a
pin in any corner, and will set all the windows a-glowing as if there
were a great fire of pine-knots in the chimney. And then how pleasant,
when we awake in the night, to be able to see one another's faces!"

There was a general smile among the adventurers at the simplicity of
the young couple's project in regard to this wondrous and invaluable
stone, with which the greatest monarch on earth might have been proud
to adorn his palace. Especially the man with spectacles, who had
sneered at all the company in turn, now twisted his visage into such
an expression of ill-natured mirth that Matthew asked him rather
peevishly what he himself meant to do with the Great Carbuncle.

"The Great Carbuncle!" answered the cynic, with ineffable scorn. "Why,
you blockhead, there is no such thing in _rerum natura_. I have
come three thousand miles, and am resolved to set my foot on every
peak of these mountains and poke my head into every chasm for the sole
purpose of demonstrating to the satisfaction of any man one whit less
an ass than thyself that the Great Carbuncle is all a humbug."

Vain and foolish were the motives that had brought most of the
adventurers to the Crystal Hills, but none so vain, so foolish, and so
impious too, as that of the scoffer with the prodigious spectacles. He
was one of those wretched and evil men whose yearnings are downward to
the darkness instead of heavenward, and who, could they but extinguish
the lights which God hath kindled for us, would count the midnight
gloom their chiefest glory.

As the cynic spoke several of the party were startled by a gleam of
red splendor that showed the huge shapes of the surrounding mountains
and the rock-bestrewn bed of the turbulent river, with an illumination
unlike that of their fire, on the trunks and black boughs of the
forest-trees. They listened for the roll of thunder, but heard
nothing, and were glad that the tempest came not near them. The
stars--those dial-points of heaven--now warned the adventurers to
close their eyes on the blazing logs and open them in dreams to the
glow of the Great Carbuncle.

The young married couple had taken their lodgings in the farthest
corner of the wigwam, and were separated from the rest of the party by
a curtain of curiously-woven twigs such as might have hung in deep
festoons around the bridal-bower of Eve. The modest little wife had
wrought this piece of tapestry while the other guests were talking.
She and her husband fell asleep with hands tenderly clasped, and awoke
from visions of unearthly radiance to meet the more blessed light of
one another's eyes. They awoke at the same instant and with one happy
smile beaming over their two faces, which grew brighter with their
consciousness of the reality of life and love. But no sooner did she
recollect where they were than the bride peeped through the
interstices of the leafy curtain and saw that the outer room of the
hut was deserted.

"Up, dear Matthew!" cried she, in haste. "The strange folk are all
gone. Up this very minute, or we shall lose the Great Carbuncle!"

In truth, so little did these poor young people deserve the mighty
prize which had lured them thither that they had slept peacefully all
night and till the summits of the hills were glittering with sunshine,
while the other adventurers had tossed their limbs in feverish
wakefulness or dreamed of climbing precipices, and set off to realize
their dreams with the curliest peep of dawn. But Matthew and Hannah
after their calm rest were as light as two young deer, and merely
stopped to say their prayers and wash themselves in a cold pool of the
Amonoosuck, and then to taste a morsel of food ere they turned their
faces to the mountain-side. It was a sweet emblem of conjugal
affection as they toiled up the difficult ascent gathering strength
from the mutual aid which they afforded.

After several little accidents, such as a torn robe, a lost shoe and
the entanglement of Hannah's hair in a bough, they reached the upper
verge of the forest and were now to pursue a more adventurous course.
The innumerable trunks and heavy foliage of the trees had hitherto
shut in their thoughts, which now shrank affrighted from the region of
wind and cloud and naked rocks and desolate sunshine that rose
immeasurably above them. They gazed back at the obscure wilderness
which they had traversed, and longed to be buried again in its depths
rather than trust themselves to so vast and visible a solitude.

"Shall we go on?" said Matthew, throwing his arm round Hannah's waist
both to protect her and to comfort his heart by drawing her close to
it.

But the little bride, simple as she was, had a woman's love of jewels,
and could not forego the hope of possessing the very brightest in the
world, in spite of the perils with which it must be won.

"Let us climb a little higher," whispered she, yet tremulously, as she
turned her face upward to the lonely sky.

"Come, then," said Matthew, mustering his manly courage and drawing
her along with him; for she became timid again the moment that he grew
bold.

And upward, accordingly, went the pilgrims of the Great Carbuncle, now
treading upon the tops and thickly-interwoven branches of dwarf pines
which by the growth of centuries, though mossy with age, had barely
reached three feet in altitude. Next they came to masses and fragments
of naked rock heaped confusedly together like a cairn reared by giants
in memory of a giant chief. In this bleak realm of upper air nothing
breathed, nothing grew; there was no life but what was concentred in
their two hearts; they had climbed so high that Nature herself seemed
no longer to keep them company. She lingered beneath them within the
verge of the forest-trees, and sent a farewell glance after her
children as they strayed where her own green footprints had never
been. But soon they were to be hidden from her eye. Densely and dark
the mists began to gather below, casting black spots of shadow on the
vast landscape and sailing heavily to one centre, as if the loftiest
mountain-peak had summoned a council of its kindred clouds. Finally
the vapors welded themselves, as it were, into a mass, presenting the
appearance of a pavement over which the wanderers might have trodden,
but where they would vainly have sought an avenue to the blessed earth
which they had lost. And the lovers yearned to behold that green earth
again--more intensely, alas! than beneath a clouded sky they had ever
desired a glimpse of heaven. They even felt it a relief to their
desolation when the mists, creeping gradually up the mountain,
concealed its lonely peak, and thus annihilated--at least, for
them--the whole region of visible space. But they drew closer together
with a fond and melancholy gaze, dreading lest the universal cloud
should snatch them from each other's sight. Still, perhaps, they would
have been resolute to climb as far and as high between earth and
heaven as they could find foothold if Hannah's strength had not begun
to fail, and with that her courage also. Her breath grew short. She
refused to burden her husband with her weight, but often tottered
against his side, and recovered herself each time by a feebler effort.
At last she sank down on one of the rocky steps of the acclivity.

"We are lost, dear Matthew," said she, mournfully; "we shall never
find our way to the earth again. And oh how happy we might have been
in our cottage!"

"Dear heart, we will yet be happy there," answered Matthew. "Look! In
this direction the sunshine penetrates the dismal mist; by its aid I
can direct our course to the passage of the Notch. Let us go back,
love, and dream no more of the Great Carbuncle."

"The sun cannot be yonder," said Hannah, with despondence. "By this
time it must be noon; if there could ever be any sunshine here, it
would come from above our heads."

"But look!" repeated Matthew, in a somewhat altered tone. "It is
brightening every moment. If not sunshine, what can it be?"

Nor could the young bride any longer deny that a radiance was breaking
through the mist and changing its dim hue to a dusky red, which
continually grew more vivid, as if brilliant particles were interfused
with the gloom. Now, also, the cloud began to roll away from the
mountain, while, as it heavily withdrew, one object after another
started out of its impenetrable obscurity into sight with precisely
the effect of a new creation before the indistinctness of the old
chaos had been completely swallowed up. As the process went on they
saw the gleaming of water close at their feet, and found themselves on
the very border of a mountain-lake, deep, bright, clear and calmly
beautiful, spreading from brim to brim of a basin that had been
scooped out of the solid rock. A ray of glory flashed across its
surface. The pilgrims looked whence it should proceed, but closed
their eyes, with a thrill of awful admiration, to exclude the fervid
splendor that glowed from the brow of a cliff impending over the
enchanted lake.

For the simple pair had reached that lake of mystery and found the
long-sought shrine of the Great Carbuncle. They threw their arms
around each other and trembled at their own success, for as the
legends of this wondrous gem rushed thick upon their memory they felt
themselves marked out by fate, and the consciousness was fearful.
Often from childhood upward they had seen it shining like a distant
star, and now that star was throwing its intensest lustre on their
hearts. They seemed changed to one another's eyes in the red
brilliancy that flamed upon their cheeks, while it lent the same fire
to the lake, the rocks and sky, and to the mists which had rolled back
before its power. But with their next glance they beheld an object
that drew their attention even from the mighty stone. At the base of
the cliff, directly beneath the Great Carbuncle, appeared the figure
of a man with his arms extended in the act of climbing and his face
turned upward as if to drink the full gush of splendor. But he stirred
not, no more than if changed to marble.

"It is the Seeker," whispered Hannah, convulsively grasping her
husband's arm. "Matthew, he is dead."

"The joy of success has killed him," replied Matthew, trembling
violently. "Or perhaps the very light of the Great Carbuncle was
death."

"'The Great Carbuncle'!" cried a peevish voice behind them. "The great
humbug! If you have found it, prithee point it out to me."

They turned their heads, and there was the cynic with his prodigious
spectacles set carefully on his nose, staring now at the lake, now at
the rocks, now at the distant masses of vapor, now right at the Great
Carbuncle itself, yet seemingly as unconscious of its light as if all
the scattered clouds were condensed about his person. Though its
radiance actually threw the shadow of the unbeliever at his own feet
as he turned his back upon the glorious jewel, he would not be
convinced that there was the least glimmer there.

"Where is your great humbug?" he repeated. "I challenge you to make me
see it."

"There!" said Matthew, incensed at such perverse blindness, and
turning the cynic round toward the illuminated cliff. "Take off those
abominable spectacles, and you cannot help seeing it."

Now, these colored spectacles probably darkened the cynic's sight in
at least as great a degree as the smoked glasses through which people
gaze at an eclipse. With resolute bravado, however, he snatched them
from his nose and fixed a bold stare full upon the ruddy blaze of the
Great Carbuncle. But scarcely had he encountered it when, with a deep,
shuddering groan, he dropped his head and pressed both hands across
his miserable eyes. Thenceforth there was in very truth no light of
the Great Carbuncle, nor any other light on earth, nor light of heaven
itself, for the poor cynic. So long accustomed to view all objects
through a medium that deprived them of every glimpse of brightness, a
single flash of so glorious a phenomenon, striking upon his naked
vision, had blinded him for ever.

"Matthew," said Hannah, clinging to him, "let us go hence."

Matthew saw that she was faint, and, kneeling down, supported her in
his arms while he threw some of the thrillingly-cold water of the
enchanted lake upon her face and bosom. It revived her, but could not
renovate her courage.

"Yes, dearest," cried Matthew, pressing her tremulous form to his
breast; "we will go hence and return to our humble cottage. The
blessed sunshine and the quiet moonlight shall come through our
window. We will kindle the cheerful glow of our hearth at eventide and
be happy in its light. But never again will we desire more light than
all the world may share with us."

"No," said his bride, "for how could we live by day or sleep by night
in this awful blaze of the Great Carbuncle?"

Out of the hollow of their hands they drank each a draught from the
lake, which presented them its waters uncontaminated by an earthly
lip. Then, lending their guidance to the blinded cynic, who uttered
not a word, and even stifled his groans in his own most wretched
heart, they began to descend the mountain. Yet as they left the shore,
till then untrodden, of the spirit's lake, they threw a farewell
glance toward the cliff and beheld the vapors gathering in dense
volumes, through which the gem burned duskily.

As touching the other pilgrims of the Great Carbuncle, the legend goes
on to tell that the worshipful Master Ichabod Pigsnort soon gave up
the quest as a desperate speculation, and wisely resolved to betake
himself again to his warehouse, near the town-dock, in Boston. But as
he passed through the Notch of the mountains a war-party of Indians
captured our unlucky merchant and carried him to Montreal, there
holding him in bondage till by the payment of a heavy ransom he had
woefully subtracted from his hoard of pine-tree shillings. By his long
absence, moreover, his affairs had become so disordered that for the
rest of his life, instead of wallowing in silver, he had seldom a
sixpence-worth of copper. Doctor Cacaphodel, the alchemist, returned
to his laboratory with a prodigious fragment of granite, which he
ground to powder, dissolved in acids, melted in the crucible and burnt
with the blowpipe, and published the result of his experiments in one
of the heaviest folios of the day. And for all these purposes the gem
itself could not have answered better than the granite. The poet, by a
somewhat similar mistake, made prize of a great piece of ice which he
found in a sunless chasm of the mountains, and swore that it
corresponded in all points with his idea of the Great Carbuncle. The
critics say that, if his poetry lacked the splendor of the gem, it
retained all the coldness of the ice. The lord De Vere went back to
his ancestral hall, where he contented himself with a wax-lighted
chandelier, and filled in due course of time another coffin in the
ancestral vault. As the funeral torches gleamed within that dark
receptacle, there was no need of the Great Carbuncle to show the
vanity of earthly pomp.

The cynic, having cast aside his spectacles, wandered about the world
a miserable object, and was punished with an agonizing desire of light
for the wilful blindness of his former life. The whole night long he
would lift his splendor-blasted orbs to the moon and stars; he turned
his face eastward at sunrise as duly as a Persian idolater; he made a
pilgrimage to Rome to witness the magnificent illumination of Saint
Peter's church, and finally perished in the Great Fire of London, into
the midst of which he had thrust himself with the desperate idea of
catching one feeble ray from the blaze that was kindling earth and
heaven.

Matthew and his bride spent many peaceful years and were fond of
telling the legend of the Great Carbuncle. The tale, however, toward
the close of their lengthened lives, did not meet with the full
credence that had been accorded to it by those who remembered the
ancient lustre of the gem. For it is affirmed that from the hour when
two mortals had shown themselves so simply wise as to reject a jewel
which would have dimmed all earthly things its splendor waned. When
our pilgrims reached the cliff, they found only an opaque stone with
particles of mica glittering on its surface. There is also a tradition
that as the youthful pair departed the gem was loosened from the
forehead of the cliff and fell into the enchanted lake, and that at
noontide the Seeker's form may still be seen to bend over its
quenchless gleam.

Some few believe that this inestimable stone is blazing as of old, and
say that they have caught its radiance, like a flash of summer
lightning, far down the valley of the Saco. And be it owned that many
a mile from the Crystal Hills I saw a wondrous light around their
summits, and was lured by the faith of poesy to be the latest pilgrim
of the Great Carbuncle.




THE PROPHETIC PICTURES.[1]


"But this painter!" cried Walter Ludlow, with animation. "He not only
excels in his peculiar art, but possesses vast acquirements in all
other learning and science. He talks Hebrew with Dr. Mather and gives
lectures in anatomy to Dr. Boylston. In a word, he will meet the
best-instructed man among us on his own ground. Moreover, he is a
polished gentleman, a citizen of the world--yes, a true cosmopolite;
for he will speak like a native of each clime and country on the
globe, except our own forests, whither he is now going. Nor is all
this what I most admire in him."

[Footnote 1: This story was suggested by an anecdote of Stuart related
in Dunlap's _History of the Arts of Designs_--a most entertaining
book to the general reader, and a deeply-interesting one, we should
think, to the artist.]

"Indeed!" said Elinor, who had listened with a women's interest to the
description of such a man. "Yet this is admirable enough."

"Surely it is," replied her lover, "but far less so than his natural
gift of adapting himself to every variety of character, insomuch that
all men--and all women too, Elinor--shall find a mirror of themselves
in this wonderful painter. But the greatest wonder is yet to be told."

"Nay, if he have more wonderful attributes than these," said Elinor,
laughing, "Boston is a perilous abode for the poor gentleman. Are you
telling me of a painter, or a wizard?"

"In truth," answered he, "that question might be asked much more
seriously than you suppose. They say that he paints not merely a man's
features, but his mind and heart. He catches the secret sentiments and
passions and throws them upon the canvas like sunshine, or perhaps, in
the portraits of dark-souled men, like a gleam of infernal fire. It is
an awful gift," added Walter, lowering his voice from its tone of
enthusiasm. "I shall be almost afraid to sit to him."

"Walter, are you in earnest?" exclaimed Elinor.

"For Heaven's sake, dearest Elinor, do not let him paint the look
which you now wear," said her lover, smiling, though rather perplexed.
"There! it is passing away now; but when you spoke, you seemed
frightened to death, and very sad besides. What were you thinking of?"

"Nothing, nothing!" answered Elinor, hastily. "You paint my face with
your own fantasies. Well, come for me tomorrow, and we will visit this
wonderful artist."

But when the young man had departed, it cannot be denied that a
remarkable expression was again visible on the fair and youthful face
of his mistress. It was a sad and anxious look, little in accordance
with what should have been the feelings of a maiden on the eve of
wedlock. Yet Walter Ludlow was the chosen of her heart.

"A look!" said Elinor to herself. "No wonder that it startled him if
it expressed what I sometimes feel. I know by my own experience how
frightful a look may be. But it was all fancy. I thought nothing of it
at the time; I have seen nothing of it since; I did but dream it;" and
she busied herself about the embroidery of a ruff in which she meant
that her portrait should be taken.

The painter of whom they had been speaking was not one of those native
artists who at a later period than this borrowed their colors from the
Indians and manufactured their pencils of the furs of wild beasts.
Perhaps, if he could have revoked his life and prearranged his
destiny, he might have chosen to belong to that school without a
master in the hope of being at least original, since there were no
works of art to imitate nor rules to follow. But he had been born and
educated in Europe. People said that he had studied the grandeur or
beauty of conception and every touch of the master-hand in all the
most famous pictures in cabinets and galleries and on the walls of
churches till there was nothing more for his powerful mind to learn.
Art could add nothing to its lessons, but Nature might. He had,
therefore, visited a world whither none of his professional brethren
had preceded him, to feast his eyes on visible images that were noble
and picturesque, yet had never been transferred to canvas. America was
too poor to afford other temptations to an artist of eminence, though
many of the colonial gentry on the painter's arrival had expressed a
wish to transmit their lineaments to posterity by moans of his skill.
Whenever such proposals were made, he fixed his piercing eyes on the
applicant and seemed to look him through and through. If he beheld
only a sleek and comfortable visage, though there were a gold-laced
coat to adorn the picture and golden guineas to pay for it, he civilly
rejected the task and the reward; but if the face were the index of
anything uncommon in thought, sentiment or experience, or if he met a
beggar in the street with a white beard and a furrowed brow, or if
sometimes a child happened to look up and smile, he would exhaust all
the art on them that he denied to wealth.

Pictorial skill being so rare in the colonies, the painter became an
object of general curiosity. If few or none could appreciate the
technical merit of his productions, yet there were points in regard to
which the opinion of the crowd was as valuable as the refined judgment
of the amateur. He watched the effect that each picture produced on
such untutored beholders, and derived profit from their remarks, while
they would as soon have thought of instructing Nature herself as him
who seemed to rival her. Their admiration, it must be owned, was
tinctured with the prejudices of the age and country. Some deemed it
an offence against the Mosaic law, and even a presumptuous mockery of
the Creator, to bring into existence such lively images of his
creatures. Others, frightened at the art which could raise phantoms at
will and keep the form of the dead among the living, were inclined to
consider the painter as a magician, or perhaps the famous Black Man of
old witch-times plotting mischief in a new guise. These foolish
fancies were more, than half believed among the mob. Even in superior
circles his character was invested with a vague awe, partly rising
like smoke-wreaths from the popular superstitions, but chiefly caused
by the varied knowledge and talents which he made subservient to his
profession.

Being on the eve of marriage, Walter Ludlow and Elinor were eager to
