and lodge for five dollars a week or about that and directed Frank to
them. They were all near University Place. He found the place without
difficulty.

A slipshod servant answered the bell.

"Have you got any small rooms?" asked Frank.

"Yes," answered the girl. "Missus is out, but I'll show you a hall
bedroom, if you like."

"I should like to see it."

Frank followed the girl upstairs.

He was not favorably impressed by the appearance of the interior. He did
not so much mind its being shabby, but he was repelled by the evident
lack of neatness.

The girl threw open the door of a small hall bedroom at the head of the
stairs, but it looked so comfortless that he felt sure he should not
like it. He thought it best, however, to inquire the price.

"Five dollars a week with board," answered the girl.

"I don't think it will suit me," said our hero.

"There's a larger room for seven dollars," said the servant.

"No. I think I will look elsewhere."

The next house was not much better, but the third was much neater and
more attractive, and Frank agreed to take a room at five dollars per
week.

It was a small hall bedroom, but it looked clean, and the lady who
showed him about the house was very neat in her dress.

"When will you come?" asked the lady.

"Now," replied Frank, promptly.

"Would you mind paying the first week in advance?"

"Not at all. Here is the money."

And Frank drew a five-dollar bill from his portemonnaie.

"Thank you!" said the boarding-house keeper. "I have lost so much by
boarders going away owing me money that I am obliged to ask gentlemen to
pay in advance till I am well acquainted with them."

"That is quite right," said Frank. "What is your dinner hour?"

"Six o'clock. We have lunch at half-past twelve for the ladies, but if
any gentleman happens to be at home at that time, he can go in."

Frank looked at his watch. It was only eleven o'clock and as so much of
the day remained, he decided, as soon as he had unpacked his valise, to
go downtown and look for a place without delay.

"I shall not be here at lunch to-day," he said. "You may expect me at
dinner."

There was a small bureau in the room--a piece of furniture not often
found in hall bedrooms.

Frank deposited the contents of the valise in the bureau drawers, and
then went downstairs and out into the street.




CHAPTER XIX

FRANK SEEKS EMPLOYMENT IN VAIN


It was a bright, pleasant day, and Broadway looked very lively. In spite
of his being alone in a strange city, with uncertain prospects, Frank
felt in good spirits.

Boys of his age usually like excitement and bustle, and Frank was quick
to notice the shifting scenes of the great panorama.

"Here are thousands of people," he reflected, "all of whom make a living
in some way. I don't see why I can't succeed as well as they."

Some of the objects he saw amused him.

In front of him walked an elderly man with a large placard strapped to
his back, on which was the advertisement of a "Great Clothing Emporium."

"I don't think I should fancy that kind of employment," thought our
hero.

As he was looking in at a shop window, a boy about his own age hailed
him.

"I say, Johnny, what's the price of turnips?"

"Do you want to buy any?" asked Frank quietly.

"Well, I might. Have you got any with you?"

"I am sorry I can't supply you," said Frank, coolly. "Up our way we keep
our cattle on turnips."

"You ain't so green, after all," said the boy, laughing good-naturedly.

"Thank you for the compliment!"

"I suppose I look countrylike," thought Frank, "but it won't last long.
I shall get used to city ways."

Close by he saw in a window the sign:

  "CASH BOY WANTED."

Frank as not altogether certain about the duties of cash boys nor their
rate of compensation, but he made up his mind not to lose sight of any
chances, and accordingly stepped into the store.

It proved to be a large dry-goods store.

Near the entrance he met a tall man, with black whiskers.

"Do you want any cash boys?" inquired Frank.

"Are you inquiring for yourself?"

"Yes, sir."

"You are too large. Besides, you would not be satisfied with the wages?"

"How much do you pay, sir?"

"Two dollars a week."

"No; I don't think I should like to work for that," said Frank. "Are
those cash boys?" he asked, pointing out some boys of apparently ten to
twelve years, old, who were flitting about from desk to counter.

"Yes."

"I see they are much younger than I. Excuse the trouble I have given
you!"

"None whatever," said the man, politely.

Frank left the store, and continued his walk down Broadway.

He began to feel a little serious. It was evident that the boys did not
receive as large compensation for their services as he had supposed.

The problem promised to be a perplexing one, but Frank was by no means
discouraged. In fact, if he had been, he would hardly have deserved to
be the hero of my story.

Though Clinton Place is not very far uptown, it is a considerable walk
from this point to the Astor House.

There was so much to see, however, that Frank did not become tired, nor
was he sensible of the distance. He walked a little beyond the Astor
House, and, crossing Broadway, turned down Fulton Street.

On the left side of the street his attention was drawn to a restaurant,
and he was led by the prompting of appetite to enter.

The prices he found to be reasonable, and the tables were already pretty
well filled with clerks and business men, who were partaking of their
midday lunch.

Frank found that a plate of meat, with potato and a small supply of
bread and butter, could be obtained for fifteen cents.

He afterward found restaurants where the same could be gotten for ten
cents, but generally there was a deficiency in quality or quantity, and
there was less neatness in serving the articles.

Seated at the same table with Frank were two young men, neither probably
much over twenty. One appeared to be filling a regular clerkship.

"What are you doing now, Jack?" he asked of the other.

"I am in the tea business."

"How is that?"

"You know the Great Pekin Tea Company, of course?"

"Yes."

"Well, until I can get a place, I am selling for them."

"How do you make out?"

"I can't tell you, for I have only just commenced," said his friend.

"How do they pay--salary or commission?"

"They are to pay me a commission--twenty per cent on what I sell."

"That is a good commission."

"Yes; it is good enough, if I can make a fair amount of sales. There is
a good deal of uncertainty about it of course. I would much rather have
a place like yours."

Frank listened with interest. He wondered whether the Great Pekin Tea
Company would employ him. If so, he would have a field for his energy,
and every inducement to work hard, since his pay would depend on the
amount of his sales. Besides, as an agent, he would occupy a
comparatively independent position, and Frank was ambitious enough to
enjoy this.





CHAPTER XX

AN ADVENTURE IN WALL STREET


When the two men at his table left the restaurant, Frank followed them.
At the door the two parted, the clerk going toward Broadway, while the
agent walked in the direction of Nassau Street.

"I beg your pardon," said Frank, overtaking him; "but may I ask you a
question?"

"Half a dozen, if you like," said the other, good-naturedly.

"I overheard what you said about the Great Pekin Tea Company. Do you
think I could get a chance to sell for them?"

"Oh, yes; there'll be no trouble about that!"

"I am looking for something to do," continued Frank, "and I think I
should like to try that."

"You'll find it uphill work," said the agent; "hard work and poor pay. I
shall leave it as soon as I can get a regular position. Can't you get a
place?"

"Perhaps I can. I haven't tried very hard yet," answered Frank; "but I
find boys are paid so little that I can't make enough to live on. If I
were a man it would be different."

"I don't believe you can make more than a boy's wages at selling tea,"
said Frank's new acquaintance, "but you might try it."

"Would you mind giving me a note to the company?" asked Frank.

"I will write a line on one of my business cards," said the agent. "That
will be all you will need."

He drew out a card and wrote a line commending Frank to the attention of
the company.

Frank thanked him, and sought the direction given.

Entering a large shop, not far from the Astor House, he looked about his
inquiringly. Around him were chests of tea, inscribed with Chinese
characters. A portly man addressed him.

"Well, my boy, what can I do for you?" he asked.

"Mr. Mason, one of your agents, has given me this card," said Frank. "He
thinks you might be willing to employ me."

"We are ready to employ any competent person," said the gentleman; "but
you seem very young."

"I am sixteen, sir."

"That is young. Have you had any experience as an agent?"

"No, sir?"

The man questioned him further and finally accepted him.

Frank was told that it would be well to take samples of different kinds
of teas with their respective prices attached, and seek orders for them
at private houses and groceries, noting down in a little book orders
obtained. Small quantities he could himself deliver, and large
quantities, should he be fortunate enough to obtain any, could be sent
out from the store by their general delivery.

"What commission am I to get, sir?" inquired Frank.

"Twenty per cent on parcels sold to private houses and ten per cent when
you sell to retail dealers. To the first you can charge a full price,
but it is necessary to sell at lower rates to dealers."

"I understand, sir," said Frank.

"When do you want to begin?"

"To-morrow morning, sir. Where do you advise me to go?"

"New York has been pretty well canvassed, except perhaps the upper part,
Harlem. It might be well to make a start in Brooklyn."

"Very well, sir. I will call to-morrow and get samples."

As Frank left the store, he reflected, with satisfaction:

"I have only been a few hours in New York, and I have gotten employment
already."

This reflection raised his spirits, and disposed him to regard the
future with a degree of confidence. He resolved to spend the rest of the
afternoon in walking about in the lower part of the city, and acquiring
a little familiarity with the streets, as this was a kind of knowledge
he was likely to need.

He strolled down Broadway, admiring the massive and stately structures
that lined the streets on either side. Very soon he came to Trinity
Church, and, standing in front it, looked down Wall Street. He had heard
so much of this street that he felt inclined to turn from Broadway and
walk down its entire length.

As he sauntered along a man whom he met scrutinized him sharply, as if
considering some plan. Apparently making up his mind, he stepped up to
Frank, and, touching him on the shoulder, said:

"Boy, would you like a job?"

Now Frank, though he had engaged to work for the Great Pekin Tea Company
was ready to accept any other proposal, and answered promptly:

"Yes, sir."

"That is right," said the man. "It is a mere trifle, but I am willing to
pay you a dollar."

"What is it, sir?"

"Do you see that window?"

He pointed to a basement window, in which were exposed rolls of gold,
currency and greenbacks of different denominations, and English
sovereigns and French gold coins.

"I want you to do me a little errand in there," he said.

Frank was rather surprised that the man did not do his own errand, when
the broker's office was so near, but he had no objection to earning a
dollar and signified his willingness.

"What I want you to do," said his new acquaintance, "is to sell some
government bonds for me."

"Very well, sir."

The man produced a large yellow envelope, already open.

"In this envelope," he said, "are two five-twenty governments for a
hundred dollars each. Take them in and sell them, and bring the proceeds
to me."

"All right, sir."

Frank took the envelope, and entered the office of Jones & Robinson,
that being the style of the firm.

He advanced to the counter, and singling out a clerk, said:
