Robert unconsciously began to exercise his gift of golden speech. He
dwelt upon the coming appointment of Waraiyageh, their best friend, to
deal in behalf of the King with the Hodenosaunee, and he harped
continually upon Champlain and Frontenac. He made them seem to be of
yesterday, instead of long ago. He opened the old wounds the Mohawks had
received at the hands of the French and made them sting and burn again.
He dwelt upon the faith of the English, their respect for the lands of
the Hodenosaunee and the ancient friendship with the Six Nations. He had
forgotten the words of Dayohogo that he would be a great orator, but
five minutes after they were spoken he was justifying them.

Tayoga and Willet glanced at each other, but remained silent. Young
Lennox was saying enough for all three. Dayohogo did not take his eyes
from the speaker, following all his words, and the warriors, lying on
their elbows, watched him and believed what he said. When he stopped the
chief and all the warriors together uttered a deep exclamation of
approval.

"You are called Lennox," said Dayohogo, "and after the white custom it
is the only name that you have ever had, but we have a better way. When
a warrior distinguishes himself greatly we give him a new name, which
tells what he has done. Hereafter, Lennox, you will be known to the
Ganeagaono as Dagaeoga, which is the name of a great chief of the clan
of the Turtle, of our nation."

"I thank you much, Dahoyogo," said Robert, earnestly, knowing that a
high honor was conferred upon him. "I shall try to deserve in some small
way the great name you have conferred upon me."

"One can but do his best," said the Mohawk gravely.

But Willet rejoiced openly in the distinction that had been bestowed
upon his young comrade, saying that some day it might be carried out
with formal ceremonies by the Mohawk nation, and was a fact of great
value. To be by adoption a son of any nation of the Hodenosaunee would
be of enormous assistance to him, if he negotiated with the League in
behalf of the English colonists. But to be adopted by both Onondagas and
Mohawks gave him a double power.

Robert had already been influenced powerfully by Tayoga, the young
Onondaga, and now the words of Dayohogo, the Mohawk, carried that
influence yet further. He understood as few white men did the power of
the Hodenosaunee and how its nations might be a deciding factor in the
coming war between French and English, just as he understood long after
that war was over their enormous weight in the new war between the
Americans and English, and he formed a resolution as firm as tempered
steel that his main effort for many years to come should be devoted to
strengthening the ties that connected the people of New York and the
great League.

The afternoon went on in pleasant talk. The Indians, among themselves or
with those whom they knew from long experience to be good friends, were
not taciturn. Robert told the Mohawks that they were going to Quebec,
and Dayohogo expressed curiosity.

"It is the story in our nation, and it is true," he said, "that
generations ago we held the great rock of Stadacona, and that the first
Frenchman, Cartier, who came to Canada, found us there, and drove us
away with firearms, which we had never seen before, and which we did not
know how to meet. It is said also by our old men that we had a town with
palisades around it at Hochelaga (Montreal), but whether it is true or
not I do not know. It may be that it was a town of the Wanedote
(Hurons), our enemies. And yet the Wanedote are of our blood, though far
back in the past we split asunder, and now they take the peace belts of
the French, while we take those of the English."

"And the capital of the French, which they call Quebec, and which you
call Stadacona, stands on land which really belongs to the Mohawks,"
said Robert meaningly.

Dayohogo made no answer, but gloomed into the fire again. After a while
he said that his warriors and he must depart. They were going toward
Ticonderoga, where the French had built the fort, Carillon, within the
territory of the Mohawks. He had been glad to meet Tayoga, the Great
Bear, and the new young white chief, Dagaeoga, whose speech was like the
flowing of pleasant waters. It was a favoring wind that had brought them
together, because they had enjoyed good talk, and had exchanged wise
counsel with one another. Robert agreed with him in flowery allegory and
took from the canoe where it had been stored among their other goods a
present for the chief--envoys seldom traveled through the Indian
country without some such article for some such occasion.

It was _gajewa_, a war club, beautifully carved and polished, made of
ironwood about three feet long, and with tufts of brilliant feathers at
either end. Inserted at one end was a deer's horn, about five inches in
length, and as sharp as a razor. While it was called a war club, it was
thus more of a battle ax, and at close range and wielded by a powerful
arm it was a deadly weapon. It had been made at Albany, and in order to
render it more attractive three silver bands had been placed about it at
equal intervals.

It was at once a weapon and a decoration, and the eyes of Dayohogo
glistened as he received it.

"I take the gift, Dagaeoga," he said, "and I will not forget."

Then they exchanged salutations, and the Mohawks disappeared silently in
the forest.




CHAPTER VI

THE TWO FRENCHMEN


When the three were left alone in the glade the hunter turned to young
Lennox.

"You've done good work today, Robert," he said. "I didn't know you had
in you the makings of an orator and diplomatist. The governor of New
York did better than he knew when he chose you for one of this mission."

Robert blushed again at praise and modestly protested.

"Lennox has found that for which he is best fitted," said Tayoga, slyly.

"If I'm to talk without end I'll do my best," said Robert, laughing,
"and I suggest that we resume our journey now. There doesn't appear to
be any further danger from the Indians who besieged us."

"You're right about it, Robert," said the hunter. "The coming of the
Mohawks has put a barrier between us and them. I've an idea that
Dayohogo and his warriors won't go far toward Ticonderoga, but will soon
turn south to meet those savages and acquire a few scalps if they can,
and if they do meet 'em I hope they'll remove that Ojibway, Tandakora,
who I think is likely to make us a lot of trouble."

Willet never spoke of the Iroquois as "savages," but he often applied
the term to the Canadian and Western Indians. Like Robert, he regarded
those who had built up the great political and military power of the
Hodenosaunee as advanced, and, in a sense, civilized nations.

"I think my friend, the Great Bear, is right," said Tayoga. "Unless
Tandakora and his band have gone toward the west it is likely that
Dayohogo will meet them, and they cannot stand before the Mohawks."

"I think it more probable," said Robert, "that after the failure to
destroy us Tandakora went back to St. Luc, giving a false explanation of
his absence or none at all, just as he pleased."

"It may be so," said Tayoga, "but I have another opinion."

While they talked they were taking the canoe from its shelter, and then
they bore it down to the river again, putting it back into the stream
and listening with pleasure to the gurgle of the water by its sides.

"Paddling isn't the easiest work in the world," said Willet with
satisfaction, "but when you're used to it your muscles can stand it a
long time, and it's far ahead of walking. Now, ho for Canada!"

"Ho for Canada!" said Robert, and the three paddles flashed again in the
clear water. The canoe once more became a live thing and shot down the
stream. They were still in the wilderness, racing between solid banks of
green forest, and they frequently saw deer and bear drinking at the edge
of the river, while the foliage was vivid with color, and musical with
the voices of singing birds.

Robert had a great elation and he had reason to be satisfied with
himself. They had triumphed over the dangers of the gorge and savage
siege, and he had sowed fruitful seed in the mind of Dayohogo, the
powerful Mohawk chief. He had also come to a realization of himself,
knowing for the first time that he had a great gift which might carry
him far, and which might be of vast service to his people.

Therefore, the world was magnificent and beautiful. The air of forest
and mountain was keen with life. His lungs expanded, all his faculties
increased in power, and his figure seemed to grow. Swelling confidence
bore him on. He was anxious to reach Quebec and fulfill his mission.
Then he would go back to the vale of Onondaga and match himself against
the clever St. Luc or any other spokesman whom the Marquis Duquesne
might choose to send.

But his golden dreams were of Quebec, which was a continuous beacon and
lure to him. Despite a life spent chiefly in the woods, which he loved,
he always felt the distant spell of great capitals and a gorgeous
civilization. In the New World Quebec came nearer than any other city to
fulfilling this idea. There the nobles of France, then the most
glittering country in the world, came in silks and laces and with gold
hilted swords by their sides. The young French officers fought with a
jest on their lips, but always with skill and courage, as none knew
better than the British colonials themselves. There was a glow and
glamor about Quebec which the sober English capitals farther south did
not have. It might be the glow and glamor of decay, but people did not
know it then, although they did know that the Frenchman, with his love
of the forest and skill in handling the Indians, was a formidable foe.

"When do you think we'll reach the St. Lawrence, Dave?" he asked.

"In two or three days if we're not attacked again," replied the hunter,
"and then we'll get a bigger boat and row down the river to Quebec."

"Will they let us pass?"

"Why shouldn't they? There's no war, at least not yet."

"That battle back there in the gorge may not have been war, but it
looked precisely like it."

The hunter laughed deep in his throat, and it was a satisfied laugh.

"It did look like it," he said, "and it was war, red war, but nobody was
responsible for it. The Marquis Duquesne, the Governor General of
Canada, who is Onontio to our Iroquois, will raise his jeweled hand, and
protest that he knew nothing about those Indians, that they were wild
warriors from the west, that none of his good, pious Indians of Canada
could possibly have been among them. And the Intendant, Francois Bigot,
the most corrupt and ambitious man in North America, will say that they
obtained no rifles, no muskets, no powder, no lead from him or his
agents. Oh, no, these fine French gentlemen will disown the attack upon
us, as they would have disavowed it, just the same, if we had been
killed. I want to warn you, Robert, and you, Tayoga, that when you reach
Quebec you'll breathe an air that's not that of the woods, nor yet of
Albany or New York. It's a bit of old Europe, it's a reproduction on a
small scale of the gorgeous Versailles over there that's eating the
heart out of France. The Canadian Frenchman is a good man, brave and
enduring, as I ought to know, but he's plundered and fooled by those
people who come from France to make fame or quick fortunes here."

He spoke with earnestness, but not as a hunter. Rather he seemed now to
Robert, despite his forest dress, to be a man of the world, one who
understood cities as well as the wilderness.

"I don't know all your life, Dave," said young Lennox, "but I'm quite
sure you know a great deal more than you would have people to think.
Sometimes I believe you've been across the great water."

"Then you believe right, Robert. I never told you in so many words
before, but I've been in Europe. I'll talk to you about it another time,
not now, and I'll choose where and when."

He spoke so positively that Robert did not pursue the topic, knowing
that if the hunter wished to avoid it he had good reasons. Yet he felt
anew that David Willet, called the Great Bear by the Iroquois, had not
spent his whole life in the woods and that when the time came he could
tell a tale. There was always the fact that Willet spoke excellent
English, so unlike the vernacular of the hunters.

The afternoon was waning fast. The sun was setting in an ocean of fire
that turned the blue line of the mountains in the east to red. The slope
of the land made the current of the river much swifter, and Robert and
Willet drew in their paddles, leaving the work to Tayoga alone, who sat
in the prow and guided their light craft with occasional strokes,
letting the stream do the rest.

There was no more expert canoeman than Tayoga in the whole northern
wilderness. A single sweep of his paddle would send the canoe to any
point he wished, and apparently it was made without effort. There was no
shortening of the breath nor any sudden and violent movement of his
figure. It was all as smooth and easy as the flowing of the water
itself. It seemed that Tayoga was doing nothing, and that the canoe once
more was alive, the master of its own course.

The ocean of fire faded into a sea of gray, and then black night came,
but the canoe sped on in the swift current toward the St. Lawrence. It
was still the wilderness. The green forest on either side of the stream
was unbroken. No smoke from a settler's chimney trailed across the sky.
It was the forest as the Indian had known it for centuries. Robert,
sitting in the center of the canoe, quit dreaming of great cities and
came back to his own time and place. He felt the majesty of all that
surrounded him, but he was not lonely, nor was he oppressed. Instead,
the night, the great forest, the swift river and the gliding canoe
appealed to his sensitive and highly imaginative mind. He was uplifted
and he felt the confidence and elation that contribute so much to
success.

It was characteristic of the three, so diverse in type, and yet knitted
so closely together in friendship, that they would talk much at times
and at other times have silence long and complete. Now, neither spoke
for at least three hours. Tayoga, in the prow, made occasional strokes
of his paddle, but the current remained swift and the speed of the canoe
was not slackened. The young Onondaga devoted most of his time to
watching. Much wreckage from storms or the suction of flood water often
floated on the surface of these wild rivers, and his keen eyes searched
for trunk or bough or snag. They also scanned at intervals the green
walls speeding by on either side, lest they might pass some camp fire
and not notice it, but finding no lighter note in the darkness he felt
sure that no hostile bands were near.

About midnight the force of the current began to abate and Robert and
Willet used the paddles. The darkness also thinned. The rainless clouds
drifted away and disclosed a full moon, which turned the dusk of the
water to silver. The stars came out in cluster after cluster and the
skies became a shining blue. The wilderness revealed itself in another
and splendid phase, and Robert saw and admired.

"How long will we go on, Dave?" The words were his and they were the
first to break the long silence.

"Until nearly daylight," replied Willet. "Then we can land, take the
canoe into the bushes and rest. What do you say, Tayoga?"

"It is good," replied the Onondaga. "We are not weary, because the
river, of its own accord, has borne us on its bosom, but we must sleep.
We would not wish to appear heavy of eye and mind before the children of
Onontio."

"Well spoken, Tayoga," said the hunter. "An Iroquois chief knows that
appearance and dignity count, and you were right to remind us of it. I
think that by the next sunset we'll be meeting French, not the Canadian
French that they call _habitants_, but outposts made up mostly of
officers and soldiers from France. They'll be very curious about us,
naturally so, and since your new friend Dayohogo has announced that you
are a great orator, you can do most of the talking and explaining,
Robert."

"I'll talk my best," replied young Lennox. "Nobody can do more."

As agreed, they drew the canoe into the bushes shortly before daylight,
and slept several hours. Then they returned to the river and resumed
their journey. By the middle of the afternoon they saw signs of
habitation, or at least of the presence of human beings. They beheld two
smokes on the right bank, and one on the left, trailing black lines
against the blue of the sky, but they were all far away, and they did
not care to stop and determine their origin.

Shortly before sunset they saw a camp fire, very close on the eastern
shore, and as they drew near the figures of men in uniform were visible
against the red glow.

"I think we'd better draw in here," said Robert. "This is undoubtedly an
outpost, and, likely, an officer of some importance is in charge. Ours
is a mission of peace, and we want to placate as many people as we can,
as we go."

"It is so," said Tayoga, making a sweep or two of the paddle, and
sending the canoe in a diagonal line toward the designated shore.

Two men in blue uniforms with white facings walked to the edge of the
water and looked at them with curiosity. Robert gave them a gaze as
inquiring as their own, and after the habit of the forest, noted them
carefully. He took them to be French of France. One was about forty
years of age, rather tall, built well, his face browned by forest life.
He had black, piercing eyes and a strong hooked nose. A man of
resolution but cold of heart, Robert said to himself. The other, a
little smaller, and a little younger, was of much the same type. The
uniforms of both were fine and neat, and they bore themselves as
officers of importance. Like St. Luc, they fortified Robert's opinion of
what he was going to find at Quebec.

Neither of the men spoke until the canoe touched the shore, and its
three occupants sprang out. Then they bowed politely, though Robert
fancied that he saw a trace of irony in their manner, and the elder said
in good English:

"Good evening, gentlemen."

"Good evening, Messieurs," said Robert, remembering that he was to be
spokesman. "We are English."

"I can see readily that two of you are."

"The third, Tayoga, the son of a great Onondaga chief, is English also
at heart."

The lips of the Frenchman curled ever so little. Robert saw at once
that he challenged his assertion about Tayoga, but he did not seem to
