form somewhat like an umbrella; and the wood is so pliable that the ends
of the largest branches may be bent down to within two or three feet of
the earth.

5. The bark is whitish and somewhat rough. A tree is never without leaves,
which are at small distances from one another, and on almost opposite
sides of a bough. Blossoms and green and ripe fruit may be seen on the
same tree at the same time. When the blossom falls off, there grows in its
place a small green fruit, which becomes dark red as it ripens.

6. This fruit is not unlike a cherry, and is very good to eat. Under the
pulp of this cherry is found the bean or berry we call coffee, wrapped in
a fine, thin skin. The berry is at first very soft, and has a bad taste;
but as the cherry ripens the berry grows harder, and the dried-up fruit
becomes a shell or pod of a deep brown color.

7. The berry is now solid, and its color is a translucent green. Each
shell contains two seeds, rounded on one side and flat on the other. The
seeds lie with the flat sides together, and, in one highly prized variety,
the two seeds grow together, forming one: this is known as the pea berry.
When the fruit is so ripe that it can be shaken from the tree, the husks
are separated from the berries, and are used, in Arabia, by the natives,
while the berries are sold.

8. The young plants are inserted in holes from twelve to eighteen inches
deep, and six or eight feet apart. If left to themselves, they would grow
to the height of eighteen or twenty feet; but they are usually dwarfed by
pruning, so that the fruit may be easily got at by the gatherer.

9. Thus dwarfed, they extend their branches until they cover the whole
space about them. They begin to yield fruit the third year. By the sixth
or seventh year they are at full bearing, and continue to bear for twenty
years or more.

l0. Before the berry can be used, it undergoes a process of roasting. The
amount of aromatic oil brought out in roasting has much to do with the
market value of coffee, and it has been found that the longer the raw
coffee is kept, the richer it becomes in this peculiar oil, and so the
more valuable. But after the coffee is roasted, and especially after it is
ground, it loses its aroma rapidly.

11. Arabia produces the celebrated Mocha, or "Mokha," coffee, which is the
finest in the world; but little or none of the best product is ever taken
out of that country. The Java coffee from the East Indies is next prized,
but the best quality of this kind is also quite difficult to obtain, and
many, therefore, prefer the finest grades of Rio coffee from South America
to such Mocha and Java as can be had in our country.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Af-ford'ed, yielded, produced. 3. Off'spring,
descendants, however remote, from, the stock. 4. Pli'a-ble, easily bent.
7. Trans-lu'cent, permitting the passage of light. 8. Prun'-ing, trimming.
10. Ar-o-mat'ic, containing aroma, fragrant.


EXERCISES.--What country first supplied coffee? How did the plant come to
be grown in other countries? Describe the plant. What is said of the
fruit? How are the plants cultivated? What is said about the roasting of
coffee? What are the three principal kinds of coffee used, and how are
they valued?



XLIII. THE WINTER KING. (120)

1. Oh! what will become of thee, poor little bird?
   The muttering storm in the distance is heard;
   The rough winds are waking, the clouds growing black,
   They'll soon scatter snowflakes all over thy back!
   From what sunny clime hast thou wandered away?
   And what art thou doing this cold winter day?

2. "I'm picking the gum from the old peach tree;
   The storm doesn't trouble me. Pee, dee, dee!"

3. But what makes thee seem so unconscious of care?
   The brown earth is frozen, the branches are bare:
   And how canst thou be so light-hearted and free,
   As if danger and suffering thou never should'st see,
   When no place is near for thy evening nest,
   No leaf for thy screen, for thy bosom no rest?

4. "Because the same Hand is a shelter for me,
   That took off the summer leaves. Pee, dee, dee!"

5. But man feels a burden of care and of grief,
   While plucking the cluster and binding the sheaf:
   In the summer we faint, in the winter we're chilled,
   With ever a void that is yet to be filled.
   We take from the ocean, the earth, and the air,
   Yet all their rich gifts do not silence our care.

6. "A very small portion sufficient will be,
   If sweetened with gratitude. Pee, dee, dee!"

7. But soon there'll be ice weighing down the light bough,
   On which thou art flitting so playfully now;
   And though there's a vesture well fitted and warm,
   Protecting the rest of thy delicate form,
   What, then, wilt thou do with thy little bare feet,
   To save them from pain, mid the frost and the sleet?

8. "I can draw them right up in my feathers, you see,
   To warm them, and fly away. Pee, dee, dee!"

9. I thank thee, bright monitor; what thou hast taught
   Will oft be the theme of the happiest thought;
   We look at the clouds; while the birds have an eye
   To Him who reigns over them, changeless and high.
   And now little hero, just tell me thy name,
   That I may be sure whence my oracle came.

10. "Because, in all weather, I'm merry and free,
    They call me the Winter King. Pee, dee, dee!"


DEFINITIONS.--l. Mut'ter-ing, murmuring, rumbling. 3. Un-con'scious, not
knowing, not perceiving. 5. Clus'ter, a bunch. 7. Flit'ing, moving about
in a lively manner. Ves'ture, clothing, covering. 9. Mon'i-tor, one who
warns of faults. Or'a-cle, a wise sentence or decision.



XLIV. THE NETTLE. (121)

1. Anna. O papa! I have stung my hand with that nettle.

2. Father. Well, my dear, I am sorry for it; but pull up that large dock
leaf you see near it; now bruise the juice out of it on the part which is
stung. Well, is the pain lessened?

3. A. Oh, very much indeed, I hardly feel it now. But I wish there was not
a nettle in the world. I am sure I do not know what use there can be in
them.

4. F. If you knew anything of botany, Nanny, you would not say so.

5.  A. What is botany, papa?

6.  F. Botany, my dear, is the knowledge of plants.

7.  A. Some plants are very beautiful. If the lily were growing in our
fields, I should not complain. But this ugly nettle! I do not know what
beauty or use there can be in that.

8. F. And yet, Nanny, there is more beauty, use, and instruction in a
nettle, than even in a lily.

9. A. O papa, how can you make that out?

10. F. Put on your gloves, pluck up that nettle, and let us examine it.
First, look at the flower.

11. A. The flower, papa? I see no flower, unless those little ragged knobs
are flowers, which have neither color nor smell, and are not much larger
than the heads of pins.

12. F. Here, take this magnifying glass and examine them.

13. A. Oh, I see now; every little knob is folded up in leaves, like a
rosebud. Perhaps there is a flower inside.

14. F. Try; take this pin and touch the knob. Well, what do you see?

15.  A. Oh, how curious!

16.  F. What is curious?

17. A. The moment I touched it, it flew open. A little cloud rose out like
enchantment, and four beautiful little stems sprung up as if they were
alive; and, now that I look again with the glass, I see an elegant little
flower as nice and perfect as a lily itself.

18. F. Well, now examine the leaves.

19. A. Oh, I see they are all covered over with little bristles; and when
I examine them with the glass, I see a little bag, filled with a juice
like water, at the bottom of each. Ha! these are the things which stung
me.

20. F. Now touch the little bag with the point of the pin.

21. A. When I press the bag, the juice runs up and comes out at the small
point at the top; so I suppose the little thorn must be hollow inside,
though it is finer than the point of my cambric needle.

22.  F. Have all the leaves those stings?

23. A. No, papa; some of the young ones are quite green and soft, like
velvet, and I may handle them without any danger.

24.  F. Now look at the stem, and break it.

25. A. I can easily crack it, but I can not break it asunder, for the bark
is so strong that it holds it together.

26. F. Well, now you see there are more curious things in
the nettle than you expected.

27. A. Yes, indeed, I see that. But you have often told me that God makes
nothing without its use; and I am sure I can not see any use in all these
things.

28. F. That we will now consider. You saw the little flower burst open,
and a cloud rose, you say, like enchantment. Now all this is necessary for
the nature of the plant. There are many thousand plants in the world, and
it has pleased God, in his wisdom, to make them all different. Now look at
this other nettle, which grew on the opposite side of the road; you see
that it is not exactly like the one you have just examined.

29. A. No, papa; this has little flat seeds instead of flowers.

30. F. Very right, my dear. Now, in order to make those seeds grow, it is
necessary that the little flower of this plant and the seed of that should
be together, as they are in most others. But plants can not walk, like
animals. The wisdom of God, therefore, has provided a remedy for this.
When the little flower bursts open it throws out a fine powder, which you
saw rise like a cloud; this is conveyed by the air to the other plant, and
when it falls upon the seed of that plant it gives it power to grow, and
makes it a perfect seed, which, in its turn, when it falls to the ground,
will produce a new plant. Were it not for this fine powder, that seed
would never be perfect or complete.

31. A. That is very curious, indeed; and I see the use of the little cloud
and the flower; but the leaf that stung me, of what use can that be?
There, dear papa, I am afraid I puzzle you to tell me that.

32. P. Even these stings are made useful to man. The poor people in some
countries use them instead of blisters, when they are sick. Those leaves
which do not sting are used by some for food, and from the stalk others
get a stringy bark, which answers the purpose of flax. Thus you see that
even the despised nettle is not made in vain; and this lesson may serve to
teach you that we only need to understand the works of God to see that "in
goodness and wisdom he has made them all."


DEFINITIONS.--12. Mag'ni-fy-ing glass, an instrument used to make objects
appear larger. 17. En-chant'ment, magic art, witch-craft. 5. A-sun'der,
apart, into parts. 30. Rem'e-dy, that which removes an evil. Con-veyed',
carried. 32. String'y,  full of strings.



XLV. THE TEMPEST. (125)

By James T. Fields (born 1817, died 1881), who was born at Portsmouth, N.
H. He was a poet, and the author, also, of some well known prose works. Of
these, his "Yesterdays with Authors" is the most noted.

1. We were crowded in the cabin;
     Not a soul would dare to sleep:
   It was midnight on the waters,
     And a storm was on the deep.

2. 'T is a fearful thing in winter
     To be shattered by the blast,
   And to hear the rattling trumpet
     Thunder, "Cut away the mast!"

3. So we shuddered there in silence,
     For the stoutest held his breath,
   While the hungry sea was roaring,
     And the breakers threatened death.

4. And as thus we sat in darkness,
     Each one busy in his prayers,
   "We are lost!" the captain shouted,
     As he staggered down the stairs.

5. But his little daughter whispered,
     As she took his icy hand,
   "Is n't God upon the ocean,
     Just the same as on the land?"

6. Then we kissed the little maiden,
     And we spoke in better cheer;
   And we anchored safe in harbor
     When the morn was shining clear.


DEFINITIONS.--l. Deep, the ocean. 2. Blast, tempest. 3. Break'ers, waves
of the sea broken by rocks. 6. Cheer, state of mind.



XLVI. THE CREATOR. (126)

The poetry at the close of this selection is by John Keble, a celebrated
English clergyman, born in 1792. He held for some years the professorship
of Poetry at Oxford University. He died in 1866.

1. Come, and I will show you what is beautiful. It is a rose fully blown.
See how she sits upon her mossy stem, the queen of flowers. Her leaves
glow like fire. The air is filled with her sweet odor. She is the delight
of every eye.

2. But there is one fairer than the rose. He that made the rose is more
beautiful than the rose. He is altogether lovely. He is the delight of
every heart.

3. I will show you what is strong. The lion is strong. When he raiseth
himself up from his lair, when he shaketh his mane, when the voice of his
roaring is heard, the cattle of the field fly, and the wild beasts of the
desert hide themselves; for he is terrible.

4. But He who made the lion is stronger than the lion. He can do all
things. He gave us life, and in a moment can take it away, and no one can
save us from his hand.

5. I will show you what is glorious. The sun is glorious. When he shineth
in the clear sky, when he sitteth on his throne in the heavens, and
looketh abroad over the earth, he is the most glorious and excellent
object the eye can behold.

6. But He who made the sun is more glorious than the sun. The eye cannot
look on his dazzling brightness. He seeth all dark places, by night as
well as by day. The light of his countenance is over all the world.

7. This great Being is God. He made all things, but He is more excellent
than all that He has made. He is the Creator, they are the creatures. They
may be beautiful, but He is Beauty. They may be strong, but He is
Strength. They may be perfect, but He is Perfection.

8. There is a book, who runs may read,
Which heavenly truth imparts,
And all the lore its scholars need--
Pure eyes and loving hearts.

9.  The works of God, above, below,
      Within us, and around,
    Are pages in that book, to show
      How God himself is found.

10. The glorious sky, embracing all,
      Is like the Father's love;
    Wherewith encompassed, great and small
      In peace and order move.

11. Thou who hast given me eyes to see
      And love this sight so fair,
    Give me a heart to find out Thee
      And read Thee everywhere.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Blown, blossomed, bloomed. O'dor, smell, scent. 3. Lair,
bed of a wild beast. Des'ert, a wilderness, a place where no one lives. 5.
Ex'cel-lent, surpassing others in worth, su-perior. 6. Daz'zling,
overpowering with light. 7. Per-fec'tion, the state of being perfect, so
that nothing is wanting. 8. Im-parts', makes known. Lore, learning. 10.
En-com'passed, surrounded.


EXERCISES.--What is described as beautiful? As strong? As glorious? Who is
more beautiful than the rose, stronger than the lion, and more glorious
than the sun? What is the book which we may all read? What should it teach
us?



XLVII. THE HORSE. (128)

1. Uncle Thomas. Well, boys, I am glad to see you again. Since I last saw
you I have made quite a tour, and at some future time will describe to you
what I have seen. I promised at this meeting, however, to tell you
something about animals, and I propose to begin with the horse. But I know
that you like stories better than lecturing, so I will proceed at once to
tell you some which I have gathered for you.

2. Frank. We never feel tired of listening to you, Uncle Thomas. We know
you always have something curious to tell us.

3. Uncle Thomas. Well then, Frank, to begin at once with the horse.

4. In several parts of the world there are to be found large herds of wild
horses. In South America the immense plains are inhabited by them, and it
is said that ten thousand are sometimes found in a single herd. These
herds are always preceded by a leader, who directs their motions; and such
is the regularity with which they perform their movements, that it seems
as if they could hardly be surpassed by the best trained cavalry.

5. It is extremely dangerous for travelers to meet a herd of this
description. When they are unaccustomed to the sight of such a mass of
creatures, they can not help feeling greatly alarmed at their rapid and
apparently irresistible approach. The trampling of the animals sounds like
distant thunder; and such is the rapidity and impetuosity of their
advance, that it seems to threaten instant destruction.

6. Sometimes, however, they suddenly stop short, utter a loud and piercing
neigh, and, with a rapid wheel, take an opposite course, and altogether
disappear. On such occasions it requires great care in the traveler to
prevent his horses from breaking loose and escaping with the wild herd.

7. In those countries where wild horses are so plentiful, the inhabitants
do not take the trouble to raise others, but whenever they want one they
mount upon an animal accustomed to the sport, and gallop over the plain
toward a herd, which is readily found at no great distance.

8. The rider gradually approaches some stragglers from the main body, and,
having selected the one he wishes, he dexterously throws the lasso (which
is a long rope with a running noose, and is firmly fixed to his saddle)
either over the wild horse's head or in such a manner as to entangle his
hind legs; and by the sudden checking of his own horse, he throws the
captured animal over on its side.

9. In an instant he jumps off his horse, wraps his cloak round the head of
the captive, forces a bit into his mouth, and straps a saddle on his back.
He then removes the cloak, and the animal starts to his feet. With equal
quickness the hunter leaps into his saddle; and, in spite of the kicking
of the captive, keeps his seat, till, being wearied out with his efforts,
the horse submits to the guidance of his new master, and is reduced to
complete obedience.

10. Frank. But, Uncle Thomas, are all horses originally wild? I have heard
that Arabia is famous for raising horses.

11. Uncle Thomas. Arabia has, for a long time, been noted for the beauty
and speed of its horses. It is not strange, however, that the Arabian
horse should be the most excellent, when we consider the care and kindness
with which it is treated. One of the best stories which I have ever heard
of the love of an Arabian for his steed, is that related of an Arab, from
whom an English officer wished to purchase his horse.

12. The animal was a bright bay mare, of fine form and great beauty; and
the owner, proud of her appearance and qualities, paraded her before the
Englishman's tent until she attracted his attention. On being asked if he
would sell her, "What will you give me?" was the reply. "That depends upon
her age. I suppose she is past five?" "Guess again," said he. "Four?"
"Look at her mouth," said the Arab, with a smile. On examination she was
found to be about three. This, from her size and symmetry, greatly
increased her value.
