
The notable scheme which just now engrossed the attention of the
Butterflies was no less than the establishment of a "fleet of boats"
upon the lake. The dream of half a dozen boats, under command of
Commodore Frank Sedley, maneuvering on the water, performing beautiful
evolutions, and doing a hundred things which they could not then define,
was so pleasant, so fascinating, that they could not easily give it up.

There would be the commodore in his "flag boat," signalizing the fleet,
now bidding them pull in "close order," now ordering a boat out on
service, and now sending one to examine a bay or a harbor. And then, if
they could only get leave to explore Rippleton River, how the commander
of the squadron would send out a small craft to sound ahead of them, and
to buoy off the rocks and shoals, and how the people on the banks of the
stream would stare when they saw them moving in sections against the
sluggish current! Ah, a fleet of boats was such a brilliant ideal, that
I will venture to say more than one of the boys lay awake nights to
think about it.

I will not attempt to tell my young friends all the queer fancies
concerning the squadron in which they indulged. They were essentially
air castles, very beautiful structures, it is true, but as yet they
rested only on the clouds. But the means of realizing this magnificent
ideal was within their grasp. They had the money to buy the boats, and
the only question was, whether George Weston, the "director" of the
club, would permit the purchase.

"What have you done about the fleet, Tony?" asked Joseph Hooper.

"I have spoken to my brother about it," replied Tony, with a smile.

"What did he say?"

"He had no objection."

"Hurrah! We shall have the fleet then! And Tony, we shall go in for
having you commodore part of the time."

"That we will!" echoed half a dozen voices.

"You would make as good a commodore as Frank," added Joseph.

"I guess not," answered Tony, modestly. "Didn't you see how slick Frank
beat us in the race? If I had followed his tactics, we might have stood
some chance, at least."

"Some chance! Didn't we keep ahead of him till we had got almost home?"

"Yes; but that was a part of Frank's tactics. He let us get tired out,
and then beat us. But we haven't got the fleet yet, fellows, and we are
a pack of fools to count the chickens before they are hatched."

"You said George has no objections," replied Joseph, glancing anxiously
at Tony.

"He has not, but he wants to consult Captain Sedley before he consents."

The boys looked a little disconcerted at this intelligence, and a
momentary silence ensued.

"Do you think he will object, Tony?" asked one.

"I am pretty sure he will not."

"Have you said anything to Frank about it?"

"Yes; and he says the Zephyrs will put their money with ours, if we get
the fleet."

"Hurrah! I _know_ his father will consent!"

"I have even got a hint from him that he should not object," added Tony,
very quietly.

"That is glorious! We shall certainly have the fleet then!" shouted
Joseph Hooper.

"I am pretty sure there will be no trouble about it. Almost everybody is
willing to admit now that the clubs are a good thing; that they keep the
fellows out of mischief, and stimulate them to do their duty at home and
at school. So much for our strict regulations. If we can get more boats,
and form more clubs, everybody concerned will be the better for it."

"That's the idea."

"We can get four small boats for our money--can't we?" asked one of the
boys.

"Frank thought we had better get different sized boats," replied Tony.

"For different kinds of service," added Joseph, demurely.

"Say, one eight-oar boat, one six-oar, and two four-oar," said Tony.

"That would be first rate! Then we could take in twenty-two fellows."

"Twenty-three; the commodore would not be the coxswain of any boat, but
command the whole."

The boys grew so nervous and excited during this fine discussion, that
they could hardly keep their seats. In imagination the fleet was already
afloat, and the broad pennant of Commodore Sedley was flying on board
the Zephyr.

"How long before we can get the boats, Tony?" asked a little fellow,
his eyes snapping with delight at the glorious anticipation.

"Perhaps they can be bought ready made. We need not wait for new ones.
In a few weeks, at least before vacation---- Hallo, Paul! I am glad you
have come."

Little Paul looked very sad as he entered Butterfly Hall. With a faint
smile he received the greetings of his friends.

"All aboard!" shouted Tony, as he rose front his chair. "You haven't got
your uniform on, Paul."

"I can't go with you, Tony," replied Little Paul, in a gloomy tone.

"Not go with us! Why not? What is the matter?"

"I must leave the club too," he added, in a husky voice.

"Leave the club!"

"We are going to move Down East."

"That's too bad!"

All the boys gathered round Little Paul, and there was a troubled look
upon their countenances.

"We cannot stay here any longer," continued the poor boy, as he dashed a
tear from his eye.

It was evident to all that some misfortune had overtaken the Munroe
family, and Little Paul's sorrows excited the deepest interest and
sympathy.

Without any solicitation on the part of his companions, the little
fellow told them the story of his father's trials, and the reason why he
was compelled to leave Rippleton.

"When is the money due, Paul?" asked Tony.

"On the first of May. My father has no money end he cannot pay the
note."

"How much did you say it was?"

"Five hundred dollars. It is a great sum for us."

"My father says 'Squire Chase is not any better than he ought to be,"
added Dick Chester, who had returned with Little Paul.

"He is a very hard man," replied Paul. "But I must go home again. I
shall see you before I leave town;" and the poor fellow turned away to
hide his tears.

"Poor Little Paul!" said Tony, when he had gone.

"How I pity him!" added Henry Brown.

"So do I," reiterated Joseph Hooper.

"How much do you pity him, fellows?" asked Tony, seating himself in his
arm-chair.

"So much that we would help him if we could," answered Henry.

"You can help him."

A deep silence ensued.

"Have you the nerve to make a great sacrifice, Butterflies?" exclaimed
Tony with energy.

"We have."

"I move you, Mr. Chairman, that our four hundred dollars be applied to
the relief of Little Paul's father," said Henry Brown, catching Tony's
idea.

"Second the motion," added Dick Chester, promptly.

"Bravo!" shouted Tony, slapping the table with his fist. "That's what I
call noble! But before we do it, just think what a fine thing the fleet
would be. It is a great sacrifice."

"Question!" called Joseph Hooper.

"Think well, fellows," said Tony. "Any remarks upon the subject will be
in order. It is a great question, and ought not to be hastily decided."

"Question!" shouted the whole club, wildly.

"Those in favor of applying the four hundred dollars to the relief of
Mr. Munroe will signify it," said Tony.

"All up!"

"_It is a unanimous vote!_"




CHAPTER XI.

BETTER TO GIVE THAN RECEIVE.


"All aboard!" shouted Tony, as soon as he had declared the vote: and the
boys hurried into the boat to be in readiness to join the Zephyr, which
was already upon the lake.

Tony's spirits were unusually buoyant. The sympathy and co-operation of
the club in regard to Little Paul's father was in the highest degree
grateful to his feelings. Perhaps his companions did not so cheerfully
resign the project of the fleet; perhaps they had acted upon the impulse
of the moment; but they were all to experience the benefit of doing a
good deed, and sacrificing their own gratification for the happiness of
others. Tony felt better for the sacrifice they had made, and probably
the rest of them shared his feelings. He was satisfied that they did not
fully realize what they had done, and with the determination to take a
fit opportunity to talk over the matter with them, he took his place in
the boat.

The Zephyrs were laying on their oars, waiting for the Butterfly when
she backed out of the boat house.

"You are late, Tony, which is rather odd for you," said Frank.

"We had a little business to attend to, which detained us," replied
Tony; "and while we are here we may as well tell you about it. We have
voted our money away."

"For the fleet?"

"No; we have given that up."

"Indeed! Given it up?" exclaimed Frank, not a little surprised at this
declaration.

"Fact, Frank!"

"Something new has turned up, then?"

"Let us lash boats to keep us from drifting apart, and I will tell you
all about it."

The two boats were fastened together fore and aft, and Tony proceeded to
tell the story of Little Paul's father. He spoke loud enough for all the
Zephyrs to hear him, and as his heart warmed towards Mr. Munroe in his
misfortunes, his eyes dilated, and his gestures were as apt and
energetic as though he had been an orator all his lifetime.

"I see what you have done with your money," said Frank, as the speaker
paused at the close of the narrative. "It was like you, Tony--noble and
generous!"

"We gave all our money for the relief of Mr. Munroe; but I didn't even
suggest the thing to the fellows. Henry Brown made the motion, and it
was a unanimous vote."

"Bravo, Butterflies!"

"Have you given up the fleet?" asked Tim Bunker, whose face was the only
one which did not glow with satisfaction.

"Yes."

"There is more fun in helping a poor man out of trouble than in working
a fleet," added Henry Brown.

"So I say," put in Dick Chester.

"Humph!" grunted Tim.

"But, Tony, you said the note was five hundred dollars--didn't you?"
asked Frank.

"I did."

"And you have only four hundred?"

"That's all;" and Tony's eyes rekindled with delight at the anticipation
of what the Zephyrs would do.

"You hear that, fellows."

"Would a motion be in order now?" asked Charles Hardy.

"Hold your tongue, you fool!" said Tim Bunker, in a low tone. "We can
get another boat with our money, and you shall be coxswain of it."

Charles looked at him.

"A motion would be in order; at least we can _make_ it in order,"
replied Frank.

But Charles hesitated. The tempting offer of Tim, the absurdity of which
he did not stop to consider, conquered his first impulse.

"I move you we appropriate one hundred dollars to put with the
Butterfly's money for Mr. Munroe," said William Blight, and Charles had
lost the honor of making the motion.

"Second the motion," added Fred Harper.

Those in favor of giving our money to Mr. Munroe will signify it."
