"It's like an Arctic land outside. All footsteps, whether of men or
horses, have been hidden by the snow. There is certainly no trail for us
to follow."

"I know it, Weber, but it seems to me that Mademoiselle Lannes is
calling to me. She tells me to bring her back."

The Alsatian glanced at John, but the young man's face was earnest. It
was evident that he believed what he said.

"Mademoiselle Lannes may be calling to you," he said, "but how can you
go, and where?"

"I don't know," repeated John obstinately, "but I mean to find her."

He walked irresolutely back and forth and his eye fell upon the register
again. Certainly it had been moved once more. He had remembered just how
it lay after he saw Weber's name there, and now it was turned much
further to one side. He snatched up the candle and held it over the open
pages. Then he saw written in a heavy hand just beneath Weber's name:

     _Prince Karl of Auersperg, Zillenstein, Tyrol.
     Luitpold Helmuth Schwenenger,    "        "
     Captain Max Sanger, Dantzig, Prussia.
     Suite of His Highness, twenty persons._

John understood thoroughly. He uttered a fierce cry of anger and grief,
and Weber looked eagerly over his shoulder.

"We know now who has come," he said.

"Yes, we know," exclaimed John, "and I could wish that it had been
anybody else! I hate this man! To me he represents all that is evil in
the Old World, the concentrated wickedness of feudalism and I fear him,
though not for myself! Weber, I can't bear to think of Julie Lannes in
his hands! If it were von Arnheim or that young Kratzek or any normal
German it would be different, but this man, Auersperg, is not of our
time! He belongs to an older and worse age!"

"He is very hard and determined," said Weber. "In my secret work for
France I have seen him more than once, and I know his character and
family history thoroughly. An immense pride of birth and blood. Great
courage and resolution and a belief that he, as a prince of the old
stock, entitled to what he wishes."

"Out of place in our day."

"It may be. But war favors his beliefs, and now he holds the whip hand.
The beautiful Mademoiselle Julie was his prisoner for a short time
before, and you will pardon me for telling you, what you must have
surmised, Mr. Scott, that her youth, her marvelous beauty and her
courage and spirit, so befitting one who bears the name of Lannes, have
made a great appeal to His Highness. That is why, under the cover of
storm and battle, he has carried her away."

"The monster!"

"Not so bad as that, Mr. Scott. There are some things that even a prince
would not dare in this comparatively mild age of ours. The Prince of
Auersperg is a widower with no children. He will offer her a morganatic
marriage."

"A morganatic marriage! And what is that? Neither the one nor the other.
It's a disgrace for any woman! A mere halfway marriage!"

"It would be legal, and she'd have a title."

"A title! What would that amount to?"

"I've heard that you Americans are fond of titles, and that your rich
women bring their daughters to Europe to marry them!"

"An infinitesimal minority, Weber. It's true that we have such foolish
women, but the rest of us regard them with contempt."

"He could offer her vast wealth and even as a morganatic wife a great
position."

"I think you're testing me. Weber, trying to see what I will say. Well,
I will say this. I don't believe that Julie would accept Auersperg on
any terms, not if he were to make her a real princess of the oldest
princely house in the world, not if he were to lay the fortunes of the
Rothschilds at her feet. She is of good French republican stock, and she
is a thorough republican herself."

Weber smiled a little.

"Your faith in Mademoiselle Lannes is great," he said, "and I can see
that it proceeds, in part at least, from a just and pure emotion."

John reddened. He saw that he had laid bare his soul, but he was not
ashamed. Once more he strengthened his heart and now he resolved upon a
plan.

"The snowfall is decreasing fast," he said. "Auersperg and his troop
can't be far from here. The traveling is too hard for them to travel
swiftly, even if they have automobiles. I shall go to the hospital camp,
raise a force and search the country. The commandant will give me
soldiers readily, because it would be worth while to capture such a man
as Auersperg--behind our lines, too."

"I don't wish to discourage you," said Weber, "but I doubt whether you
can find him."

"Maybe so and maybe not," said John, and then he remembered the
automobile in which Julie and the Picards had come. Doubtless it was
safe behind the cathedral where they had left it, and he could force it
through the snow much faster than he could walk.

"Come!" he exclaimed to Weber. "I know of a way to save time."

He rushed through the snow to the rear of the cathedral and Weber,
without question, followed him. The automobile was there, well supplied,
and John sprang into the front seat. He was no skillful driver, but he
had learned enough to manage a machine in some fashion, and powerful
emotions were driving him on.

"Up, Weber!" he cried.

"Which way are you going?"

"To the hospital camp, of course, and we'll just touch the top of the
high-arched bridge over the river! The snowfall is decreasing fast, and
soon we'll be able to see a long distance."

"We can do so now, and the moon is coming out, too. Heavens, Mr. Scott,
it's come too soon, because it shows us to the enemy!"

He pointed with a long and shaking finger. At the far end of the street
a massive German column was emerging into view. John was startled.

"These are no raiders!" he exclaimed. "They must have broken through a
portion of our lines and are attempting to flank other positions! But
Chastel's hospitality for us is ended."

He put on full speed and drove the machine rapidly through the snow
toward the river.

"We've another reason now why we should reach the camp!" he exclaimed.
"Our people must be warned of the presence of the Germans in force in
Chastel!"

There was a crash of rifle fire and bullets struck all about them. Two
or three glanced off the side of the machine itself, which a moment or
two later ran into a deep drift and stuck there, panting.

Weber sprang out and threw himself flat in the snow. John instinctively
did the same, and the second volley fired with better aim riddled the
machine. There was a heavy explosion, it turned on its side, its wheels
revolving for a moment or two, and then it lay still, like a dying
monster.

John sprang to his feet and rushed for the shelter of a building only a
few yards away. He saw Weber's shadow flitting by his side, but when he
reached cover he found that he had lost him. Doubtless in the excitement
of the moment the Alsatian had found hiding elsewhere. He was sorry that
they had become separated, but Weber had a great ability to take care of
himself, and John was quite sure that he would escape. The task that
lay upon him now was to make good his own flight.

The building, the shelter of which he had reached, was a low brick
structure, already much damaged by shells and shrapnel. But the walls
were thick enough to protect him for the moment from bullets, and
flinging himself down in the deep snow he crouched in the shadow until
he could regain sufficient breath for further flight. He heard more
shots fired, but evidently random triggers only had been pulled, as no
bullet struck near him.

The fall of snow ceased almost entirely, and the moon grew brighter and
brighter. Chastel was a vast white ruin, tinted with silver, and as such
it had an uncanny beauty of its own. But John, thankful that the snow
was so deep, lay buried in it, where it had drifted against the wall.
The Germans in a town so near the French lines were not likely to make a
diligent search for a single man, and he felt that he was safe if he did
not freeze to death.

Peeping above the snow he saw about fifty German infantrymen walk down
the road toward the river, their heavy boots crunching in the snow. They
were stalwart, ruddy fellows, boys of twenty-one or two--he knew now
that boys did most of the world's fighting--and he liked their simple,
honest faces. He felt anew that he did not hate the German people;
instead he felt friendship for them, but he did hate more intensely than
ever the medieval emperors and the little group of madmen about them
who, almost without warning, could devote millions to slaughter. An
intense democrat in the beginning and becoming more intense in the
furnace of war, he believed that the young German peasants coming down
the road would have much more chance before the Judgment Seat than the
princes and generals who so lightly sent them there.

The soldiers went on a little distance beyond the edge of the town. The
cessation of the snow and the brilliant moonlight enabled them to see
far into the plain below, where the hospital camp lay. John, looking in
the same direction, saw little wisps of smoke rising above the blur of
the camp, but the distance was too great for him to detect anything
else.

The low note of the trumpet called to the young troops, and they turned
back into the town. John rose from his covert, brushed the snow from his
clothing, beat his chest with his fists, and increased the circulation
which would warm his body anew. Then he stood against the wall
listening. He had no doubt that the Germans would go away
presently--there was nothing to keep them in Chastel--and he made a
sudden shift in his plans. He would go back to the Hotel de l'Europe,
and stay there until day. Lannes would surely come in the morning. He
had no doubt that at daybreak he would see the lithe and sinuous figure
of the _Arrow_ shooting down from the blue depths, and then he and her
brother would go away in search of Julie. Looking down from the air and
traveling at almost unbelievable speed, their chances of finding
Auersperg's party would be a hundred times better than if he merely
prowled along on the ground.

The thought was a happy one to him, and again there was a great uprising
of youth and hope. But the hosts of the air were already at work to
defeat his plan. The invisible powers which war could now use were ready
when the storm died. Far away the wireless stations sputtered and
crackled, and words carried on nothing, were passing directly over him.
They made no mention of John Scott, but he was vitally involved in what
they were planning. Down under the horizon little black dots that were
aeroplanes had begun to rise and to look cautiously over a field, where
wireless had already told them that something was done. Further away
telephone and telegraph wires were humming with words, and all the hosts
of the air were concentrating their energies upon Chastel.

John, having left the shelter of the wall, stepped into the road, where
the snow had been trodden deep by the young Germans. From that point he
could not see into Chastel, but a deep solemn note came from a far point
to the east. It was the voice of a great gun carrying an immense
distance in the night, and it struck like a hammer upon his heart. It
seemed to him a warning that the path that way, the way Auersperg had
undoubtedly gone with Julie, was barred.

He walked up the newly trodden road into Chastel, and then he darted
back again to cover. He saw the gleam of many gray uniforms and he heard
a clank which he knew could be made only by the wheels of cannon. The
new forces of the enemy were coming and evidently they were now in
great strength in Chastel and beyond it. John's heart leaped in alarm.
It was a powerful flank movement, a daring and successful attempt under
cover of the storm, and he recognized at once all his dangers.

Keeping as well under cover as he could, he turned and raced toward the
bridge. He saw the misty smoke hovering over the hospital camp, and he
did not believe that any adequate force to meet the Germans could be
found there, but alarms could be sent in every direction.

He expected that more than one shot would be sent after his flying
figure, but none came and his swift flight took him far toward the
river. Then he saw a long line of dark forms before him and the flashing
tips of bayonets. Holding his arms high above his head he shouted in
French over and over again that he was a friend, and then ran almost
directly into the arms of a short muscular man in the uniform of a
French colonel.

"Bougainville!" he cried.

"Aye, Mr. Scott, it is I! My regiment is here and many others."

"Then look out. Chastel is full of Germans."

"It is for them that we've come!"




CHAPTER VI

JOHN'S RESOLVE


John stood weakly, and with heart palpitating, but it was only for a few
moments. Strength poured back in a full tide, and he said to
Bougainville:

"You'll let me go back with you?"

"Of course, but there's heavy fighting ahead. Messages warned us in the
night that the Germans had broken through, and ever since the storm
stopped the wireless has been talking to us, giving us the exact
details. We've been marching for hours. My regiment was the first to
cross the river but, as you see, others are close behind."

"And you command them all?"

The eyes of the former Apache of Montmartre glittered.

"Yes," he replied. "It was an honor that General Vaugirard assigned to
me. I lead the vanguard."

Except the radiance from his eyes he showed no emotion. John noticed
that his features were cast in the antique mold. The pallor and thinness
of his face accentuated his powerful features, and once more John was
reminded of the portraits of the young Napoleon. Could there be such a
thing as reincarnation? But he remembered that while a new mind like
Napoleon's might be possible a new career like Napoleon's was not. Then
all thoughts of any kind upon the subject were driven from his mind by
the flash of firing that came from Chastel.

The rifles were rattling fast, and with them soon came the heavy crash
of artillery. Bougainville ran up and down his lines, but, to John's
surprise, he was holding his men back, rather than urging them on. But
he quickly saw the reason. He heard the hissing and shrieking of shells
over his head and he saw them bursting in Chastel. The fire increased so
fast and became so tremendous in volume that all the French lay down in
the snow, and John put his fingers in his ears lest he be deafened.

He understood the purpose of the French commander. It was to hurl a
continuous shower of steel upon the enemy, and then when it ceased the
French were to charge. Raising his head a little he saw the ruined
buildings of Chastel melting away entirely under the tremendous fire of
the great French field guns. House after house was springing into flames
and wall after wall was crumbling down in fragments. German guns were
replying fast, but their position amid falling masonry was much worse
than that of the French in the open.

John was lying in the snow near Bougainville, with the shells from both
sides hissing and shrieking in a storm over their heads. He was used to
being under fire and he knew that none of these missiles was intended
for them, but he could not restrain a quiver of apprehension now and
then, lest some piece of shrapnel, falling short, should find him. It
was always the shrapnel with the hideous whine and shriek and its
tearing wound that they dreaded most. The clean little rifle bullet,
which if it did not kill did not hurt much, was infinitely more welcome.

"How long will this go on?" John asked of Bougainville; his voice could
be heard as an undertone in the roar of the battle.

"Not long, because at present we have the advantage. The Germans know
that they're worse off in the town than they would be outside. Our guns
are bringing tons and tons of brick and stone about their ears. Hark to
our splendid artillery, Mr. Scott! See how it sweeps Chastel!"

The French fire always increasing in volume was most accurate and
deadly. The famous seventy-five-millimeter gun was again proving itself
the most terrible of mobile field weapons. As walls fell, pyramids of
fire shot up in many places, casting a sinister glow over the snowy
