
     You can't imagine how kind she was to him. At last she told Fani to
     call his master, and when the man came she went out into another
     room to talk with him. After a while she came back, and then, what
     do you think? She asked Fani if he would not like to go and live
     with me at her house! I can't begin to tell you how I felt. At
     first I could scarcely breathe for joy, and then I began to think I
     must have made a mistake; it couldn't be true. But Fani cried out
     with delight, and he seized Mrs. Stanhope's hand and looked at her
     so beseechingly, and he promised to work as hard as he could, and
     do everything to please her if he might only go. "You shall," she
     said; and then she told him when to meet us at the railroad next
     day. What a promise for Fani and me!

     As we were going back to the hotel, Mrs. Stanhope said to Aunt
     Clarissa, "Did you notice the resemblance? Doesn't he look at you
     out of his big brown eyes just as my Philo did?" Aunt Clarissa saw
     the likeness too, and said that was the reason that she took a
     fancy to Fani the moment she saw him. You see, Philo was Nora's
     little brother. In the evening, Mrs. Stanhope spoke several times
     about the likeness, and it was the first time that she had talked
     with us at all. All that night I kept thinking it was too good to
     be true; it must be a dream; but the next morning, when we got to
     the railroad station, there was Fani, and he had been waiting three
     hours, ever since six o'clock. Mrs. Stanhope laughed a little at
     his impatience--it was the first time she had laughed at all.

     All day long we travelled in the railway carriage, and Fani was as
     happy as he could be. When we stopped at a station, and Aunt
     Clarissa was going to get out and fetch us something to eat, Mrs.
     Stanhope stopped her and said: "No, no; we have an escort now, he
     must wait upon us." Then she explained to Fani what he was to do,
     and you ought to have seen how he ran about and did it all so
     handily, and he kept looking at Mrs. Stanhope to see if she was
     pleased; and she was pleased, that was plain enough. In the evening
     we stopped at Mainz on the Rhine, and Mrs. Stanhope said we should
     see the river in the morning. And the next day, what do you think?
     we went on a splendid steamboat; no one can possibly understand it
     without seeing it. Fani was like a crazy creature all day, he was
     so wild with delight; and Mrs. Stanhope let him run about all over
     the boat and look at everything. Sometimes I didn't see him for an
     hour at a time! By and by he came and took your present, and said
     he was going to draw everything that he had seen, and just how the
     whole boat was arranged, so that he should never forget it. And he
     wants me to thank you a great deal for the beautiful present. I
     forgot to say that before.

     In the evening, when we left the boat, we found a carriage and a
     wagon waiting for us. We drove for half an hour or more, and then
     we came to Mrs. Stanhope's house. It is a large house, standing in
     the middle of a garden, and with large trees about it. When we got
     out of the carriage, Fani whispered to me, "Do you suppose I shall
     work in the stables or in the garden?" Of course I couldn't tell
     him; I did not even know what I was to do myself. But nothing has
     turned out as we thought it would. At first Mrs. Stanhope was so
     sad that we did not see her at all for three days. Aunt Clarissa
     was just as kind as she could be. She took us all about the garden
     and showed us the place where Philo was buried; a white cross
     stands there with his name on it. And Nora was buried by his side,
     under a big linden.

     On the fourth day Mrs. Stanhope came to table with us, and after
     dinner she talked very kindly with us, and said that now it was
     time for us to begin to work. Oh, how surprised Fani and I were
     when we found out what we were to do! What kind of hard work do you
     guess it is? No work at all! You won't believe it, but it is true.
     We just sit all the morning in the school-room and study! The
     teacher comes at nine o'clock and stays till one, and Fani and I
     are the only scholars! Of course Fani is much cleverer than I am;
     but the teacher is very kind, and when I cannot do my lessons he
     only says: "Come, be brave, and you'll soon do as well as your
     brother!" I get along very well, and I am not so ashamed as I was
     when all the children in school were ahead of me. It is one o'clock
     before we know it, and we are glad when school-time comes the next
     day. After dinner we all go into the garden; and Mrs. Stanhope
     takes Fani with her, and he talks with her about his lessons and
     his ideas about all sorts of things; and it is easy to see that she
     likes him very much, better of course than she does me; you know
     how frank he is. He tells her just how he feels and how glad he is
     to be here with her, and he thanks her over and over again for all
     her kindness, and he holds her hand tight; and, when he looks up at
     her so beaming with happiness, she strokes his hair, and seems more
     fond of him than I have ever seen her of any one except Nora. But I
     can never do as Fani does; though I have just the same feelings, I
     cannot speak them out; and I'm afraid she does not think that I am
     so grateful, and I can quite understand that she cannot care as
     much for me as for Fani. But Aunt Clarissa is very good to me, and,
     when we come in out of the garden, I go into a room with her and
     she teaches me to sew and to embroider as you do. Tell Oscar that,
     even if I don't succeed in finding people to form a society, I will
     at any rate work him a beautiful banner,--Aunt Clarissa says that I
     may,--so he must be sure to write me what he wants for a motto.
     While I am working, Fani has a lesson in drawing; a teacher comes
     for two hours. Mrs. Stanhope almost always sits with him during
     this lesson, for she is delighted that Fani learns so quickly, and
     draws such beautiful things already.

     After that Fani and I go into the garden by ourselves and play
     about as much as we like. We run into every corner of it, for all
     about are stone seats to rest on, and white marble statues, and the
     garden is large and beautiful and stretches way down to the river;
     and there stand the great lindens, and it is all the most splendid
     and beautiful place in the world. Please tell Fred that I am
     looking all the time after beetles and such things, but I haven't
     been able to catch any; he mustn't be vexed with me, perhaps I
     shall succeed better by and by.

     After supper Aunt Clarissa sits down at the piano, and we sing
     Nora's favorite song and several others that she has taught me.
     Generally Fani sits in the other room and draws by himself; but
     when he sings with us it sounds much better, and it's only when he
     sings, too, that Mrs. Stanhope comes in to listen. After this, we
     get our lessons ready for the next day. But time passes much too
     quickly here; and Fani and I are always sorry when the day is over
     and we have to go to bed. I am almost never tired now; and, oh, it
     is so lovely to live here and to be with Fani. When we go in to our
     meals, Aunt Clarissa always says, "Thank God that we have children
     again with us at table!" And yesterday Mrs. Stanhope answered: "I
     think you would like to have the house full of children." And Aunt
     Clarissa replied, "I should never have too many of them." Then Mrs.
     Stanhope said: "Next year we must invite our friends from
     Switzerland to visit us; all four of the doctor's children; and you
     can take little Rikli under your special charge." At these words
     Fani shouted for joy; but I couldn't utter a sound; I could
     scarcely swallow, I was so delighted. Aunt Clarissa clapped her
     hands and said, "Elsli must write directly and invite them, so that
     we may make sure of them"; and, afterwards, she said to me again,
     "What a splendid plan that is of Mrs. Stanhope's!" In the evening
     Fani and I went all round the garden to pick out all the places
     that we particularly want to show you. Fred will be able to catch
     his own insects. Fani is going to write you a long letter, and then
     one to Oscar; but first he wants to draw a picture of the linden
     trees and the little spot under them, to send you for a present. We
     send our love to you all a thousand times, and beg you to give it
     to our father and mother and the little boys.

     Fani sends his special love to you.


     Your true friend,

     ELSLI.


When the letter was finished, there came a burst of shouting and
hand-clapping that seemed as if it would never stop. Such good news for
the children! What a prospect of delights! The mother and aunt
sympathized in their pleasure; but they took the greatest satisfaction
in the thought that their anxiety for Fani was forever relieved, and
that God had led the two children whose welfare lay so near their
hearts, by such unlooked-for ways, into a happy and hopeful life.

Which of the four children was most pleased with the prospect of the
visit to the villa on the Rhine, it would be impossible to say. They
could talk of nothing else, and think of nothing else. Oscar saw in
imagination whole armies of Swiss collected there, and united in one
fraternal society by his efforts, with Fani's help. He began at once to
employ every spare moment in searching for a motto for the promised
banner. Emma was in a condition of almost feverish joy. Fani was really
on the road to become a painter, and her long-cherished wish was being
accomplished. Now that Mrs. Stanhope was evidently so fond of him,
surely everything would be done for his improvement. But she could
hardly wait for the time to come for their visit, for every day she had
some new idea for his future that she longed to tell him. Fred had his
hands full of preparations. He looked forward to making such an increase
of his collections that he was afraid he should not have room to contain
them all. He induced his aunt to promise him all the useless boxes in
the house, and all winter long he stored them away in his room in
readiness for the expected occupants.

Little Rikli enjoyed the anticipation of the summer with pure delight.
She was never so happy as when with Fred, yet her pleasure in being with
him had been always mixed with fright; but she was sure that under the
protection of good Aunt Clarissa there would be no danger that frogs or
beetles should be allowed to annoy her, or that any unpleasant creatures
would crawl out upon her under the shady lindens by the river.

Fani and Elsli grew better and happier every day; they had but one
unsatisfied wish--that the summer would come; so that they might welcome
their dear old friends to their new home, and show them its beauties and
share its blessings with them.

Aunt Clarissa took great pains that the two children committed to her
care should not forget the good Father in heaven who had provided such
a home for them. She led them often to the spot where Philo and Nora lay
buried, and reminded them how quickly and unexpectedly sorrow may be
changed into joy, as they had themselves experienced; then she told them
that just so quickly joy may be changed to sorrow, and that into the
brightest sunshine the shadow of death may fall; so that only those can
live happy and secure who have full trust in God, who holds all life in
his hand, and who makes both joy and sorrow work together for good to
those who love him.




[Illustration: DINO AND CORNELLI HAD UNDERTAKEN A GREAT WORK; THEY WERE
LAYING OUT MARTHA'S GARDEN]




VOLUME TWO


CHAPTER I.

THE NEW HOME.


Winter was over and gone. The early summer roses had opened again, and
raised their heads high about the villa on the Rhine. They glowed and
blossomed in all the garden-beds, and glistened in the sunshine, and
sent their sweet perfume far and near on every breeze. On the pebbly
path that led down from the splashing fountain to the lindens by the
river, Fani and Elsli scampered back and forth, drinking in the fragrant
air.

"Do you know where Mrs. Stanhope's house gets its name?" asked Fani, as
he stood by a bed of flowers, watching with delight the airy
butterflies flitting from blossom to blossom, and then floating away as
in ecstacy up into the blue air.

"Of course I do," answered Elsli; "it is called Rosemount because there
are so many rose-bushes stretching from up here way down to the
lindens."

"Well, that's true; but there's nothing melancholy about it," said Fani,
reproachfully. "What makes you look so sad, Elsli? You almost always
look sad nowadays, and it isn't right, for I'm sure there's no reason
for it. And Mrs. Stanhope notices it, too, and she doesn't like it very
well; she must think that you are horribly ungrateful, and that you
don't realize how well off we are. And yet you can't help realizing it
when you think how it used to be at home."

"Yes; I do think of it, and I realize it all perfectly, Fani; and I am
not a bit ungrateful. But you see I can't express it to Mrs. Stanhope;
I wish I could. And then, besides, Fani," she added, after a pause,
"Aunt Clarissa has often told me that when we are well off ourselves,
and have everything we need, and more, too, we ought to think all the
more about the poor, and do what we can to help them. And I am always
thinking about them, and wishing that I could share some of the good
things we enjoy with those who have none."

"What do you mean, Elsli?" cried Fani; "there is no one about here who
is poor; even the men and women-servants live like gentlefolk. Have you
never noticed that Lina, the chambermaid, wears a hat when she goes out,
and a red and yellow shawl, just like Mrs. Bickel? And what red cheeks
the cook has! She has enough to eat, I'm sure; and the coachman wears
gloves when he drives."

"Yes, I know; but I mean--well, you see we have a great deal of time to
ourselves, and can run round in the garden and amuse ourselves, and I
can't help thinking that I might be doing something useful. I might knit
some stockings for the children at home if I had some yarn, but I don't
like to ask for any; I have so many things."

"Why, of course you can't ask for it, Elsli; what are you thinking of?
And you know how many clothes and things Mrs. Stanhope is always sending
to mother? Only last week a big bundle went off; don't you remember,
Elsli?"

"Yes, I know all that; but what I mean is that I want to do something
myself, and not go on taking my own comfort and enjoyment when so many
other people are suffering."

"But you know the doctor said you _must_ take comfort; and he told Mrs.
Stanhope not to let you sit at your books and study all the time, but to
keep you a great deal in the open air. Come, let's run all round the big
rose-bed, and draw in long breaths of that delicious perfume. How strong
it is! I can smell it way off here. Come!" and Fani took hold of his
sister's hand and began to run. But she held back.

"I can't run as you do, Fani," she said, breathing heavily; "I would
rather go down to the stone seat under the lindens by the river and sit
a while."

"Now you see, Elsli," said Fani, as he walked slowly by her side down
towards the river, "now you see how soon you get tired. It is a good
thing for you that you have this garden to stay in. And how lovely it is
down here, too! do you notice? there's quite a different smell here, and
its delicious!"

Fani was already seated on the bench, and he leaned back against the
trunk of the old linden, whose head was crowned with flowers that
diffused a sweet perfume through the air. The fresh foaming waves of the
river ran below, bathing the low hanging branches as they flowed along.

"Oh, how beautiful it is here! It will do you good to shout as loud as
you can, Elsli. I'm sure it would make you feel better."

"Yes, indeed," said the girl assentingly, but no joyous look came into
her pale face, such as shone from Fani's eyes. "When I sit here I always
think of Nora. There's such a beautiful view of the sunset from here.
And then I think of the evening when she went away, how the whole sky
was golden, as if the heavens were open, and you could look right into
them and see the crystal river flowing there forever. Whenever it is a
clear evening, and the red clouds come in the west, I always think that
Nora is looking down at me and beckoning me to come to her. How dearly I
should love to go!"

Fani sprang to his feet in great distress.

"How can you talk so, Elsli? Here we are living so happily together.
Nobody was ever so happy as we are, and yet you talk as if it was all
nothing, and all you want is to die! I'm sure I don't want to die, and
you ought not to. And if you were to talk in this way to Mrs. Stanhope
just once, what do you suppose would happen? I can tell you--she'd just
send us straight home, I know; and how would you like that? And I'm
certain that she means to have us stay here always; for several times
when I've said something about being a painter she has begun to talk
about the future, and she takes it for granted that you and I are to
live with her. Just think of that! Then I shall be a gentleman and you a
lady like Mrs. Stanhope, and then--"

"Oh, Fani, you trouble me still more when you talk so," interrupted
Elsli, sadly. "I see more plainly every day that I can never be what
Mrs. Stanhope wants me to be. I am afraid she will be more and more
vexed about it, and will like me less and less. And you too will be
ashamed of me by and by, because I cannot be what you would like to have
me."

Fani had seated himself again at Elsli's side, but at these words he
sprang again to his feet, crying out reproachfully:--

"Oh, Elsli, what strange notions have you taken into your head? It isn't
pleasant in you to talk so. Why don't you think of all the nice things
there are, and what good times we have together, and let all these
melancholy ideas go?"

"I don't think of melancholy things on purpose, Fani, and I wish I did
not at all," said Elsli, pleadingly. "It is this way. Whenever I begin
to think of something very pleasant, then sad thoughts come into my
mind, and I keep wondering whether there isn't something that I can do
for those in trouble, and then I am unhappy because I can't think of
