"Now I'll see what I can do," muttered Herbert, sighting at the saucy
little fellow, who seemed to be ridiculing his purpose of reaching it
with a bullet at such a height.

The young hunter aimed with great care, pressed the trigger, and, as the
sharp report rang through the woods, the squirrel came tumbling to the
ground, with its skull shattered.

Herbert Watrous was surprised and delighted, scarcely believing in his
own success. He picked up the slain rodent and saw that its destruction
had been caused by the bullet he fired.

"That's business," he exclaimed, with a thrill of pride; "but why
couldn't I shoot that way when Nick and Sam were looking at me? I know
how the thing is done now, and when we get together I'll give them some
lessons in marksmanship."

He left the squirrel on the ground, but had not gone far when a new idea
struck him and he came back, picked it up, and put it in his game-bag.

"If I show them a squirrel, they can't help believing that I shot him."

The serious question which Herbert had been discussing with himself,
ever since being alone, was what he would do if he should happen to come
upon the bear. He had not quite so much confidence in his gun as he had
when he started out, though the shooting of the squirrel brought back
considerable of his natural assurance.

The conclusion he reached was that it would be just as well if he and
bruin did not meet. Excellent as was his Remington, it was not a
repeating rifle, and he was afraid that one shot, even if well aimed,
would not be enough.

"If I had a Henry, which shoots sixteen shots in sixteen seconds, I
could fill him so full of lead that he couldn't run fast enough to
overtake me if I didn't happen to kill him."

But the Henry, which he desired so much, was beyond his reach, and it
was idle to wish for it.

Accordingly, he slung his gun over his shoulder in true sportsman style,
and strode along the path until the greater part of the distance was
passed, when, like his friends, he found a fallen tree at a convenient
spot and sat down for a rest.

Herbert, in his luxurious home in the city, had become accustomed to
irregular hours, so that it was now the most natural thing in the world
for him to fall asleep and not open his eyes until he shivered with
cold and it was growing dark around him.

He started up in no little surprise, and, recalling where he was,
hastened along the path toward the camp.

"They'll be worried almost to death about me," was his thought, "and I
shouldn't wonder if they start out to hunt me up. Ah!"

The reverberating report of a rifle came from the direction of the
limestone rock, and he felt no doubt that it was meant as a signal to
direct him.

Herbert replied by firing his own gun in the air and shouting that he
was coming. He did not forget to place another cartridge in his rifle,
for, truth to tell, he was a little nervous over this lonely tramp
through the woods at such a late hour.

He listened, and heard the answering shout of Sam Harper, and,
communication being thus established, Herbert held his peace and
hastened forward as best he could in the faint moonlight.

"I hope I won't meet any sort of game now," was the wish of the lad,
"for I am in a hurry to join the boys--"

Could he believe his eyes!

He had hardly given expression to the wish, when a dark mass loomed up
to sight directly ahead of him, and he plainly saw the gleam and glow of
a pair of frightful eyes fixed upon him. He was sure, too, that he had
heard the threatening growl of the monster, which might well believe he
had the youngster in his power.

"It's the bear, as sure as I'm alive!" gasped Herbert. "There's no
getting away from him! Heaven save me from missing, for if my gun fails
me now, it is all over! He won't give me time to climb a tree, and I
_must_ shoot!"




CHAPTER XXII.

THE "VACANT CHAIR."


It is hard to imagine a more trying situation than that of Master
Herbert Watrous, who, while walking along a path in the woods, saw by
the faint moonlight what he believed to be the figure of an enormous
black bear, sitting on its haunches, and waiting for him to move either
forward or backward before springing upon him.

He shuddered with fear, but, with a courage hardly to be expected in his
case, he drew up his rifle, sighted as best he could, and fired
point-blank at the brute, when no more than a rod separated the two.

It was impossible to miss, even with such an unsteady aim, and the lad
had not a particle of doubt that he had hit him; but had he inflicted a
mortal wound?

Without waiting an unnecessary second, Herbert flung out the shell of
the cartridge and placed a new one in the breech. His hands trembled so
that he could hardly keep from dropping it, but he succeeded better than
would have been supposed.

Once more the gun was raised, and the leaden missile was buried in the
dark object.

But it did not stir, and the amazed lad was transfixed. What did it
mean?

"I'll give him another, and if that don't answer--"

From out the gloom in front he discerned a figure advancing upon him,
but a second glance showed that it was a man instead of a wild animal.

"Hallo, my friend? what are you firing at?"

The voice was such a cheery one that the courage of Herbert instantly
came back, and it may be said that he was never gladder in all his life
to see a person.

"Why, I thought that was a wild animal--that is, a bear, in the path in
front of me; what is it?"

The man laughed heartily.

"The path makes a little bend right there, so it is not in, but beside
the path; it is an oak stump on which you have been wasting your lead."

"But those glaring eyes--"

"That is fox-fire, which does look odd in the night-time."

"But I heard it growling."

"Be assured it was all imagination, my young friend; there is no bear or
wild animal near us--at least he hasn't shown himself yet."

"Well, I'm blamed glad to hear it, for there isn't much fun in hunting
wild beasts when it is too dark to aim well: may I ask how it is you
happen along here without a gun?"

"I live only a little ways off, and, if you will go back with me, I will
be glad to entertain you over night."

"I'm obliged to you, but I have two friends who are expecting me, up by
the rock yonder."

"I judged you belonged to the party, but there is only one of them
there, unless the other has come since I left. The one named Harper, who
called at my house this afternoon, is there, and has started his camp
fire. He is impatient for the others to come in, and asked me to tell
you, if we met, that he particularly wished you to 'hurry up your
cakes'--I suppose you know what that means."

"I do, and will bid you good-night."

They exchanged pleasant greetings, and separated, each to pursue his own
way.

Herbert was anxious to join his friends; for the fact that he had fired
into a stump, under the belief that it was a bear, was no proof that the
dreaded quadruped was not somewhere in the neighborhood.

As the path, which he was able to keep without difficulty, led by the
rock where the three lads were to meet, he had not gone far when he
caught the starlike twinkle of a point of light, which told him he was
not far from camp.

"Hallo, Sam, are you there?" called out Herbert, while yet a
considerable distance off.

"Yes. What makes you so late?" was the impatient response and question.

Without pausing to reply, Herbert hurried forward and a few minutes
later joined Sam Harper, who had a large fire going, and had broiled a
squirrel and a rabbit, both of which were in fine condition.

"Where's Nick?" asked Sam, as soon as he saw the youth was alone.

"How should I know anything about him? I haven't seen him since we
parted."

"It's mighty queer, any way you may look at it; Nick is always the most
prompt to keep any bargain he made, and I haven't seen anything of him
for hours. He ought to have been here the very first."

"Have you signaled to him?"

"I have fired off my gun, and shouted and whistled till my cheeks ache,
and I haven't had the first show of an answer."

The manner in which these disheartening words were uttered showed that
Sam Harper was ill at ease, not so much over the continued absence of
Nick, as from his utter silence. It was fully understood by all, that,
if anything happened to either one, he was to signal immediately to the
others.

Neither Herbert nor Sam had heard Nick's rifle, though it might have
been discharged without recognition by them.

Herbert had been asleep so long that he could have missed the report
very readily, while Sam was so far from Nick that the sound of his gun
could have been mistaken for that fired by some wandering hunter,
unknown to either.

Every few minutes, Sam halloed or whistled, after Nick's favorite manner
of signaling, and then the two bent their heads and listened for the
answer, which came not.

The broiled game remained untasted, for Sam's appetite was suspended,
and Herbert refused to eat while his companion was in such mental
trouble.

"There's no use of talking," finally exclaimed Sam, unable to repress
his uneasiness, "something has gone wrong with Nick, and I'm bound to
find out what it is."




CHAPTER XXIII.

HUNTING A BUCK.


It will be remembered that when Nick Ribsam left his companions, early
in the afternoon, it was with the resolution to find out whether the
showy shot made by Herbert Watrous at the buck, had done the execution
he claimed for it.

This forced him to make a much longer detour than did Sam Harper, and,
as he was obliged to move with great caution, he found no time to sit
down and rest or sleep.

The more he reflected on the exploit which Herbert attempted, the more
did he doubt it.

"I suppose they hit a target a mile off, as Sam told me; but that is
when they know the exact distance. No person can hit a deer a quarter of
a mile away, unless he does it by chance. Herbert proved he can't shoot
anything close to him, and it isn't likely he hit the deer by accident,
for such accidents don't happen unless it's a person that you don't
want to hurt."

But he had started out to find the truth of the matter, and it was in
accordance with his disposition to do so, if it was possible.

Nick knew that if the buck which they had seen was anywhere in the
neighborhood, it was necessary to proceed with extreme caution to avoid
giving alarm. The wonder was that it had shown itself after the fright
caused by the dog.

The drowsy autumn afternoon was well advanced when the boy saw, from his
surroundings, that he was close to the spot where the deer stood when
Herbert fired at it with his long-range rifle. There was the rock, but
the animal was invisible.

Just beyond was an oak which had been upturned by some wrenching tornado
or storm. The roots protruded upward and from the sides, the dirt still
clinging to them, so that the bottom spread out like a fan.

The base of the trunk lay flat on the ground, but the branching limbs
supported the top to that extent that it was raised five or six feet
from the earth. Consequently, it sloped away in an incline from the
crested summit to the base.

Such a sight is not unusual in any forest, for it is the general fashion
of trees to fall that way; but Nick was struck by the evident fact that,
although the oak was uprooted, as it is termed, yet enough connection
with the ground remained to afford nourishment, and to keep life within
it.

He started toward it, but had moved only a few steps when a slight
rustling in the undergrowth arrested his attention. Stopping short he
looked about him, and, with an amazement which can hardly be imagined,
saw the buck within fifty feet of him.

He was in a clump of undergrowth, and was browsing on some tender
shoots. His position was such that his side was toward Nick, who first
caught sight of his antlers above the bushes: and it was a remarkable
thing that he did not detect the approach of the young hunter, despite
the caution he used.

The sight was so unexpected that Nick was taken aback, and had a spasm
of that nervous affection which sometimes seizes the inexperienced
hunter, and is known as "buck fever."

Knowing that the game would bound away with the speed of the wind the
instant he scented danger, the lad brought up his rifle and pointed at
him.

Poor Nick shook as if he had a chill; it was impossible to control his
nerves; but, aiming as best he could, he fired. The deer was "hit hard,"
though not so hard as young Ribsam meant and most ardently desired.

Dropping the breech of his gun, Nick looked to see the result of his
shot, and found it amazing to a startling degree.

The buck, which was a noble fellow, stopped browsing, and, with his head
thrown high in air, looked around to learn where his assailant was.
Catching sight of the staring lad, the animal emitted a furious sniff
and charged upon him at full speed.

This is a most unusual thing for a deer to do, though many a hunter has
been killed by a wounded buck or moose, who has turned upon and attacked
him with the fury of a tiger.

[Illustration: "He turned on his heel and ran with might and main for
the fallen tree."]

Nick Ribsam thought it very singular, but he thought it very alarming
as well, and, without waiting to watch matters further, he turned on his
heel and ran with might and main for the fallen tree.

The lusty youngster was a good runner, but the buck made three times as
much speed as he "went for him," with head lowered like a charging bull.

Nick had to think fast, but fast as he thought he couldn't see how the
fallen oak was to offer him refuge against the fury of the animal, and,
unless it did so, he was in a bad predicament.

It was impossible to reach any tree in time to climb out of reach, as
Nellie did when pursued by the bear, and the highest portion of the
prostrate trunk would not protect him from the antlers of the savage
buck.

There was no use for the empty rifle as it seemed, and Nick was on the
point of throwing it away, when it occurred to him that it might still
serve as a weapon of defense.

"I will club it and see what can be done."




CHAPTER XXIV.

HUNTED BY A BUCK.


Glancing over his shoulder, Nick Ribsam kept informed of the movements
of his fierce foe, who was certainly carrying things with a hurricane
rush.

Finding there was no getting away from him, Nick, just as he reached the
fallen tree, whirled around and, grasping his rifle by the barrel, swung
the stock back over his shoulder and poised himself for the blow, which
he believed must decide his own fate.

The boy made a formidable-looking picture; but it was all lost on the
buck, which did not halt nor slacken his pace.

It was a terrifying sight as he plunged toward the lad with lowered head
and glowering front, for the deer was an exceptionally large and
powerful one, and he meant to kill the individual that had sent the
bullet into his side, and from which the red blood was already
streaming.

It may be said just here, that Nick Ribsam no longer doubted the
failure of the long-range shot of Herbert Watrous.

The imperiled lad drew a deep respiration, poised himself on his
advanced foot, and, swinging to one side, with a view of avoiding the
full force of the charge, he brought down the stock of his gun with the
utmost strength he could command.

It descended with great power--so far as a ten-year-old boy is
concerned--but it was not sufficient to throw the buck off his base nor
to interfere with his plan of procedure.

He struck the lad with tremendous force, sending the gun flying from his
grasp and knocking Nick fully a dozen feet. Never in all his life had
the boy received such a terrific shock, which drove the breath from his
body and sent him spinning, as it seemed, through twenty yards of space.

