This was the best that Ziffak, with all his influence at court could
do, and indeed it was as much as he expected to accomplish.  He
admitted that Waggaman and Burkhardt were likely to interfere, but he
did not believe they could do so to any serious extent, provided the
white men themselves were circumspect in their behavior.

While this interesting interchange was going on, the two boats were
side by side, so gently impelled that their progress was moderate and
conversation pleasant.  Thinking that the Professor had slept long
enough, and that he ought to know the news, Fred Ashman turned to wake
him; but to his surprise, the German met his look with a smile and the
remark that he had heard every word spoken.  Then he rose to a sitting
posture, saluted Ziffak and proceeded to light his pipe.

The latter pleased the whites still further by explaining that he meant
to keep them company for the rest of the distance.  Despite his
encouraging statements, they felt much easier with him as their escort.

By using their paddles with moderate vigor, they could reach their
destination by the middle of the afternoon.  There was no better hour
to arrive, for the king was always in his best mood after enjoying his
siesta, which was always completed by the time the sun was half-way
down the sky.

It was to be expected also that before that hour, Waggaman and
Burkhardt would spread the news of the expected coming of the wonderful
strangers.  They would do what they could, to excite distrust and
enmity, but Ziffak was positive that since his brother had given his
promise, it would be sacredly kept, and that for two days at least
their stay at the village would be without peril to any one of the
little company.




CHAPTER XX.

AT THE MURHAPA VILLAGE.

The sun was half-way down the sky when the canoe containing the
explorers, and accompanied by the smaller craft impelled by Ziffak,
rounded a bend of the upper Xingu and came in sight of the village of
the Murhapas.

The herculean native gave an extra sweep of his paddle which sent his
boat slightly in advance of the other, and, striking the shore, he
sprang out and turned about to wait for them to disembark.

The scene was an impressive one, which every member of the company was
sure to remember the rest of his life.

The huts in which these strange people made their homes were similar in
structure to those of the Aryks, but instead of being built around the
three sides of a rectangle, composed one row, numbering more than a
hundred, and facing the river.  They stood a hundred yards from the
water, and being at the top of the sloping bank were above the reach of
the most violent freshet that ever came down from the mountain-fed
sources of the mighty Xingu.

The ground in front of this novel town was cleared of all trees and
undergrowth, but for most of the space was covered with bright green
grass; the whole having the appearance of a well-kept lawn that had
been artificially sodded or strewn with seed, which flourished with the
luxuriance of every species of vegetation in that tropic country.

Not only in front, but on the sides and to the rear, for an extent of
more than a hundred acres, the earth had been cleared with equal
thoroughness and was growing abundant crops of cotton, tobacco, and
edibles peculiar to the region.

The houses were separated by a space of several rods, so that the town
itself extended a long way along the water.  The dwellings, like those
of the Aryks, consisted of a single story, with the door in the middle
of the front, a window-like opening on each side of the same, roofed
over with poles, covered with earth, leaves and grass, that were
impervious to wind and storm.

It seemed to the astonished whites that the entire population had
gathered along the shore to receive them.  Several strange sights
impressed them.  The men were large, sinewy, bushy-haired and athletic.
Some sported bows and arrows, but the majority by far carried the
spears which the explorers held in such dread.  There was no native, so
far as they could see, who was the equal in size and strength of
Ziffak, but they were so much the superiors of any natives encountered
since leaving the Amazon, that it was easy to understand how they were
the lords and masters of all the tribes with which they came in
conflict.

We have spoken of the Murhapa houses as being but a single story in
height.  There was a single exception.  In the middle of the town was a
broader and larger structure than the others.  It was two stories high
and so much more marked in every respect that it was easy to decide
that it was the residence or palace of Haffgo, the king of these people.

Another singular feature was noticed by our friends as they stepped
from their canoe.  Among the natives, who were mostly as dark of skin
as Africans, was a sprinkling so different that the inference was that
they belonged to some other race, or that nature was accustomed to play
some strange freak in this almost unknown part of the world.

The king and his daughter Ariel had complexions as fair as the natives
of Georgia and Persia, and yet Ziffak, a full brother of Haffgo, was as
ebon-tinted as the darkest warrior of the tribe.  Since the features of
all were similar in a general way the cause was one that could not be
explained.

It was a moment when the new-comers fully appreciated the value of a
friend at court.  They felt that had each possessed a dozen repeating
Winchesters they would have been of no avail after leaving their canoe
and entering the village.  They had now placed their lives in the hands
of Ziffak, and, should he choose to desert them, they were doomed; it
was too late to retreat.

Many of the warriors scowled at the white men and their two helpers as
though they would have been glad to impale them with their spears, but
no demonstration was made.  Evidently Ziffak possessed unlimited power
and was backed by the pledge of the king.

Professor Grimcke was the first to step ashore, Ashman and Long
following immediately.  The three whites formed abreast, while Bippo
and Pedros covered [Transcriber's note: cowered?] so close that it was
hard for them to keep from stepping on their heels.  Ziffak placed
himself at the head, as the escort, and moved up the sloping bank with
the dignity of a conqueror.

The women, showed more taste in their dress, for all wore loose-fitting
gowns of native cloth, gaudily colored, though the children were
attired similarly to the men, with little more than a breech cloth
about the loins.  Even the boys of a most tender age were each armed
with a javelin, none of them, however, having the points of the weapons
poisoned as did their fathers and elders when on the war-path.

Another striking characteristic of these people was the abundance of
gold and diamond ornaments.  Not a woman was visible from whose ears
were not suspended heavy rings of the precious metal, while the
majority had diamonds fastened in the gold, all of several carats'
weight, and some so large and brilliant that they would have sold for
immense sums in a civilized country.

The older females had not only rings hanging from their ears, but still
more valuable ornaments depended from their noses.  It would have
enriched an army to loot the Murhapa village.

Each of the whites carried his Winchester, and Bippo and Pedros did not
forget their almost harmless spears; but the rifle of Johnston was left
behind with the valuable property.

At the moment of starting, Ziffak called to two warriors and said
something in a commanding voice.  They instantly hastened to the edge
of the water and placed themselves in front of the large canoe.  Their
action left no doubt they were obeying an order to guard the treasures
during the absence of the owners.

Reaching the top of the bank, the party were in what might be called
the main or only street of the town.  The grass had been worn smooth by
the feet of the villagers, among whom was not a dog, cat, horse, and,
indeed, any four-footed animal.

The visitors had landed near the lower end of the village, so that it
was necessary to walk some way before reaching the house of the king,
which was their destination.

As they started, the whole population began falling in behind them.
The terrified Bippo and Pedros shrank still closer to those in front,
trembling and affrighted, for the experience to which they were
subjected was enough to upset them morally, mentally and physically.

Ziffak turned his head with such a threatening scowl that the foremost
instantly fell back, dreading his vengeance, but when he faced the
other way, they began crowding forward again.

There must have been that in the appearance and action of Bippo and
Pedros which excited the latent mirth of the Murhapas, for say what we
may, the trait exists in a greater or less degree in all human beings.
One of them reached forward with his javelin and gave Bippo a sharp
prick.  With a howl, he leaped several feet in air and yelled that he
was killed.

There was an instant expansion of dark faces into grins, showing an
endless array of black stained, teeth, for the spear point was not
poisoned, and the incident caused a laugh on the part of his white
friends when they came to know the whole truth.

But the author of the practical joke had reckoned without his host.
The cry had hardly escaped the victim, when Ziffak bounded to the rear
like a cyclone.  The fellow who was a full grown warrior was still
grinning with delight, when he found himself in the terrific grasp of
the head chieftain.  It was then his turn to utter a shriek of
affright, which availed him nothing.

Ziffak first smote him to the earth by a single tremendous blow.  Then,
before he could rise to his feet, he grasped his ankles, one with
either hand, and swung him round his head, as a child whirls a sling,
before throwing the stone.

To the awed spectators he seemed a black ring of fire, so dizzyingly
swift were the gyrations, from the midst of which came a buzzing moan
of terror.

Only for a second or two was he subjected to this torture.  Suddenly
Ziffak ran toward the Xingu and then let go of the ankles.  The black,
limp object went spinning far out in the air, as if driven from some
enormous catapult.

Across the remaining space he went, falling several feet from shore and
disappearing beneath the surface.  But such fellows are extinguished
with difficulty, and the cold water quickly revived him.

By and by he came up, blew the moisture from his mouth, swam to shore,
climbed timidly out, and, sneaking up the bank again, humbly took his
place at the rear of the procession.

But Ziffak, having disposed of the joker, paid no further attention to
him, caring naught whether he swam or was drowned.  The lesson was one
that he would not forget, and produced a salutary effect upon the rest
of the multitude.  They instantly fell back so far that Bippo, finding
he had not been seriously hurt, saw that he was safe from further
disturbance.

It was only a few minutes later that Ziffak halted, his friends
immediately doing the same.

The cause was apparent: they had reached the dwelling place of Haffgo
king of the Murhapas.




CHAPTER XXI.

HAFFGO, KING OF THE MURHAPAS.

It was a memorable interview which the explorers held with Haffgo, king
of the mighty Murhapas.

Since Bippo and Pedros were servants, they were not admitted to an
audience with the potentate.  Ziffak conducted the others into the hut
adjoining the palace.  This was his own building, where his aged mother
had charge.  She understood matters from her son, and the frightened
fellows were made to feel that they were safe for a time from the
annoyances and persecutions of the multitude.

The apartment was an oblong one, being at the front, and was
characteristically furnished.  Instead of the smooth bare ground which
formed the floors of the other buildings, the palace was entirely
covered with the skins of wild animals, gaudily stained.  The whole
looked like a gorgeous, oriental carpet, which was as soft as down to
the tread.

There were no chairs or benches for auditors, for no one presumed to
sit in the presence of majesty.  The walls were hung with the same
species of ornamented furs, set off here and there by spears, bows and
arrows, arranged in fantastic fashion.

At the further end of the apartment, was a platform several feet high,
with a broad seat, covered with still more brilliant peltries, a
footstool, and on each side a vase of magnificent flowers.  These vases
were of native manufacture, beautifully ornamented, while the flowers
were of a radiant loveliness, such as are seen nowhere outside of
tropical countries.  Their delicious fragrance filled the apartment and
affected the strangers the moment the blanket was pulled aside by
Ziffak and they stepped within the royal reception room.

On each side was a broad open window, without glass, which admitted
enough sunlight to flood the place with illumination.

At the right of the dais or throne, the curtains were draped so as to
serve as a door for the king or any member of the royal household to
enter or withdraw.

On this barbaric throne sat the extraordinary personage known as King
Haffgo, ruler of the warlike Murhapas.

To say the least, his appearance was stunning, if not bewildering.

In the first place, it maybe doubted whether the intrinsic value of his
crown was not the equal of any that can be found to-day in the
monarchical countries of Europe, Asia or Africa.  Its foundation seemed
to be a network of golden wire, in which were set scores upon scores of
diamonds, weighing from five to ten carats apiece, with a central sun
the equal of the great Pitt diamond.  The coruscations from these
brilliants were overwhelming.  As the king moved his head while
speaking, every hue of the rainbow flashed and scintillated, the rays
at times seeming to dart entirely across the room.

In addition, the neck of Haffgo was encircled by a double string of the
same dazzling jewels, of hardly less magnitude; while the wrist of the
right hand, which rested on a large javelin, was clasped by a golden
bracelet of what appeared to be living fire.

The king was dressed in a species of thin cloth, gathered by a girdle
at the waist.  The crimson tint of this garment was relieved by figures
of the sun, moon and stars, of dragons, birds, beasts and reptiles in
gold.  One of his feet was visible, disclosing a species of sandal such
as is seen among the natives of the East Indies.

Had King Haffgo been encountered anywhere else, he would have been set
down as a European with an unusually fair complexion.  It bore no
liking to that of the African or native Murhapa.  His skin had none of
that chalky, transparent appearance shown by the Albinos, but was
almost pinkish and ruddy.

His bushy hair was not white, but of a decided brown, his eyes hazel,
his nose Roman, with a strong chin and a keen expression, such as was
natural to a man who had reigned an absolute autocrat all his life.

He was about fifty years of age, but his face was wrinkled like a man
of threescore and more.

King Haffgo was seated on his throne when his visitors were ushered
into his presence, as though he expected and was waiting for them.

The white men were unacquainted with the etiquette prevailing in this
barbaric court, but there are certain ceremonies which are received as
expressive of courtesy and obeisance the world over.

Ziffak gave no instructions; but, placing himself at the side of
Professor Grimcke on the left, he surveyed his friends with much
curiosity, as if waiting to see how they would conduct themselves.

Grimcke, Long and Ashman removed their hats and bowed slowly, bending
their heads almost to their knees.  Then, as they straightened up
again, the Professor, who took upon himself the duty of spokesman, said:

"We greet the great King Haffgo, and beg that he will accept the homage
of his brothers from their homes near the great water."

"Why do my brothers come from their homes to hunt out the king of the
Murhapas, when he has not asked them to come?"

These words were uttered almost exactly as given.  The accent was thick
and somewhat broken, but they showed an astonishing command of the
English tongue, and proved that Waggaman and Burkhardt had found some
exceedingly apt pupils among this people.

It is not necessary to give the interview in detail.  There was a
certain stateliness about the manner of the king which was remarkably
becoming.  His guests had prepared themselves, when starting out on
their exploring enterprise, to make friends, by providing a large
supply of gaudy trinkets, such as is always pleasing to the average
savage; but, when they saw the wonderful crown and diamond ornaments of
this autocrat, they were ashamed to let the baubles in their possession
be seen.

They consisted mainly of children's toys; and, since they were entirely
different from anything in the country, Professor Grimcke finally made
bold to offer them, with another low obeisance, to his majesty.  The
latter may have been delighted, but, if so, he did not allow it to
appear in his face or manner.

Fred Ashman handed him two brightly-polished knives, fashioned somewhat
after the familiar Bowie pattern, and, despite his reserve, it was easy
to see that they pleased him more than anything else.

Jared Long's present was a handsomely-carved meerschaum pipe.  The king
was an inveterate smoker, and, even if he didn't do anything more than
nod his head when it was placed in his hand, he ought to have been very
grateful.

Despite the pains which our friends took to win the good will of King
Haffgo, it was apparent to all three that their visit was not welcome.
Waggaman and Burkhardt may not have whispered anything in his ear about
them, but the ruler was thoroughly filled with a distrust of all white
men, the only exceptions being the ones that were the cause of this
distrust.

Being a man of unquestioned native sagacity, it needed nothing more
from his first guests than their accounts of what the other race was
doing in the cities and towns along the sea coasts.  Any people who
builded canoes large enough to cross the awful waste of waters in quest
of diamonds and gold, were sure to seize the chance to force their way
up the Xingu where much more boundless wealth awaited them.

The famous diamond mines of Brazil were not very far from this portion
of the Matto Grosso, and the pains which the emperors of Brazil had
taken to draw a part of their riches from the earth was all the proof
Haffgo could ask of the rapacity of the nations which called themselves
civilized.

Now, while this remarkable ruler could not always make certain that no
white men should enter his dominions, there remained a very good chance
of preventing such intruders from getting away again, carrying the
glowing accounts of what they had discovered.  So long as he could
maintain this condition of affairs, so long was he safe; for if he
"absorbed" every foreigner ascending the Xingu, the supply could never
exceed the demand.

The King conversed with not only the Professor, but with Long and
Ashman in turn.  They were as deferential as they knew how to be, but
all the same, their sagacity told them he bore them no good will, and
would have been much better pleased had the Aryks wiped them out before
they ascended the rapids.

At the conclusion of the interview, which lasted about half an hour,
the King Haffgo informed them they were at liberty to remain two days
in the village, during which they were not to pass outside its
boundaries.  At the expiration of the period named, they would be
allowed to descend the Xingu to their homes, under their pledge to tell
no person what they had seen and learned about the Murhapas.


