When two of us quarrelled (and Nurse used to say that no two of us
ever agreed), the provocation always seemed, to each of us, great
enough amply to excuse the passion. But I have reason to think that
people seldom exclaimed, "What grievances those poor children are
exasperated with!" but that they often said, "What terrible tempers
they all have!"

There are five of us: Philip and I are the eldest; we are twins. My
name is Isobel, and I never allow it to be shortened into the ugly
word _Bella_ nor into the still more hideous word _Izzy_, by either
the servants or the children. My aunt Isobel never would, and neither
will I.

"The children" are the other three. They are a good deal younger than
Philip and I, so we have always kept them in order. I do not mean that
we taught them to behave wonderfully well, but I mean that we made
them give way to us elder ones. Among themselves they squabbled
dreadfully.

We are a very ill-tempered family.




CHAPTER II.

ILL-TEMPERED PEOPLE AND THEIR FRIENDS--NARROW ESCAPES--THE
HATCHET-QUARREL.


I do not wish for a moment to defend ill-temper, but I do think that
people who suffer from ill-tempered people often talk as if they were
the only ones who do suffer in the matter; and as if the ill-tempered
people themselves quite enjoyed being in a rage.

And yet how much misery is endured by those who have never got the
victory over their own ill-temper! To feel wretched and exasperated by
little annoyances which good-humoured people get over with a shrug or
a smile; to have things rankle in my mind like a splinter in the
flesh, which glide lightly off yours, and leave no mark; to be unable
to bear a joke, knowing that one is doubly laughed at because one
can't; to have this deadly sore at heart--"I _cannot_ forgive; I
_cannot_ forget," there is no pleasure in these things. The tears of
sorrow are not more bitter than the tears of anger, of hurt pride or
thwarted will. As to the fit of passion in which one is giddy, blind,
and deaf, if there is a relief to the overcharged mind in saying the
sharpest things and hitting the heaviest blows one can at the moment,
the pleasantness is less than momentary, for almost as we strike we
foresee the pains of regret and of humbling ourselves to beg pardon
which must ensue. Our friends do not always pity as well as blame us,
though they are sorry for those who were possessed by devils long ago.

Good-tempered people, too, who I fancy would find it quite easy not to
be provoking, and to be a little patient and forbearing, really seem
sometimes to irritate hot-tempered ones on purpose, as if they thought
it was good for them to get used to it.

I do not mean that I think ill-tempered people should be constantly
yielded to, as Nurse says Mrs. Rampant and the servants have given way
to Mr. Rampant till he has got to be quite as unreasonable and nearly
as dangerous as most maniacs, and his friends never cross him, for the
same reason that they would hot stir up a mad bull.

Perhaps I do not quite know how I would have our friends treat us who
are cursed with bad tempers. I think to avoid unnecessary provocation,
and to be patient with us in the height of our passion, is wise as
well as kind. But no principle should be conceded to us, and rights
that we have unjustly attacked should be faithfully defended when we
are calm enough to listen. I fancy that where gentle Mrs. Rampant is
wrong is that she allows Mr. Rampant to think that what really are
concessions to his weakness are concessions to his wisdom. And what is
not founded on truth cannot do lasting good. And if, years ago, before
he became a sort of gunpowder cask at large, he had been asked if he
wished Mrs. Rampant to persuade herself, and Mrs. Rampant, the little
Rampants, and the servants to combine to persuade him, that he was
right when he was wrong, and wise when he was foolish, and reasonable
when he was unjust, I think he would have said No. I do not believe
one could deliberately desire to be befooled by one's family for all
the best years of one's life. And yet how many people are!

I do not think I am ever likely to be so loved and feared by those I
live with as to have my ill-humours made into laws. I hope not. But I
am sometimes thankful, on the other hand, that GOD is more
forbearing with us than we commonly are with each other, and does not
lead us into temptation when we are at our worst and weakest.

Any one who has a bad temper must sometimes look back at the years
before he learned self-control, and feel thankful that he is not a
murderer, or burdened for life by the weight on his conscience of
some calamity of which he was the cause. If the knife which furious
Fred threw at his sister before he was out of petticoats had hit the
child's eye instead of her forehead, could he ever have looked into
the blinded face without a pang? If the blow with which impatient
Annie flattered herself she was correcting her younger brother had
thrown the naughty little lad out of the boat instead of into the
sailor's arms, and he had been drowned--at ten years old a murderess,
how could she endure for life the weight of her unavailing remorse?

I very nearly killed Philip once. It makes me shudder to think of it,
and I often wonder I ever could lose my temper again.

We were eight years old, and out in the garden together. We had
settled to build a moss-house for my dolls, and had borrowed the
hatchet out of the wood-house, without leave, to chop the stakes with.
It was entirely my idea, and I had collected all the moss and most of
the sticks. It was I, too, who had taken the hatchet. Philip had been
very tiresome about not helping me in the hard part; but when I had
driven in the sticks by leaning on them with all my weight, and had
put in bits of brushwood where the moss fell out and Philip laughed at
me, and, in short, when the moss-house was beginning to look quite
real, Philip was very anxious to work at it, and wanted the hatchet.

"You wouldn't help me over the hard work," said I, "so I shan't give
it you now; I'll make my moss-house myself."

"No, you won't," said Philip.

"Yes, I shall," said I.

"No, you won't," he reiterated; "for I shall pull it down as fast as
you build it."

"You'd better not," I threatened.

Just then we were called in to dinner. I hid the hatchet, and Philip
said no more; but he got out before me, and when I returned to work I
found that the moss-house walls, which had cost me so much labour,
were pulled to pieces and scattered about the shrubbery. Philip was
not to be seen.

My heart had been so set upon my project that at first I could only
feel the overwhelming disappointment. I was not a child who often
cried, but I burst into tears.

I was sobbing my hardest when Philip sprang upon me in triumph, and
laughing at my distress.

"I kept my promise," said he, tossing his head, "and I'll go on doing
it."

I am sure those shocks of fury which seize one like a fit must be a
devil possessing one. In an instant my eyes were as dry as the desert
in a hot wind, and my head reeling with passion. I ran to the
hatchet, and came back brandishing it.

"If you touch one stake or bit of moss of mine again," said I, "I'll
throw my hatchet at your head. I can keep promises too."

My intention was only to frighten him. I relied on his not daring to
brave such a threat; unhappily he relied on my not daring to carry it
out. He took up some of my moss and threw it at me by way of reply.

I flung the hatchet!--

My Aunt Isobel has a splendid figure, with such grace and power as one
might expect from her strong health and ready mind. I had not seen her
at the moment, for I was blind with passion, nor had Philip, for his
back was turned towards her. I did not see distinctly how she watched,
as one watches for a ball, and caught the hatchet within a yard of
Philip's head.

My Aunt Isobel has a temper much like the temper of the rest of the
family. When she had caught it in her left hand she turned round and
boxed my ears with her right hand till I could see less than ever. (I
believe she suffered for that outburst for months afterwards. She was
afraid she had damaged my hearing, as that sense is too often damaged
or destroyed by the blows of ill-tempered parents, teachers, and
nurses.)

Then she turned back and shook Philip as vigorously as she had boxed
me. "I saw you, you spiteful, malicious boy!" said my Aunt Isobel.

All the time she was shaking him, Philip was looking at her feet.
Something that he saw absorbed his attention so fully that he forgot
to cry.

"You're bleeding, Aunt Isobel," said he, when she gave him breath
enough to speak.

The truth was this: the nervous force which Aunt Isobel had summoned
up to catch the hatchet seemed to cease when it was caught; her arm
fell powerless, and the hatchet cut her ankle. That left arm was
useless for many months afterwards, to my abiding reproach.

Philip was not hurt, but he might have been killed. Everybody told me
so often that it was a warning to me to correct my terrible temper,
that I might have revolted against the reiteration if the facts had
been less grave. But I never can feel lightly about that
hatchet-quarrel. It opened a gulf of possible wickedness and life-long
misery, over the brink of which my temper would have dragged me, but
for Aunt Isobel's strong arm and keen eye, and over which it might
succeed in dragging me any day, unless I could cure myself of my
besetting sin.

I never denied it. It was a warning.




CHAPTER III.

WARNINGS--MY AUNT ISOBEL--MR. RAMPANT'S TEMPER, AND HIS CONSCIENCE.


I was not the only scarecrow held up before my own mind.

Nurse had a gallery of historical characters, whom she kept as beacons
to warn our stormy passions of their fate. The hot-tempered boy who
killed his brother when they were at school; the hot-tempered farmer
who took his gun to frighten a trespasser, and ended by shooting him;
the young lady who destroyed the priceless porcelain in a pet; the
hasty young gentleman who kicked his favourite dog and broke its
ribs;--they were all warnings: so was old Mr. Rampant, so was my Aunt
Isobel.

Aunt Isobel's story was a whispered tradition of the nursery for many
years before she and I were so intimate, in consequence of her
goodness and kindness to me, that one day I was bold enough to say to
her, "Aunt Isobel, is it true that the reason why you never married
is because you and he quarrelled, and you were very angry, and he went
away, and he was drowned at sea?"

Child as I was, I do not think I should have been so indelicate as to
have asked this question if I had not come to fancy that Nurse made
out the story worse than it really was, for my behoof. Aunt Isobel was
so cheerful and bright with us!--and I was not at that time able to
believe that any one could mend a broken heart with other people's
interests so that the marks should show so little!

My aunt had a very clear skin, but in an instant her face was thick
with a heavy blush, and she was silent. I marvelled that these were
the only signs of displeasure she allowed herself to betray, for the
question was no sooner out of my mouth than I wished it unsaid, and
felt how furious she must naturally feel to hear that her sad and
sacred story was bandied between servants and children as a
nursery-tale with a moral to it.

But oh, Aunt Isobel! Aunt Isobel! you had at this time progressed far
along that hard but glorious road of self-conquest which I had hardly
found my way to.

"I beg your pardon," I began, before she spoke.

"You ought to," said my aunt--she never spoke less than decisively--"I
thought you had more tact, Isobel, than to tell any one what servants
have said of one's sins or sorrows behind one's back."

"I am _very_ sorry," I repeated with shame; "but the thing is, I
didn't believe it was true, you always seem so happy. I am _very_
sorry."

"It is true," said Aunt Isobel. "Child, whilst we are speaking of
it--for the first and the last time--let it be a warning for you to
illustrate a very homely proverb: 'Don't cut off your nose to spite
your own face.' Ill-tempered people are always doing it, and I did it
to my life-long loss. I _was_ angry with him, and like Jonah I said to
myself, 'I do well to be angry.' And though I would die twenty deaths
harder than the death he died to see his face for five minutes and be
forgiven, I am not weak enough to warp my judgment with my misery. I
was in the right, and he was in the wrong. But I forgot how much
harder a position it is to be in the wrong than in the right in a
quarrel. I did not think of how, instead of making the return path
difficult to those who err, we ought to make it easy, as GOD
does for us. I gave him no chance of unsaying with grace or credit
what he could not fail to regret that he had said. Isobel, you have a
clear head and a sharp tongue, as I have. You will understand when I
say that I had the satisfaction of proving that I was in the right and
he was in the wrong, and that I was firmly, conscientiously
determined to make no concessions, no half-way advances, though our
Father _goes to meet_ His prodigals. Merciful Heaven! I had the
satisfaction of parting myself for all these slow years from the most
honest--the tenderest-hearted--"

My Aunt Isobel had overrated her strength. After a short and vain
struggle in silence she got up and went slowly out of the room,
resting her hand for an instant on my little knick-knack table by the
door as she went out--the only time I ever saw her lean upon anything.

       *       *       *       *       *

Old Mr. Rampant was another of my "warnings." He--to whose face no one
dared hint that he could ever be in the wrong--would have been more
astonished than Aunt Isobel to learn how plainly--nay, how
contemptuously--the servants spoke behind his back of his unbridled
temper and its results. They knew that the only son was somewhere on
the other side of the world, and that little Mrs. Rampant wept tears
for him and sent money to him in secret, and they had no difficulty in
deciding why: "He'd got his father's temper, and it stood to reason
that he and the old gentleman couldn't put up their horses together."
The moral was not obscure. From no lack of affection, but for want of
self-control, the son was condemned to homelessness and hardships in
his youth, and the father was sonless in his old age.

But that was not the point of Nurse's tales about Mr. Rampant which
impressed me most, nor even the endless anecdotes of his unreasonable
passions which leaked out at his back-door and came up our back-stairs
to the nursery. They rather amused us. That assault on the butcher's
boy, who brought ribs of beef instead of sirloin, for which he was
summoned and fined; his throwing the dinner out of the window, and
going to dine at the village inn--by which the dogs ate the dinner and
he had to pay for two dinners, and to buy new plates and dishes.

We laughed at these things, but in my serious moments, especially on
the first Sunday of the month, I was haunted by something else which
Nurse had told me about old Mr. Rampant.

In our small parish--a dull village on the edge of a marsh--the Holy
Communion was only celebrated once a month. It was not because he was
irreligious that old Mr. Rampant was one of the too numerous
non-communicants. "It's his temper, poor gentleman," said Nurse. "He
can't answer for himself, and he has that religious feeling he
wouldn't like to come unless he was fit. The housekeeper overheard
Mrs. Rampant a-begging of him last Christmas. It was no listening
either, for he bellowed at her like a bull, and swore dreadful that
whatever else he was he wouldn't be profane."

"Couldn't he keep his temper for a week, don't you think?" said I
sadly, thinking of my mother's old copy of the _Weeks Preparation_ for
the Lord's Supper.

"It would be as bad if he got into one of his tantrums directly
afterwards," said Nurse: "and with people pestering for
Christmas-boxes, and the pudding and turkey, and so many things that
might go wrong, it would be as likely as not he would. It's a sad
thing too," she added, "for his neck's terribly short, and they say
all his family have gone suddenly with the apoplexy. It's an awful
thing, Miss Isobel, to be taken sudden--and unprepared."

The awe of it came back on me every month when the fair white linen
covered the rustiness of the old velvet altar-cloth which the marsh
damps were rotting, and the silver vessels shone, and the village
organist played out the non-communicants with a somewhat inappropriate
triumphal march, and little Mrs. Rampant knelt on with buried face as
we went out, and Mr. Rampant came out with us, looking more glum than
usual, and with such a short neck!

_Now_ I think poor Mr. Rampant was wrong, and that he ought to have
gone with Mrs. Rampant to the Lord's Supper that Christmas. He might
have found grace to have got through all the little ups and downs and
domestic disturbances of a holiday season without being very
ferocious; and if he had tried and failed I think GOD would
have forgiven him. And he might--it is possible that he
_might_--during that calm and solemn Communion, have forgiven his son
as he felt that Our Father forgave him. So Aunt Isobel says; and I
have good reason to think that she is likely to be right.

I think so too _now_, but _then_ I was simply impressed by the thought
that an ill-tempered person was, as Nurse expressed it, "unfit" to
join in the highest religious worship. It is true that I was also
impressed by her other saying, "It's an awful thing, Miss Isobel, to
be taken sudden and unprepared;" but there was a temporary compromise
in my own case. I could not be a communicant till I was confirmed.




CHAPTER IV.

CASES OF CONSCIENCE--ETHICS OF ILL-TEMPER.


Confirmations were not very frequent in our little village at this
time. About once in three years the Bishop came to us. He came when I
was twelve years old. Opinions were divided as to whether I was old
enough, but I decided the matter by saying I would rather wait till
the next opportunity.

"I may be more fit by that time," was my thought, and it was probably
not unlike some of Mr. Rampant's self-communings.

The time came, and the Bishop also; I was fifteen.

I do not know why, but nobody had proposed that Philip should be
confirmed at twelve years old. Fifteen was thought to be quite early
enough for him, and so it came about that we were confirmed together.

I am very thankful that, as it happened, I had Aunt Isobel to talk to.

"You're relieved from one perplexity at any rate," said she, when I
had been speaking of that family failing which was also mine. "You
know your weak point. I remember a long talk I had, years ago, with
Mrs. Rampant, whom I used to know very well when we were young. She
said one of her great difficulties was not being able to find out her
besetting sin. She said it always made her so miserable when clergymen
