
"If you want me to be truthful, I do mind very much," said Helen. "Oh,
you are putting him into Polly's bed. Well, I suppose he must stay there
for the present."

Mrs. Cameron was never considered an unamiable person; she was well
spoken of by her friends and relations, for she was rich, and gave away
a great deal of money to various charities and benevolent institutions.
But if ever any one expected her to depart in the smallest particular
from her own way they were vastly mistaken. Whatever her goal, whatever
her faintest desire, she rode roughshod over all prejudices until she
obtained it. Therefore it was that, notwithstanding poor Helen's
protest, Scorpion curled down comfortably between Polly's sheets, and
Mrs. Cameron, well pleased at having won her point, went down to supper.

Alas, and alas! the supper provided for the good lady was severe in its
simplicity. Alice, blushing and uncomfortable, called Helen out of the
room, and then informed her that neither Polly nor Maggie could be
found, and that there was literally nothing, or next to nothing, in the
larder.

"But that can't be the case," said Helen, "for there was a large piece
of cold roast beef brought up for my tea, and a great plate of hot
cakes, and an uncut plum cake. Surely, Alice, you must be mistaken."

"No, Miss, there's nothing downstairs. Not a joint, nor a cake, nor
nothing. If it wasn't that I found some new-laid eggs in the hen-house,
and cut some slices from the uncooked ham, I couldn't have had nothing
at all for supper--and--and----"

"Tut, tut!" suddenly exclaimed a voice in the dining-room. "What's all
this whispering about? It is very rude of little girls to whisper
outside doors, and not to attend to their aunts when they come a long
way to see them. If you don't come in at once, Miss Helen, and give me
my tea, I shall help myself."

"Find Polly, then, as quick as you can, Alice," exclaimed poor,
perplexed Helen, "and tell her that Aunt Maria Cameron has come and is
going to stay."

Alice went away, and Helen, returning to the dining-room, poured out
tea, and cut bread-and-butter, and saw her aunt demolishing with
appetite three new-laid eggs, and two generous slices of fried ham.

"Your meal was plain; but I am satisfied with it," she said in
conclusion. "I am glad you live frugally, Helen; waste is always sinful,
and in your case peculiarly so. You don't mind my telling you, my dear,
that I think it is a sad extravagance wearing crape every day, but of
course you don't know any better. You are nothing in the world but an
overgrown child. Now that I have come, my dear, I shall put this and
many other matters to rights. Tell me, Helen, how long does your father
intend to be away?"

"Until Monday, I think, Aunt Maria."

"Very well; then you and I will begin our reforms to-morrow. I'll take
you round with me, and we'll look into everything. Your father won't
know the house when he comes back. I've got a treasure of a woman in my
eye for him--a Miss Grinsted. She is fifty, and a strict
disciplinarian. She will soon manage matters, and put this house into
something like order. I had a great mind to bring her with me; but I can
send for her. She can be here by Monday or Tuesday. I told her to be in
readiness, and to have her boxes packed. My dear, I wish you would not
poke out your chin so much. How old are you? Oh, sixteen--a very gawky
age. Now then, that I am refreshed and rested, I think that we'll just
go round the house."

"Will you not wait until to-morrow, Aunt Maria? The children are all
asleep and in bed now, and Nurse never likes them to be disturbed."

"My dear, Nurse's likes or dislikes are not of the smallest importance
to me. I wish to see the children asleep, so if you will have the
goodness to light a candle, Helen, and lead the way, I will follow."

Helen, again stifling a sigh, obeyed. She felt full of trepidation and
uneasiness. Why did not Polly come in? Why had all the supper
disappeared? Where were Katie and the twins? How strangely silent the
house was.

"I will see the baby first," said Mrs. Cameron. "In bed? Well, no
matter, I wish to look at the little dear. Ah, this is the nursery; a
nice, cheerful room, but too much light in it, and no curtains to the
windows. Very bad for the dear baby's eyes. How do you do, Nurse? I have
come to see baby. I am her aunt, her dear mother's sister, Maria
Cameron."

Nurse curtseyed.

"Baby is asleep, ma'am," she said. "I have just settled her in her
little crib for the night. She's a good, healthy child, and no trouble
to any one. Yes, ma'am, she has a look of her dear blessed ma. I'll just
hold down the sheet, and you'll see. Please, ma'am, don't hold the light
full in the babe's eyes, you'll wake her."

"My good woman, I handled babies before you did. I had this child's
mother in my arms when she was a baby. Yes, the infant is well enough;
you're mistaken in there being any likeness to your late mistress in
her. She seems a plain child, but healthy. If you don't watch her sight,
she may get delicate eyes, however. I should recommend curtains being
put up immediately to these windows, and you're only using night-lights
when she sleeps. It is not _I_ that am likely to injure the baby with
too much light. Good evening, Nurse."

Nurse muttered something, her brow growing black.

"Now, Helen," continued Mrs. Cameron, "we will visit the other children.
This is the boys' room, I presume. I am fond of boys. What are your
brothers' names, my dear?"

"We call them Bob and Bunny."

"Utterly ridiculous! I ask for their baptismal names, not for anything
so silly. Ah! oh--I thought you said they were in bed: these beds are
empty."

So they were; tossed about, no doubt, but with no occupants, and the
bedclothes no longer warm; so that it could not have been quite lately
that the truants had departed from their nightly places of rest. On
further investigation, Firefly's bed was also found in a sad state of
_deshabille_, and it was clearly proved, on visiting their apartments,
that the twins and Katie had not gone to bed at all.

"Then, my dear, where are the family?" said Mrs. Cameron. "You and that
little babe are the only ones I have yet seen. Where is Mary? where is
Katharine? Where are your brothers? My dear Helen, this is awful; your
brothers and sisters are evidently playing midnight pranks. Oh, there is
not a doubt of it, you need not tell me. What a good thing it is that I
came! Oh! my poor dear sister; what a state her orphans have been
reduced to! There is nothing whatever for it but to telegraph for Miss
Grinsted in the morning."

"But, my dear auntie, I am sure, oh! I am sure you are mistaken," began
poor Helen. "The children are always very well behaved--they are,
indeed they are. They don't play pranks, Aunt Maria."

"Allow me to use my own eyesight, Helen. The beds are empty--not a
child is to be found. Come, we must search the house!"

Helen never to her dying day forgot that eerie journey through the
deserted house, accompanied by Aunt Maria. She never forgot the
sickening fear which oppressed her, and the certainty which came over
her that Polly, poor, excitable Polly, was up to some mischief.

Sleepy Hollow was a large and rambling old place, and it was some time
before the searchers reached the neighborhood of the festive garret.
When they did, however, there was no longer any room for doubt. Wild
laughter, and high-pitched voices singing many favorite nursery airs and
school-room songs made noise enough to reach the ears even of the
deafest. "John Peel" was having a frantic chorus as Helen and her aunt
ascended the step-ladder.

"For the sound of his horn brought me from my bed,
And the cry of his hounds which he ofttimes led,
Peel's 'View Hulloo!' would awaken the dead,
Or the fox from his lair in the morning."

"_Very_ nice, indeed," said Aunt Maria, as she burst open the garret
door. "Very nice and respectful to the memory of your dear mother! I am
glad, children, that I have come to create decent order in this
establishment. I am your aunt, Maria Cameron."




CHAPTER XV.

PUNISHMENT.


There are occasions when people who are accused wrongfully of a fault
will take it patiently: there was scarcely ever known to be a time when
wrongdoers did so.

The children in the garret were having a wild time of mirth and
excitement. There was no time for any one to think, no time for any one
to do aught but enjoy. The lateness of the hour, the stealthy gathering,
the excellent supper, and, finally, the gay songs, had roused the young
spirits to the highest pitch. Polly was the life of everything; Maggie,
her devoted satellite, had a face which almost blazed with excitement.

Her small eyes twinkled like stars, her broad mouth never ceased to show
a double row of snowy teeth. She revolved round her brothers and
sisters, whispering in their ears, violently nudging them, and piling on
the agony in the shape of cups of richly creamed and sugared tea, of
thick slices of bread-and-butter and jam, and plum cake, topped with
bumpers of foaming ginger-beer.

Repletion had reached such a pass in the case of the Ricketts brother
and sister that they could scarcely move; the Jones brothers were also
becoming slightly heavy-eyed; but the Maybright children fluttered about
here and there like gay butterflies, and were on the point of getting up
a dance when Aunt Maria and the frightened Helen burst upon the scene.

It required a much less acute glance than Aunt Maria's to point out
Polly as the ringleader. She headed the group of mirth-seekers, every
lip resounded with her name, all the other pairs of young eyes turned to
her. When the garret door was flung open, and Aunt Maria in no measured
tones announced herself, the children flew like frightened chickens to
hide under Polly's wing. The Rickettses and Joneses scrambled to their
feet, and ran to find shelter as close as possible to headquarters.
Thus, when Polly at last found her voice, and turned round to speak to
Aunt Maria, she looked like the flushed and triumphant leader of a
little victorious garrison. She was quite carried away by the excitement
of the whole thing, and defiance spoke both in her eyes and manner.

"How do you do, Aunt Maria?" she said. "We did not expect you. We were
having supper, and have just finished. I would ask you to have some with
us, only I am afraid there is not a clean plate left. Is there, Maggie?"

Maggie answered with a high and nervous giggle, "Oh, lor', Miss Polly!
that there ain't; and there's nothing but broken victuals either on the
table by now. We was all hungry, you know, Miss Polly."

"So perhaps," continued Polly, "you would go downstairs again, Aunt
Maria. Helen, will you take Aunt Maria to the drawing-room? I will come
as soon as I see the supper things put away. Helen, why do you look at
me like that? What's the matter?"

"Oh, Polly!" said Helen, in her most reproachful tones.

She was turning away, but Aunt Maria caught her rather roughly by the
shoulder.

"Do _all_ this numerous party belong to the family?" she said. "I see
here present thirteen children. I never knew before that my sister had
such an enormous family."

Helen felt in far too great a state of collapse to make any reply; but
Polly's saucy, glib tones were again heard.

"These are our visitors, Aunt Maria. Allow me to introduce them. Master
and Miss Ricketts, Masters Tom, Jim, and Peter Jones. This is Maggie, my
satellite, and devoted friend, and--and----"

But Aunt Maria's patience had reached its tether. She was a stout,
heavily made woman, and when she walked into the center of Polly's
garrison she quickly dispersed it.

"March!" she said, laying her hand heavily on the girl's shoulder. "To
your room this instant. Come, I shall see you there, and lock you in.
You are a very bad, wicked, heartless girl, and I am bitterly ashamed of
you. To your room this minute. While your father is away you are under
my control, and I _insist_ on being obeyed."

"Oh, lor'!" gasped Maggie. "Run," she whispered to her brother and
sister. "Make for the door, quick. Oh, ain't it awful! Oh, poor dear
Miss Polly! Why, that dreadful old lady will almost kill her."

But no, Polly was still equal to the emergency.

"You need not hold me, Aunt Maria," she said, in a quiet voice, "I can
go without that. Good night, children. I am sorry our jolly time has had
such an unpleasant ending. Now then, I'll go with you, Aunt Maria."

"In front, then," said Aunt Maria. "No loitering behind. Straight to
your room."

Polly walked down the dusty ladder obediently enough; Aunt Maria,
scarlet in the face, stumped and waddled after her; Helen, very pale,
and feeling half terrified, brought up the rear. All went well, and the
truant exhibited no signs of rebellion until they reached the wide
landing which led in one direction to the girl's bedroom, in the other
to the staircase.

Here Polly turned at bay.

"I'm not going to my room at present," she said. "If I've been naughty,
father can punish me when he comes home. You can tell anything you like
to father when he comes back on Monday. But I'm not going to obey you.
You have no authority over me, and I'm not responsible to you. Father
can punish me as much as he likes when you have told him. I'm going
downstairs, now; it's too early for bed. I've not an idea of obeying
you."

"We will see to that," said Aunt Maria. "You are quite the naughtiest
child I ever came across. Now then, Miss, if you don't go patiently, and
on your own feet, you shall be conveyed to your room in my arms. I am
quite strong enough, so you can choose."

Polly's eyes flashed.

"If you put it in that way, I don't want to fuss," she said. "I'll go
there for the present, but you can't keep me there, and you needn't
try."

Aunt Maria and Polly disappeared round the corner, and poor Helen stood
leaning against the oak balustrade, silently crying. In three or four
minutes Aunt Maria returned, her face still red, and the key of the
bedroom in her pocket.

"Now, Helen, what is the matter? Crying? Well, no wonder. Of course, you
are ashamed of your sister. I never met such a naughty, impertinent
girl. Can it be possible that Helen should have such a child? She must
take entirely after her father. Now, Helen, stop crying, tears are most
irritating to me, and do no good to any one. I am glad I arrived at this
emergency. Matters have indeed come to a pretty crisis. In your father's
absence, I distinctly declare that I take the rule of my poor sister's
orphans, and I shall myself mete out the punishment for the glaring act
of rebellion that I have just witnessed. Polly remains in her room, and
has a bread and water diet until Monday. The other children have bread
and water for breakfast in the morning, and go to bed two hours before
their usual time to-morrow. The kitchen-maid I shall dismiss in the
morning, giving her a month's wages in lieu of notice. Now, Helen, come
downstairs. Oh, there is just one thing more. You must find some other
room to sleep in to-night. I forbid you to go near your sister. In fact,
I shall not give you the key. You may share my bed, if you like."

"I cannot do that, Aunt Maria," said Helen. "I respect you, and will
obey you as far as I can until father returns, and tells us what we
really ought to do. But I cannot stay away from Polly to-night for any
one. I know she has been very naughty. I am as shocked as you can be
with all that has happened, but I know too, Aunt Maria, that harsh
treatment will ruin Polly; she won't stand it, she never would, and
mother never tried it with her. She is different from the rest of us,
Aunt Maria; she is wilder, and fiercer, and freer; but mother often
said, oh, often and often, that no one might be nobler than Polly, if
only she was guided right. I know she is troublesome, I know she was
impertinent to you, and I know well she did very wrong, but she is only
fourteen, and she has high spirits. You can't bend, nor drive Polly,
Aunt Maria, but gentleness and love can always lead her. I _must_ sleep
in my own bed to-night, Aunt Maria. Oh, don't refuse me--please give me
up the key."
