distinguish him from others, and the thought that an Egyptian spy,
still less one of the infidels, should venture into their camp had
never occurred to one of that multitude. Occasionally, he sat down near
a group of the Baggara, listening to their talk. They were impatient,
too, but they were convinced that all was for the best; and that, when
it was the will of Allah, they would destroy their enemy. Still, there
were expressions of impatience that Mahmud was not allowed to advance.

"We know," one said, "that it is at Kirkeban that the last great
destruction of the infidel is to take place, and that these madmen are
coming to their fate; still, we might move down and destroy those at
Dongola and along the river, and possess ourselves of their arms and
stores. Why should we come thus far from Omdurman, if we are to go no
farther?"

"Why ask questions?" another said contemptuously. "Enough that it is
the command of the Khalifa, to whom power and knowledge has been given
by the Mahdi, until he himself returns to earth. To the Khalifa will be
revealed the day and the hour on which we are to smite the infidel. If
Mahmud and the great emirs are all content to wait, why should we be
impatient?"

Everywhere Gregory went, he heard the same feelings expressed. The men
were impatient to be up and doing, but they must wait the appointed
hour.

It was late before he ventured to approach the tents of the leaders. He
knew that it was impossible to get near Mahmud himself, for he had his
own bodyguard of picked men. The night, however, was dark and,
enveloping himself from head to foot in his black blanket, he crawled
out until well beyond the line of tents, and then very cautiously made
his way towards them again. He knew that he should see the white
figures of the Dervishes before they could make him out; and he
managed, unnoticed, to crawl up to one of the largest tents, and lie
down against it. He heard the chatter of the women in an adjoining
tent, but there was no sound in that against which he lay.

For an hour all was quiet. Then he saw two white figures coming from
Mahmud's camp, which lay some fifty yards away. To his delight, they
stopped at the entrance of the tent by which he was concealed, and one
said:

"I can well understand, Ibrahim Khalim, that your brother Mahmud is
sorely vexed that your father will not let him advance against the
Egyptians, at Merawi. I fully share his feelings; for could I not, with
my cavalry, sweep them before me into the river, even though no footmen
came with me? According to accounts they are but two or three thousand
strong, and I have as many horsemen under my command."

"That is so, Osman Azrakyet. But methinks my father is right. If we
were to march across the desert, we would lose very many men and great
numbers of animals, and we should arrive weakened and dispirited. If we
remain here, it is the Egyptians who will have to bear the hardships of
the march across the desert. Great numbers of the animals that carry
the baggage and food, without which the poor infidels are unable to
march, would die, and the weakened force would be an easy prey for us."

"That is true," the other said, "but they may come now, as they came to
Dongola, in their boats."

"They have the cataracts to ascend, and the rapid currents of the Nile
at its full to struggle against. There is a strong force at Abu Hamed,
and our Governor at Berber will move down there, with all his force,
when he hears that the Egyptians are coming up the cataracts. Should it
be the will of Allah that they should pass them, and reach Berber, we
shall know how to meet them. Mahmud has settled this evening that many
strong forts are to be built on the river bank here, and if the
infidels try to advance farther by water, they will be all sunk.

"I agree with you and Mahmud, and wish that it had been otherwise, and
that we could hurl ourselves at once upon the Egyptians and prevent
their coming farther--but that would be but a partial success. If we
wait, they will gather all their forces before they come, and we shall
destroy them at one blow. Then we shall seize all their stores and
animals, cross the desert to Dongola, march forward to Assouan, and
there wait till the Khalifa brings his own army; and then who is to
oppose us? We will conquer the land of the infidel. I am as eager for
the day of battle as you are, but it seems to me that it is best to
wait here, until the infidels come; and I feel that it is wise of the
Khalifa thus to order. Now I will to my tent."

As soon as Ibrahim Khalim had entered his tent, Gregory crawled away,
well satisfied that he had gained exactly the information he had come
to gather. He had gone but a few paces when he saw a white figure
striding along, in front of the tents. He stopped, and threw himself
down.

Unfortunately, the path taken by the sheik was directly towards him. He
heard the footsteps advancing, in hopes that the man would pass either
in front or behind him. Then he felt a sudden kick, an exclamation, and
a heavy fall. He leapt to his feet, but the Arab sheik was as quick
and, springing up, also seized him, at the same time drawing his knife
and uttering a loud shout.

Gregory grasped the Arab's wrist, and without hesitation snatched his
own knife from the sash, and drove it deep into his assailant's body.
The latter uttered another loud cry for help, and a score of men rushed
from behind the tents.

Gregory set off at the top of his speed, dashed over the brow of the
bridge, and then, without entering the camp there, he kept along close
to the crest, running at the top of his speed and wrapping his blanket
as much as possible round him. He heard an outburst of yells behind,
and felt sure that the sheik he had wounded had told those who had
rushed up which way he had fled. With loud shouts they poured over the
crest, and there were joined by others running up from the camp.

When Gregory paused for a moment, after running for three or four
hundred yards, he could hear no sound of footsteps behind him. Glancing
round, he could not see white dresses in the darkness. Turning sharply
off, he recrossed the crest of the hill and, keeping close to it,
continued his flight until well past the end of the camp.

The alarm had by this time spread everywhere, and a wild medley of
shouts rose throughout the whole area of the encampment. He turned now,
and made for the spot where he had left Zaki and the horses. In five
minutes he reached it.

"Is that you, my lord?" Zaki asked, as he came up.

"Yes, we must fly at once! I was discovered, and had to kill--or at
least badly wound--a sheik, and they are searching for me everywhere."

"I have saddled the horses, and put the water skins on them."

"That is well done, Zaki. Let us mount and be off, at once. We will
lead the horses. It is too dark to gallop among these bushes, and the
sound of the hoofs might be heard. We will go quietly, till we are well
away."

Not another word was spoken, till they had gone half a mile.

"We will mount now, Zaki. The horses can see better than we. We will go
at a walk. I dare not strike a light to look at the compass, but there
are the stars. I do not see the north star, it must be hidden by the
mist, lower down; but the others give us the direction, quite near
enough to go by.

"It is most unfortunate that the fellow who rushed against me was a
sheik. I could see that, by the outline of his robe. If it had been a
common man, there would not have been any fuss over it. As it is, they
will search for us high and low. I know he wasn't killed on the spot,
for he shouted after I had left him; and they are likely to guess, from
his account, that I had been down at one of the emirs' tents, and was
probably a spy.

"I know that I ought to have paused a moment, and given him another
stab, but I could not bring myself to do it. It is one thing to stab a
man who is trying to take one's life, but it is quite another when he
has fallen, and is helpless."

Zaki had made no reply. He could scarcely understand his master's
repugnance to making matters safe, when another blow would have done
so, but it was not for him to blame.

They travelled all night and, when the moon rose, were able to get
along somewhat faster; but its light was now feeble and uncertain. As
soon as day broke, they rode fast, and at ten o'clock had left behind
the range of hills, stretching between the wells of Abu Klea and Jebel
Sergain.

"We ought to be safe now," Gregory said, as they dismounted. "At any
rate, the horses must have a rest. We have done over forty miles."

"We are safe for the present, my lord. It all depends whether or not
they think you are a spy. If they come to that conclusion, they will
send at once to Abu Klea; and if a strong body is stationed there, they
may have sent a party on to Gakdul, or even to El Howeyat, for they
will feel sure that we shall make for one of the wells."

"How much water have you got in the bags?"

Zaki examined them.

"Enough for ourselves for five or six days; but only enough for two
drinks each, for the horses and for ourselves, for a couple of days."

"That is bad. If we had had any idea of coming away so soon, we would
have filled the large bags yesterday. I had intended to send down the
horses in the morning, therefore left them only half full, and they
must have leaked a good deal to get so low. See if one leaks more than
the other."

It was found that one held the water well, but from the other there was
a steady drip. They transferred the water from this to the sound bag.

"We must drink as little as we can, Zaki, and give the horses only a
mouthful, now and then, and let them munch the shrubs and get a little
moisture from them. Do you think there is any fear of the Dervishes
following our tracks?"

"No, my lord. In the first place, they do not know that there are two
of us, or that we are mounted. When those who camped near us notice,
when they get up this morning, that we have moved; they will only think
that we have shifted our camp, as there was no talk of horsemen being
concerned in this affair. No, I do not think they will attempt to
follow us, except along the caravan road, but I feel sure they will
pursue us on that line."

They rested for some hours, in the shade of a high rock, leaving the
horses to pick what herbage they could find. At four o'clock they
started again. They had ridden two hours, when Zaki said:

"See, my lord, there are two men on the top of Jebel Sergain!"

Gregory gazed in that direction.

"Yes, I can notice them now, but I should not have done so, if you had
not seen them."

"They are on watch, my lord."

"Well, they can hardly see us, at this distance."

"You may be sure that they see us," Zaki said; "the eyes of an Arab are
very keen, and could not fail to catch two moving objects--especially
horsemen."

"If they are looking for us, and have seen us, Zaki, they would not be
standing stationary there."

"Not if they were alone. But others may have been with them. When they
first caught sight of us, which may have been half an hour ago, the
others may have gone down to Abu Klea, while those two remained to
watch which course we took. The Arabs can signal with their lances, or
with their horses, and from there they would be able to direct any
party in pursuit of us."

"Well, we must keep on as hard as we can, till dark; after that, we can
take it quietly. You see, the difficulty with us will be water. Now
that they have once made out two horsemen riding north, they must know
that we have some special object in avoiding them; and will, no doubt,
send a party to Gakdul, if not farther."

They crossed the rough country as quickly as they could, and then again
broke into a canter. An hour later, as they crossed a slight rise, Zaki
looked back.

"There are some horsemen in pursuit, my lord. They have evidently come
from Abu Klea."

Gregory looked round.

"There are about fifteen of them," he said. "However, they are a good
three miles behind, and it will be dark in another half hour. As soon
as it is so, we will turn off to the right or left, and so throw them
off our track. Don't hurry your horse. The animals have made a very
long journey, since we started, and we shall want them badly tomorrow."

In another half hour the sun went down. Darkness comes on quickly in
the Soudan, and in another quarter of an hour they had lost sight of
their pursuers, who had gained about a mile upon them.

"Another five minutes, Zaki, to allow for their eyes being better than
ours. Which way do you think we had better turn?"

"I should say to the left, my lord. There is another caravan route from
Metemmeh to Ambukol. It cannot be more than fifteen miles to the west."

"Do you know anything about it?"

"I have never been along there. It is a shorter route than the one to
Korti, but not so much used, I believe, because the wells cannot be
relied upon."

"Well, I feel sure we shall not be able to get at the wells on the
other line, so we had better take that. As we shall be fairly safe from
pursuit, we may as well bear towards the northwest. By doing so we
shall be longer in striking the track, but the journey will be a good
bit shorter than if we were to ride due west.

"Now we can safely dismount. It is getting pitch dark, and we will lead
our horses. I can feel that mine is nearly dead beat. In a few minutes
we will halt, and give them half a gourd full of water, each. After
that, we had better go on for another six or seven miles, so as to be
well out of sight of anyone on the hills."

Ten minutes later they heard the dull sound of horses' hoofs on the
sand. They waited five minutes, until it died away in the distance, and
then continued their course. It was slow work, as they had to avoid
every bush carefully; lest, if their pursuers halted, they should hear
the crackling of a dry stick in the still air. Zaki, who could see much
better in the dark than his master, went on ahead; while Gregory led
the two horses.

A good hour passed before they stopped. They gave the horses a scanty
drink, and took a mouthful or two each; and then, throwing themselves
down, allowed the horses to crop the scanty herbage.

After four hours' halt they pursued their way on foot for three hours,
laying their course by the stars. They calculated that they must have
gone a good fifteen miles from the point where they turned off, and
feared that they might miss the caravan track, if they went on before
daybreak.



Chapter 9: Safely Back.


As soon as the sun was up they pursued their journey, Gregory's compass
being now available.

In half an hour, Zaki said, "There is a sign of the track, my lord,"
and he pointed to the skeleton of a camel.

"How many more miles do you think we have to go, Zaki?"

"We must be a good half way, my lord."

"Yes, quite that, I should think. Looking at the map, I should say that
we must be about abreast of the line of Gakdul. This route is only just
indicated, and there are no halting places marked upon it. Still, there
must be water, otherwise caravans could not use it. We have about sixty
miles farther to go, so that if the horses were fresh we might be there
this evening; but as it is, we have still two, if not three days'
journey before us.

"Well, we must hope that we shall find some water. Just let the horses
wet their mouths; we can keep on for a bit, before we have a drink.

"How much more is there left?" he asked, after the lad had given a
little water to each horse.

"Not above two gourdfuls."

"Well, we must ride as far as we can and, at any rate, must keep one
gourdful for tomorrow. If we cover twenty-five miles today--and I don't
think the horses can do more--we can manage, if they are entirely done
up, to walk the other thirty-five miles. However, as I said, there must
be wells, and even if they are dry, we may be able to scratch the sand
out and find a little water. What food have we got?"

"Only about two pounds of dates."

"That is a poor supply for two days, Zaki, but we must make the best of
them. We will only eat a few today, so as to have a fair meal in the
morning. We shall want it, if we have to walk thirty-five miles over
the sand."

"It will not be all sand," Zaki said; "there is grass for the last
fifteen miles, near the river; and there were cultivated fields about
ten miles out, before the Dervishes came."

"That is better. Now we will be moving."

The herbage the horses had cropped during the halt had served, to a
certain degree, to supply the place of water; and they proceeded at a
brisker pace than Gregory had expected.

"Keep a sharp lookout for water. Even if the wells are dry, you will
see a difference in the growth of the bushes round them; and as it is
certain that this route has not been used for some time, there may even
be grass."

They rode on at an easy canter, and avoided pressing the horses in the
slightest degree, allowing them to walk whenever they chose. The heat
was very great, and after four hours' riding Gregory called a halt.

"We must have done twenty miles," he said. "The bushes look green about
here, and the horses have got something of a feed."

"I think this must be one of the old halting places," Zaki said,
looking round as they dismounted. "See, my lord, there are some broken
gourds, and some rags scattered about."

"So there are," Gregory said. "We will take the bridles out of the
horses' mouths, so that they can chew the leaves up better; and then we
will see if we can find where the wells were."

Twenty yards farther away they found a deep hole.

"This was one of them," the lad said, "but it is quite dry. See, there
is an old bucket lying at the bottom. I will look about; there may be
some more of them."

Two others were discovered, and the sand at the bottom of one of them
looked a somewhat darker colour than the others.

"Well, we will dig here," Gregory said. "Bring down those two half
gourds; they will help us to shovel the sand aside."

The bottom of the hole was some six feet across, and they set to work
in the middle of it. By the time they had got down two feet, the sand
was soft and clammy.

"We will get to water, Zaki, if we have to stay here all day!" said
Gregory.

It was hard work, and it was not until after four hours' toil that, to
their delight, they found the sand wet under their feet. They had taken
it by turns to use the scoop, for the labour of making the hole large
enough for them both to work at once would have been excessive.

In another hour there was half an inch of water in the hole. Gregory
took a gourd, and buried it in the soft soil until the water flowed in
over the brim.

"Give me the other one down, Zaki. I will fill that, too, and then we
will both start drinking together."

Five minutes later, the two took a long draught. The scoops were then
refilled and carried to the horses, who drank with an eagerness that
showed how great was their thirst. Three times the gourds were filled,
and emptied.

"Now hand me down that water bag."

This was half filled, and then, exhausted with their work, they threw
themselves down and slept for some hours. When they awoke, the sun was
setting.

"Bring up the horses, Zaki. Let them drink as much as they like."

The gourds had each to be filled six times, before the animals were
satisfied. The riders then took another deep drink, ate a handful of
dates, and mounted.

"We are safe now, and only have to fear a band of marauding Arabs; and
it would be hard luck, were we to fall in with them. We had better ride
slowly for the first hour or so. We must not press the horses, after
they have had such a drink."

"Very well, master."

"There is no particular reason for hurry, and even if we miss the trail
we know that, by keeping straight on, we shall strike the river
somewhere near Korti or Ambukol."

For an hour they went at a walk, and then the horses broke into their
usual pace, of their own accord. It was getting dark, now, and soon
even Zaki could not make out the track.

"The horses will keep to it, my lord," he said; "their sight is a great
deal better than ours, and I dare say their smell may have something to
do with it. Besides, the track is clear of bushes, so we should know at
once, if they strayed from it."

They rode for five hours, and then felt that the horses were beginning
to fag.

"We will halt here," Gregory said. "We certainly cannot be more than
five-and-twenty miles from the river; and, if we start at dawn, shall
be there before the heat of the day begins. We can have another handful
of dates, and give the horses a handful each, and that will leave us a
few for the morning."

The horses, after being given the dates, were again turned loose; and
it was not long before they were heard pulling the leaves off bushes.

"Our case is a good deal better this evening than it was yesterday,"
Gregory said. "Then it looked as if it would be rather a close thing,
for I am sure the horses could not have gone much farther, if we had
not found the water. I wish we had a good feed to give them."

"They will do very well on the bushes, my lord. They get little else,
when they are with the Arabs; a handful of durra, occasionally, when
they are at work; but at other times they only get what they can pick
up. If their master is a good one, they may get a few dates. They will
carry us briskly enough to the river, tomorrow."

They did not talk long, and were soon sound asleep. Zaki was the first
to wake.

"Day is just breaking, master."

"You don't say so!" Gregory grumbled, sleepily. "It seems to me that we
have only just lain down."

They ate the remainder of their dates, took a drink of water, and gave
two gourdfuls to the horses; and, in a quarter of an hour, were on
their way again. They had ridden but two or three miles, when Zaki
exclaimed:

"There are some horsemen!"

"Eight of them, Zaki, and they are evidently riding to cut us off! As
far as I can see, only four of them have guns; the others have spears.

"I think we can manage them. With my breech-loader I can fire two shots
to their one, and we have pistols, as well."

The Arabs drew up ahead of them, and remained quiet there until the
others came to within fifty yards, and checked their horses. A man who
appeared to be the leader of the party shouted the usual salutation, to
which Gregory replied.

The leader said, "Where are my friends going and why do they halt?"

"We are on a mission. We wish to see if the infidels are still at
Ambukol."

"For that you will not want guns," the man said, "and we need them
badly. I beg of you to give them to us."

"They may be of use to us. We may come upon infidel scouts."

"Nevertheless, my friends, you must hand them over to us. We are, as
you see, eight, and you are only two. The law of the desert is that the
stronger take, and the weaker lose."

