I placed in you. You have shown much circumspection, and you did well
in escaping from Dunbar, as you did. The mad monk, too, seems to have
behaved well. I doubted your wisdom in taking him, but he has certainly
proved a useful fellow."

"I would petition, my lord, that you should continue him in your
service; and that, should you employ me upon another mission, you will
again allow me to take him with me. He is a shrewd fellow, as well as a
stout one, and I could wish for no better companion; though I own that,
since he put on his gown again at Roxburgh, and rode hither, his
spirits have greatly failed him."

"I will arrange that with the abbot," Hotspur said; "but tell him that,
while he is here, he must continue to wear his robe. His face is too
well known for him to pass as a man-at-arms, without being recognized
by half the garrison. The Lord Abbot would well object to one of his
monks turning into a swaggering man-at-arms, at his very door.

"At any rate, I shall tell the abbot that, if he will consent quietly
to the monk's unfrocking himself, until he can obtain for him release
from his vows; I will scud him away to one of the other castles, whence
I can fetch him, if you need him to accompany you on any errand, and
where he can form part of the regular garrison. But the knave must be
informed that it were best that he say nought about his former
profession, and that he comport himself as quietly as is in his nature.

"I will give him a small command, as soon as may be; for although a
very bad monk, he has proved himself to be a good soldier."

"I thank you greatly, my lord," Oswald said; "and will talk seriously
to the monk, who will be delighted when he hears that the abbot will
take steps to allow him to lay aside his gown."

Roger was, indeed, delighted when he heard the news; and still more so
when, three days later, Oswald informed him that Hotspur had obtained,
from the abbot, what was practically a release from his vows. The good
abbot said that he felt that harm, rather than good, would ensue from
keeping the monk a member of the monastery.

"He infects the lay brothers, with his talk," he said. "He is a good
instructor in arms, but he teaches not as one who feels that it is a
dire necessity to carry arms, but as one who delights in it. Moreover,
he causes scandals by his drinking bouts, and does not add to the
harmony of the place. At a time like this, when the Scots may, at any
moment, fall across the border, such a fellow may do good service to
his country; and it is surely better that a man should be a good
soldier, than that he should be a bad monk. Therefore I will let him
go, my lord; but keep him away from here. It would be a grave scandal,
were he to be brawling in the town where he is known. Therefore, I pray
you, take him elsewhere. I have striven long to make him a worthy
member of his order, but I feel that it is beyond me; and it would be
best, therefore, that he should go his own way. He may come to be a
worthy soldier, and so justify me in allowing him to unfrock himself.

"As he is abiding in your castle, I pray you bid him present himself
here, tomorrow. I would fain speak to him, and give him such advice,
concerning his future conduct, as may be of benefit to him."

When Roger returned from the monastery, the next day, he wore a much
more serious face than usual.

"The abbot has done me more good, by his talk this morning," he said to
Oswald, "than by all the lectures and penances he has ever imposed on
me. In truth, he is a good man, and I had half a mind to say that I
would return to the convent, and do my best to comport myself mildly
and becomingly.

"But I felt that it would not do, Oswald. The thing is too strong for
me and, however I might strive, I know that when the temptation came I
should break out again; and so, I held my peace."

"What did he say to you, Roger?"

"He said many things, but the gist of it was that there were as good
men outside the walls of a monastery as there were within it, and that
a soldier has as many opportunities--indeed many more opportunities--of
showing himself a good man as a monk has. In battle, he said, a soldier
must act as such, and fight stoutly against the enemy, and take life as
well as risk his own; but after the fight is over he should show
himself merciful, and if he cannot follow out the precept to love his
enemies, he should at least be compassionate and kind to them. But
above all, he should never oppress the helpless, should comport himself
honourably and kindly to women and children, and, if necessary, draw
sword in their defence against those who would ill use them. And,
though the spoils of war were honourable and necessary, when captured
in fair fight, yet the oppression and robbery of the poor were deadly
crimes.

"'Comport yourself always, Roger, as if, though a soldier in arms, you
were still a monk at heart. You are brave and strong, and may rise to
some honour; but, whether or no, you may bear yourself as if you were
of gentle blood, and wore knightly spurs. Not all who are so are
honourable and merciful, as they have vowed to be. Remember, I shall
hear of you from time to time, through my Lord Percy; and that it will
gladden me to have a good account of you, and to feel that I have not
done wrong in letting you go forth, from this house of rest, to take
part in the turmoil and strife of the world.'

"He said more than this, but this is the pith of it. I knelt down, and
swore that I would strive, to the utmost in my power, to do as he bade
me; and he put his hands on my head, and bade me go in peace; and I
tell you, I mean to prove to him that his words have not been in vain."

Two days later, Oswald started with Roger, and rode to Warkworth
Castle, some ten miles away; bearing an order to the governor to add
Roger to the strength of the garrison, telling him that he had shown
himself to be a brave soldier, and a skilful one, and that he could
place confidence in him, and appoint him to any sub-command that might
become vacant.

On the way, they entered a wood. Here Roger took off his monastic garb,
and clad himself in armour such as was worn by the garrison of Alnwick.
The monk's clothes were made up into a bundle, and left in the wood,
Oswald saying:

"I will carry them back with me, on my return, Roger. It may be that
they may come in useful, yet, if you and I travel together again in the
Percys' service."

A month passed, and then the Earl of March came, by sea, to Alnwick.
Douglas and the regent had marched against him with an overwhelming
force; and, as they were both personal enemies, he knew that his fate
would be sealed if he fell into their hands, and he had therefore been
driven to declare himself, openly, as a vassal of the English king.

On the day after his arrival he happened to be in Hotspur's room, when
Oswald entered.

"Ah! ah!" he said, "This is your messenger, Percy.

"You left me with scant notice, sir."

And he smiled.

"I was forced to do so, my lord earl; for, in truth, I was not sure
that you would not prevent me from following my lord's orders, to
return after seeing you."

"You were right. In the first place, I was not sure that you were a
true messenger; and in the second place, I feared that you might, on
return, fall into the hands of the Douglases; who would speedily find
means to wring from you an account of your mission. Therefore, I
thought that it were best that you should tarry a while with me, at
Dunbar.

"The young fellow has a good head, Lord Percy, and is as hard to hold
as a wildcat. I put the matter of watching him into the hands of two or
three of my men, whose wits I have tried more than once, and know them
to be among the most trustworthy of my followers. This lad, however,
outwitted them. How, they have never been able to explain; but my
fellows were found, trussed up like fowls for roasting, in an alley
into which they had been thrown; having, as they declared, been knocked
down by a giant fellow, who sprung from they knew not where, just as
they were about to lay hands upon your messenger. After they had
vanished, none had seen him pass the walls, and we judged that he must
have started in a craft that sailed up the Forth. Fearing that, if they
landed, he might speedily fall into the hands of Douglas, I sent a
vessel in chase; but they missed him, and indeed, from that time to
this I knew not, save by your letter to me, whether he had reached here
safely."

After a short stay, the Earl of March was about to return to Dunbar;
when he heard that the king, himself, was coming north with an army for
the invasion of Scotland, and would then confer with him, and consider
the terms on which he proposed to transfer his allegiance to him. A
month later the king arrived at Alnwick, and there George Dunbar, Earl
of March, entered into an agreement with him; in which he renounced all
fealty to the King of Scotland, in consideration for which he was
granted an estate in Lincolnshire, and other revenues. It was also
agreed that the subjects of the King of England should support the
earl, in time of necessity; and should be supported by him, and
received into his fortresses.

He was not, now, in a position to render any very efficient aid to the
king; for Robert Maitland, his nephew, to whom he had committed the
castle of Dunbar, had been summoned by Douglas, who had marched there
with a strong force, by order of the king, and had surrendered the
stronghold to him. However, he brought Dunbar's wife and family, and a
considerable force of his retainers, safely across the border.

He and Percy, together, then made a raid into the Douglas territory;
and penetrated as far as Haddington, and collected much spoil from the
country round. Douglas, however, came suddenly upon them in great
force, and they were obliged to retreat hastily across the frontier
again, abandoning their baggage and booty.

The king's invasion was no more satisfactory. The Earl of March was
unable to place Dunbar in his hands; and, as the Scots declined battle
in the open, he laid siege to Edinburgh, but without success. Dunbar
being closed to him, he was unable to obtain provisions, and was forced
to fall back to England, having accomplished nothing.

During his invasion, he had shown much more leniency than had been the
custom with his predecessors. He had taken what was necessary to
support the army, but had abstained from wasting the country,
destroying villages and towns, and slaughtering the country people;
and, so far from embittering the animosity between the two nations, he
had produced a better state of feeling; and a truce was, in
consequence, concluded for a year, at Kelso, by special commissioners
from both kings, on the 21st of December, 1400.



Chapter 8: Ludlow Castle.


Oswald Forster had not been present when, in June, 1400, the king
arrived at Alnwick. A few days after the coming of the Earl of March,
Hotspur received a letter from Sir Edmund Mortimer, the brother of his
wife; asking him to send a body of men-at-arms, under an experienced
captain who could aid him to drill newly-raised levies; for that one
Owen Glendower had taken up arms against the Lord Grey de Ruthyn, and
that turbulent men were flocking to his standard, and it was feared
that serious trouble might ensue. Percy was in a position to send but
few men, for with war with the Scotch imminent, he could not weaken
himself by sending off a large force. However, he sent for Alwyn
Forster.

"I need twenty picked men, for the service of Sir Edmund Mortimer,
Alwyn. I would send more, were it not for the position of affairs here.
What say you to taking the command of them?"

"I would gladly do so, my lord, if it be that there is a chance of
something more lively than drilling hinds, and turning them into
men-at-arms, which has been my business for years now, without a chance
of striking a blow in earnest."

"I think that there will be a certainty of fighting, Alwyn. The
Welshmen are growing troublesome again, and Sir Edmund thinks that
there may be tough work, on the Welsh marches, and has written to me
for aid.

"With the king coming hither, there is a chance that the Earl of March,
and myself, will open the war by harrying the Douglas's lands. I can
spare no great force, but even twenty tried men-at-arms would, no
doubt, be welcome. As the king is going to march into Scotland, there
is no fear that there will be any serious invasion by the Scots, and
therefore you can be spared for a while. I think not that any of my
knights would care to go in command of so small an array, but I thought
that you might like to take it."

"I shall be right glad to do so, my lord."

"I shall send your nephew with you. He is a shrewd and gallant young
fellow, and I know he would far rather be taking part in active
service, against the Welsh, than spending his time in idleness, here.
He has been too long used to a life on horseback to rest contented to
be cooped up in a castle. Besides, there will be a good opportunity of
distinguishing himself, and of learning something of a warfare even
wilder, and more savage, than that in these northern marches."

"I should like much to have him with me, my lord. Methinks that he has
the making of a right good knight; and, young as he is, I am sure that
his head is better than mine, and I should not be too proud to take
counsel of him, if needs be."

"That is settled then, Alwyn. Choose your men, and set off tomorrow
morning. Ralph Peyton, your lieutenant, shall take the command of the
garrison until you return."

Oswald was delighted when his uncle told him of the mission with which
he was charged, and that he himself was to accompany him.

"You are to have the choice of the men-at-arms, Uncle?"

"Yes, Oswald. I know what you are going to say. You would like to have
that mad monk of yours, as one of them."

"That should I, Uncle. You have no stouter man-at-arms in all your
band, and he has proved that he can be discreet when he chooses, and
did me good service in my last expedition."

"Very well, lad, we will take him. I will send one of the men over, at
once, for him to join us on the road tomorrow. I shall choose young and
active fellows, of whom we have plenty. I have never fought against the
Welsh; but they are light footed, and agile, and their country is full
of hills and swamps. The older men would do as good service here, were
the castle besieged in our absence; of which, however, there is but
slight chance; but for work against the Welsh, they would be of little
use."

Hotspur himself spoke to Oswald, that evening.

"Here is a missive to give to Sir Edmund Mortimer. I have commended you
to him, telling him that, though young, there is not one of my squires
in whom I could more implicitly trust; and that you had carried out a
delicate mission for me, with rare discretion and courage. Your uncle,
as an old retainer, and a good fighter, and the captain of my garrison,
goes in command of the men-at-arms, and in regular fighting one could
need no better officer; but in such warfare as that against the Welsh
is like to be, yours will be the better head to plan, and as my squire
you will represent me. I have specially commended you to him, as one
always to be depended upon."

"I am greatly beholden to your lordship," Oswald said, "and will try to
justify the commendations that you have given me."

At daybreak on the following morning, the little party rode out from
the castle. Oswald with his uncle rode in front; the former in the
highest spirits, while the sturdy old soldier was himself scarce less
pleased, at this change from the monotony of life in garrison.

"Years seem to have fallen off my shoulders, lad," he said, "and I feel
as young as I did when I fought at Otterburn."

"That was a bad business, Uncle; and I trust that no such misfortune as
that will befall us, this time."

"I hope not, indeed, Oswald. It was a sore fight, and we are scarce
likely to have a pitched battle with these Welsh carls. They fight not
much in our fashion, as I have heard; but dash down from their hills,
and carry fire and sword through a district, and are off again before a
force can be gathered to strike a blow. Then there are marches to and
fro among their hills, but it is like chasing a will-o'-the-wisp; and
like enough, just when you think you have got them cooped up, and
prepare to strike a heavy blow, they are a hundred miles away,
plundering and ravaging on our side of the frontier. They are half-wild
men, short in stature, and no match for us when it comes to
hand-to-hand fighting; but broad in the shoulder, tireless, and active
as our shaggy ponies, and well-nigh as untamable. 'Tis fighting in
which there is little glory, and many hard knocks to be obtained; but
it is a good school for war. It teaches a man to be ever watchful and
on his guard, prepared to meet sudden attacks, patient under
difficulties; and, what is harder, to be able to go without eating or
drinking for a long time, for they say that you might as well expect to
find corn and ale on the crest of the Grampians, as you would on the
Welsh hills."

"The prospect doesn't look very pleasant, Uncle," Oswald laughed.
"However, their hills can scarcely be more barren than ours, nor can
they be quicker on the stroke than the border raiders; and for such
work, we of the northern marches have proved far more useful than the
beefy men of the south."

"No doubt, no doubt; and maybe that, for that reason, Sir Edmund prayed
Hotspur to send a detachment to his aid; for he would know that we are
accustomed to a country as rough, and to a foe as active as he has now
to meet.

"I wonder what has stirred up the Welsh now, knowing as they do that,
although they may gain successes at first, it always ends in the
harrying of their lands, and the burning of their castles and villages.
They have been quiet for some years. But they are always like a swarm
of bees. They will work, quietly enough, till they take offence at
something; then they will pour out in a fury, attacking all they come
across, and caring nothing about death, so that they can but prick an
enemy with their stings. Maybe it is the report that the king is
engaging in another Scotch war, and they think that it is a good time
to gather spoil from their neighbours. They used to be mightily given
to warring among themselves, but of late I have heard but little of
this.

"It is a hundred years, now, since they were really troublesome, and
rose under Morgan ap Madoc; and Edward the Second had himself to reduce
them to submission, and build strong castles at Conway, Beaumaris, and
other places. There have been one or two partial risings, since then,
but nothing of much consequence. It may well be that the present
generation, who have not themselves felt the power of English arms, may
have decided to make another stroke for independence; and if so, it
will need more than Mortimer's force, or that of the other border
barons, to bring them to reason; and as for our little detachment, it
will be but a drop in the ocean. However, it may be that this is a mere
quarrel, between Mortimer and some of his neighbours.

"I have heard somewhat of the Welshman Owen Glendower, who lives in
those parts. He has a grievance against Lord Grey of Ruthyn; who, as he
says, unjustly seized a small estate of his. I know that he petitioned
Parliament for redress, but that his petition was lately refused."

"'Tis strange that such a man should have known enough of English law
to have made a petition to our parliament."

"Yes; but he is no common man. He went to England and studied at our
universities, and even lived in the inns of court, and learned the laws
of this country. Then, strangely enough, he became an esquire in the
household of King Richard, and did good service to him; and when the
court was broken up, on Richard being dethroned, he went away to his
estate in Wales. Since then I have not heard of him, save as to this
dispute with Lord Grey and his petition to Parliament thereon; but men
who were at Richard's court have told me that he was a courteous
gentleman, of excellent parts and, it was said, of much learning."

"Such a man might be a formidable enemy," Oswald said; "and if he has
been robbed by Lord Grey, he might well head an insurrection, to
recover his estates from that noble."

In the course of their ride they were joined by Roger, who warmly
thanked Alwyn for having selected him as one of his band. The other
soldiers received him heartily, for the fighting monk had been a
familiar personage at Alnwick, and his mighty strength and jovial
disposition rendered him very popular among the soldiers of the
garrison. There had been general satisfaction among them, when it was
known that he had laid aside his monk's gown, and had become one of the
Percys' men-at-arms; and there had been many expressions of regret that
he had been sent off, instead of forming one of the garrison of
Alnwick. Two or three of them addressed him, as usual, as monk, but he
said:

"Look here, comrades, I have been a monk, and a bad one, and the less
said about it the better. I am no longer a monk, but a man-at-arms; and
as I am not proud of my doings as a monk, I have given up the title, as
I have given up the garb. Therefore I give fair notice that whosoever,
in future, shall address me as monk, will feel the weight of my arm. My
name is Roger, and as Roger let me be called, henceforth."

So saying, he fell into his place in the line, when the cavalcade
continued their way.

The journey was a long one. Oswald had been well supplied with funds,
and seldom found difficulty in obtaining lodgings for the party. The
sight of an esquire, with a small troop of men-at-arms wearing the
Percy cognizance, excited no curiosity as they rode south; but when
they turned westward it was otherwise, and at their halting places
Oswald and his uncle, who dined apart from the others, were always
questioned as to their destination.

But when it was known that they were travelling to the castle of
Mortimer, whose sister was the wife of their lord, none were surprised;
for rumours were already current of troubles on the Welsh border; and
when they entered Shropshire they heard that Owen Glendower, with a
considerable force, had fallen suddenly upon the retainers of Lord Grey
de Ruthyn, had killed many, and had reoccupied the estates of which he
had been deprived by that nobleman.

On the fifteenth day after leaving Alnwick they arrived at Ludlow
Castle, of which Mortimer was the lord. Oswald was at once conducted to
the hall where the knight was sitting.

"I am bearer of a message from Sir Henry Percy," he said; "he has sent
hither a party of twenty men-at-arms, under the command of the captain
of his garrison, at Alnwick."

"I had hoped for more," the knight said, taking the missive and opening
it; "but I can understand that, now the king is marching against
Scotland, Percy cannot spare troops to despatch so long a distance. I
trust that he and my sister, his wife, and the earl are in good
health?"

"I left them so, sir."

The knight read Hotspur's letter.

"He speaks in terms of high commendation of you, young sir," he said,
as he laid the letter down on the table. "Such commendation is rarely
bestowed on one so young. I marvelled somewhat, when you entered, that
Sir Henry Percy should have sent so young a squire; but from what he
says, I doubt not that his choice is a good one; and indeed, it is
plain that your muscles have had rare exercise, and that you can stand
fatigue and hardship better than many older men. It is like that you
will have your share, for the whole border seems to be unsettled. You
have heard that this Glendower has boldly attacked, and driven out,
Lord Grey's retainers from the estates he had taken.

"As to the rights of that matter, I have nought to say. Lord Grey
manages the affairs with the Welsh in his own county of Denbighshire,
and along the north; and I keep their eastern border, and I meddle not
with his affairs, nor he with mine. I know that this Glendower is a
supporter of King Richard, of whom there are many tales current; some
saying that he escaped from Pomfret, and is still alive, though I doubt
not that the report that he died there is true. We know that there is,
in Scotland, a man whom it pleases Albany to put forward as Richard;
but this, methinks, is but a device to trouble our king. Whether this
Glendower believes in this man, or not, I know not; but certain it is
that he would embrace any opportunity to prove his hostility to Henry,
whom he professes to regard as a usurper. Whether it is on account of
