seeing Reuben kneeling on the floor. Then, seeing what he was
doing, she said:

"Oh, you are the carpenter, I suppose?"

"Yes, miss."

"I wish you would screw on some pegs I brought with me, to hang
things upon. Everything does get thrown about so, when the ship's
rolling. They are in that trunk, if you will not mind pulling it
out."

Reuben pulled out the trunk, which the girl opened and, after some
search, produced half-a-dozen iron clothes pegs. She showed him
where she wished them screwed on, and stood looking on while he
carried out her instructions.

"Are you the ship's carpenter?"

"Yes, miss."

"You seem very young for a carpenter, don't you?"

"I am young," Reuben replied, smiling, "and this is my first
voyage. Fortunately for me, the hand who was engaged hurt himself,
just as the vessel was sailing, so I obtained the berth. So far it
does not appear that it is a difficult one."

The girl looked at him a little curiously. His manner of talk and
conversation differed, so much, from the sailors in general.

"Are you really a carpenter?" she asked. "You don't look like a
carpenter."

"Yes, I am really a carpenter," Reuben answered; "at least, I am a
mill wright by trade. We are a sort of half and half between
carpenter and smith.

"Is there anything else?" he asked, as he finished screwing the
last screw.

"No, nothing else, thank you," the girl answered. "That will do
very nicely, and I am much obliged to you."

After finishing his work in the cabins, Reuben went forward.

"Captain," the young lady said, as she went upon deck, "I have been
talking to that young carpenter of yours. I am quite interested in
him. Is he really a carpenter? He does not talk a bit like one."

"I believe so, Miss Hudson," the captain replied. "At least, he
produced an excellent testimonial from his last employer, when I
engaged him. Of course, it might not have been genuine. If there
had been time, I should have made more inquiries; but he was well
spoken, and had an earnest look about him. But, now you mention it,
I don't know that it is very wise letting him go into all the
cabins, when I know so little about him."

"Oh, I never thought of that!" the girl exclaimed. "I am sure he
looks honest. It was only because he spoke so well that I mentioned
it."

"He seems to be a sharp young fellow," the captain remarked, "and I
see that he has taken to going aloft with the rest of the crew
already. He is an emigrant rather than a sailor, for he has only
shipped for a passage. I don't know whether he is going to join a
man, out there; but if not, he is certainly young to go out on his
own account. I do not think he's more than eighteen. He looks so
young, he cannot have served all his time at his trade."

"I really feel quite interested in him, Captain Wilson," the girl
said, turning to a gentleman standing by, who had been listening to
the conversation. "I wish, if you get an opportunity, you would get
into conversation with this carpenter of ours, and find out
something about him."

"I will, if you like, Miss Hudson; but I don't suppose there's much
to find out, and what there is, he's not likely to tell me. From
what you say, I should guess that he had had a bad master, and had
run away."

"But the captain said he had good testimonials," Miss Hudson
persisted.

"As to testimonials," the gentleman said, "anyone can write a
testimonial."

"How suspicious you are, Captain Wilson!" the girl laughed. "That's
the worst of being a police officer, and having to do with
criminals. You think whoever you come across is a rogue, until you
find out he is an honest man. Now, I think everyone is honest, till
I find him out to be a rogue."

"My way is the safest," the officer laughed. "At any rate, on board
this ship there are five rogues to each honest man."

"Ah, but that's not a fair average," the girl objected. "Of course,
in the colony one has to be careful, considering that half the
shepherds and stockmen are convicts, and I must own that the
natives are nearly all thieves; but how could it be otherwise, when
England sends all its rogues out to us? You see, when free labour
gets more abundant, and we can do without convicts, the colonists
will protest against it."

"Very likely they will," the officer agreed; "but what is England
to do, if she has nowhere to send her rogues?"

"That is her business," Miss Hudson said carelessly. "There is no
reason why they should be shoved on to us. In the old time, when
there were no colonies, England managed somehow, and I suppose she
could do so again."

"She managed in a very short way," Captain Wilson said. "She hung
them as fast as she caught them. It did not matter much what the
offence was, whether stealing a loaf or killing a man; but she
could hardly go back to that, now."

"No, she could not," Miss Hudson agreed; "but I have no doubt she
can find something useful for them to do, when she has to keep them
at home.

"Don't you think so, captain?"

"I daresay she could," the captain answered. "Certainly, if I were
a colonist living in a lonely part of the country, I should object
to transportation for, what with the natives and bush rangers and
bad characters generally, no one can say their life is safe."

"Oh, it's not so bad as that, captain!" Miss Hudson said
indignantly. "You are giving the place a bad character."

"I think Captain Wilson will agree it's a true one," the captain
said, smiling.

"Eh, Captain Wilson?"

"I am afraid so," the latter replied. "I know they keep me pretty
busy. However, after a year's holiday, I must not grumble if I find
plenty to do when I get there."

The voyage down to the Cape was wholly uneventful. The Paramatta
was most fortunate in her weather and, beyond trimming the sails,
the crew had a very easy time of it. Captain Wilson had, as he
promised Miss Hudson, taken the opportunity, when Reuben was
sitting idly on deck, of having a chat with him; but he did not
learn much in the course of the conversation.

"Your young carpenter puzzles me, Miss Hudson," he said to her at
dinner. "He is certainly an altogether exceptionally well-spoken
young fellow, for his condition of life; but I can't quite make him
out. I think that he has worked as a mill wright. He spoke openly
and without hesitation as to his work. But how it is he has thrown
it up and emigrated, so young, I can't make out. Of course he
cannot have served his time and yet, somehow, I don't think that he
has run away, from the manner in which he spoke of his employer.

"He has no friends whatever in the colony, as far as I could learn.
I should say he has certainly been fairly educated, and yet he
seems, from his own account, to have worked three or four years at
his trade.

"I certainly like the lad, though I own that, so far, I cannot
altogether make him out. Perhaps I shall learn somewhat more about
him, before we get to the end of the voyage, and in that case I
will tell you all I know."

Miss Hudson was the daughter of a wealthy flock owner--or, as he
was called, squatter--in New South Wales. Her father and mother
were on board the ship with her. This was her fifth voyage. She had
gone out as a baby with her parents; and had returned to England,
at the age of ten, to be educated. When eighteen, she had joined
her mother and father in Australia and, two years later, had come
with them to Europe, and had spent some months travelling on the
Continent. They were now on their way back to the colony.

The only other single lady among the passengers of the Paramatta
was going out, under the charge of the captain, to fill a place as
governess in a family in Sydney. Miss Furley was somewhat quiet,
but a friendship had naturally sprang up between her and Miss
Hudson, as the only two young women on board the ship; and the life
and high spirits of the young colonist, and the musical
acquirements of Miss Furley, helped to make the voyage pass
pleasantly for the passengers in the Paramatta.

Captain Wilson had a good tenor voice, and sang well; and one of
the other passengers was able to furnish a bass. Almost every
evening, as the ship was running down the tropics before a gentle
favouring breeze, the sound of solo and glee singing rose from the
little party gathered on the poop; and even the convicts, on deck
forward, ceased their talk and listened to the strains.

Although the passage had been a pleasant one, there was a general
feeling of satisfaction when the ship dropped her anchor in Table
Bay. Most of the passengers went on shore at once, to take up their
quarters at the hotel till she sailed again. The captain said that
it would take at least a couple of days to fill up the water tanks,
and take in a supply of fresh provisions.

On the afternoon of the second day, Reuben asked permission of the
first mate to go ashore for a few hours.

"Certainly, Whitney," the officer said. "You have proved a very
useful hand on the way out, which is more than most do who work
their passage. Nine out of ten of them are not worth their salt, to
say nothing of the rest of their rations. You can stay on shore
tonight, if you like; but you must come off early in the morning.
We hope to get away in good time."

On landing, Reuben was much struck with the variety of the scene.
In the streets of Cape Town were men of many types. Here was the
English merchant and man of business, looking and dressing just as
he would at home. Names over the shop doors were for the most part
Dutch, as was the appearance of the majority of the white men in
the streets. Dutch farmers in broad hats and homespun garments,
mounted on rough ponies, clattered along through the streets. The
manual work was for the most part done by swarthy natives, while
among the crowd were numbers of Malays, with dark olive skins,
small eyes, and jet-black hair, their women being arrayed in every
shade of gaudy colour.

For some time Reuben wandered about the streets, greatly amused at
all he saw. Towards evening he turned his face towards the sea, as
he had no wish to avail himself of the permission given him to sleep
on shore. Presently he encountered Miss Hudson and Miss Furley,
walking the other way. The former nodded brightly, for she had
several times spoken to Reuben, since their first acquaintanceship.

Reuben touched his hat, and proceeded on his way. He had gone but a
few yards when he heard a loud cry, and everyone darted suddenly
into shops or round corners.

Looking round in surprise, Reuben saw what had caused the movement.
A Malay, with his long hair streaming down his shoulders, was
rushing down the street, giving vent to terrible yells; in his hand
he held a crease, with which, just as Reuben looked round, he cut
down a native who had tried, too late, to make his escape.

The two English girls, confused and alarmed at the sudden outburst;
and unable, until too late, to comprehend the cause of it, stood
alone in the middle of the street and, too terrified now to move,
clung to each other, regardless of the shouts to fly raised by
people at the windows and doors.

[Illustration: The Ladies Saved from the Malay's Crease.]

The Malay, with a howl of exultation, made at them with uplifted
crease. Reuben sprang forward, passed the terrified women when the
Malay was within four paces of them, and threw himself with all his
force upon him. The Malay, whose eyes were fixed upon the ladies,
was taken by surprise by the assault; and his crease had not time
to fall when Reuben sprang upon him.

The shock threw both to the ground; Reuben, as he fell, throwing
both arms round his adversary. The Malay struggled furiously, and
the combatants rolled over and over on the ground. Strong as Reuben
was, the frenzy of the Malay gave him greater power; and the lad
felt he could not long retain his grip of the arm with which the
Malay strove to use his crease.

Help, however, was not long in coming. A native policeman ran up at
full speed; and brought his heavy club, with his full force, down
on the head of the Malay. The latter's limbs at once relaxed, and
Reuben sprang to his feet; breathless, but not seriously harmed,
although the blood was freely flowing from some slight wounds he
had received from the Malay's sharp-edged weapon.



Chapter 7: Gratitude.


Reuben looked round, upon gaining his feet. He saw Miss Hudson
standing by the side of her companion; who had fallen, fainting, to
the ground. Mr. Hudson and Captain Wilson, running at their full
speed, were within a few paces of the girls. They had entered a
shop to make a purchase, while the ladies strolled on; and although
they had rushed out on hearing the alarm, they were too far off to
render assistance and, impotent to help, had seen with horror the
terrible death which threatened the ladies.

Frances Hudson had not uttered a word, from the moment when the
Malay rushed down upon them; but as her father came up she turned
round, and burst into tears as he clasped her in his arms.

As soon as it was seen that the Malay was no longer dangerous, the
people poured out again from the houses and shops. It was no very
unusual thing, in Cape Town, for the Malays to run amuck; and many
of those in the streets hurried off, in the direction from which
the man had come, to inquire how many victims had fallen to his
deadly crease, and to see whether any friends were among them. On
the Malay himself no one spared a moment's attention. A second
tremendous blow, with the policeman's club, had dashed out his
brains; for Malays running amuck were always killed upon the spot,
partly in order to save further trouble with them, partly to strike
terror into others.

Many of the bystanders gathered round Reuben, seized him by the
hand, patting him on the shoulder, and praising him for the courage
with which he had faced the maddened savage. A minute later, Mr.
Hudson forced his way through the crowd. Miss Furley had already
been raised, and carried into a shop.

"Go in with her, my dear," Mr. Hudson said to his daughter. "I will
bring him to you directly.

"My brave fellow!" he exclaimed, as he made his way to Reuben and
grasped his hand, "how can I thank you for saving my child's life?
It seemed to us that she was lost, and that nothing could save her;
when we saw you dash past her, and throw yourself unarmed upon the
madman. It was a noble deed, indeed.

"You are not badly hurt, I hope," he added, as he saw the blood
streaming down Reuben's face and arm.

"Nothing to speak of, sir," Reuben replied. "At least, I think not;
but I feel rather queer from this loss of blood. I had better get
myself bandaged up."

And indeed, Reuben was turning very pale, partly from the
relaxation of the tension of the struggle; partly, as he said, from
loss of blood.

"Stand back!" Mr. Hudson cried, "don't press upon him. The lad is
nearly fainting. One of you help me get him into a shop. Where is
the nearest surgeon to be found?"

It was as much as Reuben could do to walk across the street, aided
by his two supporters. A strong glass of Cape smoke (as the native
spirit is called) and water revived him somewhat. It was some
minutes before a surgeon arrived; for five persons had been
terribly wounded, and two killed by the Malay on his course, and
the surgeons near were busily employed.

"Not very serious," the surgeon said, as soon as he examined
Reuben's wounds. "Very different affairs from those I have just
come from."

"I had hold of his hand," Reuben said, "so that he couldn't strike.
They are only cuts he made in trying to get his arm free."

"That on your arm will not trouble you, though it has bled pretty
freely. The one down your face is, fortunately, of no great
consequence; except that it has cut down to the bone on the brow
and cheek. If it had been an inch further back, it would have
severed the temporal artery. You have had a narrow escape of it. As
it is, you will get off with a scar, which may last for some time;
but as it is an honourable one, perhaps you won't so much care.
However, I will bring it together as well as I can, and stitch it
up, and it may not show much."

The wound was sewn up and then bandaged, as was that on the arm.
The other and slighter wounds were simply drawn together by slips
of plaster. When all was done, Reuben said to Mr. Hudson:

"I shall do very well now, sir. I am sure you must wish to go to
Miss Hudson. I will sit here a bit longer, and then go on board the
ship."

"You will do nothing of the kind," Mr. Hudson said. "I have just
sent for a vehicle, and you will come to the hotel and get into bed
at once. You are not fit to stand now, but I hope a good night's
rest will do you good."

Reuben would have protested, but at this moment a vehicle arrived
at the door, and with it Captain Wilson entered.

"I have just taken your daughter and Miss Furley to the hotel,
Hudson," he said. "They are both greatly shaken, and no wonder. So
I thought it better to see them back, before coming in to shake
hands with our gallant young friend here."

"He has lost a good deal of blood, Wilson; and I am just taking him
off, to get him to bed in the hotel.

"So we won't do any thanking till the morning," Mr. Hudson said,
seeing that Reuben's lip quivered, and he was incapable of bearing
any further excitement. "Do you take one of his arms and I will
take the other, and get him into that trap."

A quarter of an hour later, Reuben was in bed at the hotel. Mr.
Hudson brought him up a basin of clear soup. Having drunk this, he
turned over and was, in a very few minutes, asleep. The captain and
most of the other passengers were at the same hotel, and there was
great excitement when the news arrived of the terrible danger the
two girls had run. Mrs. Hudson had, from her early life, been
accustomed to emergencies; and the instant the girls arrived she
took them up to the room they shared between them, and insisted
upon their going at once to bed, after partaking of a cup of tea.

"What am I to do for this young fellow, Wilson?" Mr. Hudson asked
as, having seen his patient comfortably in bed, he returned
downstairs, and took a seat in the verandah by his fellow
passenger. "I owe Frances' life to him, and there is nothing I
wouldn't do for him. The question is, what? One does not like to
offer money to a man, for such a service as this."

