
This last remark was caused by the fact that Telson was taking off his
coat.  King, utterly taken aback by these ominous preparations,
protested his sorrow, apologised, and generally humiliated himself
before the offended schoolhouse junior.

But Telson had been looking out for a cause of quarrel, and now one had
come, he was just in the humour for going through with the business.
"Do you funk it?" he asked.

"Oh, no; not that, old man," said King, still friendly, and very slowly
unbuttoning his jacket; "but I'll apologise, Telson, you know."

"Don't want any apologising; I want to fight," said Telson.  "I'll take
young Bosher too."

"Oh!" said Bosher, rather alarmed, "I don't want to fight."

"I knew you were a beastly funk!" said Telson, scornfully.

"No, I'm not," said Bosher, meekly.

"Get out of the way!" cried the majestic Telson, brushing past him
towards King, who now stood with his coat off and a very apologetic
face, ready for the young bantam's disposal.

Telson and King fought there and then.  It was not a very sanguinary
contest, nor was it particularly scientific.  It did Telson good, and it
did not do King much harm.  The only awkward thing about it was that
neither side knew exactly when to stop.  Telson claimed the victory
after every round, and King respectfully disputed the statement.  Telson
thereupon taunted his adversary with "funking it," and went at him
again, very showy in action, but decidedly feeble in execution.  King,
by keeping one arm over his face and working the other gently up and
down in front of his body, was able to ward off most of the blows aimed,
and neither aspired nor aimed to hit out himself.

The "fight" might have lasted a week had not Game, coming up that way
from the boats, caught sight of it.  As it was neither an exciting
combat nor a profitable one, the Parrett's monitor considered it a good
case for interfering, as well as for calling in the authority of the
popular captain.

"King and Telson," he said, stepping between the combatants, "stop it,
and come to Bloomfield's study after chapel.  You know fighting in the
`Big' is against rules."

"What are we to go to Bloomfield for?" demanded Telson, whose temper was
still disturbed.

"For breaking rules," said Game, as he walked on.

"Shall you go?" said Telson to King as the two slowly put on their
coats.

"Yes, I suppose so, or he'll give us a licking."

"I shan't go; he's not the captain," said Telson.

"I say, you'll catch it if you don't," said King, with apprehension in
his looks.  "They're always down on you if you don't go to the captain
when you're told."

"I tell you he's not the captain," replied Telson, testily, "and I
shan't go.  If they want to report me they'll have to do it to Riddell."

With which virtuous decision he went his way, slightly solaced in his
mind by the fight, and still more consoled by the prospects of a row
ahead.

Telson was quite cute enough to see he had a strong position to start
with, and if only he played his cards well he might score off the enemy
with credit.

He therefore declined an invitation to Parson's to partake of shrimps
and jam at tea, and kept himself in his own house till the time
appointed for reporting himself to the captain.  Then, instead of going
to Bloomfield, he presented himself before Riddell.

"Well?" said the captain, in his usual half-apologetic tone.

"Oh!" said Telson, "I'm reported, please, Riddell."

"What for?  Who reported you?" asked Riddell.

"Game--for fighting," replied Telson.

"He hasn't told me of it.  You'd better come in the morning."

"Oh! it's all right," said Telson.  "I was fighting King in the `Big'
this afternoon."

Riddell looked perplexed.  This was the first case of a boy voluntarily
delivering himself up to justice, and he hardly knew what to do.

However, he had found out thus much by this time--that it didn't so much
matter what he did as long as he did something.

"You know it's against rules," said he, as severely as he could, "and
it's not the first time you've done it.  You must do fifty lines of
Virgil, and stop in the house on Monday and Tuesday."

"All right!  Thanks," said Telson, rapidly departing, and leaving
Riddell quite bewildered by the apparent gratitude of his fag.

Telson betook himself quietly to his study and began to write his lines.
It was evident from the restless way in which he looked up at every
footstep outside he did not expect to remain long undisturbed at this
harmless occupation.  Nor was he disappointed.

In about ten minutes King entered and said, "I say, Telson, you're in
for it!  You're to go to Bloomfield directly."

"What's he given you?"

"A licking!" said King; "and stopped my play half a week.  But I say,
you'd better go--sharp!"

"I'm not going," said Telson.

"What!" exclaimed King, in amazement.

"Cut it," said Telson; "I'm busy."

"He sent me to fetch you," said King.

"Don't I tell you I'm not coming?  I'll lick you, King, if you don't cut
it!"

King did "cut it" in a considerable state of alarm at the foolhardiness
of his youthful comrade.

But Telson knew his business.  No sooner had King gone than he took up
his Virgil and paper, and repaired once more to Riddell's study.

"Please, Riddell," said he, meekly, "do you mind me writing my lines
here?"

"Not a bit," said Riddell, whose study was always open house to his
youthful fag.

Telson said "Thank you," and immediately deposited himself at the table,
and quietly continued his work, awaiting the result of King's message.

The result was not long in coming.

"Telson!" shouted a voice down the passage in less than five minutes.

Telson went to the door and shouted back, "What's the row?"

"Where are you?" said the voice.

"Here," replied Telson, shutting the door and resuming his work.

"Who's that?" asked Riddell of his fag.

"I don't know, unless it's Game," said Telson.

"Now then, Telson," cried the voice again, "come here."

"I can't--I'm busy!" shouted Telson back from where he sat.  At the same
moment the door opened, and Game entered in a great state of wrath.

The appearance of a Parrett monitor "on duty" in the schoolhouse was
always a strange spectacle; and Game, when he discovered into whose
study he had marched, was a trifle embarrassed.

"What is it, Game?" asked Riddell, civilly.

"I want Telson," said Game, who, by the way, had scarcely spoken to the
new captain since his appointment.

"What do you want?" said Telson, boldly.

"Why didn't you come when you were sent for?" demanded Game.

"Who sent for me?"

"Bloomfield."

"I'm not Bloomfield's fag," retorted Telson.  "I'm Riddell's."

"What did I tell you this afternoon?" said Game, beginning to suspect
that he had fallen into a trap.

"Told me to go to the captain after chapel."

"And what do you mean by not going?"

"I did go--I went to Riddell."

"I told you to go to Bloomfield," said Game, growing hot.

"Bloomfield's not the captain," retorted Telson, beginning to enjoy
himself.  "Riddell's captain."

"You were fighting in the `Big,'" said Game, looking uneasily at Riddell
while he spoke.

"I know I was.  Riddell's potted me for it, haven't you, Riddell?"

"I've given Telson fifty lines, and stopped his play two days," said
Riddell, quietly.

"Yes, and I'm writing the lines now," said Telson, dipping his pen in
the ink, and scarcely smothering a laugh.

Game, now fully aware of his rebuff, was glad of an opportunity of
covering his defeat by a diversion.

"Look here," said he, walking up to Telson, "I didn't come here to be
cheeked by you, I can tell you."

"Who's cheeking you?" said Telson.  "I'm not."

"Yes, you are," said Game.  "I'm not going to be humbugged about by
you."

"I don't want to humbug you about," replied the junior, defiantly.

"I think there's a mistake, you know," said Riddell, thinking it right
to interpose.  "I've given him lines for fighting in the `Big,' and
there's really no reason for his going to Bloomfield."

"I told him to come to Bloomfield, and he ought to have come."

"I don't think you had any right to tell him to go to Bloomfield,"
replied Riddell, with a boldness which astonished himself.  "I'm
responsible for stopping fights."

"I don't want you to tell me my business," retorted Game, hotly; "who
are you?"

Game could have thrashed the captain as easily as he could Telson, and
the thought flashed through Riddell's mind as he paused to reply.  He
would much have preferred saying nothing, but somehow the present seemed
to be a sort of crisis in his life.  If he gave in now, the chance of
asserting himself in Willoughby might never return.

"I'm the captain," he replied, steadily, "and as long as I am captain
I'm responsible for the order of the school, and I prefer to do my own
work!"

There was something in his look and tone as he uttered these inoffensive
words which took Game aback and even startled Telson.  It was not at all
like what fellows had been used to from Riddell, certainly very unlike
the manner he was generally credited with.  But neither Telson nor Game
were half so amazed at this little outburst as was the speaker himself.
He was half frightened the moment he had uttered it.  Now he was in for
it with a vengeance!  It would go out to all Willoughby, he knew, that
he meant to stand by his guns.  What an awful failure, if, after all, he
should not be able to keep his word!

Game, with a forced smile which ill accorded with his inward
astonishment, left the study without another word, heedless even of the
laugh which Telson could no longer repress.

Of course many perverted stories of their adventure immediately got
abroad in Willoughby.  Telson's highly-coloured version made it appear
that a pitched battle had been fought between Game and the new captain,
resulting in the defeat of the former chiefly through Telson's
instrumentality and assistance.  As, however, this narrative did not
appear in the same dress two hours running, it was soon taken for what
it was worth, and most fellows preferred to believe the Parretts'
version of the story, which stated that Riddell had announced his
intention of keeping order in Willoughby without the help of the
monitors, and had had the cheek to tell Bloomfield to mind his own
business.

The indignation of Parrett's house on hearing such a story may be
imagined.  It was even past a joke.  Bloomfield seriously offered to
resign all pretensions to authority and let things take their course.

"It makes me seem," he said, "as if I wanted to stick myself up.  If
he's so sure of keeping order by himself, I don't see what use it is my
pretending to do it too."

"It would serve him right if you did so," said Game.  "But it would be
so awfully like giving in now, after you have once begun."

This view of the matter decided the question.  But Bloomfield all the
same was considerably impressed by what had happened.

He knew in his heart that his only title to the position he assumed was
the whim of his schoolfellows.  He was a usurper, in fact, and however
much he tried to persuade himself he was acting solely for the good of
Willoughby, he knew those motives were only half sincere.  And in spite
of all his efforts, the school was as rowdy as ever.  If he did thrash a
batch of juniors one day, or stop some disorderly Limpets of their play,
it never seemed to make much impression.  Whereas the one or two rioters
whom Riddell had ventured to tackle had somehow distinctly reformed
their habits.  How was it?

Bloomfield, as he thought the thing over, was not quite happy.  He had
been happier far last term when, under old Wyndham, he had exerted
himself loyally for the good of the school.  Was he not exerting himself
now?  Why should he be unhappy?  It was not because he felt himself
beaten--he scorned the idea--or that he felt unequal to the task before
him.  That too was preposterous.  And yet, he felt, he certainly needed
something.  If only now he were first classic as well as captain of the
clubs, what a pull he would have!

And as this thought occurred to him, he also recalled Crossfield's
famous speech at the last Parliament and the laughter which had greeted
it.  Could he translate "Balbus hopped over a wall" without the
dictionary?  Ah!  He thought sometimes he would try, just to prove how
slanderous Crossfield's insinuation had been.  The result of all these
cogitations was that Bloomfield began to discover he was not quite such
an "all-round" man as his friends had told him.  And that being so, had
not he better qualify himself like an honest man for his post?

He did not like to confide the idea to his friends for fear of their
laughter, but for a week or two at least he actually read rather hard on
the sly.  The worst of it was, that till the examinations next term
there could be nothing to show for it.  For the Sixth did not change
their places every day as the lower forms did.  There was no chance of
leaping to the top at a bound by some lucky answer, or even of advancing
a single desk.  And therefore, however hard he worked this term, he
would never rise above eighteenth classic in the eyes of the school, and
that was not--well, he would have liked to be a little higher for the
sake of Willoughby!

The outlook was not encouraging.  Even Wibberly, the toady, and Silk,
the Welcher, were better men than he was at classics.

Suppose, instead of spending his energy over classics, he were to get up
one or two rousing speeches for the Parliament, which should take the
shine out of every one else and carry the school by storm?  It was not a
bad idea.  But the chance would not come.  No one could get up a fine
speech on such a hackneyed subject as "That Rowing is a finer Sport than
Cricket," or that "The Study of Science in Public Schools should be
Abolished!"  And when he did attempt to prepare an oration on the
subject of Compulsory Football, the first friend he showed it to pointed
out so many faults in the composition of the first sentence that
prudence prompted him to put the effusion in the fire.

Meanwhile his friends and admirers kept him busy.  Their delight seemed
to be to seize on all the youngsters they could by any pretext lay hands
on and hale them to appear before him.  By this means they imagined they
were making his authority known and dealing a serious blow at the less
obtrusive captain in the schoolhouse.

Poor Bloomfield had to administer justice right and left for every
imaginable offence, and was so watched and prompted by officious
admirers that he was constantly losing his head and making himself
ridiculous.

He gave one boy a thrashing for being found with a paper dart in his
hand, because Game had reported him; and to another, who had stolen a
book, he gave only twenty lines, because he was in the second-eleven.
Cusack and Welcher, who was caught climbing the schoolhouse elms one
Monday, he sentenced to an hour's detention; and Pilbury, whom he caught
in the same act on Tuesday, he deprived of play for a week--that is, he
said he was not to leave his house for a week.  But Pilbury turned up
the very next day in the "Big," under the very nose of the Parrett
captain, who did not even observe his presence.

It was this sort of thing which, as the term dragged on, made Bloomfield
more and more uncomfortable with his position.  It was all very well for
Game, and Ashley, and Wibberly to declare that but for him Willoughby
would have gone to the dogs--it was all very well of them to make game
of and caricature Riddell and his failures.  Seeing is believing; and
Bloomfield, whose heart was honest, and whose common sense, when left to
itself, was not altogether feeble, could not help making the unpleasant
discovery that he was not doing very much after all for Willoughby.

But the boat-race was now coming on.  There, at any rate, was a sphere
in which he need fear no rival.  With Parrett's boat at the head of the
river, and he its stroke, he would at any rate have one claim on the
obedience of Willoughby which nobody could gainsay.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

TELSON AND PARSON GO TO AN EVENING PARTY.

It was the Saturday before the boat-race, and the excitement of
Willoughby was working up every hour.  Boys who were generally in the
habit of lying in bed till the chapel bell began to ring had been up at
six for a week past, to look at the practices on the river.  Parliament
had adjourned till after the event, and even the doings of the rival
captains indoors were forgotten for a while in prospect of the still
more exciting contest out of doors.

Everybody--even the Welchers, who at the last moment had given up any
attempt to form a crew, and "scratched"--found it hard to think or talk
of any other subject, and beyond the school bounds, in Shellport itself,
a rumour of the coming race had got wind and attracted many outsiders to
the river banks.

But it was not the prospect of the coming race which this Saturday
afternoon was agitating the mind of Master Henry Brown.

Brown was a Limpet, belonging to the schoolhouse, who occupied the
distinguished position of being the only day-boarder in Willoughby.  His
parents lived in Shellport, and thus had the benefit of the constant
society of their dear Harry; while the school, on the other hand, was
deprived of that advantage for a portion of every day in the term.

It was probably to make up for this deprivation that Mr and Mrs Brown
made it a practice of giving an evening party once a term, to which the
doctor and his ladies were always invited, and also any two of dear
Harry's friends he liked to name.

In this way the fond parents not only felt they were doing a polite and
neighbourly act to their son's schoolmaster and schoolfellows, but that
they were also the means of bringing together teacher and pupil in an
easy unconstrained manner which would hardly be possible within the
walls of the school itself.

It was the prospect of one of these delightful entertainments that was
exhilarating Brown this Saturday afternoon.

And it must be confessed the excitement was due to very opposite
emotions in the breast of the day-boarder.  The doctor and his ladies
were coming!  On the last two occasions they had been unfortunately
prevented, which had been a great blow to Brown's "pa and ma" but a
relief to Brown himself.  And now the prospect of meeting these awful
dignitaries face to face in his own house put him in a small panic.  But
on the other hand, he knew there would be jellies, and savoury pie, and
strawberries, and tipsy-cake, at home that night.  He had seen them
arrive from the confectioner's that morning, and, Limpet as he was,
Brown smiled inwardly as he meditated thereon.  This was a second ground
for excitement.  And a third, equal to either of the other two, was that
Parson and Telson were invited and were coming!

He had tried one or two other fellows first.  He had sounded Coates on
the subject, but he unfortunately was engaged.  He had pressed Wyndham
to come, but Wyndham was busy that evening with the library.  He had
appealed to one or two other schoolhouse Limpets, but all, on hearing
that the doctor and Co. were to be present, respectfully declined.

Finally Brown dropped upon Telson, and condescendingly proposed to him
to be present as one of his two friends.

Telson thought the matter over and fancied it promised well.  He liked
the sound of the jellies and the tipsy-cake, and just at present he knew
of no special reason for "funking" the doctor.  As for the doctor's
ladies, Telson had never seen them, so they did not weigh particularly
with him.

"Who else is going?" he asked.

"Oh, I don't know yet," said Brown, rather grandly.  "I've one or two
fellows in my mind."

"Why don't you ask young Parson?" suggested Telson, innocently.

"Parson? he's not a schoolhouse kid."

"I know he's not, but he and I are very chummy, you know.  I wouldn't
mind coming if he went."

"I'll see," said Brown, mightily, but secretly relieved to know of some
one likely to come as his second "friend."

"All right," said Telson.  "I've not promised, mind, if he can't come."

"Oh, yes, you have!" replied Brown, severely, as he left the room.

In due time he found Parson and broached the subject to him.

Parson viewed the matter in very much the same light as Telson had.  He
liked the "tuck-in" better than the company.

It never occurred to him it was odd that Brown should come all the way
from the schoolhouse to invite him, a Parrett's junior, to his feast;
nor did it occur to him either that the invitation put him under any
obligation to his would-be host.

"I tell you what I'll do," said he, in a business-like manner, much as
if Brown had asked him to clean out his study for him, "if you ask
Telson to come too, I'm game."

Brown half doubted whether these two allies had not been consulting
together on the subject, so startling was the similarity of their
conditions.

"Oh!  Telson's coming," he said, in as offhand a way as he could.

"He is!  Then I'm on, old man; rather!" exclaimed the delighted Parson.

"All right!  Six-thirty, mind, and chokers!" said Brown, not a little
relieved to have scraped up two friends for the festive occasion.  At
the appointed time--or rather before the appointed time, for they
arrived at twenty minutes past six--our two heroes, arrayed in their
Sunday jackets and white ties, presented themselves at the house of
their host.  They had "put it on" considerably in order to get ahead of
the doctor's party; for they considered that--as Parson expressed
it--"it would be a jolly lot less blushy work" to be there before the
head master arrived.  There was no doubt about their success in this
little manoeuvre, for when the servant opened the door the hall was full
of rout seats, and a man, uncommonly like the greengrocer, in a dress
coat, was busily unpacking plates out of a small hamper.

Into this scene of confusion Parson and Telson were ushered, and here
they were left standing for about five minutes, interested spectators,
till the hall was cleared and the domestic had leisure to go and tell
Master Harry of their arrival.

Master Harry was dressing, and sent down word they had better go into
the shoe-room till he came down.  Which they did, and amused themselves
during the interval with trying on Mr Brown's Wellingtons, and tying
together the laces of all Harry's boots they could discover.

In due time Harry appeared in grand array.  "How jolly early you are!"
was his hospitable greeting.  "You said six-thirty, didn't you?" said
Telson.  "Yes; it's only just that now.  Nobody will be here for a
quarter of an hour yet.  You had better come in and see ma."

The two guests obeyed cheerfully.  Ma was in the drawing-room, busily
adjusting the sashes of the three juvenile Misses Brown, with her mouth
full of pins.  So all she could do was to smile pleasantly at her two
visitors and nod her head as they each came up and held out their hands
to be shaken.

"Better sit down," suggested Brown.

Parson and Telson thereupon retreated to the sofa, on the edge of which
they sat for another five or ten minutes, looking about them
complacently, and not attempting to break the silence of the scene.

The silence, however, was soon broken by a loud double knock at the hall
door, which was the signal for Mr Brown, senior, to bolt into the room
in a guilty way with one cuff not quite buttoned, and stand on the
hearthrug with as free-and-easy an air as if he had been waiting there a
quarter of an hour at least.  Knock followed knock in quick succession,
and after the usual amount of fluttering in the hall, the greengrocer
flung open the drawing-room door and ushered in Dr and Mrs Patrick,
Miss Stringer, and half a dozen other arrivals.

Our two heroes, sitting side by side, unnoticed on the edge of the sofa,
had full opportunity to take stock of the various guests, most of whom
were strangers to them.

As every one appeared to be about the doctor's age, things promised
slowly for Parson and Telson, whose interest in Brown's party decidedly
languished when finally they found themselves swept off their perch and
helplessly wedged into a corner by an impenetrable phalanx of skirts.

But this was nothing compared with a discovery they made at the same
time that they had missed their tea!  There was a merry rattle of cups
and spoons in a room far off, through the half-open door of which they
