seemingly much nearer, the ibex was considerably more than a hundred
yards from where they were seated: for the point of the precipice upon
which it stood was quite four hundred feet above the level.

Caspar, reflecting upon this, was easily dissuaded from his design; and
the next moment was wondering why he had been so near playing the fool
as to throw away a shot--his penultimate one, too--at an animal placed
full fifty yards beyond the carry of his gun!



CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

GOATS AND SHEEP.

As the ibex kept its ground, without showing any signs of retreating, or
even moving a muscle of its body, they remained watching it.  Not,
however, in silence: for as the animal was standing as if to have its
portrait painted, Karl, in words addressed to his two companions, but
chiefly intended for the instruction of Caspar, proceeded to execute
that very task.

"The ibex," said he, "is an animal whose name has been long famous, and
about which the closet naturalists have written a great deal of
nonsense--as they have about almost every other animal on the earth.
After all that has been said about it, it is simply a goat--a wild goat,
it is true, but still only a goat--having all the habits, and very much
of the appearance characteristic of the domestic animal of this name.

"Every one knows that the common goat exists in as many varieties as the
countries it inhabits.  Indeed, there are more kinds of goats than
countries: for it is not uncommon to meet with three or four sorts
within the boundaries of a single kingdom--as in Great Britain itself.
These varieties differ almost as much from each other as the `breeds' of
dogs; and hence there has been much speculation among zoologists, as to
what species of wild goat they have all originally sprung from.

"Now, it is my opinion," continued the plant-hunter, "that the tame
goats found among different nations of the earth have not all descended
from the same stock; but are the progeny of more than one wild species--
just as the domesticated breeds of sheep have sprung from several
species of wild sheep; though many zoologists deny this very plain
fact."

"There are different species of wild goats, then?" said Caspar,
interrogatively.

"There are," replied the plant-hunter, "though they are not very
numerous--perhaps in all there may be about a dozen.  As yet there are
not so many known to zoologists--that is, not a dozen that have been
identified and described as distinct species; but no doubt when the
central countries, both of Asia and Africa--with their grand chains of
mountains--have been explored by scientific naturalists, at least that
number will be found to exist.

"The speculating systematists--who decide about genera and species, by
some slight protuberance upon a tooth--have already created a wonderful
confusion in the family of the goats.  Not contented with viewing them
all as belonging to a single genus, they have divided them into five
genera--though to most of the five they ascribe only _one species_!--
thus uselessly multiplying names, and rendering the study of the subject
more complicated and difficult.

"There can be no doubt that the goats, both wild and tame--including the
ibex, which is a true wild goat--form of themselves a separate family in
the animal kingdom, easily distinguishable from sheep, deer, antelopes,
or oxen.  The wild goats often bear a very close resemblance to certain
species of wild sheep; and the two are not to be distinguished from each
other, by the goats being covered with hair and the sheep with wool--as
is generally the case with tame breeds.  On the contrary, both sheep and
goats in a wild state have _hairy_ coats--the sheep as much as the
goats; and in many instances the hair of both is quite as short as that
of antelopes or deer.  Even where there are almost no external marks to
distinguish wild goats from certain kinds of wild sheep, there are found
_moral_ characteristics which serve as guides to the genus.  The goat is
bolder, and of a fiercer nature; and its other habits, even in the wild
state, differ essentially from those of the wild sheep.

"The ibex which we see above us," continued Karl, looking up to the
quadruped upon the cliff, "is neither more nor less than a wild goat.
It is not the only species of wild goat inhabiting the Himalayas; for
there is the `tahir,' a stronger and larger animal than it; and it is
believed that when these great mountains have been thoroughly
_ransacked_ [Karl here smiled at the very unscientific word he had made
use of], there will turn up one or two additional species.

"It is not the only species of ibex neither," continued he, "for there
is one found in the European Alps, known by the name of `steinboc;'
another, in the Pyrenees, called the `tur;' a third, in the Caucasus,
the `zac;' and one or two others in the mountains of Africa.

"With regard to the animal now before, or rather above us," continued
Karl, "it differs very little from others of the same family; and as
both its appearance and habits have been very ably described by a noted
sportsman, who was also an accomplished naturalist, I cannot do better
than quote his description: since it gives almost every detail that is
yet authentically known of the Himalayan ibex.

"`The male,' writes this gentleman author, `is about the size of the
_tahir_ [here he speaks of the other well-known species of Himalayan
wild goat, and which is itself much larger than any of the domesticated
kinds].  Except just after changing their coats, when they are of a
greyish hue, the general colour of the ibex is a dirty yellowish brown.
I have, however, killed the younger animals, both male and female, with
their coats as red as that of a deer in his red coat; but never saw an
old male of that colour, for the reason, I imagine, that he lives much
higher, and sheds his hair much later in the season.  The hair is short,
something in texture like that of the _burrell_ and other wild sheep;
and in the cold weather is mixed with a very soft downy wool, resembling
the shawl-wool of Thibet.  This and the old hair is shed in May and
June; and in districts occupied by the flocks at that season the bushes
and sharp corners of rocks are covered with their cast-off winter coats.
The striking appearance of the ibex is chiefly owing to the noble
horns: which nature has bestowed upon it.  In full-grown animals the
horns, which curve gracefully over the shoulders, are from three to four
feet in length along the curve, and about eleven inches in circumference
at the base.  Very few attain a greater length than four feet; but I
have heard of their being three inches longer.  Their beards, six or
eight inches in length, arc of shaggy black hair.  The females, light
greyish-brown in colour, are hardly a third the size of the males; and
their horns are round and tapering, from ten inches to a foot in length.
Their appearance upon the whole is clean-made, agile, and graceful.

"`In the summer they everywhere resort to the highest accessible places
where food can be found--often to a part of the country several marches
distant from their winter haunts.  This migration commences as soon as
the snow begins to disappear; and is very gradually performed--the
animals receding from hill to hill, and remaining a few days upon each.

"`At this season the males keep in large flocks, apart from the females;
and as many as a hundred may occasionally be seen together.  During the
heat of the day they rarely move about, but rest and sleep--either on
the beds of snow in the ravines, or on the rocks and shingly slopes of
the barren hill-sides, above the limits of vegetation.  Sometimes, but
very rarely, they will lie down on the grassy spots where they have been
feeding.  Towards evening they begin to move, and proceed to their
grazing-grounds--which are often miles away.  They set out walking
slowly at first; but, if they have any considerable distance before
them, soon break into a trot; and sometimes the whole flock will go as
hard as they can lay legs to the ground.  From what we could gather from
the natives, we concluded that they remain in these high regions until
the end of October; when they begin to mix with the females, and
gradually descend to their winter resorts.  The females do not wander so
much or so far--many remaining on the same ground throughout the year--
and those that do visit the distant hills are generally found lower down
than the males, seldom ascending above the limits of vegetation.  They
bring forth their young in July, having generally two at a birth;
though, like other gregarious animals, many are frequently found barren.

"`The ibex are wary animals, gifted with very sharp sight and an acute
sense of smell.  They are very easily alarmed, and so wild, that a
single shot fired at a flock is often sufficient to drive them away from
that particular range of hills they may be upon.  Even if not fired at,
the appearance of a human being near their haunt is not unfrequently
attended with the same result.  Of this we had many instances during our
rambles after them, and the very first flock of old males we found gave
us a proof.  They were at the head of the Asrung valley, and we caught
sight of them just as they were coming down the hill to feed--a noble
flock of nearly a hundred old males.  It was late in the day, and we had
a long way to return to camp.  Prudence whispered, "Let them alone till
to-morrow," but excitement carried the day, and we tried the stalk.
Having but little daylight remaining, we may have hurried, and
consequently approached them with less caution than we should have done
had we had time before us.  However it might be, we failed; for long
before we got within range, some of them discovered us, and the whole
flock decamped without giving us the chance of a shot.  Not having fired
at, or otherwise disturbed them, more than by approaching the flock, we
were in great hopes of finding them the next day; but that and several
succeeding ones were passed in a fruitless search.  They had entirely
forsaken that range of hills.

"`All readers of natural history are familiar with the wonderful
climbing and saltatory powers of the ibex; and, although they cannot (as
has been described in print) make a spring and hang on by their horns
until they gain footing, yet in reality, for such heavy-looking animals,
they get over the most inaccessible-looking places in an almost
miraculous manner.  Nothing seems to stop them, nor to impede in the
least their progress.  To see a flock, after being fired at, take a
direct line across country, which they often do, over all sorts of
seemingly impassable ground; now along the naked face of an almost
perpendicular rock, then across a formidable landslip, or an inclined
plane of loose stones or sand, which the slightest touch sets in motion
both above and below; diving into chasms to which there seems no
possible outlet, but instantly reappearing on the opposite side; never
deviating in the slightest from their course; and at the same time
getting over the ground at the rate of something like fifteen miles an
hour, is a sight not easily to be forgotten.  There are few animals, if
any, that excel the ibex in endurance and agility.'"



CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

A BATTLE OF BUCKS.

Karl had scarcely finished speaking, when, as if to illustrate still
further the habits of the ibex, a curious incident occurred to the
animal upon, which their eyes were fixed.

It ceased to be a solitary individual: for while they were gazing at it
another ibex made its appearance upon the cliff, advancing towards the
one first seen.  The new comer was also a male, as its huge
scimitar-shaped horns testified; while in size, as in other respects, it
resembled the one already on the rock as much as if they had been
brothers.  It was not likely they were so.  At all events the behaviour
of the former evinced anything but a fraternal feeling.  On the
contrary, it was advancing with a hostile intent, as its attitudes
clearly proved.  Its muzzle was turned downward and inward, until the
bearded chin almost touched its chest; while the tips of its horns,
instead of being thrown back upon its shoulders--their usual position
when the animal stands erect--were, elevated high in the air.  Moreover,
its short tail, held upright and jerking about with a quick nervous
motion, told that the animal meditated mischief.  Even at so great a
distance the spectators could perceive this: for the forms of both the
ibex were so clearly outlined against the sky, that the slightest motion
on the part of either could be perceived with perfect distinctness.

The new comer, when first observed, appeared to be approaching by
stealth--as if he intended to play the cowardly assassin, and butt the
other over the cliff!  Indeed, this was his actual design, as was
discovered in the sequel; and had the other only remained for six
seconds longer in the attitude in which he had been first seen, his
assailant would no doubt have at once succeeded in his treacherous
intent.

We are sorry to have to say that he _did_ succeed--though not without a
struggle, and the risk of being himself compelled to take that desperate
leap which he had designed for his antagonist.

It was probably the voice of Caspar that hindered the immediate
execution of this wicked intention; though, alas! it only stayed it for
a short time.  Caspar, on seeing the treacherous approach, had
involuntarily uttered a cry of warning.  Though it could not have been
understood by the imperilled ibex, it had the effect of startling him
from his dreamy attitude, and causing him to look around.  In that look
he perceived his danger, and quick as thought, took measures to avert
it.  Suddenly raising himself on his hind-legs, and using them as a
pivot, he wheeled about, and then came to the ground on all fours, face
to face with his adversary.  He showed no sign of any desire to retreat,
but seemed to accept the challenge as a matter of course.  Indeed, from
his position, it would have been impossible for him to have retreated
with any chance of safety.  The cliff upon which he had been standing,
was a sort of promontory projecting beyond the general line of the
precipice; and towards the mountain slope above his escape had been
already cut off by his challenger.  On all other sides of him was the
beetling cliff.  He had no alternative but fight, or be "knocked over."
It was less a matter of choice than necessity that determined him upon
standing his ground.

This determination he had just time to take, and just time to put
himself in an attitude of defence, when his antagonist charged towards
him.  Both animals, at the same instant, uttered a fierce, snorting
sound, and rising upon their hind-legs, stood fronting each other like a
brace of bipeds.  In this movement the spectators recognised the exact
mode of combat practised by common goats; for just in the same fashion
does the ibex exhibit his prowess.  Instead of rushing _horizontally_,
head to head, and pressing each other backwards, as rams do in their
contests, the ibex after rearing aloft, come down again, horns foremost,
using the weight of their bodies as the propelling power, each
endeavouring to crush the other between his massive crest and the earth.
Several times in succession did the two combatants repeat their
rearings aloft, and the downward strokes of their horns; but it soon
became evident, that the one who had been the assailant was also to be
the conqueror.  He had an advantage in the ground: for the platform
which his adversary occupied, and from which he could not escape, was
not wide enough to afford room for any violent movements; and the
imminent danger of getting a hoof over the cliff, evidently inspired him
with fear and constraint.  The assailant having plenty of space to move
in, was able to "back and fill" at pleasure, now receding foot by foot,
then rushing forward, rising erect, and striking down again.  Each time
he made his onslaught with renewed impetus, derived from the advantage
of the ground, as well as the knowledge that if his blow failed, he
should only have to repeat it; whereas, on the part of his opponent, the
failure of a single stroke, or even of a guard, would almost to a
certainty be the prelude to his destruction.

Whether it was that the ibex attacked was the weaker animal of the two,
or whether the disadvantage of the ground was against him, it soon
became evident that he was no match for his assailant.  From the very
first, he appeared to act only on the defensive; and in all likelihood,
had the road been open to him, he would have turned tail at once, and
taken to his heels.

But no opportunity for flight was permitted him at any moment from the
beginning of the contest; and none was likely to be given him until it
should end.  The only chance of escape that appeared, even to him, was
to make a grand leap, and clear his adversary, horns and all.

This idea seemed at length to take possession of his brain: for all on a
sudden he was keen to forsake his attitude of defence, and bound high
into the air--as if to get over his adversary's horns, and hide himself
among the safer snowdrifts of the mountains.

If such was his intent it proved a sad failure.  While soaring in the
air--all his four feet raised high off the ground--the huge horns of his
adversary were impelled with fearful force against his ribs, the stroke
tossing him like a shuttlecock clear over the edge of the cliff!

The blow had been delivered so as to project his body with a revolving
impetus into the air; and turning round and round, it fell with a heavy
concussion into the bottom of the valley; where, after rebounding full
six feet from the ground, it fell back again dead as a stone.

It was some seconds before the spectators could recover from surprise at
an incident so curious, though it was one that may often be witnessed by
those who wander among the wild crags of the Himalayas--where combats
between the males of the ibex, the tahir, the burrell or Himalayan wild
sheep, and also the rams of the gigantic _Ovis ammon_, are of common
occurrence.

These battles are often fought upon the edge of a beetling precipice--
for it is in such places that these four species of animals delight to
dwell--and not unfrequently the issue of the contest is such as that
witnessed by our adventurers--one of the combatants being "butted" or
pushed right over the cliff.

It does not follow that the animal thus put _hors de combat_ is always
killed.  On the contrary, unless the precipice be one of stupendous
height, an ibex, or tahir, or burrell, will get up again after one of
those fearful falls; and either run or limp away from the spot--perhaps
to recover, and try his luck and strength in some future encounter with
the same adversary.  One of the most remarkable instances of this kind
is related by the intelligent sportsman, Colonel Markham, and by him
vouched for as a fact that came under his own observation.  We copy his
account verbatim:--

"I witnessed one of the most extraordinary feats performed by an old
tahir, that I, or any other man, ever beheld.  I shot him when about
eighty yards overhead upon a ledge of rocks.  He fell perpendicularly
that distance, and, without touching the ground or the sides of the
precipice, rebounded, and fell again about fifteen yards further down.
I thought he was knocked to atoms, but he got up and went off; and
although we tracked him by his blood to a considerable distance, we were
after all unable to find him!"

My young readers may remember that many similar feats have been
witnessed in the Rocky Mountains of America, performed by the
"bighorn"--a wild sheep that inhabits these mountains, so closely
resembling the _Ovis ammon_ of the Himalayas, as to be regarded by some
naturalists as belonging to the same species.  The hunters of the
American wilderness positively assert that the bighorn fearlessly flings
himself from high cliffs, alighting on his horns; and, then rebounding
into the air like an elastic ball, recovers his feet unhurt, and even
unstunned by the tremendous "header!"

No doubt there is a good deal of exaggeration in these "hunter stories;"
but it is nevertheless true that most species of wild goats and sheep,
as well as several of the rock-loving antelopes--the chamois and
klipspringer, for instance--can do some prodigious feats in the leaping
line, and such as it is difficult to believe in by any one not
accustomed to the habits of these animals.  It is not easy to comprehend
how Colonel Markham's tahir could have fallen eighty yards--that is, 240
feet--to say nothing of the supplementary descent of forty-five feet
further--without being smashed to "smithereens."  But although we may
hesitate to give credence to such an extraordinary statement, it would
not be a proper thing to give it a flat contradiction.  Who knows
whether there may not be in the bones of these animals some elastic
principle or quality enabling them to counteract the effects of such
great falls?  There are many mechanical contrivances of animal life as
yet but very imperfectly understood; and it is well-known that Nature
has wonderfully adapted her creatures to the haunts and habits for which
she has designed them.  It may be, then, that these wild goats and
sheep--the Blondins and Leotards of the quadruped world--are gifted with
certain saltatory powers, and furnished with structural contrivances
which are altogether wanting to other animals not requiring them.  It
would not be right, therefore, without a better knowledge of the
principles of animal mechanism, to contradict the statement of such a
respectable authority as Colonel Markham--especially since it appears to
be made in good faith, and without any motive for exaggeration.

Our adventurers had entered into no discussion of this subject on
observing the descent of the ibex.  Indeed, there was nothing to suggest
such speculations; for the creature had fallen from such an immense
height, and come down with "such a thump" upon the hard turf, that it
never occurred to any of them to fancy that there was a single gasp of
breath left in its body.  Nor was there; for on reaching the ground
after its rebound, the animal lay with limbs loose and limp, and without
sign of motion--evidently a carcass.



CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

THE BEARCOOTS.

Our adventurers were congratulating themselves on this unexpected
accession to their larder; which, like the manna of old, had, as it
were, rained down from the sky.

"Our dinner!" shouted Caspar, gleefully, as the "thump" of the falling
ibex sounded in their ears.  "Our supper, too," he added.  "Ay, more!
In such a large carcass there must be provision to last us for a week!"

All three rose to their feet, and were about starting forward to secure
the prize; when a shrill scream twice repeated fell upon their ears--
coming down apparently from the top of the cliffs, or rather from the
mountain that trended still higher above them.

Could it be the cry of the conquering ibex--his slogan of triumph?  No;
it was not his voice, nor that of a quadruped of any kind.  Neither did
the spectators for an instant believe it to be so.  On turning their
eyes upward, they saw the creature, or the creatures--for there were two
of them--from whose throats those screams had proceeded.

The victorious ibex was still standing conspicuously upon the cliff.
During the few seconds that the attention of the spectators had been
occupied elsewhere, he appeared to have been contemplating the dire deed
of destruction he had just accomplished, and perhaps indulging in the
triumph he had obtained over his unfortunate rival.  At all events he
had stepped forward upon the projecting point of the rock--to the very
spot so lately occupied by his adversary.

The cry, however, which had been heard in the valley below had reached
his ears at the same time, and perhaps a little sooner: for as the
spectators looked up, they saw that he had been startled by it, and was
looking around him with evident alarm.  In the air above and not many
yards distant from him, were two dark objects, easily recognisable as
birds upon the wing.  They were of large size, nearly black in colour,
and with that peculiar sharpness of outline and sweep of wing that
distinguish the true birds of prey.  There was no mistaking their kind--
they were eagles--of a species known in the Himalayas and the steppes of
Thibet as the "bearcoot."

They were swooping in short, abrupt curves, at intervals repeating their
shrill screams, both crying out together, and from their excited mien,
and the character of their movements, no doubt could be entertained as
to the object of their noisy demonstrations.  They were about to assault
an enemy, and that enemy was no other than the ibex.

