peace and _apparent_ prosperity of despotism, that, like the
death-dealing vampire, soothes while it destroys.

I do not say that _all_ Americans nor _all_ Englishmen are entitled to
the glory of such a holy motive for conquest.  No.  Too large a
proportion, alas! are actuated only by the ignoble idea of selfish or
national aggrandisement.  The robber is often found in the same camp,
and fighting under the same banner, with the soldier of Freedom.  It is
not strange, therefore, that the _true_ sons of Liberty should sometimes
be associated with its _bastard_ children of the shackle and the whip.

But, I shall not weary you with any more political science.  Not that I
consider it of small importance to you.  On the contrary, I deem that
science the _most important of all others that have ever occupied the
attention of men_.  Its influence extends to almost every object around
you.  It shapes the carriage in which you ride, and the ship in which
you sail.  Its knowledge modifies the nature of your soul, and decides
whether you shall be a slave or a freeman.  It even extends to the form
of your body, giving it the abject attitude and gloomy aspect of slavery
and guilt, or the bold, upright carriage and joyous look of virtue,
which God gave to the first man when He made him after His own image.

But come, boy reader!  I have promised not to weary you with these
things.  Such teachings I must reserve for a future opportunity; when,
God willing, I shall present them to intellects older than yours.
Perhaps you yourselves may then be old enough to take an interest in
them; and if so, you may learn some truths that for long years have been
the study of your friend--the author.

Now let us return to the eagle.  I am thinking what a pity it is that
the Americans should have chosen this tyrant-bird as the emblem of their
liberty; for, although he is _most appropriate_ for _one portion_ of
their people, he is far from being a fit emblem of the principles of the
great republic.  So thought the wise Franklin.  There are many other
animals, peculiar to the territory of the United States, far more
deserving of the distinction.  There is the bold but harmless buffalo,
the stately elk, and the industrious beaver; or if a bird must needs be
upon the banner, where could one be found better suited to that end than
the wild-turkey, possessing as he does a combination of good qualities--
grace, beauty, courage, and usefulness?  Thus reasoned Franklin; and it
might be yet worth the while of the American people to give
consideration to his reasoning, and discard the eagle; or, at all
events, change the species--for peculiar to the United States territory
there is another bird of the kind, far nobler, as well as larger and
more beautiful.

It is curious to observe how many countries have adopted this rapacious
bird for their emblem; and it forms a sad index to the motives that have
hitherto actuated nations.  In ancient times it was seen upon the
banners of Persia and Rome.  In modern days Napoleon spread its wings
like black shadows over France.  It is the emblem of Russian despotism
and American freedom.  Austria, Prussia, Poland, Sicily, Spain,
Sardinia, and many of the small governments of Germany, look up to the
eagle on their standards; while, upon the other side of the Atlantic, it
waves over the great nations of the United States and Mexico, as well as
several of the smaller republics.  Why, a general war among the nations
of the world would be almost exclusively a war among the eagles!  It is
not improbable that the _lion_ would insist upon having a claw in the
quarrel; although his honesty and nobility of disposition are very much
doubted, particularly by the jackal and some other animals.  He is,
therefore, no better qualified to act as the representative of a pacific
people than the very worst of the eagles; but he fortunately has a wise
keeper, called Public Opinion, who of late has held him under some
restraint.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

"What a chain of destruction!" exclaimed Lucien.  "One creature preying
upon another."

"Ay," added Francois; "and how curious it should begin with a bird and
end with a bird.  Look at the two together.  Ha! ha!"

As Francois made this remark, he pointed to the little humming-bird and
the great eagle--which had been laid side by side upon the grass, and,
sure enough, presented in size and appearance a most singular contrast
to each other.

"You forget, Francois," said Lucien, "there were two other links to the
chain, and perhaps many more."

"What other links?" demanded Francois.

"The humming-bird, you remember, when attacked, was himself a destroyer.
He was killing the little blue-winged fly."

"That is certainly another link, but--"

"Who killed the eagle?"

"Ah, true!  Basil, then, was the last link in the chain of destruction."

"Perhaps the most criminal, too," said Lucien, "because the least
necessary.  The other creatures were but following out their instincts
to procure food, whereas Basil's only motive was one of wanton
destruction."

"I beg to differ with you, Luce," said Basil, interrupting his brother,
sharply, "it was no such thing.  I shot that eagle because he killed the
kite, and robbed him of his prey, instead of using his industry and
getting food for himself.  That's why I added a link to your chain."

"In that sense," replied Lucien, smiling at his brother--who seemed a
little ruffled at being thus charged with unnecessary cruelty,--"in that
sense you were, perhaps, justifiable; though it is difficult to
understand why the eagle was more guilty than the kite himself.  He took
only one life, and so did the kite."

"But," rejoined Basil, "in addition to taking away the life of his
victim, he robbed him.  Robbery and murder both.  Now the kite was
guilty only of the latter."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed Lucien and Francois together.  "There _is_ a
distinction with a difference!"

"But, brother Luce," inquired Francois, "what did you mean when you said
there might be many more links to this chain?"

"Why, who knows but the blue-winged fly was preying upon some other
creatures smaller than himself?  And these again, upon others still
less; who, though invisible to our eyes, possess life and organisation
as well as we.  Who knows to the contrary?  And who knows the reason why
a mysterious Providence has created those beings to be the food of each
other?  That is a question about which we can arrive at no satisfactory
conclusion."

"Who knows, brother," said Francois, "since you are speculating--who
knows but there may be an extra link at the other end of the chain?  Ho,
Basil! what say you?  Suppose we fall in with grizzly bears."  And
Francois laughed as he put the question.

"And supposing we do," replied Basil, "_you_ are as likely to form that
link as anybody else."

"Heaven forbid!" exclaimed Lucien.  "I hope that in all our travels we
shall see neither a grizzly bear nor an Indian."

"And I hope for nothing of the sort," rejoined Basil.  "I long to have a
crack at a grizzly; and as for Indians, I haven't the least fear of
them, so long as I carry this."

As Basil made this remark, he drew out the little beaded case from his
bosom, held it up a moment, and then returned it to its place again.

"Now, brother," cried Francois, "tell as about that pouch, and how it is
to save us from Indians.  I am really curious to know."

"Not now, my boy," replied Basil, with a patronising air.  "Not now.  We
must prepare our supper, and get to sleep.  We have lost half a day
drying our rags, so we must make up for it by an early start in the
morning.  Then for the prairies!"

"Then for the prairies!" echoed Francois,--"the prairies--the wild
horses--the big-horns--and the buffalo!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THREE BUFFALOES WITH WINGS.

Our travellers next morning resumed their journey, and for several days
continued on without meeting any incident worth recording.  They crossed
many large streams, among which may be mentioned the Neches and Trinity
of Texas.

On the "divide," between the Trinity and Brazos rivers, an adventure
befell them that came near having a painful result.

In hot weather it was their custom to halt during the noon hours, both
to refresh themselves and rest their animals.  This is the custom of
most travellers through these wild regions, and is called "nooning."

With this intention, one day, they drew bridle by the edge of a tract of
prairie, and dismounted.  Behind them was the forest through which they
had just passed, and before them lay the prairie, which they intended to
cross in the cool of the evening.  The surface of the latter was quite
level, covered with a green mantle of young buffalo-grass, with here and
there an island of low timber that broke the monotony of the view.  In
the distance a thick forest of live oak bounded the prairie on the other
side; and although the latter appeared only two or three miles distant,
it was not less than ten--so deceptive is the pure atmosphere of these
upland regions.  The country in which they now were was what is termed
"timber prairie"--that is, a prairie interspersed with groves and
copses.

I say our adventurers had just dismounted, and were about to take off
their saddles, when an exclamation from Francois drew the attention of
his brothers.

"_Voila_!" cried he, pointing out to the open ground.  "Buffaloes--
buffaloes!"

Basil and Lucien looked in the direction pointed out.  Three large dark
objects were seen on the crest of a low swell in the prairie.  They were
moving about; and one was evidently smaller than the others.

"Of _course_ they are buffaloes," continued Francois.  "Look at their
size!  Two bulls and a cow, no doubt."

His brothers agreed with him.  None of the three had ever seen buffaloes
in their native wilderness; and of course had but an indistinct idea of
how they might appear from a distance.  Buffaloes they must be--elk or
deer would look red--wolves red or white; and they could not be bears,
as these last would not likely be out on the prairie in threes, unless,
indeed, they might be grizzly bears--who do sometimes go out into the
open ground to dig for the "pomme-blanche" and other roots.  This,
however, was not probable, as the grizzly bears are seldom or never
found so far to the eastward.  No.  They were not "grizzlys."  They were
not wild horses neither, that was plain enough.  Buffaloes, then, they
must be.

Like all who see buffaloes for the first time in their native pastures,
our young hunters were filled with excitement--the more so, since to
meet with these animals was the object of their expedition, of the long
and perilous journey they had undertaken.

A hurried consultation followed as to how they should capture these
three.  It was true that none of them was a _white_ buffalo; but no
matter.  Our hunters wanted to taste buffalo-beef; and the chase after
these would give them practice, which might serve them afterwards.  How,
then, were they to set about it?

"Why, run them, of course," counselled the ready Francois, with the air
of an experienced buffalo-hunter.

Now, there are several methods of hunting buffaloes, practised upon the
prairies, both by whites and Indians.  The most common is that of which
Francois spoke, "running."  This is done by simply overtaking the
buffalo, galloping alongside of him--the hunter, of course, being on
horseback--and shooting him through the heart while he runs.  Shoot him
in the region of the heart you must; for you may put twenty bullets into
his great body elsewhere, and he will still manage to get away from you.
The hunters aim a little above the brisket, and behind the
fore-shoulder.  The white hunters use the rifle, or sometimes a large
pistol--which is better for the purpose, as they can load it more easily
while going in a gallop.  The Indians prefer the bow--as they can shoot
arrow after arrow in quick succession, thus slaying many buffaloes in a
single "run."  So expert are they with this weapon, that their arrows
have been known to pierce through the bodies of large buffaloes, and
pass clear out on the other side!  At times the Indians use spears with
which they thrust the buffaloes, while galloping alongside of them.

Another method of hunting these animals, is termed "approaching."

"Approaching" buffaloes is nothing else than creeping stealthily on them
until within range, when the hunter fires, often loads again and fires,
and so on, until many of them are killed, before their companions take
the alarm and scamper off.  Indeed, the hunter will sometimes crawl up
to a herd; and concealing himself behind the bodies of those he has
already killed, fire away until many have fallen.  In doing this he
takes care to keep to leeward; for if otherwise, and these animals--who
have much keener scent than sight--should happen to "wind" him, as it is
termed, they are off in a moment.  So keen is their scent, that they can
detect an enemy to windward at the distance of a mile or more.  In
"approaching," the hunter sometimes disguises himself in the skin of a
wolf or deer; when the buffaloes, mistaking him for one of these
animals, permit him to get within shooting distance.  An Indian has been
known to creep up in this manner into the midst of a buffalo herd, and
with his bow and arrows, silently shoot one after another, until the
whole herd lay prostrate!  "Approaching" is sometimes a better method
than "running."  The hunter thus saves his horse--often a jaded one--and
is likely to kill a greater number of buffaloes, and get so many more
hides, if that be his object, as it sometimes is.  When he is a
traveller only, or a beaver-trapper, who wants to get a buffalo for his
dinner, and cares for no more than one, then "running" is the more
certain mode of obtaining it.  In this way, however, he can kill only
one, or at most two or three; for, while he is shooting these, and
loading between times, the herd scatters, and runs out of his reach; and
his horse is apt to be too much "blown" to allow him to overtake them
again.

A third method of hunting buffaloes is the "surround."  This is
practised only by the Indians--as the white hunters of the prairies are
rarely ever in such numbers as would enable them to effect a "surround."
The name almost explains the nature of this hunt, which is practised as
follows:--When a hand of Indian hunters discover a herd of buffaloes,
they scatter and deploy into a circle around them.  They soon accomplish
this on their swift horses, for they are mounted--as all prairie-hunters
are sure to be, whether whites or Indians.  As soon as the circle is
formed, the Indians ride inward with loud yells, and drive the buffaloes
into a thick clump in the centre.  They then dash upon them with bows
and lances--each hunter killing as many as he can.  The buffaloes become
confused, run to and fro, and but few of them in the end get off.  A
herd of hundreds, and even thousands, is sometimes slaughtered at one of
these _battues_.  The Indians make this wholesale destruction for two
objects; first, to get the meat, which they preserve by "jerking"--that
is, by cutting into thin strips and drying in the sun--and, secondly,
for the skins with which they cover their tents, make their beds, and
part of their clothing.  Many of them they barter at the trading-houses
of the whites--established in remote regions for this purpose--where
they receive in exchange knives, rifles, lead, powder, beads, and
vermilion.

Another method the Indians have of hunting the buffalo, is not unlike
the last, but is still more fearful to witness.

Most of the region where the buffaloes range consists of high upland
prairies, such as in Asia are called "steppes," and in Mexico and South
America "mesas," or "table-lands."  Such plains are elevated from three
to six thousand feet above the level of the sea.  In many places on
these table-lands there are deep rifts called "canons," or more properly
"barrancas," that have probably been formed by running water during
rain-storms.  These are often dry, and look like vast fissures opening
down into the earth--often for a thousand feet or more--and extending
away for scores of miles across the prairie.  Sometimes two of them
intersect each other, forming a triangular space or peninsula between;
and the traveller on reaching this point is obliged to turn back, as he
finds himself almost encircled by precipices yawning downward into the
earth.  Whenever the Indians get a herd of buffaloes near one of these
canons, they surround them on three sides, and guide them towards the
precipice; and when they are near enough, gallop forward with wild
shouts, causing the buffaloes to dash madly and blindly over.  A whole
herd will sometimes leap a precipice in this way--those in the front
being forced over by the others, and, these in turn pressed, either to
take the leap or be thrust by the spears of the pursuing horsemen.
Sometimes when the Indians are not insufficient numbers to make a
"surround" of buffalo, they collect buffalo chips, and build them in
little piles so as to represent men.  These piles are placed in two
rows, gradually converging towards each other, and leading to one of the
aforementioned bluffs.  Between these two rows they drive the buffaloes,
that, mistaking the piles of their own "chips" for Indians, are guided
onwards to the edge of the precipice, when the hunters make their noisy
rush, and force them over.

There are other methods of buffalo-hunting, such as pursuing them in the
snow, when the hunters in their snow-shoes easily overtake and slaughter
them.  Some Mexican buffalo-hunters (in the southern prairies called
