and Don Cosme, weeping and crying aloud, "_Pobre Narcisso! nuestro
hermanito--le asesinaran_!"  (Poor Narcisso, our little brother!--they
will murder him!)

In the midst of this distressing scene the door of the drawing-room was
thrown suddenly open, and a servant rushed in, shouting in an agitated
voice, "_El norte! el norte_!"



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

"The Norther."

We hurried after Don Cosme towards the _ante-sala_, both myself and my
companions ignorant of this new object of dread.

When we emerged from the stairway the scene that hailed us was one of
terrific sublimity.  Earth and heaven had undergone a sudden and
convulsive change.  The face of nature, but a moment since gay with
summer smiles, was now hideously distorted.  The sky had changed
suddenly from its blue and sunny brightness to an aspect dark and
portentous.

Along the north-west a vast volume of black vapour rolled up over the
Sierra Madre, and rested upon the peaks of the mountains.  From this,
ragged masses, parting in fantastic forms and groupings, floated off
against the concavity of the sky as though the demons of the storm were
breaking up from an angry council.  Each of these, as it careered across
the heavens, seemed bent upon some spiteful purpose.

An isolated fragment hung lowering above the snowy cone of Orizava, like
a huge vampire suspended over his sleeping victim.

From the great "parent cloud" that rested upon the Sierra Madre,
lightning-bolts shot out and forked hither and thither or sank into the
detached masses--the messengers of the storm-king bearing his fiery
mandates across the sky.

Away along the horizon of the east moved the yellow pillars of sand,
whirled upward by the wind, like vast columnar towers leading to heaven.

The storm had not yet reached the rancho.  The leaves lay motionless
under a dark and ominous calm; but the wild screams of many birds--the
shrieks of the swans, the discordant notes of the frightened pea-fowl,
the chattering of parrots as they sought the shelter of the thick olives
in terrified flight--all betokened the speedy advent of some fearful
convulsion.

The rain in large drops fell upon the broad leaves with a soft, plashing
sound; and now and then a quick, short puff came snorting along, and,
seizing the feathery frondage of the palms, shook them with a spiteful
and ruffian energy.

The long green stripes, after oscillating a moment, would settle down
again in graceful and motionless curves.

A low sound like the "sough" of the sea or the distant falling of water
came from the north; while at intervals the hoarse bark of the _coyote_
and the yelling of terrified monkeys could be heard afar off in the
woods.

"_Tapa la casa! tapa la casa_!"  (Cover the house!) cried Don Cosme as
soon as he had fairly got his head above ground.  "_Anda_!--_anda con
los macates_!"  (Quick with the cords!)  With lightning quickness a roll
of palmetto mats came down on all sides of the house, completely
covering the bamboo walls, and forming a screen impervious to both wind
and rain.  This was speedily fastened at all corners, and strong stays
were carried out and warped around the trunks of trees.  In five minutes
the change was complete.  The cage-looking structure had disappeared,
and a house with walls of yellow _petate_ stood in its place.

"Now, Senores, all is secured," said Don Cosme.  "Let us return to the
drawing-room."

"I should like to see the first burst of this tornado," I remarked, not
wishing to intrude upon the scene of sorrow we had left.

"So be it, Captain.  Stand here under the shelter, then."

"Hot as thunder!" growled the major, wiping the perspiration from his
broad, red cheeks.

"In five minutes, Senor Coronel, you will be chilled.  At this point the
heated atmosphere is now compressed.  Patience! it will soon be
scattered."

"How long will the storm continue?"  I asked.  "_Por Dios_!  Senor, it
is impossible to tell how long the `_norte_' may rage: sometimes for
days; perhaps only for a few hours.  This appears to be a `_huracana_'.
If so, it will be short, but terrible while it lasts.  _Carrambo_!"

A puff of cold, sharp wind came whistling past like an arrow.  Another
followed, and another, like the three seas that roll over the stormy
ocean.  Then, with a loud, rushing sound, the broad, full blast went
sweeping--strong, dark, and dusty--bearing upon its mane the screaming
and terrified birds, mingled with torn and flouted leaves.

The olives creaked and tossed about.  The tall palms bowed and yielded,
flinging out their long pinions like streamers.  The broad leaves of the
plantains flapped and whistled, and, bending gracefully, allowed the
fierce blast to pass over.

Then a great cloud came rolling down; a thick vapour seemed to fill the
space; and the air felt hot and dark and heavy.  A choking, sulphureous
smell rendered the breathing difficult, and for a moment day seemed
changed to night.

Suddenly the whole atmosphere blazed forth in a sheet of flame, and the
trees glistened as though they were on fire.  An opaque darkness
succeeded.  Another flash, and along with it the crashing thunder--the
artillery of heaven--deafening all other sounds.

Peal followed peal; the vast cloud was breached and burst by a hundred
fiery bolts; and like an avalanche the heavy tropical rain was
precipitated to the earth.

It fell in torrents, but the strength of the tempest had been spent on
the first onslaught.  The dark cloud passed on to the south, and a
piercing cold wind swept after it.

"_Vamos a bajar, senores_!"  (Let us descend, gentlemen), said Don Cosme
with a shiver, and he conducted us back to the stairway.

Clayley and the major looked towards me with an expression that said,
"Shall we go in?"  There were several reasons why our return to the
drawing-room was unpleasant to myself and my companions.  A scene of
domestic affliction is ever painful to a stranger.  How much more
painful to us, knowing, as we did, that our countrymen--that _we_--had
been the partial agents of this calamity!  We hesitated a moment on the
threshold.

"Gentlemen, we must return for a moment: we have been the bearers of
evil tidings--let us offer such consolation as we may think of.  Come!"



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A LITTLE FAIR WEATHER AGAIN.

On re-entering the _sala_ the picture of woe was again presented, but in
an altered aspect.  A change, sudden as the atmospheric one we had just
witnessed, had taken place; and the scene of wild weeping was now
succeeded by one of resignation and prayer.

On one side was Dona Joaquina, holding in her hands a golden rosary with
its crucifix.  The girls were kneeling in front of a picture--a portrait
of Dolores with the fatal dagger; and the "Lady of Grief" looked not
more sorrowful from the canvas than the beautiful devotees that bent
before her.

With their heads slightly leaning, their arms crossed upon their
swelling bosoms, and their long loose hair trailing upon the carpet,
they formed a picture at once painful and prepossessing.

Not wishing to intrude upon this sacred sorrow, we made a motion to
retire.

"No, Senores," said Don Cosme, interrupting us.  "Be seated; let us talk
calmly--let us know the worst."

We then proceeded to inform Don Cosme of the landing of the American
troops and the manner in which our lines were drawn around the city, and
pointed out to him the impossibility of anyone passing either in or out.

"There is still a hope, Don Cosme," said I, "and that, perhaps, rests
with yourself."

The thought had struck me that a Spaniard of Don Cosme's evident rank
and wealth might be enabled to procure access to the city by means of
his consul, and through the Spanish ship of war that I recollected was
lying off San Juan.

"Oh! name it, Captain; name it!" cried he, while at the word "hope" the
ladies had rushed forward, and stood clinging around me.

"There is a Spanish ship of war lying under the walls of Vera Cruz."

"We know it--we know it!" replied Don Cosme eagerly.

"Ah! you know it, then?"

"Oh, yes!" said Guadalupe.  "Don Santiago is on board of her."

"Don Santiago?" inquired I; "who is he?"

"He is a relation of ours, Captain," said Don Cosme; "an officer in the
Spanish navy."

This information pained me, although I scarcely knew why.

"You have a friend, then, aboard the Spanish ship," said I to the elder
of the sisters.  "'Tis well; it will be in his power to restore to you
your brother."

A ring of brightening faces was around me while I uttered these cheering
words; and Don Cosme, grasping me by the hand, entreated me to proceed.

"This Spanish ship," I continued, "is still allowed to keep up a
communication with the town.  You should proceed aboard at once, and by
the assistance of this friend you may bring away your son before the
bombardment commences.  I see no difficulty; our batteries are not yet
formed."

"I will go this instant!" said Don Cosme, leaping to his feet, while
Dona Joaquina and her daughters ran out to make preparations for his
journey.

Hope--sweet hope--was again in the ascendant.

"But how, Senor?" asked Don Cosme, as soon as they were gone; "how can I
pass your lines?  Shall I be permitted to reach the ship?"

"It will be necessary for me to accompany you, Don Cosme," I replied;
"and I regret exceedingly that my duty will not permit me to return with
you at once."

"Oh, Senor!" exclaimed the Spaniard, with a painful expression.

"My business here," continued I, "is to procure pack-mules for the
American army."

"Mules?"

"Yes.  We were crossing for that purpose to a plain on the other side of
the woods, where we had observed some animals of that description."

"'Tis true, Captain; there are a hundred or more; they are mine--take
them all!"

"But it is our intention to pay for them, Don Cosme.  The major here has
the power to contract with you."

"As you please, gentlemen; but you will then return this way, and
proceed to your camp?"

"As soon as possible," I replied.  "How far distant is this plain?"

"Not more than a league.  I would go with you, but--" Here Don Cosme
hesitated, and, approaching, said in a low tone: "The truth is, Senor
Capitan, I should be glad if you could take them _without my consent_.
I have mixed but little in the politics of this country; but Santa Anna
is my enemy--he will ask no better motive for despoiling me."

"I understand you," said I.  "Then, Don Cosme, we will take your mules
by force, and carry yourself a prisoner to the American camp--a Yankee
return for your hospitality."

"It is good," replied the Spaniard, with a smile.

"Senor Capitan," continued he, "you are without a sword.  Will you
favour me by accepting this?"

Don Cosme held out to me a rapier of Toledo steel, with a golden
scabbard richly chased, and bearing on its hilt the eagle and nopal of
Mexico.

"It is a family relic, and once belonged to the brave Guadalupe
Victoria."

"Ha! indeed!"  I exclaimed, taking the sword; "I shall value it much.
Thanks, Senor! thanks!  Now, Major, we are ready to proceed."

"A glass of maraschino, gentlemen?" said Don Cosme, as a servant
appeared with a flask and glasses.  "Thank you--yes," grunted the major;
"and while we are drinking it, Senor Don, let me give you a hint.  You
appear to have plenty of _pewter_."  Here the major significantly
touched a gold sugar-dish, which the servant was carrying upon a tray of
chased silver.  "Take my word for it, you can't bury it too soon."

"It is true, Don Cosme," said I, translating to him the major's advice.
"We are not French, but there are robbers who hang on the skirts of
every army."

Don Cosme promised to follow the hint with alacrity, and we prepared to
take our departure from the rancho.

"I will give you a guide, Senor Capitan; you will find my people with
the _mulada_.  Please _compel_ them to lasso the cattle for you.  You
will obtain what you want in the corral.  _Adios, Senores_!"

"Farewell, Don Cosme!"

"_A dios, Capitan! adios! adios_!"

I held out my hand to the younger of the girls, who instantly caught it
and pressed it to her lips.  It was the action of a child.  Guadalupe
followed the example of her sister, but evidently with a degree of
reserve.  What, then, should have caused this difference in their
manner?

In the next moment we were ascending the stairway.

"Lucky dog!" growled the major.  "Take a ducking myself for that."

"Both beautiful, by Jove!" said Clayley; "but of all the women I ever
saw, give me `Mary of the Light'!"



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

THE SCOUT CONTINUED, WITH A VARIETY OF REFLECTIONS.

Love is a rose growing upon a thorny bramble.  There is jealousy in the
very first blush of a passion.  No sooner has a fair face made its
impress on the heart than hopes and fears spring up in alternation.
Every action, every word, every look is noted and examined with a
jealous scrutiny; and the heart of the lover, changing like the
chameleon, takes its hues from the latest sentiment that may have
dropped from the loved one's lips.  And then the various looks, words,
and actions, the favourable with the unfavourable, are recalled, and by
a mental process classified and marshalled against each other, and
compared and balanced with as much exactitude as the _pros_ and
_contras_ of a miser's bank-book; and in this process we have a new
alternation of hopes and fears.

Ah, love! we could write a long history of thy rise and progress; but it
is doubtful whether any of our readers would be a jot the wiser for it.
Most of them ere this have read that history in their own hearts.

I felt and knew that I was in love.  It had come like a thought, as it
comes upon all men whose souls are attuned to vibrate under the mystical
impressions of the beautiful.  And well I knew _she_ was beautiful.  I
saw its unfailing index in those oval developments--the index, too, of
the intellectual; for experience had taught me that _intellect takes a
shape_; and that those peculiarities of form that we admire, without
knowing why, are but the material illustrations of the diviner
principles of mind.

The eye, too, with its almond outline, and wild, half-Indian, half Arab
expression--the dark tracery over the lip, so rarely seen in the
lineaments of her sex--even these were attractions.  There was something
picturesque, something strange, something almost fierce, in her aspect;
and yet it was this indefinable something, this very fierceness, that
had challenged my love.  For I must confess mine is not one of those
curious natures that I have read of, whose love is based only upon the
goodness of the object.  That _is not love_.

My heart recognised in her _the heroine of extremes_.  One of those
natures gifted with all the tenderness that belongs to the angel idea--
woman; yet soaring above her sex in the paralysing moments of peril and
despair.  Her feelings, in relation to her sister's cruelty to the
gold-fish, proved the existence of the former principle; her actions, in
attempting my own rescue when battling with the monster, were evidence
of the latter.  One of those natures that may err from the desperate
intensity of one passion, that knows no limit to its self-sacrifice
short of destruction and death.  One of those beings that may fall--but
_only once_.

"What would I not give--what would I not do--to be the hero of such a
heart?"

These were my reflections as I quitted the house.

I had noted every word, every look, every action, that could lend me a
hope; and my memory conjured up, and my judgment canvassed, each little
circumstance in its turn.

How strange her conduct at bidding adieu!  How unlike her sister!  Less
friendly and sincere; and yet from this very circumstance I drew my
happiest omen.

Strange--is it not?  My experience has taught me that love and hate for
the _same_ object can exist in the _same_ heart, and at the _same_ time.
If this be a paradox, I am a child of error.

I believed it then; and her apparent coldness, which would have rendered
many another hopeless, produced with me an opposite effect.

Then came the cloud--the thought of Don Santiago--and a painful feeling
shot through my heart.

"Don Santiago, a naval officer, young, handsome.  Bah! hers is not a
heart to be won by a face."

Such were my reflections and half-uttered expressions as I slowly led my
soldiers through the tangled path.

Don Santiago's age and his appearance were the creations of a jealous
fancy.  I had bidden adieu to my new acquaintances knowing nothing of
Don Santiago beyond the fact that he was an officer on board the Spanish
ship of war, and a relation of Don Cosme.

"Oh, yes!  Don Santiago is on board!  Ha! there was an evident interest.
Her look as she said it; her manner--furies!  But he is a relation, a
cousin--_a cousin--I hate cousins_!"

I must have pronounced the last words aloud, as Lincoln, who walked in
my rear, stepped hastily up, and asked:

"What did yer say, Cap'n?"

