"Oh, don't ask me, my dear; it's not for me to say; and you needn't mind
calling me nurse, for it always sounds nice and pleasant to me.  There,
now, doesn't that feel cool and comforting?"

"Lovely," cried Glyn softly, and as he looked up in the pleasant face,
with its grey curls on either side, his eyes for the moment, what could
be seen of them, seemed to be sparkling with mischief and mirth, for
there was a feeling of pride and triumph at his success swelling in his
breast, and a few moments later, so great was the comfort he experienced
under the delicate manipulation of his motherly attendant's hands, that
he looked up at her and began to smile--only began, for he uttered an
ejaculation of pain.

"Oh, my dear, did I hurt you?" cried the housekeeper.

"No," said the boy, in rather a piteous tone; "it was my face.  It's all
stiff and queer."

"Yes, I told you that it was one-sided," said Singh merrily.

"Well, never mind, my dear; it will soon be better," said the
housekeeper soothingly.  "But you must do exactly what I tell you, and
be very patient and still."

"But, I say, look here, Mrs Hamton," cried Glyn, catching the hand
which was bearing the sponge and holding it to his cheek, to the old
lady's intense satisfaction, though somehow there came an unwonted look
of moisture in her eyes.

"What were you going to say, my dear?  But, dear, dear, what a pity it
is that you should go and disfigure yourselves like this!  What would
your poor father say if he knew?"

"Oh, I say, don't talk about it," cried Glyn.--"Fancy, Singhy, if he
could see us now!"

Glyn tried to whistle, but his puffed-up lips refused to give forth a
sound; and, seeing this, Singh whistled for him, and then in spite of
the pain and stiffness of their faces the two boys laughed till the
suffering became intense.

"Oh, don't, don't, don't, Singhy!" cried Glyn.  "I can't bear it."

"Well, I never did see two such young gentlemen as you are," said the
old housekeeper, smiling in turn.

"You ought both to be lying back looking as melancholy as black, and
here you are making fun of your troubles.  Ah, it's a fine thing, my
dears, to be boys and quite young; but I do hope that you will never
fight any more, and that you will both soon go and shake hands with Mr
Slegge, and tell him you are very sorry you hit him.  I am sure that he
must feel very sorry that he ever hit you, he being so much bigger and
having so long had the advantage of being taught by the Doctor, who is
the best man that ever lived, while you two are so new, and you, Mr
Singh, so much younger than Mr Slegge that I do wonder he ever so far
forgot himself as to hit you.  Now, you will make friends afterwards,
won't you?"

"No!" cried Singh sharply.  "I hate the coward."

"Oh, my dear!" cried the old lady.

"He doesn't mean it, nursey," cried Glyn, getting hold of her hand
again.  "He only said it because he feels so sore.  He's got a sore face
and a sore temper; but it will be all right when he gets well."

"I hope so, my dear; and you will shake hands with him, won't you?"

"Yes," said Glyn merrily, "as soon as he holds out his.  I can afford
to.--Can't I, Singhy?"

"Oh yes, of course."

"There," said the old lady, "now that's spoken nicely, and I don't think
I'll bathe your face any more.--Now, my dear," she continued to Singh,
"it's your turn."

"Oh, mine doesn't want doing, does it?" said the boy carelessly.

"Yes, my dear, and very badly too.  If it isn't bathed with my lotion it
will go on swelling, and be more discoloured still."

"Oh!" cried the boy eagerly.--"Here, you, Glyn, get up out of that
chair.  It's my turn now, as Mrs Hamton says," and he took another
glimpse at the glass.  "There, I'm ready.  Oh, I say, I do look a
wretch!"

Under the care of the good-natured old housekeeper during the next two
days a great deal of the swelling went down; but after the old lady's
report, and visits from the Doctor himself, they were both still treated
as infirmary patients, and relieved from lessons till such time as they
should be presentable amongst their fellows.

But on the third day the confinement was growing irksome in the extreme;
and the Doctor, after his daily visit, gave Singh permission to come
down into the grounds if he liked.  But the boy did not like.  A glance
at his companion in adversity revealed a disappointed look, and as soon
as the Doctor was gone he picked up one of the books with which they
were well supplied.

"Well," said Glyn gloomily, "why don't you go down?"

"Because I don't want to," was the reply; and no more was said.

But that afternoon soon after dinner, which was brought up to them by
the housekeeper on a folding-tray, and just when the irksomeness of
their position was pressing hardest upon their brains, there was a quick
step on the stairs, a sharp tap at the door, the handle was turned
without any waiting for permission, and Wrench's head was thrust in.

"I say, young gents," he cried, "here's a go!"

"What's the matter?" asked Glyn anxiously.  "Don't say Slegge's worse."

"I wasn't going to, sir.  It's something worse than that."

"What?"

"There's a gentleman along with the Doctor."

"A gentleman!" cried the boys together.

"Yes; a tall, military-looking gentleman, with long white starchers, and
such a voice.  He seemed as if he wanted to look me through.  Fierce as
fierce he was when he gave me his card to take in."

"What was on the card?" cried Glyn excitedly.

"Can't you guess, sir?" said the man, grinning.

"Colonel Severn!" shouted Singh.

"My father!" gasped Glyn.  "Oh, Singhy!  And us with faces like this!"



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

BEFORE THE "STARCHERS."

Singh ran across to the glass on the dressing-table.

"Why, Glyn, we can't see him.  I'm bad enough, but you are far worse.
What's to be done?"

"I dunno," cried Glyn.  "Who in the world would have thought he was
coming down here to-day!"

"We are supposed to be in the infirmary, aren't we?" said Singh.  "I
say, couldn't we undress and go to bed?"

"No," said Glyn promptly.  "What difference would that make?"

"Why, he'd think we were too ill to be seen."

"Nonsense," cried Glyn.  "Wouldn't he come up and see us all the same?"

"Oh dear!" groaned Singh.  "What a mess we are in!  This comes of your
fighting."

"Well, who made me fight?  Who began it?"

"Well, I suppose it was I," said Singh; "but I couldn't stand still and
let him knock us both about.  Oh dear, what a lot of bother it all is!"

"Here, I say, Wrench," cried Glyn excitedly, "were you sent up to tell
us that my father was here?"

"No, sir," said the man, grinning; "but I thought you'd like to know.  I
must go now, in case my bell rings."

The footman went off hurriedly, and the two boys, after a fresh visit to
the looking-glass, tried to make the best of their appearance.

Glyn combed his hair down in a streak over one side of his bruised
forehead, while Singh poured out some cold water and dabbed and sponged
his right eye; but he could not wash away the discoloration that
surrounded it, and after applying the towel he plumped himself down in a
chair and sat staring at his companion.

"It's no use," he said; "I daren't face guardian, and I won't."

"You tell him so," said Glyn, laughing, "and see what he will say."

"How am I going to tell him so when I shan't see him?"

"Why, you'll be obliged to."

"I tell you I won't!" cried Singh passionately.

"There's a sneak!  And you will let me go down alone and face it all."

"Oh, I say, don't talk like that," cried Singh.  "Can't we get out of it
somehow, old chap?  Let's run away till the Colonel's gone."

"Yes, of course," cried Glyn sarcastically.  "How much money have you
got?"

"Oh, I don't know; half-a-crown and some shillings."

"Oh, I have got more than that.  I have got half-a-sovereign.  Shall we
go to Plymouth, and sail for somewhere abroad?"

"Yes, anywhere, so that we don't have to meet your father."

"Ah," said Glyn, who was trying very hard to make the lock of hair he
had combed over a bruise stop in its place, but it kept jumping up again
and curling back to the customary position in spite of applications of
cold water and pomatum.

"Well, what do you mean by `Ah'?" grumbled Singh.

"Mean by `Ah'?" replied Glyn slowly.  "Why, it means what a stupid old
chucklehead you are.  Run away!  Likely, isn't it?"

"Oh, too late! too late!" cried Singh, for there was another sharp tap
at the door, and Wrench entered smartly, closely followed by his cat.

"Doctor's compliments, gentlemen, and you are to come down into the
drawing-room directly.--And just you go back to the pantry at once," he
shouted at his cat.  "How many more times am I to tell you that you are
not to follow me up into the young gentlemen's rooms?"

"Bah!" shouted Glyn, and he threw the hairbrush he held smartly at the
footman, who caught it cleverly, as if he were fielding a ball at
mid-wicket, and deposited it upon the dressing-table.

"Well caught, sir!" cried the man, eulogising his own activity.  "There,
never mind, gentlemen; go down and get it over.  There ain't anything to
be ashamed of.  If I was you, Mr Severn, I should feel proud at having
licked that great big disagreeable chap.  I shall be glad to see his
back.  He's quite big enough to leave school."

"Ah!" said Glyn with a sigh.  "Come on, Singhy; Wrench is right.  Let's
get it over; only I want to bathe my face again.  It smells of old
Mother Hamton's embro--what did she call it?  You may as well go on
first.  I won't be long."

"What!" cried Singh, looking aghast at the speaker.  "Go down and see
him alone?  I won't!  He's not my father; he's yours.  You may go first,
and I won't come unless I'm obliged."

"Won't you?" said Glyn, laughing softly, and he caught hold of his
companion's wrist and drew it under his arm.  "Open the door, Wrenchy,
and make way for the hospital--two wounded men going down.--I say,
Singhy, look as bad as you can.  Here, I know: Wrenchy and I will carry
you down in a chair."

Singh opened his mouth quickly and shut it sharply, making his white
teeth close together with a snap.  Then knitting his brows and drawing a
deep breath, he held on tightly to his companion, and walked with him in
silence downstairs into the hall.  Here the pair stopped short by the
drawing-room door, where Wrench slipped before them and raised his hand
to show them in; but Glyn caught him by the arm.

"Wait a moment," he said, and the three stood there by the mat, forming
a group, listening to the slow, heavy murmur of the Doctor's voice and
the replies given in a loud, sonorous, emphatic tone.

"Now," said Glyn at last.

The door was thrown open, and they entered, to face the Doctor, who was
seated back in an easy-chair with his hands before him and finger-tips
joined; while right in the centre of the hearthrug, his back to the
fireplace and legs striding as if he were across his charger, stood the
tall grey Colonel, swarthy with sunburn and marked by the scar of a
tulwar-cut which had divided his eyebrow and passed diagonally from brow
to cheek.

He was gazing at the Doctor and listening politely to something he was
saying in his soft, smooth voice, but turned his head sharply as the
door was opened, and his ultra-long, heavy grey moustache seemed to
writhe as he fixed the boys with his keen grey eyes in turn.

"Right, Doctor!" he cried, as if he were giving an order to a squadron
to advance.  "Disgraceful!--Well, you do look a pretty pair!"

"I'll leave you together," said the Doctor, rising slowly, and then
glancing at the boys.  "Yes," he said softly, "dreadfully marked; but
you should have seen them, Colonel, directly after their encounter."

"Ha, yes; wounded on the field," said the Colonel drily.  "Thank you.
Yes, sir, I think I should like to have a few words with them alone."

For the first time since they had known him the feeling was strong upon
the boys that they would have liked their preceptor to stay.

But the Doctor gave each of them a grave nod as he moved towards the
door, and they both stood as if chained to the carpet till the Colonel
made a stride forward, when Glyn recollected himself, ran to the door,
and opened it for the Doctor to pass out.

The Colonel grunted, and then as the door was closed, he marched slowly
across to his son; and as the boy faced him caught him by the shoulder
with his right hand, walked him back to where Singh stood alone, grabbed
him with his left, and forced them both towards the wide bay window
fully into the light.

"Stand there!" he said, in commanding tones.

Then stooping stiffly to seize the Doctor's easy-chair by the back, he
made the castors squeak as he swung it round and threw himself into it
with his back to the window, when he crossed one leg over the other, and
sat staring at them fiercely and scanning for some moments every trace
of the late encounter.

Glyn drew a long, deep breath loudly enough to be heard, while Singh
stood with hanging hands, opening and closing his fingers, and passing
his tongue quickly over his dry lips.  But the Colonel still went on
staring at them and frowning heavily the while.

At last Singh could bear it no longer.

"Oh, say something, sir!" he cried passionately.  "Scold us, bully us,
punish us if you like; but I can't bear to be looked at like that."

It was the Colonel's turn now to draw a deep breath, as he raised
himself in the chair a little, thrust one hand behind him, fumbled for
his pocket, and then drew out a large soft bandana handkerchief and blew
his nose with a blast like a trumpeted order to charge.

Then, as he sank back in his chair, "Ha, ha, ha! haw, haw, haw!" he
literally roared.  "Well, you do look a pretty pair of beauties!" he
cried.  "But this won't do.  Here, you, Glyn, what do you mean by this,
sir?  Didn't I warn you against fighting, and tell you to protect and
set an example to young Singh here?"

"Yes, father."

"Look at yourself in the glass.  You look a pretty pattern, don't you?"

"Yes, father."

"I told you to look at yourself in the glass.  Why don't you?"

"Because I know every scratch and bruise thoroughly by heart, father."

"But--" began the Colonel.

Here Singh interposed.

"It wasn't his fault, sir," cried the boy.  "It was mine.  He didn't
want to fight, and said he wouldn't."

"Ho!" said the Colonel.  "Said he wouldn't fight, did he."

"Yes, sir, and he actually let the big bully hit him."

"Ha!" said the Colonel.  "And then knocked him down for it?"

"No, he didn't, sir," cried Singh, with his eyes twinkling.  "He
wouldn't fight even then."

"Humph!" grunted the Colonel.  "And what then?"

"Well, it put me in such a rage, sir, that I couldn't bear it, and I
went and hit the big fellow right in the face, and he hit me again."

"Ah, you needn't tell me that," replied the Colonel; "that's plain
enough.  Well, what after?"

"Well, that made Glyn take my part, and he swung me behind him; and oh,
sir, he did give the big fellow such an awful thrashing!"

"Ha!" said the Colonel, taking his great grey moustache by both hands
and drawing it out horizontally.  "A thorough thrashing, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

