his burden.

"Well, what is your determination?" asked Ernest again, advancing in a
threatening attitude towards Blackall, on whom he could now, had he
chosen, have inflicted a very severe punishment.  "Will you promise
faithfully, by all you hold sacred, not to touch or hurt Ellis in any
way for this?"

"I should think you had better try to make a bargain for yourself
first," said Blackall.

"Not I!" said Bracebridge, proudly; "I can stand a thrashing far better
than Ellis.  I am pretty well accustomed to your lickings, and they
don't hurt me much.  Therefore, again, I ask you, will you promise, or
will you not?"  As he spoke, he doubled his fists, and advanced on
Blackall, whose face was completely exposed to an attack, while Ellis
kept battering away at his head, and grasped his arms tighter than ever.

What might have been the consequences I do not know; Bracebridge, in all
probability, would pretty severely have handled the bully, and, his
anger being excited, would have left some marks not very easily
eradicated on his countenance: when a light was seen in the passage, and
a quick step advanced towards them.  Bracebridge disdained to fly, and
Blackall could not, so they waited the result.

"Ah! vat you garcons do there?" exclaimed Monsieur Malin, for it was the
French master, holding up his candle.  "Let me see!  Ah, I understand!
You, Blackall, are one very bad boy.  You go to bed now.  Bracebridge,
Ellis, you come with me."

Ellis on this jumped off Blackall's back, and glad he was to do so, for
his arms were beginning to ache terribly with his exertions.

Blackall sneaked off, vowing vengeance in his craven heart on his
adversaries; and the kind-hearted Frenchman led the other two away, and
urged them to keep clear of the bully.  When, however, he heard how the
affair had taken place, he was very much inclined to go and inform the
Doctor, to try and get Blackall expelled, but they entreated aim not to
do so, and declared that they did not fear him, and would not run the
risk of thus injuring his prospects.

"Ah, you are brave garcons, brave garcons!" exclaimed Monsieur Malin.

At all events, they were true, right-feeling English boys.



CHAPTER SIX.

OUR MILITARY EXERCISES.

Bracebridge had to press his advice on Ellis more than once before he
could induce him to apply for leave to drill and to learn fencing and
the broadsword exercise.  All these sort of lessons were classed among
the extras, so that the Doctor did not insist on the boys learning them
unless by the express wish of their parents.  If they themselves wished
to learn them, they had to write home and get leave.  This system, I
fancy, made these branches of education far more popular than they would
otherwise have been.  The several masters, knowing that the number of
their pupils depended on the interest they could excite in their
respective sciences, did their utmost to make them attractive.  They
generally succeeded.

Monsieur Malin would, at all events, have been popular.  He was a
gentleman by birth and by education, of polished manners, and very
good-natured, and as everybody liked him, everybody wished to learn
French.  Old Dibble, our drill-sergeant, was very unlike him in most
respects, but still he won all our hearts.  He was a kind-hearted man,
and had an excellent temper, and he took great pains to teach us our
drill and to make us like it.  He was the very man to turn us all into
soldiers, and, as Bracebridge had said of him, he never grew weary of
recounting his deeds of arms to all whom he could find ready to listen.
He was a tall man, somewhat stout, with a bald patch on the top of his
head, and grey hair and whiskers, a thoroughly soldier-like hooked nose,
and fine piercing grey eyes.  Good-natured as he was, he would stand no
nonsense or any skylarking; and we all agreed that when he was in the
army he was certain to have kept all the men under him in capital order.

Our dancing-master was Mr Jay.  He was a proficient in his art; and
though he might not have been able to jump as high or to spin round on
one leg as long as an opera-dancer, he was able to teach us to dance
like gentlemen.  He was also a professor of fencing and gymnastics, and
a very good instructor he was.  He understood thoroughly what the human
body could do, and what it might do advantageously.  He also taught
boxing.

The Doctor was a great encourager of all athletic exercises, and allowed
all the boys who wished it to take lessons in boxing once a week for
half-an-hour at a time.  The greater number availed themselves of the
permission, and most of the school were very good boxers.  The result
was that, as a rule, we were a most peaceable set of boys, and I believe
that fewer quarrels took place than among any equal number of boys in
England.  We had a riding-master, who used to come every Saturday with
five or six ponies, and give us lessons in a paddock attached to the
school-grounds.  The Doctor used to say that his wish was to educate our
hearts, our minds, and our bodies as far as he had the power, and that
he found from experience that the greater variety of instruction he
could give us, the more perfectly he could accomplish his object.  He
himself gave us instruction in swimming.  I have described the pond in
the grounds.  He used a machine something like a large fishing-rod.  A
belt was fastened round the waist of a young swimmer, and by the belt he
was secured to the end of a line hanging from the rod.  The Doctor used
to stand, rod in hand, and encourage and advise the boy till he gained
confidence and knew how to strike out properly.  He was anxious to
prevent any one from getting into a bad way of striking out, for, as he
used to say, it was as difficult to get rid of a bad habit as to acquire
a good one.  He was, therefore, always waging a deadly warfare against
all bad habits from their very commencement, not only with regard to
swimming, but in every other action of life.  As soon as a boy had
learned to strike out properly, he turned him over to the instruction of
one of the bigger boys, who had especial charge of him in the water.  He
had always four or five boys whom he had taught to swim thoroughly well,
and he made them swimming-masters.  They benefited by having to give
instruction to others, and by learning to keep their tempers.  Nothing,
perhaps, tries the temper so much as having to teach dull or inattentive
boys.  Blackall had been made one of the swimming-masters, but at the
commencement of the bathing season the Doctor called him up, and without
a word of explanation told him that he thought fit to dismiss him from
the post.  He lost, in consequence, several privileges attached to the
office.  To a person of Blackall's character, the mode of his dismissal
was a considerable punishment.  It showed him that the Doctor was aware
of some of his misconduct, but of how much he was still left in
ignorance, and he had to live on in fear that some more severe
punishment was still in store for him.  I am glad to say that there were
very few other fellows at all like Blackall in the school.  There were,
of course, some few bullies and blackguards, or who would speedily have
become so if left to their own devices, and there were cowards, and boys
who carelessly told an untruth, or were addicted to the too common vice
of prevarication.  There were also vicious boys, or who would have been
vicious had they not been watched and restrained.  These were exceptions
to the general rule.  The Doctor's system, embracing the law of
kindness, answered well, and brought forth good fruits.

"Come along, Ellis," said Ernest, one Saturday afternoon, when he found
his friend busily working away at the model of a vessel he was cutting
out of a piece of American pine; "there's Sergeant Dibble in the
playground; I'll take you up to him, and tell him that he must turn you
into a soldier before the holidays.  He'll do it if you obey his
directions."  Sergeant Dibble was found in the middle of the playground,
surrounded by a number of boys, who were listening eagerly to one of his
stories with which he was amusing them till the hour to commence had
arrived.

"The reason why we conquered was this, young gentlemen," he was saying.
"Every man, from the highest to the lowest, knew his duty and did it.
If they didn't know it and didn't do it, Lord Wellington sent them about
their business, no matter who they were.  Remember that when you grow
up.  Your duty, I take it, is to do your best in whatever station you
may be placed; what you are certain will produce the best results and
forward the objects in which you are engaged.  It is not enough to say,
`Such were my orders;' you must try and discover the spirit of your
orders.  Above all things, you must never be afraid of responsibility.
Never be afraid of being found fault with when you know that you've done
what's right.  I was going to tell you how we crossed the river Douro,
in Portugal; how we surprised Marshal Soult, and how Lord Wellington ate
the dinner which had been prepared for him and his staff.  We very
nearly made him and his whole army prisoners, and we followed them up so
closely that they had no time to rest till they were clear out of
Portugal; but the hour is up.  Fall in, young gentlemen; fall in!"

Ernest took this opportunity to go up to the Sergeant and to explain
that he would find Ellis a very willing though, perhaps, a very awkward
pupil, and begged that he would treat him accordingly, and not suppose
that his awkwardness arose from carelessness or idleness.

Sergeant Dibble looked at Ellis for a few moments.  "No fear, Master
Bracebridge," he answered; "I've made a first-rate soldier out of far
worse materials.  If he's the will, he'll soon get them long arms and
legs to do their duty.  It's rather hard work to get a person who has no
ear to march in time, but that's to be overcome by perseverance, and the
eye must be made to do the work which the ear cannot.  Fall in, Master
Ellis, if you please."

Ellis had no notion of what falling in meant, so he shuffled about from
place to place, looking up inquiringly at the Sergeant.  "Take your
place, I mean, in the awkward squad, Master Ellis."

"That's where I shall always have to be," thought poor Ellis.  "Which
are the awkwardest squad, Sergeant?" said he, looking up.  "It strikes
me that I should go there."

Whatever Ellis thought of himself, there were several other boys just as
awkward, or at all events as unapt to learn military manners.  Little
Eden was one of them, that is to say, he always forgot what he had
learned during his previous lesson.  Gregson was another.  He was not
awkward in his movements, but while instruction was going forward he was
always thinking of something else.  One reason that Bracebridge
succeeded so well in whatever he undertook was, that he had the power of
concentrating his attention on whatever he was about; in the school-room
or play-room, in the cricket-field or on the parade-ground, it was the
same.  It was his great talent.  He had many other talents, and he also
had, from his earliest days, been well trained.  Had he been an only
son, he might have been spoiled, but he had many brothers, and his
temper had been tried, and he had been taught to command himself, and
while he relied on his own energies for success, to obey his elders and
to treat all his fellow-creatures with respect.  Sergeant Dibble very
soon pronounced him his best drill.  The awkward squad had been standing
by themselves for some minutes, looking very awkward, indeed, when
Sergeant Dibble exclaimed--

"Fall out, Mr Bracebridge, and take charge of that squad.  Exercise
them in the balance step, and put them through their facings."

Ernest, not a little proud, obeyed, and while the rest of the young
soldiers were marching up and down, taking open order, wheeling to the
right or left, and going through a variety of manoeuvres, he placed
himself in front of the boys I have described, with others, making
altogether about a dozen.  His first aim was to awaken them all up.
"Attention!" he exclaimed in a sharp tone, which made them all spring up
suddenly.  He then explained very clearly what he wanted them to do, and
put himself in the required attitude, taking care that they all did the
same.  Very few could not do the balance step.  Chivey and other hopping
games had taught them that.  He kept them at it a very few minutes, and
then telling them to practise it by themselves, went on to teach them
their facings, explaining the object of each movement.  He did it all in
so patient and good-natured a manner that every boy in the squad
expressed a hope that Bracebridge might be set to teach them again.

"I'll tell you what we will do; we will work away every day in the week,
and when Sergeant Dibble comes next week we will show him what we can
do."  The idea was taken up enthusiastically, and even the least apt of
the squad made great progress.  In two or three weeks they were fully
equal to those who had been drilling all the half.  Sergeant Dibble was
delighted, and foretold that if Master Bracebridge went into the army he
would distinguish himself.

"I don't know what I am to be," replied Ernest; "I know that I am to do
everything I am set to do as well as I can."

There were some twenty boys or more who were very far from perfect in
their drill in the larger squad, and Sergeant Dibble managed to persuade
them to put themselves, during the week, under Ernest's instruction.
Some few, at first, kicked at the notion, but finally all agreed to obey
his orders on the parade-ground during one hour every day.  Others, of
their own accord, joined, and in a short time he had quite a large army
of volunteers.  He spared no pains to perfect them.  He got the Sergeant
to bring him a "Manual of Drill Instruction," and every spare moment he
spent in studying it attentively.

In a few weeks Ernest's squad surpassed that composed of the older boys
in the accuracy and rapidity of their movement; and Sergeant Dibble,
when he came, expressed his astonishment and delight on finding what
could be done when all set to work with a will to do it.

Ernest, too, gained great popularity, and many who had before rather
envied him now frankly acknowledged his talents and excellent qualities.
He himself also behaved very well.  He did not set himself up above the
rest in consequence of what he had done and the applause he had gained,
but the moment the drill was over he became like one of the rest, and
took his hat, or his fishing-rod, or his hoop--though, by the by, he was
getting rather out of hoops--and went off shouting and laughing with all
the merry throng.

The greatest possible change was worked in Ellis.  He no longer looked
like the same boy.  The alteration in his appearance was almost as
striking as that which takes place in a country clown caught by a
recruiting sergeant, half drunk at a fair, as he rolls on, looking every
moment as if he was going to topple over, from public-house to
public-house, and when he has been under the drill-sergeant's hands for
a couple of years, and is turned into the trim, active, intelligent
soldier.  At first, few who saw poor Ellis's awkward attempts could
possibly avoid laughing.  How he rolled from side to side; how he stuck
out one foot, and changed it again and again, finding that it was the
wrong one; how, when the word "to the right-about" was given, he
invariably found himself grinning in the face of his left-hand man,
unless by good chance the latter had made the same mistake as himself,
when he became suddenly inspired with the hope that he had, for a
wonder, hit off the right thing.  He soon found his hopes disappointed
by being summoned to repeat the movement, with a caution to do it
correctly.  Then, on receiving the order to march, he nearly always
started off with his right foot instead of his left, and when he did put
out the left, he quickly changed it to the right, under the impression
that he must have made a mistake.  Still his perseverance was most
praiseworthy.  Bracebridge had assured him that in time he would become
a good soldier if he wished it, and a good soldier he resolved to be,
whether he followed up the profession or not.  He read as hard as he had
ever done, and found time to manufacture all sorts of things, and yet no
one practised more than he did drilling, and games, and all sorts of
athletic exercises.  Before the change I have described was perceptible,
the half was nearly over, and the summer holidays were about to begin.
I have, in mentioning it, run on somewhat ahead of events.  Ernest had
advised him to learn to dance and to fence.

"Come, come, you are joking now, old fellow," was his reply, in his
former melancholy tone of voice.  "I may learn any rough affair, like
drilling and gymnastics, and, perhaps, the broadsword exercises, and
learn enough to cut a fellow's head off; but to hop and skip about to
the sound of a fiddle, or to handle a thin bar of steel so as to prevent
another fellow with a similar weapon running his into me, is totally
beyond my powers.  I know that I could not, if I was to try ever so
much."

"So you thought about gymnastics, and so you thought about drilling, and
yet you have succeeded very well in both.  Remember the motto of our
Silver Knight.  Push on up the hill; work away at one thing, and then
another.  It is extraordinary how much may be learnt in a short time, if
people will but give their minds to what they are about.  I know a good
number of things, and I can do a good number of things, and yet I have
not spent more hours of my life with a book before me than have most
boys of my age; but then, when I have had a book before me, I have been
really busy, getting all I could out of it; I have not sat idling and
frittering away my time as so many fellows do.  I don't fancy that I
cannot do a thing because it is difficult; I always try to find out
where the difficulty lies, and then see how I can best get over it.  I
like difficulties, because I like to conquer them.  This world is full
of difficulties, which it is the business of men to conquer.  A farmer
cannot get a field of corn to grow without overcoming difficulties.  He
must dig up or plough up the ground; he must get rid of the weeds; he
must trench it, and after a time manure it; and this he must do year
after year, or it will not produce abundantly.  And so it is throughout
all the works to be done in this world: then why should we expect to get
knowledge, to cultivate our minds, to get rid of the weeds growing up
constantly in them, without labour, and hard labour, too?  Now, I dare
say, my dear fellow, you think that I am talking very learnedly, or you
may say, very pedantically; but I do not even claim originality for my
views.  My father pointed them out to me and my brothers long ago.  He
threw difficulties in our way, and stood by till we overcame them,
telling us it was the best practice we could have in the world.  I
cannot tell you how much we owe to our father.  He is the wisest man I
ever met.  I dare say there are many cleverer people; men who can talk
better, and have done more, and have written more, and who are thought
much more of in the world; but my brother and I agree, for all that,
