may give us a call."

Thus Simon O'Rook prosecuted his courtship.  In process of time he
married the widow, and was finally installed as master of the juvenile
Holly Tree in the suburbs, while his wife conducted the parent stem in
town.  Vegetables and other country produce had to be conveyed to the
town Tree regularly.  For this purpose a pony-cart was set up, which
travelled daily between it and the country branch.  Thus it came to pass
that O'Rook's Californian dreams were realised, for "sure," he was wont
to say, "haven't I got a house in the country an' a mansion in the town,
an' if I don't drive my carriage and four, I can always drive me cart
an' wan, anyhow, with a swate little widdy into the bargain."

It is, we suppose, almost superfluous to say that Doctor Jack and Polly
Samson were united in due course, but it is necessary to record that, by
special arrangement, Walter Wilkins, Esquire, and Susan Trench were
married on the same day.  More than that, the Doctor and Watty so
contrived matters that they rented a double villa in the suburbs of the
nameless city, one-half of which was occupied by Dr Jack's family, the
other by that of Wilkins.  Still further, it was so contrived by
Philosopher Jack that a small cottage was built on an eminence in his
garden, in which there was a room, precisely similar in all respects to
that in which he had first met his father-in-law.  There was a hammock
in this room, slung as the original hammock had been, and although the
old telescopes and sou'-westers and marine stores and charts had been
sold and lost past redemption, a good many new things, bearing a strong
resemblance to such articles, were purchased and placed on the walls and
in the corners, so that almost the only difference between it and the
old room was the absence of fishy smells.  There was an improvement,
also, in the view; for whereas, in the old room, the window commanded a
prospect of about ten yards in extent, comprising a brick wall, a
lamp-post, and a broken pump, the windows of the new room overlooked
miles and miles of landscape, embracing villages, hamlets, fields, and
forests, away to the horizon.

In this cottage Captain Samson took up his abode, rent free, and the
money which he was thus enabled to save, or which Jack insisted on his
saving, was spent in helping the poor all round his dwelling.  Here the
captain spent many happy hours in converse with Polly and her husband.
To this room, as time rolled on, he brought a small child, to which,
although not its nurse, he devoted much of his spare time, and called it
"Polly."

And oh! it was a wonderful sight to see Polly the second, with her heart
in her mouth and her hair flying in the air, riding the captain's foot
"in a storm!"

Here, too, as time continued to roll on, he fabricated innumerable boats
and ships for little boys, whose names were Teddie, Watty, Ben, Baldwin,
and such like.  In this room, also, every Sunday morning early, the
captain was to be found with a large, eager, attentive class of little
boys and girls, to whom he expounded the Word of God, with many an
illustrative anecdote, while he sought to lead them to that dear Lord
who had saved his soul, and whose Holy Spirit had enabled him to face
the battles of life, in prosperity and adversity, and had made him "more
than conqueror."  Here, also, in the evenings of the same holy day, he
was wont to gather a meeting of old people, to whom he discanted on the
same "old, old story."  In all which works he was aided and abetted by
the families of the double house close by.

Besides his constant visitors among the young, the aged, and the poor,
the captain had a few occasional visitors at his residence, which, by
the way, was named Harmony Hall.

Among these were Bailie Trench and his wife, who were naturally
attracted to that region by the presence there of a slender, loving,
sprightly boy, whose name was Benjamin Walter Wilkins, and who bore--at
least they thought he bore--a striking resemblance to their loved and
lost son Ben.  The family from the cottage on the Border also paid
annual visits to Number 1 of the double house (which was the Doctor's),
and the various members of that family, being very fond of a chat with
the old sailor, often found themselves of an evening in "the old
store-room" (as the boys styled it) of Harmony Hall.

These visits were regularly returned, chiefly in the summer-time, by the
captain and the families of the double house, on which occasions the
cottage on the Border was taxed to such an extent that Philosopher Jack
was obliged to purchase a neighbouring barn, which he had fitted up as a
dormitory that could accommodate almost a battalion of infantry.  During
these visits the trouting streams of the neighbourhood were so severely
whipped that the fish knew the difference between a real and an
artificial fly as well as their tormentors, but they were captured for
all that.

Baldwin Burr and Jacob Buckley were also among the occasional visitors
at the Hall; but their visits were few and far between, because of their
having taken up their permanent abode in California.  Only when they
came home on business, once in the two years, had they an opportunity of
seeing their old comrade, but they never failed to take advantage of
such opportunities.  These men were not prone to speak about themselves,
but from various remarks they made, and from their general appearance,
it was easy to see that they were substantial and influential members of
society in foreign parts.

From Baldwin the captain heard that Bob Corkey had, during his
wanderings, fallen in with Bounce and Badger, and that these three had
formed a partnership, in which they tried their luck at gold-digging,
farming, fur-trading, and many other sources of livelihood, but, up to
the last news of them, without success.  There was hope of them yet,
however, so thought Baldwin Burr, because of the latest remarks made by
them in the hearing of credible witnesses.  Bob Corkey, having attained
to the lowest depths of destitution and despair, had, it was said, made
to his comrades the following observation: "Mates, it strikes me that we
are three great fools;" whereupon Bounce had replied, "We're more than
that Bob, we're three great sinners;" to which Badger had added, with
considerable emphasis, "That's a fact," and when men come to this, there
is hope for them.

The only personage of our tale who now remains to be mentioned is Mrs
Niven.

That steady-going female continued her vocation of ministering to the
wants of young students, some of whom treated her well, while others--to
their shame, be it said--took advantage of her amiability.  In regard to
this latter fact, however, it may be recorded that Peggy proved a
sharp-witted, tight-handed, and zealous defender of her mistress.  Among
Mrs Niven's other boarders there was one who was neither young nor a
student.  He came to reside with her in the following manner:--

One evening Peggy was heard in altercation with a man in the passage who
seemed bent on forcing his way into the house.  The students who chanced
to be in their rooms at the time cocked their ears, like war-steeds
snuffing the battle from afar, and hoped for a row.  Mrs Niven, after
opening the parlour door softly, and listening, called out, "Let the
gentleman come up, Peggy."

"Gentleman indeed!" cried the irate Peggy, who had the intruder by the
throat, "he's only a dirty auld blagyird."

"Niver ye mind, Peggy," returned Mrs Niven peremptorily; "I ken him.
Let him up."

Immediately after, there walked into the parlour a bowed, mean-looking,
dirty little old man, who, as he sat down on a chair, paid some doubtful
compliments to Peggy.

"Oh, Maister Black, is it you!" said Mrs Niven, sitting down beside
him.

Besides being all that we have said, Mr Black was ragged, dishevelled,
haggard, and in every way disreputable.

"Yes, it's me, Mrs Niven," he replied harshly, "and you see I'm in a
sorry plight."

"I see, I see," said the good woman, taking his hand and shedding tears.
"I kent ye had lost a' by that fearfu' bank failure, but I didna ken ye
had come doon sae low.  And oh! to think that it was a' through me, an
your kindness in offerin' to tak the shares aff my hands.  Oh!  Maister
Black, my heart is wae when I look at ye.  Is there onything I can dae
for ye?"

Now, it was quite a new light to Mr Black that his relative had not
found him out.  He had called in a fit of desperation, for the purpose
of extorting money from her by any means.  He now changed his tactics,
and resolved to board and lodge with her gratuitously.  The proposition
rather startled the poor woman, for she found it difficult to make the
two ends meet, even when her house was full of lodgers.  She had not the
heart to refuse him, however, and thus Mr Black was fairly installed in
the old room whose window opened on the cats' parade.

In her difficulty Mrs Niven went, as she was in the habit of doing, to
Philosopher Jack, to whom she represented Mr Black as such a suffering
and self-sacrificing man, that his heart was quite melted.

"I'll tell you what I'll do, Mrs Niven," he said.  "There is a sum of
money in my father's possession, the interest of which enabled me to pay
my way when I came back from the gold-fields.  My father won't use that
money himself and I won't accept it from him.  We have therefore
resolved to devote it to charitable purposes.  Now, we will give Mr
Black a small annuity out of it, for your sake, Mrs Niven."

Philosopher Jack was not, however, so easily deceived as Mrs Niven.  He
afterwards "found out" Mr Black, and told him so in very stern
language.  Nevertheless, he did not stop his allowance.  Neither did he
enlighten Mrs Niven as to the man's true character, though he kept a
sharp eye on him.

Thus did Mr Black become a pensioner and a free boarder.  There is no
sinner on this side [of] the grave who is beyond redemption.  That which
prosperity and adversity had equally failed to accomplish, was finally
brought about by unmerited kindness,--Mr Black's spirit was quietly and
gradually, but surely, broken.  The generous forbearance of Edwin Jack,
and the loving Christian sympathy of his intended victim, proved too
much for him.  He confessed his sin to Jack, and offered to resign his
pension; but Jack would not hear of it, as the pensioner was by that
time too old and feeble to work.  He also confessed to Mrs Niven, but
that unsuspecting woman refused to believe that he ever did or could
harbour so vile a design towards her, and she continued in that mind to
her dying day.

Peggy, however, was made of sterner stuff.  She not only believed his
confession, but she refused to believe in his repentance, and continued
to treat him with marked disrespect until her mistress died.  After that
however, she relented, and retired with him to a poorer residence, in
the capacity of his servant.  Peggy was eccentric in her behaviour.
While she nursed him with the assiduous care and kindness of a rough but
honest nature, she continued to call him a "dirty auld blagyird" to the
last.  The expression of this sentiment did not, however, prevent her
from holding more polite intercourse.  When his eyes grew dim, she read
to him not only from the Bible, but from the Pilgrim's Progress and
Robinson Crusoe, which were their favourites among the books of the
little library furnished to them by Christian friends.  And many sage
and original remarks did Peggy make on those celebrated books.  The
topics of conversation which she broached with Mr Black from time to
time were numerous, as a matter of course, for Peggy was loquacious; but
that to which she most frequently recurred was the wonderful career of
Philosopher Jack, for Peggy liked to sing his praises, and never tired
of treating the old man to long-winded accounts of that hero's ever
memorable voyage to the Southern Seas.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Philosopher Jack, by R.M. Ballantyne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PHILOSOPHER JACK ***

***** This file should be named 21756.txt or 21756.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/7/5/21756/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


