village of his wife's relations, when a band of slave-hunters suddenly
attacked the village.  They were armed with guns, and at once began to
murder the old people and capture the young.  Resistance was useless.
His relatives were armed only with bows and spears.  Being taken by
surprise, they all fled in terror, but were pursued and few escaped.
His wife, he said--and a scowl of terrible ferocity crossed Chimbolo's
face as he said it--was about to become a mother at the time.  He seized
her in his arms on the first alarm, and fled with her into the bush,
where he concealed her, and then hurried back to aid his relations, but
met them--old and young, strong and feeble--flying for their lives.  It
was not possible to rally them; he therefore joined in the flight.
While running, a bullet grazed his head and stunned him.  Presently he
recovered and rose, but in a few minutes was overtaken and captured.  A
slave-stick was put on his neck, and, along with a number of Manganja
men, women, and children, he was driven down to the coast, and sold,
with a number of other men and women, among whom was his own mother, to
a Portuguese merchant on the coast, near the East Luavo mouth of the
Zambesi.  There he was found to be of a rebellious spirit, and at last
on positively refusing to lash his mother, his master ordered him to be
whipped to death, but, changing his mind before the order had been quite
carried out he ordered him to be bound hand and foot and taken away in a
sack.  As to his wife, he had never heard of her since that night which
was about two years past.  He knew that she had not been found, because
he had not seen her amongst the other captives.  If they had found her
they would have been sure to carry her off, because--here Chimbolo's
visage again grew diabolical--she was young, he said, and beautiful.

When all this had been translated into bad English by Antonio, Harold
asked if Chimbolo thought it probable that his wife was still alive in
the Manganja highlands.  To this the former said that he thought it
likely.

"W'y, then," said Disco, giving his right thigh a powerful slap, which
was his favourite method of emphasising a remark, "wot d'ye say, sir, to
lay our course for these same highlands, and try for to find out this
poor critter?"

"Just what was running in my own mind, Disco," said Harold, musing over
his supper.  "It does not make much difference what part of this country
we go to, being all new to us; and as Antonio tells me the Manganja
highlands are up the Shire river, which was explored by Dr Livingstone
not long ago, and is not distant many days' journey from this, I think
we can't do better than go there.  We shall have a good as well as a
definite object in view."

"Wery good, sir; I'm agreeable," returned Disco, reaching forth his
pewter plate; "another hunk o' that pottimus, Jumbo; it's better than
salt-junk any day; and I say, Jumbo, don't grin so much, else ye'll
enlarge yer pretty little mouth, which 'ud be a pity."

"Yis, saar," replied Jumbo, becoming very grave all of a sudden, but on
receiving a nod and an expressive wink from the seaman, he exploded
again, and rolled backward on the grass, in the performance of which act
he capsized Zombo's can of tea, whereupon Zombo leaped upon him in
wrath, and Masiko, as in duty bound, came to the rescue.

"Clap a stopper on yer noise, will 'ee?" cried Disco sternly, "else
you'll be bringin' all the wild beasts in these parts down on us to see
wot it's all about."

"That reminds me," said Harold, when quiet was restored, "that we must
now organise ourselves into something of a fighting band--a company, as
it were, of soldiers,--and take our regular spell of watching by night,
for, from all that I hear of the disturbed state of the country just
now, with these runaway slaves and rebels, it will be necessary to be on
our guard.  Of course," he added, smiling, "I suppose I must be captain
of the company, and you, Disco, shall be lieutenant."

"Not at all," replied the seaman, shaking his head, and frowning at
Jumbo, whose brilliant teeth at once responded to the glance, "not at
all, none of your sodgerin' for me.  I never could abide the lobsters.
Fust-mate, sir, that's wot _I_ am, if I'm to be expected to do my
dooty."

"Well then, first-mate be it," rejoined Harold, "and Antonio shall be
serjeant-major--"

"Bo's'n--bo's'n," suggested Disco; "keep up appearances wotiver ye do,
an' don't let the memory of salt water go down."

"Very good," said Harold, laughing; "then you shall be boatswain,
Antonio, as well as cook, and I will instruct you in the first part of
your duty, which will be to keep watch for an hour while the rest of us
sleep.  My first-mate will teach you the whistling part of a boatswain's
duty, if that should be required--"

"Ah, and the roar," interrupted Disco, "a bo's'n would be nothin'
without his roar--"

At that moment the woods around them were filled with a tremendous and
very unexpected roar, which caused the whole party to spring up, and
induced the new bo's'n to utter a yell of terror that would have done
credit to the whistle of the most violent bo's'n on the sea.  Next
moment the travellers were surrounded by a large and excited band of
armed negroes.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

ENEMIES ARE CHANGED INTO FRIENDS--OUR TRAVELLERS PENETRATE INTO THE
INTERIOR OF THE LAND.

To possess the power of looking perfectly calm and unconcerned when you
are in reality considerably agitated and rather anxious, is extremely
useful in any circumstances, but especially so when one happens to be in
the midst of grinning, gesticulating, naked savages.

Our hero, Harold Seadrift possessed that power in an eminent degree, and
his first-mate, Disco Lillihammer, was not a whit behind him.  Although
both had started abruptly to their legs at the first alarm, and drawn
their respective revolvers, they no sooner found themselves surrounded
by overwhelming numbers than they lowered their weapons, and, turning
back to back, faced the intruders with calm countenances.

"Sit down, men, every one of you except Antonio," said Harold, in a
quiet, but clear and decided voice.

His men, who, having left their guns in the canoe, were utterly
helpless, quietly obeyed.

"Who are you, and what do you want?" demanded Antonio, by Harold's
order.

To this a tall negro, who was obviously the leader of the band, replied
in the native tongue,--"It matters little who we are; you are in our
power."

"Not quite," said Harold, slightly moving his revolver.  "Tell him that
he _may_ overcome us, but before he does so my friend and I carry the
lives of twelve of his men in our pistols."

The negro chief, who quite understood the powers of a revolver,
replied--"Tell your master, that before he could fire two shots, he and
his friend would have each twelve bullets in his body.  But I have not
time to palaver here.  Who are you, and where are you going?"

"We are Englishmen, travelling to see the country," replied Harold.

The chief looked doubtfully at him, and seemed to waver, then suddenly
making up his mind, he frowned and said sternly--"No; that is a lie.
You are Portuguese scoundrels.  You shall all die.  You have robbed us
of our liberty, our wives, our children, our homes; you have chained,
and tortured, and flogged us!"--he gnashed his teeth at this point, and
his followers grew excited.  "Now we have got free, and you are caught.
We will let you know what it is to be slaves."

As the negro chief stirred up his wrath by thus recounting his wrongs,
and advanced a step, Harold begged Disco, in a low, urgent voice, not to
raise his pistol.  Then looking the savage full in the face, without
showing a trace of anxiety, he said--"You are wrong.  We are indeed
Englishmen, and you know that the English detest slavery, and would, if
they could, put a stop to it altogether."

"Yes, I know that," said the chief.  "We have seen one Englishman here,
and he has made us to know that not all men with white faces are
devils--like the Portuguese and Arabs.  But how am I to know you are
English?"

Again the chief wavered a little, as if half-inclined to believe
Harold's statement.

"Here is proof for you," said Harold, pointing to Chimbolo, who, being
scarcely able to move, had remained all this time beside the fire
leaning on his elbow and listening intently to the conversation.  "See,"
he continued, "that is a slave.  Look at him."

As he said this, Harold stepped quickly forward and removed the blanket,
with which he had covered his lacerated back after dressing it.

A howl of execration burst from the band of negroes, who pointed their
spears and guns at the travellers' breasts, and would have made a speedy
end of the whole party if Antonio had not exclaimed "Speak, Chimbolo,
speak!"

The slave looked up with animation, and told the rebels how his
Portuguese owner had ordered him to be flogged to death, but changed his
mind and doomed him to be drowned,--how that in the nick of time, these
white men had rescued him, and had afterwards treated him with the
greatest kindness.

Chimbolo did not say much, but what he did say was uttered with emphasis
and feeling.  This was enough.  Those who would have been enemies were
suddenly converted into warm friends, and the desperadoes, who would
have torn their former masters, or any of their race, limb from limb, if
they could have got hold of them, left our adventurers undisturbed in
their bivouac, after wishing them a prosperous journey.

It was nevertheless deemed advisable to keep watch during the night.
This was done faithfully and conscientiously as far as it went.  Harold
took the first hour by way of example.  He sat over the fire,
alternately gazing into its embers while he meditated of home, and round
upon the dark forest while he thought of Africa.  True to time, he
called Disco, who, equally true to his sense of duty, turned out at once
with a deep "Ay, ay, sir."  The self-styled first-mate placed his back
against a tree, and, endeavouring to believe it to be a capstan, or
binnacle, or any other object appertaining to the sea, stared at the
ghostly stems of the forest-trees until they began to dance hornpipes
for his special gratification, or glowered at the shadows until they
became instinct with life, and all but induced him to rouse the camp
twenty times in the course of his hour's vigil.  True to time also, like
his predecessor, Disco roused Antonio and immediately turned in.

The vivacious _chef de cuisine_ started up at once, took up his position
at the foot of the tree which Disco had just left, leaned his back
against it, and straightway went to sleep, in which condition he
remained till morning, leaving the camp in unprotected felicity and
blissful ignorance.

Fortunately for all parties, Disco awoke in time to catch him napping,
and resolved to punish him.  He crept stealthily round to the back of
the tree against which the faithless man leaned, and reached gently
round until his mouth was close to Antonio's cheek, then, collecting all
the air that his vast lungs were capable of containing, he poured into
Antonio's ear a cumulative roar that threw the camp and the denizens of
the wilderness far and near into confusion, and almost drove the whole
marrow in Antonio's body out at his heels.  The stricken man sprang up
as if earth had shot him forth, uttered a yell of terror such as seldom
greets the ear, and rushed blindly forward.  Repeating the roar, Disco
plunged after him.  Antonio tumbled over the fire, recovered himself,
dashed on, and would certainly have plunged into the river, if not into
the jaws of a crocodile, had not Jumbo caught him in his arms, in the
midst of a chorus of laughter from the other men.

"How dare 'ee go to sleep on dooty?" demanded Disco, seizing the culprit
by the collar, "eh! we might have bin all murdered by rebels or eaten by
lions, or had our eyes picked out by gorillas, for all that _you_ would
have done to prevent it--eh?" giving him a shake.

"Oh, pardon, forgif.  Nevair doot more again," exclaimed the breathless
and trembling Antonio.

"You'd _better_ not!" said Disco, giving him another shake and releasing
him.

Having done so, he turned on his heel and bestowed a quiet look, in
passing, on Jumbo, which of course threw that unfortunate man into
convulsions.

After this little incident a hasty breakfast was taken, the canoes were
launched, and the voyage was continued.

It is not necessary to trace the course of our explorers day by day as
they ascended the Zambesi, or to recount all the adventures or
misadventures that befell them on their journey into the interior.  It
is sufficient for the continuity of our tale to say that many days after
leaving the coast they turned into the Shire river, which flows into the
Zambesi about 150 miles from the coast.

There are many fountain-heads of slavery in Africa.  The region of the
interior, which gives birth to the head-waters of the Shire river, is
one of the chief of these.  Here lies the great lake Nyassa, which was
discovered and partly explored by Dr Livingstone, and hence flows a
perennial stream of traffic to Kilwa, on the coast--which traffic, at
the present time, consists almost exclusively of the two kinds of ivory,
white and black, the former (elephants' tusks) being carried by the
latter (slaves), by which means the slave-trade is rendered more
profitable.

Towards this populous and fertile region, then, our adventurers directed
their course, when they turned out of the great river Zambesi and began
to ascend the Shire.

And here, at the very outset of this part of the journey, they met with
a Portuguese settler, who did more to open their eyes to the blighting
and withering influence of slavery on the land and on its people than
anything they had yet seen.

Towards the afternoon of the first day on the Shire, they landed near
the encampment of the settler referred to, who turned out to be a
gentleman of a Portuguese town on the Zambesi.

Harold found, to his delight, that he could speak English fluently, and
was, moreover, an exceedingly agreeable and well-informed man.  He was
out at the time on a hunting expedition, attended by a party of slaves.

Harold spent the evening in very pleasant intercourse with Senhor Gamba,
and at a later hour than usual returned to his camp, where he
entertained Disco with an account of his new acquaintance.

While thus engaged, he was startled by the most appalling shrieks, which
proceeded from the neighbouring encampment.  Under the impression that
something was wrong, both he and Disco leaped up and ran towards it.
There, to his amazement and horror, Harold beheld his agreeable friend
Senhor Gamba thrashing a young slave unmercifully with a whip of the
most formidable character.  Only a few lashes from it had been given
when Harold ran up, but these were so powerful that the unhappy victim
dropped down in a state of insensibility just as he reached the spot.

The Portuguese "gentleman" turned away from the prostrate slave with a
scowl, but betrayed a slight touch of confusion on meeting the gaze of
Harold Seadrift.

"Senhor!" exclaimed the latter sternly, with mingled remonstrance and
rebuke in his tone, "how _can_ you be so cruel?  What has the boy done
to merit such inhuman chastisement?"

"He has neglected my orders," answered the Portuguese, as though he
resented the tone in which Harold spoke.

"But surely, surely," said Harold, "the punishment is far beyond the
offence.  I can scarcely believe the evidence of my own eyes and ears
when they tell me that _you_ have been guilty of this."

"Come," returned Senhor Gamba, softening into a smile, "you English
cannot understand our case in this land.  Because you do not keep
slaves, you take the philanthropic, the religious view of the question.
We who do keep slaves have a totally different experience.  You cannot
understand, you cannot sympathise with us."

"No, truly, we can _not_ understand you," said Harold earnestly, "and
God forbid that we should ever sympathise with you in this matter.  We
detest the gross injustice of slavery, and we abhor the fearful
cruelties connected with it."

"That is because, as I said, you are not in our position," rejoined the
Senhor, with a shrug of his shoulders.  "It is easy for you to take the
philanthropic view, which, however, I admit to be the best, for in the
eyes of God all men are equal, and though the African be a degraded man,
I know enough of him to be sure that he can be raised by kindness and
religion into a position not very inferior to our own; but we who keep
slaves cannot help ourselves we _must_ act as we do."

"Why so?--is cruelty a necessity?" asked Harold.

"Yes, it is," replied the Senhor decidedly.

"Then the abolition of slavery is a needcessity too," growled Disco, who
had hitherto looked on and listened in silent wonder, debating with
himself as to the propriety of giving Senhor Gamba, then and there, a
sound thrashing with his own whip!

"You see," continued the Portuguese, paying no attention to Disco's
growl,--"You see, in order to live out here I must have slaves, and in
order to keep slaves I must have a whip.  My whip is no worse than any
other whip that I know of.  I don't justify it as right, I simply defend
it as necessary.  _Wherever slavery exists, discipline must of necessity
be brutal_.  If you keep slaves, and mean that they shall give you the
labour of their bodies, and of their minds also, in so far as you permit
them to have minds, you must degrade them by the whip and by all other
means at your disposal until, like dogs, they become the unhesitating
servants of your will, no matter what that will may be, and live for
your pleasure only.  It will never pay me to adopt your philanthropic,
your religious views.  I am here.  I _must_ be here.  What am I to do?
Starve?  No, not if I can help it.  I do as others do--keep slaves and
act as the master of slaves.  I must use the whip.  Perhaps you won't
believe me," continued Senhor Gamba, with a sad smile, "but I speak
truth when I say that I was tender-hearted when I first came to this
country, for I had been well nurtured in Lisbon; but that soon passed
away--it could not last.  I was the laughing-stock of my companions.
Just to explain my position, I will tell you a circumstance which
