"Yes, I have a good lot," retorted Billy.  "I met 'em all first in
Yarmouth, when ashore for their week's holiday.  There's Joseph White,
master of the mission smack _Cholmondeley_, a splendid feller he is; an'
Bogers of the _Cephas_, an' Snell of the _Ruth_, an' Kiddell of the
_Celerity_, an' Moore of the M.A.A., an' Roberts of the _Magnet_, an'
Goodchild and Brown, an' a lot more, all first-rate fellers, whose
little fingers are worth the whole o' your big body."

"Well, well, what a lucky fellow you are!" said Gunter, with affected
surprise; "an' have you no bad fellers at all among your acquaintance?"

"Oh yes," returned the boy quickly, "I knows a good lot o' them too.
There's Dick the Swab, of the _White Cloud_, who drinks like a fish, an'
Pimply Brock, who could swear you out o' your oiled frock in five
minutes, an' a lot of others more or less wicked, but not one of 'em so
bad as a big ugly feller I knows named John Gunter, who--"

Billy was interrupted by Gunter making a rush at him, but the boy was
too nimble for the man, besides which, Gunter's bruises, to which we
have before referred, were too painful to be trifled with.  Soon
afterwards the boat returned for another cargo of trunks, and the crew
of the _Evening Star_ went to work again.

Meanwhile the "power of littles" began to tell on the capacious hold of
the steamer.  Let us go on board of her for a few minutes and mount the
bridge.  The fleet had now closed in and swarmed around her so thickly,
that it seemed a miracle that the vessels did not come into collision.
From the smacks, boat after boat had run alongside and made fast, until
an absolute flotilla was formed on either side.  As each boat came up it
thrust itself into the mass, the man who had pulled the bow-oar taking
the end of the long painter in his hand ready for a leap.  Some boats'
crews, having trans-shipped their trunks, were backing out; others were
in the midst of that arduous and even dangerous operation; while still
more came pouring in, seeking a place of entrance through the heaving
mass.

The boat of the _Evening Star_ was ere long among the latter with her
second load--Zulu grinning in the bow and Spivin in the stern.  Zulu was
of that cheery temperament that cannot help grinning.  If he had been
suddenly called on to face Death himself, we believe he would have met
him with a grin.  And, truly, we may say without jesting, that Zulu had
often so faced the King of Terrors, for it is a sad fact that many a
bold and brave young fellow meets his death in this operation of
trans-shipping the fish--a fall overboard is so very easy, and, hampered
as these men are with huge sea-boots and heavy garments, it too often
happens that when they chance to fall into the sea they go down like a
stone.

They never seem to think of that, however.  Certainly Zulu did not as he
crouched there with glittering eyes and glistening teeth, like a dark
tiger ready for a spring.

There was strict discipline, but not much interference with the work, on
board the steamer.  No boat was permitted to put its trunks aboard abaft
a certain part of the vessel, but in front of that the fishermen were
left to do the work as best they could.  They were not, however,
assisted--not even to the extent of fastening their painters--the crew
of the steamer being employed below in stowing and iceing the fish.

When the _Evening Star's_ boat, therefore, had forced itself alongside,
Zulu found himself heaving against the steamer's side, now looking up at
an iron wall about fifteen feet high, anon pitching high on the billows
till he could see right down on the deck.  He watched his opportunity,
threw himself over the iron wall, with the painter in one hand, (while
Spivin and the boat seemed to sink in the depths below), rolled over on
the deck, scrambled to his feet, made the painter fast to the foremast
shrouds, and ran to look over the side.

Spivin was there ready for him, looking up, with a trunk on the boat's
gunwale.  Next moment he was looking down, for a wave had lifted the
boat's gunwale absolutely above the vessel's bulwark for an instant.  No
words were needed.  Each knew what to do.  Zulu made a powerful grab,
Spivin let go, the trunk was on the steamer's rail, whence it was hurled
to the deck, narrowly missing the legs and toes of half-a-dozen reckless
men who seized it and sent it below.  Almost before Zulu could turn
round Spivin was up again with another trunk, another wild grab was
made, but not successfully, and Spivin sank to rise again.  A second
effort proved successful--and thus they went on, now and then missing
the mark, but more frequently hitting it, until the boat was empty.

You have only to multiply this little scene by forty or fifty, and you
have an idea of the loading of that steamer on the high seas.  Of course
you must diversify the picture a little, for in one place you have a man
hanging over the side with a trunk in mid-air, barely caught when in its
descent, and almost too heavy for him by reason of his position.  In
another place you have a man glaring up at a trunk, in another glaring
down;--in all cases action the most violent and most diversified,
coupled with cool contempt of crushed fingers and bruised shins and
toes.

At last the furore began to subside.  By degrees the latest boats
arrived, and in about three hours from the time of commencing, the crew
of the steamer began to batten down the hatches.  Just then, like the
"late passenger," the late trawler came up.  The captain of the steamer
had seen it long before on the horizon doing its best to save the
market, and good-naturedly delayed a little to take its fish on board,
but another smack that came up a quarter of an hour or so after that,
found the hatches closed, and heard the crushing reply to his hail--"Too
late!"

Then the carrying-steamer turned her sharp bow to the sou'-west, put on
full steam, and made for the Thames--distant nearly 300 miles--with over
2000 trunks of fresh fish on board, for the breakfast, luncheon and
dinner tables of the Great City.  Thus, if the steamer were to leave
early on a Monday, it would arrive on Tuesday night and the fish be sold
in the market on Wednesday morning about five o'clock.

With little variation this scene is enacted every day, all the year
round, on the North Sea.  It may not be uninteresting to add, that on
the arrival of the steamer at Billingsgate, the whole of her cargo would
probably be landed and sold in less than one hour and a half.



CHAPTER NINE.

ANOTHER DRAG-NET HAULED--THE MISSION SMACK.

When the steamer left the fleet the wind was beginning to moderate, and
all eyes were turned as usual towards the admiral's smack to observe his
movements.

The fishing vessels were still crowded together, running to and fro, out
and in, without definite purpose, plunging over the heaving swells--some
of them visible on the crests, others half hidden in the hollows--and
behaving generally like living creatures that were impatiently awaiting
the signal to begin a race.

While in this position two smacks came so near to the _Evening Star_, on
opposite sides, that they seemed bent on running her down.  David Bright
did not concern himself, however.  He knew they were well able to take
care of themselves.  They both sheered off to avoid him, but after doing
so, ran rather near to each other.

"One o' them b'longs to the Swab," said Billy.

"Ay," said Joe, "if he hadn't swabbed up too much liquor this morning,
he wouldn't steer like that.  Why, he _will_ foul her!"

As he spoke the Swab's bowsprit passed just inside one of the ropes of
the other vessel, and was snapped off as if it had been a pipe-stem.

"Sarves him right," growled Gunter.

"It's a pity all the same," said Trevor.  "If we all got what we
deserve, we'd be in a worse case than we are to-day mayhap."

"Come, now, Gunter," said Joe, "don't look so cross.  We'll have a
chance this arternoon, I see, to bear away for the mission-ship, an' git
somethin' for your shins, and a bandage for Spivin's cut, as well as
some cuffs for them that wants 'em."

Captain Bright did not like visiting the mission-ship, having no
sympathy with her work, but as she happened to be not far distant at the
time, and he was in want of surgical assistance, he had no reasonable
ground for objecting.

By this time the admiral had signalled to steer to the nor'-east, and
the fleet was soon racing to windward, all on the same tack.  Gradually
the _Evening Star_ overhauled the mission-ship, but before she had quite
overtaken her, the wind, which had been failing, fell to a dead calm.
The distance between the two vessels, however, not being great, the boat
was launched, and the skipper, Luke Trevor, Gunter and Billy went off in
her.

The mission vessel, to which reference has more than once been made, is
a fishing-smack in the service of the Mission to Deep-Sea Fishermen, and
serves the purpose of a floating church, a dispensary, a temperance halt
and a library to a portion of the North Sea fleet.  It fills a peculiar
as well as a very important position, which requires explanation.

Only a few years ago a visitor to the North Sea fleet observed, with
much concern, that hundreds of the men and boys who manned it were
living godless as well as toilsome lives, with no one--at least in
winter--to care for their souls.  At the same time he noted that the
Dutch _copers_, or floating grog-shops, were regularly appointed to
supply the fleets with cheap and bad spirits, and stuck to them through
fair-weather and foul, in summer and winter, enduring hardship and
encountering danger and great risk in pursuit of their evil calling.  Up
to that time a few lay missionaries and Bible-readers had occasionally
gone to visit the fleets in the summer-time, [see Appendix], but the
visitor of whom we write felt that there was a screw loose here, and
reasoned with himself somewhat thus:--

"Shall the devil have his mission-ships, whose crews are not afraid to
face the winter gales, and shall the servants of the Lord be mere
fair-weather Christians, carrying their blessed and all-important
message of love and peace to these hard-working and almost forsaken men
only during a summer-trip to the North Sea?  If fish _must_ be caught,
and the lives of fathers, husbands, brothers, and sons be not only
risked but lost for the purpose, has not the Master got men who are
ready to say, `The glorious Gospel _must_ be carried to these men, and
we will hoist our flag on the North Sea summer and winter, so as to be a
constant witness there for our God and His Christ?'"

For thirty years before, it has been said, a very few earnest Christians
among the fishermen of the fleet had been praying that some such
thoughts might be put into the hearts of men who had the power to render
help.

We venture to observe in passing that, perchance, those praying
fishermen were not so "few" as appearances might lead us to suppose, for
God has His "hidden ones" everywhere, and some of these may have been at
the throne of grace long prior to the "thirty years" here mentioned.

Let not the reader object to turn aside a few minutes to consider how
greatly help was needed--forty-six weeks or so on the sea in all
weathers all the year round, broken by a week at a time--or about six or
seven weeks altogether--on shore with wife and family; the rest, hard
unvarying toil and exposure, with nothing to do during the brief
intervals of leisure--nothing to read, nothing new to think of, no
church to raise the mind to the Creator, and distinguish the Sabbath
from the week-day, and no social intercourse of a natural kind, (for a
society of men only is not natural), to elevate them above the lower
animals, and with only drinking and gambling left to degrade them below
these creatures; and this for forty or fifty years of their lives, with,
in too many cases, neither hope nor thought beyond!

At last the fishermen's prayers were answered, the thoughts of the
visitor bore fruit, and, convinced that he was being led by God, he
began to move in the matter with prayer and energy.  The result was that
in the year 1881 he received the unsolicited offer of a smack which
should be at his entire disposal for mission purposes, but should
endeavour to sustain herself, if possible, by fishing like the rest of
the fleet.  The vessel was accepted.  A Christian skipper and fisherman,
named Budd, and a like-minded crew, were put into her; she was fitted
out with an extra cabin, with cupboards for a library and other
conveniences.  The hold was arranged with a view to being converted into
a chapel on Sundays, and it was decided that, in order to keep it clear
on such days, the trawl should not be let down on Saturday nights; a
large medicine-chest--which was afterwards reported to be "one of the
greatest blessings in the fleet,"--was put on board; the captain made a
colporteur of the Bible Society, agent for the Shipwrecked Mariners'
Society and of the Church of England Temperance Society.  The Religious
Tract Society, and various publishers, made a grant of books to form the
nucleus of a free lending library; the National Lifeboat Institution
presented an aneroid barometer, and Messrs. Hewett and Company made a
present of the insurance premium of 50 pounds.  Thus furnished and
armed, as aforesaid, as a Mission Church, Temperance Hall, Circulating
Library, and Dispensary, the little craft one day sailed in amongst the
smacks of the "Short Blue" fleet, amid the boisterous greetings of the
crews, and took up her position under the name of the _Ensign_, with a
great twenty-feet Mission-flag flying at the main-mast-head.

This, then was the style of vessel towards which the boat of the
_Evening Star_ was now being pulled over a superficially smooth but
still heaving sea.  The boat was not alone.  Other smacks, the masters
of which as well as some of the men were professed Christians, had
availed themselves of the opportunity to visit the mission smack, while
not a few had come, like the master of the _Evening Star_, to procure
medicine and books, so that when David Bright drew near he observed the
deck to be pretty well crowded, while a long tail of boats floated
astern, and more were seen coming over the waves to the rendezvous.

It was no solemn meeting that.  Shore-going folk, who are too apt to
connect religious gatherings with Sunday clothes, subdued voices, and
long faces, would have had their ideas changed if they had seen it.  Men
of the roughest cast, mentally and physically, were there, in heavy
boots and dirty garments, laughing and chatting, and greeting one
another; some of the younger among them sky-larking in a mild way--that
is, giving an occasional poke in the ribs that would have been an
average blow to a "land-lubber," or a tip to a hat which sent it on the
deck, or a slap on the back like a pistol-shot.  There seemed to be "no
humbug," as the saying goes, among these men; no pretence, and all was
kindly good-fellowship, for those who were on the Lord's side showed
it--if need were, said it--while those who were not, felt perhaps, that
they were in a minority and kept quiet.

"Come along, Joe, what cheer!"

"Here you are, Bill--how goes it, my hearty!"

"All well, praise the Lord."

"Ay, hasn't He sent us fine weather at the right time? just to let us
have a comfortable meetin'!"

"That's so, Dick, the Master does all things well."

"What cheer!  Johnson, I'm glad to see _you_ here.  The boy has got some
cocoa for'ard--have some?"

"Thank 'ee, I will."

Such were some of the expressions heartily uttered, which flew about as
friend met friend on the mission deck.

"I say, Harry," cried one, "was it you that lost your bowsprit this
mornin'?"

"No, it was the Swab," said Harry, "but we lost our net and all the gear
last night."

"That was unfort'nit," remarked a friend in a tone of sympathy, which
attracted the attention of some of those who stood near.

"Ah! lads," said the master of the mission-ship, "that was a small
matter compared with the loss suffered by poor Daniel Rodger.  Did you
hear of it?"

"Yes, yes," said some.  "No," said another.  "I thought I saw his flag
half-mast this mornin', but was too fur off to make sure."

Most of the men crowded round the master of the smack, while, in deep
sad tones, he told how the son of Daniel Rodger had, during the night,
been swept overboard by a heavy sea and drowned before the boat could be
launched to rescue him.  "But," continued the speaker in a cheerful
voice, "the dear boy was a follower of Jesus, and he is now with Him."

When this was said, "Praise the Lord!" and "Thank God!" broke from
several of the men in tones of unmistakable sincerity.

It was at this point that the boat of the _Evening Star_ ranged
alongside.  The master of the mission smack went to the side and held
out his hand, which David Bright grasped with his right, grappling the
smack's rail at the same time with his left, and vaulted inboard with a
hearty salutation.  As heartily was it returned, especially by the
unbelievers on board, who, perchance, regarded him as a welcome
accession to their numbers!

Billy, Gunter, and the others tumbled on to the deck in the usual
indescribable manner, and the former, making fast the long painter,
added the _Evening Star's_ boat to the lengthening flotilla astern.

"Your man seems to be hurt," said the master of the mission smack--whom
we may well style the missionary--"not badly, I hope.  You're limpin' a
bit."

"Oh! nothin' to speak of," growled Gunter, "on'y a bit o' skin knocked
off."

"We'll put that all right soon," returned the missionary, shaking hands
with the other members of the crew.  "But p'r'aps you'd like to go below
with us, first.  We're goin' to hold a little service.  It'll be more
comfortable under hatches than on deck."

"No, thank 'ee," replied Gunter with decision.  "I'll wait till yer
done."

"P'r'aps _you_ would like to come?" said the missionary to the captain.

"Well, I--I may as well as not," said David with some hesitation.

"Come along then, lads," and the genial sailor-missionary led the way to
the capacious hold, which had been swept clean, and some dozens of
fish-boxes set up on end in rows.  These, besides being handy, formed
excellent seats to men who were not much used to arm-chairs.

In a few seconds the little church on the Ocean Wilderness was nearly
full of earnest, thoughtful men, for these fishermen were charmingly
natural as well as enthusiastic.  They did not assume solemn
expressions, but all thought of sky-larking or levity seemed to have
vanished as they entered the hold, and earnestness almost necessarily
involves gravity.
