
"I like it ill," he said, "to disagree on this point with my father; but
Ulf is right.  We all know that Harald is King of Norway by _law_, and
we do not meet here to dispute his title; but we also know that kings
are not gods.  Men create a law and place it over their own heads, so
that the lawmakers as well as those for whom it is made must bow before
it; but when it is found that the law works unfairly, the lawmaker may
repeal it, and cast it aside as useless or unworthy.  So kings were
created for the sole purpose of guiding nations and administering laws,
in order that national welfare might be advanced.  The moment they cease
to act their part, that moment they cease to be worthy kings, and become
useless.  But if, in addition to this, they dare to ignore and break the
laws of the land, then do they become criminal; they deserve not only to
be cast aside, but punished.  If, in defence of our rights, we find it
necessary to dethrone the King, we cannot be charged with disloyalty,
because the King has already dethroned himself!"

Erling paused a moment at this point, and a murmur of approval ran
through the circle of his auditors.

"When Harald Haarfager's father," he resumed, "Halfdan the Black, ruled
over Norway, he made laws which were approved by the people.  He obeyed
them himself, and obliged others to observe them; and, that violence
should not come in the place of the laws, he himself fixed the number of
criminal acts in law, and the compensations, mulcts, or penalties, for
each case, according to everyone's birth and dignity, from the King
downwards; so that when disputes were settled at the Things the utmost
fair play prevailed--death for death, wound for wound; or, if the
parties chose, matters could be adjusted by payments in money--each
injury being valued at a fixed scale; or matters might be settled and
put right by single combat.  All this, ye know full well, Halfdan the
Black compassed and settled in a _legal manner_, and the good that has
flowed from his wise and legal measures (for I hold that a king is not
entitled to pass even wise laws illegally) has been apparent to us ever
since.  But now all this is to be overturned--with or without the
consent of the Things--because a foolish woman, forsooth, has the power
to stir up the vanity of a foolish king!  Shall this be so?  Is our
manhood to be thus riven from us, and shall we stand aloof and see it
done, or, worse still, be consenting unto it?  Let death be our portion
first!  It has been rumoured that the people of southern lands have done
this--that they have sold themselves to their kings, so that one man's
voice is law, and paid troops of military slaves are kept up in order
that this one man may have his full swing, while his favourites and his
soldier-slaves bask in his sunshine and fatten on the people of the
land!  It is impossible for us of Norway to understand the feelings or
ideas of the men who have thus sold themselves--for we have never known
such tyranny--having, as the scalds tell us, enjoyed our privileges,
held our Things, and governed ourselves by means of the collective
wisdom of the people ever since our forefathers came from the East; but
I warn ye that if this man, Harald Haarfager, is allowed to have his
will, our institutions shall be swept away, our privileges will depart,
our rights will be crushed, and the time will come when it shall be said
of Norsemen that they have utterly forgotten that they once were free!
Again I ask, shall we tamely stand aside and suffer this to be?  Shall
our children ever have it in their power to say, `There was a time when
our mean-spirited forefathers might have easily stopped the leak that
caused the flood by which we are now borne irresistibly downward?'  I
repeat, let us rather perish!  Let us go armed to the Springs and tell
the King that he--equally with ourselves--is subject to the laws of the
land!"

Erling delivered the last sentence in a voice of thunder, and with a
fierce wave of the hand, that drew forth shouts of enthusiastic
applause.

Instantly Glumm started up, forgetful, in the heat of the moment, of the
jealousy that had so recently sprung up between him and his friend.

"I am not a speaker," he shouted gruffly, "but poor is the man who
cannot back up and egg on his friend.  Erling speaks the truth; and all
I have to suggest is that he should be sent by us to tell all this to
King Harald Haarfager's face!"

Glumm sat down with the prompt decision of a man who has thoroughly
delivered himself of all that he intends to say; and many in the
assembly testified their approval of his sentiments.

At this point Ivor the Old arose and gave it as his opinion that the
sooner the King should be brought off his high horse the better;
whereupon Finn the One-eyed suggested, with a laugh, that the old hermit
should be sent with his bow and arrow to teach him due submission to the
laws.  Then there was a good deal of confused, and not a little
passionate discussion, which waxed louder and more vehement until
Guttorm Stoutheart stood up, and, although not a dalesman, requested the
attention of the assembly for a few minutes.

"It is obvious," he said in the hearty tones of a man who knows that he
is sure of carrying a large portion of his audience along with him--"it
is obvious that you are all pretty much of one mind as to the principle
on which we should act at this time; and my good friend Haldor the
Fierce (who seems of late to have changed his nature, and should,
methinks, in future, be styled Haldor the Mild) is evidently on the
losing side.  The only thing that concerns us, it seems to me, is the
manner in which we shall convey our opinion to the King--how we shall
best, as the scald says:--

  "`Whisper in the King's unwilling ear
  That which is wholesome but unsweet to hear.'

"Now, to the quick-witted among you various methods will doubtless have
already been suggested; and I am perchance only echoing the sentiments
of many here, when I say that it would be worthy of the men of
Horlingdal that they should fight the King at once, and put a stop to
the burnings, hangings, torturings, jarl-makings, and subduings of which
he has been so guilty of late, and which I confess is so unlike his
free, generous, manly character, that I have found it hard to believe
the reports which have reached my ears, and which, after all, can only
be accounted for by the fact that he is at present led by the nose by
that worst of all creatures, a proud imperious girl, who has the
passions of a warrior and the brains of a bairn!  Another method, which
would signify at least our contempt for Harald's principles, would be
the sending of a thrall to him with a reaping-hook, and a request that
he would cut off his own head and give it to us in token that, having
ceased to be a king, he is resolved no longer to continue to be a
dishonoured man!  And that reminds me of one of Ulf's thralls named
Kettle Flatnose, who could assist Harald nobly in the work of beheading
himself, for last night, when he and I fought side by side against the
Danes, he used a hook of his own making, with such effect, that I was
fain to pause and laugh, while myself in the very act of splitting an
iron headpiece.  But perchance that is not a suitable method of
compassing our ends, besides it would cost the thrall his life, and I
should be sorry to aid in bringing about the death of Kettle Flatnose,
whose island is a happy one if it counts many such clear-headed and
able-bodied warriors.

"But another plan was proposed by Glumm the Gruff, which seemed to me to
have the approval of many present, and assuredly it has mine, that we
should send King Erling at once to Harald, to tell him our opinions to
his face, to sound him as to his intentions, and to bring back the news
as fast as possible, so that we may go armed or unarmed to the Springs,
as prudence may direct.  Moreover, as it would be unfair to send a man
alone on such a dangerous errand, I would suggest that he should have a
comrade to keep him company and share his fortunes, and that for this
end none better could be found than Glumm the Gruff himself."

This speech settled the mind of the meeting.  After a little more talk
it was finally arranged that Erling and Glumm should go at once to meet
King Harald, who could not yet, it was thought, have arrived at the
Springs, and endeavour to find out his temper of mind in regard to the
men of Horlingdal.  After that the Thing broke up, and the members
dispersed to partake of "midag-mad", or dinner, in the dwellings of
their various friends.



CHAPTER TEN.

PROVES THAT THE BEST OF FRIENDS MAY QUARREL ABOUT NOTHING, AND THAT WAR
HAS TWO ASPECTS.

"Now, Erling," said Glumm, with a face so cheerful, that had the
expression been habitual, he never would have been styled the Gruff, "I
will go home with thee and wait until thou art busked, after which we
will go together to my house and have a bite and a horn of mead before
setting out on this expedition.  I thank the Stoutheart for suggesting
it, for the business likes me well."

"Thou wert ever prone to court danger, Glumm," said Erling with a laugh,
as they hurried towards Haldorstede, "and methinks thou art going to be
blessed with a full share of it just now, for this Harald Haarfager is
not a man to be trifled with.  Although thou and I could hold our own
against some odds, we shall find the odds too much for us in the King's
camp, should he set his face against us.  However, the cause is a good
one, and to say truth, I am not sorry that they had the goodness to
pitch on thee and me to carry out the plan."

Thus conversing they arrived at Ulfstede, where Herfrida met them at the
door, and was soon informed of their mission.  She immediately went to
an inner closet, where the best garments and arms were kept, and brought
forth Erling's finest suit of armour, in order that he might appear with
suitable dignity at court.

She made him change his ordinary shoes for a pair made of tanned
leather, on which he bound a pair of silver spurs, which had been taken
from a cavalier of southern lands in one of Haldor's viking cruises.
She brought, and assisted him to put on, a new suit of mail, every ring
of which had been brightly polished by the busy hands of Ingeborg, who
was unusually fond of meddling with everything that pertained to the art
of war; also a new sword-belt of yellow leather, ornamented with gold
studs.  On his head she placed a gilt helmet with his favourite crest, a
pair of hawk's wings expanded upwards, and a curtain of leather covered
with gilt-steel rings to defend the neck.  Over his shoulders she flung
a short scarlet cloak, which was fastened at the throat by a large
silver brooch, similar to the circular brooches which are still to be
found in the possession of the rich bonders of Norway.  Then she
surveyed her stalwart son from head to foot, and said that he would
stand comparison with any king in the land, small or great.

At this Erling laughed, and asked for his sword.

"Which one, my son?"

"The short one, mother.  I had indeed thought of taking my good old axe
with me, but that would not look well in a man bent on a mission of
peace.  Would it, Glumm?  And if I should have to fight, why, my short
sword is not a light one, and by putting to a little more force I can
make it bite deep enough.  So now, Glumm, I am ready for the road.
Farewell, mother."

The young men went out and hastened down the valley to Glummstede, near
Horlingend.

Now it chanced that Hilda and her foster-sister Ada had resolved, about
that time of the day, to walk up the dale together, and as there was
only one road on that side of the river, of necessity they were met by
their lovers; and it so fell out that the meeting took place in a
picturesque part of the dale, where the road passed between two high
precipitous cliffs.

The instant that Ada's eyes fell on Glumm her active brain conceived the
idea of treating him to a disappointment, so she said hurriedly to her
friend:

"Hilda, wilt thou manage to lead Glumm aside and keep talking to him for
a short time, while I speak with Erling?  I want to ask him something
about that sword-belt which I am making for Glumm, and which I intend to
send him as the gift of an enemy."

"I will do as ye desire," replied Hilda, with a feeling of
disappointment; "but with what truth canst thou send it, Ada, as an
enemy's gift?"

"Simple Hilda!" said the other, with a laugh, "am I not an enemy to his
peace of mind?  But hush! they will overhear us."

It chanced that Hilda was on the same side of the road with Erling, and
Ada on that with Glumm, and both youths observed this fact with secret
satisfaction as they approached and wished the maids "good day"; but
just as they were about to shake hands Ada crossed in front of her
companion, and taking Erling's outstretched hand said:

"Erling, I am glad to meet thee, because I have a knotty point which I
wish thine aid to disentangle.  I will turn and walk with thee a short
way, because I know thy business is pressing.  It is always so with men,
is it not?"

"I know not," answered Erling, smiling at the girl's arch look, despite
his surprise and chagrin at the unexpected turn affairs had taken, for
he had noted the readiness with which Hilda had turned towards Glumm,
and almost, as he imagined, led him aside purposely!  "But it seems to
me, Ada, that, however pressing a man's business may be, woman has the
power to delay it."

"Nay, then, if thine is indeed so pressing just now," said Ada, with a
toss of the head (which Glumm, who walked behind with Hilda, took
particular note of), "I will not presume to--"

"Now, Ada," said Erling, with a light laugh, "thou knowest that it is
merely waste of time to affect indignation.  I know thee too well to be
deceived.  Come, what is it that ye would consult me about? not the
forging of a battle-axe or spear-head, I warrant me."

"Nay, but a portion of armour scarce less important, though not so
deadly.  What say you to a sword-belt?"

"Well, I am somewhat skilled in such gear."

"I am ornamenting one for a friend of thine, Erling, but I will not tell
his name unless I have thy promise not to mention to him anything about
our conversation."

"I promise," said Erling, with an amused glance.

"It is for Glumm."

"For Glumm!" repeated Erling in surprise; "does Glumm then know--"

"Know what?" asked Ada, as Erling stopped abruptly.

"Does he know that thou art making this belt for him?"

"Know it? why, how could it be a secret if he knew it?"

"Ah, true, I--well?"

"Besides," continued Ada, "I am not _making_ it; I said I was going to
ornament it.  Now it is with reference to that I would consult thee."

Here Ada became so deeply absorbed in the mysteries of ornamental armour
that she constrained Erling at least to appear interested, although,
poor man, his heart was behind him, and he had much difficulty in
resisting the desire to turn round when he heard Hilda's voice--which,
by the way, was heard pretty constantly, for Glumm was so uncommonly
gruff and monosyllabic in his replies that she had most of the talking
to herself.

This unpleasant state of things might have lasted a considerable time,
had not the party reached the path which diverged to the left, and,
crossing the river over a narrow bridge composed of two tall trees
thrown across, led to Glummstede.  Here Erling stopped suddenly, and
wheeling round, said:

"I regret that we cannot go farther down the dale to-day, as Glumm and I
must fare with all speed to the Springs to meet King Harald."

"I trust thine errand is one of peace?" said Hilda in a slightly anxious
tone.

"To judge by their looks," said Ada, glancing expressively at Glumm, "I
should say that their intentions were warlike!"

"Despite our looks," replied Erling, with a laugh, "our business with
the King is of a peaceful nature, and as it is pressing, ye will excuse
us if--"

"Oh! it _is_ pressing, after all," cried Ada; "come, sister, let us not
delay them."

So saying, she hurried away with her friend, and the two youths strode
on to Glummstede in a very unenviable frame of mind.

Having refreshed themselves with several cuts of fresh salmon--drawn
that morning from the foaming river--and with a deep horn of home-brewed
ale, the young warriors mounted a couple of active horses, and rode up
the mountain path that led in a zigzag direction over the fells to the
valley of the Springs.  They rode in silence at first--partly because
the nature of the track compelled them to advance in single file, and
partly because each was in the worst possible humour of which his nature
was capable, while each felt indignant at the other, although neither
could have said that his friend had been guilty of any definable sin.

It may here be mentioned in passing, that Glumm had clothed and armed
himself much in the same fashion as his companion, the chief difference
being that his helmet was of polished steel, and the centre of his
shield was painted red, while that of Erling was white.  His only
offensive weapons were a dagger and the long two-handed sword which had
been forged for him by his friend, which latter was slung across his
back.

An hour and a half of steady climbing brought the youths to the level
summit of the hills, where, after giving their steeds a few minutes to
breathe, they set off at a sharp gallop.  Here they rode side by side,
but the rough nature of the ground rendered it necessary to ride with
care, so that conversation, although possible, was not, in the
circumstances, very desirable.  The silence, therefore, was maintained
all the way across the fells.  When they came to descend on the other
side they were again obliged to advance in single file, so that the
silence remained unbroken until they reached the base of the mountains.

Here Erling's spirit revived a little, and he began to realise the
absurdity of the conduct of himself and his friend.

"Why, Glumm," he exclaimed at last, "a dumb spirit must have got hold of
us!  What possesses thee, man?"

"Truly it takes two to make a conversation," said Glumm sulkily.

"That is as thou sayest, friend, yet I am not aware that I refused to
talk with thee," retorted Erling.

"Nor I with thee," said Glumm sharply, "and thy tongue was glib enough
when ye talked with Ada in Horlingdal."

A light flashed upon Erling as his friend spoke.

"Why, Glumm," he said lightly, "a pretty girl will make most men's
tongues wag whether they will or no."

Glumm remembered his own obstinate silence while walking with Hilda, and
deeming this a studied insult he became furious, reined up and said:

"Come, Erling, if ye wish to settle this dispute at once we need fear no
interruption, and here is a piece of level sward."

