which the sweet singer of Israel has expressed in the words: "Praise ye
him, sun and moon; praise him, all ye stars of light."

There was a deep, solemn stillness all around--a stillness widely
different from that peaceful composure which characterises a calm day in
an inhabited land.  It was the death-like stillness of that most
peculiar and dreary desolation which results from the total absence of
animal existence.  The silence was so oppressive that it was with a
feeling of relief he listened to the low, distant voices of the men as
they paused ever and anon in their busy task to note and remark on the
progress of their work.  In the intense cold of an Arctic night the
sound of voices can be heard at a much greater distance than usual, and
although the men were far off, and hummocks of ice intervened between
them and Fred, their tones broke distinctly, though gently, on his ear.
Yet these sounds did not interrupt the unusual stillness.  They served
rather to impress him more forcibly with the vastness of that tremendous
solitude in the midst of which he stood.

Gradually his thoughts turned homeward, and he thought of the dear ones
who circled round his own fireside, and, perchance, talked of him; of
the various companions he had left behind, and the scenes of life and
beauty where he used to wander; but such memories led him irresistibly
to the far north again, for in all home-scenes the figure of his father
started up, and he was back again in an instant, searching toilsomely
among the floes and icebergs of the Polar Seas.  It _was_ the invariable
ending of poor Fred's meditations, and, however successful he might be
in entering, for a time, into the spirit of fun that characterised most
of the doings of his shipmates, and in following the bent of his own
joyous nature, in the hours of solitude, and in the dark night, when no
one saw him, his mind ever reverted to the one engrossing subject, like
the oscillating needle to the pole.

As he continued to gaze up, long and earnestly, into the starry sky, his
thoughts began to wander over the past and the present at random, and a
cold shudder warned him that it was time to return to the hut; but the
wandering thoughts and fancies seemed to chain him to the spot, so that
he could not tear himself away.  Then a dreamy feeling of rest and
comfort began to steal over his senses, and he thought how pleasant it
would be to lie down and slumber; but he knew that would be dangerous,
so he determined not to do it.

Suddenly he felt himself touched, and heard a voice whispering in his
ear.  Then it sounded loud.  "Hallo, sir!  Mr Ellice!  Wake up, sir,
d'ye hear me?" and he felt himself shaken so violently that his teeth
rattled together.  Opening his eyes reluctantly, he found that he was
stretched at full length on the snow, and Joseph West was shaking him by
the shoulder as if he meant to dislocate his arm.

"Hallo, West! is that you?  Let me alone, man, I want to sleep."  Fred
sank down again instantly--that deadly sleep, produced by cold, and from
which those who indulge in it never awaken, was upon him.

"Sleep!" cried West frantically, "you'll die, sir, if you don't rouse
up.  Hallo!  Meetuck!  O'Riley! help here!"

"I tell you," murmured Fred faintly, "I want to sleep--only a moment or
two--ah!  I see; is the hut finished?  Well, well, go, leave me.  I'll
follow--in--a--"

His voice died away again, just as Meetuck and O'Riley came running up.
The instant the former saw how matters stood, he raised Fred in his
powerful arms, set him on his feet, and shook him with such vigour that
it seemed as if every bone in his body must be forced out of joint.

"What mane ye by that, ye blubber-bag?" cried the Irishman wrathfully,
doubling his mittened fists and advancing in a threatening manner
towards the Esquimaux; but, seeing that the savage paid not the least
attention to him, and kept on shaking Fred violently with a
good-humoured smile on his countenance, he wisely desisted from
interfering.

In a few minutes Fred was able to stand and look about him with a stupid
expression, and immediately the Esquimaux dragged, and pushed, and shook
him along towards the snow-hut, into which he was finally thrust, though
with some trouble, in consequence of the lowness of the tunnel.  Here,
by means of rubbing and chafing, with a little more buffeting, he was
restored to some degree of heat; on seeing which Meetuck uttered a quiet
grunt, and immediately set about preparing supper.

"I do believe I've been asleep," said Fred, rising and stretching
himself vigorously as the bright flame of a tin lamp shot forth and shed
a yellow lustre on the white walls.

"Aslape is it! be me conscience an' ye have just.  Oh then, may I never
indulge in the same sort o' slumber!"

"Why so?" asked Fred in some surprise.

"You fell asleep on the ice, sir," answered West, while he busied
himself in spreading the tarpaulin and blanket-bags on the floor of the
hut, "and you were very near frozen to death."

"Frozen, musha!  I'm not too shure that he's melted yit!" said O'Riley,
taking him by the arm and looking at him dubiously.

Fred laughed.  "Oh yes; I'm melted now!  But let's have supper, else I
shall faint for hunger.  Did I sleep many hours?"

"You slept only five minutes," said West, in some surprise at the
question.  "You were only gone about ten minutes altogether."

This was indeed the case.  The intense desire for sleep which is
produced in Arctic countries when the frost seizes hold of the frame
soon confuses the faculties of those who come under its influence.  As
long as Fred had continued to walk and work, he felt quite warm, but the
instant he sat down on the lump of ice to rest, the frost acted on him.
Being much exhausted, too, by labour and long fasting, he was more
susceptible than he would otherwise have been to the influence of cold,
so that it chilled him at once, and produced that deadly lethargy from
which, but for the timely aid of his companions, he would never have
recovered.

The arrangements for supping and spending the night made rapid progress,
and under the influence of fire and animal heat--for the dogs were taken
in beside them--the igloe became comfortably warm; yet the snow-walls
did not melt, or become moist, the intense cold without being sufficient
to counteract and protect them from the heat within.  The fair roof,
however, soon became very dingy, and the odour of melted fat rather
powerful.  But Arctic travellers are proof against such trifles.

The tarpaulin was spread over the floor, and a tin lamp, into which
several fat portions of the walrus were put, was suspended from a stick
thrust into the wall.  Round this lamp the hunters circled, each seated
on his blanket-bag, and each attended to the duty which devolved upon
him.  Meetuck held a tin kettle over the flame, till the snow, with
which it was filled, melted and became cold water, and then gradually
heated until it boiled; and all the while he employed himself in
masticating a lump of raw walrus flesh, much to the amusement of Fred,
and to the disgust, real or pretended, of O'Riley.  But the Irishman,
and Fred too, and every man on board the _Dolphin_, came at last to
_relish_ raw meat, and to long for it.  The Esquimaux prefer it raw in
these parts of the world (although some travellers assert that in more
southern latitudes they prefer cooked meat), and with good reason, for
it is much more nourishing than cooked flesh; and learned, scientific
men, who have wintered in the Arctic regions, have distinctly stated
that in those cold countries they found raw meat to be better for them
than cooked meat, and they assure us that they at last came to _prefer_
it!  We would not have our readers to begin forthwith to dispense with
the art of cookery, and cast Soyer to the dogs; but we would have them
henceforth refuse to accept that common opinion, and vulgar error, that
Esquimaux eat their food raw _because they are savages_.  They do it
because nature teaches them that, under the circumstances, it is best.

The duty that devolved upon O'Riley was to roast small steaks of the
walrus, in which operation he was assisted by West, while Fred undertook
to get out the biscuit-bag and pewter plates, and to infuse the coffee
when the water should boil.  It was a strange feast in a strange place,
but it proved to be a delightful one; for hunger requires not to be
tempted, and is not fastidious.

"Oh, but it's good, isn't it?" remarked O'Riley, smacking his lips, as
he swallowed a savoury morsel of the walrus and tossed the remnant--a
sinewy bit--to Dumps, who sat gazing sulkily at the flame of the lamp,
having gorged himself long before the bipeds began supper.

"Arrah! ye won't take it, won't ye?  Here, Poker!"

Poker sprang forward, wagging the stump of his tail, and turned his head
to one side, as if to say: "Well, what's up?  Any fun going?"

"Here, take that, old boy; Dumps is sulky."

Poker took it at once, and a single snap caused it to vanish.  He, too,
had finished supper, and evidently ate the morsel to please the
Irishman.

"Hand me the coffee, Meetuck," said Fred.  "The biscuit lies beside you,
don't give in so soon, man."

"Thank you, sir, I have about done."

"Meetuck, ye haythen, try a bit o' the roast; do now, av it was only to
plaaze me."

Meetuck shook his head quietly, and, cutting a _fifteenth_ lump off the
mass of raw walrus that lay beside him, proceeded leisurely to devour
it.

"The dogs is nothin' to him," muttered O'Riley.  "Isn't it a curious
thing, now, to think that we're all at _sea_ a eatin', and drinkin', and
slaapin'--or goin' to slaape--jist as if we wor on the land, and the
great ocean away down below us there, wid whales, and seals, and
walrusses, and mermaids, for what I know, a swimmin' about jist under
whare we sit, and maybe lookin' through the ice at us this very minute.
Isn't it quare?"

"It is odd," said Fred, laughing, "and not a very pleasant idea.
However, as there is at least twelve feet of solid ice between us and
the company you mention, we don't need to care much."

"Ov coorse not," replied O'Riley, nodding his head approvingly as he
lighted his pipe; "that's my mind intirely, in all cases o' danger, when
ye don't need to be afeared, ye needn't much care.  It's a good chart to
steer by, that same."

This last remark seemed to afford so much food for thought to the
company that nothing further was said by anyone until Fred rose and
proposed to turn in.  West had already crawled into his blanket-bag, and
was stretched out like a mummy on the floor, and the sound of Meetuck's
jaws still continued as he winked sleepily over the walrus meat, when a
scraping was heard outside the hut.

"Sure, it's the foxes; I'll go and look," whispered O'Riley, laying down
his pipe and creeping to the mouth of the tunnel.

He came back, however, faster than he went, with a look of
consternation, for the first object that confronted him on looking out
was the enormous head of a Polar bear.  To glance round for their
firearms was the first impulse, but these had unfortunately been left on
the sledge outside.  What was to be done?  They had nothing but their
clasp-knives in the igloe.  In this extremity Meetuck cut a large hole
in the back of the hut intending to creep out and procure one of the
muskets, but the instant the opening was made the bear's head filled it
up.  With a savage yell O'Riley seized the lamp and dashed the flaming
fat in the creature's face.  It was a reckless deed, for it left them
all in the dark, but the bear seemed to think himself insulted, for he
instantly retreated, and when Meetuck emerged and laid hold of a gun he
had disappeared.

They found, on issuing into the open air, that a stiff breeze was
blowing, which, from the threatening appearance of the sky, promised to
become a gale; but as there was no apprehension to be entertained in
regard to the stability of the floe, they returned to the hut, taking
care to carry in their arms along with them.  Having patched up the
hole, closed the doors, rekindled the lamp, and crept into their
respective bags, they went to sleep, for, however much they might dread
the return of Bruin, slumber was a necessity of nature that would not be
denied.

Meanwhile the gale freshened into a hurricane, and was accompanied with
heavy snow, and when they attempted to move next morning they found it
impossible to face it for a single moment.  There was no alternative,
therefore, but to await the termination of the gale, which lasted two
days, and kept them close prisoners all the time.  It was very
wearisome, doubtless, but they had to submit, and sought to console
themselves and pass the time as pleasantly as possible by sleeping, and
eating, and drinking coffee.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

JOURNEY RESUMED--THE HUNTERS MEET WITH BEARS AND HAVE A GREAT FIGHT, IN
WHICH THE DOGS ARE SUFFERERS--A BEAR'S DINNER--MODE IN WHICH ARCTIC
ROCKS TRAVEL--THE ICE-BELT.

In the abating of the great storm, referred to in the last chapter, the
hunters sought to free themselves from their snowy prison, and succeeded
in burrowing, so to speak, upwards, after severe labour, for the hut was
buried in drift which the violence of the gale had rendered extremely
compact.

O'Riley was the first to emerge into the upper world.  Having dusted the
snow from his garments, and shaken himself like a Newfoundland dog, he
made sundry wry faces, and gazed round him with the look of a man that
did not know very well what to do with himself.

"It's a quare place, it is, intirely," he remarked, with a shake of the
head that betokened intense sagacity, while he seated himself on a mound
of snow and watched his comrades as they busied themselves in dragging
their sleeping-bags and cooking utensils from the cavern they had just
quitted.  O'Riley seemed to be in a contemplative mood, for he did not
venture any further remark, although he looked unutterable things as he
proceeded quietly to fill his little black pipe.

"Ho, O'Riley! lend a hand, you lazy fellow," cried Fred; "work first and
play afterwards, you skulker."

"Sure that same is what I'm doin'," replied O'Riley with a bland smile
which he eclipsed in a cloud of smoke.  "Haven't I bin workin' like a
naagur for two hours to git out of that hole, and ain't I playin' a tune
on me pipe now?  But I won't be cross-grained.  I'll lind ye a hand av
ye behave yerself.  It's a bad thing to be cross-grained," he continued,
pocketing his pipe and assisting to arrange the sledge; "me owld
grandmother always towld me that, and she was wise, she wos, beyand
ordn'r.  More like Salomon nor anything else."

"She must have directed that remark specially to you, I think," said
Fred--"let Dumps lead, West, he's tougher than the others,--did she not,
O'Riley?"

"Be no manes.  It wos to the pig she said it.  Most of her conversation
(and she had a power of it) wos wid the pig, and many's the word o' good
advice she gave it, as it sat in its usual place beside the fire
forenint her; but it was all thrown away, it wos, for there wosn't
another pig in all the length o' Ireland as had sich a will o' its own;
and it had a screech, too, when it wasn't plaazed, as bate all the steam
whistles in the world, it did.  I've often moralated on that same, and
I've noticed that as it is wid pigs, so it is wid men and women--some of
them at laste--the more advice ye give them, the less they take."

"Down, Poker; quiet, good dog!" said West, as he endeavoured to restrain
the ardour of the team, which, being fresh and full fed, could scarcely
be held in by the united efforts of himself and Meetuck while their
companions lashed their provisions, etcetera, on the sledge.

"Hold on, lads!" cried Fred, as he fastened the last lashing.  "We'll be
ready in a second.  Now, then, jump on, two of you!  Catch hold of the
tail-line, Meetuck!  All right!"

"Hall right!" yelled the Esquimaux, as he let go the dogs and sprang
upon the sledge.

The team struggled and strained violently for a few seconds in their
efforts to overcome the _vis inertiae_ of the sledge, and it seemed as
if the traces would part, but they were made of tough walrus hide, and
held on bravely, while the heavy vehicle gradually fetched way, and at
length flew over the floes at the rate of seven or eight miles an hour.
Travelling, however, was not now quite as agreeable as it had been when
they set out from the ship, for the floes were swept bare in some places
by the gale, while in other places large drifts had collected, so that
the sledge was either swaying to and fro on the smooth ice, and swinging
the dogs almost off their feet, or it was plunging heavily through banks
of soft snow.

As the wind was still blowing fresh, and would have been dead against
them had they attempted to return by a direct route to the ship, they
made for the shore, intending to avail themselves of the shelter
afforded by the ice-belt.  Meanwhile the carcass of the walrus, at least
as much of it as could not be packed on the sledge, was buried in the
hut, and a spear planted above it to mark the spot.

"Hah! an' it's cowld," said O'Riley, wrapping himself more closely in
his fur jumper as they sped along.  "I wish we wos out o' the wind, I
do."

"You'll have your wish soon, then," answered West, "for that row of
icebergs we're coming to will shelter us nearly all the way to the
land."

"Surely you are taking us too much off to the right, Meetuck," said
Fred; "we are getting farther away from the ship."

"No fee.  Be win' too 'trong.  We turn hup 'long shore very quick,
soon--ha!"

Meetuck accompanied each word with a violent nod of his head, at the
same time opening and shutting his mouth and winking with both eyes,
being apparently impressed with the conviction that such contortions of
visage rendered his meaning more apparent.

"Look! look! ho!  Nannook, nannook!"  (a bear, a bear!) whispered the
Esquimaux with sudden animation, just as they gained the lee of the
first iceberg.

The words were unnecessary, however, for the whole party were looking
ahead with the most intense eagerness at a bear which their sudden
advent had aroused from a nap in the crevice of the iceberg.  A little
cub was discerned a moment after, standing by her side, and gazing at
the intruders with infantine astonishment.  While the muskets were being
loosened and drawn out, Meetuck let slip all the dogs, and in a few
seconds they were engaged in active warfare with the enemy.

"Oh! musha!  Dumps is gone intirely!"  The quadruped referred to was
tossed to a height of about thirty feet, and alighted senseless upon the
ice.  The bear seized him with her teeth and tossed him with an
incredibly slight effort.  The other dogs, nothing daunted by the fate
of their comrade, attacked the couple in the rear, biting their heels,
and so distracting their attention that they could not make an energetic
attack in any direction.  Another of the dogs, however, a young one,
waxing reckless, ventured too near the old bear, and was seized by the
back, and hurled high into the air, through which it wriggled violently,
and descended with a sounding whack upon the ice.  At the same moment a
volley from the hunters sent several balls into the carcass of both
mother and cub; but, although badly wounded, neither of them evinced any
sign of pain and exhaustion as they continued to battle with the
remaining dogs.

The dogs that had already fallen in the fray had not been used to
bear-hunting--hence their signal defeat; but this was not the case with
the others, all of which were old campaigners; and Poker especially,
although not old in years, was a practical fighter, having been trained
not to attack but to harass.  The systematic and steady way in which
they advanced before the bear, and retired, right and left, leading her
into a profitless pursuit, was very interesting to witness.  Another
volley from the hunters caused them to make off more rapidly, and
wounded the cub severely, so much so that in a few minutes it began to
flag.  Seeing this, the mother placed it in front of her, and urged it
forward with her snout so quickly that it was with the utmost difficulty
the men could keep up with them.  A well-directed shot, however, from
Fred Ellice brought the old bear to the ground; but she rose instantly,
and again advanced, pushing her cub before her, while the dogs continued
to embarrass her.  They now began to fear that, in spite of dogs and
men, the wounded bears would escape, when an opportune crack in the ice
presented itself, into which they both tumbled, followed by the yelping,
and, we may add, limping, dogs.  Before they could scramble up on the
other side, Meetuck and Fred, being light of foot, gained upon them
sufficiently to make sure shots.

"There they go," cried Fred, as the she-bear bounced out of the crack
with Poker hanging to her heels.  Poker's audacity had at last
outstripped his sagacity, and the next moment he was performing a
tremendous somersault.  Before he reached the ice, Meetuck and Fred
fired simultaneously, and when the smoke cleared away, the old bear was
stretched out in death.  Hitherto the cub had acted exclusively on the
defensive, and entrusted itself entirely to the protection of its dam,
but now it seemed to change its character entirely.  It sprang upon its
mother's body, and, assuming an attitude of extreme ferocity, kept the
dogs at bay, snapping and snarling right and left until the hunters came
up.

For the first time since the chase began, a feeling of intense pity
touched Fred's heart, and he would have rejoiced at that moment had the
mother risen up, and made her escape with her cub.  He steeled his
heart, however, by reflecting that fresh provisions were much wanted on
board the _Dolphin_; still, neither he nor his shipmates could bring
themselves to shoot the gallant little animal, and it is possible that
they might have made up their minds to allow it to escape after all, had
not Meetuck quietly ended their difficulty by putting a ball through its
heart.

"Ah, then, Meetuck!" said O'Riley, shaking his head as they examined
their prize, "ye're a hard-hearted spalpeen, ye are, to kill a poor
little baby like that in cowld blood.  Well, it's yer natur', an' yer
trade, so I s'pose it's all right."

The weight of this bear, which was not of the largest size, was
afterwards found to be above five hundred pounds, and her length was
eight feet nine inches.  The cub weighed upwards of a hundred pounds,
and was larger than a Newfoundland dog.

The operation of cutting out the entrails, preparatory to packing on the
sledge, was now commenced by Meetuck, whose practised hand applied the
knife with the skill, though not with the delicacy, of a surgeon.

"She has been a hungry bear, it seems," remarked Fred, as he watched the
progress of the work, "if we may judge from the emptiness of her
stomach."

"Och, but she's had a choice morsel, if it was a small wan!" exclaimed
O'Riley in surprise, as he picked up a plug of tobacco.  On further
