their strength away to the opening through the reef; passed
through, and headed for the ship.

They now saw what they had not, at first, observed. At a distance
of some three miles astern were five large prahus, with their sails
set, and the banks of oars rising and falling rapidly. The brig was
chased by the pirates.

The boys rested on their paddles, for a moment.

"They are more than a match for her, I am afraid," Will said. "What
do you say, Hans, shall we go on, or not?"

Hans made no reply. He was never quick at coming to a decision.

"We had better go," Will went on. "We can see whether they mean to
fight, or not."

The boys were naked to the waist--for the thorns of the forest had
long since torn in pieces the shirts which they had on, when they
landed from the wreck--and their skins were bronzed to a deep
copper color Still, they differed in hue from the natives of the
island; and the men on board the brig regarded them with some
surprise, as they approached it.

"Throw us a rope!" Will shouted as they neared her.

There was a cry of surprise from the crew, at being addressed in
English; but a rope was thrown, and the boys soon sprang on board.
They saw, at once, that the ship was an English one.

"Hallo! Where do you spring from?" asked the captain.

"We were shipwrecked here, ten months ago," Will said, "and have
been living with the natives."

"At any other time, I should have been glad to see you," the
captain said; "but just at present, if you will take my advice, you
will get into your canoe and row on shore again.

"As you see," and he pointed to the prahus, "we are chased and,
although I mean to fight to the last--for there is no mercy to be
expected from these bloodthirsty scoundrels--I fear the chances are
small."

Will looked round and saw that the six cannons which the brig
carried--for vessels trading in the Eastern Archipelago are always
armed--had already been loosened ready for action; and that a group
of men were at work mounting a long gun, which had just been raised
from the hold. Knowing the number of men that the prahus carried,
Will felt that the chance of a successful resistance was slight.

There were about eighteen men on deck--a number larger than the
brig would carry in other seas, but necessary in so dangerous a
trading ground as this. The prahus, however, would each carry from
eighty to one hundred men; and these, attacking at once from
opposite sides, would be likely to bear down all opposition.

Suddenly an idea occurred to him.

"Look, sir, there is a passage through the reef, there; with plenty
of water and width enough for your ship. I can take her through.
There is no other passage, for some distance. If you take her
inside, and lay her across the channel, the prahus can only attack
on one side; and you can place all your guns and strength there."

The captain at once saw the advantage of this scheme.

"Capital!" he exclaimed. "Take the helm at once, my lad.

"Ease off the sheets, men."

They were now nearly opposite the entrance, and the light wind was
blowing towards the shore. The captain ordered all hands to reduce
sail, only keeping on enough to give the vessel steerage way. Two
boats were lowered, and an anchor and cable passed into each and,
as the brig passed through the opening, the rest of the sail was
lowered.

The boats rowed to the reef, one on either side. The anchors were
firmly fixed into the rock and, one being taken from the head and
the other from the stern, the crews set to work at the capstan, and
speedily had the vessel safely moored, broadside on, across the
entrance to the reef.

The Malay boats were now about a mile astern. They had ceased
rowing, when they saw the vessel headed for the land, supposing
that the captain was about to run on shore. When, to their
astonishment, they saw her pass the reef with safety, they again
set to at their work.

The guns were now all brought over to the side facing the entrance,
and were loaded to the muzzle with bullets. A number of shots,
belonging to the long gun, were placed by the bulwarks; in
readiness to hurl down into the prahus, should they get alongside.
The sailors--though determined to fight till the last--had, when
the boys came on board, been making their preparations with the
silence of despair. They were now in high spirits, for they felt
that they could beat off any attempt of the enemy to attack them.

When the Malays were abreast of the ship, they ceased rowing and
drew close together, and evidently held a consultation.

The brig at once opened fire with her long gun, and the first shot
hulled one of the prahus, close to the water's edge.

"That's right, Tom," the captain said, "stick to the same craft. If
you can sink her, there is one the less."

Several more shots were fired, with such effect that the Malays
were observed jumping overboard in great numbers, and swimming
towards the other boats--their own being in a sinking condition.
The other four prahus at once turned their heads towards shore, and
rowed with full speed towards the ship.

They knew that the entrance, of whose existence they had been
previously unaware, was an exceedingly narrow one and, as they
neared the shore, could see--by the line of breaking surf--that it
could, at most, be wide enough for one to pass at a time,
Accordingly one drew ahead and, discharging the cannon which it
carried in its bow, rowed at full speed for the entrance; another
following so close behind that its bow almost touched the stern.

"Train the guns to bear on the center of the channel," the captain
said. "Let the three bow guns take the first boat, the other three
the second.

"Do you, Tom, work away at the two behind."

The prahus came along at a great rate, the sweeps churning up the
water into foam. The leading boat dashed through the channel, the
sweeps grating on the rocks on either side. Her bow was but two
yards distant from the side of the ship when the captain gave the
word. The three cannon poured their contents into her, sweeping her
crowded decks and tearing out her bottom. Great as was her speed,
she sank below the water, just as her bow touched the side of the
ship.

Ten seconds later the command was again given; and a broadside, as
destructive, was poured into the second boat. The damage done was
somewhat less, and her bow reached the side of the ship. A dozen
Malays sprang on board, as their boat sank under their feet; but
the sailors were ready and, with musket, pistol, and cutlass fell
upon them, and either cut down or drove them overboard. The sea
around was covered with swimmers, but the ship was too high out of
the water for them to attempt to board her; and the Malays at once
struck out for the shore, the sailors keeping up the musketry fire
upon them, until out of range.

The other two boats had not followed. The mate had plumped a shot
from the long gun full into the bow of the first and--seeing the
destruction which had fallen upon their leaders--both turned their
heads and made for sea; the mate continuing his fire until they
were out of range, one shot carrying away the greater part of the
oars, on one side of the boat previously struck. When at a distance
of upwards of a mile they ceased rowing and, for some time, lay
close together. The men of the injured boat were observed to be
stopping the yawning hole in her bows, a few inches above the water
level; the other started off, at full speed, up the coast.

It was now evening, and there was scarcely a breath of wind. The
men crowded round the lads, and thanked them warmly for having been
the means of saving them from destruction.

"I am afraid you are not out of danger, yet," Will said, as the
captain shook him by the hand. "No doubt that boat has gone off
with the news and, before morning, you will have half a dozen fresh
enemies coming down, inside the reef, to attack you."

"If we had but a breath of wind, we might do," the captain said.

"I fear you will have none before morning; then it generally blows
fresh, for two or three hours. I don't know how far it is to the
village which is the headquarters of the pirates. As far as I could
make out, from the Malays with whom we have been living, it is
about six hours' walking; but the boats will row twice as fast as a
man would walk through the forest. In that case you may be attacked
at two or three o'clock in the morning, and you won't get the
breeze till after sunrise."

"Are there any other channels through the reef?" the captain asked.

"I do not know," Will replied. "We have never explored it very far,
either way; but as I should think, from the action of the Malays,
that they did not know of this, they might not know of any other,
did it exist."

"Then," the captain said, "I will warp the brig out through the
channel again; and anchor her, stem and stern, across it outside.
They will find it as hard to attack us, there, as they did before.
Then, when the breeze comes, we will slip our cable and run for it.
She is a fast sailer; and can, I think, get away from the pirates,
even with their sails and oars. Besides, by shifting the long gun
and two of the others to her stern, we can give it them so hot
that, even if they are the fastest, we may sicken them."

"I do not know, sir," Will said. "They would be likely to hang
about you, until the breeze drops; and then to attack you on all
sides at once. If we could but keep them from coming through the
channel, in pursuit, we should be safe."

"Ah! But how on earth are we to do that?" the captain asked.

William Gale was silent for a minute or two.

"Have you plenty of powder on board the ship, sir?"

"Plenty--we use it for barter."

"It seems to me--" Will went on, "--that if, before sailing, you
could sink a couple of barrels of powder in the channel, with a
fuse to explode them, a few minutes after we had left; the Malays
would be so astonished, at the explosion, that they would not
venture to pass through."

"Your idea is a capital one," the captain said, warmly; "but how
about a fuse which would burn under water?

"What do you think, Tom? Could it be managed?"

"I should think so, sir," the mate answered. "Suppose we take one
of those empty 30-gallon beer casks, and fill that up with
powder--it will hold ten or twelve of the little barrels--and then
we might bung it up, and make a hole in its head. Over the hole we
might fix a wine bottle, with the bottom knocked out; and so
fastened, with tow and oakum, that the water won't get in. Then we
might shove down through the mouth of the bottle, and through the
hole below it into the powder, a long strip of paper dipped in
saltpetre, to make touch paper of it. I don't know as a regular
fuse would do, as it might go out for want of air; but there would
be plenty to keep touch paper alight.

"We could sling three or four 18-pounder shots under the bottom of
the cask, to make it sink upright. Just before we slip our cables,
we might lower it down with the boats; lighting the fuse the last
thing, and sticking in the cork. If we don't put too much
saltpetre, it might burn for some minutes before it reached the
powder."

"It's worth trying, at any rate," the captain said; "but I fear it
would not burn long enough. I think that, instead of a bottle, we
might jam a piece of iron tube--six or eight feet long--into the
head of the cask, and cut a bung to fit it. In that way we could
get a good length of fuse."

This plan was carried out. A large cask was filled with powder; and
an iron tube, three inches in diameter and six feet long, fitted
into it, and made water tight. A long strip of paper, after being
dipped in water in which gunpowder had been dissolved; was then
dried, rolled tight, and lowered down the tube, until it touched
the powder. A bung was cut to fit the top of the tube; a piece of
wash-leather being placed over it, to ensure its being perfectly
water tight. The top of the fuse was then cut level with the pipe.
Several bits of iron were lashed to the lower end of the cask, to
make it sink upright; and the cask was steadily lowered into a boat
lying alongside the ship, in readiness for use.

The sailors entered into the preparations with the glee of
schoolboys; but the machine was not ready until long after the ship
had been towed out again through the channel, and moored broadside
to it, just outside.



Chapter 8: The Torpedo.


It was about two o'clock in the morning when the watch awoke the
crew, with the news that they could hear the distant sound of oars
coming along the shore. All took their places, in silence. After a
time the rowing ceased, and all was quiet again. Half an hour
passed, and then there was a slight sound close alongside and, in
the channel, they could dimly make out a small boat--which was
rapidly rowed away into the darkness again, several musket shots
being fired after it.

"They have sent on ahead, to find if we were lying in the same
berth," the captain said. "I expect they will be puzzled when they
hear that we are outside, and that the entrance is guarded. I
should not be surprised if they did not attack before morning. They
had such a lesson, yesterday, that I don't think they will try to
force the channel in our teeth again; but will play the waiting
game, sure that they will secure us, sooner or later."

So it turned out. The hours passed slowly on, but no sound was
heard. Then, in the dim morning light, a pirate fleet of eight
prahus was seen, lying at a distance of half a mile within the
reef.

As the day broke, the breeze sprang up, the sails were hoisted, and
the captain prepared to slip his cables. A similar preparation
could, through the glasses, be observed on board the Malay fleet.

"That will do very well," the captain said. "Those fellows will be
along in about eight or ten minutes after we have started; and the
fuse, according to the experiments we made as to its rate of
burning, will last about seven.

"Now, quick, lads, into the boat.

"Tom, you take charge of the sinking."

In another minute the boat was rowed to the channel, and the cask
lowered over the side. It was held there, for a minute, while the
mate struck a light and applied it to the touch paper. Then he
pressed the bung firmly into the top of the tube, the lashings of
the cask were cut, and the boat rowed back to the ship. The anchors
were already on board, and the brig was getting way on her as the
boat rowed alongside. The men jumped on board, and the boat was
suffered to tow behind, while all hands set the whole of the sails.
The vessel was soon running briskly before the land breeze.

The pirate fleet was instantly in motion. Every eye in the ship was
directed towards them.

"They will be there in less than ten minutes from the moment I
lowered the cask," the mate said, looking at his watch.

"Not much," the captain said, "they are rowing fast, now; but the
trees keep off the wind, and their sails do not help them. They
were a minute or two behind us in starting."

It was just eight minutes, from the time when the cask had been
lowered, that the first of the Malay boats rowed out through the
channel.

"I hope nothing has gone wrong," the mate growled.

"I am not afraid of that; though we may be wrong, a minute or two,
as to the length of the fuse."

