best he could for those under him.

"It was a lucky thing for me that I took that walk on the Brooklyn
Bridge," he reasoned. "Perhaps I shouldn't have gotten the job
otherwise."

The clerk, Wilson, proved kind and considerate, and under him our hero
learned rapidly.

"Didn't I tell you that you'd strike luck," said Dick. "Now, all you've
got to do is to nurse that job carefully, and you'll be at the top of
the firm some day."

"Well, I am going to nurse it as carefully as I can," laughed Nat.

When our hero had time he went to the police headquarters to see if
anything had been learned of Nick Smithers.

"Nothing yet," said the officer in charge. "But I think he'll be run
down sooner or later."

"I'd like to run him down myself."

"I've no doubt you would."

Nat had been working for Mr. Garwell about a week when he received
another letter from Sam Price. Sam wrote, in part, as follows:

     "Since I sent my last letter, there have been great changes at your
     uncle's farm. He has discharged the housekeeper, and some say he is
     courting the Widow Guff. For all I know they'll be married pretty
     soon. More than that, I heard somebody say that he was thinking of
     coming to New York to look for you."

Nat read this communication with close attention. He knew the Widow Guff
as a person who took boarders in the town where he had sold his cow. She
had three children, and had the reputation of being a rather tart and
self-willed woman.

"I shouldn't think Uncle Abner would want to marry that widow," thought
Nat. "Wonder what put it into his head? And what put it into his head to
come to New York to look for me? I'd rather he would keep his distance."

Nat did not know that for the past few months the Widow Guff had had a
hard time of it with a number of her boarders, and could scarcely make
both ends meet, yet such was a fact.

One day the widow called on a friend, and from this friend learned that
Abner Balberry had discharged his housekeeper, and was keeping house by
himself.

"It's a shame for him to be all alone," thought the widow. "And with
that nephew of his away, too! Some good woman ought to be keeping house
for him."

The widow had long had her eye on Abner Balberry, whom she knew fairly
well. She knew Abner was well-to-do, and keeping a boarding house seemed
of a sudden a great burden to her.

"Wish I could make Abner propose," she said to herself. "He just ought
to have a wife."

So the widow kept on thinking, and by and by her face brightened. She
had an idea, which she resolved to put into execution the very first
opportunity.

"Fred," said she to her son, a tall gawk of a boy, "I want you to go to
Mr. Abner Balberry's house, and ask him if he will stop in and see me
the first time he comes to town."

"Wot do yer want, ma?" drawled Fred.

"Never mind, Fred. Just ask him to call. Say I'd like a little advice
from him."

Fred shuffled off on his errand, and found Nat's uncle down in the
henhouse, searching for eggs.

"Ma wants you to come and see her," said the youth.

"Wants me to come an' see her?" queried Nat's uncle.

"Yep."

"What for?"

"Dunno. Said she'd like some advice."

"All right; I'll come," said Abner.

That afternoon, after milking, he arrayed himself in his best, and drove
over to the widow's boarding house. He was glad to make the visit, for
since discharging his housekeeper he had found life on the farm rather
lonely.

The widow greeted him warmly, and asked him into her parlor, closing the
doors, so that nobody might interrupt them. She seemed somewhat
embarrassed.

"Fred told me that you would like to see me," commenced Nat's uncle.

"Yes, Abner, I do; but I'm afraid you'll think it strange of me--at
least of what I have to say to you."

"Oh, that's all right, Lucy; you know you kin trust me," he replied.

"Suppose,"--the widow cast down her eyes,--"mind, I am only supposing a
case--suppose a person should find a pot full of gold pieces in an old
well, would the law have a right to touch it, or would it belong to the
finder?"

At the mention of a pot of gold, Abner Balberry became exceedingly
interested. As we know, he was very miserly, and he realized that a pot
of gold would be worth a good deal of money.

"A pot of gold, Lucy," he said. "Why, unquestionably, the law would have
nothing to do with it."

"Could the one who had owned the house years before, or lived in the
place, come forward and claim it?"

"No, Lucy; I think not."

"Thank you, very much, Abner, for your advice. The--er--question just
came into my--er--mind, and I wanted to satisfy myself; that's all."

"Certainly, widow, certainly," answered Nat's uncle. He wanted to ask
some questions, but did not dare.

"Now you are here, you must take supper with me," went on the Widow
Guff.

"Thank you, Lucy, you are very kind----"

"I know you haven't any housekeeper any more, and nobody to cook for
you. Yes, stay by all means."

The widow was a fairly good cook, and Nat's uncle ate with a relish all
that was offered to him, ending with a piece of berry pie which was
particularly fine. He spent a social hour after the meal, and then drove
home in a thoughtful mood.

"Is it possible that the widow really found a pot of gold in the well?"
he thought. "She didn't really say so, but it was mighty odd for her to
ask me such questions. I'll have to look into this a bit." And then he
got to thinking that the widow was not such a bad-looking woman after
all, and a wife with a pot of gold would be a very nice thing to
possess.

About a week later Abner Balberry had occasion to go to town, to draw a
little money from the bank, with which to pay for a cow he had
purchased. He was passing the widow's home when she came out on the
piazza and nodded to him.

"Good-morning," she said.

"Good-morning," he returned, and stopped for a chat. During the course
of the conversation he mentioned his errand, and she said she was going
to the bank too. He asked her to ride to the institution, and she
accepted the invitation. When they arrived there he told her he would
wait until she was through. Then he went around to a side window of the
bank, where he might hear what took place.

The widow tripped up to the window.

"Can you give me change for a ten-dollar gold piece?" she asked.

"With pleasure, Mrs. Guff," was the answer, and the change for the gold
piece was immediately forthcoming.

"By the way," went on the widow, "the bank is in quite a flourishing
condition, is it not?"

"We are doing finely, yes."

"And you receive deposits, do you not?"

"Of course."

"Do you receive as high as--as five thousand dollars?"

"No," answered the cashier, in some surprise. "Three thousand dollars
from one depositor is our limit. Do you know of anybody who----"

"It's of no consequence," interrupted the widow, hurriedly. "I only
asked out of curiosity. How much interest do you pay?"

"Four per cent. on the first thousand and three per cent. on the
remainder."

"Thank you, and much obliged for the change. Good-morning," and the
Widow Guff tripped out lightly and hurried up the street.

Abner Balberry had overheard every word and his face was a study as he
went into the bank to draw what he wanted, thirty dollars.

"Jest had the Widow Guff here, didn't you?" he said, lightly.

"Yes, Mr. Balberry." The cashier paused. "Do you know if anybody has
left her money lately?" he continued.

"Not that I know on? Why?"

"Oh, she was asking what rate of interest we paid, and if we took as
high as five thousand dollars."

"I see. Well, I don't know nothin' about it," and Abner Balberry
pocketed his money and his bank book, and walked out after the widow.

If he had been in deep thought before he was more so now. Was it
possible that the widow had found five thousand dollars?

"She changed a ten-dollar piece," he reasoned. "I reckon I kin see
through a millstone when there's a hole through it. Tell ye what, a
widder with five thousand in gold ain't to be sneezed at! I wonder if
anybody else knows o' this? Hope they don't!"

That evening the farmer sat up till late, thinking the situation over.
He did not wish for a wife so much, but he did wish to get his hands on
that pot of gold.

"If I want her I'll have to propose before some other feller hears o'
this," he told himself.

The farmer made it his business to go to town two days later, and drove
past the widow's house very slowly. She saw him from a window, and
nodded and smiled.

This was encouraging, and on returning from his errand, he tied up in
front of the place, and rang the bell.

"Oh, Abner, I am delighted to see you!" said the widow, on coming to the
door. "Come in."

"Thank you, Lucy," he answered, and entered the parlor.

"It was so good of you to come," she simpered. "I wanted somebody to
talk to."

"Anything special?" he asked, curiously.

"I have received notice to leave this house. I guess Mr. Haskell, the
owner, wishes it for himself." She did not add that her rent was about
due, and she did not know how to meet the payment.

"Where do you think of going, widow?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Abner. I haven't a single place. You know I'm
all alone in the world."

She looked at him fondly, and he at once fell into the trap.

"Better come an' live with me, Lucy."

"Oh, Abner! What do you mean?"

"I mean that I think a heap o' you, Lucy, an' I'd like you fer my wife.
I know as how we could git along fine together," answered Nat's uncle,
earnestly. Just then that pot of gold seemed almost within his reach.

The widow blushed, and pretended to be greatly surprised.

"I--I never dreamed of this, Abner!" she whispered. "It's--it's so
sudden."

"But you ain't goin' to say no, are you?"

"Well, I--I----" She blushed again. "I must say I like you a great deal,
Abner."

"Then say yes."

"Well, I will," declared the widow, and then she allowed him to kiss
her. Abner felt very happy, and asked her to set the day at once.

"Bein' as you're to git out o' this house, you might as well give up the
boarders, an' come to my house at once," he said.

The widow consented, and said she would marry him in ten days. He drove
home almost in a dream, and at once had the house put in order, and
actually bought himself a new suit of clothes and a new hat.

"It's a good bit o' money to spend," he reasoned. "But I've got to do
the proper thing, or she won't feel like lettin' go o' that gold."

When the time came, they were married in the local church, and then he
drove her home. Her furniture had already arrived. She at once took
possession of the place, and began to set things to rights.

"I won't ask her about that pot o' gold jest yet," mused Abner. "I'll
have to wait a few days at least."




CHAPTER XVI

ABNER VISITS NEW YORK


Several days passed, and Nat's uncle did all in his power to please his
new wife. He found her very tart at times, and inclined to have her own
way, but she was a good cook and general housekeeper, and that counted
for a great deal.

"It won't do to cross her," he told himself. "I've got to find out about
thet gold first."

At last he could stand the suspense no longer and so, one day, while at
the dinner table, he told the story of a rich find of money by a lady in
Philadelphia.

"It was in the weekly paper," said he, "and by the way," he went on,
"what about the pot of gold you found?"

"The pot of gold I found?" she repeated, blankly.

"Yes, the one you found in the well. What did you do with it?"

"Why, I never found any pot of gold in a well, Abner! What put that in
your head?"

He shoved back his chair in horror, and gazed at her blankly.

"Didn't you tell me you had found a pot of gold in a well, Lucy?" he
demanded.

"Never!"

"Certainly, you did. You asked me if you could keep it or if the law
could take it from you. I told you the law couldn't touch it."

"Oh, I remember now!" she answered, sweetly. "I read about such a find
in a story magazine, and I was wondering if the finder could keep it, or
if it would have to be turned over to the person who owned the property
on which the well was located. But I certainly never said anything about
my finding a pot of gold."

"Well, I'll be jiggered! Didn't you go to the bank an' ask 'em if they
would take five thousand dollars?"

"Oh, I was only curious to know how much they would take, that was all,
Abner." And she smiled again.

Abner could not endure that smile, and pushing back his chair still
further, he arose and left the house. Once in the barn he shook his fist
viciously at an imaginary enemy.

"Of all the fools!" he muttered. "I've been tuk in clean an' clear! She
ain't got no pot o' gold, an' never did have! If this ain't jest the
worst yet. Abner Balberry, you ought to be kicked full o' holes, and
ducked in the pond besides!"

He felt in no mental condition to go back to the house, and so did not
return until it was time for supper. He found a good meal awaiting him,
and his wife on hand as pert as ever.

"What made you run off?" she demanded. "It wasn't a nice way to do."

"You fooled me about thet pot o' gold," he answered, bluntly.

"I never did, and I want you to stop talking about it, Abner Balberry."

This was said so sharply it fairly made him jump.

"Eh?"

"Did you marry me simply for my money?" she demanded, coming up to him
with her hands on her hips.

"N--no!" he stammered.

"Well, then, stop talking about a pot o' gold. I haven't any, and
neither have you."

"Ain't you got no money o' your own, Lucy?"

"If I have I'm going to keep it to myself," she answered. "Come to
supper."

He sat down and ate in silence. The next day he wanted to speak about
money again, but she cut him short.

"I don't want to hear about it," she said, tartly. "I'm your wife, and I
am going to do my share, keeping house and helping around. And you have
got to do your share, and treat me fairly. I once heard that the first
Mrs. Balberry didn't get all that was coming to her--that she had to
wear the same dress and bonnet for years. Now, I want to say, right now,
that isn't my style. When I want a new dress I want it, and you are
going to give it to me."

"Am I?" he said, slowly.

"Yes, you are, Abner Balberry, and if I want spending money you have got
