as he rang to back the boat.

She backed down the stream about twenty rods, and then he stopped her.
He then ordered Clingman to draw a piece of sailcloth over the stem, to
prevent the dead pines from scratching the paint on the bow. As soon as
this was done, she went ahead again at full speed, and the captain
called to the engineer to give her all the steam he could. She went
ahead at a furious rate, and Scott pointed her to what seemed to be the
weakest place in the barrier.

"Now hold on, fellows, or she will tip you over!" shouted the captain as
the boat approached the obstruction.

She struck the mass of pines, and drove her bow far into it, but stopped
without going through it. The barrier was not solid, and was held
together by the entanglement of the bushes as they were driven into the
nucleus of the mass by the current.

"We can't cut through in that way," said Scott, as he looked at the
half-sundered bridge.

"We don't want to take the back track," added Louis.

"There are more ways than one to skin a mosquito, and we haven't half
tried yet," replied the captain. "The thing is softer than I supposed,
and yielded when the boat hit it. I could go through, but it would take
all the paint off the sides. Get out the anchor, Clingman, and we will
see what can be done."

"I think we shall stick fast enough without anchoring," said Morris with
a laugh.

"Wait a few minutes, my hearty; for I was not thinking of coming to
anchor just now," answered Scott, as he went forward to the stem, and
mounted the rail.

The anchor was stowed under the forward seat; and Clingman, after
overhauling the cable, passed it up to the captain. It was not very
heavy, and with a skilful toss he threw it just over the edge of the
barrier on the up-stream side. All wondered what he was going to do, for
they saw no way to get through by means of the anchor; but they were
willing to believe that the captain knew what he was about, and they
said nothing.

"Now pay out about fifty feet of cable," continued Scott, as he rang the
gong to back her. "Haul steady on it till you are sure it is fast in the
stuff, Clingman."

The seaman humored the cable till he was unable to haul the rope home,
and then reported the situation. The boat continued to back till the
cable was hauled taut, when he stopped her. Then he spoke through the
tube to the engineer, and rang the gong. The craft moved again, but very
gently, for Scott was afraid the anchor would not hold; but it did, and
speaking through the tube, he gradually increased the speed. The cable
swayed and groaned, and it was evident that a heavy strain was upon it.
The barrier was shaking and quivering under the pressure, and it was
plain that something would yield very soon.

"Hurrah!" shouted Felix, who was looking over the bow at the bridge of
pines; and the cry was repeated by the rest of the cabin party, and
taken up by the sailors. "Bully for you, Captain Scott! Upon me wurrud,
ye's have skinned the muskitty!"

This demonstration was called forth by the rupture of the barrier in two
places, so that about one-half of it gave way, and was towed down stream
by the steamer. Scott kept the craft moving till he found a place in the
green banks of the river to leave the tow, for it was wide enough to
obstruct the channel.

"Clingman and Wales, jump on the raft with the boathooks, and crowd the
stuff over to the starboard side," said the captain when he had found
the place he wanted.

He stopped the boat, and then went ahead, to enable the men to get upon
the mass, after they had thrown a couple of boards upon it to stand on.
Backing her again, he hugged the starboard side of the stream, and drew
the raft abreast of the place, and close to it, where it was to be left.
The men on it hooked into the screw-pines, and hauled it into the
opening. Pulling vines from the trees, they moored it where it was. As
soon as the two men came aboard the boat, the captain went ahead again.

"You did that job handsomely, Captain Scott," said Louis. "I thought the
only way we could get through was by cutting a passage for the boat."

"That would have taken too long," replied Scott, as he called Clinch to
the wheel. "Mind your eye! for the river is very crooked up here. Look
out for the swing as she goes around the bends."

The boat had not gone a great distance when she came to a considerable
expanse of territory which had been swept over by fire. The party did
not think that the green bushes would burn; but they had burned so that
nothing was left of them but the blackened stems, and there was no room
for an argument.

"When the fire gets started, it scorches and dries the bushes till they
will burn," Louis explained. "But what are we coming to now?" he asked,
looking ahead where the country seemed to be level, and covered with a
sheet of water, in which the screw-pines were abundant.

"That must be one of your lakes, Louis," added the captain.

"If it is mine, I will sell it to you," replied he.

"I don't want to buy; but I am not so sure that we can get through as
shoal a place as that seems to be, for it is only the spreading out of
the river. The greater the expanse, the less the depth. How is that,
Achang?"

"Plenty water; float the boat," answered the Bornean. "Little Padang
Lake. Plenty pandanus."

"What are pandanuses?" asked Scott.

"The plural of the word is pandanaceae; and they are the same thing as
the screw-pines, and sometimes are found thirty feet high. There is one;
and you can see roots starting out of the stem, and heading downward.
The leaves are very useful to the natives. We shall get tied in a hard
knot if we follow the twists of this stream much farther."

Presently the boat came to the lake. The captain was considerably
exercised about the depth of water; and as they entered the lake, which
was not very different from the overflowed region they had visited that
day, he ordered the wheelman to stop her.

"There must be some sort of a channel through this pond," said he,
looking about him. "There is a bigger lake than this one farther up.
There are mountains in sight in the distance, and the water from them
must find an outlet to the sea."

"I have no doubt you are right; and probably there is a channel through
this lake, for its water must get to the sea, unless it dries up on the
way," added Louis.

"It will be easier to find this channel near the river than it will when
we are half-way across the lake;" and the captain sent two men with
Morris in the sampan to search for it.

The water was tolerably clear; and they went to the mouth of the outlet,
sounding all the time with the boathooks. They found the channel at this
point, and then followed it up beyond the steamer. Morris shouted that
the sampan was in the channel, and the Blanchita moved into it. The
searching-party returned to the steamer. Morris was the mate; and, with
the two men who had gone with him, he was directed to keep the run of
the deeper water.

In another half-hour they came to the forest again, though the trees
were growing in the shallow lake. Achang was hard at work all the time,
taking all the pains with his operation which Louis had required of him;
but his occupation did not prevent him from looking about him, and he
soon made a discovery.

"Mias! Mias!" he shouted, pointing to a tall tree a few rods from the
boat. "Mias fast asleep!"

All the party looked in the direction indicated, and saw the orang. He
was lying on his back in the crotch of the tree, holding on with both
hands to the branches. He must have been a heavy sleeper or the puffing
of the engine would have aroused him. But Louis would not fire at him,
as Scott suggested. He had a bigger orang than the one in the tree, and
he did not want another. As he would not fire, Felix refused to do so,
and the mias was left to finish his nap.

A little later in the day the boat came to Padang Lake; but they were
disappointed when they found it was filled with screw-pines, though they
could see open water, in one direction quite a large sheet of it.
Following the channel, they reached the open space. The boat had hardly
passed the limit of the screw-pines before Clingman shouted, "Fish!"

The captain rang the gong, the boat stopped, and fishlines were in
demand. The flesh of the orang was used for bait; and in a few minutes
Morris hauled up a fish so large that it taxed all his strength and
skill to get him into the boat.




CHAPTER XIII

THE CAPTAIN'S ASTOUNDING PROPOSITION


All the cabin party had their lines out, but not another fish was
caught. The place where they fished seemed to be a hole, and the water
was deep and clear. Perhaps Morris's struggle with the big fish had
scared the others away, for not another could be seen. The day was done,
and it was growing dark. It was decided to anchor where they were, and
spend the night there; and they hoped the fish would be in biting
condition the next morning.

Achang called the fish the gourami, or something like that; but beyond
this nothing was known about him. Louis, who was generally posted, could
tell his companions nothing about it. But Pitts had cut it up, and it
was fried for supper. The flesh was hard, and the flavor excellent.
There was enough of it for all hands, and the supper amounted to a
feast. A heavy thunder-shower made the evening very gloomy; but the
canvas roof and curtains of the Blanchita fully protected the party from
the rain, which fell in sheets for full two hours.

The next morning when the party turned out, the weather was as pleasant
as they could desire, and the air was cleared and freshened by the
shower. The first thing they did was to throw over their lines; for
they could see the fish through the clear water of the lake. In about as
many minutes they had hooked four fish, though not one of them was so
large as the one Morris had caught the evening before. But at that point
they ceased to bite, and not another nibble was had. Either the fish did
not like the looks of the boat, handsome as she was, which would have
been very bad taste on their part, or the struggles of those which had
been hauled in frightened them away. Very likely the fish could have
explained the reason for their sudden disappearance; but they did not,
and it remained a mystery.

They had an ice-chest on board, and Mr. Eng had replenished it at
Simujan. Pitts dressed the fish, and put them in the refrigerator. For
breakfast they had fresh pork, and it was much better than that they had
had before. They had learned to drink coffee without milk, for it was
not often that it could be procured away from the larger towns.

"I say, fellows, don't you think there can be too much of a good thing?"
asked Captain Scott at the head of the table.

"Of course there can be too much of a good thing; for a fellow might eat
ice-cream till his throat was frozen," replied Felix.

"Almost anything becomes a bad thing when you have too much of it,"
added Louis. "But I think we could have stood about four more of those
nice fish. What is the moral of all this, Captain?"

"With me the moral is that I have had hunting enough for the present,"
replied Scott. "I should like a little more variety in our daily life."

"I don't think I should care to go hunting more than one day in a week,
or, at most, two," replied Louis. "We have had it right along for a
week; and, as you suggest, that's too much of a good thing."

"But it was you, Louis, who went in for three weeks of it," added the
captain.

"Simply because I thought it would take the Guardian-Mother and the
Blanche about that time to visit Siam and French Cochin-China."

"I suppose if we had made our trip up these rivers in a sampan, we
should not have got so far inland in another week," added Morris.

"I don't think we should have come up here at all if the Blanchita had
not been available," said Louis. "But we are close to the mountains now,
and I am in favor of a tramp on shore."

"All right; and after breakfast we will get under way, for I must attend
to the navigation," replied Scott; "and I suppose Felipe has steam
enough by this time."

They left the table, and Scott went to the wheel. To save time and
trouble, the men took their meals in the after cabin, and the engineer
had the head of the table. Both Louis and Felix had run the engine of
the Maud a portion of the time on her memorable voyage from Funchal to
Gibraltar, and the former was sent to the engine-room. The boat went
ahead; and after passing through a section of pandanus, they came to an
open lake, which they judged to be five miles long.

The water was shallow, though deep enough for the steamer. The captain
opened the binnacle, and headed the Blanchita to the north. It was a
very quiet time, and the boat went along at her usual speed. In little
less than half an hour she reached the head of the lake; but there was
no convenient landing-place for a craft of her draught, and she was
anchored at a considerable distance from the shore. Achang and two of
the seamen were directed to attend the "Big Four," and they were landed
in the sampan.

Each of the cabin party took his fowling-piece, while Achang had a
rifle, and each of the sailors carried one, the latter to be used by the
young men if they were wanted. They had walked but a short distance
before they came to a steep precipice about twenty feet high, at which a
notched log had been placed by some former visitors, as they supposed;
but as soon as they had mounted it, they came upon a Dyak long-house,
which might have been better called a short-house, for it contained but
six doors, and therefore the tax upon the village need not have caused
any grumbling.

The dwelling was not now a novelty, neither were the Dyak men and
maidens; for the latter were not as pretty as several they had seen on
the river. They were very hospitable, and invited the party to enter
the house, which they did; but there was little to interest them there.
Achang talked with them, and the head man said they caught plenty of
fish in the lake, and they snared pigs, deer, monkeys, and other game.
He engaged a couple of guides for the mountains.

The game was plentiful, and the hunters shot several deer, a pig, and a
Malay bear; but they were not enthusiastic hunters, considering that
they had come to Borneo for that purpose. After a four hours' tramp they
all thought they had had enough of it. Felix declared that he preferred
to hunt cobras and tigers, for all the game seemed to be very tame to
him. Seating themselves on the ground, they rested for an hour, and then
started on their return to the boat. All the game was given to the Dyak
guides, who were very glad to get it. They swung it on a pole, and
trotted along with their load as though it had been no burden at all.

"They do that all day," said Achang. "Never get tired."

"They have load enough to feed the village for a week," added the
captain. "I should not care for the fun of feeding them another week,
for I find hunting here very tame business."

"My sintimints also," added Felix.

After a walk of another hour they reached the Dyak house, and the whole
population of the place followed them to the shore. They were filled
with wonder and admiration at the sight of the Blanchita, and went off
to her in their sampans. They were permitted to go on board; but when
Felipe fed the fire in the furnace, and the steam began to hiss, some of
them were frightened, and fled to their boats.

Dinner was all ready when the party went on board; and Achang was
instructed to send off the guests, for the boat was to get under way at
once. They got into their sampans; but they remained near the Blanchita,
evidently desirous to see her sail. They had not to wait long, for the
anchor was weighed, and the captain rang the gong. She went off at her
usual speed, and the Dyaks expressed their astonishment in various ways.

"Dinner all ready, gentlemen," said Pitts as soon as the steamer was
well under way.

"What have you for dinner, Pitts?" asked the captain.

"Baked fish, Captain, in two pieces; for he was too long to go into my
oven," replied the cook.

"All right. Take the wheel, Clingman, and make the course due south."

"Due south, sir," repeated the wheelman.

The party hastened to the after cabin; for they were hungry after their
long tramp, though they had taken a light lunch with them. The fish, "in
two pieces," was placed before the captain; while Pitts stood by his
side, ready to pass the plates, and hear any comments the captain might
make on the principal viand.

The odor from the steaming fish was emphatically agreeable to the hungry
hunters, and so was the soft divan to their tired legs. Scott helped the
members of the party to liberal portions of the dainty dish, and without
pausing for manners they began to partake. When the captain had tasted
the fish, he stopped short, and looked at Pitts. Then he reached out his
right hand to him.

"Your hand, Pitts!" and the cook took it, his face wreathed in smiles.
"You have cooked a dish here, Pitts, which is fit for any king on the
continent of Europe, to say nothing of Asia."

The rest of the party applauded vigorously, and every one of them,
following the example of the captain, took the cook by the hand, and
bestowed additional praise upon him; and Louis declared that he could
not have done better if he had served his time as a _cuisinier_ in the
Grand Hotel in Paris. But the most telling tribute to the skill of the
cook was in the amount consumed; and the captain expressed a fear that
the engineer and five seamen would have to "kiss the cook."

"It is only a woman cook that gets served in that way, and then not
unless she is good looking," replied Pitts, laughing. "But you need have
no fear, Captain, and the second table will have no occasion to kiss the
cook, even it were one of the pretty girls we saw at the long-house
below; for I have another fish in the oven, and it will be done by the
time they are ready for it."

"That's right, Pitts; look out for the men as well as you do for the
rest of us," added the captain. "Now, fellows, I am going to the wheel;
and I want to see all of you in the fore cabin, for I have something to
say, and we may have occasion to vote."

