
But what they proceeded to do My Lady never knew; for she was so
frightened at the long words that she ran for her life, and locked
herself into her bedroom, for fear of being squashed by the words and
strangled by the sentence. A boa constrictor, she said, was bad company
enough: but what was a boa constrictor made of paving stones?

"It was quite shocking! What can they think is the matter with him?"
said she to the old nurse.

"That his wit's just addled; may be wi' unbelief and heathenry," quoth
she.

"Then why can't they say so?"

And the heaven, and the sea, and the rocks, and the vales
re-echoed--"Why indeed?" But the doctors never heard them.

So she made Sir John write to the _Times_ to command the Chancellor of
the Exchequer for the time being to put a tax on long words;--

A light tax on words over three syllables, which are necessary evils,
like rats: but, like them, must be kept down judiciously.

A heavy tax on words over four syllables, as _heterodoxy_,
_spontaneity_, _spiritualism_, _spuriosity_, _etc._

And on words over five syllables (of which I hope no one will wish to
see any examples), a totally prohibitory tax.

And a similar prohibitory tax on words derived from three or more
languages at once; words derived from two languages having become so
common that there was no more hope of rooting out them than of rooting
out peth-winds.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer, being a scholar and a man of sense,
jumped at the notion; for he saw in it the one and only plan for
abolishing Schedule D: but when he brought in his bill, most of the
Irish members, and (I am sorry to say) some of the Scotch likewise,
opposed it most strongly, on the ground that in a free country no man
was bound either to understand himself or to let others understand him.
So the bill fell through on the first reading; and the Chancellor,
being a philosopher, comforted himself with the thought that it was not
the first time that a woman had hit off a grand idea and the men turned
up their stupid noses thereat.

Now the doctors had it all their own way; and to work they went in
earnest, and they gave the poor professor divers and sundry medicines,
as prescribed by the ancients and moderns, from Hippocrates to
Feuchtersleben, as below, viz.--

  1. _Hellebore, to wit_--
         _Hellebore of AEta._
         _Hellebore of Galatia._
         _Hellebore of Sicily._
         _And all other Hellebores, after the method of the
            Helleborising Helleborists of the Helleboric era.
            But that would not do. Bumpsterhausen's blue follicles
            would not stir an inch out of his encephalo digital
            region._

  2. _Trying to find out what was the matter with him, after the
        method of_
       _Hippocrates_,
       _Aretaeus_,
       _Celsus_,
       _C[oe]lius Aurelianus_,
       _And Galen_.

But they found that a great deal too much trouble, as most people have
since; and so had recourse to--

  3. _Borage._
     _Cauteries._

Boring a hole in his head to let out fumes, which (says Gordonius)
"will, without doubt, do much good." But it didn't.

   _Bezoar stone._
   _Diamargaritum._
   _A ram's brain boiled in spice._
   _Oil of wormwood._
   _Water of Nile._
   _Capers._
   _Good wine (but there was none to be got)._
   _The water of a smith's forge._
   _Hops._
   _Ambergris._
   _Mandrake pillows._
   _Dormouse fat._
   _Hares' ears._
   _Starvation._
   _Camphor._
   _Salts and senna._
   _Musk._
   _Opium._
   _Strait-waistcoats._
   _Bullyings._
   _Bumpings._
   _Blisterings._
   _Bleedings._
   _Bucketings with cold water._
   _Knockings down._
   _Kneeling on his chest till they broke it in,
      etc. etc.; after the mediaeval or monkish
      method: but that would not do. Bumpsterhausen's
      blue follicles stuck there still._

Then--

  4. _Coaxing._
     _Kissing._
     _Champagne and turtle._
     _Red herrings and soda water._
     _Good advice._
     _Gardening._
     _Croquet._
     _Musical soirees._
     _Aunt Sally._
     _Mild tobacco._
     _The Saturday Review._
     _A carriage with outriders, etc. etc._

After the modern method. But that would not do.

And if he had but been a convict lunatic, and had shot at the Queen,
killed all his creditors to avoid paying them, or indulged in any other
little amiable eccentricity of that kind, they would have given him in
addition--

The healthiest situation in England, on Easthampstead Plain.

Free run of Windsor Forest.

The _Times_ every morning.

A double-barrelled gun and pointers, and leave to shoot three Wellington
College boys a week (not more) in case black game was scarce.

But as he was neither mad enough nor bad enough to be allowed such
luxuries, they grew desperate, and fell into bad ways, viz.--

  5. _Suffumigations of sulphur._
     _Herrwiggius his "Incomparable drink for madmen"_:

Only they could not find out what it was.

    _Suffumigation of the liver of the fish * * *_

Only they had forgotten its name, so Dr. Gray could not well procure
them a specimen.

    _Metallic tractors._
    _Holloway's Ointment._
    _Electro-biology._
    _Valentine Greatrakes his Stroking Cure._
    _Spirit-rapping._
    _Holloway's Pills._
    _Table-turning._
    _Morison's Pills._
    _Hom[oe]opathy._
    _Parr's Life Pills._
    _Mesmerism._
    _Pure Bosh._
    _Exorcisms, for which they read Maleus Maleficarum, Nideri
       Formicarium, Delrio, Wierus, etc._

But could not get one that mentioned water-babies.

    _Hydropathy._
    _Madame Rachel's Elixir of Youth._
    _The Poughkeepsie Seer his Prophecies._
    _The distilled liquor of addle eggs._
    _Pyropathy._

As successfully employed by the old inquisitors to cure the malady of
thought, and now by the Persian Mollahs to cure that of rheumatism.

    _Geopathy, or burying him._
    _Atmopathy, or steaming him._
    _Sympathy, after the method of Basil Valentine his Triumph
        of Antimony, and Kenelm Digby his Weapon-salve, which some
        call a hair of the dog that bit him._
    _Hermopathy, or pouring mercury down his throat to move the
        animal spirits._
    _Meteoropathy, or going up to the moon to look for his lost
        wits, as Ruggiero did for Orlando Furioso's: only, having
        no hippogriff, they were forced to use a balloon; and,
        falling into the North Sea, were picked up by a Yarmouth
        herring-boat, and came home much the wiser, and all over
        scales._
    _Antipathy, or using him like "a man and a brother."_
    _Apathy, or doing nothing at all._
    _With all other ipathies and opathies which Noodle has invented,
        and Foodle tried, since black-fellows chipped flints at
        Abbeville--which is a considerable time ago, to judge by
        the Great Exhibition._

But nothing would do; for he screamed and cried all day for a
water-baby, to come and drive away the monsters; and of course they did
not try to find one, because they did not believe in them, and were
thinking of nothing but Bumpsterhausen's blue follicles; having, as
usual, set the cart before the horse, and taken the effect for the
cause.

So they were forced at last to let the poor professor ease his mind by
writing a great book, exactly contrary to all his old opinions; in which
he proved that the moon was made of green cheese, and that all the mites
in it (which you may see sometimes quite plain through a telescope, if
you will only keep the lens dirty enough, as Mr. Weekes kept his voltaic
battery) are nothing in the world but little babies, who are hatching
and swarming up there in millions, ready to come down into this world
whenever children want a new little brother or sister.

Which must be a mistake, for this one reason: that, there being no
atmosphere round the moon (though some one or other says there is, at
least on the other side, and that he has been round at the back of it to
see, and found that the moon was just the shape of a Bath bun, and so
wet that the man in the moon went about on Midsummer-day in Macintoshes
and Cording's boots, spearing eels and sneezing); that, therefore, I
say, there being no atmosphere, there can be no evaporation; and
therefore, the dew-point can never fall below 71.5 deg. below zero of
Fahrenheit: and, therefore, it cannot be cold enough there about four
o'clock in the morning to condense the babies' mesenteric apophthegms
into their left ventricles; and, therefore, they can never catch the
hooping-cough; and if they do not have hooping-cough, they cannot be
babies at all; and, therefore, there are no babies in the moon.--Q.E.D.

Which may seem a roundabout reason; and so, perhaps, it is: but you will
have heard worse ones in your time, and from better men than you are.

But one thing is certain; that, when the good old doctor got his book
written, he felt considerably relieved from Bumpsterhausen's blue
follicles, and a few things infinitely worse; to wit, from pride and
vain-glory, and from blindness and hardness of heart; which are the true
causes of Bumpsterhausen's blue follicles, and of a good many other ugly
things besides. Whereon the foul flood-water in his brains ran down, and
cleared to a fine coffee colour, such as fish like to rise in, till very
fine clean fresh-run fish did begin to rise in his brains; and he caught
two or three of them (which is exceedingly fine sport, for brain
rivers), and anatomised them carefully, and never mentioned what he
found out from them, except to little children; and became ever after a
sadder and a wiser man; which is a very good thing to become, my dear
little boy, even though one has to pay a heavy price for the blessing.

        "Stern Lawgiver! yet thou dost wear
         The Godhead's most benignant grace;
         Nor know we anything so fair
         As is the smile upon thy face:
         Flowers laugh before thee on their beds
         And fragrance in thy footing treads;
         Thou dost preserve the stars from wrong;
  And the most ancient heavens, through Thee, are fresh and strong."

                                 WORDSWORTH, _Ode to Duty_.





CHAPTER V


BUT what became of little Tom?

He slipped away off the rocks into the water, as I said before. But he
could not help thinking of little Ellie. He did not remember who she
was; but he knew that she was a little girl, though she was a hundred
times as big as he. That is not surprising: size has nothing to do with
kindred. A tiny weed may be first cousin to a great tree; and a little
dog like Vick knows that Lioness is a dog too, though she is twenty
times larger than herself. So Tom knew that Ellie was a little girl, and
thought about her all that day, and longed to have had her to play with;
but he had very soon to think of something else. And here is the account
of what happened to him, as it was published next morning in the
Waterproof Gazette, on the finest watered paper, for the use of the
great fairy, Mrs. Bedonebyasyoudid, who reads the news very carefully
every morning, and especially the police cases, as you will hear very
soon.

He was going along the rocks in three-fathom water, watching the pollock
catch prawns, and the wrasses nibble barnacles off the rocks, shells and
all, when he saw a round cage of green withes; and inside it, looking
very much ashamed of himself, sat his friend the lobster, twiddling his
horns, instead of thumbs.

"What, have you been naughty, and have they put you in the lock-up?"
asked Tom.

The lobster felt a little indignant at such a notion, but he was too
much depressed in spirits to argue; so he only said, "I can't get out."

"Why did you get in?"

"After that nasty piece of dead fish." He had thought it looked and
smelt very nice when he was outside, and so it did, for a lobster: but
now he turned round and abused it because he was angry with himself.

"Where did you get in?"

"Through that round hole at the top."

"Then why don't you get out through it?"

"Because I can't": and the lobster twiddled his horns more fiercely than
ever, but he was forced to confess.

"I have jumped upwards, downwards, backwards, and sideways, at least
four thousand times; and I can't get out: I always get up underneath
there, and can't find the hole."

Tom looked at the trap, and having more wit than the lobster, he saw
plainly enough what was the matter; as you may if you will look at a
lobster-pot.

"Stop a bit," said Tom. "Turn your tail up to me, and I'll pull you
through hindforemost, and then you won't stick in the spikes."

But the lobster was so stupid and clumsy that he couldn't hit the hole.
Like a great many fox-hunters, he was very sharp as long as he was in
his own country; but as soon as they get out of it they lose their
heads; and so the lobster, so to speak, lost his tail.

Tom reached and clawed down the hole after him, till he caught hold of
him; and then, as was to be expected, the clumsy lobster pulled him in
head foremost.

"Hullo! here is a pretty business," said Tom. "Now take your great
claws, and break the points off those spikes, and then we shall both get
out easily."

"Dear me, I never thought of that," said the lobster; "and after all the
experience of life that I have had!"

You see, experience is of very little good unless a man, or a lobster,
has wit enough to make use of it. For a good many people, like old
Polonius, have seen all the world, and yet remain little better than
children after all.

But they had not got half the spikes away when they saw a great dark
cloud over them: and lo, and behold, it was the otter.

How she did grin and grin when she saw Tom. "Yar!" said she, "you little
meddlesome wretch, I have you now! I will serve you out for telling the
salmon where I was!" And she crawled all over the pot to get in.

Tom was horribly frightened, and still more frightened when she found
the hole in the top, and squeezed herself right down through it, all
eyes and teeth. But no sooner was her head inside than valiant Mr.
Lobster caught her by the nose and held on.

And there they were all three in the pot, rolling over and over, and
very tight packing it was. And the lobster tore at the otter, and the
otter tore at the lobster, and both squeezed and thumped poor Tom till
he had no breath left in his body; and I don't know what would have
happened to him if he had not at last got on the otter's back, and safe
out of the hole.

He was right glad when he got out: but he would not desert his friend
who had saved him; and the first time he saw his tail uppermost he
caught hold of it, and pulled with all his might.

But the lobster would not let go.

"Come along," said Tom; "don't you see she is dead?" And so she was,
quite drowned and dead.

And that was the end of the wicked otter.

But the lobster would not let go.

"Come along, you stupid old stick-in-the-mud," cried Tom, "or the
fisherman will catch you!" And that was true, for Tom felt some one
above beginning to haul up the pot.

But the lobster would not let go.

Tom saw the fisherman haul him up to the boat-side, and thought it was
all up with him. But when Mr. Lobster saw the fisherman, he gave such a
furious and tremendous snap, that he snapped out of his hand, and out of
the pot, and safe into the sea. But he left his knobbed claw behind
him; for it never came into his stupid head to let go after all, so he
just shook his claw off as the easier method. It was something of a
bull, that; but you must know the lobster was an Irish lobster, and was
hatched off Island Magee at the mouth of Belfast Lough.

Tom asked the lobster why he never thought of letting go. He said very
determinedly that it was a point of honour among lobsters. And so it is,
