a big pile of straw there that'll do yez for a bed, if yez put your
coats on. I'll light yez down, but I ain't going to leave yez a light
for fear yez'd set fire to the place."

Saying good-night to the girls, who looked as if they thought their last
hour was come, we went to the lower room. It was quite empty, save for a
pile of fire wood and another of clean straw. Casting a stealthy glance
around, ere Peg withdrew the light, I was relieved to see that there
were no skulls in sight. We four boys snuggled down in the straw. We did
not expect to sleep, but we were very tired and before we knew it our
eyes were shut, to open no more till morning. The poor girls were not
so fortunate. They always averred they never closed an eye. Four things
prevented them from sleeping. In the first place Peg snored loudly; in
the second place the fitful gleams of firelight kept flickering over the
skull for half the night and making gruesome effects on it; in the third
place Peg's pillows and bedclothes smelled rankly of tobacco smoke; and
in the fourth place they were afraid the rat Peg had spoken of might
come out to make their acquaintance. Indeed, they were sure they heard
him skirmishing about several times.

When we wakened in the morning the storm was over and a young morning
was looking through rosy eyelids across a white world. The little
clearing around Peg's cabin was heaped with dazzling drifts, and we
boys fell to and shovelled out a road to her well. She gave us
breakfast--stiff oatmeal porridge without milk, and a boiled egg apiece.
Cecily could NOT eat her porridge; she declared she had such a bad
cold that she had no appetite; a cold she certainly had; the rest of us
choked our messes down and after we had done so Peg asked us if we had
noticed a soapy taste.

"The soap fell into the porridge while I was making it," she said.
"But,"--smacking her lips,--"I'm going to make yez an Irish stew for
dinner. It'll be fine."

An Irish stew concocted by Peg! No wonder Dan said hastily,

"You are very kind but we'll have to go right home."

"Yez can't walk," said Peg.

"Oh, yes, we can. The drifts are so hard they'll carry, and the snow
will be pretty well blown off the middle of the fields. It's only
three-quarters of a mile. We boys will go home and get a pung and come
back for you girls."

But the girls wouldn't listen to this. They must go with us, even
Cecily.

"Seems to me yez weren't in such a hurry to leave last night," observed
Peg sarcastically.

"Oh, it's only because they'll be so anxious about us at home, and it's
Sunday and we don't want to miss Sunday School," explained Felicity.

"Well, I hope your Sunday School will do yez good," said Peg, rather
grumpily. But she relented again at the last and gave Cecily a wishbone.

"Whatever you wish on that will come true," she said. "But you only have
the one wish, so don't waste it."

"We're so much obliged to you for all your trouble," said the Story Girl
politely.

"Never mind the trouble. The expense is the thing," retorted Peg grimly.

"Oh!" Felicity hesitated. "If you would let us pay you--give you
something--"

"No, thank yez," responded Peg loftily. "There is people who take money
for their hospitality, I've heerd, but I'm thankful to say I don't
associate with that class. Yez are welcome to all yez have had here, if
yez ARE in a big hurry to get away."

She shut the door behind us with something of a slam, and her black
cat followed us so far, with stealthy, furtive footsteps, that we were
frightened of it. Eventually it turned back; then, and not till then,
did we feel free to discuss our adventure.

"Well, I'm thankful we're out of THAT," said Felicity, drawing a long
breath. "Hasn't it just been an awful experience?"

"We might all have been found frozen stark and stiff this morning,"
remarked the Story Girl with apparent relish.

"I tell you, it was a lucky thing we got to Peg Bowen's," said Dan.

"Miss Marwood says there is no such thing as luck," protested Cecily.
"We ought to say it was Providence instead."

"Well, Peg and Providence don't seem to go together very well, somehow,"
retorted Dan. "If Peg is a witch it must be the Other One she's in co.
with."

"Dan, it's getting to be simply scandalous the way you talk," said
Felicity. "I just wish ma could hear you."

"Is soap in porridge any worse than tooth-powder in rusks, lovely
creature?" asked Dan.

"Dan, Dan," admonished Cecily, between her coughs, "remember it's
Sunday."

"It seems hard to remember that," said Peter. "It doesn't seem a mite
like Sunday and it seems awful long since yesterday."

"Cecily, you've got a dreadful cold," said the Story Girl anxiously.

"In spite of Peg's ginger tea," added Felix.

"Oh, that ginger tea was AWFUL," exclaimed poor Cecily. "I thought I'd
never get it down--it was so hot with ginger--and there was so much of
it! But I was so frightened of offending Peg I'd have tried to drink it
all if there had been a bucketful. Oh, yes, it's very easy for you all
to laugh! You didn't have to drink it."

"We had to eat two meals, though," said Felicity with a shiver. "And I
don't know when those dishes of hers were washed. I just shut my eyes
and took gulps."

"Did you notice the soapy taste in the porridge?" asked the Story Girl.

"Oh, there were so many queer tastes about it I didn't notice one more
than another," answered Felicity wearily.

"What bothers me," remarked Peter absently, "is that skull. Do you
suppose Peg really finds things out by it?"

"Nonsense! How could she?" scoffed Felix, bold as a lion in daylight.

"She didn't SAY she did, you know," I said cautiously.

"Well, we'll know in time if the things she said were going to happen
do," mused Peter.

"Do you suppose your father is really coming home?" queried Felicity.

"I hope not," answered Peter decidedly.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Felicity severely.

"No, I oughtn't. Father got drunk all the time he was home, and wouldn't
work and was bad to mother," said Peter defiantly. "She had to support
him as well as herself and me. I don't want to see any father coming
home, and you'd better believe it. Of course, if he was the right sort
of a father it'd be different."

"What I would like to know is if Aunt Olivia is going to be married,"
said the Story Girl absently. "I can hardly believe it. But now that
I think of it--Uncle Roger has been teasing her ever since she was in
Halifax last summer."

"If she does get married you'll have to come and live with us," said
Cecily delightedly.

Felicity did not betray so much delight and the Story Girl remarked with
a weary little sigh that she hoped Aunt Olivia wouldn't. We all felt
rather weary, somehow. Peg's predictions had been unsettling, and our
nerves had all been more or less strained during our sojourn under her
roof. We were glad when we found ourselves at home.

The folks had not been at all troubled about us, but it was because they
were sure the storm had come up before we would think of leaving Cousin
Mattie's and not because they had received any mysterious message from
Peg's skull. We were relieved at this, but on the whole, our adventure
had not done much towards clearing up the vexed question of Peg's
witchcraft.




CHAPTER IX. EXTRACTS FROM THE FEBRUARY AND MARCH NUMBERS OF "OUR
MAGAZINE"


RESOLUTION HONOUR ROLL

Miss Felicity King.


HONOURABLE MENTION

Mr. Felix King. Mr. Peter Craig. Miss Sara Ray.


EDITORIAL

The editor wishes to make a few remarks about the Resolution Honour
Roll. As will be seen, only one name figures on it. Felicity says she
has thought a beautiful thought every morning before breakfast without
missing one morning, not even the one we were at Peg Bowen's. Some of
our number think it not fair that Felicity should be on the honour
roll (FELICITY, ASIDE: "That's Dan, of course.") when she only made one
resolution and won't tell us what any of the thoughts were. So we
have decided to give honourable mention to everybody who has kept one
resolution perfect. Felix has worked all his arithmetic problems by
himself. He complains that he never got more than a third of them
right and the teacher has marked him away down; but one cannot keep
resolutions without some inconvenience. Peter has never played tit-tat-x
in church or got drunk and says it wasn't as bad as he expected. (PETER,
INDIGNANTLY: "I never said it." CECILY, SOOTHINGLY: "Now, Peter, Bev
only meant that as a joke.") Sara Ray has never talked any mean gossip,
but does not find conversation as interesting as it used to be. (SARA
RAY, WONDERINGLY: "I don't remember of saying that.")

Felix did not eat any apples until March, but forgot and ate seven the
day we were at Cousin Mattie's. (FELIX: "I only ate five!") He soon gave
up trying to say what he thought always. He got into too much trouble.
We think Felix ought to change to old Grandfather King's rule. It was,
"Hold your tongue when you can, and when you can't tell the truth."
Cecily feels she has not read all the good books she might, because some
she tried to read were very dull and the Pansy books were so much more
interesting. And it is no use trying not to feel bad because her hair
isn't curly and she has marked that resolution out. The Story Girl came
very near to keeping her resolution to have all the good times possible,
but she says she missed two, if not three, she might have had. Dan
refuses to say anything about his resolutions and so does the editor.


PERSONALS

We regret that Miss Cecily King is suffering from a severe cold.

Mr. Alexander Marr of Markdale died very suddenly last week. We never
heard of his death till he was dead.

Miss Cecily King wishes to state that she did not ask the question about
"Holy Moses" and the other word in the January number. Dan put it in for
a mean joke.

The weather has been cold and fine. We have only had one bad storm. The
coasting on Uncle Roger's hill continues good.

Aunt Eliza did not favour us with a visit after all. She took cold and
had to go home. We were sorry that she had a cold but glad that she had
to go home. Cecily said she thought it wicked of us to be glad. But when
we asked her "cross her heart" if she wasn't glad herself she had to say
she was.

Miss Cecily King has got three very distinguished names on her quilt
square. They are the Governor and his wife and a witch's.

The King family had the honour of entertaining the Governor's wife to
tea on February the seventeenth. We are all invited to visit Government
House but some of us think we won't go.

A tragic event occurred last Tuesday. Mrs. James Frewen came to tea and
there was no pie in the house. Felicity has not yet fully recovered.

A new boy is coming to school. His name is Cyrus Brisk and his folks
moved up from Markdale. He says he is going to punch Willy Fraser's head
if Willy keeps on thinking he is Miss Cecily King's beau.

(CECILY: "I haven't ANY beau! I don't mean to think of such a thing for
at least eight years yet!")

Miss Alice Reade of Charlottetown Royalty has come to Carlisle to teach
music. She boards at Mr. Peter Armstrong's. The girls are all going to
take music lessons from her. Two descriptions of her will be found in
another column. Felix wrote one, but the girls thought he did not do her
justice, so Cecily wrote another one. She admits she copied most of the
description out of Valeria H. Montague's story Lord Marmaduke's First,
Last, and Only Love; or the Bride of the Castle by the Sea, but says
they fit Miss Reade better than anything she could make up.


HOUSEHOLD DEPARTMENT

Always keep the kitchen tidy and then you needn't mind if company comes
unexpectedly.

ANXIOUS INQUIRER: We don't know anything that will take the stain out
of a silk dress when a soft-boiled egg is dropped on it. Better not wear
your silk dress so often, especially when boiling eggs.

Ginger tea is good for colds.

OLD HOUSEKEEPER: Yes, when the baking-powder gives out you can use
tooth-powder instead.

(FELICITY: "I never wrote that! I don't care, I don't think it's fair
for other people to be putting things in my department!")

Our apples are not keeping well this year. They are rotting; and besides
father says we eat an awful lot of them.

PERSEVERANCE: I will give you the recipe for dumplings you ask for.
But remember it is not everyone who can make dumplings, even from the
recipe. There's a knack in it.

If the soap falls into the porridge do not tell your guests about it
until they have finished eating it because it might take away their
appetite.

                              FELICITY KING.


ETIQUETTE DEPARTMENT

P-r C-g:--Do not criticize people's noses unless you are sure they can't
hear you, and don't criticize your best girl's great-aunt's nose in any
case.

(FELICITY, TOSSING HER HEAD: "Oh, my! I s'pose Dan thought that was
extra smart.")

C-y K-g:--When my most intimate friend walks with another girl and
exchanges lace patterns with her, what ought I to do? Ans. Adopt a
dignified attitude.

F-y K-g:--It is better not to wear your second best hat to church, but
if your mother says you must it is not for me to question her decision.

