I like or no, to go a three days' journey to the witch's castle, and
marry her daughter. The skin that was my guard you have burned it, and
the egg-wife that gave you the counsel was the witch herself. I won't
reproach you: your punishment will be severe without it. Farewell for
ever!'

He kissed her for the last time, and was off the next minute, walking
as fast as he could. She shouted after him, and then seeing there was no
use, she dressed herself and pursued him. He never stopped, nor stayed,
nor looked back, and still she kept him in sight; and when he was on the
hill she was in the hollow, and when he was in the hollow she was on
the hill. Her life was almost leaving her, when, just as the sun was
setting, he turned up a lane, and went into a little house. She crawled
up after him, and when she got inside there was a beautiful little boy
on his knees, and he kissing and hugging him. 'Here, my poor darling,'
says he, 'is your eldest child, and there,' says he, pointing to a woman
that was looking on with a smile on her face, 'is the eagle that carried
him away.' She forgot all her sorrows in a moment, hugging her child,
and laughing and crying over him. The woman washed their feet, and
rubbed them with an ointment that took all the soreness out of their
bones, and made them as fresh as a daisy. Next morning, just before
sunrise, he was up, and prepared to be off, 'Here,' said he to her, 'is
a thing which may be of use to you. It's a scissors, and whatever stuff
you cut with it will be turned into silk. The moment the sun rises, I'll
lose all memory of yourself and the children, but I'll get it at sunset
again. Farewell!' But he wasn't far gone till she was in sight of him
again, leaving her boy behind. It was the same to-day as yesterday:
their shadows went before them in the morning and followed them in the
evening. He never stopped, and she never stopped, and as the sun was
setting he turned up another lane, and there they found their little
daughter. It was all joy and comfort again till morning, and then the
third day's journey commenced.

But before he started he gave her a comb, and told her that whenever she
used it, pearls and diamonds would fall from her hair. Still he had his
memory from sunset to sunrise; but from sunrise to sunset he travelled
on under the charm, and never threw his eye behind. This night they
came to where the youngest baby was, and the next morning, just before
sunrise, the prince spoke to her for the last time. 'Here, my poor
wife,' said he, 'is a little hand-reel, with gold thread that has no
end, and the half of our marriage ring. If you ever get to my house,
and put your half-ring to mine, I shall recollect you. There is a wood
yonder, and the moment I enter it I shall forget everything that ever
happened between us, just as if I was born yesterday. Farewell, dear
wife and child, for ever!' Just then the sun rose, and away he walked
towards the wood. She saw it open before him and close after him, and
when she came up, she could no more get in than she could break
through a stone wall. She wrung her hands and shed tears, but then she
recollected herself, and cried out, 'Wood, I charge you by my three
magic gifts, the scissors, the comb, and the reel--to let me through';
and it opened, and she went along a walk till she came in sight of a
palace, and a lawn, and a woodman's cottage on the edge of the wood
where it came nearest the palace.

She went into the lodge, and asked the woodman and his wife to take her
into their service. They were not willing at first; but she told them
she would ask no wages, and would give them diamonds, and pearls, and
silk stuffs, and gold thread whenever they wished for them, and then
they agreed to let her stay.

It wasn't long till she heard how a young prince, that was just arrived,
was living in the palace of the young mistress. He seldom stirred
abroad, and every one that saw him remarked how silent and sorrowful he
went about, like a person that was searching for some lost thing.

The servants and conceited folk at the big house began to take notice
of the beautiful young woman at the lodge, and to annoy her with their
impudence. The head footman was the most troublesome, and at last she
invited him to come and take tea with her. Oh, how rejoiced he was, and
how he bragged of it in the servants' hall! Well, the evening came, and
the footman walked into the lodge, and was shown to her sitting-room;
for the lodge-keeper and his wife stood in great awe of her, and gave
her two nice rooms for herself. Well, he sat down as stiff as a ramrod,
and was talking in a grand style about the great doings at the castle,
while she was getting the tea and toast ready. 'Oh,' says she to him,
'would you put your hand out at the window and cut me off a sprig or two
of honeysuckle?' He got up in great glee, and put out his hand and head;
and said she, 'By the virtue of my magic gifts, let a pair of horns
spring out of your head, and sing to the lodge.' Just as she wished, so
it was. They sprung from the front of each ear, and met at the back. Oh,
the poor wretch! And how he bawled and roared! and the servants that he
used to be boasting to were soon flocking from the castle, and grinning,
and huzzaing, and beating tunes on tongs and shovels and pans; and he
cursing and swearing, and the eyes ready to start out of his head, and
he so black in the face, and kicking out his legs behind him like mad.

At last she pitied him, and removed the charm, and the horns dropped
down on the ground, and he would have killed her on the spot, only he
was as weak as water, and his fellow-servants came in and carried him up
to the big house. Well, some way or other the story came to the ears of
the prince, and he strolled down that way. She had only the dress of a
countrywoman on her as she sat sewing at the window, but that did not
hide her beauty, and he was greatly puzzled after he had a good look,
just as a body is puzzled to know whether something happened to him when
he was young or if he only dreamed it. Well, the witch's daughter heard
about it too, and she came to see the strange girl; and what did she
find her doing but cutting out the pattern of a gown from brown paper;
and as she cut away, the paper became the richest silk she ever saw. The
witch's daughter looked on with greedy eyes, and, says she, 'What would
you be satisfied to take for that scissors?' 'I'll take nothing,' says
she, 'but leave to spend one night outside the prince's chamber.' Well,
the proud lady fired up, and was going to say something dreadful; but
the scissors kept on cutting, and the silk growing richer and richer
every inch. So she promised what the girl had asked her.

When night came on she was let into the palace and lay down till the
prince was in such a dead sleep that all she did couldn't awake him.
She sung this verse to him, sighing and sobbing, and kept singing it the
night long, and it was all in vain:

Four long years I was married to thee; Three sweet babes I bore to thee;
Brown Bear of Norway, turn to me.

At the first dawn the proud lady was in the chamber, and led her away,
and the footman of the horns put out his tongue at her as she was
quitting the palace.

So there was no luck so far; but the next day the prince passed by again
and looked at her, and saluted her kindly, as a prince might a farmer's
daughter, and passed one; and soon the witch's daughter passed by, and
found her combing her hair, and pearls and diamonds dropping from it.

Well, another bargain was made, and the princess spent another night of
sorrow, and she left the castle at daybreak, and the footman was at his
post and enjoyed his revenge.

The third day the prince went by, and stopped to talk with the strange
woman. He asked her could he do anything to serve her, and she said he
might. She asked him did he ever wake at night. He said that he often
did, but that during the last two nights he was listening to a sweet
song in his dreams, and could not wake, and that the voice was one that
he must have known and loved in some other world long ago. Says she,
'Did you drink any sleepy posset either of these evenings before you
went to bed?' 'I did,' said he. 'The two evenings my wife gave me
something to drink, but I don't know whether it was a sleepy posset or
not.' 'Well, prince,' said she, 'as you say you would wish to oblige me,
you can do it by not tasting any drink to-night.' 'I will not,' says he,
and then he went on his walk.

Well, the great lady came soon after the prince, and found the stranger
using her hand-reel and winding threads of gold off it, and the third
bargain was made.

That evening the prince was lying on his bed at twilight, and his mind
much disturbed; and the door opened, and in his princess walked, and
down she sat by his bedside and sung:

Four long years I was married to thee; Three sweet babes I bore to thee;
Brown Bear of Norway, turn to me.

'Brown Bear of Norway!' said he. 'I don't understand you.' 'Don't you
remember, prince, that I was your wedded wife for four years?' 'I do
not,' said he, 'but I'm sure I wish it was so.' 'Don't you remember our
three babes that are still alive?' 'Show me them. My mind is all a heap
of confusion.' 'Look for the half of our marriage ring, that hangs at
your neck, and fit it to this.' He did so, and the same moment the charm
was broken. His full memory came back on him, and he flung his arms
round his wife's neck, and both burst into tears.

Well, there was a great cry outside, and the castle walls were heard
splitting and cracking. Everyone in the castle was alarmed, and made
their way out. The prince and princess went with the rest, and by the
time all were safe on the lawn, down came the building, and made the
ground tremble for miles round. No one ever saw the witch and her
daughter afterwards. It was not long till the prince and princess had
their children with them, and then they set out for their own palace.
The kings of Ireland and of Munster and Ulster, and their wives, soon
came to visit them, and may every one that deserves it be as happy as
the Brown Bear of Norway and his family.

From 'West Highland Tales.'




Little Lasse


There was once a little boy whose name was Lars, and because he was so
little he was called Little Lasse; he was a brave little man, for he
sailed round the world in a pea-shell boat.

It was summer time, when the pea shells grew long and green in the
garden. Little Lasse crept into the pea bed where the pea stalks rose
high above his cap, and he picked seventeen large shells, the longest
and straightest he could find.

Little Lasse thought, perhaps, that no one saw him; but that was
foolish, for God sees everywhere.

Then the gardener came with his gun over his shoulder, and he heard
something rustling in the pea bed.

'I think that must be a sparrow,' he said. 'Ras! Ras!' but no sparrows
flew out, for Little Lasse had no wings, only two small legs. 'Wait! I
will load my gun and shoot the sparrows,' said the gardener.

Then Little Lasse was frightened, and crept out on to the path.

'Forgive me, dear gardener!' he said. 'I wanted to get some fine boats.'

'Well, I will this time,' said the gardener. 'But another time Little
Lasse must ask leave to go and look for boats in the pea bed.'

'I will,' answered Lasse; and he went off to the shore. Then he opened
the shells with a pin, split them carefully in two, and broke small
little bits of sticks for the rowers' seats. Then he took the peas which
were in the shells and put them in the boats for cargo. Some of the
shells got broken, some remained whole, and when all were ready Lasse
had twelve boats. But they should not be boats, they should be large
warships. He had three liners, three frigates, three brigs and three
schooners. The largest liner was called Hercules, and the smallest
schooner The Flea. Little Lasse put all the twelve into the water, and
they floated as splendidly and as proudly as any great ships over the
waves of the ocean.

And now the ships must sail round the world. The great island over there
was Asia; that large stone Africa; the little island America; the small
stones were Polynesia; and the shore from which the ships sailed out was
Europe. The whole fleet set off and sailed far away to other parts of
the world. The ships of the line steered a straight course to Asia, the
frigates sailed to Africa, the brigs to America, and the schooners to
Polynesia. But Little Lasse remained in Europe, and threw small stones
out into the great sea.

Now, there was on the shore of Europe a real boat, father's own, a
beautiful white-painted boat, and Little Lasse got into it. Father and
mother had forbidden this, but Little Lasse forgot. He thought he should
very much like to travel to some other part of the world.

'I shall row out a little way--only a very little way,' he thought. The
pea-shell boats had travelled so far that they only looked like little
specks on the ocean. 'I shall seize Hercules on the coast of Asia,' said
Lasse, 'and then row home again to Europe.'

He shook the rope that held the boat, and, strange to say, the rope
became loose. Ditsch, ratsch, a man is a man, and so Little Lasse manned
the boat.

Now he would row--and he could row, for he had rowed so often on the
step sat home, when the steps pretended to be a boat and father's big
stick an oar. But when Little Lasse wanted to row there were no oars
to be found in the boat. The oars were locked up in the boat-house, and
Little Lasse had not noticed that the boat was empty. It is not so easy
as one thinks to row to Asia without oars.

What could Little Lasse do now? The boat was already some distance out
on the sea, and the wind, which blew from land, was driving it still
further out. Lasse was frightened and began to cry. But there was no
one on the shore to hear him. Only a big crow perched alone in the birch
tree; and the gardener's black cat sat under the birch tree, waiting to
catch the crow. Neither of them troubled themselves in the least about
Little Lasse, who was drifting out to sea.

Ah! how sorry Little Lasse was now that he had been disobedient and got
into the boat, when father and mother had so often forbidden him to do
so! Now it was too late, he could not get back to land. Perhaps he would
be lost out on the great sea. What should he do?

When he had shouted until he was tired and no one heard him, he put
his two little hands together and said, 'Good God, do not be angry with
Little Lasse.' And then he went to sleep. For although it was daylight,
old Nukku Matti was sitting on the shores of the 'Land of Nod,' and was
fishing for little children with his long fishing rod. He heard the low
words which Little Lasse said to God, and he immediately drew the boat
to himself and laid Little Lasse to sleep on a bed of rose leaves.

Then Nukku Matti said to one of the Dreams, 'Play with Little Lasse, so
that he does not feel lonesome.'

It was a little dream-boy, so little, so little, that he was less than
Lasse himself; he had blue eyes and fair hair, a red cap with a silver
band, and white coat with pearls on the collar. He came to Little Lasse
and said, 'Would you like to sail round the world?'

'Yes,' said Lasse in his sleep, 'I should like to.'

'Come, then,' said the dream-boy, 'and let us sail in your pea-shell
boats. You shall sail in Hercules and I shall sail in The Flea.'

So they sailed away from the 'Land of Nod,' and in a little while
Hercules and The Flea were on the shores of Asia away at the other end
of the world, where the Ice Sea flows through Behring Straits into the
Pacific Ocean. A long way off in the winter mist they could see the
explorer Nordenskiold with his ship Vega trying to find an opening
between the ice. It was so cold, so cold; the great icebergs glittered
strangely, and the huge whales now lived under the ice, for they could
not make a hole through with their awkward heads. All around on the
dreary shore there was snow and snow as far as the eye could see; little
grey men in shaggy skins moved about, and drove in small sledges through
the snow drifts, but the sledges were drawn by dogs.

'Shall we land here?' asked the dream-boy.

'No,' said Little Lasse. 'I am so afraid that the whales would swallow
us up, and the big dogs bite us. Let us sail instead to another part of
the world.'

'Very well,' said the dream-boy with the red cap and the silver band;
'it is not far to America'--and at the same moment they were there.

The sun was shining and it was very warm. Tall palm trees grew in long
rows on the shore and bore coconuts in their top branches. Men red as
copper galloped over the immense green prairies and shot their arrows
at the buffaloes, who turned against them with their sharp horns. An
enormous cobra which had crept up the stem of a tall palm tree threw
itself on to a little llama that was grazing at the foot. Knaps! it was
all over the little llama.

'Shall we land here?' asked the dream-boy.

'No,' said Little Lasse. 'I am so afraid that the buffaloes will butt
us, and the great serpent eat us up. Let us travel to another part of
the world.'

'Very well,' said the dream-boy with the white coat, 'it is only a
little way to Polynesia'--and then they were there.

It was very warm there, as warm as in a hot bath in Finland. Costly
spices grew on the shores: the pepper plant, the cinnamon tree, ginger,
saffron; the coffee plant and the tea plant. Brown people with long ears
and thick lips, and hideously painted faces, hunted a yellow-spotted
tiger among the high bamboos on the shore, and the tiger turned on them
and stuck its claws into one of the brown men. Then all the others took
to flight.

'Shall we land here?' asked the dream-boy.

'No,' said Little Lasse. 'Don't you see the tiger away there by the
pepper plant? Let us travel to another part of the world.'

'We can do so,' said the dream-boy with the blue eyes. 'We are not far
from Africa'--and as he said that they were there.

They anchored at the mouth of a great river where the shores were
as green as the greenest velvet. A little distance from the river an
immense desert stretched away. The air was yellow; the sun shone so hot,
so hot as if it would burn the earth to ashes, and the people were as
black as the blackest jet. They rode across the desert on tall camels;
the lions roared with thirst, and the great crocodiles with their grey
lizard heads and sharp white teeth gaped up out of the river.

'Shall we land here?' asked the dream-boy.

'No,' said Little Lasse. 'The sun would burn us, and the lions and the
crocodiles would eat us up. Let us travel to another part of the world.'

'We can travel back to Europe,' said the dream-boy with the fair hair.
And with that they were there.

They came to a shore where it was all so cool and familiar and friendly.
There stood the tall birch tree with its drooping leaves; at the top sat
the old crow, and at its foot crept the gardener's black cat. Not far
away was a house which Little Lasse had seen before; near the house
there was a garden, and in the garden a pea bed with long pea shells.
An old gardener with a green coat walked about and wondered if the
cucumbers were ripe. Fylax was barking on the steps, and when he saw
Little Lasse he wagged his tail. Old Stina was milking the cows in the
farmyard, and there was a very familiar lady in a check woollen shawl
on her way to the bleaching green to see if the clothes were bleached.
There was, too, a well-known gentleman in a yellow summer coat, with a
long pipe in his mouth; he was going to see if the reapers had cut the
rye. A boy and a girl were running on the shore and calling out, 'Little
Lasse! Come home for bread-and-butter!'

'Shall we land here?' asked the dream-boy, and he blinked his blue eyes
roguishly.
