The Northman turned in his chair.

"It is he, Freda, surely enough, though how he comes to be a slave here
to my comrade Bijorn I know not. Bijorn, my friend, I owe this youth a
deep debt of gratitude; he had my life and the life and honour of Freda
in his hands, and he spared both, and, slave though he may be of yours
at present, yet I hail him as my friend. Tell me how came he in your
hands? He is Edmund, the valiant young Saxon who smote us more than
once so heavily down in Wessex."

"I know it," Bijorn replied, "and will tell you how he came into my
hands, and in truth he was captured by accident and not by any valour
of my arm." The jarl then related the circumstances under which Edmund
had been captured, and the narrow escape he had had of being offered as
a sacrifice to Odin. And Siegbert then told his guests at length the
incidents of his capture by the Dragon.

"He let me go free and without a ransom," he concluded, "and that part
of my obligation I should be glad to repay, though for his gentleness
to Freda I must still remain his debtor. What say you, Bijorn, will you
sell him to me? Name your price in horses, arms, and armour, and
whatever it be I will pay it to you."

"In truth, Siegbert," Bijorn said, "I like not to part with the lad;
but since you are so urgent, and seeing that you cannot otherwise
discharge the obligation under which, as you say, he has laid you, I
cannot refuse your prayer. As to the price, we will arrange that anon."

"Then it is settled," Siegbert said. "You are a free man, Ealdorman
Edmund," and he held out his hand to the youth. "Now seat yourself at
the table with my guests; there are none here but may feel honoured at
dining with one of King Alfred's bravest thanes."

The transformation in Edmund's position was sudden indeed; a moment
since he was a slave, and although he had determined upon making an
effort for freedom, he had known that the chances of escape were small,
as swift galleys would have been sent off in pursuit, and it was
probable that he would have been speedily overtaken and brought back.
Now he was free, and would doubtless be allowed to return home with the
first party who sailed thither.

Siegbert at once tried to make Edmund feel at home, addressing much of
his conversation to him. Bijorn, too, spoke in a friendly manner with
him, but Sweyn was silent and sullen; he was clearly ill-pleased at
this change of fortune which had turned his father's slave into a
fellow-guest and equal. His annoyance was greatly heightened by the
fact that it was Freda who had recognized the young Saxon, and the
pleasure which her face evinced when her father proposed to purchase
him from Bijorn angered him still more. In his heart he cursed the
horse whose welcoming neigh had in the first instance saved Edmund's
life, and the trial by augury which had confirmed the first omen. After
the banquet was over Siegbert requested Edmund to relate his various
adventures.

The telling of tales of daring was one of the favourite amusements of
the Danes; Siegbert and his friends quaffed great bumpers of mead; and
the ladies sat apart listening while Edmund told his story.

"You have a brave record, indeed," Siegbert said when he had finished,
"for one so young; and fond as are our youths of adventure there is not
one of them of your age who has accomplished a tithe of what you have
done. Why, Freda, if this youth were but one of us he would have the
hearts of all the Norse maidens at his feet. In the eyes of a Danish
girl, as of a Dane, valour is the highest of recommendations."

"I don't know, father," Freda said, colouring at being thus addressed,
"that we should be as bold as that, although assuredly it is but right
that a maiden should esteem valour highly. It is to her husband she has
to look for protection, and she shares in the honour and spoil which he
gains by his valiant deeds, so you have always taught me."

"And rightly too, girl. Next to being a great hero, the greatest honour
is to be the wife of one. I pledge you, Ealdorman Edmund, and should be
right proud were you a son of mine. You have told your story modestly,
for many of the battles and adventures of which you have spoken are
known to me by report, and fame has given you a larger share in the
successes than you claim for yourself. 'Tis a pity you were not born a
Northman, for there is little for you to do in Saxon England now."

"I do not despair yet," Edmund replied. "Things have gone badly with
us, but the last blow is not struck yet. You will hear of King Alfred
in the spring, unless I am mistaken."

"But they say your King Alfred is half a monk, and that he loves
reading books more than handling the sword, though, to do him justice,
he has shown himself a brave warrior, and has given us far more trouble
than all the other Saxon kings together."

"King Alfred fights bravely," Edmund said, "because he is fighting for
his country and people; but it is true that he loves not war nor
strife. He reads much and thinks more, and should he ever come to his
kingdom again he will assuredly be one of the wisest and best monarchs
who has ever sat on a throne. He has talked to me much of the things
which he has at heart, and I know he intends to draw up wise laws for
the ruling of his people."

"We love not greatly being ruled, we Northmen," Bijorn said, "but for
each to go his own way as he wills, provided only he inflicts no ill
upon his neighbour. We come and we go each as it pleases him. Our
fleets traverse the sea and bring home plunder and booty. What need we
of laws?"

"At present you have no great need of laws," Edmund replied, "seeing
that you lead a wandering life; but when the time shall come--and it
must come to you as it has come to other nations--when you will settle
down as a rich and peaceful community, then laws will become necessary."

"Well," Bijorn said, "right glad am I that I live before such times
have come. So far as I can see the settling down you speak of, and the
abandonment of the ancient gods has done no great good either to you
Saxons or to the Franks. Both of you were in the old time valiant
people, while now you are unable to withstand our arms. You gather
goods, and we carry them off; you build cities, and we destroy them;
you cultivate the land, and we sweep off the crops. It seems to me that
we have the best of it."

"It seems so at present," Edmund said, "but it will not last. Already
in Northumbria and in East Anglia the Danes, seeing that there is no
more plunder to be had, are settling down and adopting the customs of
the Saxons, and so will it be in Mercia and Wessex if you keep your
hold of them, and so will it be in other places. The change is but
beginning, but it seems to me certain to come; so I have heard King
Alfred say."

"And does he think," Sweyn said scoffingly, speaking almost for the
first time, "that we shall abandon the worship of our gods and take to
that of your Christ?"

"He thinks so and hopes so," Edmund replied quietly. "So long as men's
lives are spent wholly in war they may worship gods like yours, but
when once settled in peaceful pursuits they will assuredly recognize
the beauty and holiness of the life of Christ. Pardon me," he said,
turning to Siegbert, "if it seems to you that I, being still young,
speak with over-boldness, but I am telling you what King Alfred says,
and all men recognize his wisdom and goodness."

"I know not of your religion myself," Siegbert replied, "but I will own
willingly that though its teachings may be peaceful, it makes not
cowards of those who believe in it. I have seen over and over again old
men and young men die on the altars of their churches as fearlessly and
calmly as a Viking should do when his time comes. No Northman fears
death, for he knows that a joyous time awaits him; but I am bound to
say that your Christians meet death to the full as calmly. Well, each
his own way, I say, and for aught I know there may be a Christian
heaven as well as the Halls of Odin, and all may be rewarded in their
own way for their deeds."

Bijorn and his party now rose to take leave. "I will come across to
your tent in the morning," Siegbert said, "and we can then discuss what
payment I shall make you for this young Saxon. I fear not that you will
prove over hard to your old comrade."

After Bijorn had departed Siegbert assigned to Edmund a place in his
tent as an honoured guest. Slaves brought in bundles of rushes for the
beds. Freda retired to a small tent which had been erected for her
adjoining the larger one, and the jarl and Edmund lay down on their
piles of rushes at the upper end of the tent. Siegbert's companions and
followers stretched themselves along the sides, the slaves lay down
without, and in a few minutes silence reigned in the tent.




CHAPTER X: THE COMBAT


"I was thinking much of what you said last night," Freda said at
breakfast. "How is it that you, whose religion is as you say a peaceful
one, can yet have performed so many deeds of valour and bloodshed?"

"I am fighting for my home, my country, and my religion," Edmund said.
"Christianity does not forbid men to defend themselves; for, did it do
so, a band of pagans might ravage all the Christian countries in the
world. I fight not because I love it. I hate bloodshed, and would
rather die than plunder and slay peaceful and unoffending people. You
have been in England and have seen the misery which war has caused
there. Such misery assuredly I would inflict on none. I fight only to
defend myself and my country men and women. Did your people leave our
land I would gladly never draw sword again."

"But what would you do with yourself?" Freda asked in tones of
surprise. "How would you pass your time if there were no fighting?"

"I should have plenty to do," Edmund said smiling; "I have my people to
look after. I have to see to their welfare; to help those who need it;
to settle disputes; to rebuild the churches and houses which have been
destroyed. There would be no difficulty in spending my time."

"But how could a man show himself to be a hero," the Danish girl asked,
"if there were no fighting?"

"There would be no occasion for heroes," Edmund said, "at least of
heroes in the sense you mean--that is, of men famous principally for
the number they have slain, and the destruction and misery they have
caused. Our religion teaches us that mere courage is not the highest
virtue. It is one possessed as much by animals as by men. Higher
virtues than this are kindness, charity, unselfishness, and a desire to
benefit our fellow-creatures. These virtues make a man a truer hero
than the bravest Viking who ever sailed the seas. Even you, Freda,
worshipper of Odin as you are, must see that it is a higher and a
better life to do good to your fellow-creatures than to do evil."

"It sounds so," the girl said hesitatingly; "but the idea is so new to
me that I must think it over before I can come to any conclusion."

Freda then went about her occupations, and Edmund, knowing that
Siegbert would not return for some time, as he was going with Bijorn to
a council which was to be held early in the day, strolled down to look
at the galleys ranged along on the beach. These varied greatly in form
and character. Some of the sailing ships were large and clumsy, but the
galleys for rowing were lightly and gracefully built. They were low in
the water, rising to a lofty bow, which sometimes turned over like the
neck of a swan, at other times terminated in a sharp iron prow, formed
for running down a hostile boat. Some of them were of great length,
with seats for twenty rowers on either side, while all were provided
with sails as well as oars. When the hour for dinner approached he
returned to Siegbert's tent. The jarl had not yet come back from the
council. When he did so Edmund perceived at once that he was flushed
and angry.

"What has disturbed you, father?" Freda asked, as on hearing his voice
she entered the tent. "Has aught gone wrong at the council?"

"Yes," the jarl replied, "much has gone wrong. Bijorn and I had not
concluded our bargain when we went to the council. We had, indeed, no
difficulty about the terms, but we had not clasped hands over them, as
I was going back to his tent after the council was over. At the council
the expedition against France was discussed, and it was proposed that
we should consult the gods as to the chances of the adventure. Then the
Jarl Eric rose and proposed that it should be done in the usual way by
a conflict between a Dane and a captive. This was of course agreed to.

"He then said that he understood that there was in the camp a young
Saxon of distinguished valour, and that he proposed that Sweyn, the son
of Bijorn, should fight with him. Sweyn had expressed to him his
willingness to do so should the council agree. I rose at once and said
that the Saxon was no longer a captive, since I had ransomed him
because he had once done me a service; but upon being pressed I was
forced to admit that the bargain had not been concluded. I must acquit
Bijorn of any share in the matter, for it came upon him as much by
surprise as it did upon me. It seems that it is all Sweyn's doing. He
must have taken the step as having a private grudge against you. Have
you had any quarrel with him?"

"No," Edmund replied. "He has ever shown himself haughty and
domineering, but we have come to no quarrel."

"At any rate he wants to kill you," Siegbert said. "I did my best to
prevent it, pointing out that the combat ought to take place between a
Frank and a Dane. However, the Northmen are always glad to see a good
fight, and having satisfied themselves that in point of age and
strength you were not unfairly matched, they decided that the conflict
should take place. He is taller, and I think somewhat stronger than
you, and has proved himself a valiant fighter, and I would give much if
the combat could be avoided."

"I fear him not," Edmund said quietly, "though I would fain that this
could be avoided. Had I met Sweyn upon a battle-field in England I
would have slain him as a natural enemy; but to fight him in cold
blood, either as a matter of augury or to furnish amusement for the
assembly, likes me not. However, I must of course defend myself, and if
harm comes to him it is no blame of mine."

"You will have no easy victory, I can tell you," Siegbert said, "for
none among our young Danes bears a higher reputation."

"But after the combat is over how shall I stand?" Edmund asked; "for if
I defeat or slay Sweyn I shall still be his father's slave."

"That will you not," Siegbert replied. "In these cases the captive if
victorious is always restored to liberty; but at any rate you shall
fight as a free man, for when I have finished my dinner I will go to
Bijorn and conclude our bargain. Do not look so cast down, Freda; a
Northman's daughter must not turn pale at the thought of a conflict.
Sweyn is the son of my old friend, and was, before he took to arms,
your playfellow, and since then has, methought, been anxious to gain
your favour, though all too young yet for thinking of taking a wife;
but never mind, there are as good as he to be found; and if our young
Saxon here proves his conqueror other suitors will come, never fear."

Freda was silent, but her face flushed painfully, and Edmund saw the
tears falling down her cheeks as she bent over her plate.

After the meal was over Siegbert again went out, and Edmund,
approaching Freda, said, "Do not fret, Freda; if it should be that I
find my skill in arms greater than that of Sweyn, I promise you that
for your sake I will not wound him mortally."

"I care not," the girl said passionately; "spare him not for my sake,
for I hate him, and were there no other Norseman in the world I would
never be wife of his."

So saying she left the tent. Edmund now regretted the chance which had
assigned him to Siegbert, for he would rather have taken his chance of
escape by sea than have awaited the conflict with Sweyn. But he could
not carry his plan of escape into effect now, for it would seem as if
he had fled the conflict. That this would be a desperate one he did not
doubt. The course which Sweyn had taken showed a bitter feeling of
hatred against him, and even were it not so the young Northman would,
fighting in the presence of the leaders of his nation, assuredly do his
best to conquer. But Edmund had already tried his strength with older
and more powerful men than his adversary and had little fear of results.

The news of the approaching conflict caused considerable excitement in
the Danish camp, and Edmund's figure was narrowly scrutinized as he
wandered through it. All who had been engaged in the war in Wessex had
heard of Edmund, and there was no slight curiosity, when the news went
abroad that the Saxon leader was a captive in the camp, to see what he
was like.

At first when it was bruited abroad that Sweyn, the son of Jarl Bijorn,
was to fight this noted Saxon champion the idea was that the enterprise
was a rash one, strong and valiant as Sweyn was known to be for a young
man; but when it was seen that Edmund was no older than he, and to the
eye less strong and powerful, they felt confident in the power of their
champion to overcome him.

Siegbert spared no pains to see that his guest had an even equal
chance. He procured for him a strong and well-made helmet which fitted
him comfortably, and gave him the choice out of a large number of
shields and swords. Edmund selected a weapon which answered nearly in
weight and balance that which he was accustomed to wield. There was
feasting again that night in Siegbert's tent; but he did not allow
Edmund to join in it, insisting after the meal was over that he should
retire to a small hut hard by.

"You will want your head and your nerves in good order to-morrow," he
said. "Feasting is good in its way, and the night before battle I
always drink deeply, but for a single combat it were best to be
prudent." As Edmund left the tent Freda, who had not appeared at
dinner, came up to him.

"I have been crying all day," she said simply. "I know not why, for I
have often seen my father go out to battle without a tear. I think you
must have upset me with your talk this morning. I hope that you will
win, because it was wrong and unfair of Sweyn to force this battle upon
you; and I hate him for it! I shall pray Odin to give you victory. You
don't believe in him, I know; still my prayers can do you no harm."

"Thank you," Edmund said. "I shall pray to One greater and better than
Odin. But weep not any longer, for I trust neither of us will be
killed. I shall do my best to guard myself, and shall try not to slay
him; for this fight is not for my nation or for my religion, but
concerns myself only."

The following morning the Northmen assembled. The jarls and other
leading men formed the inner line of a circle some thirty yards in
diameter, the others stood without; Jarl Eric entered the ring with
Sweyn, while Edmund, accompanied by Siegbert, entered at the other side
of the circle.

"I protest," Siegbert cried in a loud voice, "against this conflict
taking place. Edmund the Saxon is no captive here, but a free man, and
my guest; moreover, being a Saxon, the issue of this fight between him
and a Northman can serve no purpose as an augury as to the success of
our expedition against the Franks. Therefore do I protest against the
conflict."

There was again a consultation between the leaders, for a murmur of
approbation had run round the ranks of the spectators, who it was
evident were impressed in favour of the young Saxon, and considered
that the jarl's words were just and reasonable. Eric spoke for a minute
with Sweyn.

"I feel," he said in a loud voice, "that what Jarl Siegbert says is
reasonable, that no augury can be drawn from the fight, and that, since
Edmund is no longer a captive, and a friend of Siegbert's, he cannot be
forced into fighting in order that we may have an augury. But the
Saxon, though so young, has won a reputation even among us, the enemies
of his race; and my friend Sweyn, who has shown himself one of the
bravest of our young men, considers that he has cause of quarrel with
him, and challenges him to fight--not necessarily to the death, or till
one is slain, but till the jarls here assembled do pronounce one or the
other to be the victor. This is a fair challenge--first, there is a
private quarrel; next, there is emulation between these young men, who
may fairly claim to be the champions of the youth of the two races.
Such a challenge the Saxon will hardly refuse."

In accordance with the customs of the day it would have been impossible
for Edmund to have refused such a challenge without disgrace, and he
did not for a moment think of doing so.

"I am ready to fight Sweyn," he said. "I have no great cause of quarrel
with him; but if he conceives that he has grounds of quarrel with me,
that is enough. As to championship of the Saxons, we have no champions;
we fight not for personal honour or glory, but for our homes, our
countries, and our religion, each doing his best according to the
strength God has given him, and without thought of pride on the one
hand or envy on the other because the strength or courage of one may be
somewhat greater than that of another. Still, as a Saxon standing here
as the only representative of my nation in an assembly of Northmen, I
cannot refuse such a challenge, for to do so would be to infer that we
Saxons are less brave than you. Therefore I am ready for the combat."

The Northmen clashed their weapons against their shields in token of
their approval of the young Saxon's words, and the young champions
prepared for the combat. They were naked to the waist save for shield
and helmet; below the waist each wore a short and tightly-fitting
garment covered with plates of brass; the legs were naked, and each
wore a pair of light sandals; their weapons were long straight swords.
The weapon Edmund had chosen was considerably lighter than that of his
opponent, but was of toughest steel, on which were engraved in rough
characters, "Prayers to Woden for victory."

The difference in height between the combatants was considerable.
Edmund stood five feet ten, but looked shorter from the squareness and
width of his shoulders. Sweyn was nearly four inches taller, and he too
was very strongly built. His muscles indeed stood out in stronger
development than did those of Edmund, and if pure strength was to win
the day few of those who looked on doubted that the Dane would be the
victor.

The combat was a long one. For some time Edmund contented himself with
standing upon the defensive and guarding the tremendous blows which
Sweyn rained upon him. In spite of the efforts of the Northman, he
could neither beat down the Saxon's guard nor force him to fall back a
single step.

Again and again the rattle of the spectators' arms clashed an approval
of Edmund's steady resistance to his opponent's assaults. The Norsemen
delighted beyond all things in a well-fought encounter. Each man,
himself a warrior, was able to appreciate the value of the strokes and
parries. The betting at the commencement had run high upon Sweyn, and
horses, armour, arms, and slaves had been freely wagered upon his
success; but as the fight went on the odds veered round, and the
demeanour of the combatants had as much to do with this as the skill
and strength shown by Edmund in his defence. The Dane was flushed and
furious; his temper gave way under the failure of his assaults. The
Saxon, on the contrary, fought as calmly and coolly as if practicing
