care where you put me, so long as you do not separate me from Philip."

"She certainly loves my son!" said Mr. Granville to himself. "Yet her
ordinary manner is cold and constrained, and she does not seem like a
woman whose affections would easily be taken captive. Yet Philip seems
to have found the way to her heart. It must be because she has had so
much care of him. We are apt to love those whom we benefit."

But though Mr. Granville credited Mrs. Brent with an affection for
Philip, he was uneasily conscious that the boy's return had not brought
him the satisfaction and happiness he had fondly anticipated.

To begin with, Philip did not look at all as he had supposed his son
would look. He did not look like the Granvilles at all. Indeed, he had
an unusually countrified aspect, and his conversation was mingled with
rustic phrases which shocked his father's taste.

"I suppose it comes of the way in which he has been brought up and
the country boys he has associated with," thought Mr. Granville.
"Fortunately he is young, and there is time to polish him. As soon as I
reach Chicago I will engage a private tutor for him, who shall not only
remedy his defects of education, but do what he can to improve my son's
manners. I want him to grow up a gentleman."

The next day the three started for Chicago, while Mr. Granville's real
son and heir continued to live at a cheap lodging-house in New York.

The star of Jonas was in the ascendant, while poor Philip seemed
destined to years of poverty and hard work. Even now, he was threatened
by serious misfortune.



CHAPTER XX.

LEFT OUT IN THE COLD.

Of course Phil was utterly ignorant of the audacious attempt to deprive
him of his rights and keep him apart from the father who longed once
more to meet him. There was nothing before him so far as he knew except
to continue the up-hill struggle for a living.

He gave very little thought to the prediction of the fortune-teller whom
he had consulted, and didn't dream of any short-cut to fortune.

Do all he could, he found he could not live on his wages.

His board cost him four dollars a week, and washing and lunch two
dollars more, thus compelling him to exceed his salary by a dollar each
week.

He had, as we know, a reserve fund, on which he could draw, but it
was small, and grew constantly smaller. Then, again, his clothes were
wearing out, and he saw no way of obtaining money to buy new.

Phil became uneasy, and the question came up to his mind, "Should he
write to his step-mother and ask her for a trifling loan?" If the money
had been hers, he would not have done so on any condition; but she had
had nothing of her own, and all the property in her hands came through
Mr. Brent, who, as he knew, was attached to him, even though no tie of
blood united them. He certainly meant that Phil should be cared for out
of the estate, and at length Phil brought himself to write the following
letter:

"NEW YORK, March 10, 18--.

"DEAR MRS. BRENT: I suppose I ought to have written you before, and
have no good excuse to offer. I hope you and Jonas are well, and will
continue so. Let me tell you how I have succeeded thus far.

"I have been fortunate enough to obtain a place in a large mercantile
establishment, and for my services I am paid five dollars a week. This
is more than boys generally get in the first place, and I am indebted to
the partiality of an old gentleman, the senior member of the firm, whom
I had the chance to oblige, for faring so well. Still I find it hard to
get along on this sum, though I am as economical as possible. My board
and washing cost me six dollars a week, and I have, besides, to buy
clothing from time to time. I have nearly spent the extra money I had
with me, and do not know how to keep myself looking respectable in the
way of clothing. Under the circumstances, I shall have to apply to you
for a loan, say of twenty-five dollars. In a year or two I hope to earn
enough to be entirely independent. At present I cannot expect it. As my
father--Mr. Brent--undoubtedly intended to provide for me, I don't think
I need to apologize for making this request. Still I do it reluctantly,
for I would prefer to depend entirely upon myself.

"With regards to you and Jonas, I am yours truly, PHILIP BRENT."



Phil put this letter in the post-office, and patiently waited for an
answer.

"Mrs. Brent surely cannot refuse me," he said to himself, "since I have
almost wholly relieved her of the expense of taking care of me."

Phil felt so sure that money would be sent to him that he began to look
round a little among ready-made clothing stores to see at what price he
could obtain a suit that would do for every-day use. He found a store
in the Bowery where he could secure a suit, which looked as if it would
answer, for thirteen dollars. If Mrs. Brent sent him twenty-five, that
would leave him twelve for underclothing, and for a reserve fund to meet
the weekly deficit which he could not avoid.

Three--four days passed, and no letter came in answer to his.

"It can't be that Mrs. Brent won't at least answer my letter," he
thought uneasily. "Even if she didn't send me twenty-five dollars, she
couldn't help sending me something."

Still he felt uneasy, in view of the position in which he would find
himself in case no letter or remittance should come at all.

It was during this period of anxiety that his heart leaped for joy
when on Broadway he saw the familiar form of Reuben Gordon, a young man
already mentioned, to whom Phil had sold his gun before leaving Gresham.

"Why, Reuben, how are you?" exclaimed Phil joyfully. "When did you come
to town?"

"Phil Brent!" exclaimed Reuben, shaking hands heartily. "I'm thunderin'
glad to see you. I was thinkin' of you only five minutes ago, and
wonderin' where you hung out."

"But you haven't told me when you came to New York."

"Only this morning! I'm goin' to stay with a cousin of my father's, that
lives in Brooklyn, over night."

"I wanted to ask you about Mrs. Brent and Jonas. I was afraid they might
be sick, for I wrote four days ago and haven't got any answer yet."

"Where did you write to?"

"To Gresham, of course," answered Phil, in surprise.

"You don't mean to say you hain't heard of their leavin' Gresham?" said
Reuben, in evident astonishment.

"Who has left Gresham?"

"Your mother--leastwise, Mrs. Brent--and Jonas. They cleared out three
weeks ago, and nobody's heard a word of them since--that is, nobody in
the village."

"Don't you know where they've gone?" asked Phil, in amazement.

"No. I was goin' to ask you. I s'posed, of course, they'd write and let
you know."

"I didn't even know they had left Gresham."

"Well, that's what I call cur'us. It ain't treatin' you right accordin'
to my ideas."

"Is the house shut up?"

"It was till two days ago. Then a brother of Mrs. Brent came and opened
it. He has brought his wife and one child with him, and it seems they're
goin' to live there. Somebody asked him where his sister and Jonas were,
but they didn't get no satisfaction. He said he didn't rightly know
himself. He believed they was travelin'; thought they might be in
Canada."

Phil looked and felt decidedly sober at this information. He understood,
of course, now, why his letter had not been answered. It looked as if he
were an outcast from the home that had been his so long. When he came to
New York to earn a living he felt that he was doing so voluntarily,
and was not obliged to do so. Now he was absolutely thrown upon his own
resources, and must either work or starve.

"They've treated you real mean," said Reuben.

"I never did like Mrs. Brent, or Jonas either, for that matter.

"Where are you working?"

Phil answered this question and several others which his honest country
friend asked, but his mind was preoccupied, and he answered some of the
questions at random. Finally he excused himself on the ground that he
must be getting back to the store.

That evening Phil thought seriously of his position. Something must be
done, that was very evident. His expenses exceeded his income, and he
needed some clothing. There was no chance of getting his wages raised
under a year, for he already received more pay than it was customary to
give to a boy. What should he do?

Phil decided to lay his position frankly before the only friend he had
in the city likely to help him--Mr. Oliver Carter. The old gentleman
had been so friendly and kind that he felt that he would not at any
rate repulse him. After he had come to this decision he felt better. He
determined to lose no time in calling upon Mr. Carter.

After supper he brushed his hair carefully, and made himself look as
well as circumstances would admit. Then he bent his steps toward Twelfth
Street, where, as the reader will remember, Mr. Carter lived with his
niece.

He ascended the steps and rang the bell. It was opened by Hannah,
who recognized him, having admitted him on the former occasion of his
calling.

"Good-evening," said Phil pleasantly. "Is Mr. Carter at home?"

"No, sir," answered Hannah. "Didn't you know he had gone to Florida?"

"Gone to Florida!" repeated Phil, his heart sinking. "When did he
start?"

"He started this afternoon."

"Who's asking after Uncle Oliver?" asked a boy's voice.

Looking behind Hannah, Phil recognized the speaker as Alonzo Pitkin.



CHAPTER XXI.

"THEY MET BY CHANCE."

"Who was asking after Uncle Oliver?" demanded Alonzo superciliously.

"I was," answered Philip.

"Oh! it's you, is it?" said Alonzo, rather disdainfully.

"Yes," answered Phil calmly, though he felt provoked at Alonzo's tone,
which was meant to be offensive. "You remember me, don't you?"

"You are the boy that got round Uncle Oliver, and got him to give you a
place in pa's store."

"I deny that I got round him," returned Phil warmly. "I had the good
luck to do him a favor."

"I suppose you have come after money?" said Alonzo coarsely.

"I sha'n't ask you for any, at any rate," said Phil angrily.

"No; it wouldn't do any good," said Alonzo; "and it's no use asking ma,
either. She says you are an adventurer, and have designs on Uncle Oliver
because he is rich."

"I shall not ask your mother for any favor," said Phil, provoked. "I am
sorry not to meet your uncle."

"I dare say!" sneered Alonzo.

Just then a woman, poorly but neatly dressed, came down stairs. Her face
was troubled. Just behind her came Mrs. Pitkin, whose face wore a chilly
and proud look.

"Mr. Carter has left the city, and I really don't know when he will
return," Phil heard her say. "If he had been at home, it would not have
benefited you. He is violently prejudiced against you, and would not
have listened to a word you had to say."

"I did not think he would have harbored resentment so long," murmured
the poor woman. "He never seemed to me to be a hard man."

Phil gazed at the poorly dressed woman with a surprise which he did not
attempt to conceal, for in her he recognized the familiar figure of his
landlady. What could she have to do in this house? he asked himself.

"Mrs. Forbush!" he exclaimed.

"Philip!" exclaimed Mrs. Forbush, in a surprise as great as his own,
for she had never asked where her young lodger worked, and was not aware
that he was in the employ of her cousin's husband and well acquainted
with the rich uncle whom she had not seen for years.

"Do you know each other?" demanded Mrs. Pitkin, whose turn it was to be
surprised.

"This young gentleman lodges in my house," answered Mrs. Forbush.

"Young gentleman!" repeated Alonzo, with a mocking laugh.

Philip looked at him sternly. He had his share of human nature, and
it would have given him satisfaction to thrash the insolent young
patrician, as Alonzo chose to consider himself.

"And what do you want here, young man?" asked Mrs. Pitkin in a frosty
tone, addressing Phil of course.

"I wished to see Mr. Carter," answered Phil.

"Really, Mr. Carter seems to be very much in request!" sneered Mrs.
Pitkin. "No doubt he will be very much disappointed when he hears
what he has lost. You will have to go to Florida to see him, I think,
however." She added, after a pause: "It will not be well for either of
you to call again. Mr. Carter will understand the motive of your calls."

"How cruel you are, Lavinia!" said Mrs. Forbush sadly.

"My name is Mrs. Pitkin!" said that lady frigidly.

"You have not forgotten that we are cousins, surely?"

"I do not care to remember it, Mrs. Forbush. Good-day."

There was no alternative but for Mrs. Forbush to say "good-day" also,
and to descend the steps.

Philip joined her in the street.

"Are you really the cousin of Mrs. Pitkin?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Mrs. Forbush. "I bear the same relationship to Mr.
Carter that she does. We were much together as girls, and were both
educated at the same expensive schools. I offended my relatives by
marrying Mr. Forbush, whose fault was that he was poor, and chiefly,
I think, through the efforts of Lavinia Pitkin I was cast out by the
family. But where did you meet Uncle Oliver?"

Philip explained the circumstances already known to the reader.

"Mr. Carter seems to me to be a kind-hearted man," he said. "I don't
believe he would have cast you off if he had not been influenced by
other parties."

"So I think," said Mrs. Forbush. "I will tell you," she continued, after
a pause, "what drew me here this afternoon. I am struggling hard to keep
my head above water, Mr. Brent, but I find it hard to meet my expenses.
I cannot meet my rent due to-morrow within fifteen dollars, and I dared
to hope that if I could meet Uncle Oliver face to face and explain
matters to him, he would let me have the money."

"I am sure he would," said Phil warmly.

"But he is in Florida, and will probably remain there for a month or two
at least," said Mrs. Forbush, sighing. "But even if he were in the city I
suppose Lavinia would do all in her power to keep us apart."

"I have no doubt she would, Mrs. Forbush. Though she is your cousin, I
dislike her very much."

"I suppose the boy with whom you were talking was her son Alonzo?"

"Yes; he is about the most disagreeable boy I ever met. Both he and
his mother seem very much opposed to my having an interview with your
uncle."

"Lavinia was always of a jealous and suspicious disposition," said Mrs.
Forbush. "I have not seen Alonzo since he was a baby. He is two years
older than my Julia. He was born before I estranged my relatives by
marrying a poor man."

"What are you going to do, Mrs. Forbush, about the rent?" asked Phil, in
a tone of sympathy.

"I don't know. I shall try to get the landlord to wait, but I don't know
how he will feel about it."

"I wish I had plenty of money. I would gladly lend you all you need."

"I am sure you would, Philip," said Mrs. Forbush. "The offer does me
good, though it is not accompanied by the ability to do what your good
heart dictates. I feel that I am not without friends."

"I am a very poor one," said Phil. "The fact is, I am in trouble myself.
My income is only five dollars a week, and my expenses are beyond that.
I don't know how I am going to keep up."

"You may stay with me for three dollars a week, if you cannot pay four,"
said Mrs. Forbush, forgetting her own troubles in her sympathy with our
hero.

"No, Mrs. Forbush, you can't afford it. You need money as much as I do,
and perhaps more; for you have more than yourself to support."

"Yes, poor Julia!" sighed the mother. "She is born to a heritage of
poverty. Heaven only knows how we are going to get along."

"God will provide for us, Mrs. Forbush," said Philip. "I don't know how
it is, but in spite of my troubles I feel cheerful. I have a confidence
that things will come out well, though I cannot possibly imagine how."

"You are young, and youth is more inclined to be hopeful than maturer
years. However, I do not wish to dampen your cheerfulness. Keep it, and
let it comfort you."

If Phil could have heard the conversation that took place between
Mrs. Pitkin and Alonzo after their departure, he might have felt less
hopeful.

"It is dreadfully annoying that that woman should turn up after all
these years!" said Mrs. Pitkin, in a tone of disgust.

"Is she really your cousin, ma?" asked Alonzo.

"Yes, but she disgraced herself by a low marriage, and was cast off."

"That disposes of her, then?"

"I don't know. If she could meet Uncle Oliver, I am afraid she would
worm herself into his confidence and get him to do something for her.
Then it is unfortunate that she and that boy have fallen in with each
other. She may get him to speak to Uncle Oliver in her behalf."

"Isn't he working for pa?"

"Yes."

"Why don't you get pa to discharge him while Uncle Oliver is away?"

"Well thought of, Alonzo! I will speak to your father this very
evening."



CHAPTER XXII.

PHIL IS "BOUNCED."

Saturday, as is usual in such establishments, was pay-day at the store
of Phil's employers. The week's wages were put up in small envelopes and
handed to the various clerks.

When Phil went up to the cashier to get his money he put it quietly into
his vest-pocket.

Daniel Dickson, the cashier, observing this, said:

"Brent, you had better open your envelope."

Rather surprised, Phil nevertheless did as requested.

In the envelope, besides the five-dollar bill representing his week's
salary, he found a small slip of paper, on which was written these
ominous words:

"Your services will not be required after this week." Appended to this
notice was the name of the firm.

Phil turned pale, for to him, embarrassed as he was, the loss of his
