who had been as gay and well as any one at breakfast that morning, was
never seen in the college again. She was unconscious, the servants
said, for a long time, and when she awoke was in high fever. She was
removed to the hospital, and Maggie had seen the last of her friend.
Poor Annabel died in two days, and afterward Maggie took the fever.
Yes, she has been quite changed since then. She always had moods, as
she called them, but not like now. Sometimes I think she is almost
flighty."

Rosalind was silent. After a while she said in a prim little voice,
which she adopted now and then when she wanted to conceal her real
feelings:

"But I do wonder what the quarrel was about-- I mean, what really
happened between Annabel and Maggie."

"Look here, Rosalind, have I said anything about a quarrel? Please
remember that the whole thing is conjecture from beginning to end, and
don't go all over the place spreading stories and making mischief. I
have told you this in confidence, so don't forget."

"I won't forget," replied Rosalind. "I don't know why you should
accuse me of wanting to make mischief, Annie. I can't help being
curious, of course, and, of course, I'd like to know more."

"Well, for that matter, so would I," replied Annie. "Where there is a
mystery it's much more satisfactory to get to the bottom of it. Of
course, something dreadful must have happened to account for the
change in Miss Oliphant. It would be a comfort to know the truth, and,
of course, one need never talk of it. By the way, Rosie, you are just
the person to ferret this little secret out; you are the right sort of
person for spying and peeping."

"Oh, thank you," replied Rosalind; "if that's your opinion of me I'm
not inclined to do anything to please you. Spying and peeping, indeed!
What next?"

Annie Day patted her companion's small white hand.

"And so I've hurt the dear little baby's feelings!" she said. "But I
didn't mean to-- no, that I didn't. And she such a pretty, sweet
little pet as she is! Well, Rosie, you know what I mean. If we can
find out the truth about Miss Maggie we'll just have a quiet little
crow over her all to ourselves. I don't suppose we shall find out, but
the opportunities may arise-- who knows? Now I want to speak to you
about another person, and that is Maggie's new friend."

"What new friend?" Rosalind blushed brightly.

"That ugly Priscilla Peel. She has taken her up. Any one can see
that."

"Oh, I don't think so."

"But I do-- I am sure of it. Now I have good reason not to like Miss
Priscilla. You know what a virtuous parade she made of herself a few
nights ago?"

"Yes, you told me."

"Horrid, set-up minx! Just the sort of girl who ought to be suppressed
and crushed out of a college like ours. Vaunting her poverty in our
very faces and refusing to make herself pleasant or one with us in any
sort of way. Lucy Marsh and I had a long talk over her that night, and
we put our heads together to concoct a nice little bit of punishment
for her. You know she's horridly shy, and as gauche as if she lived in
the backwoods, and we meant to 'send her to Coventry.' We had it all
arranged, and a whole lot of girls would have joined us, for it's
contrary to the spirit of a place like this to allow girls of the
Priscilla Peel type to become popular or liked in any way. But, most
unluckily, poor, dear, good, but stupid, Nancy Banister was in the
room when Prissie made her little oration, and Nancy took her up as if
she were a heroine and spoke of her as if she had done something
magnificent, and, of course, Nancy told Maggie, and now Maggie is as
thick as possible with Prissie. So you see, my dear Rosalind, our
virtuous little scheme is completely knocked on the head."

"I don't see--" began Rosalind.

"You little goose, before a week is out Prissie will be the fashion.
All the girls will flock around her when Maggie takes her part. Bare,
ugly rooms will be the rage; poverty will be the height of the
fashion, and it will be considered wrong even to go in for the
recognized college recreations. Rosie, my love, we must nip this
growing mischief in the bud."

"How?" asked Rosalind.

"We must separate Maggie Oliphant and Priscilla Peel."

"How?" asked Rose again. "I'm sure," she added in a vehement voice,
"I'm willing-- I'm more than willing."

"Good. Well, we're at home now, and I absolutely must have a cup of
tea. No time for it in my room to-night-- let's come into the hall and
have some there. Look here, Rosalind, I'll ask Lucy Marsh to have
cocoa to-night in my room, and you can come too. Now keep a silent
tongue in your head, Baby."

  CHAPTER XII

 A GOOD THING TO BE YOUNG

IT was long past the tea-hour at Heath Hall when Maggie Oliphant and
Priscilla started on their walk home. The brightness and gaiety of the
merry party at the Marshalls' had increased as the moments flew on.
Even Priscilla had caught something of the charm. The kindly spirit
which animated every one seemed to get into her. She first became
interested, then she forgot herself. Prissie was no longer awkward;
she began to talk, and when she liked she could talk well.

As the two girls were leaving the house Geoffrey Hammond put in a
sudden appearance.

"I will see you home," he said to Maggie.

"No, no, you mustn't," she answered; her tone was vehement. She forgot
Prissie's presence and half turned her back on her.

"How unkind you are!" said the young man in a low tone.

"No, Geoffrey, but I am struggling-- you don't know how hard I am
struggling-- to be true to myself."

"You are altogether mistaken in your idea of truth," said Hammond,
turning and walking a little way by her side.

"I am not mistaken-- I am right."

"Well, at least allow me to explain my side of the question."

"No, it cannot be; there shall be no explanations, I am resolved. Good
night, you must not come any further."

She held out her hand. Hammond took it limply between his own.

"You are very cruel," he murmured in the lowest of voices.

He raised his hat, forgot even to bow to Priscilla, and hurried off
down a side street.

Maggie walked on a little way. Then she turned and looked down the
street where he had vanished. Suddenly she raised her hand to her
lips, kissed it and blew the kiss after the figure which had already
disappeared. She laughed excitedly when she did this, and her whole
face was glowing with a beautiful color.

Prissie, standing miserable and forgotten by the tall, handsome girl's
side, could see the light in her eyes and the glow on her cheeks in
the lamplight.

"I am here," said Priscilla at last in a low, half-frightened voice.
"I am sorry I am here, but I am. I heard what you said to Mr. Hammond.
I am sorry I heard."

Maggie turned slowly and looked at her. Prissie returned her gaze.
Then, as if further words were wrung from her against her will, she
continued:

"I saw the tears in your eyes in the fern-house at the Marshalls'. I
am very sorry, but I did see them."

"My dear Prissie!" said Maggie. She went up suddenly to the girl, put
her arm round her neck and kissed her.

"Come home now," she said, drawing Prissie's hand through her arm. "I
don't think I greatly mind your knowing," she said after a pause. "You
are true; I see it in your face. You would never tell again-- you
would never make mischief."

"Tell again! Of course not." Prissie's words came out with great
vigor.

"I know you would not, Priscilla; may I call you Priscilla?"

"Yes."

"Will you be my friend and shall I be your friend?"

"If you would," said Prissie. "But you don't mean it. It is impossible
that you can mean it. I'm not a bit like you-- and-- and-- you only
say these things to be kind."

"What do you mean, Priscilla?"

"I must tell you," said Prissie, turning very pale. "I heard what you
said to Miss Banister the night I came to the college."

"What I said to Miss Banister? What did I say?"

"Oh, can't you remember? The words seemed burnt into me: I shall never
forget them. I had left my purse in the dining-hall, and I was going
to fetch it. Your door was a little open. I heard my name, and I
stopped-- yes, I did stop to listen."

"Oh, what a naughty, mean little Prissie! You stopped to listen. And
what did you hear? Nothing good, of course? The bad thing was said to
punish you for listening."

"I heard," said Priscilla, her own cheeks crimson now, "I heard you
say that it gave you an aesthetic pleasure to be kind, and that was
why you were good to me."

Maggie felt her own color rising.

"Well, my dear," she said, "it still gives me an aesthetic pleasure to
be kind. You could not expect me to fall in love with you the moment I
saw you. I was kind to you then, perhaps, for the reason I stated. It
is very different now."

"It was wrong of you to be kind to me for that reason."

"Wrong of me? What an extraordinary girl you are, Priscilla-- why was
it wrong of me?"

"Because I learned to love you. You were gentle to me and spoke
courteously when others were rude and only laughed; my whole heart
went out to you when you were so sweet and gentle and kind. I did not
think-- I could not possibly think-- that you were good just because
it gave you a sort of selfish pleasure. When I heard your words I felt
dreadful. I hated St. Benet's; I wished I had never come. Your words
turned everything to bitterness for me."

"Did they really, Priscilla? Oh, Prissie! what a thoughtless, wild,
impulsive creature I am. Well, I don't feel now as I did that night.
If those words were cruel, forgive me. Forget those words, Prissie."

"I will if you will."

"I? I have forgotten them utterly."

"Thank you, thank you."

"Then we'll be friends-- real friends; true friends?"

Yes."

"You must say Yes, Maggie.'"

"Yes, Maggie."

"That is right. Now keep your hand in my arm. Let's walk fast. Is it
not glorious to walk in this semi-frosty sort of weather? Prissie,
you'll see a vast lot that you don't approve of in your new friend."

"Oh, I don't care," said Priscilla.

She felt so joyous she could have skipped.

"I've as many sides," continued Maggie, "as a chamelon has colors. I
am the gayest of the gay, as well as the saddest of the sad. When I am
gay you may laugh with me, but I warn you when I am sad you must never
cry with me. Leave me alone when I have my dark moods on, Prissie."

"Very well, Maggie, I'll remember."

"I think you'll make a delightful friend," said Miss Oliphant, just
glancing at her; "but I pity your side of the bargain."

"Why?"

"Because I'll try you so fearfully."

"Oh, no, you won't. I don't want to have a perfect friend."

"Perfect. No, child-- Heaven forbid. But there are shades of
perfection. Now, when I get into my dark moods, I feel wicked as well
as sad. No, we won't talk of them; we'll keep them away. Prissie, I
feel good to-night-- good-- and glad: it's such a nice feeling."

"I am sure of it," said Priscilla.

"What do you know about it, child? You have not tasted life yet. Wait
until you do. For instance-- no, though-- I won't enlighten you.
Prissie, what do you think of Geoffrey Hammond?"

"I think he loves you very much."

"Poor Geoffrey! Now, Prissie, you are to keep that little thought
quite dark in your mind-- in fact, you are to put it out of your mind.
You are not to associate my name with Mr. Hammond's-- not even in your
thoughts. You will very likely hear us spoken of together, and some of
the stupid girls here will make little quizzing, senseless remarks.
But there will be no truth in them, Prissie. He is nothing to me nor I
to him."

"Then why did you blow a kiss after him?" asked Priscilla.

Maggie stood still. It was too dark for Priscilla to see her blush.

"Oh, my many-sided nature!" she suddenly exclaimed. "It was a wicked
sprite made me blow that kiss. Prissie, my dear, I am cold: race me to
the house."

The two girls entered the wide hall, flushed and laughing. Other girls
were lingering about on the stairs. Some were just starting off to
evening service at Kingsdene; others were standing in groups,
chatting. Nancy Banister came up and spoke to Maggie. Maggie took her
arm and walked away with her.

Prissie found herself standing alone in the hall. It was as if the
delightful friendship cemented between herself and Miss Oliphant in
the frosty air outside had fallen to pieces like a castle of cards the
moment they entered the house. Prissie felt a chill. Her high spirits
went down a very little. Then, resolving to banish the ignoble spirit
of distrust, she prepared to run upstairs to her own room.

Miss Heath called her name as she was passing an open door.

"Is that you, my dear? Will you come to my room after supper
to-night?"

"Oh, thank you," said Prissie, her eyes sparkling.
