Perhaps she had gone over to "stay all night" with the Blythe girls. She
did this occasionally, deeming it a great treat. John Meredith sighed.
He felt that Una's whereabouts ought not to be a mystery to him. Cecelia
would have looked after her better than that.

If only Cecelia were still with him! How pretty and gay she had been!
How the old manse up at Maywater had echoed to her songs! And she
had gone away so suddenly, taking her laughter and music and leaving
silence--so suddenly that he had never quite got over his feeling of
amazement. How could SHE, the beautiful and vivid, have died?

The idea of a second marriage had never presented itself seriously to
John Meredith. He had loved his wife so deeply that he believed he could
never care for any woman again. He had a vague idea that before very
long Faith would be old enough to take her mother's place. Until then,
he must do the best he could alone. He sighed and went to his room,
where the bed was still unmade. Aunt Martha had forgotten it, and Mary
had not dared to make it because Aunt Martha had forbidden her to meddle
with anything in the minister's room. But Mr. Meredith did not notice
that it was unmade. His last thoughts were of St. Augustine.



CHAPTER X. THE MANSE GIRLS CLEAN HOUSE

"Ugh," said Faith, sitting up in bed with a shiver. "It's raining. I do
hate a rainy Sunday. Sunday is dull enough even when it's fine."

"We oughtn't to find Sunday dull," said Una sleepily, trying to pull her
drowsy wits together with an uneasy conviction that they had overslept.

"But we DO, you know," said Faith candidly. "Mary Vance says most
Sundays are so dull she could hang herself."

"We ought to like Sunday better than Mary Vance," said Una remorsefully.
"We're the minister's children."

"I wish we were a blacksmith's children," protested Faith angrily,
hunting for her stockings. "THEN people wouldn't expect us to be better
than other children. JUST look at the holes in my heels. Mary darned
them all up before she went away, but they're as bad as ever now. Una,
get up. I can't get the breakfast alone. Oh, dear. I wish father and
Jerry were home. You wouldn't think we'd miss father much--we don't see
much of him when he is home. And yet EVERYTHING seems gone. I must run
in and see how Aunt Martha is."

"Is she any better?" asked Una, when Faith returned.

"No, she isn't. She's groaning with the misery still. Maybe we ought to
tell Dr. Blythe. But she says not--she never had a doctor in her
life and she isn't going to begin now. She says doctors just live by
poisoning people. Do you suppose they do?"

"No, of course not," said Una indignantly. "I'm sure Dr. Blythe wouldn't
poison anybody."

"Well, we'll have to rub Aunt Martha's back again after breakfast. We'd
better not make the flannels as hot as we did yesterday."

Faith giggled over the remembrance. They had nearly scalded the skin off
poor Aunt Martha's back. Una sighed. Mary Vance would have known just
what the precise temperature of flannels for a misery back should be.
Mary knew everything. They knew nothing. And how could they learn,
save by bitter experience for which, in this instance, unfortunate Aunt
Martha had paid?

The preceding Monday Mr. Meredith had left for Nova Scotia to spend
his short vacation, taking Jerry with him. On Wednesday Aunt Martha was
suddenly seized with a recurring and mysterious ailment which she always
called "the misery," and which was tolerably certain to attack her
at the most inconvenient times. She could not rise from her bed, any
movement causing agony. A doctor she flatly refused to have. Faith and
Una cooked the meals and waited on her. The less said about the meals
the better--yet they were not much worse than Aunt Martha's had been.
There were many women in the village who would have been glad to come
and help, but Aunt Martha refused to let her plight be known.

"You must worry on till I kin git around," she groaned. "Thank goodness,
John isn't here. There's a plenty o' cold biled meat and bread and you
kin try your hand at making porridge."

The girls had tried their hand, but so far without much success. The
first day it had been too thin. The next day so thick that you could cut
it in slices. And both days it had been burned.

"I hate porridge," said Faith viciously. "When I have a house of my own
I'm NEVER going to have a single bit of porridge in it."

"What'll your children do then?" asked Una. "Children have to have
porridge or they won't grow. Everybody says so."

"They'll have to get along without it or stay runts," retorted Faith
stubbornly. "Here, Una, you stir it while I set the table. If I leave it
for a minute the horrid stuff will burn. It's half past nine. We'll be
late for Sunday School."

"I haven't seen anyone going past yet," said Una. "There won't likely be
many out. Just see how it's pouring. And when there's no preaching the
folks won't come from a distance to bring the children."

"Go and call Carl," said Faith.

Carl, it appeared, had a sore throat, induced by getting wet in the
Rainbow Valley marsh the previous evening while pursuing dragon-flies.
He had come home with dripping stockings and boots and had sat out the
evening in them. He could not eat any breakfast and Faith made him go
back to bed again. She and Una left the table as it was and went to
Sunday School. There was no one in the school room when they got there
and no one came. They waited until eleven and then went home.

"There doesn't seem to be anybody at the Methodist Sunday School
either," said Una.

"I'm GLAD," said Faith. "I'd hate to think the Methodists were better
at going to Sunday School on rainy Sundays than the Presbyterians. But
there's no preaching in their Church to-day, either, so likely their
Sunday School is in the afternoon."

Una washed the dishes, doing them quite nicely, for so much had she
learned from Mary Vance. Faith swept the floor after a fashion and
peeled the potatoes for dinner, cutting her finger in the process.

"I wish we had something for dinner besides ditto," sighed Una. "I'm so
tired of it. The Blythe children don't know what ditto is. And we NEVER
have any pudding. Nan says Susan would faint if they had no pudding on
Sundays. Why aren't we like other people, Faith?"

"I don't want to be like other people," laughed Faith, tying up her
bleeding finger. "I like being myself. It's more interesting. Jessie
Drew is as good a housekeeper as her mother, but would you want to be as
stupid as she is?"

"But our house isn't right. Mary Vance says so. She says people talk
about it being so untidy."

Faith had an inspiration.

"We'll clean it all up," she cried. "We'll go right to work to-morrow.
It's a real good chance when Aunt Martha is laid up and can't interfere
with us. We'll have it all lovely and clean when father comes home, just
like it was when Mary went away. ANY ONE can sweep and dust and wash
windows. People won't be able to talk about us any more. Jem Blythe
says it's only old cats that talk, but their talk hurts just as much as
anybody's."

"I hope it will be fine to-morrow," said Una, fired with enthusiasm.
"Oh, Faith, it will be splendid to be all cleaned up and like other
people."

"I hope Aunt Martha's misery will last over to-morrow," said Faith. "If
it doesn't we won't get a single thing done."

Faith's amiable wish was fulfilled. The next day found Aunt Martha still
unable to rise. Carl, too, was still sick and easily prevailed on to
stay in bed. Neither Faith nor Una had any idea how sick the boy really
was; a watchful mother would have had a doctor without delay; but there
was no mother, and poor little Carl, with his sore throat and aching
head and crimson cheeks, rolled himself up in his twisted bedclothes and
suffered alone, somewhat comforted by the companionship of a small green
lizard in the pocket of his ragged nighty.

The world was full of summer sunshine after the rain. It was a peerless
day for house-cleaning and Faith and Una went gaily to work.

"We'll clean the dining-room and the parlour," said Faith. "It wouldn't
do to meddle with the study, and it doesn't matter much about the
upstairs. The first thing is to take everything out."

Accordingly, everything was taken out. The furniture was piled on the
veranda and lawn and the Methodist graveyard fence was gaily draped with
rugs. An orgy of sweeping followed, with an attempt at dusting on Una's
part, while Faith washed the windows of the dining-room, breaking one
pane and cracking two in the process. Una surveyed the streaked result
dubiously.

"They don't look right, somehow," she said. "Mrs. Elliott's and Susan's
windows just shine and sparkle."

"Never mind. They let the sunshine through just as well," said Faith
cheerfully. "They MUST be clean after all the soap and water I've used,
and that's the main thing. Now, it's past eleven, so I'll wipe up this
mess on the floor and we'll go outside. You dust the furniture and I'll
shake the rugs. I'm going to do it in the graveyard. I don't want to
send dust flying all over the lawn."

Faith enjoyed the rug shaking. To stand on Hezekiah Pollock's tombstone,
flapping and shaking rugs, was real fun. To be sure, Elder Abraham
Clow and his wife, driving past in their capacious double-seated buggy,
seemed to gaze at her in grim disapproval.

"Isn't that a terrible sight?" said Elder Abraham solemnly.

"I would never have believed it if I hadn't seen it with my own eyes,"
said Mrs. Elder Abraham, more solemnly still.

Faith waved a door mat cheerily at the Clow party. It did not worry her
that the elder and his wife did not return her greeting. Everybody
knew that Elder Abraham had never been known to smile since he had been
appointed Superintendent of the Sunday School fourteen years previously.
But it hurt her that Minnie and Adella Clow did not wave back. Faith
liked Minnie and Adella. Next to the Blythes, they were her best friends
in school and she always helped Adella with her sums. This was gratitude
for you. Her friends cut her because she was shaking rugs in an old
graveyard where, as Mary Vance said, not a living soul had been buried
for years. Faith flounced around to the veranda, where she found Una
grieved in spirit because the Clow girls had not waved to her, either.

"I suppose they're mad over something," said Faith. "Perhaps they're
jealous because we play so much in Rainbow Valley with the Blythes.
Well, just wait till school opens and Adella wants me to show her how to
do her sums! We'll get square then. Come on, let's put the things back
in. I'm tired to death and I don't believe the rooms will look much
better than before we started--though I shook out pecks of dust in the
graveyard. I HATE house-cleaning."

It was two o'clock before the tired girls finished the two rooms. They
got a dreary bite in the kitchen and intended to wash the dishes at
once. But Faith happened to pick up a new story-book Di Blythe had lent
her and was lost to the world until sunset. Una took a cup of rank tea
up to Carl but found him asleep; so she curled herself up on Jerry's bed
and went to sleep too. Meanwhile, a weird story flew through Glen St.
Mary and folks asked each other seriously what was to be done with those
manse youngsters.

"That is past laughing at, believe ME," said Miss Cornelia to her
husband, with a heavy sigh. "I couldn't believe it at first. Miranda
Drew brought the story home from the Methodist Sunday School this
afternoon and I simply scoffed at it. But Mrs. Elder Abraham says she
and the Elder saw it with their own eyes."

"Saw what?" asked Marshall.

"Faith and Una Meredith stayed home from Sunday School this morning and
CLEANED HOUSE," said Miss Cornelia, in accents of despair. "When Elder
Abraham went home from the church--he had stayed behind to straighten
out the library books--he saw them shaking rugs in the Methodist
graveyard. I can never look a Methodist in the face again. Just think
what a scandal it will make!"

A scandal it assuredly did make, growing more scandalous as it spread,
until the over-harbour people heard that the manse children had not only
cleaned house and put out a washing on Sunday, but had wound up with an
afternoon picnic in the graveyard while the Methodist Sunday School was
going on. The only household which remained in blissful ignorance of
the terrible thing was the manse itself; on what Faith and Una fondly
believed to be Tuesday it rained again; for the next three days it
rained; nobody came near the manse; the manse folk went nowhere; they
might have waded through the misty Rainbow Valley up to Ingleside, but
all the Blythe family, save Susan and the doctor, were away on a visit
to Avonlea.

"This is the last of our bread," said Faith, "and the ditto is done. If
Aunt Martha doesn't get better soon WHAT will we do?"

"We can buy some bread in the village and there's the codfish Mary
dried," said Una. "But we don't know how to cook it."

"Oh, that's easy," laughed Faith. "You just boil it."

Boil it they did; but as it did not occur to them to soak it beforehand
it was too salty to eat. That night they were very hungry; but by the
following day their troubles were over. Sunshine returned to the world;
Carl was well and Aunt Martha's misery left her as suddenly as it had
come; the butcher called at the manse and chased famine away. To crown
all, the Blythes returned home, and that evening they and the manse
children and Mary Vance kept sunset tryst once more in Rainbow Valley,
where the daisies were floating upon the grass like spirits of the dew
and the bells on the Tree Lovers rang like fairy chimes in the scented
twilight.



CHAPTER XI. A DREADFUL DISCOVERY

"Well, you kids have gone and done it now," was Mary's greeting, as she
joined them in the Valley. Miss Cornelia was up at Ingleside, holding
agonized conclave with Anne and Susan, and Mary hoped that the session
might be a long one, for it was all of two weeks since she had been
allowed to revel with her chums in the dear valley of rainbows.

"Done what?" demanded everybody but Walter, who was day-dreaming as
usual.

"It's you manse young ones, I mean," said Mary. "It was just awful of
you. _I_ wouldn't have done such a thing for the world, and _I_ weren't
brought up in a manse--weren't brought up ANYWHERE--just COME up."

"What have WE done?" asked Faith blankly.

"Done! You'd BETTER ask! The talk is something terrible. I expect it's
ruined your father in this congregation. He'll never be able to live it
down, poor man! Everybody blames him for it, and that isn't fair. But
nothing IS fair in this world. You ought to be ashamed of yourselves."

"What HAVE we done?" asked Una again, despairingly. Faith said nothing,
but her eyes flashed golden-brown scorn at Mary.

"Oh, don't pretend innocence," said Mary, witheringly. "Everybody knows
what you have done."

"_I_ don't," interjected Jem Blythe indignantly. "Don't let me catch you
making Una cry, Mary Vance. What are you talking about?"

"I s'pose you don't know, since you're just back from up west," said
Mary, somewhat subdued. Jem could always manage her. "But everybody else
knows, you'd better believe."

"Knows what?"
