Besides, you have seen Mr. Dewey."

"Yes, I should know him ag'in if I met him."

"How did he seem when you knew him?" asked Ida, hesitating, because
conscious that the question was vaguely expressed and might not be
understood.

"He was a quiet, sober chap, workin' early and late," answered Jake,
who, rough as he was, comprehended the drift of her questions. "He
wasn't exactly pop'lar with the boys, because he wouldn't drink with
'em, and that made them think he was proud, or grudged the expense."

"They were very greatly mistaken," said Ida hastily.

"We found that out," said the miner. "A young chap fell sick; he was
a newcomer and had neither friends nor money, and was pretty bad
off. Dewey sat up with him night after night, and gave him fifty
dollars when he got well to help him back to 'Frisco. You see, his
sickness made him tired of the mines."

"That was like Richard," said Ida softly. "He was always
kind-hearted."

"After that," continued Jake, "none of us had a word to say agin'
him. We knowed him better, and we liked him for his kindness to that
young chap."

If Jake Bradley had sought to commend himself to Ida Sinclair, he
could not have found a better or more effectual way than by praising
her lover. She became more cordial at once, and better satisfied
with the arrangement she had formed to send off the ex-miner in
Ben's company in search of her lover.

The arrangements were speedily made. The two were to start out,
equipped at Miss Sinclair's expense, on an exploring-tour, the main
object being to find Richard Dewey, and apprise him of her arrival
in California. They were permitted, however, to work at mining,
wherever there was a favorable opportunity, but never to lose sight
of the great object of their expedition. From time to time, as they
had opportunity, they were to communicate with Miss Sinclair,
imparting any information they might have gathered.

"I shall have to leave much to your discretion," said Ida,
addressing them both. "I know absolutely nothing of the country, and
you, Mr. Bradley, are tolerably familiar with it. I have only to add
that should you become unfortunate, and require more money, you have
only to let me know. In any event, I shall take care to recompense
you for all your efforts in my behalf."

"We don't want to bear too heavy on your purse, miss," said Jake
Bradley. "Once we get to the mines, we kin take care of ourselves.
Can't we, Ben?"

"I hope so, Mr. Bradley."

Bradley eyed Ben reproachfully, and our hero at once smilingly
corrected himself. "I mean Jake."

"That suits me better. I s'pose the young lady wouldn't like to call
me Jake?"

"I think not," said Ida, smiling.

"I ain't used to bein' called mister. The boys always called me
Jake."

"But I am not one of the boys, Mr. Bradley," said Miss Sinclair.

"Right you are, miss, and I reckon Richard Dewey would rather have
you as you are."

Ida laughed merrily. To her the miner was a new character, unlike
any she had ever met, and though rough and unconventional, she was
disposed to like him.

"Find him for me, and you can ask him the question if you like. Tell
him from me-but you must first know me by my real name."

Ben looked surprised. He had forgotten that Ida Sinclair was only
assumed to elude the vigilance of her guardian.

"My real name is Florence Douglas. I am of Scotch descent, as you
will judge. Can you remember the name?"

"I can, Cousin Ida-I mean Cousin Florence," said Ben.

"Then let Ida Sinclair be forgotten. Richard--Mr. Dewey-would not
know me by that name."

"I tell you, Ben, that gal's a trump!" said Jake Bradley
enthusiastically, when they were by themselves; "and so I'll tell
Dick Dewey when I see him."

"She's been a kind friend to me, Jake. I hope we can find Mr. Dewey
for her."

"We'll find him if he's in California," answered Jake.




CHAPTER XIV

THE CANON HOTEL.


Late in the afternoon of the third day subsequent a man and a boy
might have been seen riding slowly through a rocky canon probably
eighty miles west from San Francisco. Both were mounted on the small
native horses of California, generally called mustangs. These
animals possess a strength disproportioned to their size, and show
great endurance. At times they have a playful habit of bucking, not
quite agreeable to an inexperienced horseman.

The reader will already have guessed that the two riders are Jake
Bradley and Ben. The mustangs were on a walk, being apparently weary
with the day's tramp.

"Well, Ben," said Bradley, "what do you say to camping out for the
night?"

"I have no objection," said Ben, "and I don't think my horse has."

"He is better off than mine, having less to carry. Are you tired?"

"Not very tired, but my limbs are rather stiff."

"What hotel shall we put up at, Ben?" asked Bradley, with a humorous
glance about him.

"There isn't much choice," said Ben. "The Canon Hotel seems to be
the only one that is open hereabouts. The only objection is, that we
shall have to sleep on the floor, with the windows all open."

"That's about so, Ben," assented Bradley, laughing. "I shouldn't
mind sleeping in a Christian bed to-night myself. Well, here goes!"

As he spoke, he jumped from the back of his horse, and, taking out a
rope, tethered it to a tree hard by.

Ben followed his example.

"Now for the grub," said Bradley. "I'm powerfully empty myself. This
ridin' all day up and down hill is wearin' to the stomach. What do
you say?"

"I've got a healthy appetite myself, Jake."

"This yere Canon Hotel that you was talkin' about ain't first-class.
It don't supply anything but cold victuals. Now, ef we had a cup of
coffee to wash it down, and kinder warm us up, it would go to the
right spot, eh, Ben?"

"You are right, Jake! but please don't speak of it again. It makes
my mouth water."

"Stay here a few minutes, Ben, and I'll reconnoiter a little.
Perhaps I can find a better place for campin'."

"All right, Jake!"

While Bradley was absent Ben threw himself on the ground, and began
to think. It was the third day of the expedition. Ben enjoyed riding
through this new, unsettled country. He almost felt in the solitudes
of the woods and hills as if he were the original explorer of this
far-distant country. He was more than three thousand miles away from
his native town, entrusted with a mission of importance. The thought
was gratifying to his boyish fancy, and inspired him with a new
sense of power and increased his self-reliance. He was glad,
however, to have the company of Jake Bradley. He was ready to
acknowledge that his chances of success, had he started alone, would
have been much smaller, and certainly he would have found it
exceedingly lonesome.

His companion was not a man of culture, nor were his tastes
elevated, but there was a rough honesty about him, and a good humor,
which made him an agreeable companion. Besides, he knew the country,
and Ben felt secure in leaving the conduct of the trip to him.

"I am glad I came out here," thought Ben, as, with his head pillowed
on his knapsack, he looked up through the branches of the tall trees
to the blue sky beyond. "It's better than staying at home and
working for Deacon Pitkin, or blacking boots for Sam Sturgis. Here I
am my own man, free and don't need to run at anybody's bidding."

Probably most boys of Ben's age share his love of independence, but
it is neither practicable nor desirable that at sixteen a boy should
be his own master, much as he may desire it. In the case of our
hero, circumstances had thrown him upon his own resources, and it
may be added that he could better be trusted with the management of
himself than most boys.

Ben's reverie was broken in upon by the return of his companion.

"What are you dreamin' about, Ben?" queried Jake.

"I was thinking about home, Jake."

"This don't look much like it, eh, Ben?"

"Not much."

"Well, my lad, I've found something," continued Bradley.

"Found something? What! a nugget?" exclaimed Ben, in excitement.

"Not much. This ain't the place for such a find as that."

"What, then, Jake?"

"I've found a hotel."

"Where?" asked Ben eagerly.

"Get up and stand by me. There! look yonder. What do you see?"

"It looks like smoke."

"It is smoke. There's a cabin yonder. I've reconnoitered, and I seed
the door open, and a woman inside. Now, I'm going to ask her to give
us some supper and a bed. Won't that be fine?"

"Splendid, Jake!"

"Then unhitch that animal of yours, and we'll put our best foot
forrards, and maybe we'll get a hot supper and a Christian bed to
sleep in."




CHAPTER XV.

A POLITE HOSTESS.


The cabin was a rough one, built of logs, with an adobe chimney. It
contained two rooms and a loft. The inducements to live in such a
lonely spot must have been small enough, but so many undesirable
localities are inhabited, that it is hardly worth while to feel or
express surprise at men's taste in such matters.

The approach of Ben and his companion was not observed by the inmate
or inmates of the cabin. It was only when Bradley, dismounting from
his mustang, struck the door-post with the handle of his whip-for it
is needless to say that bells were not to be found in that
neighborhood--that their presence became known.

A woman, tall, spare, and with harsh features, came to the door. She
eyed Bradley askance.

"Well, what's wanted, and who are you?" she demanded.

"We are bound for the mines, ma'am," said Bradley. "We expected to
camp out to-night, but we happened to see the smoke rising from your
chimbly, and we made bold to ride up and ask you for supper and a
night's lodging."

"We don't take in tramps," said the woman roughly.

"We're on a tramp," said Bradley, resolved not to be rebuffed, "but
we've got money to pay for our accommodations."

"This ain't a hotel," said the woman, but less roughly.

"Of course not," said Bradley, in a conciliatory manner; "but I
guess you won't object to get us some supper and give us a bed.
We'll pay for all the trouble we make. That's fair, ain't it?"

"I don't know what my husband will say," returned the woman, in an
undecided manner.

"Won't you ask him, ma'am?"

"He's gone out just now. He won't be back for an hour."

"While you're waitin' for him, can't you get us some supper? Then
you can send us off if he ain't willin' to keep us."

"I'll do that," said the woman. "You'd better stay outside till I
get supper ready. There ain't much room here, and you'll be in the
way."

"Jest as you say, ma'am. I s'pose it would be too much to ask if you
kin give us a hot cup of coffee. We haven't tasted any since we left
'Frisco."

"I can give you coffee," answered the woman. "My husband likes it,
and we always keep it on hand."

"Good!" said Bradley, his face lighting up with satisfaction. "We've
rid far to-day, and a cup of coffee will go to the right spot."

Bradley and Ben threw themselves on the ground near-by, and awaited
with complacence the call to supper.

"We're in luck, Ben," said his companion. "Who'd have expected a hot
supper out here in this lonely place?"

"I don't much like the looks of our landlady, Jake," said Ben.

"She ain't handsome, I allow, Ben; but if she gives us a good
supper, that don't matter. We must make the most of this, for it's
uncertain when we get another."

"W'on't she give us breakfast in the morning?"

"I didn't think of that. Maybe she will, and that'll be a good start
on our to-morrow's journey."

In about three-quarters of an hour the woman came to the door, and
called the travelers in to supper.

An unpainted wooden table was set in the middle of the floor, on
which was spread a simple but appetizing meal. There was a plate of
meat, which appeared to have been fried; a loaf of bread, and a pot
of coffee; but there was neither milk nor butter. This naturally
detracted from the attractiveness of the bread and coffee, but our
travelers were not disposed to be fastidious.

Ben tasted the meat, and it evidently puzzled him. In taste it
differed from anything he had eaten before.

Bradley smiled at his perplexity.

"Don't you know what it is, Ben?" he asked.

"No."

"Do you like it?"

"I am hungry enough to enjoy anything."

"Well, lad, it's bear steak."

"Bear steak!" repeated Ben, in surprise.

"Exactly. I've eaten it before two or three times. You see, we
haven't any markets here to depend on, and we must take what we can
get."

"It isn't bad," said Ben meditatively.

During this conversation the landlady had been out of the room. As
it concluded, she reentered.

"Your supper is good, ma'am," said Bradley.

"Now if you only had a cow to supply you with milk and butter, you'd
be fixed complete."

"If you want 'em you'll have to go somewhere else," said the woman.

