well-known house in Wall Street.

"So far, so good!" said the broker. "It appears that besides the
bonds sold you had four one-hundred-dollar bonds?"

"Yes, sir."

"You had not parted with them?"

"No, sir."

"They will some time be put on the market, and then we shall have a
clew to the mystery."

"That boy has probably got them," said the housekeeper, nodding her
head emphatically.

"You are at liberty to search my chamber, Mrs. Estabrook," said
Grant, quietly.

"He may have passed them over to that man Morrison," suggested the
housekeeper.

"I hardly think that likely," said Willis Ford, who saw danger to
himself in any persecution of Jim Morrison.

Mr. Reynolds noticed his defense of Morrison, and glanced at him
thoughtfully.

"Mrs. Estabrook," he said, "I am satisfied that you possessed the
bonds which you claim, and I will relieve your mind by saying that I
will guarantee you against loss by their disappearance. You need
have no further anxiety on the subject. I will undertake to
investigate the matter, which at present appears to be involved in
mystery. Whether or not I succeed in solving it will not matter to
you, since you are saved from loss."

"Thank you, sir," said the housekeeper, feeling considerably
relieved; "it wasn't much, but it was my all. I depended upon it to
use when old age prevented me from earning my living."

"I am glad you are so wise in providing for the future."

"You won't let that boy escape?" the housekeeper could not help
adding.

"If you refer to Grant Thornton, I think I may say for him that he
has no intention of leaving us."

"Is he to stay in the house?"

"Of course; and I expect him to aid me in coming to the truth. Let
me request, Mrs. Estabrook, that you discontinue referring to him in
offensive terms, or I may withdraw my offer guaranteeing you from
loss. Grant, if you will accompany me, I have some questions to put
to you."

Grant and his employer left the room together.

"He won't let the boy be punished, though he must know he's guilty,"
said Mrs. Estabrook, spitefully.

"He makes a fool of himself about that boy," said Willis Ford,
disconcerted.

"He's an artful young vagabond," said the housekeeper. "I know he
took the bonds."

"Of course he did," Ford assented, though he had the best of reasons
for knowing that Grant was innocent.

"At any rate," he continued, "you are all right, mother, since Mr.
Reynolds agrees to make up the value of the bonds to you. When you
get your money, just consult me about investing it. Don't put it
into bonds, for they may be stolen."

"Perhaps I'd better put it into the savings bank," said his
stepmother.

"You'll get very small interest there; I can invest it so you can
make quite as much. However, there will be time enough to speak of
that when you've got the money. Now, mother, I shall have to bid you
good-evening."

"Can't you stay longer, Willis? I feel so upset that I don't like to
be left alone. I don't know what that boy may do."

"I think you are safe," said Willis Ford, secretly amused. But, as
he left the house, he felt seriously disquieted. There was danger
that Jim Morrison, when he found the money which he was to receive
withheld, would be incensed and denounce Ford, who had received back
his evidence of indebtedness. Should he divulge that the bonds had
been given him by Ford, Grant would be cleared, and he would be
convicted of theft.

As Ford was leaving the house a telegraph boy was just ascending the
steps. It was John Cavanagh, already referred to.

As his eyes rested on Ford, he said to himself: "Where have I seen
that feller? I know his face."

Then it flashed upon the boy that he had seen Ford at the Grand
Central Hotel, in the act of giving bonds to Jim Morrison.

"It's queer I should meet him here," said the telegraph boy to
himself. "I wonder what game he's up to."

Johnny was introduced into the presence of Mr. Reynolds, for whom he
had a message. On his way out he met Grant in the hall. The two boys
were acquainted, Grant having at one time advanced Johnny two
dollars toward paying his mother's rent.

"Do you live here?" asked the telegraph boy.

"Yes," answered Grant.

"I met a feller goin' out that I've seen before. Who was it?"

"Willis Ford, a clerk of Mr. Reynolds."

"I seed him in the Grand Central Hotel yesterday givin' some bonds
to a suspicious-lookin' chap."

"You did," exclaimed Grant. "Come right up and tell that to Mr.
Reynolds," and he seized the astonished telegraph boy by the arm.



CHAPTER XIX -- IMPORTANT EVIDENCE



Mr. Reynolds looked rather surprised when Grant appeared, drawing
the telegraph boy after him.

"This boy has got something to tell you about Mr. Ford," said Grant,
breathless with excitement.

"About Mr. Ford?" repeated the broker. "What do you know about
Willis Ford?"

"I don't know his name," replied Johnny. "It's the chap that just
went out of the house."

"It was Mr. Ford," explained Grant.

"Tell me what you know about him," said the broker, encouragingly.

"I seed him in the Grand Central Hotel, givin' some bond to a
flashy-lookin' man. There was a boy wid him, a big boy."

"With whom--Mr. Ford?"

"No, wid the other chap."

"I know who he means, sir," said Grant. "It was Tom Calder."

"And the man?"

"Was Jim Morrison, the same man that gave me the bonds to sell."

"That seems important," said Mr. Reynolds. "I did not believe Ford
capable of such rascality."

"He had as good a chance to take the bonds as I, sir. He was here
last evening."

"Was he?" asked the broker, quickly. "I did not know that."

"He was here for an hour at least. I saw him come in and go out."

Mr. Reynolds asked several more questions of the telegraph boy, and
enjoined him to silence.

"My boy," he said, "come here to-morrow evening at half-past seven.
I may want you."

"I will, sir, if I can get away. I shall be on duty."

"Say to the telegraph company that I have an errand for you. Your
time will be paid for."

"That will make it all right, sir."

"And, meanwhile, here is a dollar for your own use."

Johnny's eyes sparkled, for with his limited earnings this sum would
come in very handy. He turned away, nearly forgetting the original
errand that brought him to the house, but luckily it occurred in
time. The nature of it has nothing to do with this story.

When Johnny had gone, Mr. Reynolds said: "Grant, I need not caution
you not to breathe a word of this. I begin to think that there is a
conspiracy against you; but whether Willis Ford is alone in it, or
has a confederate I cannot decide. My housekeeper does not appear to
like you."

"No, sir, I am sorry to say she does not; but I don't think she is
in this plot. I think she honestly believes that I stole her bonds."

"I have too great confidence in you to believe it. I own I was a
little shaken when the key was found. You have no idea how it came
in your pocket, I suppose?"

"No, sir, I can't guess. I might suspect Mr. Ford of putting it
there, but I can't see how he managed it."

"Well, we will let matters take their course. You will go to work as
usual, and not speak a word of what has happened this evening."

"Thank you, sir."

Meanwhile, we must follow Willis Ford. When he left the house, he
was by no means in a comfortable frame of mind. He felt that it was
absolutely necessary to see Jim Morrison, and have an understanding
with him. What arrangements he could make with him, or how he could
reconcile him to the loss of the money which he had expected to
receive from the sale of the bonds, he could not yet imagine.
Perhaps he would be willing to receive the other four bonds in part
payment. In that case Willis himself would not profit as much as he
had hoped from the theft; but there seemed no alternative. He had
got himself into a scrape, and he must get out of it the best way
possible.

Though he did not know where to find Morrison, he thought it likely
that he might be seen at the White Elephant, a large and showy
billiard room on Broadway, near Thirtieth Street. There were several
gambling houses near by, and there or in that neighborhood he
thought that Morrison might be met.

He was right. On entering the billiard room he found the man he
sought playing a game of billiards with Tom Calder, at the first
table.

"I want to see you, Morrison," he said, in a low voice. "Is the game
'most finished?"

"I have only six points more to make. I shall probably run out this
time."

He was right in his estimate. Two minutes later the two went out of
the saloon together, accompanied by Tom.

"Well, what is it?" he asked.

"Let us turn into a side street."

They turned into Thirtieth Street, which was much less brilliantly
lighted than Broadway, and sauntered leisurely along.

"Did you buy the bonds of that boy?" asked Morrison, anxiously.

"Yes."

"Then it's all right. Have you brought me the money?"

"How should I?" returned Ford, impatiently. "I couldn't pay him, and
keep the money myself."

"Oh, well, it doesn't matter. He is to meet me to-morrow morning and
hand over the money."

"I am afraid you will be disappointed." "Disappointed," repeated
Morrison, quickly. "What do you mean? The boy hasn't made off with
the money, has he? If he has---" and the sentence ended with an
oath.

"No, it isn't as you suppose."

"Then why won't he pay me the money, I'd like to know?"

"There is some trouble about the bonds. It is charged that they are
stolen."

"How is that? You gave them to me," said Morrison, suspiciously.

Now came the awkward moment. However, Ford had decided on the story
he would tell.

"They were given me by a person who owed me money," he said,
plausibly. "How was I to know they were stolen?"

"They were stolen, then?"

"I suppose so. In fact, I know so."

"How do you know?"

"Well--in fact, they were stolen from my stepmother."

Morrison whistled.

"Well," he said.

"Of course you mustn't say that I gave them to you. You would get me
into trouble."

"So you want to save yourself at my expense? I am to be suspected of
stealing the bonds, am I? That's a decidedly cool proposal, but it
won't do. I shall clear myself, by telling just where I got the
bonds."

"That's what I want you to do."

"You do!" ejaculated the gambler, in surprise.

"Yes. You are to say that the boy gave them to you."

"Why should I say that?"

"Because he is already suspected of stealing the bonds."

"But I gave them to him to sell."

"You mustn't admit it. There is no proof of it except his word."

"What's your game? Whatever it is, it is too deep for me."

"I've got it all arranged. You are to say that the boy owed you a
gambling debt, and agreed to meet you to-morrow morning to pay it.
Of the bonds, you are to know nothing, unless you say that he told
you he had some which he was going to sell, in order to get money to
pay you."

"What advantage am I to get out of all this?"

"What advantage? Why, you will save yourself from suspicion."

"That isn't enough. I didn't take the bonds, and you know it. I
believe you did it yourself."

"Hush!" said Willis Ford, looking around him nervously.

"Look here, Ford, I gave up your I O U, and now I find I've got to
whistle for my money."

"Go with me to my room, and you shall have four hundred dollars
to-night."

"In cash?"

"No; in bonds."

"Some more of the same kind? No, thank you, I want ready money."

"Then give me a little more time, and I will dispose of them--when
this excitement blows over."

Finally Morrison gave a sulky assent, and the conspirators parted.



CHAPTER XX -- AT THE FIFTH AVENUE HOTEL



"If I thought he was playing me false," said Jim Morrison, after
Ford and himself had parted company, "I'd make him smart for it."

"I guess it's all right," said Tom, who was less experienced and
less suspicious than his companion.

"It may be so, but I have my suspicions. I don't trust Willis Ford."

"Shall you go round to the Fifth Avenue Hotel to meet Grant
to-morrow morning."

"Of course I shall. I want to see what the boy says. It may be a
put-up job between him and Ford."

The very same question was put by Grant to Mr. Reynolds.

"Shall I go round to the hotel to-morrow morning to see Morrison and
Tom Calder?"

The broker paused a moment and looked thoughtful.

"Yes," he answered, after a pause. "You may."

"And what shall I say when he demands the money?"

Upon this Mr. Reynolds gave Grant full instructions as to what he
desired him to say.

About quarter after eight o'clock the next morning a quiet-looking
man, who looked like a respectable bookkeeper entered the Fifth
Avenue Hotel and walked through the corridor, glancing, as it
seemed, indifferently, to the right and left. Finally he reached
the door of the reading room and entered. His face brightened as at
the further end he saw two persons occupying adjoining seats. They
were, in fact, Morrison and Tom Calder.

The newcomer selected a Boston daily paper, and, as it seemed, by
chance, settled himself in a seat not six feet away from our two
acquaintances, so that he could, without much effort, listen to
their conversation.

"It's almost time for Grant to come," said Tom, after a pause.

"Yes," grumbled Morrison, "but as he won't have any money for me, I
don't feel as anxious as I should otherwise."

"What'll you say to him?"

"I don't know yet. I want to find out whether Ford has told the
truth about the bonds. I believe he stole 'em himself."

Five minutes later Grant entered the reading-room. A quick glance
showed him, not only the two he had come to meet, but the quiet,
little man who was apparently absorbed in a copy of the Boston
Journal. He went up at once to meet them.
