"There's nothing like fetching up these fellows with a round turn,"
he said. "'No money, no clothes'--that's my motto. Merrill told me all
about that little bill that sent Luke Harrison over here. He don't run
up any bill with me, if I know myself."

Luke went round to the village store. Harry Walton usually spent a part
of every evening in instructive reading and study; but after a hard
day's work he felt it necessary to pass an hour or so in the open air,
so he came down to the center of center of the village.

"Hello, Walton!" said Luke, accosting him with unusual cordiality. "You
are just the fellow I want to see."

"Am I?" inquired Harry in surprise, for there was no particular
friendship or intimacy between them.

"Yes; I'm going to ask a little favor of you--a mere trifle. Lend me
five or ten dollars for a week. Five will do it, you can't spare more."

Harry shook his head.

"I can't do that, Luke."

"Why not? Haven't you got as much?"

"Yes, I've got it."

"Then why won't you lend it to me?"

"I have little money and I can't run any risk."

"Do you think I won't pay you back?"

"Why do you need to borrow of me? You get much higher wages than I do."

"I want to pay a bill to-night. I didn't think you'd be so
unaccommodating."

"I shouldn't be willing to lend to anyone," said Harry.

"The money isn't mine. I am going to send it home."

"A great sight you are!" sneered Luke. "I wanted to see just how mean
you were. You've got the money in your pocket but you won't lend it."

This taunt did not particularly disturb Harry. There is a large class
like Luke, who offended at being refused a loan, though quite aware that
they are never likely to repay it. My young readers will be sure to meet
specimens of this class, against whom the only protection is a very firm
and decided "No."




CHAPTER XVII. THE NIGHT SCHOLARS


Immediately after Thanksgiving Day, the winter schools commenced. That
in the center district was kept by a student of Dartmouth college, who
had leave of absence from the college authorities for twelve weeks, in
order by teaching to earn something to help defray his college expenses.
Leonard Morgan, now a junior, was a tall, strongly made young man of
twenty-two, whose stalwart frame had not been reduced by his diligent
study. There were several shoe shops in the village, each employing from
one to three boys, varying in age from fifteen to nineteen. Why could
he not form a private class, to meet in the evening, to be instructed in
advanced arithmetic, or, if desired, in Latin and Greek? He broached the
idea to Stephen Bates, the prudential committeeman.

"I don't know," said Mr. Bates, "what our boys will think of it. I've
got a boy that I'll send, but whether you'll get enough to make it pay I
don't know."

"I suppose I can have the schoolhouse, Mr. Bates?"

"Yes, there won't be no objection. Won't it be too much for you after
teachin' in the daytime?"

"It would take a good deal to break me down."

"Then you'd better draw up a notice and put it up in the store and
tavern," suggested the committeeman.

In accordance with this advice, the young teacher posted up in the two
places the following notice:


"EVENING SCHOOL

"I propose to start an evening school for those who are occupied during
the day, and unable to attend the district school. Instruction will be
given in such English branches as may be desired, and also in Latin and
Greek, if any are desirous of pursuing a classical course. The school
will commence next Monday evening at the schoolhouse, beginning at seven
o'clock. Terms: Seventy cents a week, or five dollars for the term of
ten weeks.

"LEONARD MORGAN."


"Are you going to join the class, Walton?" asked Frank Heath.

"Yes," said Harry, promptly.

"Where'll you get the money?" asked Luke Harrison, in a jeering tone.

"I shan't have to go far for it."

"I don't see how you can spend so much money."

"I am willing to spend money when I can get my money's worth," said our
hero. "Are you going?"

"To school? No, I guess not. I've got through my schooling."

"You don't know enough to hurt you, do you, Luke?" inquired Frank Heath,
slyly.

"Nor I don't want to. I know enough to get along."

"I don't and never expect to," said Harry.

"Do you mean to go to school when you're a gray-headed old veteran?"
asked Frank, jocosely.

"I may not go to school then but I shan't give up learning then," said
Harry, smiling. "One can learn without going to school. But while I'm
young, I mean to go to school as much as I can."

"I guess you're right," said Frank; "I'd go myself, only I'm too lazy.
It's hard on a feller to worry his brain with study after he's been at
work all day. I don't believe I was cut out for a great scholar."

"I don't believe you were, Frank," said Joe Bates.

"You always used to stand pretty well down toward the foot of the class
when you went to school."

"A feller can't be smart as well as handsome. As long as I'm
good-looking, I won't complain because I wasn't born with the genius of
a Bates."

"Thank you for the compliment, Frank, though I suppose it means that I
am homely. I haven't got any genius or education to spare."

When Monday evening arrived ten pupils presented themselves, of whom
six were boys, or young men, and four were girls. Leonard Morgan felt
encouraged. A class of ten, though paying but five dollars each, would
give him fifty dollars, which would be quite an acceptable addition to
his scanty means.

"I am glad to see so many," he said. "I think our evening class will be
a success. I will take your names and ascertain what studies you wish to
pursue."

When he came to Harry; he asked, "What do you propose to study?"

"I should like to take up algebra and Latin, if you are willing,"
answered our hero.

"Have you studied either at all?"

"No, sir; I have not had an opportunity."

"How far have you been in arithmetic?"

"Through the square and cube root?"

"If you have been so far, you will have no difficulty with algebra. As
to Latin, one of the girls wishes to take up that and I will put you in
the class with her."

It will be seen that Harry was growing ambitious. He didn't expect to
go to college, though nothing would have pleased him better; but he
felt that some knowledge of a foreign language could do him no harm.
Franklin, whom he had taken as his great exemplar, didn't go to college;
yet he made himself one of the foremost scientific men of the age and
acquired enduring reputation, not only as a statesman and a patriot, but
chiefly as a philosopher.

A little later, Leonard Morgan came round to the desk at which Harry was
sitting.

"I brought a Latin grammar with me," he said, "thinking it probable
some one might like to begin that language. You can use it until yours
comes."

"Thank you," said Harry; and he eagerly took the book, and asked to have
a lesson set, which was done.

"I can get more than that," he said.

"How much more?"

"Twice as much."

Still later he recited the double lesson, and so correctly that the
teacher's attention was drawn to him.

"That's a smart boy," he said. "I mean to take pains with him. What a
pity he can't go to college!"





CHAPTER XVIII. LOST, OR STOLEN


Harry learned rapidly. At the end of four weeks he had completed the
Latin grammar, or that part of it which his teacher, thought necessary
for a beginner to be familiar with, and commenced translating the easy
sentences in "Andrews' Latin Reader."

"You are getting on famously, Harry," said his teacher. "I never had a
scholar who advanced so."

"I wish I knew as much as you."

"Don't give me too much credit. When I compare myself with our
professors, I feel dissatisfied."

"But you know so much more than I do," said Harry.

"I ought to; I am seven years older."

"What are you going to study, Mr. Morgan?"

"I intend to study law."

"I should like to be an editor," said Harry; "but I don't see much
prospect of it."

"Why not?"

"An editor must know a good deal."

"There are some who don't," said Leonard Morgan, with a smile. "However,
you would like to do credit to the profession and it is certainly in
these modern days a very important profession."

"How can I prepare myself?"

"By doing your best to acquire a good education; not only by study but
by reading extensively. An editor should be a man of large information.
Have you ever practiced writing compositions?"

"A little; not much."

"If you get time to write anything, and will submit it to me, I will
point out such faults as I may notice."

"I should like to do that," said Harry, promptly.

"What subject shall I take?"

"You may choose your own subject. Don't be too ambitious but select
something upon which you have some ideas of your own."

"Suppose I take my motto? 'Live and learn.'"

"Do so, by all means. That is a subject upon which you may fairly be
said to have some ideas of your own."

In due time Harry presented a composition on this subject. The thoughts
were good, but, as might be expected, the expression was somewhat crude,
and of course the teacher found errors to correct and suggestions to
make. These Harry eagerly welcomed and voluntarily proposed to rewrite
the composition. The result was a very much improved draft. He sent a
copy home and received in reply a letter from his father, expressing
surprise and gratification at the excellence of his essay.

"I am glad, Harry," the letter concluded, "that you have formed just
views of the importance of learning. I have never ceased to regret that
my own opportunities for education were so limited and that my time has
been so much absorbed by the effort to make a living, that I have
been able to do so little toward supplying my deficiencies. Even in a
pecuniary way an education will open to you a more prosperous career,
and lead, I hope, to competence, instead of the narrow poverty which has
been my lot. I will not complain of my own want of success, if I can see
my children prosper."

But while intent upon cultivating his mind, Harry had not lost sight of
the great object which had sent him from home to seek employment among
strangers. He had undertaken to meet the note which his father had given
Squire Green in payment for the cow. By the first of December he had
saved up thirty-three dollars toward this object. By the middle of
January the note would come due.

Of course he had not saved so much without the strictest economy, and by
denying himself pleasures which were entirely proper. For instance, he
was waited upon by Luke Harrison on the first day of December, and asked
to join in a grand sleighing excursion to a town ten miles distant,
where it was proposed to take supper, and, after a social time, return
late in the evening.

"I would like to go," said Harry, who was strongly, tempted, for he was
by no means averse to pleasure; "but I am afraid I cannot. How much will
it cost?"

"Three dollars apiece. That pays for the supper too."

Harry shook his head. It was for rum a week's wages. If he were not
trying to save money for his father, he might have ventured to incur
this expense, but he felt that under present circumstances it would not
be best.

"I can't go," said Harry.

"Oh, come along," urged Luke. "Don't make such a mope of yourself.
You'll be sure to enjoy it."

"I know I should; but I can't afford it."

"I never knew a feller that thought so much of money as you," sneered
Luke.

"I suppose it looks so," said Harry; "but it isn't true."

"Everybody says you are a miser."

"I have good reasons for not going."

"If you would come, it would make the expense lighter for the rest of us
and you would have a jolly time."

This conversation took place as they were walking home from the store in
the evening. Harry pulled out his handkerchief suddenly from his pocket
and with it came his pocketbook, containing all his savings. He didn't
hear if fall; but Luke did, and the latter, moreover, suspected what it
was. He did not call Harry's attention to it, but, falling back, said:
"I've got to go back to the store. I forgot something. Good night!"

"Good night!" said Harry, unsuspiciously.

Luke stooped swiftly while our hero's back was turned, and picked up
the pocketbook. He slipped it into his own pocket, and, instead of
going back to the store, went to his own room, locked the door, and then
eagerly pulled out the pocketbook and counted the contents.

"Thirty-three dollars! What a miser that fellow is! It serves him right
to lose his money."





CHAPTER XIX. AN UNWELCOME VISITOR


Luke Harrison had picked up Harry's pocketbook, and, though knowing it
to be his, concealed the discovery upon the impulse of the moment.

"What I find is mine," he said to himself. "Of course it is. Harry
Walton deserves to lose his money."

It will be seen that he had already decided to keep the money. It looked
so tempting to him, as his eyes rested on the thick roll of bills--for,
though insignificant in amount, the bills were ones and twos, and twenty
in number--that he could not make up his mind to return it.

Luke was fond of new clothes. He wanted to reestablish his credit with
Merrill, for he was in want of a new coat and knew that it would be
useless to order one unless he had some money to pay on account. He
decided to use a part of Harry's money for this purpose. It would be
better, however, he thought, to wait a day or two, as the news of
the loss would undoubtedly spread abroad, and his order might excite
suspicion, particularly as he had been in Harry's company at the time
the money disappeared. He therefore put the pocketbook into his trunk,
and carefully locked it. Then he went to bed.

Meanwhile, Harry reached Mr. Leavitt's unconscious of the serious
misfortune which had befallen him. He went into the sitting room and
talked a while with Mr. Leavitt, and at ten o'clock took his lamp and
went up to bed. While he was undressing he felt in his pocket for his
money, intending to lock it up in his trunk as usual. His dismay may be
conceived when he could not find it.

Poor Harry sank into a chair with that sudden sinking of the heart which
unlooked-for misfortune brings and tried to think where he could have
left the pocketbook.

That evening he found himself under the necessity of buying a necktie at
the store, and so had taken it from his trunk. Could he have left it on
the counter? No; he distinctly remembered replacing it in his pocket. He
felt the need of consulting with somebody, and with his lamp in his hand
went downstairs again.

"You haven't concluded to sit up all night, have you?" asked Mr.
Leavitt, surprised at his reappearance.

"Are you sick, Harry?" asked Mrs. Leavitt. "You're looking dreadfully
pale."

"I've lost my pocketbook," said Harry..

