I don't like Mrs. Canfield's table. I shall feel justified in paying a
little more than I do now."

The only thing that troubled him was as to the deposit. Though he had
economized as closely as he knew how, he had made quite an inroad upon
his small capital, and had only forty-six dollars left. He had been in
Chicago four weeks, and had not yet been able to write home that he had
found a permanent position. He had written about his insurance agency,
and had not failed to chronicle his first success.

This letter Doctor Mack had read to his housekeeper, Miss Nancy Sprague.

"Well, Nancy," he said, "Walter is at work."

"You don't say so, doctor! What is he doing?"

"He is a life-insurance agent."

"Is that a good business?"

"Walter writes that one agent is making a hundred and twenty-five
dollars a week," answered the doctor, with a humorous twinkle in his
eye.

"I'm glad Master Walter has got such a good business," said the
housekeeper, brightening up. "That's a great sum for a boy like him to
make."

"It isn't he that has made it, Nancy. There are very few that do, and
those have to be old and experienced men."

"Well, he'll make a good living, anyhow."

"Perhaps so," answered the doctor dubiously, for he understood better
than Nancy how precarious were the chances of an inexperienced agent. He
was not at all surprised when Walter wrote later that though he had met
with some success, he thought it better to look for a situation with a
regular salary attached.

"He's gaining a little knowledge of the world," thought the guardian.
"I don't think he'll be able to indulge in luxurious living for the
present. It won't be long, probably, before he runs out of money."

It was with a hopeful spirit that Walter started for the office of Locke
& Green. He was pretty well acquainted with Chicago by this time, and
had no difficulty in locating any office in the business part of the
city.

No indication was given in the advertisement of the business carried
on by Locke & Green. As to that, however, Walter felt indifferent. His
chief concern was the weekly salary of fifteen dollars, which he needed
very much.

Arrived at the number indicated, Walter ran upstairs, and with some
difficulty found the office in a small room on the fourth floor. A card
on the door bore the names:

LOCKE & GREEN

Again there was no clue to the business carried on by the firm.

Walter was not sure whether he ought to knock, but finally decided to
open the door and enter. He found himself in a room scarcely larger than
a small bedroom, with a small desk in one corner. At this sat a man with
long hair, industriously writing in a large blank book. He glanced at
Walter as the door opened.

"Wait a moment, young man!" he said, in a deep bass voice. "I will be at
leisure in two minutes."

He wrinkled up his face, turned back several pages, appeared
thoughtfully considering some problem, and then wrote again rapidly.

Finally he turned--he was seated in a revolving chair--and placing his
two hands together, palms inward, said abruptly: "Well, young man, what
can I do for you?"

"I believe you advertised in the _Tribune_ this morning for a
confidential clerk?"

"Yes."

"I should like to apply for the position, if it is still vacant."

"We have not yet filled the place," said Mr. Locke. "We have had several
applications, but the post is a very responsible one, and we are, of
course, very particular."

"I am afraid my chance is very small, then," thought Walter.

"Still, I like your appearance, and it is possible that you may suit.
Have you business experience?"

"Not much, sir. Indeed, till a short time since I was a college
student."

"Yale or Harvard?"

"No, sir; Euclid College."

"Ahem; small, but very respectable. Your name?"

"Walter Sherwood."

"How long were you in college?"

"Two years."

"Left of your own accord?"

"Oh, yes, sir."

"Just so. I thought perhaps you might have been suspended or expelled."

"I can refer you on that point to the president or any of the
professors."

"Oh, I will take your word for it."

"I left college on account of losing my property."

"Ah, indeed!" said Mr. Locke doubtfully. "Perhaps you noticed that we
require a small deposit as a guarantee of fidelity."

"Yes, sir. I have a little money."

Mr. Locke looked relieved.

"Of course," continued he loftily, "doing the business we do, money
is of comparatively little importance to us, except as a guarantee of
fidelity. How much did you say you had?"

"I didn't say, sir. I could deposit twenty-five dollars with you."

Mr. Locke shrugged his shoulders.

"That is very little," he said.

"True, sir, but it is a good deal to me. It will be enough to insure my
fidelity."

"We had a young man here this morning," said Mr. Locke musingly, "who
was willing to deposit a hundred dollars with us."

"Indeed, sir! I wonder you did not take him."

"We should, so far as the money went, but I could see by his appearance
that there was no business in him. Our clerk must be quick, sharp,
alert. The young man was very much disappointed."

"I couldn't deposit any such sum as that, Mr. Locke."

"It will not be necessary. Still, twenty-five dollars is very small.
You couldn't say thirty, could you? That is merely equal to two weeks'
salary."

"Yes, sir. I might be willing to deposit thirty dollars. May I ask what
business you are interested in?"

"We have control for the Western States of a valuable patent--a
folding-table--and we have several hundred agents out, who report
in general by letter."

"That accounts for the small office," thought Walter.

"Come here a moment, and I will give you an idea how we carry on
business. Here, for instance, is a page devoted to B. Schenck. He is
operating for us in Minnesota. You will observe that his remittances for
the last four weeks aggregate three hundred and sixty-seven dollars. He
has been doing very well, but we have others who do better. On the next
page is our account with G. Parker. His month's work amounts to two
hundred and eighty-nine dollars."

"What would my duties be, sir?"

"To keep the office when I am out, receive letters, and answer them, and
see agents."

"I think I could do that, sir."

"Hours from nine to five. I think you will suit me. If at the end of the
week I don't find you satisfactory, I will pay you your wages and return
your money."

"Very well, sir. I accept the position."

"You may as well hand me the money, and go to work to-day." Walter drew
out thirty dollars, the greater part of his little store, and handed it
to Mr. Locke.

Mr. Locke tucked it carelessly into his vest pocket, and taking his hat
said: "Sit down here, and if any agents come in, tell them I will be
back at one o'clock. That is all you will need to do to-day."




CHAPTER XVII

WALTER'S VISITORS


Walter sat down at the desk complacently. He had parted with thirty
dollars, but it was on deposit with his new employer, and would be
returned to him whenever his engagement terminated. He only hoped that
his services would prove satisfactory. He meant to do his best. On
fifteen dollars a week he could live very comfortably, and even save
money. He felt that it would be prudent to do this, as he did not wish
to call upon his guardian for any remittances during the year.

"I sha'n't have to work very hard," thought Walter.

In default of any other employment he looked over the large ledger
committed to his charge. It appeared to contain certain accounts with
different agents, all of whom seemed to be meeting with very good
success, judging from the amount of remittances credited to them.

In about half-an-hour there was a knock at the door.

"Come in!" called out Walter.

A man of about thirty-five entered briskly. He was rather shabbily
dressed, and his red face indicated possible indulgence in intoxicating
liquor. "Is Mr. Locke in?" he asked.

"No, sir."

"I wanted to see him."

"I am his confidential clerk," said Walter proudly. "Are you an agent?"

"Yes, I am an agent. I suppose I ought to see him."

"He will be back at one o'clock."

"I can't stop, as I have been away for some weeks and want to go out and
see my family at Barrington."

"If you wish to leave any message I will give it to Mr. Locke as soon as
he returns."

"Perhaps that will do. My name is Jerome Grigson. Tell Mr. Locke I have
met with excellent success in Ohio. In the last four weeks I have sold
goods to the amount of four hundred and seventeen dollars."

"I should think it was doing remarkably well," observed Walter.

"It is; but any one could sell for Locke business chiefly in Mr. Locke's
hands. How long have you been in the office?"

"Not long," answered Walter, who did not care to admit that his term of
service covered less than an hour.

"You've a good place with a rising firm. Mind you keep it!"

"I will try to," said Walter earnestly.

"They're square men, Locke & Green. I never worked for squarer men."

This was pleasant to hear. Walter felt that he Had made no mistake in
parting with his thirty Dollars.

"Well, I must be going. Have you taken down my name?"

"Yes, sir; Jerome Grigson."

"Right. Say, I will look in some time to-morrow and bring in a check for
four hundred and seventeen dollars.

"Very well, sir."

Mr. Grigson left the office. Twenty minutes Later a boy of about his own
age opened the door. He glanced at Walter diffidently.

"You advertised for a confidential clerk," he said. "Is--is the place
filled?"

"Yes," answered Walter, in a tone of satisfaction.

"You don't want anybody else, do you?" asked the youth, looking
disappointed.

"Not at present, but we might be able to employ you as an agent."

"Is it hard work?

"Well, of course you will have to exert yourself," said Walter
condescendingly, toying with a pen as he spoke, "but successful men can
earn good wages with us."

He was talking as if he was one of the partners, but it is a way young
clerks have.

"Are you one of the firm?" asked the young man doubtfully.

"No," answered Walter, "not exactly. Mr. Locke will be in about one
o'clock, and if you will come round a little after that you can talk
with him about an agency. I will put in a good word for you," he added,
in a patronizing tone.

"Thank you, sir. I'd like to get a place."

The youth departed and Walter was left alone. But not for long. A
middle-aged man entered and looked inquiringly at Walter.

"Are you Mr. Green?" he asked.

"No, sir."

"I have seen Mr. Locke, but I thought you might be Mr. Green."

Walter felt flattered to be taken for one of the firm.

"I am the confidential clerk," he said. "Can I do anything for you?"

"I wanted to see Mr. Locke and pay him some money."

"I will take it and receipt for it," said Walter briskly.

"Well, I suppose that will do, as you are the clerk."

"What name?" asked Walter, opening the book.

"Jonas Damon. Here is a check on the Corndish National Bank of Illinois
for two hundred and twenty-seven dollars. I have made it payable to
Locke & Green."

"All right," said Walter, in a businesslike tone.

"If you wish to see Mr. Locke he will be in at one o'clock," he added,
as he put the check in his vest pocket.

"No, I am obliged to go out of town in half-an-hour. It isn't necessary
to see him. He would rather see the check."

Mr. Damon laughed, and so did Walter. It Made him feel quite like a
business man to be installed in an office, receiving and crediting
checks.

"Have you been long in our employment?" he asked.

"About six months."

"I hope you have found it satisfactory?"

"Yes, I have made an excellent living. How much salary do you get?"

"Fifteen dollars a week," answered Walter rather complacently.

"You look like a smart young fellow. You'd easily make double the money
as an agent."

"Thank you for the suggestion. I may undertake that some time. I have
been a life-insurance agent."

"Did it pay?"

"Not as well as I hoped. I think I shall like my present place better."

"I must be going. Tell Mr. Locke I will be in to-morrow."

"All right."

"It is evident," thought Walter, "that I am in the employ of a
substantial and prosperous firm. The duties are certainly very light and
pleasant. I am in luck to get a clerkship here. It is rather surprising
Mr. Locke didn't ask for references."

Then it occurred to him that the deposit was taken as a substitute
for references. Then again Walter flattered himself that his personal
appearance might have produced a favorable impression upon his employer
and had some influence in leading to an engagement.

His next caller was a young man, dark and sallow, with a slight
mustache.

"Is this the office of Locke & Green?" he asked.

"Yes, sir."

"Will you describe Mr. Locke to me?" asked the young man, who appeared
to be laboring under some excitement.

Walter was rather surprised at such a request, but complied with it.

"Yes, he's the man," said his visitor, slapping his hands together
impetuously. "He's the man that cheated me out of fifty dollars!"

"You must be mistaken," said Walter. "How did he cheat you out of it?"

"One moment--are you his confidential clerk?"

