crack shot undoubtedly.

It was not surprising, therefore, that the two friends went nearly mad
with excitation when the whole flock of gulls rose into the air like a
white cloud, and sailed in endless circles and gyrations above and
around their heads--flying so close at times that they might almost
have been caught by the hand. Neither was it surprising that
innumerable shots were fired, by both sportsmen, without a single bird
being a whit the worse for it, or themselves much the better; the
energetic efforts made to hit being rendered abortive by the very
eagerness which caused them to miss. And this was the less
extraordinary, too, when it is remembered that Harry in his haste
loaded several times without shot, and Charley rendered the right
barrel of his gun _hors de combat_ at last, by ramming down a charge of
shot and omitting powder altogether, whereby he snapped and primed, and
snapped and primed again, till he grew desperate, and then suspicious
of the true cause, which he finally rectified with much difficulty.

Frequently the gulls flew straight over the heads of the youths--which
produced peculiar consequences, as in such cases they took aim while
the birds were approaching; but being somewhat slow at taking aim, the
gulls were almost perpendicularly above them ere they were ready to
shoot, so that they were obliged to fire hastily in _hope_, feeling
that they were losing their balance, or give up the chance altogether.

Mr. Park sat grimly in his place all the while, enjoying the scene, and
smoking.

"Now then, Charley," said he, "take that fellow."

"Which? where? Oh, if I could only get one!" said Charley, looking up
eagerly at the screaming birds, at which he had been staring so long,
in their varying and crossing flight, that his sight had become
hopelessly unsteady.

"There! Look sharp; fire away!"

Bang went Charley's piece, as he spoke, at a gull which flew straight
towards him, but so rapidly that it was directly above his head;
indeed, he was leaning a little backwards at the moment, which caused
him to miss again, while the recoil of the gun brought matters to a
climax, by toppling him over into Mr. Park's lap, thereby smashing that
gentleman's pipe to atoms. The fall accidentally exploded the second
barrel, causing the butt to strike Charley in the pit of his
stomach--as if to ram him well home into Mr. Park's open arms--and
hitting with a stray shot a gull that was sailing high up in the sky in
fancied security. It fell with a fluttering crash into the boat while
the men were laughing at the accident.

"Didn't I say so?" cried Mr. Park, wrathfully, as he pitched Charley
out of his lap, and spat out the remnants of his broken pipe.

Fortunately for all parties, at this moment the boat approached a spot
on which the guide had resolved to land for breakfast; and seeing the
unpleasant predicament into which poor Charley had fallen, he assumed
the strong tones of command with which guides are frequently gifted,
and called out,--

"Ho, ho! a terre! a terre! to land! to land! Breakfast, my boys;
breakfast!"--at the same time sweeping the boat's head shoreward, and
running into a rocky bay, whose margin was fringed by a growth of small
trees. Here, in a few minutes, they were joined by the other boats of
the brigade, which had kept within sight of each other nearly the whole
morning.

While travelling through the wilds of North America in boats, voyageurs
always make a point of landing to breakfast. Dinner is a meal with
which they are unacquainted, at least on the voyage, and luncheon is
likewise unknown. If a man feels hungry during the day, the
pemmican-bag and its contents are there; he may pause in his work at
any time, for a minute, to seize the axe and cut off a lump, which he
may devour as he best can; but there is no going ashore--no resting for
dinner. Two great meals are recognised, and the time allotted to their
preparation and consumption held inviolable--breakfast and supper: the
first varying between the hours of seven and nine in the morning; the
second about sunset, at which time travellers usually encamp for the
night. Of the two meals it would be difficult to say which is more
agreeable. For our own part, we prefer the former. It is the meal to
which a man addresses himself with peculiar gusto, especially if he has
been astir three or four hours previously in the open air. It is the
time of day, too, when the spirits are freshest and highest, animated
by the prospect of the work, the difficulties, the pleasures, or the
adventures of the day that has begun; and cheered by that cool, clear
_buoyancy_ of Nature which belongs exclusively to the happy morning
hours, and has led poets in all ages to compare these hours to the
first sweet months of spring or the early years of childhood.

Voyageurs, not less than poets, have felt the exhilarating influence of
the young day, although they have lacked the power to tell it in
sounding numbers; but where words were wanting, the sparkling eye, the
beaming countenance, the light step, and hearty laugh, were more
powerful exponents of the feelings within. Poet, and painter too, might
have spent a profitable hour on the shores of that great sequestered
lake, and as they watched the picturesque groups--clustering round the
blazing fires, preparing their morning meal, smoking their pipes,
examining and repairing the boats, or suning their stalwart limbs in
wild, careless attitudes upon the greensward--might have found a
subject worthy the most brilliant effusions of the pen, or the most
graphic touches of the pencil.

An hour sufficed for breakfast. While it was preparing, the two friends
sauntered into the forest in search of game, in which they were
unsuccessful; in fact, with the exception of the gulls before
mentioned, there was not a feather to be seen--save, always, one or two
whisky-johns.

Whisky-johns are the most impudent, puffy, conceited little birds that
exist. Not much larger in reality than sparrows, they nevertheless
manage to swell out their feathers to such an extent that they appear
to be as large as magpies, which they further resemble in their
plumage. Go where you will in the woods of Rupert's Land, the instant
that you light a fire two or three whisky-johns come down and sit
beside you, on a branch, it may be, or on the ground, and generally so
near that you cannot but wonder at their recklessness. There is a
species of impudence which seems to be specially attached to little
birds. In them it reaches the highest pitch of perfection. A bold,
swelling, arrogant effrontery--a sort of stark, staring,
self-complacent, comfortable, and yet innocent impertinence, which is
at once irritating and amusing, aggravating and attractive, and which
is exhibited in the greatest intensity in the whisky-john. He will jump
down almost under your nose, and seize a fragment of biscuit or
pemmican. He will go right into the pemmican-bag, when you are but a
few paces off, and pilfer, as it were, at the fountain-head. Or if
these resources are closed against him, he will sit on a twig, within
an inch of your head, and look at you as only a whisky-john _can_ look.

"I'll catch one of these rascals," said Harry, as he saw them jump
unceremoniously into and out of the pemmican-bag.

Going down to the boat, Harry hid himself under the tarpaulin, leaving
a hole open near to the mouth of the bag. He had not remained more than
a few minutes in this concealment when one of the birds flew down, and
alighted on the edge of the boat. After a glance round to see that all
was right, it jumped into the bag. A moment after, Harry, darting his
hand through the aperture, grasped him round the neck and secured him.
Poor whisky-john screamed and pecked ferociously, while Harry brought
him in triumph to his friend; but so unremittingly did the bird scream
that its captor was fain at last to let him off, the more especially as
the cook came up at the moment and announced that breakfast was ready.




CHAPTER XII.

The storm.


Two days after the events of the last chapter, the brigade was making
one of the traverses which have already been noticed as of frequent
occurrence in the great lakes. The morning was calm and sultry. A deep
stillness pervaded Nature, which tended to produce a corresponding
quiescence in the mind, and to fill it with those indescribably solemn
feelings that frequently arise before a thunderstorm. Dark, lurid
clouds hung overhead in gigantic masses, piled above each other like
the battlements of a dark fortress, from whose ragged embrasures the
artillery of heaven was about to play.

"Shall we get over in time, Louis?" asked Mr. Park, as he turned to the
guide, who sat holding the tiller with a firm grasp; while the men,
aware of the necessity of reaching shelter ere the storm burst upon
them, were bending to the oars with steady and sustained energy.

"Perhaps," replied Louis, laconically.--"Pull, lads, pull! else you'll
have to sleep in wet skins to-night."

A low growl of distant thunder followed the guide's words, and the men
pulled with additional energy; while the slow measured hiss of the
water, and clank of oars, as they cut swiftly through the lake's clear
surface, alone interrupted the dead silence that ensued.

Charley and his friend conversed in low whispers; for there is a
strange power in a thunder-storm, whether raging or about to break,
that overawes the heart of man,--as if Nature's God were nearer then
than at other times; as if He--whose voice, indeed, if listened to,
speaks even in the slightest evolution of natural phenomena--were about
to tread the visible earth with more than usual majesty, in the vivid
glare of the lightning flash, and in the awful crash of thunder.

"I don't know how it is, but I feel more like a coward," said Charley,
"just before a thunderstorm than I think I should do in the arms of a
polar bear. Do you feel queer, Harry?"

"A little," replied Harry, in a low whisper, "and yet I'm not
frightened. I can scarcely tell what I feel, but I'm certain it's not
fear."

"Well, I don't know," said Charley. "When father's black bull chased
Kate and me in the prairies, and almost overtook us as we ran for the
fence of the big field, I felt my heart leap to my mouth, and the blood
rush to my cheeks, as I turned about and faced him, while Kate climbed
the fence; but after she was over, I felt a wild sort of wickedness in
me, as if I should like to tantalise and torment him,--and I felt
altogether different from what I feel now while I look up at these
black clouds. Isn't there something quite awful in them, Harry?"

Ere Harry replied, a bright flash of lightning shot athwart the sky,
followed by a loud roll of thunder, and in a moment the wind rushed,
like a fiend set suddenly free, down upon the boats, tearing up the
smooth surface of the water as it flew, and cutting it into gleaming
white streaks. Fortunately the storm came down behind the boats, so
that, after the first wild burst was over, they hoisted a small portion
of their lug sails, and scudded rapidly before it.

There was still a considerable portion of the traverse to cross, and
the guide cast an anxious glance over his shoulder occasionally, as the
dark waves began to rise, and their crests were cut into white foam by
the increasing gale. Thunder roared in continued, successive peals, as
if the heavens were breaking up, while rain descended in sheets. For a
time the crews continued to ply their oars; but as the wind increased,
these were rendered superfluous. They were taken in, therefore, and the
men sought partial shelter under the tarpaulin; while Mr. Park and the
two boys were covered, excepting their heads, by an oilcloth, which was
always kept at hand in rainy weather.

"What think you now, Louis?" said Mr. Park, resuming the pipe which the
sudden outburst of the storm had caused him to forget. "Have we seen
the worst of it?"

Louis replied abruptly in the negative, and in a few seconds shouted
loudly, "Look out, lads! here comes a squall. Stand by to let go the
sheet there!"

Mike Brady, happening to be near the sheet, seized hold of the rope,
and prepared to let go, while the men rose, as if by instinct, and
gazed anxiously at the approaching squall, which could be seen in the
distance, extending along the horizon, like a bar of blackest ink,
spotted with flakes of white. The guide sat with compressed lips, and
motionless as a statue, guiding the boat as it bounded madly towards
the land, which was now not more than half-a-mile distant.

"Let go!" shouted the guide, in a voice that was heard loud and clear
above the roar of the elements.

"Ay, ay," replied the Irishman, untwisting the rope instantly, as with
a sharp hiss the squall descended on the boat.

At that moment the rope became entangled round one of the oars, and the
gale burst with all its fury on the distended sail, burying the prow in
the waves, which rushed inboard in a black volume, and in an instant
half filled the boat.

"Let go!" roared the guide again, in a voice of thunder; while Mike
struggled with awkward energy to disentangle the rope.

As he spoke, an Indian, who during the storm had been sitting beside
the mast, gazing at the boiling water with a grave, contemplative
aspect, sprang quickly forward, drew his knife, and with two blows (so
rapidly delivered that they seemed but one) cut asunder first the sheet
and then the halyards, which let the sail blow out and fall flat upon
the boat. He was just in time. Another moment and the gushing water,
which curled over the bow, would have filled them to the gunwale. As it
was, the little vessel was so full of water that she lay like a log,
while every toss of the waves sent an additional torrent into her.

"Bail for your lives, lads!" cried Mr. Park, as he sprang forward, and,
seizing a tin dish, began energetically to bail out the water.
Following his example, the whole crew seized whatever came first to
hand in the shape of dish or kettle, and began to bail. Charley and
Harry Somerville acted a vigorous part on this occasion--the one with a
bark dish (which had been originally made by the natives for the
purpose of holding maple sugar), the other with his cap.

For a time it seemed doubtful whether the curling waves should send
most water _into_ the boat, or the crew should bail most _out_ of it.
But the latter soon prevailed, and in a few minutes it was so far got
under that three of the men were enabled to leave off bailing and reset
the sail, while Louis Pettier returned to his post at the helm. At
first the boat moved but slowly, owing to the weight of water in her;
but as this gradually grew less, she increased her speed and neared the
land.

"Well done, Redfeather," said Mr. Park, addressing the Indian as he
resumed his seat; "your knife did us good service that time, my fine
fellow."

Redfeather, who was the only pure native in the brigade, acknowledged
the compliment with a smile.

"_Ah, oui_," replied the guide, whose features had now lost their stern
expression. "These Injins are always ready enough with their knives.
It's not the first time my life has been saved by the knife of a
red-skin."

"Humph! bad luck to them," muttered Mike Brady; "it's not the first
time that my windpipe has been pretty near spiflicated by the knives o'
the redskins, the murtherin' varmints."

As Mike gave vent to this malediction, the boat ran swiftly past a low
rocky point, over which the surf was breaking wildly.

"Down with the sail, Mike," cried the guide, at the same time putting
the helm hard up. The boat flew round, obedient to the ruling power,
made one last plunge as it left the rolling surf behind, and slid
gently and smoothly into still water under the lee of the point.

Here, in the snug shelter of a little bay, two of the other boats were
found, with their prows already on the beach, and their crews actively
employed in landing their goods, opening bales that had received damage
from the water, and preparing the encampment; while ever and anon they
paused a moment to watch the various boats as they flew before the
gale, and one by one doubled the friendly promontory.

If there is one thing that provokes a voyageur more than another, it is
being wind-bound on the shores of a large lake. Rain or sleet, heat or
cold, icicles forming on the oars, or a broiling sun glaring in a
cloudless sky, the stings of sand-flies, or the sharp probes of a
million musquitoes, he will bear with comparative indifference; but
being detained by high wind for two, three, or four days
together--lying inactively on shore, when everything else, it may be,
is favourable: the sun bright, the sky blue, the air invigorating, and
all but the wind propitious--is more than his philosophy can carry him
through with equanimity. He grumbles at it; sometimes makes believe to
laugh at it; very often, we are sorry to say, swears at it; does his
best to sleep through it; but whatever he does, he does with a bad
grace, because he's in a bad humour, and can't stand it.

For the next three days this was the fate of our friends. Part of the
time it rained, when the whole party slept as much as was possible, and
then _endeavoured_ to sleep _more_ than was possible, under the shelter
afforded by the spreading branches of the trees. Part of the time was
fair, with occasional gleams of sunshine, when the men turned out to
eat and smoke and gamble round the fires; and the two friends sauntered
down to a sheltered place on the shore, sunned themselves in a warm
nook among the rocks, while they gazed ruefully at the foaming billows,
told endless stories of what they had done in time past, and equally
endless _prospective_ adventures that they earnestly hoped should
befall them in time to come.

While they were thus engaged, Redfeather, the Indian who had cut the
ropes so opportunely during the storm, walked down to the shore, and
sitting down on a rock not far distant, fell apparently into a reverie.

"I like that fellow," said Harry, pointing to the Indian.

"So do I. He's a sharp, active man. Had it not been for him we should
have had to swim for it."

"Indeed, had it not been for him I should have had to sink for it,"
said Harry, with a smile, "for I can't swim."

"Ah, true, I forgot that. I wonder what the red-skin, as the guide
calls him, is thinking about," added Charley in a musing tone.

"Of home, perhaps, 'sweet home,'" said Harry, with a sigh. "Do you
think much of home, Charley, now that you have left it?"

Charley did not reply for a few seconds. He seemed to muse over the
question.

At last he said slowly--

"Think of home? I think of little else when I am not talking with you,
Harry. My dear mother is always in my thoughts, and my poor old father.
Home? ay; and darling Kate, too, is at my elbow night and day, with the
tears streaming from her eyes, and her ringlets scattered over my
shoulder, as I saw her the day we parted, beckoning me back again, or
reproaching me for having gone away--God bless her! Yes, I often, very
often, think of home, Harry."

Harry made no reply. His friend's words had directed his thoughts to a
very different and far-distant scene--to another Kate, and another
father and mother, who lived in a glen far away over the waters of the
broad Atlantic. He thought of them as they used to be when he was one
of the number, a unit in the beloved circle, whose absence would have
caused a blank there. He thought of the kind voice that used to read
the Word of God, and the tender kiss of his mother as they parted for
the night. He thought of the dreary day when he left them all behind,
and sailed away, in the midst of strangers, across the wide ocean to a
strange land. He thought of them now--_without_ him--accustomed to his
absence, and forgetful, perhaps, at times that he had once been there.
As he thought of all this a tear rolled down his cheek, and when
Charley looked up in his face, that tear-drop told plainly that he too
thought sometimes of home.

"Let us ask Redfeather to tell us something about the Indians," he said
at length, rousing himself. "I have no doubt he has had many adventures
in his life. Shall we, Charley?"

"By all means--Ho, Redfeather; are you trying to stop the wind by
looking it out of countenance?"

The Indian rose and walked towards the spot where the boys lay.

"What was Redfeather thinking about?" said Charley, adopting the
somewhat pompous style of speech occasionally used by Indians. "Was he
thinking of the white swan and his little ones in the prairie; or did
he dream of giving his enemies a good licking the next time he meets
them?"

"Redfeather has no enemies," replied the Indian. "He was thinking of
the great Manito, [Footnote: God.] who made the wild winds, and the
great lakes, and the forest."

"And pray, good Redfeather, what did your thoughts tell you?"

"They told me that men are very weak, and very foolish, and wicked; and
that Manito is very good and patient to let them live."

"That is to say," cried Harry, who was surprised and a little nettled
to hear what he called the heads of a sermon from a red-skin, "that
_you_, being a man, are very weak, and very foolish, and wicked, and
that Manito is very good and patient to let _you_ live?"

"Good," said the Indian calmly; "that is what I mean."

"Come, Redfeather," said Charley, laying his hand on the Indian's arm,
"sit down beside us, and tell us some of your adventures. I know that
you must have had plenty, and it's quite clear that we're not to get
away from this place all day, so you've nothing better to do."

The Indian readily assented, and began his story in English.

Redfeather was one of the very few Indians who had acquired the power
of speaking the English language. Having been, while a youth, brought
much into contact with the fur-traders, and having been induced by them
to enter their service for a time, he had picked up enough of English
to make himself easily understood. Being engaged at a later period of
life as a guide to one of the exploring parties sent out by the British
Government to discover the famous North West Passage, he had learned to
read and write, and had become so much accustomed to the habits and
occupations of the "pale faces," that he spent more of his time, in one
way or another, with them than in the society of his tribe, which dwelt
in the thick woods bordering on one of the great prairies of the
interior. He was about thirty years of age; had a tall, thin, but wiry
and powerful frame; and was of a mild, retiring disposition. His face
wore a habitually grave expression, verging towards melancholy;
induced, probably, by the vicissitudes of a wild life (in which he had
seen much of the rugged side of nature in men and things) acting upon a
sensitive heart, and a naturally warm temperament. Redfeather, however,
was by no means morose; and when seated along with his Canadian
comrades round the camp fire, he listened with evidently genuine
interest to their stories, and entered into the spirit of their jests.
But he was always an auditor, and rarely took part in their
conversations. He, was frequently consulted by the guide in matters of
difficulty, and it was observed that the "red-skin's" opinion always
carried much weight with it, although it was seldom given unless asked
for. The men respected him much because he was a hard worker, obliging,
