however, as I treat not of that rest which is spiritual, but, more
particularly, of that which applies to the mind and to the body.

Of this rest we stood much in need on our return home, and we found it
exceedingly sweet, when we indulged in it, after completing the journey
just related.  It had not, indeed, been a very long journey, nevertheless
we had pursued it so diligently that our frames were not a little
prostrated.  Our minds were also very much exhausted in consequence of
the many surprises, frequent alarms, and much profound thought, to which
they had been subjected; so that when we lay down on the night of our
return under the shelter of the bower, we fell immediately into very deep
repose.  I can state this with much certainty, for Jack afterwards
admitted the fact, and Peterkin, although he stoutly denied it, I heard
snoring loudly at least two minutes after lying down.  In this condition
we remained all night and the whole of the following day without awaking
once, or so much as moving our positions.  When we did awake it was near
sunset, and we were all in such a state of lassitude that we merely rose
to swallow a mouthful of food.  As Peterkin remarked, in the midst of a
yawn, we took breakfast at tea-time, and then went to bed again, where we
lay till the following forenoon.

After this we arose very greatly refreshed, but much alarmed lest we had
lost count of a day.  I say we were much alarmed on this head, for we had
carefully kept count of the days since we were cast upon our island, in
order that we might remember the Sabbath-day, which day we had hitherto
with one accord kept as a day of rest, and refrained from all work
whatsoever.  However, on considering the subject, we all three
entertained the same opinion as to how long we had slept, and so our
minds were put at ease.

We now hastened to our Water Garden to enjoy a bathe, and to see how did
the animals which I had placed in the tank.  We found the garden more
charming, pelucid, and inviting than ever, and Jack and I plunged into
its depth, and gambolled among its radiant coral groves; while Peterkin
wallowed at the surface, and tried occasionally to kick us as we passed
below.  Having dressed, I then hastened to the tank; but what was my
surprise and grief to find nearly all the animals dead, and the water in
a putrid condition!  I was greatly distressed at this, and wondered what
could be the cause of it.

"Why, you precious humbug," said Peterkin, coming up to me, "how could
you expect it to be otherwise?  When fishes are accustomed to live in the
Pacific Ocean, how can you expect them to exist in a hole like that?"

"Indeed, Peterkin," I replied, "there seems to be truth in what you say.
Nevertheless, now I think of it, there must be some error in your
reasoning; for, if I put in but a few very small animals, they will bear
the same proportion to this pond that the millions of fish bear to the
ocean."

"I say, Jack," cried Peterkin, waving his hand, "come here, like a good
fellow.  Ralph is actually talking philosophy.  Do come to our
assistance, for he's out o' sight beyond me already!"

"What's the matter?" inquired Jack, coming up, while he endeavoured to
scrub his long hair dry with a towel of cocoa-nut cloth.

I repeated my thoughts to Jack, who, I was happy to find, quite agreed
with me.  "Your best plan," he said, "will be to put very few animals at
first into your tank, and add more as you find it will bear them.  And
look here," he added, pointing to the sides of the tank, which, for the
space of two inches above the water-level, were incrusted with salt, "you
must carry your philosophy a little farther, Ralph.  That water has
evaporated so much that it is too salt for anything to live in.  You will
require to add _fresh_ water now and then, in order to keep it at the
same degree of saltness as the sea."

"Very true, Jack, that never struck me before," said I.

"And, now I think of it," continued Jack, "it seems to me that the surest
way of arranging your tank so as to get it to keep pure and in good
condition, will be to imitate the ocean in it.  In fact make it a
miniature Pacific.  I don't see how you can hope to succeed unless you do
that."

"Most true," said I, pondering what my companion said.  "But I fear that
that will be very difficult."

"Not at all," cried Jack, rolling his towel up into a ball, and throwing
it into the face of Peterkin, who had been grinning and winking at him
during the last five minutes.  "Not at all.  Look here.  There is water
of a certain saltness in the sea; well, fill your tank with sea water,
and keep it at that saltness by marking the height at which the water
stands on the sides.  When it evaporates a little, pour in _fresh_ water
from the brook till it comes up to the mark, and then it will be right,
for the salt does not evaporate with the water.  Then, there's lots of
sea-weed in the sea;--well, go and get one or two bits of sea-weed, and
put them into your tank.  Of course the weed must be alive, and growing
to little stones; or you can chip a bit off the rocks with the weed
sticking to it.  Then, if you like, you can throw a little sand and
gravel into your tank, and the thing's complete."

"Nay, not quite," said Peterkin, who had been gravely attentive to this
off-hand advice, "not quite; you must first make three little men to dive
in it before it can be said to be perfect, and that would be rather
difficult, I fear, for two of them would require to be philosophers.  But
hallo! what's this?  I say, Ralph, look here.  There's one o' your crabs
up to something uncommon.  It's performing the most remarkable operation
for a crab I ever saw,--taking off its coat, I do believe, before going
to bed!"

We hastily stooped over the tank, and certainly were not a little amused
at the conduct of one of the crabs which still survived it companions.  It
was one of the common small crabs, like to those that are found running
about everywhere on the coasts of England.  While we gazed at it, we
observed its back to split away from the lower part of its body, and out
of the gap thus formed came a soft lump which moved and writhed
unceasingly.  This lump continued to increase in size until it appeared
like a bunch of crab's legs: and, indeed, such it proved in a very few
minutes to be; for the points of the toes were at length extricated from
this hole in its back, the legs spread out, the body followed, and the
crab walked away quite entire, even to the points of its nipper-claws,
leaving a perfectly entire shell behind it, so that, when we looked, it
seemed as though there were two complete crabs instead of one!

"Well!" exclaimed Peterkin, drawing a long breath, "I've _heard_ of a man
jumping out of his skin and sitting down in his skeleton in order to cool
himself, but I never expected to _see_ a crab do it!"

We were, in truth, much amazed at this spectacle, and the more so when we
observed that the new crab was larger than the crab that it came out of.
It was also quite soft, but by next morning its skin had hardened into a
good shell.  We came thus to know that crabs grow in this way, and not by
the growing of their shells, as we had always thought before we saw this
wonderful operation.

Now I considered well the advice which Jack had given me about preparing
my tank, and the more I thought of it, the more I came to regard it as
very sound and worthy of being acted on.  So I forthwith put his plan in
execution, and found it to answer excellently well, indeed much beyond my
expectation; for I found that after a little experience had taught me the
proper proportion of sea-weed and animals to put into a certain amount of
water, the tank needed no farther attendance; and, moreover, I did not
require ever afterwards to renew or change the sea-water, but only to add
a very little fresh water from the brook, now and then, as the other
evaporated.  I therefore concluded that if I had been suddenly conveyed,
along with my tank, into some region where there was no salt sea at all,
my little sea and my sea-fish would have continued to thrive and to
prosper notwithstanding.  This made me greatly to desire that those
people in the world who live far inland might know of my wonderful tank,
and, by having materials like to those of which it was made conveyed to
them, thus be enabled to watch the habits of those most mysterious
animals that reside in the sea, and examine with their own eyes the
wonders of the great deep.

For many days after this, while Peterkin and Jack were busily employed in
building a little boat out of the curious natural planks of the chestnut
tree, I spent much of my time in examining with the burning-glass the
marvellous operations that were constantly going on in my tank.  Here I
saw those anemones which cling, like little red, yellow, and green blobs
of jelly, to the rocks, put forth, as it were, a multitude of arms and
wait till little fish or other small animalcules unwarily touched them,
when they would instantly seize them, fold arm after arm around their
victims, and so engulf them in their stomachs.  Here I saw the ceaseless
working of those little coral insects whose efforts have encrusted the
islands of the Pacific with vast rocks, and surrounded them with enormous
reefs.  And I observed that many of these insects, though extremely
minute, were very beautiful, coming out of their holes in a circle of
fine threads, and having the form of a shuttle-cock.  Here I saw curious
little barnacles opening a hole in their backs and constantly putting out
a thin feathery hand, with which, I doubt not, they dragged their food
into their mouths.  Here, also, I saw those crabs which have shells only
on the front of their bodies, but no shell whatever on their remarkably
tender tails, so that, in order to find a protection to them, they thrust
them into the empty shells of wilks, or some such fish, and when they
grow too big for one, change into another.  But, most curious of all, I
saw an animal which had the wonderful power, when it became ill, of
casting its stomach and its teeth away from it, and getting an entirely
new set in the course of a few months!  All this I saw, and a great deal
more, by means of my tank and my burning-glass, but I refrain from
setting down more particulars here, as I have still much to tell of the
adventures that befell us while we remained on this island.




CHAPTER XIII.


Notable discovery at the spouting cliffs--The mysterious green monster
explained--We are thrown into unutterable terror by the idea that Jack is
drowned--The Diamond Cave.

"Come, Jack," cried Peterkin, one morning about three weeks after our
return from our long excursion, "let's be jolly to-day, and do something
vigorous.  I'm quite tired of hammering and hammering, hewing and
screwing, cutting and butting, at that little boat of ours, that seems as
hard to build as Noah's ark; let us go on an excursion to the mountain
top, or have a hunt after the wild ducks, or make a dash at the pigs.  I'm
quite flat--flat as bad ginger-beer--flat as a pancake; in fact, I want
something to rouse me, to toss me up, as it were.  Eh! what do you say to
it?"

"Well," answered Jack, throwing down the axe with which he was just about
to proceed towards the boat, "if that's what you want, I would recommend
you to make an excursion to the water-spouts; the last one we had to do
with tossed you up a considerable height, perhaps the next will send you
higher, who knows, if you're at all reasonable or moderate in your
expectations!"

"Jack, my dear boy," said Peterkin, gravely, "you are really becoming too
fond of jesting.  It's a thing I don't at all approve of, and if you
don't give it up, I fear that, for our mutual good, we shall have to
part."

"Well, then, Peterkin," replied Jack, with a smile, "what would you
have?"

"Have?" said Peterkin, "I would _have_ nothing.  I didn't say I wanted to
_have_; I said that I wanted to _do_."

"By the by," said I, interrupting their conversation, "I am reminded by
this that we have not yet discovered the nature of yon curious appearance
that we saw near the water-spouts, on our journey round the island.
Perhaps it would be well to go for that purpose."

"Humph!" ejaculated Peterkin, "I know the nature of it well enough."

"What was it?" said I.

"It was of a _mysterious_ nature to be sure!" said he, with a wave of his
hand, while he rose from the log on which he had been sitting, and
buckled on his belt, into which he thrust his enormous club.

"Well then, let us away to the water-spouts," cried Jack, going up to the
bower for his bow and arrows; "and bring your spear, Peterkin.  It may be
useful."

We now, having made up our minds to examine into this matter, sallied
forth eagerly in the direction of the water-spout rocks, which, as I have
before mentioned, were not far from our present place of abode.  On
arriving there we hastened down to the edge of the rocks, and gazed over
into the sea, where we observed the pale-green object still distinctly
visible, moving its tail slowly to and fro in the water.

"Most remarkable!" said Jack.

"Exceedingly curious," said I.

"Beats everything!" said Peterkin.

"Now, Jack," he added, "you made such a poor figure in your last attempt
to stick that object, that I would advise you to let me try it.  If it
has got a heart at all, I'll engage to send my spear right through the
core of it; if it hasn't got a heart, I'll send it through the spot where
its heart ought to be."

"Fire away, then, my boy," replied Jack with a laugh.

Peterkin immediately took the spear, poised it for a second or two above
his head, then darted it like an arrow into the sea.  Down it went
straight into the centre of the green object, passed quite through it,
and came up immediately afterwards, pure and unsullied, while the
mysterious tail moved quietly as before!

"Now," said Peterkin, gravely, "that brute is a heartless monster; I'll
have nothing more to do with it."

"I'm pretty sure now," said Jack, "that it is merely a phosphoric light;
but I must say I'm puzzled at its staying always in that exact spot."

I also was much puzzled, and inclined to think with Jack that it must be
phosphoric light; of which luminous appearance we had seen much while on
our voyage to these seas.  "But," said I, "there is nothing to hinder us
from diving down to it, now that we are sure it is not a shark."

"True," returned Jack, stripping off his clothes; "I'll go down, Ralph,
as I'm better at diving than you are.  Now then, Peterkin, out o' the
road!"  Jack stepped forward, joined his hands above his head, bent over
the rocks, and plunged into the sea.  For a second or two the spray
caused by his dive hid him from view, then the water became still, and we
saw him swimming far down in the midst of the green object.  Suddenly he
sank below it, and vanished altogether from our sight!  We gazed
anxiously down at the spot where he had disappeared, for nearly a minute,
expecting every moment to see him rise again for breath; but fully a
minute passed, and still he did not reappear.  Two minutes passed! and
then a flood of alarm rushed in upon my soul, when I considered that
during all my acquaintance with him, Jack had never stayed underwater
more than a minute at a time; indeed seldom so long.

"Oh, Peterkin!" I said, in a voice that trembled with increasing anxiety,
"something has happened.  It is more than three minutes now!"  But
Peterkin did not answer and I observed that he was gazing down into the
water with a look of intense fear mingled with anxiety, while his face
was overspread with a deadly paleness.  Suddenly he sprang to his feet
and rushed about in a frantic state, wringing his hands, and exclaiming,
"Oh, Jack, Jack! he is gone!  It must have been a shark, and he is gone
for ever!"

For the next five minutes I know not what I did.  The intensity of my
feelings almost bereft me of my senses.  But I was recalled to myself by
Peterkin seizing me by the shoulder and staring wildly into my face,
while he exclaimed, "Ralph! Ralph! perhaps he has only fainted.  Dive for
him, Ralph!"

It seemed strange that this did not occur to me sooner.  In a moment I
rushed to the edge of the rocks, and, without waiting to throw off my
garments, was on the point to spring into the waves, when I observed
something black rising up through the green object.  In another moment
Jack's head rose to the surface, and he gave a wild shout, flinging back
the spray from his locks, as was his wont after a dive.  Now we were
almost as much amazed at seeing him reappear, well and strong, as we had
been at first at his non-appearance; for, to the best of our judgment, he
had been nearly ten minutes under water, perhaps longer, and it required
no exertion of our reason to convince us that this was utterly impossible
for mortal man to do and retain his strength and faculties.  It was
therefore with a feeling akin to superstitious awe that I held down my
hand and assisted him to clamber up the steep rocks.  But no such feeling
affected Peterkin.  No sooner did Jack gain the rocks and seat himself on
one, panting for breath, than he threw his arms round his neck, and burst
into a flood of tears.  "Oh, Jack, Jack!" said he, "where were you?  What
kept you so long?"

After a few moments Peterkin became composed enough to sit still and
listen to Jack's explanation, although he could not restrain himself from
attempting to wink every two minutes at me, in order to express his joy
at Jack's safety.  I say he attempted to wink, but I am bound to add that
he did not succeed, for his eyes were so much swollen with weeping, that
his frequent attempts only resulted in a series of violent and altogether
idiotical contortions of the face, that were very far from expressing
what he intended.  However, I knew what the poor fellow meant by it, so I
smiled to him in return, and endeavoured to make believe that he was
winking.

"Now, lads," said Jack, when we were composed enough to listen to him,
"yon green object is not a shark; it is a stream of light issuing from a
cave in the rocks.  Just after I made my dive, I observed that this light
came from the side of the rock above which we are now sitting; so I
struck out for it, and saw an opening into some place or other that
appeared to be luminous within.  For one instant I paused to think
whether I ought to venture.  Then I made up my mind, and dashed into it.
For you see, Peterkin, although I take some time to tell this, it
happened in the space of a few seconds, so that I knew I had wind enough
in me to serve to bring me out o' the hole and up to the surface again.
Well, I was just on the point of turning,--for I began to feel a little
uncomfortable in such a place,--when it seemed to me as if there was a
faint light right above me.  I darted upwards, and found my head out of
water.  This relieved me greatly, for I now felt that I could take in air
