"If they are just like the pattern, they will be sure to suit me."

"And now, my young friend," he added, "let me know how you are getting
on in your own business."

"I am making a dollar a day, sometimes a little more."

"That is very good."

"Yes, sir; but it won't last long."

"I believe you told me that the stand belonged to some one else."

"Yes, sir; I am only tending it in his sickness; but he is getting
better, and when he gets about again, I shall be thrown out of
business."

"But you don't look like one who would remain idle long."

"No, sir; I shall be certain to find something to do, if it is only
blacking boots."

"Have you ever been in that business?"

"I've tried about everything," said Paul, laughing.

"I suppose you wouldn't enjoy boot-blacking much?"

"No, sir; but I would rather do that than be earning nothing."

"You are quite right there, and I am glad you have no false shame in
the matter. There are plenty who have. For instance, a stout,
broad-shouldered young fellow applied to me thus morning for a
clerkship. He said he had come to the city in search of employment, and
had nearly expended all his money without finding anything to do. I
told him I couldn't give him a clerkship, but was in want of a porter. I
offered him the place at two dollars per day. He drew back, and said he
should not be willing to accept a porter's place."

"He was very foolish," said Paul.

"So I thought. I told him that if such were his feelings, I could not
help him. Perhaps he may regret his refusal, when he is reduced to his
last penny. By the way, whenever you have to give up your stand, you may
come to me, and I will see what I can do for you."

"Thank you, sir."

"And now, about these shirts; I believe I agreed to pay a dollar and a
quarter each."

"Yes, sir."

"As they are of extra size, I think I ought to pay twelve shillings,
instead of ten."

"My mother thinks herself well paid at ten shillings."

"There must be a great deal of work about one. Twelve shillings are none
too much," and Mr. Preston placed nine dollars in Paul's hand.

"Thank you," said Paul, gratefully. "My mother will consider herself
very lucky."

When Mrs. Hoffman received from Paul a dollar and a half more than she
anticipated, she felt in unusually good spirits. She had regretted the
loss of her former poorly paid work, but it appeared that her seeming
misfortune had only prepared the way for greater prosperity. The trouble
was that it would not last. Still, it would tide over the dull time, and
when this job was over, she might be able to resume her old employment.
At any rate, while the future seemed uncertain, she did not feel like
increasing her expenditures on account of her increased earnings, but
laid carefully away three-quarters of her receipts to use hereafter in
case of need.

Meanwhile, Paul continued to take care of George Barry's business. He
had been obliged to renew the stock, his large sales having materially
reduced it. Twice a week he went up to see his principal to report
sales. George Barry could not conceal the surprise he felt at Paul's
success.

"I never thought you would do so well," he said. "You beat me."

"I suppose it's because I like it," said Paul. "Then, as I get only half
the profits, I have to work the harder to make fair wages."

"It is fortunate for my son that he found you to take his place,"
said Mrs. Barry. "He could not afford to lose all the income from his
business."

"It is a good thing for both of us," said Paul. "I was looking for a job
just when he fell sick."

"What had you been doing before?"

"I was in the prize-package business, but that got played out, and I
was a gentleman at large, seeking for a light, genteel business that
wouldn't require much capital."

"I shall be able to take my place pretty soon now," said the young man.
"I might go to-morrow, but mother thinks it imprudent."

"Better get back your strength first, George," said his mother, "or you
may fall sick again."

But her son was impatient of confinement and anxious to get to work
again. So, two days afterward, about the middle of the forenoon, Paul
was surprised by seeing George Barry get out of a Broadway omnibus, just
in front of the stand.

"Can I sell you a necktie, Mr. Barry?" he asked, in a joke.

"I almost feel like a stranger," said Barry, "it's so long since I have
been here."

"Do you feel strong enough to take charge now?" asked Paul.

"I am not so strong as I was, and the walk from our rooms would tire me;
but I think if I rode both ways for the present I shall be able to get
along."

"Then you won't need me any longer?"

"I would like to have you stay with me to-day. I don't know how I shall
hold out."

"All right! I'll stop."

George Barry remained in attendance the rest of the day. He found that
his strength had so far returned that he should be able to manage alone
hereafter, and he told Paul so.

"I am glad you are well again, George," said Paul. "It must have been
dull work staying at home sick."

"Yes, it was dull; but I felt more comfortable from knowing that you
were taking my place. If I get sick again I will send for you."

"I hope you won't get sick; but if you do, I will do what I can to help
you."

So the two parted on the best of terms. Each had been of service to the
other, and neither had cause to complain.

"Well," said Paul to himself, "I am out of work again. What shall I go
at next?"

It was six o'clock, and there was nothing to be done till the morrow. He
went slowly homeward, revolving this subject in his mind. He knew that
he need not remain idle. He could black boots, or sell newspapers, if
nothing better offered, and he thought it quite possible that he might
adopt the latter business, for a few days at least. He had not forgotten
Mr. Preston's injunction to let him know when he got out of business;
but, as the second half dozen shirts would be ready in three or four
days, he preferred to wait till then, and not make a special call on Mr
Preston. He had considerable independence of feeling, and didn't like
to put himself in the position of one asking a favor, though he had no
objection to accept one voluntarily offered.

"Well, mother," he said, entering his humble home, "I am out of
business."

"Has George recovered, then?"

"Yes, he was at the stand to-day, but wanted me to stay with him till
this evening."

"Oh, I'm so sorry!" said Jimmy.

"Sorry that George has got well? For shame, Jimmy!"

"No, I don't mean that, Paul. I am sorry you are out of work."

"I shall find plenty to do, Jimmy. Perhaps Mr. Stewart will take me in
as senior partner, if I ask him."

"I don't think he will," said Jimmy, laughing.

"Then perhaps I can get a few scholars in drawing. Can't you recommend
me?"

"I am afraid not, Paul, unless you have improved a good deal."



CHAPTER XIV

THE DIAMOND RING

Paul was up betimes the next morning. He had made up his mind for a
few days, at least, to sell newspapers, and it was necessary in this
business to begin the day early. He tool a dollar with him and invested
a part of it in a stock of dailies. He posted himself in Printing House
square, and began to look out for customers. Being an enterprising
boy, he was sure to meet with fair success in any business which he
undertook. So it happened that at ten o'clock he had sold out his stock
of papers, and realized a profit of fifty cents.

It was getting late for morning papers, and there was nothing left to do
till the issue of the first edition of the afternoon papers.

"I'll go down and see how George Barry is getting along," thought Paul.

He crossed Broadway and soon reached the familiar stand.

"How's business, George?" he inquired.

"Fair," said Barry. "I've sold four ties."

"How do you feel?"

"I'm not so strong as I was, yet. I get tired more easily. I don't think
I shall stay in this business long."

"You don't? What will you do then?"

"I've got a chance in Philadelphia, or I shall have by the first of the
month."

"What sort of a chance?"

"Mother got a letter yesterday from a cousin of hers who has a store
on Chestnut street. He offers to take me as a clerk, and give me ten
dollars a week at first, and more after a while."

"That's a good offer. I should like to get one like it."

"I'll tell you what, Paul, you'd better buy out my stand. You know how
to sell ties, and can make money."

"There's only one objection, George."

"What's that?"

"I haven't got any capital."

"It don't need much."

"How much?"

"I'll sell out all my stock at cost price."

"How much do you think there is?"

"About twenty-five dollars' worth. Then there is the frame, which is
worth, say ten dollars, making thirty-five in all. That isn't much."

"It's more than I've got. I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll take it, and
pay you five dollars down and the rest in one month."

"I would take your offer, Paul, but I need all the money how. It will be
expensive moving to Philadelphia and I shall want all I can get."

"I wish I could buy you out," said Paul, thoughtfully.

"Can't you borrow the money?"

"How soon do you want to give up?"

"It's the seventeenth now. I should like to get rid of it by the
twenty-second."

"I'll see what I can do. Just keep it for me till to-morrow."

"All right."

Paul walked home revolving in his mind this unexpected opportunity. He
had made, as George Barry's agent, a dollar a day, though he received
only half the profits. If he were himself the proprietor, and did
equally well, he could make twelve dollars a week. The calculation
almost took away his breath. Twelve dollars a week would make about
fifty dollars a month. It would enable him to contribute more to the
support of the family, and save up money besides. But the great problem
was, how to raise the necessary money. If Paul had been a railroad
corporation, he might have issued first mortgage bonds at a high rate
of interest, payable in gold, and negotiated them through some leading
banker. But he was not much versed in financial schemes, and therefore
was at a loss. The only wealthy friend he had was Mr. Preston, and he
did not like to apply to him till he had exhausted other ways and means.

"What makes you so sober, Paul?" asked his mother, as he entered the
room. "You are home early."

"Yes, I sold all my papers, and thought I would take an early dinner, so
as to be on hand in time for the first afternoon papers."

"Don't you feel well?"

"Tiptop; but I've had a good offer, and I'm thinking whether I can
accept it."

"What sort of an offer?"

"George Barry wants to sell out his stand."

"How much does he ask?"

"Thirty-five dollars."

"Is it worth that?"

"Yes, it's worth all that, and more, too. If I had it I could make two
dollars a day. But I haven't got thirty-five dollars."

"I can let you have nine, Paul. I had a little saved up, and I haven't
touched the money Mr. Preston paid me for the shirts."

"I've got five myself, but that will only make fourteen."

"Won't he wait for the rest?"

"No, he's going to Philadelphia early next week, and wants the whole in
cash."

"It would be a pity to lose such a good chance," said Mrs. Hoffman.

"That's what I think."

"You could soon save up the money on two dollars a day."

"I could pay for it in a month--I mean, all above the fourteen dollars
we have."

"In a day or two I shall have finished the second half-dozen shirts, and
then I suppose Mr. Preston will pay me nine dollars more. I could let
you have six dollars of that."

"That would make twenty. Perhaps George Barry will take that. If he
won't I don't know but I will venture to apply to Mr. Preston."

"He seems to take an interest in you. Perhaps he would trust you with
the money."

"I could offer him a mortgage on the stock," said Paul.

"If he has occasion to foreclose, he will be well provided with
neckties," said Mrs. Hoffman, smiling.

"None of which he could wear. I'll tell you what, mother, I should
like to pick up a pocketbook in the street, containing, say, twenty or
