fire-escape. "_Jasper!_" called Polly, hoarsely, "it will kill
Grandpapa if you go--oh!" She turned at a cry from the girl, whose arms
were around a bent, shaking, little figure, and they had both sunk to
the ground.

"I brought her down long ago," said another fireman, who could speak
English, pointing to the white-haired old lady, who, on hearing her
granddaughter's voice, had pushed her way through the crowd, as Dr.
Fisher hurried up.

And then Mr. King and his party gathered his group, and they hurried to
another hotel close by, Jasper and Mr. Henderson and Mother Fisher
waiting to see to the belongings of the party; for the fire was now
subdued, although the guests had to go elsewhere for shelter, and the
little doctor was in his element, taking care of the old lady, and then
he rushed off to look after a score or more of other fainting women.

But nobody was really hurt--the smoke and the panic had been the worst,
only the poor thing who had dragged down the feather pillow sat by it
till the little doctor, discovering her, called two stout men, who took
her up in their arms--she screaming all the while for her treasure--and
bore her to a neighbouring house that kindly opened its doors to some
of the people so suddenly thrown out of shelter. And it wasn't till
near breakfast time that the little doctor came to the hotel that was
now their home.

"Brain-fever patient," he said briefly. "Wife, I must get a cold
plunge, or I'll be having it next." And when breakfast was really set
before their party, he appeared with the others fresh from his bath,
and as cheery as if nothing had happened to break his good night's rest.

"O dear me! How did you ever get so many things over here, in all this
world, and why didn't you let me stay with you?" Polly had exclaimed in
one breath, looking at the array of dresses, sacks, and hats disposed
around the room. And Mamsie was kneeling before an open trunk to take
out more.

"It wasn't best, Polly," said her mother, who had longed for Polly as
no one knew better than did Mother Fisher herself. "You were really
needed here with Grandpapa and Phronsie. You truly were, my dear."

"I know," said Polly. "Well, do let me take those out, Mamsie; you're
tired to death, already. Oh, and you've brought my dear little American
flag!" She seized it and hugged it with delight.

"Did you suppose I could come back without that flag," exclaimed Mother
Fisher in a reproving tone, "when you've put it up in your room every
place where we've stopped?--why, Polly!"

"No, Mamsie, I really didn't think you could," answered Polly, quickly,
and running to her, little silk flag and all, to throw her arms around
her neck, "only it's so good to see the dear thing again."

"You may take the things from me, and hang them up somewhere," said her
mother; "that will help me the most," giving her an armful. "I don't
see how you ever thought of so many things, Mamsie!" exclaimed Polly
going off with her armful.

"I brought all I thought we needed just at first," said Mother Fisher,
diving into the trunk depths again.

"How did you ever do it?" cried Polly, for the fiftieth time, as she
sorted, and hung the various garments in their proper places.

"Oh, Jasper helped me pack them, and then he got the hotel porter to
bring over the trunks," answered Mother Fisher, her head in the trunk.
"I've locked up our rooms, and got the keys, so I can get the rest by
and by."

"But how did you first hear of the fire?" asked Polly, when they were
all finally seated around the breakfast table, little Mrs. Gray--for so
the white-haired old lady was called--and her granddaughter Adela being
invited to join, "do tell me, Mamsie, I don't understand," she added in
a puzzled way.

"No, you were talking about Marken in your sleep," said Mother Fisher,
"when I went to call you, and how you would be ready in the morning."

"Marken?" repeated old Mr. King, looking up from the egg he was
carefully breaking for Phronsie so that she might eat it from the
shell. "So we were going there this morning. Well, we won't see that
island now for a good many days; at least, till we get over this
fright. Beside, we have things to settle here, and to get comfortably
fixed. But we'll have that excursion all in good time, never fear."

"Well, how did you, Mamsie," Polly begged again, "first hear of the
fire? Do tell me."

"Somebody made a good deal of noise down in the corridor," said Mother
Fisher, "and your father went out to see what was the matter, and then
he came back and told me what to do, and he took Phronsie and went for
old Mr. King. But he had sent a porter to warn them in 165, and they
would tell the Hendersons in the next room, before he ran upstairs to
me." It was a long speech for Mother Fisher.

"Mamsie," asked Polly, suddenly, after she had leaned across her mother
and beamed at the little doctor, which so delighted him that his big
spectacles nearly fell off in his plate, "how _did_ you know where the
fire-escape was?"

"Oh, that was your father's doings, too," said Mother Fisher. She
couldn't help but show her pride. "He told me all about it the first
day we got to the hotel. He always does; he says it's better to know
these things."

"Wife--wife," begged the little doctor, imploringly.

"I'm going to tell, Adoniram," said Mother Fisher, proudly, "the whole
story; they ought to know."

"Indeed we had; and so you shall," commanded Mr. King, from the head of
the table.

"I can't help it! I really must!" exclaimed Polly, hopping out of her
chair,--there were no other people in the breakfast room beside their
party, so really it wasn't so very dreadful after all,--and she ran
back of her mother's chair, and threw her arms around the little
doctor's neck. "Oh, Papa Fisher," she cried, setting ever so many
kisses on his cheeks under the big spectacles, "you've saved all our
lives."

"There--there, Polly," cried the little doctor, quite overcome.

"And ours, too," said little Mrs. Gray, in a shaking voice.




XI

THE TWO BIRTHDAYS IN OLD HOLLAND


And Polly never knew about a certain shelf in Grandpapa's closet, nor
how full it was getting, when Jasper ran every now and then to add the
gifts as fast as the different members of the party picked up pretty
things in the shops for the coming birthday--now very near. And she
actually forgot all about the birthday itself; all her mind being set
on the Henderson box, so soon to sail off over the sea.

And Mother Fisher would look over at her absorbed face, and smile, to
watch her in the shops, picking out things for the Henderson boys; and
old Mr. King would send many a keen glance at her, and Jasper had hard
work not to exclaim, "Oh, Polly, father has got you a--" And then he'd
pull himself up, and rush off into some great plan to buy Peletiah
Henderson something that a Badgertown boy ought to have. And Phronsie
was carefully guarded on all sides these days, lest she should let out
the great secret, for, of course, she ought to be in the very centre of
all these preparations to celebrate Polly's birthday in Old Amsterdam,
so she knew everything just as soon as it was planned. But sometimes,
with all this care, the whole thing nearly popped out.

"Mr. King!" It was Mother Fisher who called after him, and her voice
didn't sound like hers, for it had an excited little ring. "Oh, are you
going out?" for she didn't see that he held his hat in his hand till he
turned in the corridor.

"I can wait just as well if it's anything you want, Mrs. Fisher," he
said gladly, controlling his surprise at her unusual manner. "I was
only about to run down to the Kalver-straat for a little matter I just
thought of for the birthday. Can I do anything for you?" he begged.

"Yes, it's just that," said Mrs. Fisher, hurriedly; "it's about the
birthday--I must speak quickly--I've just found out,--" she glanced up
and down the corridor as if fully expecting to see Polly dash around a
corner,--"that Adela Gray's birthday is to-morrow--"

"The dickens! You don't say so!" exploded Mr. King. "Well, now, I call
that very clever on your part to have found it out. Very clever indeed,
Mrs. Fisher," he repeated, beaming at her. "And just in time, for it
would have been a dreadful thing, indeed, to have had that poor little
girl left out, and her birthday too! Dear me!"

"It would, indeed," said Mrs. Fisher, heartily, with a shiver at the
mere thought.

"And we might as well have had no celebration in such a case, for Polly
wouldn't have enjoyed a single bit of it--not an atom!" declared old
Mr. King, bringing his walking stick heavily down on the floor.

"What is it--oh, Grandpapa, what is it?" and Polly came hurrying along
the corridor, and Jasper after her.

"Here she comes!" exclaimed Grandpapa, in a fright. "Glad you told
me--Hush--O dear me--I'll take care of the gifts."

"And I'm to do the rest--just the same--Doctor Fisher and I. Remember!"
It was all Mrs. Fisher had time to utter. Even then, Polly caught the
last words in the flurry.

"Oh, what is it, Mamsie--Is anything the matter with Papa-Doctor?" And
her brown eyes filled with alarm at her mother's unusual manner.

"Polly," Mrs. Fisher looked into the brown eyes with a steady glance,
and all the hurry was gone out of her voice, "your father is all right.
And now, run away, you and Jasper." She looked over Polly's shoulder at
him as she spoke. "No, not another word, child." And away Mrs. Fisher
hurried, while old Mr. King slipped off in the opposite direction.

"How funnily they act," said Polly, looking first after one and then
another, with a puzzled face. "What can it be, Jasper?"

"Oh, well, I suppose they are in a hurry," said Jasper, as carelessly
as he could. "Never mind, Polly, everything is all right. Oh, I say,
let's fix our stamp books."

"But I was going to ask Grandpapa to go out with us, and now he's gone
by himself," and Polly's face grew more puzzled than ever.

"Polly," said Jasper, desperately, "I really think we ought to fix our
stamp books. I really do," and he took her hand. "My stamps are all in
heaps in the envelopes, and in a mess generally. Come, let's begin
now--do." And he led her back down the corridor.

"I suppose so," said Polly, with a reluctant little sigh, as they went
off.

And that afternoon, there was another narrow escape, when it seemed as
if the secret really must pop out. Polly, rushing along to the reading
room opposite the big dining room, saw Mother Fisher in consultation
with the head waiter, and he was saying "cake," and then he stopped
suddenly, and Mrs. Fisher turned and saw her. And Mamsie came across
the hall, and into the reading room, and sat there a bit, while Polly
tossed off a letter to Alexia Rhys, that had been worrying her for
days. And there was a funny little smile tucked away in the corners of
Mother Fisher's mouth, and Polly thought that things were getting
queerer than ever.

"I am glad you are writing that letter," said Mrs. Fisher, with an
approving smile that chased the funny little one all around the
strongly curved mouth, "for Alexia will feel badly not to hear often
from you, Polly."

"I know it," said Polly, wrinkling her brows, "and I didn't mean to let
this wait so long," scribbling away as fast as she could.

"Take care, Polly," warned her mother; "a carelessly written letter is
no compliment, and it gets you in a bad way. Don't hurry so, child," as
Polly's pen went scratching across the paper at a fearful rate.

"But there are so many letters to write to all the girls," said Polly,
stopping a minute to look at her mother, "and I've only just got all
the letters in my steamer mail-bag answered. I _must_ write to Cathie
and Philena, and Amy Garrett too, to-day, Mamsie," she added, in
distress.

"Polly," said Mother Fisher, looking into the flushed face, "I tell you
what would be the best way for you to do. All the letters in your
mail-bag are answered, you said?"

"Yes, indeed," declared Polly. "Oh, Mamsie, you didn't think I could
put those off?" she asked reproachfully.

"No, Polly, I really didn't," Mrs. Fisher made haste to assure her.
"Well, now, mother will tell you what will be the best way for you to
do. Write as good a letter as you can to Alexia, and tell her to send
it around to all the girls, for a kind of a bulletin, and--"

"Oh, Mamsie Fisher," cried Polly, not stopping to hear the rest, but
deserting the writing table to run and throw her arms around her
mother's neck, "you're the bestest, dearest mother in all this
world--oh--oh! Now I sha'n't have but one letter to write! How fine!"

"And you must write that one letter very nicely, Polly, and take ever
so much pains with it," said Mother Fisher, her black eyes shining at
the happy solution; "and that is much better than to hurry off a good
many slovenly ones. Besides, it is not well to take your time and
strength for too much letter writing, for there are the boys, and Mrs.
Whitney and--"

"Grandma Bascom and dear Mrs. Beebe," finished Polly. "Oh, I couldn't
ever forget them, Mamsie, in all this world." She stopped cuddling
Mother Fisher's neck, to peer into the black eyes.

"No, you mustn't ever forget them," repeated Mrs. Fisher, emphatically,
"in all this world, Polly. Well, get to work now over your one letter
that's to be a bulletin!"

"I shall tear this one up," declared Polly, running back to get into
her chair again. "O dear me, what a horrible old scrawl," she cried,
with a very red face. "I didn't know it did look so bad" And she tore
it clear across the page, and then snipped it into very little bits.

"That's the result of hurry," observed Mother Fisher, wisely, "and I
would begin all over again, Polly."

So Polly took a fresh sheet and set to work; and Mrs. Fisher, seeing
her so busily occupied, soon stole out. And there was the head waiter
waiting for her in the dining room, and Polly never heard a word they
said, although "cake" was mentioned a great many times, and several
other things too.

But the next morning Polly Pepper woke up to the fact that it was her
birthday. For there was Mamsie leaning over her pillow, the first thing
she saw the minute her eyes were opened. And Phronsie was sitting on
the end of the bed with her hands folded in her lap.

When she saw Polly's eyes open, she gave a little crow and darted
forward. "Oh, I thought you never would wake up, Polly," she said,
throwing her arms around Polly's neck.

"Yes, this child has been sitting there a whole hour, Polly." Mother
Fisher gave a merry little laugh, and then she began to drop kisses on
Polly's rosy cheek--ever so many of them.

Polly's dewy eyes opened wide.

"It's your birthday, don't you know!" exclaimed Phronsie, trying to
drop as many kisses and as fast, on Polly's other cheek, and to talk at
the same time.

"Mamsie Fisher!" cried Polly, springing up straight in the middle of
the bed, nearly knocking Phronsie over. "Why, so it is. Oh, how could I
forget--and sleep over. And I'm fifteen!"

"You're fifteen," repeated Mother Fisher, setting the last little kiss
on Polly's cheek,--"and it's the best thing you could possibly do, to
sleep over, child. Now, then, Phronsie, let us help her to get dressed."

Wasn't there a merry time, though, for the next half-hour, till Polly
had had her bath, and was arrayed, Mother Fisher and Phronsie here,
there, and everywhere, helping to tie and to hook Polly's
clothes--Phronsie bringing her little silver button-hook that Auntie
Whitney gave her, declaring that she should button Polly's boots.

"Oh, no, child," protested Polly. "I'll button them myself," flying off
for the boots.

But Phronsie piped out, hurrying after her, "I have them, Polly," and,
sure enough, there they were, one under each arm; "do let me,
Polly--do, please!" she begged.

"I would, Polly," advised Mrs. Fisher, "for Phronsie really has set her
heart on doing it."

So Polly sat down in the low chair, and put out her foot, feeling very
queer indeed, and as if she ought to be doing up Phronsie's boots
instead. And Phronsie curled up on the floor, and patiently drew every
one of the buttons into place, and buttoned them fast. And then on with
the other boot.

"There, now, I did do them all by myself," she announced, getting up
from the floor, and smoothing down her gown with much importance. "I
did truly, Polly."

"So you did, Pet," cried Polly, sticking out both feet to look at them.
"You buttoned every single one of those buttons up splendidly, Phronsie
Pepper. Now my toes will be just as happy all day; oh, you can't think
how happy they'll be." And she seized her, half smothering her with
kisses.

