five or six ravines were investigated as far as they could be ascended.
Samples were frequently taken from sand and gravel and washed, but
though particles of gold were frequently found, they were not in
sufficient quantity to promise good results from washing.

"If we had a band of natives with us," Dias said, "we should no doubt
get enough to pay well--that is to say, to cover all expenses and leave
an ounce or two of profit to every eight or ten men engaged--but as
matters stand we should only be wasting time by remaining here."

They had no difficulty in obtaining sufficient food; turkeys and
pheasants were occasionally shot; a tapir was once killed, and, as they
had brought hooks and lines with them, fish were frequently caught in
the streams. These were of small size, but very good eating. But, as
Dias said, they could not hope to find larger species, except far out
in the plains, where the rivers were deep and sluggish.

The work was hard, but they were now accustomed to it. They often had
to go a considerable distance before they could find trees available
for bridging the torrents, but, on the other hand, they sometimes came
upon some of much smaller girth than those they had first tackled. The
labour in getting these down was comparatively slight. Sometimes these
stood a little way from the stream, but after they were felled two
mules could easily drag them to the site of the bridge. When on the
march, Harry and his brother carried their double-barrelled guns, each
with one barrel charged with shot suitable for pheasants or other
birds, the other with buck-shot. Dias carried a rifle. Very seldom did
they mount their mules, the ground being so rough and broken, and the
boughs of the trees so thick, that it was less trouble to walk at the
heads of their animals than to ride.




CHAPTER VII

AN INDIAN ATTACK


One day when they returned from exploring a valley, Harry and his
brother, taking their rifles, strolled down an open glade, while Dias
and Jose unpacked the animals. They had gone but a hundred yards when
they heard a sound that was new to them. It sounded like the grunting
of a number of pigs. Dias was attending to the mules. Harry and Bertie
caught up their guns. Presently a small pig made its appearance from
among some trees. Harry was on the point of raising his gun to his
shoulder when Dias shouted, "Stop, do not shoot!"

"What is the matter, Dias?" he asked in surprise, as the latter ran up.

"That is a peccary."

"Well, it is a sort of pig, isn't it?"

"Yes, senor. But if you were to kill it, we might all be torn in
pieces. They travel through the forests in great herds, and if one is
injured or wounded, the rest will rush upon its assailants. You may
shoot down dozens of them, but that only redoubles their fury. The only
hope of escape is to climb a tree; but they will keep watch there,
regardless of how many are shot, until hunger obliges them to retire.
They are the bravest beasts of the forests, and will attack and kill
even a lion or a tiger if it has seized one of their number. I beg you
to stroll back quietly, and then sit down. I will go to the head of the
mules. If the herd see that we pay no attention to them, they may go on
without interfering with us. If we see them approaching us, and
evidently intending to attack, we must take to the trees and try to
keep them from attacking the mules; but there would be small chance of
our succeeding in doing so."

He and Jose at once went up to the mules, and stood perfectly quiet at
their head. Harry and Bertie moved closely up, laid their
double-barrelled guns beside them, and then sat down. By this time
forty or fifty of the peccaries had issued from the trees; some were
rooting among the herbage, others stood perfectly quiet, staring at the
group on the rise above them. Seeing no movement among them nor any
sign of hostility, they joined the others in their search for food, and
in a quarter of an hour the whole herd had moved off along the edge of
the forest.

"Praise be to the saints!" Dias said, taking off his hat and crossing
himself. "We have escaped a great danger. A hunter would rather meet a
couple of lions or tigers than a herd of peccaries. These little
animals are always ready to give battle, and once they begin, fight
till they die. The more that are killed the more furious do the others
become. Even in a tree there is no safety. Many a hunter has been
besieged in a tree until, overpowered by thirst, he fell to the ground
and was torn to pieces."

"What do they eat?" Harry asked.

"They will eat anything they kill, but their chief food is roots. They
kill great numbers of snakes. Even the largest python is no match for a
herd of peccaries if they catch him before he can take refuge in a
tree."

"Well, then, it is very lucky that you stopped us before we fired."

"Fortunate indeed, senor. By taking to the trees we might have saved
our lives, but we should certainly have lost our mules. Both pumas and
tigers kill the little beasts when they come across stragglers. And it
is well that they do, for otherwise the woods would be full of them,
though fortunately they do not multiply as fast as our pigs, having
only two or three in a litter. They are good eating, but it is seldom
that a hunter can shoot one, for if he only wounds it, its shrieks will
call together all its companions within a mile round."

"Then we must give up the idea of having pork while we are among the
mountains."

"Now, are you going to keep me here all day, Dias?" Maria called
suddenly. "It seems to me that you have forgotten me altogether."

Harry and Bertie could not help laughing.

Dias had, on returning to the mules, taken his wife and seated her on a
branch six feet from the ground, in order that, should the peccaries
attack them, he might be ready at once to snatch up his rifle and join
in the fight without having first to think of the safety of his wife.
He now lifted her down.

The action did even more than what Dias had said to convince Harry of
the seriousness of the danger to which they had been exposed, for as a
rule Donna Maria had scoffed at any offers of aid, even in the most
difficult places, and with her light springy step had taxed the power
of the others to keep up with her. These offers had not come from Dias,
who showed his confidence in his wife's powers by paying no attention
whatever, and a grim smile had often played on his lips when Harry or
his brother had offered her a hand. That his first thought had been of
her now showed that he considered the crisis a serious one.

"I thought Dias had gone mad," she said, as she regained her feet. "I
could not think what was the matter when he began to shout and ran
towards you. I saw nothing but a little pig. Then, when he came slowly
back with you and suddenly seized me and jerked me up on to that bough,
I felt quite sure of it, especially when he told me to hold my tongue
and not say a word. Was it that little pig? I saw lots more of them
afterwards."

"Yes; and if they had taken it into their heads to come this way you
would have seen a good deal more of them than would be pleasant," Dias
said. "With our rifles we could have faced four lions or tigers with a
better hope of success than those little pigs you saw. They were
peccaries, a sort of wild pig, and the most savage little beasts in the
forest. They would have chased us all up into the trees and killed all
the mules."

"Who would have thought it!" she said. "Why, when I was a girl I have
often gone in among a herd of little pigs quite as big as those things,
and never felt the least afraid of them. I must have been braver than I
thought I was."

"You are a good deal sillier than you think you are, Maria," Dias said
shortly. "There is as much difference between our pig and a peccary as
there is between a quiet Indian cultivator on the Sierra and one of
those savage Indians of the woods."

"I suppose I can light a fire now, Dias. There is no fear of those
creatures coming back again, is there?"

"No, I should think not. Fortunately they are going in the opposite
direction, otherwise I should have said that we had better stop here
for a day or two in case they should attack us if we came upon them
again."

The next day, as they were journeying through the forest, at the foot
of the slopes Jose gave a sudden exclamation.

"What is it?" Dias asked.

"I saw a naked Indian standing in front of that tree; he has gone now."

"Are you sure, Jose?"

"Quite sure. He was standing perfectly still, looking at us, but when I
called to you he must have slipped round the tree. I only took my eyes
off him for a moment; when I looked again he was gone."

"Then we are in for trouble," Dias said gravely. "Of course it was one
of the Chincas. No doubt he was alone, but you may be sure that he has
made off to tell his companions he has seen us. He will know exactly
how many we are, and how many animals we have. It may be twenty-four
hours, it may be three or four days, before he makes his appearance
again; but it is certain that, sooner or later, we shall hear of him.
Hunters as they are, they can follow a track where I should see
nothing; and so crafty are they, that they can traverse the country
without leaving the slightest sign of their passage. The forest might
be full of them, and yet the keenest white hunter would see no
footprint or other mark that would indicate their presence."

"What had we better do, Dias?"

"We shall probably come to another stream before nightfall, senor. This
we will follow up until we get to some ravine bare of trees. There we
can fight them; in the forest we should have no chance. They would lie
in ambush for us, climb into the trees and hide among the foliage, and
the first we should know of their presence would be a shower of arrows;
and as they are excellent marksmen, we should probably be all riddled
at the first volley. There can be no sauntering now, we must push the
animals forward at their best speed. I will lead the way. Do you,
senor, bring up the rear and urge the mules forward. I shall try and
pick the ground where the trees are thinnest, and the mules can then go
at a trot. They cannot do so here, for they would always be knocking
their loads off."

It was evening before they arrived at a stream. Here they made a short
halt while they gave a double handful of grain to each of the animals,
then they pushed on again until it was too dark to go farther.

"Will it be safe to light a fire, Dias?"

"Yes, that will make no difference. They are not likely to attack us at
night. Savages seldom travel after dark, partly because they are afraid
of demons, partly because they would be liable to be pounced upon by
wild beasts. But I do not think there is any chance of their overtaking
us until tomorrow. The man Jose saw may have had companions close at
hand, but they will know that we are well armed, and will do nothing
until they have gathered a large number and feel sure that they can
overpower us. They will probably take up the track to-morrow at
daylight; but we have made a long march, and can calculate that we
shall find some defensible position before they overtake us. Jose and I
will keep watch to-night."

"We will take turns with you, Dias."

"No, senor; my ears are accustomed to the sounds of the forests, yours
are not. If you were watching I should still have no sleep."

The night passed without an alarm.

An hour before daylight Dias gave all the animals a good feed of corn,
and as soon as it was light they again started. They were already some
distance up the mountain, and after eight hours' travelling they
arrived at a gorge that suited their purpose. For two hundred yards the
rocks rose perpendicularly on each side of the stream, which was but
some thirty feet wide. No rain had fallen for some days, and the water
was shallow enough at the foot of the cliff for the mules to make their
way among the fallen rocks, through which it rushed impetuously. At the
upper end the cliffs widened out into a basin some fifty yards across.

"We cannot do better than halt here," Dias said. "In two or three hours
we can form a strong breast-work on the rocks nearly out to the middle
of the stream, where the current is too swift for anyone to make his
way up against it."

"Are they likely to besiege us long, Dias?"

"That I cannot say; but I do not think they will give it up easily.
Savages learn to be patient when roaming the forest in search of game.
Their time is of no value to them; besides, they are sure to lose many
if they attack, and will therefore try to get their revenge."

"They may have to give it up from want of food."

Dias shook his head.

"There are sure to be plenty of fish in the river, and they will poison
some pool and get an abundance. With their bows and arrows they can
bring down monkeys from the trees, and can snare small animals.
However, senor, we can talk over these things to-morrow. We had best
begin the breast-work at once while Maria is cooking dinner, which we
need badly enough, for we have had nothing but the maize cakes we ate
before starting."

Working hard till it was dark, they piled up rocks and stones till they
formed a breast-work four feet high on both sides. Some twelve feet in
the centre were open. They had chosen a spot where so many fallen rocks
lay in the stream that it needed comparatively little labour to fill up
the gaps between them.

"I thought wood-chopping bad enough," Bertie said as they threw
themselves down on the ground after completing their labour, "but it is
a joke to this. My back is fairly broken, my arms feel as if they were
pulled out of the sockets, my hands are cut, I have nearly squeezed two
nails off."

"It has been hard work," Harry agreed; "still, we have made ourselves
fairly safe, and we will get the walls a couple of feet higher in the
morning. We shall only want to add to them on the lower face in order
to form a sort of parapet that will shelter us as we lie down to fire,
so it won't be anything like such hard work. Then we will fill in the
rocks behind with small stones and sand to lie down upon."

"They will never be able to fight their way up to it," Dias said.

"We need have no fear on that score. The question is, can they get down
into this valley behind us; the rocks look very steep and in most
places almost perpendicular."

"They are steep, senor; but trees grow on them in many places, and
these savages are like monkeys. We shall have to examine them very
carefully when we have finished the wall. If we find that it is
possible for anyone to get down, we must go up the next gorge and see
if we can find a better position."

"I suppose you think we are safe for to-night, Dias?'

"I don't think they will try to come up through the stream. They have
keen eyes, but it would be so dark down there that even a cat could not
see. They will guess that we have stopped here, and will certainly want
to find out our position before they attack. One or two may come up as
scouts, and in that case they may attack at daybreak. Of course two of
us will keep watch; we can change every three hours. I will take the
first watch with your brother, and you and Jose can take the next."

"Jose had better sleep," Maria put in; "he watched all last night. My
eyes are as good as his, and I will watch with Don Harry."

Harry would have protested, but Dias said quietly:

"That will be well, Maria, but you will have to keep your tongue quiet.
These savages have ears like those of wild animals, and if you were to
raise your voice you might get an arrow in the brain."

"I can be silent when I like, Dias."

"It is possible," Dias said dryly; "but I don't remember in all these
years we have been married that I have known you like to do so."

"I take that as a compliment," she said quietly, "for it shows at least
that I am never sulky. Well, Don Harry, do you accept me as a fellow
watcher?"

"Certainly I shall be very glad to have you with me; and I don't think
that you need be forbidden to talk in a low tone, for the roar of the
water among the rocks would prevent the sound of voices from being
heard two or three yards away."

Accordingly, as soon as it became dark Dias went to the wall with
Bertie. Jose, after a last look at the mules, wrapped himself in a
blanket and lay down.

"I think I had better turn in to the tent," Harry said; "we have had
two days' hard work, and the building of that wall has pretty nearly
finished me, so if I don't get two or three hours' sleep to-night I am
afraid I shall not be a very useful sentinel."

Five minutes later he was sound asleep, and when his brother roused him
he could hardly believe that it was time for him to go on duty.

"Dias is waiting there. Will you come down?" the latter said. "You were
sleeping like a top; I had to pull at your leg three times before you
woke."

"I am coming," Harry said as he crawled out. "I feel more sleepy than
when I lay down, and will just run down to the stream and sluice my
head, that will wake me up in earnest, for the water is almost as cold
as ice."

When he came back he was joined by Donna Maria, and, taking both his
shot-gun and rifle, he went forward with her to the barricade.

"So you have neither seen nor heard anything, Dias?"

"Nothing whatever, senor."

"I have had a good sleep, Dias; we will watch for the next four hours.
It is eleven o'clock now, so you will be able at three to take it on
till daylight."

"I will send and call you again an hour before that," Dias said. "If
they attack, as I expect they will as soon as the dawn breaks, we had
better have our whole force ready to meet them."

So saying Dias went off.

"This is scarcely woman's work, Donna Maria."

"It is woman's work to help defend her life, senor, as long as she can.
If I found that the savages were beating us I should stab myself. They
would kill you, but they might carry me away with them, which would be
a thousand times worse than death."

"I don't think there is any fear of their beating us," Harry said;
"certainly not here. We ought properly to be one on each side, but
really I shirk the thought of wading through the river waist-deep at
that shallow place we found a hundred yards up; it would be bad enough
to go through it, worse still to lie for four hours in wet clothes."

"Besides, we could not talk then, senor," Maria said with a little
laugh, "and that would be very dull."

"Very dull. Even now we must only talk occasionally; we shall have to
keep our eyes and ears open."

"I don't think either of them will be much good," she said; "I can see
the white water but nothing else, and I am sure I could not hear a
naked footstep on the rocks."

"It is a good thing the water is white, because we can make out the
rocks that rise above the surface. When our eyes get quite accustomed
to the dark we should certainly be able to see any figures stepping
upon them or wading in the water."

"I could see that now, senor. I think it will be of advantage to talk,
for I am sure if I were to lie with my eyes straining, and thinking of
nothing else, they would soon begin to close."

Talking occasionally in low tones, but keeping up a vigilant watch,
they were altogether hidden from the view of anyone coming up the
stream, for they exposed only their eyes and the top of their heads
above the rough parapet. No attempt had been made to fill up the spaces
between the stones, so that, except for the rounded shape, it would be
next to impossible to make them out between the rough rocks of the
crest. Harry had laid his double-barrelled gun on the parapet in front
of him. He had loaded both barrels with buck-shot, feeling that in the
darkness he was far more likely to do execution with that weapon than
with a rifle.

They had been some two hours on watch when Donna Maria touched his arm
significantly. He gazed earnestly but could see nothing. A minute
later, however, a rock about fifteen yards away seemed to change its
shape. Before, it had been pointed, but just on one side of the top
there was now a bulge.

"Do you see them?" Maria whispered. "I can make out one above the
rocks; the other is standing against the wall."

[Illustration: AN INDIAN SPIES THE EXPEDITION.]

There was no movement for two or three minutes, and Harry had no doubt
that they were examining the two black lines of stones between which
the water was rushing.

"There are two others on this side, senor," Maria whispered.

The pause was broken by the sharp tap of two arrows striking on the
stones a few inches below their heads.

"Well, you have begun it," Harry muttered.

He had already sighted his gun at the head half-hidden by the rock. He
now pulled the trigger, and then, turning, he fired the other barrel,
aiming along the side of the canyon where the two men seen by his
companion must be standing. The head disappeared, and loud cries broke
from the other side. The stillness that had reigned in the valley was
broken by a chorus of shrieks and roars, and the air overhead thrilled
with the sound of innumerable wings. Harry on firing had laid down the
fowling-piece and snatched up his rifle.

"Do you see any others?"
