
She took it in her hand, and looked at it all over.  It sparkled a
little, and shone here and there, but not much.  It was of a sort of
grey-whiteness, something like spun glass.

'Is this all your spinning, grandmother?' she asked.

'All since you came to the house.  There is more there than you think.'

'How pretty it is!  What am I to do with it, please?'

'That I will now explain to you,' answered the lady, turning from her
and going to her cabinet.  She came back with a small ring in her hand.
Then she took the ball from Irene's, and did something with the
ring--Irene could not tell what.

'Give me your hand,' she said.  Irene held up her right hand.

'Yes, that is the hand I want,' said the lady, and put the ring on the
forefinger of it.

'What a beautiful ring!' said Irene.  'What is the stone called?'

'It is a fire-opal.' 'Please, am I to keep it?'

'Always.' 'Oh, thank you, grandmother!  It's prettier than anything I
ever saw, except those--of all colours-in your--Please, is that your
crown?'

'Yes, it is my crown.  The stone in your ring is of the same sort--only
not so good.  It has only red, but mine have all colours, you see.'

'Yes, grandmother.  I will take such care of it!  But--' she added,
hesitating.

'But what?' asked her grandmother.

'What am I to say when Lootie asks me where I got it?'

'You will ask her where you got it,' answered the lady smiling.

'I don't see how I can do that.'

'You will, though.'

'Of course I will, if you say so.  But, you know, I can't pretend not
to know.'

'Of course not.  But don't trouble yourself about it.  You will see
when the time comes.'

So saying, the lady turned, and threw the little ball into the rose
fire.

'Oh, grandmother!' exclaimed Irene; 'I thought you had spun it for me.'

'So I did, my child.  And you've got it.'

'No; it's burnt in the fire!'

The lady put her hand in the fire, brought out the ball, glimmering as
before, and held it towards her.  Irene stretched out her hand to take
it, but the lady turned and, going to her cabinet, opened a drawer, and
laid the ball in it.

'Have I done anything to vex you, grandmother?' said Irene pitifully.

'No, my darling.  But you must understand that no one ever gives
anything to another properly and really without keeping it.  That ball
is yours.'

'Oh! I'm not to take it with me!  You are going to keep it for me!'

'You are to take it with you.  I've fastened the end of it to the ring
on your finger.'

Irene looked at the ring.

'I can't see it there, grandmother,' she said.

'Feel--a little way from the ring--towards the cabinet,' said the lady.

'Oh! I do feel it!' exclaimed the princess.  'But I can't see it,' she
added, looking close to her outstretched hand.

'No.  The thread is too fine for you to see it.  You can only feel it.
Now you can fancy how much spinning that took, although it does seem
such a little ball.'

'But what use can I make of it, if it lies in your cabinet?'

'That is what I will explain to you.  It would be of no use to you--it
wouldn't be yours at all if it did not lie in my cabinet.  Now listen.
If ever you find yourself in any danger--such, for example, as you were
in this same evening--you must take off your ring and put it under the
pillow of your bed.  Then you must lay your finger, the same that wore
the ring, upon the thread, and follow the thread wherever it leads you.'

'Oh, how delightful!  It will lead me to you, grandmother, I know!'

'Yes.  But, remember, it may seem to you a very roundabout way indeed,
and you must not doubt the thread.  Of one thing you may be sure, that
while you hold it, I hold it too.'

'It is very wonderful!' said Irene thoughtfully.  Then suddenly
becoming aware, she jumped up, crying:

'Oh, grandmother! here have I been sitting all this time in your chair,
and you standing!  I beg your pardon.'

The lady laid her hand on her shoulder, and said:

'Sit down again, Irene.  Nothing pleases me better than to see anyone
sit in my chair.  I am only too glad to stand so long as anyone will
sit in it.'

'How kind of you!' said the princess, and sat down again.

'It makes me happy,' said the lady.

'But,' said Irene, still puzzled, 'won't the thread get in somebody's
way and be broken, if the one end is fast to my ring, and the other
laid in your cabinet?'

'You will find all that arrange itself.  I am afraid it is time for you
to go.'

'Mightn't I stay and sleep with you tonight, grandmother?' 'No, not
tonight.  If I had meant you to stay tonight, I should have given you a
bath; but you know everybody in the house is miserable about you, and
it would be cruel to keep them so all night.  You must go downstairs.'

'I'm so glad, grandmother, you didn't say "Go home," for this is my
home.  Mayn't I call this my home?'

'You may, my child.  And I trust you will always think it your home.
Now come.  I must take you back without anyone seeing you.'

'Please, I want to ask you one question more,' said Irene.  'Is it
because you have your crown on that you look so young?'

'No, child,' answered her grandmother; 'it is because I felt so young
this evening that I put my crown on.  And I thought you would like to
see your old grandmother in her best.'

'Why do you call yourself old?  You're not old, grandmother.'

'I am very old indeed.  It is so silly of people--I don't mean you, for
you are such a tiny, and couldn't know better--but it is so silly of
people to fancy that old age means crookedness and witheredness and
feebleness and sticks and spectacles and rheumatism and forgetfulness!
It is so silly! Old age has nothing whatever to do with all that.  The
right old age means strength and beauty and mirth and courage and clear
eyes and strong painless limbs.  I am older than you are able to think,
and--'

'And look at you, grandmother!' cried Irene, jumping up and flinging
her arms about her neck.  'I won't be so silly again, I promise you.
At least--I'm rather afraid to promise--but if I am, I promise to be
sorry for it--I do.  I wish I were as old as you, grandmother.  I don't
think you are ever afraid of anything.'

'Not for long, at least, my child.  Perhaps by the time I am two
thousand years of age, I shall, indeed, never be afraid of anything.
But I confess I have sometimes been afraid about my children--sometimes
about you, Irene.'

'Oh, I'm so sorry, grandmother!  Tonight, I suppose, you mean.'

'Yes--a little tonight; but a good deal when you had all but made up
your mind that I was a dream, and no real great-great-grandmother.  You
must not suppose I am blaming you for that.  I dare say you could not
help it.'

'I don't know, grandmother,' said the princess, beginning to cry. 'I
can't always do myself as I should like.  And I don't always try.  I'm
very sorry anyhow.'

The lady stooped, lifted her in her arms, and sat down with her in her
chair, holding her close to her bosom.  In a few minutes the princess
had sobbed herself to sleep.  How long she slept I do not know.  When
she came to herself she was sitting in her own high chair at the
nursery table, with her doll's house before her.



CHAPTER 16

The Ring

The same moment her nurse came into the room, sobbing.  When she saw
her sitting there she started back with a loud cry of amazement and
joy.  Then running to her, she caught her in her arms and covered her
with kisses.

'My precious darling princess! where have you been?  What has happened
to you?  We've all been crying our eyes out, and searching the house
from top to bottom for you.'

'Not quite from the top,' thought Irene to herself; and she might have
added, 'not quite to the bottom', perhaps, if she had known all.  But
the one she would not, and the other she could not say. 'Oh, Lootie!
I've had such a dreadful adventure!' she replied, and told her all
about the cat with the long legs, and how she ran out upon the
mountain, and came back again.  But she said nothing of her grandmother
or her lamp.

'And there we've been searching for you all over the house for more
than an hour and a half!' exclaimed the nurse.  'But that's no matter,
now we've got you!  Only, princess, I must say,' she added, her mood
changing, 'what you ought to have done was to call for your own Lootie
to come and help you, instead of running out of the house, and up the
mountain, in that wild, I must say, foolish fashion.'

'Well, Lootie,' said Irene quietly, 'perhaps if you had a big cat, all
legs, running at you, you might not exactly know what was the wisest
thing to do at the moment.'

'I wouldn't run up the mountain, anyhow,' returned Lootie.

'Not if you had time to think about it.  But when those creatures came
at you that night on the mountain, you were so frightened yourself that
you lost your way home.'

This put a stop to Lootie's reproaches.  She had been on the point of
saying that the long-legged cat must have been a twilight fancy of the
princess's, but the memory of the horrors of that night, and of the
talking-to which the king had given her in consequence, prevented her
from saying what after all she did not half believe--having a strong
suspicion that the cat was a goblin; for she knew nothing of the
difference between the goblins and their creatures: she counted them
all just goblins.

Without another word she went and got some fresh tea and bread and
butter for the princess.  Before she returned, the whole household,
headed by the housekeeper, burst into the nursery to exult over their
darling.  The gentlemen-at-arms followed, and were ready enough to
believe all she told them about the long-legged cat. Indeed, though
wise enough to say nothing about it, they remembered, with no little
horror, just such a creature amongst those they had surprised at their
gambols upon the princess's lawn.

In their own hearts they blamed themselves for not having kept better
watch.  And their captain gave orders that from this night the front
door and all the windows on the ground floor should be locked
immediately the sun set, and opened after upon no pretence whatever.
The men-at-arms redoubled their vigilance, and for some time there was
no further cause of alarm.

When the princess woke the next morning, her nurse was bending over
her.  'How your ring does glow this morning, princess!--just like a
fiery rose!' she said.

'Does it, Lootie?' returned Irene.  'Who gave me the ring, Lootie? I
know I've had it a long time, but where did I get it?  I don't
remember.'

'I think it must have been your mother gave it you, princess; but
really, for as long as you have worn it, I don't remember that ever I
heard,' answered her nurse.

'I will ask my king-papa the next time he comes,' said Irene.



CHAPTER 17

Springtime

The spring so dear to all creatures, young and old, came at last, and
before the first few days of it had gone, the king rode through its
budding valleys to see his little daughter.  He had been in a distant
part of his dominions all the winter, for he was not in the habit of
stopping in one great city, or of visiting only his favourite country
houses, but he moved from place to place, that all his people might
know him.  Wherever he journeyed, he kept a constant look-out for the
ablest and best men to put into office; and wherever he found himself
mistaken, and those he had appointed incapable or unjust, he removed
them at once.  Hence you see it was his care of the people that kept
him from seeing his princess so often as he would have liked.  You may
wonder why he did not take her about with him; but there were several
reasons against his doing so, and I suspect her great-great-grandmother
had had a principal hand in preventing it.  Once more Irene heard the
bugle-blast, and once more she was at the gate to meet her father as he
rode up on his great white horse.

After they had been alone for a little while, she thought of what she
had resolved to ask him.

'Please, king-papa,' she said, 'Will you tell me where I got this
pretty ring?  I can't remember.'

The king looked at it.  A strange beautiful smile spread like sunshine
over his face, and an answering smile, but at the same time a
questioning one, spread like moonlight over Irene's.  'It was your
queen-mamma's once,' he said.

'And why isn't it hers now?' asked Irene.

'She does not want it now,' said the king, looking grave.

'Why doesn't she want it now?'

'Because she's gone where all those rings are made.'

'And when shall I see her?' asked the princess.

'Not for some time yet,' answered the king, and the tears came into his
eyes.

Irene did not remember her mother and did not know why her father
looked so, and why the tears came in his eyes; but she put her arms
round his neck and kissed him, and asked no more questions.

The king was much disturbed on hearing the report of the
gentlemen-at-arms concerning the creatures they had seen; and I presume
would have taken Irene with him that very day, but for what the
presence of the ring on her finger assured him of.  About an hour
