wounded remained with some surgeons under the protection of the Red
Cross flag. All the available transport accompanied the column, but the
men's kits and all other encumbrances were left behind. They were
obliged to pass through Dundee to get upon the southern road, but so
quietly was the movement effected that but few of the townsmen knew
what was happening.

The column was led by Colonel Dartnel, chief of the Natal Police, whose
knowledge of the district was invaluable to the troops. The roads were
heavy, and the rain continued to pour down in torrents. Each man
carried three days' provisions; they tramped along silently through the
night; stoppages by swollen streams were frequent, and by daybreak the
next morning they had only accomplished nine miles of their journey.
Early in the morning the townspeople had woke up to the fact that the
army had gone, and there was a general exodus of all who could obtain
conveyances. The Boers remained for some time in ignorance that the
force whose capture or destruction they had regarded as certain had
slipped away. They saw the tents, but the fact that neither men nor
horses were visible puzzled them, and it was eleven o'clock before some
of the more venturesome galloping down found that the English force had
escaped.

Then from all sides they poured into the town. Had they at once pursued
they might still have overtaken the retreating force before nightfall;
but they immediately set to work to loot the great stores of provisions
left behind, and to gather their pickings from the deserted houses of
Dundee, and so let slip their opportunity, and no pursuit whatever was
attempted. For four days the column continued its march, resting for a
few hours each day and usually marching all night. The road was
terribly bad, leading through narrow mountain passes, and had but a
small force of the enemy held the Waschbrank gorge, where the sides
were for three miles nearly perpendicular, a terrible calamity might
have taken place. Happily, however, the Boers were in absolute
ignorance of the road which the British troops were following, and
concluded that they must have somewhere crossed the railway and were
making their way down by the roads to its west. That they had gone
through Helpmakaar does not appear to have occurred to them, for after
marching some thirty miles to that town the column was as far off
Ladysmith as when it started.

The anxiety at the latter town was intense. The line being still uncut,
the arrival of the column at Helpmakaar was known, but beyond that no
communication could be received. On Tuesday the 24th Colonel Dartnel
arrived in Ladysmith with the news that the column was now twenty miles
away, all well, and he at once returned to them with supplies and a
small relief force. On Wednesday many of the men came in, and on
Thursday the remainder arrived and were heartily greeted. On the
24th--in order to divert the attention of Joubert and the Free State
Boers, both of whom were converging upon General Yule's column, still
making its way through the passes--a force composed of three regiments
of cavalry, four of Colonial Mounted Infantry, three batteries, and
four infantry regiments went out. The enemy were found near
Reitfontein. No actual engagement took place, but for some hours an
artillery and rifle duel was maintained and the Boers fell back. The
number of casualties was not large, and these were principally among
the Gloucester regiment, who, on entering a valley supposed to be
untenanted, were received by a heavy fire from a strong party of the
enemy hidden there. The fight, however, fulfilled the object for which
the advance was undertaken, that of occupying the Boers' attention and
enabling the column from Dundee to make its way into Ladysmith
unmolested. The Boers were now closing in on the latter town from all
directions, and preparations for defence at once began. The town-hall
and the schools were fitted up as hospitals and everything arranged for
the reception of wounded. As the Boers had already been seen near
Colenso, sixteen miles to the south, it was certain that the
communications would ere long be cut.

No more unsuitable place for a military camp could well have been
selected than Ladysmith, which had indeed been chosen, years before the
war was thought of, on account of its position on the railway, and the
vicinity of the Klip river. The fact that the country immediately round
was fertile and forage was obtainable no doubt influenced the military
authorities in their selection. Lying in the heart of a mountainous
country, it was commanded by steep and rocky hills at a distance of
from two to four miles. Just as many castles built in the days before
firearms were in use were rendered untenable against even the clumsy
cannon of early days placed on eminences near, so the improvement in
artillery and the possession of powerful modern guns by the Boers had
gravely imperilled the position of Ladysmith. The military authorities
could never have anticipated that the town would be besieged by foes
armed with artillery that could carry over five miles. But such was the
case now, and all there felt, as soon as it was decided to defend the
place till the last, that the position was a precarious one.

Fortunately, a considerable store of provisions had been collected, and
so long as the line was open additions were being sent up by every
train. The line was a single one, winding along through passes among
the hills, and therefore open to attack by small bodies of the enemy.
In point of size Ladysmith was the third largest town in Natal. Durban
boasted a population of thirty thousand, Pietermaritzburg of twenty
thousand, and Ladysmith of four thousand five hundred, being four
hundred larger than that of Dundee. It was the point at which the line
of railway forked, one branch running north through Glencoe to the
Transvaal, the other northwest through Van Reenen's Pass to
Bloemfontein. It was a pretty straggling town with its barracks,
government buildings and large stores. Almost all the houses were
detached and standing in their own gardens, and as these were largely
wooded its appearance was very picturesque, with the Klip river, a
branch of the Tugela, running through it. The houses were, for the most
part, one-storied, and the roofs were all painted white for the sake of
coolness. No perfectly open town had ever before undergone a siege by
an army of some thirty thousand men provided with excellent guns, and
yet the garrison awaited the result with perfect confidence.




CHAPTER VII

LADYSMITH BESIEGED


On the 30th, the Boers being now in force on many of the hills around
the town, and having inflicted the first annoyance upon Ladysmith by
cutting the conduit that brought down the water-supply to the town from
a reservoir among the hills, and so forced it for the future to depend
upon a few wells and the muddy water of the river, it was determined to
make an effort to drive them back and to gain possession of some of the
hills from which it was now evident the town would stand a risk of
being bombarded. Hitherto there had been considerable apathy in taking
measures for keeping the enemy as far as possible out of range. A few
redoubts thrown up during the last week and strongly held would have
been invaluable, but it seemed to be considered by the military
authorities that the siege could be but a short one, and that the Boers
would speedily be driven off by the troops now pouring into Durban.

An effort was now to be made to repair the consequences of this
remissness and to drive the Boers off the positions they occupied, and
it was hoped that if a heavy blow were dealt them they would draw off
altogether. The forces of Joubert, Meyer, and the Free Staters were now
all within a distance of a few miles, and were all to be beaten up.
Their central position was on a hill afterwards known as Signal Hill,
and on this they had already planted a forty-pounder gun. A force
composed of six companies of the Royal Irish Fusiliers, four and a half
of the Gloucesters, a mountain battery and a troop of Hussars started
at midnight towards a hill known as Nicholson's Nek, occupied by the
Free Staters. Major General Hunter with a brigade of infantry, three
batteries, and a small cavalry force were to attack Meyer's commando to
the east, while General White, with two infantry brigades, French's
cavalry, and six batteries of field artillery moved against Joubert's
force on Modder Spruit. It was hoped that the Boers, if defeated, would
find their retreat barred by the force that had stated early for
Nicholson's Nek. All were well away from the town before daylight broke.

At five o'clock in the morning the guns spoke out, and were at once
answered by the Boer artillery, and the roar of fire soon became
general. General White's central column was screened by a ridge near
the railway, and the big gun on Signal Hill directed its fire partly
against the town and partly against the cavalry which could be seen by
them in rear of the column. As only a few of the Volunteer Horse had
been ordered to accompany the attacking force, Chris and his companions
took up their position on an eminence that afforded a general view of
the battle, and here a large number of the townspeople also gathered.
The general plan of operations was that the two movable columns should
form a rough arc of a circle and, driving in both flanks of the Boers,
sweep the whole force before them.

"They have a great many guns," Peters said, as the rattle of the
machine-guns and the thud of quick-firing one-pounders joined the
continuous fire of several Boer batteries and the deeper roar of their
big gun, "and they seem to be in greater force than was supposed, for I
can make out large reinforcements coming up to them from behind."

Our artillery were first placed about four thousand yards from the Boer
position, but as this was on higher ground than that occupied by our
guns our fire did not appear to be effective. They were therefore moved
forward some distance, supported by two battalions of the Rifles and
the Dublin Fusiliers. The infantry force with them pushed forward
rapidly and gained a crest from which they threatened to take the Boer
position on Signal Hill in rear; but the Boers, very strongly
reinforced, moved to meet them, and heavy fighting took place, until
the enemy's force became so strong that they not only checked the
further advance of the brigade, but threatened it on both flanks. Two
batteries went to their assistance, but even with this aid they could
not continue their advance, pressed as they were by greatly superior
numbers and harassed by the fire of the Boer field batteries on the
hill.

At other points our advance was opposed as hotly. Nowhere were our
infantry gaining ground. The enemy had not wasted their time, but had
thrown up intrenchments on the steep hills they occupied, and from
these shelters maintained a terrible fire, while their numerous
machine-guns swept the ground with a hail of bullets and shells. On
such ground the cavalry were useless, and the range of the Boer guns
was much greater than that of our own.

"It seems to me," Chris said, "that instead of gaining ground we are
losing it. We can't see at all what is going on, but certainly the
firing seems nearer than it was."

All had thought the same though none had cared to suggest such a thing.

"Hurrah! there is a train coming in," Field said. "I heard they were
expecting a party of sailors with naval guns. They would be useful just
at the present moment. Let us go down and see, we can make out nothing
from here."

Glad to be doing something they went down the hill. As they reached the
station they saw a large detachment of sailors at work detraining some
twelve-pounders and two large quick-firing guns. Teams of oxen were
brought up, the sailors harnessed themselves to ropes, and with
tremendous exertions one of the guns was taken up to an eminence, and
at eleven it opened fire. It was but just in time. In steady order the
columns were retiring with their faces towards the Boers, answering
shot for shot, carrying off their wounded as they dropped, in spite of
the terrible rifle fire and the roar of the Boers' batteries; but as
soon as the first naval gun opened fire, amid the cheers of the
townspeople, the situation was changed. The first two shells burst
close to the Boer big gun, the third in the midst of the artillerymen,
and it was some time before its fire was resumed. In the meantime the
sailors had turned their attention to other Boer batteries which the
field artillery had scarcely been able to reach, and one by one these
were withdrawn over the crest.

At one o'clock Colonel Hamilton's brigade, which had hitherto been
lying behind the crest they first occupied, in readiness to repel any
counter-attack the Boers might make, now moved out and took up their
position to cover the retirement of Hunter's column and Howard's
brigade, and although the Boers pressed hotly upon them they held their
ground steadily until their comrades had all reached their camp, and
then marched in unhindered by the enemy, whose big cannon had now been
finally silenced by the naval gun and their batteries for the most part
obliged to retire.

After seeing the naval gun open fire Chris had gone down to speak to
Captain Brookfield, when he met two soldiers of a mountain battery
carrying an injured comrade. They took him into the hospital and then
came out. Their shoulder-straps showed them to belong to the mountain
battery that had gone out with the Royal Irish Fusiliers and the
Gloucesters, of whom nothing had been heard, though occasionally, in
momentary intervals of fire, the sound of distant musketry could be
made out in the direction of Nicholson's Nek.

"How are your party getting on?" he asked.

"We don't know anything about them, sir," one of the men said, "except
that they have been heavily engaged since daylight. I am afraid that
they are in a tight place."

"How is it you know nothing about them?"

"It has been a bad job altogether," the man said. "We were marching up
a steep valley with only room for us to lead two mules abreast; we were
in the rear of the column. Suddenly a boulder came rolling down the
hill and some shots were fired. In a moment the mules stampeded. One or
two began it, kicking and plunging and squealing like wild beasts, then
the others all set to. There was no holding them? it was almost
pitch-dark, and before one could say 'knife' they were tearing down the
road we had come up. There was no time to stop, and those who were
lucky jumped out of their way, those who were not were knocked down and
trampled on. As soon as they had gone those of us who were not hurt set
off after them and looked for them everywhere, but only two or three
were caught. Where the rest went I don't know, but I hope that they got
into the enemy's line of fire and were all shot. At last we gave it up
as a bad job and went back to bring in the fellows who were hurt. I
think most of them are in now. We have been a long time, for Thompson's
leg was broken and one of his arms, and, I expect, most of his ribs,
and it hurt him so to be moved that we have had to stop every two
yards."

"It is a bad business indeed," Chris said; "and of course all your guns
are lost?"

"Every one of them, and what is worse, all the reserve small-arm
ammunition is lost too. The mules carrying them were with ours, and as
the fighting up there has been going on ever since, I am afraid the
infantry must have pretty well used up their last cartridges."

It was not until the next day that the extent of the calamity was
known, when a Boer came down with a white flag asking that doctors
might be sent up. The little column instead of, as had been hoped,
surprising the Boers had itself been ambushed, being suddenly attacked
by two strong parties of the enemy. They at once seized a little
eminence, threw up a breastwork of stone, and defended themselves
successfully until the ammunition was entirely exhausted, and a hundred
and fifty had been killed or wounded. The Boers had, by taking
advantage of every bit of cover, crept up close to them, and a
murderous fire was poured in. The two regiments asked Colonel Carleton,
who commanded them, to allow them to charge with their bayonets and cut
their way through. He consented to allow the desperate attempt to be
made, and the men were in the act of fixing bayonets when someone
raised a white flag, and the Boers standing up advanced to receive the
surrender.

After this the laws of war permitted no further defence, and the men,
half mad with fury at the situation in which they were placed, threw
down their rifles and were made prisoners. This was at two o'clock in
the afternoon, after the rest of the force had returned to Ladysmith;
and thus some nine hundred men fell into the hands of the Boers. Apart
from this the loss was comparatively small considering the heat of the
engagement. The day's work had been altogether unsatisfactory; no
advantage whatever had been gained beyond the discovery of the Boers'
position, and their unexpected strength and fighting powers, and it was
evident that the force at Ladysmith was unable to drive off the enemy
unaided, and must undergo a siege until the arrival of a relieving
army. There were provisions calculated to last for two months, and no
one doubted that long before that time General Buller would arrive to
their rescue. So confident had the military authorities been, that not
only had no defensive works been thrown up, but they had omitted to
send the women and children, and the men unfitted to give active
assistance, to the rear.

On the following morning the scouts held a council of war.

"Now," Chris said, "we have to decide the all-important question. It is
quite certain that the town is going to be besieged, and I should say
that the siege will last for some time, as nothing can be done to
relieve them until a lot of troops arrive from home. We have shown at
Dundee and Elandslaagte that our fellows can drive the Boers from their
kopjes, but a force arriving to relieve Ladysmith would have to fight
its way through a tremendously mountainous district, and to capture at
least eight or ten such positions. At Dundee and Elandslaagte the Boers
had only a few guns, and the big one from Pretoria had not arrived, nor
had they time to fortify themselves. It is certain, therefore, that it
will require a very big force to fight its way in here, especially as
the Tugela has to be crossed, and the Boers will of course destroy the
bridges.

"It may be a couple of months before the place is relieved. Of course
the question is, Shall we stay here or go? I don't think we should be
of much use here; indeed, I don't see that cavalry would be any good at
all, whereas if a portion of the Boers push south we may be very useful
in our own line of scouting. Still, this is a question for you to
decide. You chose to make me your commander when at work, but we should
all have an equal voice in a matter of this sort."

There was little discussion; all were of their leader's opinion that it
was best for them to leave. The prospect of a long siege in which they
could take but little active part was not a pleasant one, and it was
decided at once that they should leave.

"Very well," Chris said. "Then I will go in to Captain Brookfield and
ask his permission to go. Now that we are in camp with him he must be
consulted."

They had since Elandslaagte taken their places as a part of the
Maritzburg Scouts, and had been drilled for some hours each day. They
were already favourites among the corps, who were proud of the work
they had done, and being a pleasant set of lads their uncouth
appearance, which had at first been viewed with much disfavour by many
of their comrades, had been forgiven. Chris went to the commander's
tent and laid the matter and their decision before him.

"I think that it is just as well that you should go, Chris," the
officer said; "and indeed I was on the point of telling you that we are
all leaving. For myself I cannot understand why the cavalry should be
kept here, and indeed I know that it is their opinion also, and that
they have asked the general to let them leave. However, he has decided
to keep them. I am sure it is a mistake. Before the siege is over
forage is sure to run short, and half the cavalry will be dismounted
before the end comes. However, I have seen him and pointed out that as
scouts we should be useless here. He has given me leave to go, but has
requested me to join the first troops that come up the line. When we
are once away I shall give you leave to act altogether independently of
us, which will I am sure suit you better than being kept for weeks
perhaps at Colenso or Estcourt. Another thing I will do. General Yule
was speaking to me only yesterday of the manner in which your party
defeated and cut up more than double your number, and how you and three
of your party went into the Boer camp at Talana and ascertained their
strength for General Symons. I expect that General Buller will come on
here, as it is certainly the most serious point at present. I will ask
Yule to give you a letter of introduction to him, it will be useful;
and I have no doubt that he will give you a free hand, as I have done.
I should not call upon General Buller in that rig-out, if I were you. I
have heard he is somewhat of a martinet at the War Office, and we know
that they have a very poor opinion of volunteers there."

Chris smiled. "Volunteers have done good service at the Cape before
now, sir, and have shown over and over again that a man can fight just
as well in plain clothes as if he were buttoned up to the chin in
uniform; and as the Boers are themselves nothing but volunteers, I
should think that before this war is over the War Office will see its
mistake."

"I should think so indeed, Chris, but at present they have certainly
not woke up to the fact. I see by the telegrams that the London
Scottish and the London Irish have both volunteered almost to a man for
service here, and that they have not even had a civil reply to their
application. I tell you, lad, this war is going to be a big thing, and
before it is over we may have both militia and volunteers out here, and
perhaps troops from the colonies. I heard that some of the Australian
colonies have already offered to send bodies of mounted men, and that
our government are ordering out a larger number of men than was at
first intended. I hear this morning that at Kimberley and Mafeking
fighting has begun. On the 24th Kimberley made a successful sortie, and
on the 25th a general attack on Mafeking was repulsed. The fact that
both these places are beleaguered, and that we have again been obliged
to fall back here, and are likely to be cut off altogether, has
evidently stirred them up, and they begin to understand that it is
going to be a much bigger affair than they expected.

"I wrote to your mother yesterday at Durban, and told her that I
intended to leave while it is still possible. Of course you have
