
The extraordinary confusion of the board-room, with the remains of the
incense in the plates, would have shown them at once that the visit of
the Phoenix had been no dream, but a radiant reality, but no one went
into the board-room again that day; and next day, before the office
was opened, it was all cleaned and put nice and tidy by a lady whose
business asking questions was not part of. That is why Cyril read
the papers in vain on the next day and the day after that; because no
sensible person thinks his dreams worth putting in the paper, and no one
will ever own that he has been asleep in the daytime.

The Phoenix was very pleased, but it decided to write an ode for itself.
It thought the ones it had heard at its temple had been too hastily
composed. Its own ode began--

     'For beauty and for modest worth
     The Phoenix has not its equal on earth.'

And when the children went to bed that night it was still trying to cut
down the last line to the proper length without taking out any of what
it wanted to say.

That is what makes poetry so difficult.



CHAPTER 6. DOING GOOD


'We shan't be able to go anywhere on the carpet for a whole week,
though,' said Robert.

'And I'm glad of it,' said Jane, unexpectedly.

'Glad?' said Cyril; 'GLAD?'

It was breakfast-time, and mother's letter, telling them how they were
all going for Christmas to their aunt's at Lyndhurst, and how father and
mother would meet them there, having been read by every one, lay on the
table, drinking hot bacon-fat with one corner and eating marmalade with
the other.

'Yes, glad,' said Jane. 'I don't want any more things to happen
just now. I feel like you do when you've been to three parties in a
week--like we did at granny's once--and extras in between, toys and
chocs and things like that. I want everything to be just real, and no
fancy things happening at all.' 'I don't like being obliged to keep
things from mother,' said Anthea. 'I don't know why, but it makes me
feel selfish and mean.'

'If we could only get the mater to believe it, we might take her to the
jolliest places,' said Cyril, thoughtfully. 'As it is, we've just got to
be selfish and mean--if it is that--but I don't feel it is.'

'I KNOW it isn't, but I FEEL it is,' said Anthea, 'and that's just as
bad.'

'It's worse,' said Robert; 'if you knew it and didn't feel it, it
wouldn't matter so much.'

'That's being a hardened criminal, father says,' put in Cyril, and he
picked up mother's letter and wiped its corners with his handkerchief,
to whose colour a trifle of bacon-fat and marmalade made but little
difference.

'We're going to-morrow, anyhow,' said Robert. 'Don't,' he added, with
a good-boy expression on his face--'don't let's be ungrateful for our
blessings; don't let's waste the day in saying how horrid it is to keep
secrets from mother, when we all know Anthea tried all she knew to give
her the secret, and she wouldn't take it. Let's get on the carpet and
have a jolly good wish. You'll have time enough to repent of things all
next week.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'let's. It's not really wrong.'

'Well, look here,' said Anthea. 'You know there's something about
Christmas that makes you want to be good--however little you wish it at
other times. Couldn't we wish the carpet to take us somewhere where we
should have the chance to do some good and kind action? It would be an
adventure just the same,' she pleaded.

'I don't mind,' said Cyril. 'We shan't know where we're going, and
that'll be exciting. No one knows what'll happen. We'd best put on our
outers in case--'

'We might rescue a traveller buried in the snow, like St Bernard dogs,
with barrels round our necks,' said Jane, beginning to be interested.

'Or we might arrive just in time to witness a will being signed--more
tea, please,' said Robert, 'and we should see the old man hide it away
in the secret cupboard; and then, after long years, when the rightful
heir was in despair, we should lead him to the hidden panel and--'

'Yes,' interrupted Anthea; 'or we might be taken to some freezing garret
in a German town, where a poor little pale, sick child--'

'We haven't any German money,' interrupted Cyril, 'so THAT'S no go. What
I should like would be getting into the middle of a war and getting hold
of secret intelligence and taking it to the general, and he would make
me a lieutenant or a scout, or a hussar.'

When breakfast was cleared away, Anthea swept the carpet, and the
children sat down on it, together with the Phoenix, who had been
especially invited, as a Christmas treat, to come with them and witness
the good and kind action they were about to do.

Four children and one bird were ready, and the wish was wished.

Every one closed its eyes, so as to feel the topsy-turvy swirl of the
carpet's movement as little as possible.

When the eyes were opened again the children found themselves on the
carpet, and the carpet was in its proper place on the floor of their own
nursery at Camden Town.

'I say,' said Cyril, 'here's a go!'

'Do you think it's worn out? The wishing part of it, I mean?' Robert
anxiously asked the Phoenix.

'It's not that,' said the Phoenix; 'but--well--what did you wish--?'

'Oh! I see what it means,' said Robert, with deep disgust; 'it's like
the end of a fairy story in a Sunday magazine. How perfectly beastly!'

'You mean it means we can do kind and good actions where we are? I see.
I suppose it wants us to carry coals for the cook or make clothes
for the bare heathens. Well, I simply won't. And the last day and
everything. Look here!' Cyril spoke loudly and firmly. 'We want to go
somewhere really interesting, where we have a chance of doing something
good and kind; we don't want to do it here, but somewhere else. See?
Now, then.'

The obedient carpet started instantly, and the four children and one
bird fell in a heap together, and as they fell were plunged in perfect
darkness.

'Are you all there?' said Anthea, breathlessly, through the black dark.
Every one owned that it was there.

'Where are we? Oh! how shivery and wet it is! Ugh!--oh!--I've put my
hand in a puddle!'

'Has any one got any matches?' said Anthea, hopelessly. She felt sure
that no one would have any.

It was then that Robert, with a radiant smile of triumph that was quite
wasted in the darkness, where, of course, no one could see anything,
drew out of his pocket a box of matches, struck a match and lighted a
candle--two candles. And every one, with its mouth open, blinked at the
sudden light.

'Well done Bobs,' said his sisters, and even Cyril's natural brotherly
feelings could not check his admiration of Robert's foresight.

'I've always carried them about ever since the lone tower day,' said
Robert, with modest pride. 'I knew we should want them some day. I kept
the secret well, didn't I?'

'Oh, yes,' said Cyril, with fine scorn. 'I found them the Sunday after,
when I was feeling in your Norfolks for the knife you borrowed off me.
But I thought you'd only sneaked them for Chinese lanterns, or reading
in bed by.'

'Bobs,' said Anthea, suddenly, 'do you know where we are? This is
the underground passage, and look there--there's the money and the
money-bags, and everything.'

By this time the ten eyes had got used to the light of the candles, and
no one could help seeing that Anthea spoke the truth.

'It seems an odd place to do good and kind acts in, though,' said Jane.
'There's no one to do them to.'

'Don't you be too sure,' said Cyril; 'just round the next turning we
might find a prisoner who has languished here for years and years, and
we could take him out on our carpet and restore him to his sorrowing
friends.'

'Of course we could,' said Robert, standing up and holding the candle
above his head to see further off; 'or we might find the bones of a
poor prisoner and take them to his friends to be buried properly--that's
always a kind action in books, though I never could see what bones
matter.'

'I wish you wouldn't,' said Jane.

'I know exactly where we shall find the bones, too,' Robert went on.
'You see that dark arch just along the passage? Well, just inside
there--'

'If you don't stop going on like that,' said Jane, firmly, 'I shall
scream, and then I'll faint--so now then!'

'And _I_ will, too,' said Anthea.

Robert was not pleased at being checked in his flight of fancy.

'You girls will never be great writers,' he said bitterly. 'They just
love to think of things in dungeons, and chains, and knobbly bare human
bones, and--'

Jane had opened her mouth to scream, but before she could decide how you
began when you wanted to faint, the golden voice of the Phoenix spoke
through the gloom.

'Peace!' it said; 'there are no bones here except the small but useful
sets that you have inside you. And you did not invite me to come out
with you to hear you talk about bones, but to see you do some good and
kind action.'

'We can't do it here,' said Robert, sulkily.

'No,' rejoined the bird. 'The only thing we can do here, it seems, is to
try to frighten our little sisters.'

'He didn't, really, and I'm not so VERY little,' said Jane, rather
ungratefully.

Robert was silent. It was Cyril who suggested that perhaps they had
better take the money and go.

'That wouldn't be a kind act, except to ourselves; and it wouldn't be
good, whatever way you look at it,' said Anthea, 'to take money that's
not ours.'

'We might take it and spend it all on benefits to the poor and aged,'
said Cyril.

'That wouldn't make it right to steal,' said Anthea, stoutly.

'I don't know,' said Cyril. They were all standing up now. 'Stealing is
taking things that belong to some one else, and there's no one else.'

'It can't be stealing if--'

'That's right,' said Robert, with ironical approval; 'stand here all day
arguing while the candles burn out. You'll like it awfully when it's all
dark again--and bony.'

'Let's get out, then,' said Anthea. 'We can argue as we go.' So they
rolled up the carpet and went. But when they had crept along to the
place where the passage led into the topless tower they found the way
blocked by a great stone, which they could not move.

'There!' said Robert. 'I hope you're satisfied!'

'Everything has two ends,' said the Phoenix, softly; 'even a quarrel or
a secret passage.'

So they turned round and went back, and Robert was made to go first with
one of the candles, because he was the one who had begun to talk about
bones. And Cyril carried the carpet.

'I wish you hadn't put bones into our heads,' said Jane, as they went
along.

'I didn't; you always had them. More bones than brains,' said Robert.

The passage was long, and there were arches and steps and turnings and
dark alcoves that the girls did not much like passing. The passage ended
in a flight of steps. Robert went up them.

Suddenly he staggered heavily back on to the following feet of Jane, and
everybody screamed, 'Oh! what is it?'

'I've only bashed my head in,' said Robert, when he had groaned for some
time; 'that's all. Don't mention it; I like it. The stairs just go right
slap into the ceiling, and it's a stone ceiling. You can't do good and
kind actions underneath a paving-stone.'

'Stairs aren't made to lead just to paving-stones as a general rule,'
said the Phoenix. 'Put your shoulder to the wheel.'

'There isn't any wheel,' said the injured Robert, still rubbing his
head.

But Cyril had pushed past him to the top stair, and was already shoving
his hardest against the stone above. Of course, it did not give in the
least.

'If it's a trap-door--' said Cyril. And he stopped shoving and began to
feel about with his hands.

'Yes, there is a bolt. I can't move it.'

By a happy chance Cyril had in his pocket the oil-can of his father's
bicycle; he put the carpet down at the foot of the stairs, and he lay
on his back, with his head on the top step and his feet straggling down
among his young relations, and he oiled the bolt till the drops of rust
and oil fell down on his face. One even went into his mouth--open, as he
panted with the exertion of keeping up this unnatural position. Then
he tried again, but still the bolt would not move. So now he tied his
handkerchief--the one with the bacon-fat and marmalade on it--to the
bolt, and Robert's handkerchief to that, in a reef knot, which cannot
come undone however much you pull, and, indeed, gets tighter and tighter
the more you pull it. This must not be confused with a granny knot,
which comes undone if you look at it. And then he and Robert pulled,
and the girls put their arms round their brothers and pulled too, and
suddenly the bolt gave way with a rusty scrunch, and they all rolled
together to the bottom of the stairs--all but the Phoenix, which had
taken to its wings when the pulling began.

Nobody was hurt much, because the rolled-up carpet broke their fall; and
now, indeed, the shoulders of the boys were used to some purpose, for
the stone allowed them to heave it up. They felt it give; dust fell
freely on them.

'Now, then,' cried Robert, forgetting his head and his temper, 'push all
together. One, two, three!'

The stone was heaved up. It swung up on a creaking, unwilling hinge, and
showed a growing oblong of dazzling daylight; and it fell back with a
bang against something that kept it upright. Every one climbed out,
but there was not room for every one to stand comfortably in the
little paved house where they found themselves, so when the Phoenix had
fluttered up from the darkness they let the stone down, and it closed
like a trap-door, as indeed it was.

You can have no idea how dusty and dirty the children were. Fortunately
there was no one to see them but each other. The place they were in
was a little shrine, built on the side of a road that went winding up
through yellow-green fields to the topless tower. Below them were fields
and orchards, all bare boughs and brown furrows, and little houses and
gardens. The shrine was a kind of tiny chapel with no front wall--just a
place for people to stop and rest in and wish to be good. So the Phoenix
told them. There was an image that had once been brightly coloured, but
the rain and snow had beaten in through the open front of the shrine,
and the poor image was dull and weather-stained. Under it was written:
'St Jean de Luz. Priez pour nous.' It was a sad little place, very
neglected and lonely, and yet it was nice, Anthea thought, that poor
travellers should come to this little rest-house in the hurry and worry
of their journeyings and be quiet for a few minutes, and think about
being good. The thought of St Jean de Luz--who had, no doubt, in his
time, been very good and kind--made Anthea want more than ever to do
something kind and good.

'Tell us,' she said to the Phoenix, 'what is the good and kind action
the carpet brought us here to do?'

'I think it would be kind to find the owners of the treasure and tell
them about it,' said Cyril.

'And give it them ALL?' said Jane.

'Yes. But whose is it?'

'I should go to the first house and ask the name of the owner of the
castle,' said the golden bird, and really the idea seemed a good one.

They dusted each other as well as they could and went down the road. A
little way on they found a tiny spring, bubbling out of the hillside and
falling into a rough stone basin surrounded by draggled hart's-tongue
ferns, now hardly green at all. Here the children washed their hands
and faces and dried them on their pocket-handkerchiefs, which always,
on these occasions, seem unnaturally small. Cyril's and Robert's
handkerchiefs, indeed, rather undid the effects of the wash. But in
spite of this the party certainly looked cleaner than before.

The first house they came to was a little white house with green
shutters and a slate roof. It stood in a prim little garden, and down
each side of the neat path were large stone vases for flowers to grow
in; but all the flowers were dead now.

Along one side of the house was a sort of wide veranda, built of poles
and trellis-work, and a vine crawled all over it. It was wider than our
English verandas, and Anthea thought it must look lovely when the
green leaves and the grapes were there; but now there were only dry,
reddish-brown stalks and stems, with a few withered leaves caught in
them.

The children walked up to the front door. It was green and narrow. A
chain with a handle hung beside it, and joined itself quite openly to a
rusty bell that hung under the porch. Cyril had pulled the bell and
its noisy clang was dying away before the terrible thought came to all.
Cyril spoke it.

'My hat!' he breathed. 'We don't know any French!'

At this moment the door opened. A very tall, lean lady, with pale
ringlets like whitey-brown paper or oak shavings, stood before them. She
had an ugly grey dress and a black silk apron. Her eyes were small
and grey and not pretty, and the rims were red, as though she had been
crying.

She addressed the party in something that sounded like a foreign
language, and ended with something which they were sure was a question.
Of course, no one could answer it.

'What does she say?' Robert asked, looking down into the hollow of his
jacket, where the Phoenix was nestling. But before the Phoenix could
answer, the whitey-brown lady's face was lighted up by a most charming
smile.

'You--you ar-r-re fr-r-rom the England!' she cried. 'I love so much
the England. Mais entrez--entrez donc tous! Enter, then--enter all. One
essuyes his feet on the carpet.' She pointed to the mat.

'We only wanted to ask--'

'I shall say you all that what you wish,' said the lady. 'Enter only!'

So they all went in, wiping their feet on a very clean mat, and putting
the carpet in a safe corner of the veranda.

'The most beautiful days of my life,' said the lady, as she shut the
door, 'did pass themselves in England. And since long time I have not
