      But in _useful learning_.

 4. As your years attain
      Life's meridian brightness,
    Hourly seek and gain
      _Genuine politeness:_
    This lives not in forms,
      As too many teach us,--
    Not in open arms,
      Not in silken speeches,

 5. Not in haughty eye,
      Not in artful dealing,
    Not within the sigh
      Of a mimicked feeling:
    But its lights preside
      Rich in nature's splendor,
    Over honest pride,
      Gentleness and candor.

 6. Slight ye not the soul
      For the frame's demerit;
    Oft a shattered bowl
      Holds a mighty spirit:
    Never search a breast
      By thy ruby's glances;
    Pomp's a puppet guest,
      Danced by circumstances.

 7. What is good and great,
      Sense can soon determine;
    Prize it though ye meet,
      Or in rags or ermine.
    Fortune's truly blind;
      Fools may be her captors;
    But the _wealth of mind_
      Stands above their scepters.

 8. Value not the lips
      Swiftest kept in motion,
    Fleetly-sailing ships
      Draw no depth of ocean:
    Snatch the chary gleam,
      From the cautious knowing
    For the deepest stream
      Scarcely lisps 'tis flowing.

 9. Cull from bad and good
      Every seeming flower,
    Store it up as food
      For some hungry hour:
    Press its every leaf,
      And remember, Johnny,
    Even weeds the chief
      May have drops of honey.

10. Pomp and power alone
      Never make a blessing;
    Seek not e'en a throne
      By one wretch distressing.
    Better toil a slave
      For the blood-earned penny,
    Than be rich, and have
      A curse on every guinea.

11. Think, my gentle boys,
      Every man a brother!
    _That's where honor lies,_
      Nay, but _greatness_ rather:
    One's the mystic whole,
      Lordly flesh won't know it;
    But the kingly soul,
      Sees but vice below it.

12. Robert, thoughts like these,
      Store you more than money;
    Read them not to please,
      But to practice, Johnny.
    Artless though their dress,
      As an infant's dimple,
    _Truth is none the less_
      _For being truly simple._

QUESTIONS.--1. What did the writer tell Robert and John to do with the
book, given them? 2. What use did he tell them to make of Youth?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXVII.

   AV A RI'' CIOUS, greedy after gain.
   IN' TI MATE, close in friendship.
   EA' GER NESS, ardent desire.
   FRU GAL' I TY, wise economy.
   AC QUI SI'' TIONS, gains.
   AF' FLU ENCE, great wealth.
   SUC' CES SION, regular order.
   MOIL' ING, drudging; laboring.
   DIS CON TIN' U ED, ceased.
   AS SI DU' I TY, untiring diligence.
   DIS GUST' ED, greatly dissatisfied.
   IN DULG' ED, gratified.
   MON' STROUS, very large.
   SUC CEED' ING, following.
   MAT' TOCK, pick-ax.
   UN DER MINE', dig under.
   O' MEN, sign; token.
   IM AG' IN ED, conceived.


WHANG, THE MILLER.

GOLDSMITH.

1. Whang, the miller, was naturally avaricious; nobody loved money
better than he, or more respected those that had it. When people would
talk of a rich man in company, Whang would say, "_I_ know him very well,
_he_ and _I_ have been very long acquainted; _he_ and _I_ are intimate."

2. But, if a poor man was mentioned, he had not the least knowledge of
the man; he might be very well, for aught _he_ knew; but he was not fond
of making many acquaintances, and loved to choose his company.

3. Whang, however, with all his eagerness for riches, was poor. He had
nothing but the profits of his mill to support him; but, though these
were small, they were certain: while it stood and went, he was sure of
eating; and his frugality was such, that he, every day, laid some money
by; which he would, at intervals, count and contemplate with much
satisfaction.

4. Yet still his acquisitions were not equal to his desires; he only
found himself above want; whereas he desired to be possessed of
affluence. One day, as he was indulging these wishes, he was informed
that a neighbor of his had found a pan of money under ground, having
dreamed of it three nights in succession.

5. These tidings were daggers to the heart of poor Whang. "Here am I,"
said he, "toiling and moiling from morning till night for a few paltry
farthings, while neighbor Thanks only goes quietly to bed, and dreams
himself into thousands before morning. Oh, that I could dream like him!
With what pleasure would I dig round the pan! How slyly would I carry it
home! Not even my wife should see me! And then, oh the pleasure of
thrusting one's hands into a heap of gold up to the elbows!"

6. Such reflections only served to make the miller unhappy. He
discontinued his former assiduity; he was quite disgusted with small
gains; and his customers began to forsake him. Every day he repeated the
wish, and every night laid himself down in order to dream. Fortune, that
was for a long time unkind, at last, however, seemed to smile upon his
distress, and indulged him with the wished-for vision.

7. He dreamed that under a certain part of the foundation of his mill,
there was concealed a monstrous pan of gold and diamonds, buried deep in
the ground, and covered with a large flat stone. He concealed his good
luck from every person, as is usual in money-dreams, in order to have
the vision repeated the two succeeding nights, by which he should be
certain of its truth. His wishes in this, also, were answered; he still
dreamed of the same pan of money, in the very same place.

8. Now, therefore, it was past a doubt; so, getting up early the third
morning, he repaired, alone, with a mattock in his hand, to the mill,
and began to undermine that part of the wall to which the vision
directed. The first omen of success that he met with, was a broken ring;
digging still deeper, he turned up a house-tile, quite new and entire.

9. At last, after much digging, he came to a broad flat stone; but then
it was so large, that it was beyond his strength to remove it.
"_There_," cried he in raptures to himself, "_there it is!_ under this
stone, there is room for a very large pan of diamonds indeed. I must
e'en go home to my wife, and tell her the whole affair, and get her to
assist me in turning it up." Away, therefore, he goes, and acquaints his
wife with every circumstance of their good fortune.

10. Her raptures, on this occasion, may easily be imagined; she flew
round his neck, and embraced him in an agony of joy. But these
transports, however, did not allay their eagerness to know the exact
sum; returning, together, to the place where Whang had been digging,
there they found--not, indeed, the expected treasure--but the mill,
their only support, undermined and fallen!

QUESTIONS.--1. Upon what was Whang, the miller, dependent for support?
2. Why was he not satisfied? 3. What did he say to himself, after the
information he had received from a neighbor? 4. What effect had such
reflections upon him? 5. What did he dream three nights successively? 6.
What did he do? 7. What was the result?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXVIII.

   PO LITE' NESS, good manners.
   FI DEL' I TY, faithfulness.
   IN CU BA' TION, act of hatching eggs.
   REC RE A' TION, pastime; amusement.
   DE MURE' LY, gravely; with affected modesty.
   AP PRE CI A' TION, estimate.
   LITHE, nimble; flexible.
   EX' IT, departure; going out.
   ARCH' I TECTS, (_ch_, like _k_,) builders.
   SA LI' VA, spittle.
   SE CRETE', to deposit; produce.
   CON'' GRE GATE, collect together.
   FLEDG' ED, furnished with feathers.
   DO MAIN', realm; kingdom.
   AC COM MO DA' TIONS, conveniences.
   MI' GRATE, remove; travel.
   SPHERE, (_ph_ like _f_,) circuit of action.


CHIMNEY-SWALLOWS.

HENRY WARD BEECHER.

1. Every one knows, who lives in the country, what a chimney-swallow is.
They are among the birds that seem to love the neighborhood of man. Many
birds there are, that nestle confidingly in the protection of their
superiors, and are seldom found nesting or breeding far from human
habitations.

2. The wren builds close to your door. Sparrows and robins, if well
treated, will make their nests right under your window, in some favorite
tree, and will teach you, if you choose to go into the business, how to
build birds' nests.

3. A great deal of politeness and fidelity may be learned. The female
bird is waited upon, fed, cheered with singing, during her incubation,
in a manner that might give lessons to the household. Nay, when she
needs exercise and recreation, her husband very demurely takes her
place, and keeps the eggs warm in the most gentlemanly way.

4. Barn-swallows have a very sensible appreciation of the pleasures of
an ample barn. A barn might not be found quite the thing to live in,
(although we have seen many a place where we would take the barn sooner
than the house,) but it is one of the most charming places in a
summer-day to lounge, read, or nap in.

5. And, as you lie on your back upon the sweet-scented hay-mow, or upon
clean straw thrown down on the great floor, reading books of natural
history, it is very pleasant to see the flitting swallows glance in and
out, or course about under the roof, with motion so lithe and rapid as
to seem more like the glancing of shadows than the winging of birds.
Their mud-nests are clean, if they _are_ made of dirt; and you would
never dream, from their feathers, what sort of a house they lived in.

6. But, it was of _chimney-swallows_ that we began to write; and they
are just now roaring in the little, stubbed chimney behind us, to remind
us of our duty. Every evening we hear them; for a nest of young ones
brings the parents in with food, early and late, and every entrance or
exit is like a distant roll of thunder, or like those old-fashioned
rumblings of high winds in the chimney, which made us children think
that all out-of-doors was coming down the chimney in stormy nights.

7. These little architects build their simple nests upon the sides of
the chimney with sticks, which they are said to break off from dead
branches of trees, though they might more easily pick them up already
prepared. But they, doubtless, have their own reasons for cutting their
own timber. Then these are glued to the wall by a saliva which they
secrete, so that they carry their mortar in their mouths, and use their
bills for trowels.

8. When the young are ready to leave, they climb up the chimney to the
top, by means of their sharp claws, aided by their tail-feathers, which
are short, stiff, and at the end armed with sharp spines. Two broods are
reared in a season. From the few which congregate in any one
neighborhood, one would not suspect the great numbers which assemble at
the end of the season. Audubon estimated that _nine thousand_ entered a
large sycamore-tree, every night, to roost, near Louisville, Kentucky.

9. Sometimes the little nest has been slighted in building, or the
weight proves too great, and down it comes into the fire-place, to the
great amusement of the children, who are all a-fever to hold in their
hands these clean, bright-eyed little fellows. Who would suspect that
they had ever been bred in such a flue?

10. And it was just this thought that set us to writing. Because a bird
lives in a chimney, he need not be _smutty_. There is many a fine
feather that lives in a chimney-corner. Nor are birds the _only_
instances. Many men are born in a garret, or in a cellar, who fly out of
it, as soon as fledged, as fine as any body. A lowly home has reared
many high natures.

11. On these bare sticks, right against the bricks, in this smoky flue,
the eggs are laid, the brooding goes on, the young are hatched, fed,
grown. But then comes the day when they spread the wing, and the whole
heaven is theirs! From morning to night, they can not touch the bounds
of their liberty!

12. And, in like manner, it is with the human soul that has learned to
know its liberty. Born in a body, pent up, and cramped, it seems
imprisoned in a mere smoky flue for passions. But, when once faith has
taught the soul that it has wings, then it begins to fly; and flying,
finds that all God's domain is its liberty.

13. And, as the swallow that comes back to roost in its hard hole at
night, is quite content, so that the morning gives it again all the
bright heavens for its soaring-ground, so may men, close quartered and
cramped in bodily accommodations, be quite patient of their narrow
bounds, for their thoughts may fly out every day gloriously.

14. And as, in autumn, these children of the chimney gather in flocks,
and fly away to heavens without a winter, so men shall find a day when
they, too, shall migrate; and, rising into a higher sphere, without
storm or winter, shall remember the troubles of this mortal life, as
birds in Florida may be supposed to remember the northern chills, which
drove them forth to a fairer clime.

QUESTIONS.--1. What birds seem to love the neighborhood of man? 2. In
what respects may men be like birds?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXIX.

The first part of each verse, or that portion read by the _First Voice_,
should be expressed in a slow and despondent tone of voice: the second
part, or that read by the _Second Voice_, should be expressed in a more
sprightly and cheerful manner.


THE DOUBTING HEART.

ADELAIDE A. PROCTER.


FIRST VOICE.

      1. Where are the swallows fled?
           Frozen and dead,
Perchance, upon some bleak and stormy shore.

SECOND VOICE.

           O doubting heart!
         Far over purple seas,
         They wait, in sunny ease,
         The balmy southern breeze,
To bring them to their northern homes once more.


FIRST VOICE.

      2. Why must the flowers die?
           Poisoned they lie
In the cold tomb, heedless of tears or rain.

SECOND VOICE.

           O doubting heart!
         They only sleep below
         The soft, white ermine snow,
         While winter winds shall blow,
To breathe and smile upon you soon again.


FIRST VOICE.

      3. The sun has hid its rays
           These many days;
Will dreary hours never leave the earth?

SECOND VOICE.

           O doubting heart!
         The stormy clouds on high
         Vail the same sunny sky,
         That soon, (for Spring is nigh,)
Shall wake the Summer into golden mirth.


FIRST VOICE.

      4. Fair Hope is dead, and light
           Is quenched in night.
What sound can break the silence of despair?

SECOND VOICE.

           O doubting heart!
         The sky is overcast,
         Yet stars shall rise at last,
         Brighter for darkness past,
And angels' silver voices stir the air.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXX.

   DECK'ED, dressed; arrayed.
   TRAIL'ING, hanging down; following one after another.
   UN FAIL'ING, constant; continually.
   UN PLI'ANT, stiff; unbending.
   DE FI'ANT, daring; bidding defiance.
   VES'PER, evening.
   CRISP'ER, more brittle.
   TREAS'URES, wealth; riches.
   MER'IT, desert; goodness.
   IN HER'IT, occupy; possess.
   MOR'SEL, bit; small piece.
   WAIL'ING, loudly lamenting.
   RAIL'ING, clamoring.


THE COMING OF WINTER.

T.B. READ.

1. Autumn's sighing,
   Moaning, dying,
   Clouds are flying
     On like steeds;
   While their shadows
   O'er the meadows.
   Walk like widows
     Decked in weeds.

2. Red leaves trailing,
   Fall unfailing,
   Dropping, sailing,
     From the wood,
   That, unpliant,
   Stands defiant,
   Like a giant
     Dropping blood.

3. Winds are swelling
   Round our dwelling,
   All day telling
     Us their woe;
   And, at vesper,
   Frosts grow crisper,
   As they whisper
     Of the snow.

4. From th' unseen land,
   Frozen inland,
   Down from Greenland,
     Winter glides,
   Shedding lightness
   Like the brightness
   When moon-whiteness
     Fills the tides.

5. Now bright Pleasure's
   Sparkling measures
   With rare treasures
     Overflow!
   With this gladness
   Comes what sadness!
   Oh, what madness,
     Oh, what woe!

6. Even merit
   May inherit
   Some bare garret,
     Or the ground;
   Or, a worse ill,
   Beg a morsel
   At some door-sill,
     Like a hound.

7. Storms are trailing,
   Winds are wailing,
   Howling, railing,
     At each door.
  'Midst this trailing
  Howling, railing,
  List the wailing
    Of the poor!

QUESTIONS.--1. What is the first sign of the coming of winter? 2. What,
the second? 3. What, the third? 4. What are some of the pleasures of
winter? 5. What is said of the poor in winter? 6. What is the use of the
apostrophes in the words _autumn's, o'er, pleasure's, 'midst,_ &c.?

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXXI.

   LIVE' LONG, whole; entire.
   EAVES, edges of a roof.
   E' VEN TIDE, evening.
   STRIV' EN, struggled; contended.
   RE LIEV' ED, mitigated; alleviated.
   WRETCH' ED NESS, distress; destitution.
   OF FENSE', fault; crime.
   PEN' I TENCE, repentance; contrition.
   EL' O QUENT LY, forcibly; persuasively.


CHILD TIRED OF PLAY.

N.P. WILLIS.

    1. Tired of play`! tired of play`!
       What hast thou done this livelong day`?
       The birds are silent', and so is the bee`;
       The sun is creeping up steeple and tree`;
       The doves have flown to the sheltering eaves',
       And the nests are dark with the drooping leaves';
       Twilight gathers', and day is done`,--
       How hast them spent it`,--restless one'?

    2. Playing`? But what hast thou done beside,
       To tell thy mother at eventide`?
       What promise of morn is left unbroken`?
       What kind word to thy playmates spoken`?
       Whom hast thou pitied, and whom forgiven`?
       How with thy faults has duty striven`?
       What hast thou learned by field and hill,
       By greenwood path, and by singing rill`?

    3. There will come an eve to a longer day',
       That will find thee tired`,--but not of play'!
       And thou wilt lean, as thou leanest now,
       With drooping limbs, and aching brow,
       And wish the shadows would faster creep,
       And long to go to thy quiet sleep.
       _Well_ were it then, if thine aching brow
       Were as free from sin and shame as now!
       _Well_ for thee, if thy lip could tell
       A tale like this, of _a day spent well_.

    4. If thine open hand hath relieved distress',--
       If thy pity hath sprung to wretchedness',--
       If thou hast forgiven the sore offense',
       And humbled thy heart with penitence',--
       If Nature's voices have spoken to thee
       With her holy meanings eloquently',--
       If every creature hath won thy love',
       From the creeping worm to the brooding dove',--
       If never a sad, low-spoken word
       Hath pled with thy human heart unheard',--
       _Then_`, when the night steals on, as now,
       It will bring relief to thine aching brow,
       And, with joy and peace at the thought of rest,
       Thou wilt sink to sleep on thy mother's breast.

QUESTIONS.--1. What had the child been doing? 2. What questions did the
mother ask? 3. What did she tell the child would come? 4. What is meant
by _eve to a longer day_, third verse? 5. What, by _quiet sleep_, same
verse? 6. What ought we to do in life, in order to have a joyful and
peaceful death? 7. What rule for the rising inflection on _restless
one_, first verse? See page 32, Note I. 8. What rule for the falling
inflection on _playing_, second verse? See page 29, Rule II. 9. What
rule for the rising inflections in the fourth verse? Rule V., page 31.

       *       *       *       *       *

LESSON XXXII.

   NORTH-EAST' ERS, north-east winds.
   EX HAUST' ED, (_x_ like _gz_,) tired out.
   VIG' I LANT, watchful.
   DE TECT' ED, discovered.
   LEE' WARD, pertaining to the part toward which the wind blows.
