
"Poor martyr! Shame to England to cut off his head!" Kitty bent over her
book, but soon her erratic fancy had started off in another direction.
She was sent to the bottom of the class when the history lesson came on,
and was looked at with growing disfavor by Miss Worrick, a particularly
painstaking and earnest young teacher.

"Really, Miss Malone, if this sort of thing goes on I must report you,"
she said. "It is pure inattention. If you wish to take any position in
the school you must make up your mind that while in school you must
work."

"And while out of school I must play," retorted Kitty. "Ah, then, it's
little of the play I get. If I had my share of the play I could do my
share of work."

"Come, you must not answer me," said Miss Worrick. "Now, sit down and
read up that chapter in your history. You will not be allowed to go out
during recess this morning."

"Not go out during recess?" cried Kitty in horror; "but it's most
important. Ah, now, do let me out; just excuse me to-day, won't you?
I'll be as good as gold to-morrow, and better; but excuse me to-day;
please, please. Say you will; for I really must go. I was to meet Gwin
Harley, the darling; and it's put out she would be awfully if I wasn't
with her. You'll let me out to-day, won't you? Please say yes."

"I do not understand you, Miss Malone. When I say a thing I mean it.
You are not to go out during recess."

Kitty's bright face fell; the cloud which had more or less hovered
round her during the entire morning deepened. She sank into her seat
with a heavy sigh.

"Never mind, Kitty; we all of us have to stay in sometimes," whispered
little Mary Davies.

"Take a chocolate out of my pocket, darlin', and don't talk to me any
more," was Kitty's answer. "I am sad past bearing. Not to see Gwin when
I had arranged it all; but I will, I must! There, take a second
chocolate if you want it; they are full of cream. But just leave me to
my own thoughts for a bit. I am so worried I don't know whether I am on
my head or my heels."

"Silence, girls--no whispering!" called the mathematical teacher, who
now came on the scene.

Poor Kitty's morning began badly, and it certainly was destined to go on
badly. None of her lessons were prepared with the slightest care; she
went down lower and lower in class, and each teacher gave her an
imposition or some other punishment. When recess came she alone in the
whole class was required to remain in the room.

The rest of the girls looked at her with pity.

"She's such an old dear, although quite the idlest and most ignorant
person I ever came across," said Mary Davies to her companions.

"Yes," whispered another little girl with fat rosy cheeks and round
eyes; "but did you ever taste such chocolate creams? Why, they must
cost a halfpenny apiece. I do love to sit next to her; she says I may
dive my hand into her pocket as often as I like."

"Oh, she's an old love!" echoed all the girls: "but what a pity it is
that she won't learn."

"She does not want to learn," said Mary Davies. "Learning would spoil
her; she is a pet."

Meanwhile in the playground Gwin Harley waited in vain for Kitty to join
her.

"Does any one know where Kitty Malone is?" she said, addressing one of
the girls in Kitty's class.

"She is kept in for an imposition; she did not know her history, and
Miss Worrick said she was to stay in," answered Mary Davies.

"Oh, well, I suppose I can see her another time," said Gwin. At that
moment she met Elma's anxious eyes.

Elma was just about to dart to the side of her friend, when, to the
amazement of all the girls, Kitty walked calmly across the playground.

"Oh Gwin, I must speak to you; it is about Alice. You know, you and
Alice are great friends. Things get worse and worse, and they are almost
past bearing. Last night I heard her sobbing in bed. She sobbed and
sobbed, and at last I could stand no more of it, and sprang out of bed,
and bent over her and said: 'Alice, is it about me you are crying?' and
she said: 'Oh, yes, Kitty, it is;' and I said, 'And why 'Oh, yes,
Kitty?' What has poor Kitty done to you?"

"'I am not happy,' answered Alice. 'Since you came everything has
changed; you have made my home miserable to me. I don't like your ways.'

"'Have you made up your mind never to be friends with me?' I asked.

"'Yes,' said Alice. 'I wish you would go away.' She sat up in bed then
with her tear-stained face, and looked at me ever so earnestly. 'Tell
mother that you would rather go to some other house--that you won't stay
here. I never could stand vulgar girls, and you are one.'

"Oh Gwin, I felt so mad. You don't think me a vulgar girl, do you?"

"Tell me the whole," said Gwin in a low voice.

"Oh, there is not much more. Alice was in a regular temper. She buried
her face in the clothes, and though I tried pinching her, and pulling
her, and petting her even, not another word would she utter. Now, you
must see for yourself, Gwin, that if this sort of thing goes on I shall
have to return home, and then the old dad will be fretted, and he will
think that I don't want to learn manners nor to get learning into me. Oh
dear, I don't want to fret him, although I hate England. I have just
been wondering if you would speak to Alice."

"Yes, certainly," answered Gwin. "I--" Her words were interrupted.

"Miss Malone, do I see you in the playground?" said a stern voice. Miss
Worrick had appeared on the scene.

"Why, then, yes, Miss Worrick, you do. It's a fine day, isn't it; and
the air is most refreshing," said Kitty in her most impertinent tones.

"Do you know that you have distinctly disobeyed me? I forbade you to
leave the schoolroom during recess. How dared you do so?"

"There wasn't much daring about it. I walked to the door, opened it, and
came out. I had made a previous engagement, and it was not at all
convenient to break it. I told you so at the time, did I not?"

For answer Miss Worrick took Kitty by the arm and led her across the
playground.

"I must take you to Miss Sherrard," she said. "I cannot manage a
disobedient girl like you."

She opened a side door, and, still holding Kitty by the arm, led her
down a long passage and into a small room, where she desired her to wait
while she fetched the head-mistress.

Miss Sherrard was a little woman, but she had a native dignity which is
beyond and above all mere personal appearance. She had a keen and
commanding eye, a somewhat pale face, an upright little figure. She was
not only short in stature, but slight; nevertheless, there was not a
mistress in the great school who did not hold her in awe as well as
admiration, and not a girl, with the exception, perhaps, of Kitty
Malone, who did not do her reverence.

When the door was shut behind Kitty, she drummed impatiently on the bare
mahogany table near which she had been placed, then walked to the window
and looked out. From her position she could catch a glimpse of Gwin
Harley pacing up and down the playground with Elma Lewis. She saw Alice
come up and talk to Gwin; she noticed that Gwin and Elma paused, then
that Alice slipped to the other side of Gwin, and the three walked
slowly up and down. As they walked they talked. Alice nodded her head
once or twice; Elma made emphatic grimaces; Gwin alone looked quiet,
calm, and stately.

"They are talking about me," thought the Irish girl, and an angry
feeling rose in her heart. "Is it for this I have left the dear old dad,
and the beautiful home, and the animals, and Aunt Bridget, and Aunt
Honora? Oh, is it for this I have left dear Old Ireland, may her heart
be blessed! to come here to be slighted, to be made little of, to be
joked at! Am I Kitty Malone, or am I somebody else? Oh! my heart will
break, my heart will break!"

"Miss Malone, I am sorry to hear this of you," said a very calm, very
distinct, and withal very kind voice, just at Kitty's back. Kitty turned
abruptly, and said aloud:

"Oh, and did you overhear me?" She then involuntarily dropped a courtesy
to the head-mistress.

Miss Sherrard shut the door behind her.

"I am sorry," she began, "to learn from Miss Worrick that you are
showing insubordination and disobedience."

"Why, then, now, and won't you let me tell my own story in my own way?"
said Kitty.

In spite of herself, Miss Sherrard gave an involuntary smile. It soon
vanished, but Kitty had caught the glint in the eye and the tremble
round the lips. "Why, then I see at a glance that you have the kind
heart," she said; "you thought to keep it in, but I saw it breaking out
just then. You'll let me tell my own story, won't you?"

"That seems fair enough," said Miss Sherrard. She seated herself as she
spoke on one of the bare, comfortless chairs, and looked full up at
Kitty.

Kitty was dressed according to Rule IV. of the Tug-of-war Society. She
wore a decidedly fashionable dress, the sleeves well puffed out at the
shoulders, fitting nicely at the elbows, and with ruffles of lace, real
lace, round the wrists. Round Kitty's throat also there were ruffles of
lace; the neck of her dress was cut a little low, showing the soft, full
contour of her exquisitely-curved throat. Her waist was clasped with a
belt of solid silver, and in front she wore a great bunch of
cabbage-roses. The cabbage-rose has a scent which, when once it assails
the nostrils, can never afterward be forgotten. Miss Sherrard, in spite
of herself, gave a little sniff.

Quick as lightning Kitty saw it, and detached the bunch of roses from
her belt.

"Now, will you have them?" she said. "Ah, do now, just to please me,
Kitty Malone; they came all the way from Old Ireland this morning. Stay,
I'll pin them into the front of your dress. Hold easy a moment dear
woman, and you'll have as neat a little bunch as ever you clapped your
two eyes on."

Miss Sherrard could not help once again letting that ghost of a smile
play round her lips, and then vanish.

"But really," she said--"oh, thank you for the roses; yes, they are very
sweet; yes, delicious! She bent her head and sniffed quite audibly.

"Ah, then, aren't they refreshing, and aren't they melting the anger
down in your heart? Say they are now--say they are. You see you never
had an out-and-out wild Irish girl to manage before. Well, and what is
it you want with me? I'll be as civil as you please, and as willing to
listen to the words of wisdom, if only you'll let me first tell my own
story."

"It is only fair that you should be allowed to tell your own tale,"
said Miss Sherrard; "but please understand that I am very angry. Miss
Worrick's story has amazed me. Do you know. Kitty Malone, of what you
are accused?"

"Well, I do, and I don't; but I should like to hear the crime spoken of
by your pretty lips. What is it? Something black of course; black things
are always laid to the door of Kitty Malone."

"The crime, Miss Malone, is the very grave sin of disobedience. You must
know that in a great school of this kind, if there were not perfect
obedience there would be no order at all."

"True for you, it looks like it; but then, as far as I can see--and I
have watched all the girls pretty closely of late--I am the only black
sheep. Now, I should think that one black sheep in a great big orderly
place of this kind would make a sort of diversion. You would all be
after her, and joking at her, and thinking which of you could get her
under control. Well, I am the black sheep, and I suppose I am sorry."

"Don't talk any more, Kitty; listen to me."

"Yes; what is it?"

"You have been disobedient; you were very inattentive over your history
lesson, not knowing it at all. Miss Worrick says, as a matter of fact,
you did not even trouble to open your book, and when the time came for
you to go through your lesson you were not able to answer a single
question. For this extreme carelessness she desired you to stay in the
schoolroom during morning recess. She said you pleaded hard that she
would excuse you, not liking to take the punishment which you richly
deserved; but Miss Worrick, very justly insisted on her word being
obeyed. What then, was her astonishment to see you in the playground
walking calmly up and down with Gwin Harley."

"Yes, dear; and what else could you expect?" answered Kitty.

"What else could I expect? I don't understand."

"Well, was it likely now that I would stay in that close, stifling
schoolroom when the sun was shining and there was a bird on a tree
outside singing to me as loud as ever it could? And I had made an
arrangement with Gwin Harley to walk up and down with her during recess,
and the darling girl had put off two others for me, and was waiting for
me. Don't you think it was about natural that I should disobey Miss
Worrick, whom I never cared twopence for, and go out to Gwin Harley,
whom I love? Of course I knew I was disobedient, and I supposed she
would punish me; but I didn't think she would have me up for you to
lecture me."

"You behaved very badly indeed," said Miss Sherrard; "and you are now
talking in an extremely silly way."

Kitty bowed her head; the light went out of her eyes, her face turned
pale.

"What punishment will you invent to torture me with?" she said at last
in a low voice. "I suppose I have done wrong, and I am willing to take
the punishment. What is it?"

"Of course you must be punished," said the head-mistress; "it would
never do to allow disobedience is the school. You see, Kitty--"

"Oh, bless you, bless you, for calling me by my Christian name,"
muttered Kitty Malone.

"Kitty, I am inclined to take you into my confidence."

"Are you, indeed? I declare you're an old dear!"

"You have come to school to learn, have you not?"

"Not a bit of it," answered Kitty; "I came to school to please the old
dad."

"Your father?"

"Yes, the dear old dad, the dearest, the best in the world."

"But what did he send you here for?"

"Well, I suppose to get knowledge and manners. Ah, bad luck to them! and
I suppose also to tame me down a bit. He said he never could manage that
at Castle Malone."

Miss Sherrard once more gave that faint involuntary smile.

"Your father sent you here," she said, "to put you under discipline.
While you are in this school, my dear girl, you must obey me, and also
the other teachers. If you are disobedient the other girls will be
disobedient, and then where should we all be?"

"It would be a lark!" muttered Kitty, with sparkling eyes.

"Don't interrupt, and please listen. I should be very sorry to send you
back to Castle Malone in disgrace. I should be sorry to have to write to
your father in order to tell him that his Kitty, whom he loves--his
bright, pretty, lovable daughter--can never learn manners nor
accomplishments, nor be tamed in the very least. There are from six to
seven hundred girls in this school, who all now know about your very
daring act of disobedience. Were I not to punish you they would be
astonished, and some of them might even go to the length of copying your
behavior. You see this for yourself, don't you?"

"Oh, I see it plain enough," answered Kitty; "plain as a pikestaff.
What's the punishment to be?"

Miss Sherrard hesitated. Once more she looked at Kitty; Kitty's eyes
were as bright as stars.

"You need not be afraid," said the pupil in an encouraging voice. "I am
nothing of a coward; I'll take anything in reason. Is it a flogging you
are thinking of ordering for me?"

"Oh, no; we never flog in this school," said Miss Sherrard in a shocked
voice.

"Why, then, if it is something in the shape of learning a lesson it will
go cruel with me. I don't care for learning, and----"

"I am afraid, Kitty, that I must give you the kind of punishment which
all the school may know about. All the school now knows of your
disobedience, and it must also be well aware of your punishment."

"Good gracious! this sounds exciting," answered Kitty. "I am to have a
punishment that all the school will know about."

"Yes, it is this. To-morrow morning, just before recess, you are to go
up to Miss Worrick, and tell her before the entire school that you are
sorry you disobeyed her; you are then to offer to stay in during the
play hour."
