way, he rang the bell, and inquired for the housekeeper.

Mrs. Estabrook was agitated when she saw her step-son. She did not
like to believe that he had robbed her, but it was hard to believe
otherwise.

"Oh, Willis!" she said almost bursting into tears, "how could you
take my small savings? I would not have believed you capable of it!"

"You don't mean to say, mother," returned Willis, with
well-dissembled and reproachful sorrow, "that you believe this
monstrous slander?"

"I don't want to believe it, Willis, heaven knows. But were not the
bonds found in your room?"

"I admit it," said Ford; "but how did they get there?"

"Did you not put them there?"

"Certainly not, mother. I thought you knew me better than that."

"But who, then--" began his step-mother, looking bewildered.

"Who should it be but that boy?"

"Grant Thornton?"

"Yes."

"Have you any proof of this?" asked the housekeeper, eagerly.

"I will tell you what I have found out. I learn that a boy called,
on the day in question, at my room and asked to see me. Being told
that I was out, he asked leave to go up and wait for me. As the
servant had no suspicion, he was allowed to go up. I don't know how
long he stayed; but no doubt he had the bonds with him and concealed
them where they were found."

"Did you ask for a description of the boy? Was it like Grant?" asked
the housekeeper, quickly.

"Unfortunately, the girl did not take particular notice of him. I
have no doubt that it was either Grant or the telegraph boy, who
seems to have been in the plot."'

Now, this story was an audacious fiction, and should not have
imposed upon a person of ordinary intelligence; but the housekeeper
was anxious to believe her step-son innocent and Grant guilty. She
therefore accepted it without question, and was loud in her
denunciation of that "artful young rascal."

"You ought to tell Mr. Reynolds of this, Willis," she said.

"It would be of no use, mother. He is too strongly prejudiced
against me. What do you think? He has refused me a letter of
recommendation. What does he care if I starve?" concluded Willis,
bitterly.

"But I care, Willis. I will not desert you," said Mrs. Estabrook, in
a tone of sympathy.

This was just the mood in which Ford desired his step-mother to be.
He was desirous of effecting a loan, and after a time succeeded in
having transferred to him two of the one-hundred-dollar bonds. He
tried hard to obtain the five hundred, but Mrs. Estabrook was too
prudent and too much attached to her savings to consent to this.
Ford had to be satisfied with considerably less.

"Ought I to stay with Mr. Reynolds after he has treated you in this
way, Willis?" asked his step-mother, anxiously.

"By all means, mother. You don't want to throw away a good
position."

"But it will be hard to see that boy high in Mr. Reynolds'
confidence, after all his wickedness."

"You must dissemble, mother. Treat him fairly, and watch your
opportunity to harm him and serve me. Don't say much about me, for
it would do no good; but keep your hold on Reynolds."

"If you think it best, Willis," said his stepmother, not without a
feeling of relief, for she was reluctant to relinquish a good home
and liberal salary, "I will remain."

"Do so by all means. We may as well make all we can out of the
enemy, for Mr. Reynolds has treated me very shabbily. And now I must
bid you good-by."

"What are your plans, Willis?"

"I can't tell you, but I think I shall go West."

"And I shall never see you!"

"You will hear from me, and I hope I shall have good news to write."

Willis Ford left the house, and, going to the Grand Central Depot,
bought a ticket for Chicago.

Now came quite a pleasant period after the trouble and excitement.
Grant found his duties at the office increased, and it was pleasant
to see that his employer reposed confidence in him. His relations
with others in the office were pleasant, now that Willis Ford was
away, and every day he seemed to get new insight into the details of
the business. Whether Jim Morrison and Tom Calder were in the city,
he did not know. At all events, they were never seen in the
neighborhood of Wall Street. Grant was not sorry to have them pass
out of his life, for he did not consider that he was likely to draw
any benefit from their presence and companionship.

He was still a member of Mr. Reynolds' house-hold. Herbert appeared
to be as much attached to him as if he were an older brother, and
the broker looked with pleasure upon the new happiness that beamed
from the face of his son.

As to Mrs. Estabrook, Grant had feared that she would continue to
show animosity toward him, but he had nothing to complain of. She
certainly did not show any cordiality in her necessary intercourse
with him; but then, on the other hand, she did not manifest any
desire to injure him. This was all Grant desired. He felt that under
no circumstances could he have made a friend of the housekeeper. He
was content to have her leave him alone.

After the lapse of six months Grant expressed a desire to go home to
pass a day or two. His mother's birthday was close at hand, and he
had bought for her a present which he knew would be acceptable.
Permission was readily accorded, and Grant passed four happy days at
home. His parents were pleased that he was so highly regarded by his
employer, and had come to think that Grant's choice had been a wise
one.

When Grant returned he went at once to the office. He found it a
scene of excitement.

"What has happened?" he asked, eagerly.

"Herbert Reynolds has disappeared, and his father is almost beside
himself with grief!" was the startling reply.



CHAPTER XXV -- ANXIOUS INQUIRIES



After a while Grant learned the particulars about Herbert's
disappearance. He had gone out to play in the street about three
o'clock in the afternoon. Generally he waited for Grant to
return-home, but during his absence he had found other companions.
When his father returned home, he inquired of the housekeeper:
"Where is Herbert?"

"He went out to play," said Mrs. Estabrook, indifferently.

"In the street?"

"I believe so."

"He ought to be in by this time."

"Probably he went to walk with some of his companions. As he had no
watch, he might not know that it is so late."

This seemed very plausible to Mr. Reynolds.

"Yes," he said; "Herbert seems lost without Grant. He will be glad
to see him back."

To this Mrs. Estabrook did not reply. She had learned, to her cost,
that it would not be politic to speak against Grant, and she was not
disposed to praise him. She seldom mentioned him at all.

The dinner bell rang, and still Herbert had not returned. His father
began to feel anxious.

"It is strange that Herbert remains so long away," he said.

"I shouldn't wonder if he had gone to Central Park on some
excursion," returned the housekeeper calmly.

"You think there is nothing wrong?" asked the broker, anxiously.

"How could there be here, sir?" answered Mrs. Estabrook, with
unruffled demeanor.

This answer helped to calm Mr. Reynolds, who ordered dinner delayed
half an hour.

When, however, an hour--two hours--passed, and the little boy still
remained absent, the father's anxiety became insupportable. He
merely tasted a few spoonfuls of soup, and found it impossible to
eat more. The housekeeper, on the contrary, seemed quite
unconcerned, and showed her usual appetite.

"I am seriously anxious, Mrs. Estabrook," said the broker. "I will
take my hat and go out to see if I can gain any information. Should
Herbert return while I am away, give him his supper, and, if he is
tired, let him go to bed, just finding out why he was out so late."

"Very well, sir."

When Mr. Reynolds had left the house a singular expression of
gratified malice swept over the housekeeper's face. "It is just
retribution," she murmured. "He condemned and discharged my stepson
for the sin of another. Now it is his own heart that bleeds."

Only a few steps from his own door the broker met a boy about two
years older than Herbert, with whom the latter sometimes played.

"Harvey," he said, "have you seen Herbert this afternoon?"

"Yes, sir; I saw him about three o'clock."

"Where?" asked the broker, anxiously.

"Just 'round the corner of the block," answered Harvey Morrison.

"Was he alone?"

"No; there was a young man with him--about twenty, I should think."

"A young man! Was it one you had ever saw before?"

"No, sir."

"What was his appearance?"

Harvey described Herbert's companion as well as he could, but the
anxious father did not recognize the description.

"Did you speak to Herbert? Did you ask where he was going?"

"Yes, sir. He told me that you had sent for him to go on an
excursion."

"Did he say that?" asked the father, startled.

"Yes, sir."

"Then there is some mischief afoot. I never sent for him," said the
agitated father.

Mr. Reynolds requested Harvey to accompany him to the nearest police
station, and relate all that he knew to the officer in charge, that
the police might be put on the track. He asked himself in vain what
object any one could have in spiriting away the boy, but no probable
explanation occurred to him.

On his return to the house he communicated to the housekeeper what
he had learned.

"What do you think of it?" he asked.

"It may be only a practical joke," answered the housekeeper calmly.

"Heaven grant it may be nothing more! But I fear it is something far
more serious."

"I dare say it's only a boy's lark, Mr. Reynolds."

"But you forget--it was a young man who was seen in his company."

"I really don't know what to think of it, then. I don't believe the
boy will come to any harm."

Little sleep visited the broker's pillow that night, but the
housekeeper looked fresh and cheerful in the morning.

"Has the woman no feeling?" thought the anxious father, as he
watched the tranquil countenance of the woman who for five years had
been in charge of his house.

When she was left alone in the house Mrs. Estabrook took from her
workbasket a letter, bearing date a month previous, and read slowly
the following paragraph: "I have never forgotten the wrong done me
by Mr. Reynolds. He discharged me summarily from his employment and
declined to give me a recommendation which would secure me a place
elsewhere. I swore at the time that I would get even with him, and I
have never changed my resolution. I shall not tell you what I
propose to do. It is better that you should not know. But some day
you will hear something that will surprise you. When that time
comes, if you suspect anything, say nothing. Let matters take their
course."

The letter was signed by Willis Ford.



CHAPTER XXVI -- A WESTERN CABIN



"Abner!"

The speaker was a tall, gaunt woman, in a loose, faded, calico
dress, and she stood at the door of a cabin in a Western clearing.

"What yer want?" came as a reply from a tall, unhealthy-looking boy
in overalls, who was sitting on a log in the yard.

"I want you to split some wood for the stove."

"I'm tired," drawled the boy.

"I'll tire you!" said the mother, sharply. "You tall, lazy,
good-for-nothing drone! Here I've been up since five o'clock,
slavin' for you and your drunken father. Where's he gone?"

"To the village, I reckon."

"To the tavern, I reckon. It's there that he spends all the money he
gets hold of; he never gives me a cent. This is the only gown I've
got, except an old alpaca. Much he cares!"

"It isn't my fault, is it?" asked the boy, indifferently.

"You're a-follerin' in his steps. You'll be just another Joel
Barton--just as shif'less and lazy. Just split me some wood before I
get hold of yer!"

Abner rose slowly, went to the shed for an ax, and in the most
deliberate manner possible began to obey his mother's commands.

The cabin occupied by Abner and his parents was far from being a
palace. It contained four rooms, but the furniture was of the most
primitive description. Joel Barton, the nominal head of the family,
was the possessor of eighty acres of land, from which he might have
obtained a comfortable living, for the soil was productive; but he
was lazy, shiftless and intemperate, as his wife had described him.
Had he been as active and energetic as she was, he might have been
in very different circumstances. It is no wonder that the poor woman
was fretted and irritated almost beyond endurance, seeing how all
her industry was neutralized by her husband's habits. Abner took
after his father, though he had not yet developed a taste for drink,
and was perfectly contented with their poor way of living, as long
as he was not compelled to work hard. What little was required of
him he would shirk if he possibly could.

This cabin was situated about a mile from the little village which
had gathered round the depot. The name of the township was Scipio,
though it is doubtful if one in fifty of the inhabitants knew after
whom it was named. In fact, the name was given by a schoolmaster,
who had acquired some rudiments of classical learning at a country
academy.

To the depot we must transport the reader, on the arrival of the
morning train from Chicago. But two passengers got out. One of them
was a young man under twenty. The other was a boy, apparently about
ten years of age, whom he held firmly by the hand.

He was a delicate-looking boy, and, though he was dressed in a
coarse, ill-fitting suit, he had an appearance of refinement and
gentle nature, as if he had been brought up in a luxurious home. He
looked sad and anxious, and the glances he fixed on his companion
indicated that he held him in fear.

"Where are you going?" he asked timidly, looking about him
apprehensively.

"You'll know soon enough," was the rough reply.

"When are you going to take me home, Mr. Ford?" asked the boy, in a
pleading tone.

"Don't trouble yourself about that."

"Papa will be so anxious about me--papa and Grant!"

The young man's brow contracted.

"Don't mention the name of that boy! I hate him."

"He was always good to me. I liked so much to be with him."

"He did all he could to injure me. I swore to be even with him, and
I will!"

"But I have never injured you, Mr. Ford."

"How could you--a baby like you?" said Ford, contemptuously.

"Then why did you take me from home, and make me so unhappy?"

"Because it was the only way in which I could strike a blow at your
father and Grant Thornton. When your father dismissed me, without a
recommendation, not caring whether I starved or not, he made me his
enemy."

"But he wouldn't if you hadn't--"

"Hadn't what?" demanded Ford, sternly.

"Taken Mrs. Estabrook's bonds."

"Dare to say that again, and I will beat you," said Willis Ford,
brutally.

Herbert trembled, for he had a timid nature, and an exquisite
susceptibility to pain.

"I didn't mean to offend you," he said.

"You'd better not. Wait here a minutes, while I look around for some
one of whom I can make inquiries. Here, sit down on that settee,
and, mind you, don't stir till I come back. Will you obey me?"

"Yes," answered the boy, submissively.


