man.

Five o'clock the next morning found my sister and me out of our beds and
desperately busy. She spent a good deal of time, of course in caring for
Ariadne. The poor girl showed no improvement at all; and we got scant
encouragement from the fact that she looked no worse.

Not a sound escaped her lips; her eyes remained closed; she gave no sign
of life, save her barely perceptible breathing. It made me sick at heart
just to look at her; so near, and yet so fearfully far away.

But when Charlotte could spare any time she gave me considerable help in
what I was trying to do. One great service she was rendering has already
been made clear: she wore the ring constantly, thus relieving me of
the anxiety of caring for it. I was very cautious not to have it in my
possession for more than a few minutes at a time.

My first move was to set down, in orderly fashion, the list of the gem's
attributes. I grouped together the fluctuating nature of its pale blue
colour, its power of reproducing those who had gone into the Blind Spot,
its combination of perfect solidity with extreme lightness; its quality
of coldness to the touch of a male, and warmth to that of a female; and
finally its ability to induct--I think this is the right term--to induct
sounds out of the unknown. This last quality might be called spasmodic
or accidental, whereas the others were permanent and constant.

Now, to this list I presently was able to add that the gem possessed no
radioactive properties that I could detect with the usual means. It was
only when I began dabbling in chemistry that I learned things.

By placing the gem inside a glass bell, and exhausting as much air as
possible from around it, the way was cleared for introducing other forms
of gases. Whereupon I discovered this:

The stone will absorb any given quantity of hydrogen gas.

In this respect it behaves analogously to that curious place on
the door-frame. Only, it absorbs gas, no liquid; and not any gas,
either--none but hydrogen.

Now, obviously this gem cannot truly absorb so much material, in the
sense of retaining it as well. The simple test of weighing it afterwards
proves this; for its weight remains the same in any circumstances.

Moreover, unlike the liquids which I poured into the wood and saw
afterwards in the basement, the gas does not escape back into the air. I
kept it under the Dell long enough to be sure of that. No; that hydrogen
is, manifestly, translated into the Blind Spot.

Learning nothing further about the gem at that time, I proceeded to
investigate the trim of the door. I began by trying to find out the
precise thickness of that liquid-absorbing layer.

To do this I scraped off the "skin" of the air-darkened wood. This layer
was .02 of an inch thick. And--that was the total amount of the active
material!

I put these scrapings through a long list of experiments. They told
me nothing valuable. I learned only one detail worth mentioning; if a
fragment of the scrapings be brought near to the Holcomb gem--say, to
within two inches--the scrapings will burst into flame. It is merely
a bright, pinkish flare, like that made by smokeless rifle-powder. No
ashes remain. After that we took care not to bring the ring near the
remaining material on the board.

All this occurred on the first day after Ariadne was stricken. Jerome
phoned to say that he had engaged the services of a dozen private
detectives, and expected to get wind of the Rhamda any hour. Both Dr.
Hansen and Dr. Higgins called twice, without being able to detect any
change for the better or otherwise in their patient.

That evening Charlotte and I concluded that we could not hold out any
longer. We must give in to the Rhamda. I phoned for a messenger, and
sent an advertisement to the newspaper which Avec had indicated.

The thing was done. We had capitulated.

The next development would be another and triumphant call from the
Rhamda, and this time we would have to give up the gem to him if we were
to save Ariadne.

The game was up.

But instead of taking the matter philosophically, I worried about it all
night. I told myself again and again that I was foolish to think about
something that couldn't be helped. Why not forget it, and go to sleep?

But somehow I couldn't. I lay wide awake till long past midnight,
finding myself growing more and more nervous. At last, such was the
tension of it all, I got up and dressed. It was then about one-thirty,
and I stepped out on the street for a walk.

Half an hour later I returned, my lungs full of fresh air, hoping that I
could now sleep. It was only a hope. Never have I felt wider awake than
I did then.

Once more--about three--I took another stroll outside. I seemed
absolutely tireless.

Each time that I had turned back home I seemed to feel stronger than
ever, more wakeful. Finally I dropped the idea altogether, went to the
house, and left a note for Charlotte, then walked down to the waterfront
and watched some ships taking advantage of the tide. Anything to pass
the time.

And thus it happened, that, about eight o'clock--breakfast time at 288
Chatterton Place--I returned to the house, and sat down at the table
with Charlotte. First, however, I opened the morning paper to read our
little ad.

It was not there. It had not been printed.




XXV

AT THE ELEVENTH HOUR


I dropped the paper in dismay. Charlotte looked up, startled, gave me a
single look, and turned pale,

"What--what's the matter?" she stammered fearfully.

I showed her. Then I ran to the phone. In a few seconds I was talking to
the very man who had taken the note from the messenger the day before.

"Yes, I handed it in along with the rest," he replied to my excited
query. Then--"Wait a minute," said he; and a moment later added: "Say,
Mr. Fenton, I've made a mistake! Here's the darned ad on the counter; it
must have slipped under the blotter."

I went back and told Charlotte. We stared at one another blankly. Why
in the name of all that was baffling had our ad "slipped" under that
blotter? And what were we to do?

This was the second day!

Well, we did what we could. We arranged for the insertion of the same
notice in each of the three afternoon papers. There would still be time
for the Rhamda to act, if he saw it.

The hours dragged by. Never did time pass more slowly; and yet, I
begrudged every one. So much for being absolutely helpless.

About ten o'clock the next morning--that is to say, today; I am writing
this the same evening--the front door bell rang. Charlotte answered and
in a moment came back with a card. It read:

SIR HENRY HODGES

I nearly upset the table in my excitement. I ran into the hall. Who
wouldn't? Sir Henry Hodges! The English scientist about whom the whole
world was talking! The most gifted investigator of the day; the most
widely informed; of all men on the face of the globe, the best equipped,
mentally, to explore the unknown! Without the slightest formality I
grabbed his hand and shook it until he smiled at my enthusiasm.

"My dear Sir Henry," I told him, "I'm immensely glad to see you! The
truth is, I've been hoping you'd be interested in our case; but I didn't
have the nerve to bother you with it!"

"And I," he admitted in his quiet way, "have been longing to take a hand
in it, ever since I first heard of Professor Holcomb's disappearance.
Didn't like to offer myself; understood that the matter had been hushed
up and--"

"For the very simple reason," I explained, "that there was nothing to be
gained by publicity. If we had given the public the facts, we would have
been swamped with volunteers to help us. I didn't know whom to confide
in, Sir Henry; couldn't make up my mind. I only knew that one such man
as yourself was just what I needed."

He overlooked the compliment, and pulled out the newspaper from his
pocket. "Bought this a few minutes ago. Saw your ad, and jumped to the
conclusion that matters had reached an acute stage. Let me have the
whole story, my boy, as briefly as you can."

He already knew the published details. Also, he seemed to be
acquainted--in some manner which puzzled me--with much that had not been
printed. I sketched the affair as quickly as I could, making it clear
that we were face to face with a crisis. When I wound up by saying that
it was Dr. Higgins who gave Ariadne three days, ending about midnight,
in which she might recover if we could secure Rhamda Avec, he said
kindly:

"I'm afraid you made a mistake, my boy, in not seeking some help. The
game has reached a point where you cannot have too many brains on your
side. Time is short for reinforcements!"

He heartily approved of my course in enlisting the aid of Miss Clarke
and her colleagues. "That is the sort of thing you need! People with
mentality; plenty of intellectual force!" And he went on to make
suggestions.

As a result, within an hour and a half our house was sheltering five
more persons.

Miss Clarke has already been introduced. She was easily one of the ten
most advanced practitioners in her line. And she had the advantage of
a curiosity that was interested in everything odd, even though she
labelled it "non-existent." She said it helped her faith in the real
truths to be conversant with the unreal.

Dr. Malloy was from the university, an out-and-out materialist, a
psychologist who made life interesting for those who agreed with William
James. His investigations of abnormal psychology are world-acknowledged.

Mme. Le Fabre, we afterwards learned, had come from Versailles
especially to investigate the matter that was bothering us. She
possessed no mediumistic properties of her own but was a staunch
proponent of spiritualism, believing firmly in immortality and the
omnipotence of "translated" souls.

Professor Herold is most widely known as the inventor of certain
apparatus connected with wireless. But he is also considered the West's
most advanced student of electrical and radio-active subjects.

I was enormously glad to have this man's expert, high-tension knowledge
right on tap.

The remaining member of the quintet which Sir Henry advised me to summon
requires a little explanation. Also, I am obliged to give him a name
not his own; for it is not often that brigadier-generals of the United
States army can openly lend their names to anything so far removed
apparently from militarism as the searching of the occult.

Yet we knew that this man possessed a power that few scientists have
developed; the power of co-ordination, of handling and balancing great
facts and forces, and of deciding promptly how best to meet any given
situation. Not that we looked for anything militaristic out of the Blind
Spot; far from it. We merely knew not what to expect, which was exactly
why we wanted to have him with us; his type of mind is, perhaps, the
most solidly comforting sort that any mystery-bound person can have at
his side.

By the time these five had gathered, Jerome had neither returned
nor telephoned. There was not the slightest trace of Rhamda Avec; no
guessing as to whether he had seen the ad. It was then one o'clock in
the afternoon. Only six hours ago! It doesn't seem possible.

So there were eight of us--three women and five men--who went upstairs
and quietly inspected the all but lifeless form of Ariadne and
afterwards gathered in the library below.

All were thoroughly familiar with the situation. Miss Clarke calmly
commented to the effect that the entire Blind Spot affair was due wholly
and simply to the cumulative effects of so many, many subjects; the
result, in other words, of error.

Dr. Malloy was equally outspoken in his announcement that he proposed
to deal with the matter from the standpoint of psychic aberration. He
mentioned dissociated personalities, group hypnosis, and so on. But he
declared that he was open to conviction, and anxious to get any and all
facts.

Sir Henry had a good deal of difficulty in getting Mme. Le Fabre to
commit herself. Probably she felt that, since Sir Henry had gone on
record as being doubtful of the spiritistic explanation of psychic
phenomena, she might get into a controversy with him. But in the end
she stated that she expected to find our little mystery simply a novel
variation on what was so familiar to her.

As might be supposed, General Hume had no opinion. He merely expressed
himself as being prepared to accept any sound theory, or portions of
such theories as might be advanced, and arrive at a workable conclusion
therefrom. Which was exactly what we wanted of him.

Of them all, Professor Herold showed the most enthusiasm. Perhaps this
was because, despite his attainments, he is still young. At any rate, he
made it clear that he was fully prepared to learn something entirely new
in science. And he was almost eager to adjust his previous notions and
facts to the new discoveries.

When all these various viewpoints had been cleared up, and we felt that
we understood each other, it was inevitable that we should look to Sir
Henry to state his position. This one man combined a large amount of the
various, specialised abilities for which the others were noted, and they
all knew and respected him accordingly. Had he stood and theorised half
the afternoon, they would willingly have sat and listened. But instead
he glanced at his watch, and observed:

"To me, the most important development of all was hearing the sound of a
dog's bark coming from the ring. As I recall the details, the sound was
emitted just after the gem had been submitted to considerable handling,
from Miss Fenton's fingers to her brother's and back again. In other
words, it was subjected to a mixture of opposing animal magnetisms.
Suppose we experiment further with it now."

Charlotte slipped the gem from her finger and passed it around. Each of
us held it for a second or two; after which Charlotte clasped the ring
tightly in her palm, while we all joined hands.

It was, as I have said, broad daylight; the hour, shortly after one.
Scarcely had our hands completed the circuit than something happened.

From out of Charlotte's closed hand there issued an entirely new sound.
At first it was so faint and fragmentary that only two of us heard it.
Then it became stronger and more continuous, and presently we were all
gazing at each other in wonderment.

For the sound was that of footsteps.




XXVI

DIRECT FROM PARADISE


The sound was not like that of the walking of the human. Nor was it such
as an animal would make. It was neither a thud nor a pattering, but more
like a scratching shuffle, such as reminded me of nothing that I had
ever heard before.

Next moment, however, there came another sort of sound, plainly audible
above the footsteps. This was a thin, musical chuckle which ended in a
deep, but faint, organ-like throb. It happened only once.

Immediately it was followed by a steady clicking, such as might be made
by gently striking a stick against the pavement; only sharper. This
lasted a minute, during which the other sounds ceased.

Once more the footsteps. They were not very loud, but in the stillness
of that room they all but resounded.

Presently Charlotte could stand it no longer. She placed the ring on the
table, where it continued to emit those unplaceable sounds.

"Well! Do--do you people," stammered Dr. Malloy, "do you people all hear
THAT?"

Miss Clarke's face was rather pale. But her mouth was firm. "It is
nothing," said she, with theosophical positiveness. "You must not
believe it--it is not the truth of--"

"Pardon me," interrupted Sir Henry, "but this isn't something to argue
about! It is a reality; and the sooner we all admit it, the better.
There is a living creature of some kind making that sound!"

"It is the spirit of some two-footed creature," asserted Mme. Le Fabre,
plainly at her ease. She was on familiar ground now. "If only we had a
medium!"

Abruptly the sounds left the vicinity of the ring. At first we could
not locate their new position. Then Herold declared that they came
from under the table; and presently we were all gathered on the floor,
listening to those odd little sounds, while the ring remained thirty
inches above, on the top of the table!

It may be that the thing, whatever it was, did not care for such a
crowd. For shortly the shuffling ceased. And for a while we stared and
listened, scarcely breathing, trying to locate the new position.

Finally we went back to our chairs. We had heard nothing further.
Nevertheless, we continued to keep silence, with our ears alert for
anything more.

"Hush!" whispered Charlotte all of a sudden. "Did you hear that?" And
she looked up toward the ceiling.

In a moment I caught the sound. It was exceedingly faint, like the
distant thrumming of a zither. Only it was a single note, which did
not rise and fall, although there seemed a continual variation in its
volume.

Unexpectedly the other sounds came again, down under the table. This
time we remained in our seats and simply listened. And presently Sir
Henry, referring to the ring, made this suggestion:

"Suppose we seal it up, and see whether it inducts the sound then as
well as when exposed."

This appealed to Herold very strongly; the others were agreeable; so I
ran upstairs to my room and secured a small screw-top metal canister,
which I knew to be airtight. It was necessary to remove the stone from
the ring, in order to get it into the opening in the can. Presently this
was done; and while our invisible visitor continued his scratchy little
walking as before, I screwed the top of the can down as tightly as I
could.

Instantly the footsteps halted.

I unscrewed the top a trifle. As instantly the stepping was resumed.

"Ah!" cried Herold. "It's a question of radioactivity, then! Remember Le
Bon's experiments, Sir Henry?"

But Miss Clarke was sorely mystified by this simple matter, and herself
repeated the experiments. Equally puzzled was Mme. Le Fabre. According
to her theory, a spirit wouldn't mind a little thing like a metal box.
Of them all, Dr. Malloy was the least disturbed; so decidedly so that
General Hume eyed him quizzically.

"Fine bunch of hallucinations, doctor."

"Almost commonplace," retorted Malloy.

Presently I mentioned that the Rhamda had come from the basement on the
night that Ariadne had materialised; and I showed that the only possible
route into the cellar was through the locked door in the breakfast
room, since the windows were all too small, and there was no other door.
Query: How had the Rhamda got there? Immediately they all became alert.
As Herold said:

"One thing or the other is true; either there is something downstairs
which has escaped you, Fenton, or else Avec is able to materialise in
any place he chooses. Let's look!"

We all went down except Charlotte, who went upstairs to stay with
Ariadne. By turns, each of us held the ring. And as we unlocked the
basement door we noted that the invisible, walking creature had reached
there before us.

Down the steps went those unseen little feet, jumping from one step to
the next just ahead of us all the way. When within three or four steps
of the bottom, the creature made one leap do for them all.

I had previously run an extension cord down into the basement, and both
compartments could now be lighted by powerful electric lamps. We gave
the place a quick examination.

"What's all this newly turned earth mean?" inquired Sir Henry, pointing
to the result of Jerome's efforts a few months before. And I explained
how he and Harry, on the chance the basement might contain some clue
as to the localisation of the Blind Spot, had dug without result in the
bluish clay.

Sir Henry picked up the spade, which had never been moved from where
Jerome had dropped it. And while I went on to tell about the pool of
liquids, which for some unknown reason had not seeped into the soil
since forming there, the Englishman proceeded to dig vigorously into the
heap I had mentioned.

The rest of us watched him thoughtfully. We remembered that Jerome's
digging had been done after Queen's disappearance. And the dog had
vanished in the rear room, the one in which Chick and Dr. Holcomb had
last been seen. Now, when Jerome had dug the clay from the basement
under this, the dining-room, he had thrown it through the once concealed
opening in the partition; had thrown the clay, that is, in a small heap
under the library. And--after Jerome had done this the phenomena had
occurred in the library, not in the dining-room.

"By Jove!" ejaculated General Hume, as I pointed this out. "This may be
something more, you know, that mere coincidence!"

Sir Henry said nothing, but continued his spading. He paid attention to
nothing save the heap that Jerome had formed. And with each spadeful he
bent over and examined the clay very carefully.

Miss Clarke and Mme. Le Fabre both remained very calm about it all.
Each from her own viewpoint regarded the work as more or less a waste of
time. But I noticed that they did not take their eyes from the spade.

