"No, no; you must speak," begged the invalid. "When the others talk,
they make the beating in my head ten times worse, and excite me; but I
like to hear your voice."

"The beating?" interrupted Melissa, in whom this word awoke old
memories. "Perhaps you feel as if a hammer was hitting you over the left
eye?

"If you move rapidly, does it not pierce your skull, and do you not feel
as sick as if you were on the rocking sea?"

"Then you also know this torment?" asked Caracalla, surprised; but
she answered, quietly, that her mother had suffered several times from
similar headaches, and had described them to her.

Caesar sank back again on the pillows, moved his dry lips, and glanced
toward the drink which Galen had prescribed for him; and Melissa,
who almost as a child had long nursed a dear invalid, guessed what he
wanted, brought him the goblet, and gave him a draught.

Caracalla rewarded her with a grateful look. But the physic only seemed
to increase the pain. He lay there panting and motionless, until, trying
to find a new position, he groaned, lightly:

"It is as if iron was being hammered here. One would think others might
hear it."

At the same time he seized the girl's hand and placed it on his burning
brow.

Melissa felt the pulse in the sufferer's temple throbbing hard and short
against her fingers, as she had her mother's when she laid her cool hand
on her aching forehead; and then, moved by the wish to comfort and heal,
she let her right hand rest over the sick man's eyes. As soon as she
felt one hand was hot, she put the other in its place; and it must have
relieved the patient, for his moans ceased by degrees, and he finally
said, gratefully:

"What good that does me! You are--I knew you would help me. It is
already quite quiet in my brain. Once more your hand, dear girl!"

Melissa willingly obeyed him, and as he breathed more and more easily,
she remembered that her mother's headache had often been relieved when
she had placed her hand on her forehead. Caesar, now opening his eyes
wide, and looking her full in the face, asked why she had not allowed
him sooner to reap the benefit of this remedy.

Melissa slowly withdrew her hand, and with drooping eyes answered
gently:

"You are the emperor, a man... and I..." But Caracalla interrupted her
eagerly, and with a clear voice:

"Not so, Melissa! Do not you feel, like me, that something else draws us
to one another, like what binds a man to his wife?--There lies the
gem. Look at it once again--No, child, no! This resemblance is not
mere accident. The short-sighted, might call it superstition or a vain
illusion; I know better. At least a portion of Alexander's soul lives in
this breast. A hundred signs--I will tell you about it later--make it
a certainty to me. And yesterday morning.... I see it all again before
me.... You stood above me, on the left, at a window.... I looked up;...
our eyes met, and I felt in the depths of my heart a strange emotion....
I asked myself, silently, where I had seen that lovely face before. And
the answer rang, you have already often met her; you know her!"

"My face reminded you of the gem," interrupted Melissa, disquieted.

"No, no," continued Caesar. "It was some thing else. Why had none of
my many gems ever reminded me before of living people? Why did your
picture, I know not how often, recur to my mind? And you? Only recollect
what you have done for me. How marvelously we were brought together! And
all this in the course of a single, short day. And you also.... I ask
you, by all that is holy to you... Did you, after you saw me in the
court of sacrifice, not think of me so often and so vividly that it
astonished you?"

"You are Caesar," answered Melissa, with increasing anxiety.

"So you thought of my purple robes?" asked Caracalla, and his face
clouded over; "or perhaps only of my power that might be fatal to your
family? I will know. Speak the truth, girl, by the head of your father!"

Then Melissa poured forth this confession from her oppressed heart:

"Yes, I could not help remembering you constantly,... and I never saw
you in purple, but just as you had stood there on the steps;... and
then--ah! I have told you already how sorry I was for your sufferings.
I felt as if... but how can I describe it truly?--as if you stood much
nearer to me than the ruler of the world could to a poor, humble girl.
It was... eternal gods!..."

She stopped short; for she suddenly recollected anxiously that this
confession might prove fatal to her. The sentence about the time which
should be fulfilled for each was ringing in her ears, and it seemed to
her that she heard for the second time the lady Berenike's warning.

But Caracalla allowed her no time to think; for he interrupted her,
greatly pleased, with the cry:

"It is true, then! The immortals have wrought as great a miracle in you
as in me. We both owe them thanks, and I will show them how grateful
I can be by rich sacrifices. Our souls, which destiny had already once
united, have met again. That portion of the universal soul which of yore
dwelt in Roxana, and now in you, Melissa, has also vanquished the pain
which has embittered my life... You have proved it!--And now... it is
beginning to throb again more violently--now--beloved and restored one,
help me once more!"

Melissa perceived anxiously how the emperor's face had flushed again
during this last vehement speech, and at the same time the pain had
again contracted his forehead and eyes. And she obeyed his command, but
this time only in shy submission. When she found that he became quieter,
and the movement of her hand once more did him good, she recovered her
presence of mind. She remembered how often the quiet application of her
hand had helped her mother to sleep.

She therefore explained to Caracalla, in a low whisper directly he began
to speak again, that her desire to give him relief would be vain if he
did not keep his eyes and lips closed. And Caracalla yielded, while her
hand moved as lightly over the brow of the terrible man as when years
ago it had soothed her mother to sleep.

When the sufferer, after a little time, murmured, with closed eyes

"Perhaps I could sleep," she felt as if great happiness had befallen
her.

She listened attentively to every breath, and looked as if spell-bound
into his face, until she was quite sure that sleep had completely
overcome Caesar.

She then crept gently on tiptoe to Philostratus, who had looked on in
silent surprise at all that had passed between his sovereign and the
girl. He, who was always inclined to believe in any miraculous cure, of
which so many had been wrought by his hero Apollonius, thought he had
actually witnessed one, and gazed with an admiration bordering on awe
at the young creature who appeared to him to be a gracious instrument of
the gods.

"Let me go now," Melissa whispered to her friend. "He sleeps, and will
not wake for some time."

"At your command," answered the philosopher, respectfully. At the
same moment a loud voice was heard from the next room, which Melissa
recognized as her brother Alexander's, who impetuously insisted on his
right of--being allowed at any time to see the emperor.

"He will wake him," murmured the philosopher, anxiously; but Melissa
with prompt determination threw her veil over her head and went into the
adjoining room.

Philostratus at first heard violent language issuing from the mouth of
Theocritus and the other courtiers, and the artist's answers were not
less passionate. Then he recognized Melissa's voice; and when quiet
suddenly reigned on that side of the door, the young girl again crossed
the threshold.

She glanced toward Caracalla to see if he still slept, and then, with a
sigh of relief, beckoned to her friend, and begged him in a whisper to
escort her past the staring men. Alexander followed them.

Anger and surprise were depicted on his countenance, which was usually
so happy. He had come with a report which might very likely induce
Caesar to order the release of his father and brother, and his heart had
stood still with fear and astonishment when the favorite Theocritus had
told him in the anteroom, in a way that made the blood rush into his
face, that his sister had been for some time endeavoring to comfort the
suffering emperor--and it was nearly midnight.

Quite beside himself, he wished to force his way into Caesar's presence,
but Melissa had at that moment come out and stood in his way, and had
desired him and the noble Romans, in such a decided and commanding tone,
to lower their voices, that they and her brother were speechless.

What had happened to his modest sister during the last few days? Melissa
giving him orders which he feebly obeyed! It seemed impossible! But
there was something reassuring in her manner. She must certainly have
thought it right to act thus, and it must have been worthy of her, or
she would not have carried her charming head so high, or looked him so
freely and calmly in the face.

But how had she dared to come between him and his duty to his father and
brother?

While he followed her closely and silently through the imperial rooms,
the implicit obedience he had shown her became more and more difficult
to comprehend; and when at last they stood in the empty corridor
which divided Caesar's quarters from those of the high-priest, and
Philostratus had returned to his post at the side of his sovereign, he
could hold out no longer, and cried to her indignantly:

"So far, I have followed you like a boy; I do not myself know why. But
it is not yet too late to turn round; and I ask you, what gave you the
right to prevent my doing my best for our people?"

"Your loud talking, that threatened to wake Caesar," she replied,
seriously. "His sleeping could alone save me from watching by him the
whole night."

Alexander then felt sorry he had been so foolishly turbulent, and after
Melissa had told him in a few words what she had gone through in the
last few hours he informed her of what had brought him to visit the
emperor so late.

Johannes the lawyer, Berenike's Christian freedman, he began, had
visited their father in prison and had heard the order given to place
Heron and Philip as state prisoners and oarsmen on board a galley.

This had taken place in the afternoon, and the Christian had further
learned that the prisoners would be led to the harbor two hours before
sunset. This was the truth, and yet the infamous Zminis had assured the
emperor, at noon, that their father and Philip were already far on their
way to Sardinia. The worthless Egyptian had, then, lied to the emperor;
and it would most likely cost the scoundrel his neck. But for this,
there would have been time enough next day. What had brought him there
at so late an hour was the desire to prevent the departure of the
galley; for John had heard, from the Christian harbor-watch that the
anchor was not yet weighed. The ship could therefore only get out to sea
at sunrise; the chain that closed the harbor would not be opened till
then. If the order to stop the galley came much after daybreak, she
would certainly be by that time well under way, and their father and
Philip might have succumbed to the hard rowing before a swift trireme
could overtake and release them.

Melissa had listened to this information with mixed feelings. She had
perhaps precipitated her father and brother into misery in order to save
herself; for a terrible fate awaited the state-prisoners at the oars.
And what could she do, an ignorant child, who was of so little use?

Andreas had told her that it was the duty of a Christian and of every
good man, if his neighbor's welfare were concerned, to sacrifice his own
fortunes; and for the happiness and lives of those dearest to her--for
they, of all others, were her "neighbors"--she felt that she could do
so. Perhaps she might yet succeed in repairing the mischief she had done
when she had allowed the emperor to sleep without giving one thought to
her father. Instead of waking him, she had misused her new power over
her brother, and, by preventing his speaking, had perhaps frustrated the
rescue of her people.

But idle lamenting was of as little use here as at any other time; so
she resolutely drew her veil closer round her head and called to her
brother, "Wait here till I return!"

"What are you going to do?" asked Alexander, startled.

"I am going back to the invalid," she explained, decisively.

On this her brother seized her arm, and, wildly excited, forbade this
step in the name of his father.

But at his vehement shout, "I will not allow it!" she struggled to free
herself, and cried out to him:

"And you? Did not you, whose life is a thousand times more important
than mine, of your own free-will go into captivity and to death in order
to save our father?"

"It was for my sake that he had been robbed of his freedom," interrupted
Alexander; but she added, quickly:

"And if I had not thought only of myself, the command to release him and
Philip would by this time have been at the harbor. I am going."

Alexander then took his hand from her arm, and exclaimed, as if urged by
some internal force, "Well, then, go!"

"And you," continued Melissa, hastily, "go and seek the lady Euryale.
She is expecting me. Tell her all, and beg her in my name to go to
rest. Also tell her I remembered the sentence about the time, which was
fulfilled. ... Mark the words. If I am running again into danger, tell
her that I do it because a voice says to me that it is right. And it is
right, believe me, Alexander!"

The artist drew his sister to him and kissed her; yet she hardly
understood his anxious good wishes; for his voice was choked by emotion.

He had taken it for granted that he should accompany her as far as the
emperor's room, but she would not allow it. His reappearance would only
lead to fresh quarrels.

He also gave in to this; but he insisted on returning here to wait for
her.

After Melissa had vanished into Caesar's quarters he immediately
carried out his sister's wish, and told the lady Euryale of all that had
happened.

Encouraged by the matron, who was not less shocked than he had been at
Melissa's daring, he returned to the anteroom, where, at first, greatly
excited, he walked up and down, and then sank on a marble seat to wait
for his sister. He was frequently overpowered by sleep. The things that
cast a shadow on his sunny mind vanished from him, and a pleasing dream
showed him, instead of the alarming picture which haunted him before
sleeping, the beautiful Christian Agatha.




CHAPTER XX.

The waiting-room was empty when Melissa crossed it for the second time.
Most of the emperor's friends had retired to rest or into the city when
they had heard that Caesar slept; and the few who had remained behaved
quietly when she appeared, for Philostratus had told them that the
emperor held her in high esteem, as the only person who was able to
give him comfort in his suffering by her peculiar and wonderful healing
power.

In the tablinum, which had been converted into a sick-room, nothing was
heard but the breathing and gentle snoring of the sleeping man. Even
Philostratus was asleep on an arm-chair at the back of the room.

When the philosopher had returned, Caracalla had noticed him, and
dozing, or perhaps in his dreams, he had ordered him to remain by him.
So the learned man felt bound to spend the night there.

Epagathos, the freedman, was lying on a mattress from the dining-room;
the corpulent physician slept soundly, and if he snored too loudly, old
Adventus poked him and quietly spoke a word of warning to him. This
man, who had formerly been a post messenger, was the only person who was
conscious of Melissa's entrance; but he only blinked at her through
his dim eyes, and, after he had silently considered why the young girl
should have returned, he turned over in order to sleep himself; for he
had come to the conclusion that this young, active creature would be
awake and at hand if his master required anything.

His wondering as to why Melissa had returned, had led to many guesses,
and had proved fruitless. "You can know nothing of women," was the end
of his reflections, "if you do not know that what seems most improbable
is what is most likely to be true. This maid is certainly not one of the
flute-players or the like. Who knows what incomprehensible whim or freak
may have brought her here? At any rate, it will be easier for her to
keep her eyes open than it is for me."

He then signed to her and asked her quietly to fetch his cloak out
of the next room, for his old body needed warmth; and Melissa gladly
complied, and laid the caracalla over the old mans cold feet with
obliging care.

She then returned to the side of the sick-bed, to wait for the emperor's
awaking. He slept soundly; his regular breathing indicated this. The
others also slept, and Adventus's light snore, mingling with the louder
snoring of the physician, showed that he too had ceased to watch. The
slumbering Philostratus now and then murmured incomprehensible words to
himself; and the lion, who perhaps was dreaming of his freedom in his
sandy home, whined low in his sleep.

She watched alone.

It seemed to her as if she were in the habitation of sleep, and as if
phantoms and dreams were floating around her on the unfamiliar noises.

She was afraid, and the thought of being the only woman among so many
men caused her extreme uneasiness.

She could not sit still.

Inaudibly as a shadow she approached the head of the sleeping emperor,
holding her breath to listen to him. How soundly he slept! And she had
come that she might talk to him. If his sleep lasted till sunrise, the
pardon for her people would be too late, and her father and Philip,
chained to a hard bench, would have to ply heavy oars as galley slaves
by the side of robbers and murderers. How terribly then would
her father's wish to use his strength be granted! Was Philip, the
narrow-chested philosopher, capable of bearing the strain which had so
often proved fatal to stronger men?

She must wake the dreaded man, the only man who could possibly help her.

She now raised her hand to lay it on his shoulder, but she half withdrew
it.

It seemed to her as if it was not much less wicked to rob a sleeping man
of his rest, his best cure, than to take the life of a living being. It
was not too late yet, for the harbor-chain would not be opened till the
October sun had risen. He might enjoy his slumbers a little longer.

With this conclusion she once more sank down and listened to the noises
which broke the stillness of the night.

How hideous they were, how revolting they sounded! The vulgarest of the
sleepers, old Adventus, absolutely sawed the air with his snoring.

The emperor's breathing was scarcely perceptible, and how nobly cut was
the profile which she could see, the other side of his face leaning on
the pillow! Had she any real reason to fear his awakening? Perhaps he
was quite unlike what Berenike thought him to be. She remembered the
sympathy she had felt for him when they had first met, and, in spite of
all the trouble she had experienced since, she no longer felt afraid. A
thought then occurred to her which was sufficient excuse for disturbing
the sick man's sleep. If she delayed it, she would be making him guilty
of a fresh crime by allowing two blameless men to perish in misery.
But she would first convince herself whether the time was pressing.
She looked out through the open window at the stars and across the open
place lying at her feet. The third hour after midnight was past, and the
sun would rise before long.

Down below all was quiet. Macrinus, the praetorian prefect, on hearing
that the emperor had fallen into a refreshing sleep, in order that he
might not be disturbed, had forbidden all loud signals, and ordered the
camp to be closed to all the inhabitants of the city; so the girl heard
nothing but the regular footsteps of the sentries and the shrieks of the
owls returning to their nests in the roof of the Serapeum. The wind from
the sea drove the clouds before it across the sky, and the plain covered
with tents resembled a sea tossed into high white waves. The camp had
been reduced during the afternoon; for Caracalla had carried out his
threat of that morning by quartering a portion of the picked troops in
the houses of the richest Alexandrians.

Melissa, bending far out, looked toward the north. The sea-breeze blew
her hair into her face. Perhaps on the ocean whence it came the high
waves would, in a few hours, be tossing the ship on which her father and
brother, seated at the oar, would be toiling as disgraced galley-slaves.
That must not, could not be!

Hark! what was that?

She heard a light whisper. In spite of strict orders, a loving couple
were passing below. The wife of the centurion Martialis, who had been
separated for some time from her husband, had at his entreaty come
secretly from Ranopus, where she had charge of Seleukus's villa, to see
him, as his services prevented his going so far away. They now stood
whispering and making love in the shadow of the temple. Melissa could
not hear what they said, yet it reminded her of the sacred night
hour when she confessed her love to Diodoros. She felt as if she were
standing by his bedside, and his faithful eyes met hers. She would not,
for all that was best in the world, have awakened him yesterday at the
Christian's house, though the awakening would have brought her fresh
promises of love; and yet she was on the point of robbing another of his
only cure, the sleep the gods had sent him. But then she loved Diodoros,
and what was Caesar to her? It had been a matter of life and death with
her lover, while disturbing Caracalla would only postpone his recovery
a few hours at the utmost. It was she who had procured the imperial
sleeper his rest, which she could certainly restore to him even if she
now woke him. Just now she had vowed for the future not to care
about her own welfare, and that had at first made her doubtful about
Caracalla; but had it not really been exceedingly selfish to lose
the time which could bring freedom to her father and brother, only to
protect her own soul from the reproach of an easily forgiven wrong? With
the question:

"What is your duty?" all doubts left her, and no longer on tiptoe, but
with a firm, determined tread, she walked toward the slumberer's couch,
and the outrage which she shrank from committing would, she saw, be
a deed of kindness; for she found the emperor with perspiring brow
groaning and frightened by a severe nightmare. He cried with the dull,
toneless voice of one talking in his sleep, as if he saw her close by:

"Away, mother, I say! He or I! Out of the way! You will not? But I,
I--If you--"

At the same he threw up his hands and gave a dull, painful cry.

"He is dreaming of his brother's murder," rushed through Melissa's mind,
and in the same instant she laid her hand on his arm and with urgent
entreaty cried in his ear: "Wake up, Caesar, I implore you! Great
Caesar, awake!"

Then he opened his eyes, and a low, prolonged "Ah!" rang from his
tortured breast.

He then, with a deep breath and perplexed glance, looked round him; and
as his eyes fell on the young girl his features brightened, and soon
wore a happy expression, as if he experienced a great joy.

"You?" he asked, with pleased surprise. "You, maiden, still here!
It must be nearly dawn? I slept well till just now. But then at the
last--Oh, it was fearful!--Adventus!"

Melissa, however, interrupted this cry, exhorting the emperor to be
quiet by putting her finger to her lips; and he understood her and
willingly obeyed, especially as she had guessed what he required from
the chamberlain, Adventus. She handed him the cloth that lay on the
table for him to wipe his streaming forehead. She then brought him
drink, and after Caracalla had sat up refreshed, and felt that the pain,
which, after a sharp attack, lasted sometimes for days, had now already
left him, he said, quite gently, mindful of her sign:

"How much better I feel already; and for this I thank you, Roxana; yes,
you know. I like to feel like Alexander, but usually--It is certainly a
pleasant thing to be ruler of the universe, for if we wish to punish or
reward, no one can limit us. You, child, shall learn that it is Caesar
whom you have laid under such obligations. Ask what you will, and I will
grant it you."

She whispered eagerly to him:

"Release my father and brother."

"Always the same thing," answered Caracalla, peevishly. "Do you know of
nothing better to wish for?"

"No, my lord, no!" cried Melissa, with importunate warmth. "If you will
give me what I most care for--"

"I will, yes, I will," interrupted the emperor in a softer voice; but
suddenly shrugging his shoulders, he continued, regretfully: "But you
must have patience; for, by the Egyptian's orders, your people have been
for some time afloat and at sea."

"No!" the girl assured him. "They are still here. Zminis has shamefully
deceived you;" and then she informed him of what she had learned from
her brother.

Caracalla, in obedience to a softer impulse, had wished to show himself
grateful to Melissa. But her demand displeased him; for the sculptor and
his son, the philosopher, were the security that should keep Melissa
and the painter attached to him. But though his distrust was so strong,
offended dignity and the tormenting sense of being deceived caused him
to forget everything else; he flew into a rage, and called loudly the
names of Epagathos and Adventus.

His voice, quavering with fury, awakened the others also out of their
sleep; and after he had shortly and severely rebuked them for their
laziness, he commissioned Epagathos to give the prefect, Macrinus,
immediate orders not to allow the ship on which Heron and Philip were,
to leave the harbor; to set the captives at liberty; and to throw
Zminis, the Egyptian, into prison, heavily chained.

When the freedman remarked, humbly, that the prefect was not likely
to be found, as he had purposed to be present again that night at the
exorcisms of the magician, Serapion, Caesar commanded that Macrinus
should be called away from the miracle-monger's house, and the orders
given him.

"And if I can not find him?" asked Epagathos.

"Then, once more, events will prove how badly I am served," answered the
emperor. "In any case you can act the prefect, and see that my orders
are carried out."

The freedman left hastily, and Caracalla sank back exhausted on the
pillows.

Melissa let him rest a little while; then she approached him, thanked
him profusely, and begged him to keep quiet, lest the pain should return
and spoil the approaching day.

He then asked the time, and when Philostratus, who had walked to the
window, explained that the fifth hour after midnight was past, Caracalla
bade him prepare a bath.

The physician sanctioned this wish, and Caesar then gave his hand to the
girl, saying, feebly and in a gentle voice: "The pain still keeps away.
I should be better if I could moderate my impatience. An early bath
often does me good after a bad night. Only go. The sleep that you know
so well how to give to others, you scarcely allow to visit you. I only
beg that you will be at hand. We shall both, I think, feel strengthened
when next I call you."

Melissa then bade him a grateful farewell; but as she was approaching
the doorway he called again after her, and asked her with an altered
voice, shortly and sternly:

"You will agree with your father if he abuses me?"

"What an idea!" she answered, energetically. "He knows who robbed him of
his liberty, and from me shall he learn who has restored it to him."

"Good!" murmured the emperor. "Yet remember this also: I need your
assistance and that of your brother's, the painter. If your father
attempts to alienate you--"

Here he suddenly let fall his arm, which he had raised threateningly,
and continued in a confidential whisper: "But how can I ever show
you anything but kindness? Is it not so? You already feel the secret
tie--You know? Am I mistaken when I fancy that it grieves you to be
separated from me?"

"Certainly not," she replied, gently, and bowed her head.

"Then go," he continued, kindly. "The day will come yet when you will
feel that I am as necessary to your soul as you are to mine. But you do
not yet know how impatient I can be. I must be able to think of you with
pleasure--always with pleasure--always."

Thereupon he nodded to her, and his eyelids remained for some time in
spasmodic movement. Philostratus was prepared to accompany the young
girl, but Caracalla prevented him by calling:

"Lead me to my bath. If it does me good, as I trust it will, I have many
things to talk over with you."

Melissa did not hear the last words. Gladly and quickly she hurried
through the empty, dimly lighted rooms, and found Alexander in a sitting
position, half asleep and half awake, with closed eyes. Then she drew
near to him on tiptoe, and, as his nodding head fell on his breast, she
laughed and woke him with a kiss.

The lamps were not yet burned out, and, as he looked into her face with
surprise, his also brightened, and jumping up quickly he exclaimed:

"All's well; we have you back again, and you have succeeded! Our
father-I see it in your face--and Philip also, are at liberty!"

"Yes, yes, yes," she answered, gladly; "and now we will go together and
fetch them ourselves from the harbor."

Alexander raised his eyes and arms to heaven in rapture, and Melissa
imitated him; and thus, without words, though with fervent devotion,
they with one accord thanked the gods for their merciful ruling.

They then set out together, and Alexander said: "I feel as if nothing
but gratitude flowed through all my veins. At any rate, I have learned
for the first time what fear is. That evil guest certainly haunts this
place. Let us go now. On the way you shall tell me everything."

"Only one moment's patience," she begged, cheerfully, and hurried into
the chief priest's rooms. The lady Euryale was still expecting her, and
as she kissed her she looked with sincere pleasure into her bright but
tearful eyes.

At first she was bent on making Melissa rest; for she would yet require
all her strength. But she saw that the girl's wish to go and meet
her father was justifiable; she placed her own mantle over her
shoulders--for the air was cool before sunrise--and at last accompanied
her into the anteroom. Directly the girl had disappeared, she turned to
her sister-in-law's slave, who had waited there the whole night by order
of his mistress, and desired him to go and report to her what he had
learned about Melissa.

The brother and sister met the slave Argutis outside the Serapeum. He
had heard at Seleukus's house where his young mistress was staying, and
had made friends with the chief priest's servants.

When, late in the evening, he heard that Melissa was still with Caesar,
he had become so uneasy that he had waited the whole night through,
first on the steps of a staircase, then walking up and down outside the
Serapeum. With a light heart he now accompanied the couple as far as the
Aspendia quarter of the town, and he then only parted from them in
order that he might inform poor old Dido of his good news, and make
preparations for the reception of the home-comers.

After that Melissa hurried along, arm in arm with her brother, through
the quiet streets.

Youth, to whom the present belongs entirely, only cares to know the
bright side of the future; and even Melissa in her joy at being able to
restore liberty to her beloved relations, hardly thought at all of the
fact that, when this was done and Caesar should send for her again,
there would be new dangers to surmount.

Delighted with her grand success, she first told her brother what her
experiences had been with the suffering emperor. Then she started on the
recollections of her visit to her lover, and when Alexander opened his
heart to her and assured her with fiery ardor that he would not rest
till he had won the heart of the lovely Christian, Agatha, she gladly
allowed him to talk and promised him her assistance. At last they
deliberated how the favor of Caesar--who, Melissa assured him, was
cruelly misunderstood--was to be won for their father and Philip; and
finally they both imagined the surprise of the old man if he should be
the first to meet them after being set at liberty.

The way was far, and when they reached the sea, by the Caesareum in
the Bruchium, the palatial quarter of the town, the first glimmer of
approaching dawn was showing behind the peninsula of Lochias. The sea
was rough, and tossed with heavy, oily waves on the Choma that ran out
into the sea like a finger, and on the walls of the Timoneum at its
point, where Antonius had hidden his disgrace after the battle of
Actium.

Alexander stopped by the pillared temple of Poseidon, which stood close
on the shore, between the Choma and the theatre, and, looking toward the
flat, horseshoe-shaped coast of the opposite island which still lay in
darkness, he asked:

"Do you still remember when we went with our mother over to Antirhodos,
and how she allowed us to gather shells in the little harbor? If she
were alive to-day, what more could we wish for?"

"That the emperor was gone," exclaimed the girl from the depths of her
heart; "that Diodoros were well again; that father could use his hands
as he used, and that I might stay with him until Diodoros came to fetch
me, and then... oh, if only something could happen to the empire that
Caesar might go away-far away, to the farthest hyperborean land!"

"That will soon happen now," answered Alexander. "Philostratus says that
the Romans will remain at the utmost a week longer."

"So long?" asked Melissa, startled; but Alexander soon pacified her with
the assurance that seven days flew speedily by, and when one looked back
on them they seemed to shrink into only as many hours.

"But do not," he continued, cheerfully, "look into the future! We will
rejoice, for everything is going so well now!"

He stopped here suddenly and gazed anxiously at the sea, which was no
longer completely obscured by the vanishing shadows of night. Melissa
looked in the direction of his pointing hand, and when he cried with
great excitement, "That is no little boat, it is a ship, and a large
one, too!" Melissa added, eagerly, "It is already near the Diabathra. It
will reach the Alveus Steganus in a moment, and pass the pharos."

"But yonder is the morning star in the heavens, and the fire is still
blazing on the tower," interrupted her brother. "Not till it has been
extinguished will they open the outside chain. And yet that ship is
steering in a northwesterly direction. It certainly comes out of the
royal harbor." He then drew his sister on faster, and when, in a few
minutes, they reached the harbor gate, he cried out, much relieved:

"Look there! The chain is still across the entrance. I see it clearly."

"And so do I," said Melissa, decidedly; and while her brother knocked at
the gate-house of the little harbor, she continued, eagerly:

"No ships dare go out before sunrise, on account of the rocks--Epagathos
said so just now--and that one near the pharos--"

But there was no time to put her thoughts into words; for the broad
harbor gate was thrown noisily open, and a troop of Roman soldiers
streamed out, followed by several Alexandrian men-at-arms. After
them came a prisoner loaded with chains, with whom a leading Roman in
warrior's dress was conversing. Both were tall and haggard, and when
they approached the brother and sister they recognized in them Macrinus
the praetorian prefect, while the prisoner was Zminis the informer.

But the Egyptian also noticed the artist and his companion. His eyes
sparkled brightly, and with triumphant scorn he pointed out to sea.

The magician Serapion had persuaded the prefect to let the Egyptian go
free. Nothing was yet known in the harbor of Zminis's disgrace, and he
had been promptly obeyed as usual, when, spurred on by the magician
and his old hatred, he gave the order for the galley which carried the
sculptor and his son on board to weigh anchor in spite of the early
hour.

Heron and Philip, with chains on their feet, were now rowing on the
same bench with the worst criminals; and the old artist's two remaining
children stood gazing after the ship that carried away their father and
brother into the distance. Melissa stood mute, with tearful eyes, while
Alexander, quite beside himself, tried to relieve his rage and grief by
