inhabitants live there, it is not likely that they ever see sun or
stars. Instead of the sun they see only an effulgence in the vapory sky
which disappears and reappears at regular intervals.

When we come to Mars, we have more definite knowledge, and there seems
to be greater possibilities for life there than in the case of any
other planet besides the earth. The main reason for denying that life
such as ours could exist there is that the atmosphere of Mars is so
rare that, in the light of the most recent researches, we cannot be
fully assured that it exists at all. The very careful comparisons of
the spectra of Mars and of the moon made by Campbell at the Lick
Observatory failed to show the slightest difference in the two. If Mars
had an atmosphere as dense as ours, the result could be seen in the
darkening of the lines of the spectrum produced by the double passage
of the light through it. There were no lines in the spectrum of Mars
that were not seen with equal distinctness in that of the moon. But
this does not prove the entire absence of an atmosphere. It only shows
a limit to its density. It may be one-fifth or one-fourth the density
of that on the earth, but probably no more.

That there must be something in the nature of vapor at least seems to
be shown by the formation and disappearance of the white polar caps of
this planet. Every reader of astronomy at the present time knows that,
during the Martian winter, white caps form around the pole of the
planet which is turned away from the sun, and grow larger and larger
until the sun begins to shine upon them, when they gradually grow
smaller, and perhaps nearly disappear. It seems, therefore, fairly well
proved that, under the influence of cold, some white substance forms
around the polar regions of Mars which evaporates under the influence
of the sun's rays. It has been supposed that this substance is snow,
produced in the same way that snow is produced on the earth, by the
evaporation of water.

But there are difficulties in the way of this explanation. The sun
sends less than half as much heat to Mars as to the earth, and it does
not seem likely that the polar regions can ever receive enough of heat
to melt any considerable quantity of snow. Nor does it seem likely that
any clouds from which snow could fall ever obscure the surface of Mars.

But a very slight change in the explanation will make it tenable. Quite
possibly the white deposits may be due to something like hoar-frost
condensed from slightly moist air, without the actual production of
snow. This would produce the effect that we see. Even this explanation
implies that Mars has air and water, rare though the former may be. It
is quite possible that air as thin as that of Mars would sustain life
in some form. Life not totally unlike that on the earth may therefore
exist upon this planet for anything that we know to the contrary. More
than this we cannot say.

In the case of the outer planets the answer to our question must be in
the negative. It now seems likely that Jupiter is a body very much like
our sun, only that the dark portion is too cool to emit much, if any,
light. It is doubtful whether Jupiter has anything in the nature of a
solid surface. Its interior is in all likelihood a mass of molten
matter far above a red heat, which is surrounded by a comparatively
cool, yet, to our measure, extremely hot, vapor. The belt-like clouds
which surround the planet are due to this vapor combined with the rapid
rotation. If there is any solid surface below the atmosphere that we
can see, it is swept by winds such that nothing we have on earth could
withstand them. But, as we have said, the probabilities are very much
against there being anything like such a surface. At some great depth
in the fiery vapor there is a solid nucleus; that is all we can say.

The planet Saturn seems to be very much like that of Jupiter in its
composition. It receives so little heat from the sun that, unless it is
a mass of fiery vapor like Jupiter, the surface must be far below the
freezing-point.

We cannot speak with such certainty of Uranus and Neptune; yet the
probability seems to be that they are in much the same condition as
Saturn. They are known to have very dense atmospheres, which are made
known to us only by their absorbing some of the light of the sun. But
nothing is known of the composition of these atmospheres.

To sum up our argument: the fact that, so far as we have yet been able
to learn, only a very small proportion of the visible worlds scattered
through space are fitted to be the abode of life does not preclude the
probability that among hundreds of millions of such worlds a vast
number are so fitted. Such being the case, all the analogies of nature
lead us to believe that, whatever the process which led to life upon
this earth--whether a special act of creative power or a gradual course
of development--through that same process does life begin in every part
of the universe fitted to sustain it. The course of development
involves a gradual improvement in living forms, which by irregular
steps rise higher and higher in the scale of being. We have every
reason to believe that this is the case wherever life exists. It is,
therefore, perfectly reasonable to suppose that beings, not only
animated, but endowed with reason, inhabit countless worlds in space.
It would, indeed, be very inspiring could we learn by actual
observation what forms of society exist throughout space, and see the
members of such societies enjoying themselves by their warm firesides.
But this, so far as we can now see, is entirely beyond the possible
reach of our race, so long as it is confined to a single world.




VIII

HOW THE PLANETS ARE WEIGHED


You ask me how the planets are weighed? I reply, on the same principle
by which a butcher weighs a ham in a spring-balance. When he picks the
ham up, he feels a pull of the ham towards the earth. When he hangs it
on the hook, this pull is transferred from his hand to the spring of
the balance. The stronger the pull, the farther the spring is pulled
down. What he reads on the scale is the strength of the pull. You know
that this pull is simply the attraction of the earth on the ham. But,
by a universal law of force, the ham attracts the earth exactly as much
as the earth does the ham. So what the butcher really does is to find
how much or how strongly the ham attracts the earth, and he calls that
pull the weight of the ham. On the same principle, the astronomer finds
the weight of a body by finding how strong is its attractive pull on
some other body. If the butcher, with his spring-balance and a ham,
could fly to all the planets, one after the other, weigh the ham on
each, and come back to report the results to an astronomer, the latter
could immediately compute the weight of each planet of known diameter,
as compared with that of the earth. In applying this principle to the
heavenly bodies, we at once meet a difficulty that looks
insurmountable. You cannot get up to the heavenly bodies to do your
weighing; how then will you measure their pull? I must begin the answer
to this question by explaining a nice point in exact science.
Astronomers distinguish between the weight of a body and its mass. The
weight of objects is not the same all over the world; a thing which
weighs thirty pounds in New York would weigh an ounce more than thirty
pounds in a spring-balance in Greenland, and nearly an ounce less at
the equator. This is because the earth is not a perfect sphere, but a
little flattened. Thus weight varies with the place. If a ham weighing
thirty pounds were taken up to the moon and weighed there, the pull
would only be five pounds, because the moon is so much smaller and
lighter than the earth. There would be another weight of the ham for
the planet Mars, and yet another on the sun, where it would weigh some
eight hundred pounds. Hence the astronomer does not speak of the weight
of a planet, because that would depend on the place where it was
weighed; but he speaks of the mass of the planet, which means how much
planet there is, no matter where you might weigh it.

At the same time, we might, without any inexactness, agree that the
mass of a heavenly body should be fixed by the weight it would have in
New York. As we could not even imagine a planet at New York, because it
may be larger than the earth itself, what we are to imagine is this:
Suppose the planet could be divided into a million million million
equal parts, and one of these parts brought to New York and weighed. We
could easily find its weight in pounds or tons. Then multiply this
weight by a million million million, and we shall have a weight of the
planet. This would be what the astronomers might take as the mass of
the planet.

With these explanations, let us see how the weight of the earth is
found. The principle we apply is that round bodies of the same specific
gravity attract small objects on their surface with a force
proportional to the diameter of the attracting body. For example, a
body two feet in diameter attracts twice as strongly as one of a foot,
one of three feet three times as strongly, and so on. Now, our earth is
about 40,000,000 feet in diameter; that is 10,000,000 times four feet.
It follows that if we made a little model of the earth four feet in
diameter, having the average specific gravity of the earth, it would
attract a particle with one ten-millionth part of the attraction of the
earth. The attraction of such a model has actually been measured. Since
we do not know the average specific gravity of the earth--that being in
fact what we want to find out--we take a globe of lead, four feet in
diameter, let us suppose. By means of a balance of the most exquisite
construction it is found that such a globe does exert a minute
attraction on small bodies around it, and that this attraction is a
little more than the ten-millionth part of that of the earth. This
shows that the specific gravity of the lead is a little greater than
that of the average of the whole earth. All the minute calculations
made, it is found that the earth, in order to attract with the force it
does, must be about five and one-half times as heavy as its bulk of
water, or perhaps a little more. Different experimenters find different
results; the best between 5.5 and 5.6, so that 5.5 is, perhaps, as near
the number as we can now get. This is much more than the average
specific gravity of the materials which compose that part of the earth
which we can reach by digging mines. The difference arises from the
fact that, at the depth of many miles, the matter composing the earth
is compressed into a smaller space by the enormous weight of the
portions lying above it. Thus, at the depth of 1000 miles, the pressure
on every cubic inch is more than 2000 tons, a weight which would
greatly condense the hardest metal.

We come now to the planets. I have said that the mass or weight of a
heavenly body is determined by its attraction on some other body. There
are two ways in which the attraction of a planet may be measured. One
is by its attraction on the planets next to it. If these bodies did not
attract one another at all, but only moved under the influence of the
sun, they would move in orbits having the form of ellipses. They are
found to move very nearly in such orbits, only the actual path deviates
from an ellipse, now in one direction and then in another, and it
slowly changes its position from year to year. These deviations are due
to the pull of the other planets, and by measuring the deviations we
can determine the amount of the pull, and hence the mass of the planet.

The reader will readily understand that the mathematical processes
necessary to get a result in this way must be very delicate and
complicated. A much simpler method can be used in the case of those
planets which have satellites revolving round them, because the
attraction of the planet can be determined by the motions of the
satellite. The first law of motion teaches us that a body in motion, if
acted on by no force, will move in a straight line. Hence, if we see a
body moving in a curve, we know that it is acted on by a force in the
direction towards which the motion curves. A familiar example is that
of a stone thrown from the hand. If the stone were not attracted by the
earth, it would go on forever in the line of throw, and leave the earth
entirely. But under the attraction of the earth, it is drawn down and
down, as it travels onward, until finally it reaches the ground. The
faster the stone is thrown, of course, the farther it will go, and the
greater will be the sweep of the curve of its path. If it were a
cannon-ball, the first part of the curve would be nearly a right line.
If we could fire a cannon-ball horizontally from the top of a high
mountain with a velocity of five miles a second, and if it were not
resisted by the air, the curvature of the path would be equal to that
of the surface of our earth, and so the ball would never reach the
earth, but would revolve round it like a little satellite in an orbit
of its own. Could this be done, the astronomer would be able, knowing
the velocity of the ball, to calculate the attraction of the earth as
well as we determine it by actually observing the motion of falling
bodies around us.

Thus it is that when a planet, like Mars or Jupiter, has satellites
revolving round it, astronomers on the earth can observe the attraction
of the planet on its satellites and thus determine its mass. The rule
for doing this is very simple. The cube of the distance between the
planet and satellite is divided by the square of the time of revolution
of the satellite. The quotient is a number which is proportional to the
mass of the planet. The rule applies to the motion of the moon round
the earth and of the planets round the sun. If we divide the cube of
the earth's distance from the sun, say 93,000,000 miles, by the square
of 365 1/4, the days in a year, we shall get a certain quotient. Let us
call this number the sun-quotient. Then, if we divide the cube of the
moon's distance from the earth by the square of its time of revolution,
we shall get another quotient, which we may call the earth-quotient.
The sun-quotient will come out about 330,000 times as large as the
earth-quotient. Hence it is concluded that the mass of the sun is
330,000 times that of the earth; that it would take this number of
earths to make a body as heavy as the sun.

I give this calculation to illustrate the principle; it must not be
supposed that the astronomer proceeds exactly in this way and has only
this simple calculation to make. In the case of the moon and earth, the
motion and distance of the former vary in consequence of the attraction
of the sun, so that their actual distance apart is a changing quantity.
So what the astronomer actually does is to find the attraction of the
earth by observing the length of a pendulum which beats seconds in
various latitudes. Then, by very delicate mathematical processes, he
can find with great exactness what would be the time of revolution of a
small satellite at any given distance from the earth, and thus can get
the earth-quotient.

But, as I have already pointed out, we must, in the case of the
planets, find the quotient in question by means of the satellites; and
it happens, fortunately, that the motions of these bodies are much less
changed by the attraction of the sun than is the motion of the moon.
Thus, when we make the computation for the outer satellite of Mars, we
find the quotient to be 1/3093500 that of the sun-quotient. Hence we
conclude that the mass of Mars is 1/3093500 that of the sun. By the
corresponding quotient, the mass of Jupiter is found to be about 1/1047
that of the sun, Saturn 1/3500, Uranus 1/22700, Neptune 1/19500.

We have set forth only the great principle on which the astronomer has
proceeded for the purpose in question. The law of gravitation is at the
bottom of all his work. The effects of this law require mathematical
processes which it has taken two hundred years to bring to their
present state, and which are still far from perfect. The measurement of
the distance of a satellite is not a job to be done in an evening; it
requires patient labor extending through months and years, and then is
not as exact as the astronomer would wish. He does the best he can, and
must be satisfied with that.




IX

THE MARINER'S COMPASS


Among those provisions of Nature which seem to us as especially
designed for the use of man, none is more striking than the seeming
magnetism of the earth. What would our civilization have been if the
mariner's compass had never been known? That Columbus could never have
crossed the Atlantic is certain; in what generation since his time our
continent would have been discovered is doubtful. Did the reader ever
reflect what a problem the captain of the finest ocean liner of our day
would face if he had to cross the ocean without this little instrument?
With the aid of a pilot he gets his ship outside of Sandy Hook without
much difficulty. Even later, so long as the sun is visible and the air
is clear, he will have some apparatus for sailing by the direction of
the sun. But after a few hours clouds cover the sky. From that moment
he has not the slightest idea of east, west, north, or south, except so
far as he may infer it from the direction in which he notices the wind
to blow. For a few hours he may be guided by the wind, provided he is
sure he is not going ashore on Long Island. Thus, in time, he feels his
way out into the open sea. By day he has some idea of direction with
the aid of the sun; by night, when the sky is clear he can steer by the
Great Bear, or "Cynosure," the compass of his ancient predecessors on
the Mediterranean. But when it is cloudy, if he persists in steaming
ahead, he may be running towards the Azores or towards Greenland, or he
may be making his way back to New York without knowing it. So, keeping
up steam only when sun or star is visible, he at length finds that he
is approaching the coast of Ireland. Then he has to grope along much
like a blind man with his staff, feeling his way along the edge of a
precipice. He can determine the latitude at noon if the sky is clear,
and his longitude in the morning or evening in the same conditions. In
this way he will get a general idea of his whereabouts. But if he
ventures to make headway in a fog, he may find himself on the rocks at
any moment. He reaches his haven only after many spells of patient
waiting for favoring skies.

The fact that the earth acts like a magnet, that the needle points to
the north, has been generally known to navigators for nearly a thousand
years, and is said to have been known to the Chinese at a yet earlier
period. And yet, to-day, if any professor of physical science is asked
to explain the magnetic property of the earth, he will acknowledge his
inability to do so to his own satisfaction. Happily this does not
hinder us from finding out by what law these forces act, and how they
enable us to navigate the ocean. I therefore hope the reader will be
interested in a short exposition of the very curious and interesting
laws on which the science of magnetism is based, and which are applied
in the use of the compass.

The force known as magnetic, on which the compass depends, is different
from all other natural forces with which we are familiar. It is very
