The Project Gutenberg EBook An Egyptian Princess,  by Georg Ebers, v4
#15 in our series by Georg Ebers

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: An Egyptian Princess, Volume 4.

Author: Georg Ebers

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5453]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on May 7, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, BY EBERS, V4 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS, Part 1.

By Georg Ebers

Volume 4.



CHAPTER XI.

Three days before the time fixed for the departure of Nitetis, Rhodopis
had invited a large number of guests to her house at Naukratis, amongst
whom Croesus and Gyges were included.

The two lovers had agreed to meet in the garden, protected by the
darkness and the old slave, while the guests were occupied at the
banquet.  Melitta, therefore, having convinced herself that the guests
were thoroughly absorbed in conversation, opened the garden-gate,
admitted the prince, brought Sappho to him, and then retired, promising
to warn them of any intruder by clapping her hands.

"I shall only have you near me three days longer," whispered Sappho.
"Do you know, sometimes it seems to me as if I had only seen you
yesterday for the first time; but generally I feel as if you had belonged
to me for a whole eternity, and I had loved you all my life."

"To me too it seems as if you had always been mine, for I cannot imagine
how I could ever have existed without you.  If only the parting were over
and we were together again!"

"Oh, believe me, that will pass more quickly than you fancy.  Of course
it will seem long to wait--very long; but when it is over, and we are
together again, I think it will seem as if we had never been parted.  So
it has been with me every day.  How I have longed for the morning to come
and bring you with it!  but when it came and you were sitting by my side,
I felt as if I had had you all the time and your hand had never left my
head."

"And yet a strange feeling of fear comes over me, when I think of our
parting hour."

"I do not fear it so very much.  I know my heart will bleed when you say
farewell, but I am sure you will come back and will not have forgotten
me.  Melitta wanted to enquire of the Oracle whether you would remain
faithful; and to question an old woman who has just come from Phrygia and
can conjure by night from drawn cords, with incense, styrax, moon-shaped
cakes, and wild-briar leaves; but I would have none of this, for my heart
knows better than the Pythia, the cords, or the smoke of sacrifice, that
you will be true to me, and love me always."

"And your heart speaks the truth."

"But  I  have sometimes been afraid;  and have blown into a poppy-leaf,
and struck it, as the young girls here do.  If it broke with a loud crack
I was very happy, and cried, 'Ah! he will not forget!' but if the leaf
tore without a sound I felt sad.  I dare say I did this a hundred times,
but generally the leaf gave the wished-for sound, and I had much oftener
reason to be joyful than sad."

"May it be ever thus!"

"It must be! but dearest, do not speak so loudly; I see Knakias going
down to the Nile for water and he will hear us."

"Well, I will speak low.  There, I will stroke back your silky hair and
whisper in your ear 'I love you.' Could you understand?"

"My grandmother says that it is easy to understand what we like to hear;
but if you had just whispered, 'I hate you,' your eyes would have told me
with a thousand glad voices that you loved me.  Silent eyes are much more
eloquent than all the tongues in the world."

"If I could only speak the beautiful Greek language as you do, I would.."

"Oh, I am so glad you cannot, for if you could tell me all you feel, I
think you would not look into my eyes so lovingly.  Words are nothing.
Listen to the nightingale yonder!  She never had the gift of speech and
yet I think I can understand her."

"Will you confide her secret to me?  I should like to know what Gulgul,
as we Persians call the nightingale, has to talk about to her mate in the
rose-bush.  May you betray her secret?"

"I will whisper it softly.  Philomel sings to her mate 'I love thee,' and
he answers, (don't you hear him?), 'Itys, ito, itys.'"

"And what does that mean, 'Ito, ito?'"

"I accept it."

"And Itys?"

"Oh, that must be explained, to be rightly understood.  Itys is a circle;
and a circle, I was always taught, is the symbol of eternity, having
neither beginning nor end; so the nightingale sings, 'I accept it for
eternity.'"

"And if I say to you, 'I love thee?'"

"Then I shall answer gladly, like the sweet nightingale, 'I accept it for
to-day, to-morrow, for all eternity!'"

"What a wonderful night it is! everything so still and silent; I do not
even hear the nightingale now; she is sitting in the acacia-tree among
the bunches of sweet blossoms.  I can see the tops of the palm-trees in
the Nile, and the moon's reflection between them, glistening like a white
swan."

"Yes, her rays are over every living thing like silver fetters, and the
whole world lies motionless beneath them like a captive woman.  Happy as
I feel now, yet I could not even laugh, and still less speak in a loud
voice."

"Then whisper, or sing!"

"Yes, that is the best.  Give me a lyre.  Thank you.  Now I will lean my
head on your breast, and sing you a little, quiet, peaceful song.  It was
written by Alkman, the Lydian, who lived in Sparta, in praise of night
and her stillness.  You must listen though, for this low, sweet slumber-
song must only leave the lips like a gentle wind.  Do not kiss me any
more, please, till I have finished; then I will ask you to thank me with
a kiss:

         "Now o'er the drowsy earth still night prevails,
          Calm sleep the mountain tops and shady vales,
          The rugged cliffs and hollow glens;

          The wild beasts slumber in their dens;
          The cattle on the bill.  Deep in the sea
          The countless finny race and monster brood
          Tranquil repose.  Even the busy bee
          Forgets her daily toil.  The silent wood
          No more with noisy hum of insect rings;
          And all the feathered tribe, by gentle sleep subdued,
          Roost in the glade and hang their drooping wings."
                              --Translation by Colonel Mure.

"Now, dearest, where is my kiss?"

"I had forgotten it in listening, just as before I forgot to listen in
kissing."

"You are too bad.  But tell me, is not my song lovely?"

"Yes, beautiful, like everything else you sing."

"And the Greek poets write?"

"Yes, there you are right too, I admit."

"Are there no poets in Persia?"

"How can you ask such a question?  How could a nation, who despised song,
pretend to any nobility of feeling?"

"But you have some very bad customs."

"Well?"

"You take so many wives."

"My Sappho  .  .  ."

"Do not misunderstand me.  I love you so much, that I have no other wish
than to see you happy and be allowed to be always with you.  If, by
taking me for your only wife, you would outrage the laws of your country,
if you would thereby expose yourself to contempt, or even blame, (for who
could dare to despise my Bartja!) then take other wives; but let me have
you, for myself alone, at least two, or perhaps even three years.  Will
you promise this, Bartja?"

"I will."

"And then, when my time has passed, and you must yield to the customs of
your country (for it will not be love that leads you to bring home a
second wife), then let me be the first among your slaves.  Oh! I have
pictured that so delightfully to myself.  When you go to war I shall set
the tiara on your head, gird on the sword, and place the lance in your
hand; and when you return a conqueror, I shall be the first to crown you
with the wreath of victory.  When you ride out to the chase, mine will be
the duty of buckling on your spurs, and when you go to the banquet, of
adorning and anointing you, winding the garlands of poplar and roses and
twining them around your forehead and shoulders.  If wounded, I will be
your nurse; will never stir from your side if you are ill, and when I see
you happy will retire, and feast my eyes from afar on your glory and
happiness.  Then perchance you will call me to your side, and your kiss
will say, 'I am content with my Sappho, I love her still.'"

"O Sappho, wert thou only my wife now!--to-day!  The man who possesses
such a treasure as I have in thee, will guard it carefully, but never
care to seek for others which, by its side, can only show their miserable
poverty.  He who has once loved thee, can never love another: I know it
is the custom in my country to have many wives, but this is only allowed;
