will, on our return, burn the village about their ears, and hang up
any who have interfered with our people."

"I should say, Francois, that we should take prisoners, and hold as
hostages, any citizens of importance, or priests, whom we may find
encouraging the townsfolk to massacre. I would take the village
priests, and maire too, so as to carry out the same plan that acted
so well at Toulouse. We could then summon Niort, and say that,
unless the Huguenots in prison are released, and they and all the
Huguenots in the town allowed to come out and join us, we will in
the first place burn and destroy all the Catholic villages round
the town, and the pleasure houses and gardens of the citizens; and
that in the second place we will carry off the prisoners in our
hands, and hang them at once, if we hear of a single Huguenot being
further ill treated."

"That would be a capital plan, Philip, if we could get hold of
anyone of real importance. It is likely some of the principal
citizens, and perhaps Catholic nobles of the neighbourhood, will be
with those who sally out; so that they can claim credit and praise,
from the court party, for their zeal in the cause. I wish our
parties had been a little stronger for, after we have entered a
village or two, we shall have to look after the prisoners."

"I do not think it matters, Francois. A dozen stout men-at-arms,
like ours, would drive a mob of these wretches before them. They
will come out expecting to murder unresisting people; and the sight
of our men-at-arms, in their white scarves, will set them off
running like hares."

"Let it be understood," Philip continued, "that if, when one of us
gets round to the other side of the town, he should not meet the
other party, and can hear no tidings of it, he shall gallop on till
he meets it; for it is just possible, although I think it unlikely,
that one or other of us may meet with so strong a party of the
enemy as to be forced to stand on the defensive, until the other
arrives."

"I think there is little chance of that, Philip; still, it as well
that we should make that arrangement."

As they neared Niort, they met several fugitives. From them they
learned that, so far, the townspeople had not come out; but that
the Catholics in the villages were boasting that an end would be
made of the Huguenots that day, and that many of them were, in
consequence, deserting their homes and making their escape, as
secretly as they could, across the country. When within two miles
of Niort, a column of smoke was seen to arise on the left of the
town.

"They have begun the work!" Francois exclaimed. "That is my side!"

And he placed himself at the head of half the troop, giving them
orders that they were to spare none whom they found engaged in
massacring Huguenots, save priests and other persons acting as
leaders. These were to be taken as hostages, for the safety of
their brethren in the town.

"You need not be over careful with them," he said. "Throw a picket
rope round their necks, and make them trot beside you. They came
out for a little excitement, let them have enough of it."

As Francois rode off one way, Philip led his party the other.

"You have heard these orders," he said. "They will do for you,
also."

The first place they rode into, they found the Catholic inhabitants
in the streets; while the houses of the Huguenots were closed, and
the shutters barred. The men fled as the troop dashed in.

"Pursue them," Philip cried, "and thrash them back with the flat of
your swords, but wound no one."

Most of the men were soon brought back. By this time the Huguenots
had opened their doors and, with shouts of joy, were welcoming
their deliverers.

"Have they threatened you with harm?" Philip asked.

"Yes; there has been mass in the church this morning, and the
priest has told them to prepare to join in the good work, as soon
as the townspeople arrive."

The priest had already been fetched from his house, guarded by two
troopers. The maire was next pointed out, and seized. Two horses
were brought out, and the prisoners placed on them.

"Put a rope round each of their necks," Philip ordered. "Fasten it
firmly."

Two troopers took the other ends.

"Now you will come along with us," Philip went on, "and if you try
to escape, so much the worse for you.

"Now," he said to the villagers, "we shall return here shortly, and
then woe betide you if our orders are not executed. Every house in
the village shall be burned to the ground, every man we lay hold of
shall be hung.

"You will at once place every horse and cart here at the disposal
of your Huguenot brethren. You will assist them to put their
household goods in them, and will at once start with them for
Laville. Those who do so will be allowed to return, unharmed, with
their animals and carts.

"Eustace, you will remain here with two men, and see that this
order is carried out. Shoot down without hesitation any man who
murmurs. If there is any trouble whatever, before our return, the
priest and the maire shall dangle from the church tower."

The next two villages they entered, the same scene was enacted. As
they approached the fourth village, they heard cries and screams.

"Lower your lances, my friends. Forward!"

And at a gallop, the little band dashed into the village.

It was full of people. Several bodies of men and women lay in the
road. Pistol shots rang out here and there, showing that some of
the Huguenots were making a stout defence of their homes. Through
and through the crowd the horsemen rode, those in front clearing
their way with their lances, those behind thrusting and cutting
with their swords.

The Catholics were, for the most part, roughly armed. Some had
pikes, some had swords, others axes, choppers, or clubs; but none
now thought of defence. The arms that had been brought out for the
work of murder were thrown away, and there was no thought, save of
flight.

The doors of the Huguenot houses were thrown open and the men,
issuing out, fell upon those who were, just before, their
assailants. Philip saw some horsemen, and others, collected round a
cross in the centre of the village and, calling upon the men near
him to follow, dashed forward and surrounded the party, before they
apprehended the meaning of this sudden tumult. Two or three of the
men drew their swords, as if to resist; but seeing that their
friends were completely routed, they surrendered.

The party consisted of three men who were, by their dresses,
persons of rank; four or five citizens, also on horseback; four
priests, and a dozen acolytes, with banners and censers.

"Tie their hands behind them," Philip ordered. "Not the boys; let
them go."

"I protest against this indignity," one of the gentlemen said. "I
am a nobleman."

"If you were a prince of the blood, sir, and I found you engaged in
the massacre of innocent people, I would tie you up, and set you
swinging from the nearest tree, without compunction."

Their arms were all tightly bound behind them.

"Would you touch a servant of the Lord?" the leading priest said.

"Your clothing is that of a servant of the Lord," Philip replied;
"but as I find you engaged upon the work of the devil, I can only
suppose that you have stolen the clothes.

"Four of you take these priests behind you," he said to his men;
"tie them tightly, with their backs to yours. That will leave you
the use of your arms.

"Pierre, do you ride beside the other prisoners and, if you see any
attempt at escape, shoot them at once.

"Quick, my lads; there may be more of this work going on, ahead."

He then gave similar instructions, for the carriage of the Huguenot
goods, as he had at the preceding places.

At the next village they were in time to prevent the work of
massacre from commencing. A party of horsemen and some priests,
followed by a mob, were just entering it as they rode up. The
horsemen were overthrown by their onset, the mob sent flying back
towards the town, the Huguenots charging almost up to the gates.
The horsemen and priests were made prisoners, as before; and when
the rest of the band returned from their pursuit, they again rode
on. They had now made half a circuit of Niort, and presently saw
Francois and his party, galloping towards them.

"I had begun to be afraid that something had happened," Francois
said, as he rode up. "I waited a quarter of an hour and then rode
on, as we agreed.

"Well, I see you have got a good batch of prisoners."

"We have lost no time," Philip said. "We have been through five
villages. At one we were just in time, for they had begun the work
of massacre, before we got up. At another, we met them as they
arrived. But at the other three, although the villagers were
prepared for the work, the townsmen had not arrived."

"There were only three villages on my side," Francois said. "At the
first, they had nearly finished their work before we arrived. That
was where we saw the smoke rising. But we paid them for it
handsomely, for we must have cut down more than a hundred of the
scoundrels. At one of the others, the Huguenots were defending
themselves well; and there, too, we gave the townspeople a lesson.
At the third, all was quiet. We have taken six or eight burghers,
as many gentlemen, and ten priests."

Philip told him the orders he had given, for the Catholics to place
their horses and carts at the disposal of their Huguenot fellow
villagers.

"I wish I had thought of it," Francois said. "But it is not too
late. I will ride back with my party, and see all our friends well
on their way from the villages. I left four men at each, to keep
the Catholics from interfering.

"If you will go back the way you came, we will meet again on the
main road, on the other side of the town. I don't think there is
any fear of their making a sortie. Our strength is sure to be
greatly exaggerated; and the fugitives, pouring in from each side
of the town with their tales, will spread a report that Conde
himself, with a whole host of horsemen, is around them."

Philip found all going on well, as he returned through the
villages, the scare being so great that none thought of disobeying
the orders; and in a couple of hours he rejoined Francois, having
seen the whole of the Huguenot population of the villages well on
their way.

"Now, Philip, we will go and summon the town. First of all, though,
let us get a complete list of the names of our prisoners."

These were all written down, and then the two leaders, with their
eight men-at-arms, rode towards the gates of Niort, a white flag
being raised on one of the lances.



Chapter 9: An Important Mission.


"We have made an excellent haul," Francois said as, while awaiting
the answer to their signal, they looked down the list of names.
"Among the gentlemen are several connected with some of the most
important Catholic families of Poitou. The more shame to them, for
being engaged in so rascally a business; though when the court and
the king, Lorraine and the Guises, set the example of persecution,
one can scarcely blame the lesser gentry, who wish to ingratiate
themselves with the authorities, for doing the same.

"Of the citizens we have got one of the magistrates, and four or
five other prominent men; whom I know, by reputation, as having
been among the foremost to stir up the people against the
Huguenots. These fellows I could hang up with pleasure, and would
do so, were it not that we need them to exchange for our friends.

"Then we have got thirty priests. The names of two of them I know
as popular preachers who, after the last peace was made, denounced
the king and his mother as Ahab and Jezebel, for making terms with
us. They, too, were it not for their sacred office, I could string
up without having any weight upon my conscience.

"Ah! There is the white flag. Let us ride forward."

The gates remained closed, and they rode up to within a hundred
yards of them. In a few minutes several persons made their
appearance on the wall over the gateway, and they then advanced to
within twenty paces of the gate.

Then one from the wall said:

"I am John De Luc, royal commissioner of this town. This is the
reverend bishop of the town. This is the maire, and these the
magistrates. To whom am I speaking?"

"I am the Count Francois de Laville," Francois replied; "and I now
represent the gentlemen who have come hither, with a large body of
troops, to protect those of our faith from persecution and
massacre. We arrived too late to save all, but not to punish; as
the ruffians of your town have learned, to their cost. Some two or
three hundred of them came out to slay, and have been slain.

"The following persons are in our hands," and he read the list of
the prisoners. "I now give you notice that unless, within one hour
of the present time, all those of the reformed faith whom you have
thrown into prison, together with all others who wish to leave, are
permitted to issue from this gate, free and unharmed, and carrying
with them what portion of their worldly goods they may wish to take,
I will hang up the whole of the prisoners in my hands--gentlemen,
citizens, and priests--to the trees of that wood, a quarter of a
mile away. Let it be understood that the terms are to be carried
out to the letter. Proclamation must be made through your streets
that all of the reformed faith are free to depart, taking with them
their wives and families, and such valuables and goods as they may
choose. I shall question those who come out, and if I find that any
have been detained against their will, or if the news has not been
so proclaimed that all can take advantage of it, I shall not release
the prisoners.

"If these terms are not accepted, my officers will first hang the
prisoners, then they will ravage the country round; and will then
proceed to besiege the city and, when they capture it, take
vengeance for the innocent blood that has been shed within its
walls. You best know what is the strength of your garrison, and
whether you can successfully resist an assault by the troops of the
Admiral.

"I will give you ten minutes to deliberate. Unless by the end of
that time you accept the conditions offered, it will go hard with
those in our hands."

"Impious youth," the bishop, who was in full pontificals, said,
"you would never dare to hang priests."

"As the gentlemen of your party have thought it no sin to put to
death scores of our ministers, and as I found these most holy
persons hounding on a mob to massacre, I shall certainly feel no
compunction, whatever, in executing the orders of my leader, to
hang them with the other malefactors," Francois replied; "and
methinks that you will benefit these holy men more, by advising
those with you to agree to the conditions which I offer, than by
wasting your breath in controversy with me."

There was a hasty conversation between those on the wall, and it
was not long before they came to an agreement. De Luc feared that
he should incur the enmity of several powerful families, if he left
their relatives for execution. The citizens were equally anxious to
save their fellows; and were, moreover, scared at the threat of the
neighbourhood being laid waste, and the town attacked, by this
unknown force that had appeared before it. They had heard vague
rumours of the arrival of the prince and Admiral, with a large
force, at La Rochelle; but it might well be that he had turned
aside on his journey, at the news of the occurrences at Niort. The
bishop was equally anxious to rescue the priests, for he felt that
he might be blamed for their death by his ecclesiastical superiors.

Their consultation over, de Luc turned to the Count.

"Do you give me your solemn assurance and word, as a noble of
France, that upon our performing our part of the condition, the
prisoners in your hands shall be restored unharmed?"

"I do," Francois replied. "I pledge my honour that, as soon as I
find that the whole of those of our religion have left the town
peaceably, the prisoners shall be permitted to return, unharmed in
any way."

"Then we accept the terms. All those of the reformed religion in
the town, whether at present in prison or in their homes, who may
desire to leave, will be permitted to pass. As soon as you retire,
the gate shall be opened."

Francois and his party fell back a quarter of a mile. In a short
time, people began to issue in twos and threes from the gate. Many
bore heavy bundles on their backs, and were accompanied by women
and children, all similarly laden. A few had with them carts, piled
up with household goods.

From the first who came, Francois learned that the conditions had
been carried out; the proclamation being made in every street, at
the sound of the trumpet, that all who held the reformed religion
were free to depart, and that they might take with them such goods
as they could carry, or take in carts. At first it had been thought
that this was but a trap, to get the Huguenots to reveal
themselves; but the reports of those who had returned, discomfited,
to the town, that there was a great Huguenot force outside, and
that many people of consideration had been taken prisoners, gave
them courage; and some of the leading citizens went round, to every
house where persons suspected of being Huguenots were living, to
urge them to leave, telling them that a treaty had been made
securing them their safety. Before the hour had passed, more than
five hundred men, women, and children had left the town.

As all agreed that no impediment had been placed in their way, but
that upon the contrary, every person even suspected as having
Huguenot leanings had been urged to go, Francois and Philip felt
assured that, at any rate, all who wished to leave had had the
opportunity of doing so. They waited ten minutes over the hour; and
then, seeing that no more came forth, they ordered the prisoners to
be unbound, and allowed to depart for the city.

As the fugitives had come along they were told that the Prince of
Conde, with a strong force, had entered La Rochelle; and were
advised to make for that city, where they would find safety and
welcome. Those, however, who preferred to go to Laville, were
assured that they would be welcomed and cared for, there, until an
opportunity arose for their being sent, under escort, to La
Rochelle. The greater portion decided to make, at once, for the
Huguenot city.

"I think, Philip, you had better take forty of the men, to act as a
rearguard to these poor people, till you are within sight of La
Rochelle. The fellows whom we have let free will tell, on their
return to the town, that we are but a small party; and it is
possible they may send out parties in pursuit."

"I don't think it is likely. The townspeople have been too roughly
handled to care about running any risks. They have no very large
body of men-at-arms in the town. Still, if they do pursue, it will
be by the road to La Rochelle, for that is the one they will think
that most of the fugitives will take.

"Had we not better divide the troop equally, Francois?"

"No, I think not. They will imagine we shall all be going by that
road; and that, moreover, some of the other gentlemen of our faith
may be coming to meet us, with their retainers. Twenty will be
ample for me. Do you take the rest."

Two hours later, Philip saw a cloud of dust rising from the road in
his rear. He hurried on with the fugitives in front of him until,
half an hour later, they came to a bridge over a stream. This was
only wide enough for four horsemen to cross abreast, and here he
took up his station.

In a few minutes, a number of horsemen approached. They were riding
without order or regularity, intent only on overtaking their prey.
Seeing the disorder in which they came, Philip advanced from the
bridge, formed up his men in two lines, and then charged at full
gallop.

The men-at-arms tried to rein in their horses and form in order
but, before they could do so, the Huguenots burst down upon them.
The horses of the Catholics, exhausted with the speed at which they
had been ridden, were unable to withstand the shock; and they and
their riders went down before it. A panic seized those in the rear
and, turning quickly, they fled in all directions, leaving some
thirty of their number dead on the ground. Philip would not permit
his followers to pursue.

"They outnumber us four times," he said; "and if we scatter, they
may turn and fall upon us. Our horses have done a long day's work,
and deserve rest. We will halt here at the bridge. They are not
likely to disturb us, but if they do, we can make a stout
resistance here.

"Do you ride on, Jacques, and tell the fugitives that they can
press forward as far as they like, and then halt for the night. We
will take care that they are not molested, and will ride on and
overtake them, in the morning."

The night passed quietly and, late the following evening, the party
were in sight of La Rochelle. Philip had intended to turn at this
point, where all danger to the fugitives was over, and to start on
his journey back. But the hour was late, and he would have found it
difficult to obtain food and forage, without pressing the horses.
He therefore determined to pass the night at La Rochelle, as he
could take the last news, thence, back to Laville.

The streets of the town presented a busy aspect. Parties of
Huguenot gentlemen and their retainers were constantly arriving,
and fugitive villagers had come in from a wide extent of country.
Large numbers of men were working at the walls of the town. The
harbour was full of small craft. Lines of carts brought in
provisions from the surrounding country, and large numbers of oxen,
sheep, and goats were being driven in.

"As we shall start for Laville in the morning," Philip said to his
men, "it is not worth while to trouble to get quarters; and indeed,
I should say, from the appearance of the place, that every house is
already crowded from basement to roof. Therefore we will bivouac
down by the shore, where I see there are many companies already
bestowed."

As soon as they had picketed their horses, a party were sent off,
to purchase provisions for the troop and forage for their horses;
and when he had seen that the arrangements were complete, Philip
told Pierre to follow him, and went up to the castle, where Conde
and Coligny, with their families, were lodged. He was greeted
warmly by several of the gentlemen who had stopped at the chateau,
a few days before.

The story of the fugitives from Niort had already spread through
the town, and Philip was eagerly questioned about it. Just as he
was about to tell the story, Conde and the Admiral came out, from
an inner room, into the large anteroom where they were talking.

"Ah! Here is the young count's cousin, Monsieur Fletcher," the
Admiral said. "Now we shall hear about this affair of Niort, of
which we have received half a dozen different versions, in the last
hour. Is the count himself here?"

"No, sir. He returned to Laville, escorting the fugitives who went
thither; while he sent me, with the larger portion of the troop, to
protect the passage hither of the main body."

"But it was reported to me that the troop with which you entered
was but forty strong. I hear you fought a battle on the way. Did
you lose many men there?"

"None, sir. Indeed I am glad to say that, beyond a few trifling
wounds, the whole matter has been carried out without any loss to
the party that rode from Laville."

"How strong were they altogether, monsieur?"

"Sixty, sir."

"Then where did you join the force that, as we hear, cut up the
townspeople of Niort as they were massacring our people in the
villages round, and afterwards obtained from the town the freedom
of those who had been cast into prison, and permission for all
Huguenots to leave the town?"

"There was no other force, sir. We had just the sixty men from
Laville, commanded by my cousin Francois. When the news arrived of
the doings at Niort, there was no time to send round to gather our
friends; so we mounted the men-at-arms at the chateau and rode with
all speed, and were but just in time. Had we delayed another half
hour, to gather a larger force, we should have been too late."

"Tell us all about it," the prince said.

"This seems to have been a gallant and well-managed affair,
Admiral."

Philip related the whole circumstances of the affair; how the
townspeople had been heavily punished, and the chief men taken as
hostages, and the peasants compelled to assist to convey the
property of the Huguenots to Laville; also the subsequent
negotiations, and the escape of all the Huguenots from Niort; and
how the troop under him had smartly repulsed, with the loss of over
thirty men, the men-at-arms from the city.

"A gallant enterprise," the prince said. "What think you, Admiral?"

"I think, indeed, that this young gentleman and his cousin, the
young Count of Laville, have shown singular prudence and
forethought, as well as courage. The matter could not have been
better managed, had it been planned by any of our oldest heads.
That they should, at the head of their little bodies of
men-at-arms, have dispersed the cowardly mob of Niort, is what we
may believe that any brave gentleman would have done; but their
device of taking the priests and the other leaders as hostages,
their boldness in summoning the authorities of Niort, under the
threat of hanging the hostages and capturing the town, is indeed
most excellent and commendable. I heard that the number of
fugitives from Niort was nearly six hundred, and besides these
there were, I suppose, those from the villages."

"About two hundred set out from the villages, sir."

"Eight hundred souls. You hear that, gentlemen? Eight hundred souls
have been rescued, from torture and death, by the bravery and
prudence of these two young gentlemen, who are in years but youths.
Let it be a lesson, to us all, of what can be done by men engaged
in a good work, and placing their trust in God. There is not one of
us but might have felt proud to have been the means of doing so
great and good a work, with so small a force; and to have saved
eight hundred lives, without the loss of a single one; to say
nothing of the sharp lesson given to the city mobs, that the work
of massacre may sometimes recoil upon those who undertake it.

"Our good friend De la Noue has, more than once, spoken very highly
to the prince and myself respecting the young count, and this young
English gentleman; and they certainly have more than borne out his
