
An unexpected pang went through him.

He sorted and classified endlessly what he had learned. He formed and
rejected a dozen plans. At last there was one he could not reject.




XV


Commander Grinnel was officer of the day, and sore as a boil about it.
O.N.I. wasn't supposed to catch the duty. You risked your life on
cloak-and-dagger missions; let the shore-bound fancy dans do the
drudgery. But there he was, nevertheless, in the guard house office with
a .45 on his hip, the interminable night stretching before him, and the
ten-man main guard snoring away outside.

He eased his bad military conscience by reflecting that there wasn't
anything to guard, that patrolling the shore establishment was just worn
out tradition. The ships and boats had their own watch. At the very
furthest stretch of the imagination, a tarzan might sneak into town and
try to steal some ammo. Well, if he got caught he got caught. And if he
didn't, who'd know the difference with the accounting as sloppy as it
was here? They did things differently in Iceland.

       *       *       *       *       *

They crept through the midnight dark of New Portsmouth's outskirts. As
before, she led with her small hand. Lights flared on a wharf where,
perhaps, a boat was being serviced. A slave screamed somewhere under the
lash or worse.

"Here's the doss house," Martha whispered. It was smack between
paydays--part of the plan--and the house was dark except for the
hopefully-lit parlor. They ducked down the alley that skirted it and
around the back of Bachelor Officer Quarters. The sentry, if he were
going his rounds at all, would be at the other end of his post when they
passed--part of the plan.

Lee Falcaro was quartered alone in a locked room of the O.N.I. building.
Martha had, from seventy miles away, frequently watched the lock being
opened and closed.

They dove under the building's crumbling porch two minutes before a late
crowd of drinkers roared down the street and emerged when they were
safely gone. There was a charge of quarters, a little yeoman, snoozing
under a dim light in the O.N.I. building's lobby.

"Anybody else?" Charles whispered edgily.

"No. Just her. She's asleep. Dreaming about--never mind. Come on
Charles. He's out."

The little yeoman didn't stir as they passed him and crept up the
stairs. Lee Falcaro's room was part of the third-floor attic, finished
off specially. You reached it by a ladder from a second-floor one-man
office.

The lock was an eight-button piccolo--very rare in New Portsmouth and
presumably loot from the mainland. Charles' fingers flew over it:
1-7-5-4-, 2-2-7-3-, 8-2-6-6- and it flipped open silently.

But the door squeaked.

"She's waking up!" Martha hissed in the dark. "She'll yell!"

Charles reached the bed in two strides and clamped his hand over Lee
Falcaro-Bennet's mouth. Only a feeble "mmm!" came out, but the girl
thrashed violently in his grip.

"Shut up, lady!" Martha whispered. "Nobody's going to rape you."

There was an astonished "mmm?" and she subsided, trembling.

"Go ahead," Martha told him. "She won't yell."

He took his hand away nervously. "We've come to administer the oath of
citizenship," he said.

The girl answered in the querulous voice that was hardly hers: "You
picked a strange time for it. Who are you? What's all the whispering
for?"

He improvised. "I'm Commander Lister. Just in from Iceland aboard atom
sub _Taft_. They didn't tell you in case it got turned down, but I was
sent for authorization to give you citizenship. You know how unusual it
is for a woman."

"Who's this child? And why did you get me up in the dead of night?"

He dipped deeply into Martha's probings of the past week.
"Citizenship'll make the Guard Intelligence gang think twice before they
try to grab you again. Naturally they'd try to block us if we
administered the oath in public. Ready?"

"Dramatic," she sneered. "Oh, I suppose so. Get it over with."

"Do you, Lee Bennet, solemnly renounce all allegiances previously held
by you and pledge your allegiance to the North American Government?"

"I do," she said.

There was a choked little cry from Martha. "Hell's fire," she said.
"Like breaking a leg!"

"What are you talking about, little girl?" Lee asked, coldly alert.

"It's all right," Charles said wearily. "Don't you know my voice? I'm
Orsino. You turned me in back there because they don't give, citizenship
to women and so your de-conditioning didn't get triggered off. I managed
to break for the woods. A bunch of natives got me. I busted loose with
the help of Martha here. Among her other talents, the kid's a mind
reader. I remember the triggering shocked me out of a year's growth; how
do you feel?"

Lee was silent, but Martha answered in a voice half puzzled and half
contemptuous: "She feels fine, but she's crying."

"Am not," Lee Falcaro gulped.

Charles turned from her, embarrassed. In a voice that strove to be
normal, he whispered to Martha: "What about the boat?"

"Still there," she said.

Lee Falcaro said tremulously: "Wh-wh-what boat?"

"Martha's staked out a reactor-driven patrol speedboat at a wharf. One
guard aboard. She--watched it in operation and I have some small-boat
time. I really think we can grab it. If we get a good head-start, they
don't have anything based here that'll catch up with it. If we get a
break on the weather, their planes won't be able to pick us up."

Lee Falcaro stood up, dashing tears from her eyes. "Then let's go," she
said evenly.

"How's the C.Q.--that man downstairs, Martha?"

"Still sleepin'. The way's as clear now as it'll ever be."

They closed the door behind them and Charles worked the lock. The Charge
of Quarters looked as though he couldn't be roused by anything less
than an earthquake as they passed--but Martha stumbled on one of the
rotting steps after they were outside the building.

"Patrick and Bridget rot my clumsy feet off!" she whispered. "He's
awake."

"Under the porch," Charles said. They crawled into the dank space
between porch floor and ground. Martha kept up a scarcely-audible
volleyfire of maledictions aimed at herself.

When they stopped abruptly Charles knew it was bad.

Martha held up her hand for silence, and Charles imagined in the dark
that he could see the strained and eerie look of her face. After a pause
she whispered: "He's using the--what do you call it? You talk and
somebody hears you far away? A prowler he says to them. A wild man from
the woods. The bitches bastard must have seen you in your handsome suit
of skin and dirt, Charles. Oh, we're _for_ it! May my toe that stumbled
grow the size of a boulder! May my cursed eyes that didn't see the step
fall out!"

They huddled down in the darkness and Charles took Lee Falcaro's hand
reassuringly. It was cold. A moment later his other hand was taken, with
grim possessiveness, by the child.

Martha whispered: "The fat little man. The man who kills, Charles."

He nodded. He thought he had recognized Grinnel from her picture.

"And ten men waking up. Charles, do you remember the way to the wharf?"

"Sure," he said. "But we're net going to get separated."

"They're mean, mad men," she said. "Bloody-minded. And the little man is
the worst."

They heard the stomping feet and a babble of voices, and Commander
Grinnel's clear, fat-man's tenor: "Keep it quiet, men. He may still be
in the area." The feet thundered over their heads on the porch.

In the barest of whispers Martha said: "The man that slept tells them
there was only one, and he didn't see what he was like except for the
bare skin and the long hair. And the fat man says they'll find him
and--and--and says they'll find him." Her hand clutched Charles'
desperately and then dropped it as the feet thudded overhead again.

Grinnel was saying: "Half of you head up the street and half down. Check
the alleys, check open window--hell, I don't have to tell you. If we
don't find the bastard on the first run we'll have to wake up the whole
Guard Battalion and patrol the whole base with them all the goddam
night, so keep your eyes open. Take off."

"Remember the way to the wharf, Charles," Martha said. "Good-bye lady.
Take care of him. Take good care of him." She wrenched her hand away and
darted out from under the porch.

Lee muttered some agonized monosyllable. Charles started out after the
child instinctively and then collapsed weakly back onto the dirt. They
heard the rest.

"Hey, you--it's him, by God! Get him! Get him!"

"Here he is, down here! Head him off!"

"Over there!" Grinnel yelled. "Head him off! Head him--good work!"

"For God's sake. It's a girl."

"Those goddam yeomen and their goddam prowlers."

Grinnel: "Where are you from, kid?"

"That's no kid from the base, commander. Look at her!"

"I just was, sarge. Looks good to me, don't it to you?"

Grinnel, tolerant, fatherly, amused: "Now, men, have your fun but keep
it quiet."

"Don't be afraid, kid--" There was an animal howl from Martha's throat
that made Lee Falcaro shake hysterically and Charles grind his
fingernails into his palms.

Grinnel: "Sergeant, you'd better tie your shirt around her head and take
her into the O.N.I. building."

"Why, commander! And let that lousy little yeoman in on it?"

Grinnel, amused, a good Joe, a man's man: "That's up to you, men. Just
keep it quiet."

"Why, commander, sometimes I like to make a little noise--"

"Ow!" a man yelled. There was a scuffle of feet and babbling voices.
"Get her, you damn fool!" "She bit my hand--" "There she goes--" and a
single emphatic shot.

Grinnel's voice said into the silence that followed: "That's that, men."

"Did you _have_ to shoot, Commander?" an aggrieved Guardsman said.

"Don't blame me, fellow. Blame the guy that let her go."

"God-dammit, she bit me--"

Somebody said as though he didn't mean it: "We ought to take her
someplace."

"The hell with that. Let 'em get her in the morning."

"Them as wants her." A cackle of harsh laughter.

Grinnel, tolerantly: "Back to the guardhouse, men. And keep it quiet."

They scuffled off and there was silence again for long minutes. Charles
said at last: "We'll go down to the wharf." They crawled out and looked
for a moment from the shelter of the building at the bundle lying in the
road.

Lee muttered: "Grinnel."

"Shut up," Charles said. He led her down deserted alleys and around
empty corners, strictly according to plan.

The speedboat was a twenty-foot craft at Wharf Eighteen, bobbing on the
water safely removed from other moored boats and ships. Lee Falcaro let
out a small, smothered shriek when she saw a uniformed sailor sitting in
the cockpit, apparently staring directly at them.

"It's all right," Charles said. "He's a drunk. He's always out cold by
this time of night." Smoothly Charles found the rope locker, cut lengths
with the sailor's own knife and bound and gagged him. The man's eyes
opened, weary, glazed and red while this was going on and closed again.
"Help me lug him ashore," Charles said. Lee Falcaro took the sailor's
legs and they eased him onto the wharf.

They went back into the cockpit. "This is deep water," Charles said, "so
you'll have no trouble with pilotage. You can read a compass and charts.
There's an automatic dead reckoner. My advice is just to pull the
moderator rods out quarter-speed, point the thing west, pull the rods
out as far as they'll go--and relax. Either they'll overtake you or they
won't."

She was beginning to get the drift. She said nervously: "You're talking
as though you're not coming along."

"I'm not," he said, playing the lock of the arms rack. The bar fell
aside and he pulled a .45 pistol from its clamp. He thought back and
remembered where the boat's diminutive magazine was located, broke the
feeble lock and found a box of short, fat, heavy little cartridges. He
began to snap them into the pistol's magazine.

"What do you think you're up to?" Lee Falcaro demanded.

"Appointment with Commander Grinnel," he said. He slid the heavy
magazine into the pistol's grip and worked the slide to jack a cartridge
into the chamber.

"Shall I cast off for you?" he asked.

"Don't be a fool," she said. "You sound like a revival of a Mickey
Spillane comedy. You can't bring her back to life and you've got a job
to do for the Syndic."

"You do it," he said, and snapped another of the blunt, fat, little
cartridges into the magazine.

She cast off, reached for the moderator-rod control and pulled it hard.

"Gee," he gasped, "you'll sink us!" and dashed for the controls. You had
seconds before the worm-gears turned, the cadmium rods withdrew from
their slots, the reactor seethed and sent boiling metal cycling through
the turbine--

He slammed down manual levers that threw off the fore and aft mooring
lines, spun the wheel, bracing himself, and saw Lee Falcaro go down to
the deck in a tangle, the .45 flying from her hand and skidding across
the knurled plastic planking. But by then the turbine was screaming an
alarm to the whole base and they were cutting white water through the
buoy-marked gap in the harbor net.

Lee Falcaro got to her feet. "I'm not proud of myself," she said to him.
"But she told me to take care of you."

