dissatisfaction every now and then.

"What _can_ he be up to now, I wonder?" murmured the disturbed youth,
sleepily.

The hermit, who slept through all noises with infantine simplicity, made
no answer, but a peculiar snort from the negro, who lay not far off on
his other side, told that he was struggling with a laugh.

"Hallo, Moses! are you awake?" asked Nigel, in a low voice.

"Ho yes, Massa Nadgel. I's bin wakin' a good while, larfin fit to bu'st
my sides. De purfesser's been agoin' on like a mad renoceros for more 'n
an hour. He's arter suthin, which he can't ketch. Listen! You hear 'im
goin' round an' round on his tip-toes. Dere goes anoder chair. I only
hope he won't smash de lamp an' set de house a-fire."

"Veil, veil; I've missed him zee tence time. Nevair mind. Have at you
vonce more, you aggravating leetle zing!"

Thus the unsuccessful man relieved his feelings, in a growling tone, as
he continued to move about on tip-toe, rattling the bamboo flooring in
spite of his careful efforts to move quietly.

"Why, Verkimier, what are you after?" cried Nigel at last, loud enough
to be heard through the partition.

"Ah! I am sorry to vake you," he replied, without, however, suspending
his hunt. "I have tried my best to make no noice, but zee bamboo floor
is--hah! I have 'im at last!"

"What is it?" asked Nigel, becoming interested.

"Von leetle bat. He come in vis a moss----"

"A what?"

"A moss--a big, beautiful moss."

"Oh! a moth--well?"

"Vell, I shut zee window, capture zee moss, ant zen I hunt zee bat vith
my bootterfly-net for an hour, but have only captured him zis moment.
Ant he is--sooch a--sooch a splendid specimen of a _very_ rar' species,
zee _Coelops frizii_--gootness! Zere goes zee lamp!"

The crash that followed told too eloquently of the catastrophe, and
broke the slumbers even of the hermit. The whole party sprang up, and
entered the naturalist's room with a light, for the danger from fire
was great. Fortunately the lamp had been extinguished in its fall, so
that, beyond an overpowering smell of petroleum and the destruction of a
good many specimens, no serious results ensued.

After securing the _Coelops frithii_, removing the shattered glass,
wiping up the oil, and putting chairs and tables on their legs, the
professor was urged to go to bed,--advice which, in his excitement, he
refused to take until it was suggested that, if he did not, he would be
totally unfit for exploring the forest next day.

"Vy, it is next day already!" he exclaimed, consulting his watch.

"Just so. Now _do_ turn in."

"I vill."

And he did.




CHAPTER XVIII.

A TRYING ORDEAL--DANGER THREATENS AND FLIGHT AGAIN RESOLVED ON.


When the early birds are singing, and the early mists are scattering,
and the early sun is rising to gladden, as with the smile of God, all
things with life in earth and sea and sky--then it is that early-rising
man goes forth to reap the blessings which his lazy fellow-man fails to
appreciate or enjoy.

Among the early risers that morning was our friend Moses. Gifted with an
inquiring mind, the negro had proceeded to gratify his propensities by
making inquiries of a general nature, and thus had acquired, among other
things, the particular information that the river on the banks of which
the village stood was full of fish. Now, Moses was an ardent angler.

"I lub fishing," he said one day to Nigel when in a confidential mood;
"I can't tell you how much I lub it. Seems to me dat der's nuffin' like
it for proggin' a man!"

When Nigel demanded an explanation of what proggin' meant, Moses said
he wasn't quite sure. He could "understand t'ings easy enough though he
couldn't allers 'splain 'em." On the whole he thought that prog had a
compound meaning--it was a combination of poke and pull "wid a flavour
ob ticklin' about it," and was rather pleasant.

"You see," he continued, "when a leetle fish plays wid your hook, it
progs your intellec' an' tickles up your fancy a leetle. When he grabs
you, dat progs your hopes a good deal. When a big fish do de same, dat
progs you deeper. An' when a real walloper almost pulls you into de
ribber, dat progs your heart up into your t'roat, where it stick till
you land him."

With surroundings and capacities such as we have attempted to describe,
it is no wonder that Moses sat down on the river-bank and enjoyed
himself, in company with a little Malay boy, who lent him his bamboo rod
and volunteered to show him the pools.

But there were no particular pools in that river It was a succession of
pools, and fish swarmed in all of them. There were at least fifteen
different species which nothing short of an ichthyologist could
enumerate correctly. The line used by Moses was a single fibre of bark
almost as strong as gut; the hook was a white tinned weapon like a small
anchor, supplied by traders, and meant originally for service in the
deep sea. The bait was nothing in particular, but as the fish were not
particular that was of no consequence. The reader will not be surprised,
then, when we state that in an hour or so Moses had had his heart
progged considerably and had filled a large bag with superb fish, with
which he returned, perspiring, beaming, and triumphant to breakfast.

After breakfast the whole party went forth for what Verkimier styled
"zee business of zee day," armed with guns, spears, botanical boxes,
bags, wallets, and butterfly nets.

In the immediate neighbourhood of the village large clearings in the
forest were planted as coffee gardens, each separated from the other for
the purpose of isolation, for it seems that coffee, like the potato, is
subject to disease. Being covered with scarlet flowers these gardens had
a fine effect on the landscape when seen from the heights behind the
village. Passing through the coffee grounds the party was soon in the
tangled thickets of underwood through which many narrow paths had been
cut.

We do not intend to drag our readers through bog and brake during the
whole of this day's expedition; suffice it to say that the collection of
specimens made, of all kinds, far surpassed the professor's most
sanguine expectations, and, as for the others, those who could more or
less intelligently sympathise did so, while those who could not were
content with the reflected joy of the man of science.

At luncheon--which they partook of on the river-bank, under a
magnificently umbrageous tree--plans for the afternoon were fixed.

"We have kept together long enough, I think," said Van der Kemp. "Those
of us who have guns must shoot something to contribute to the national
feast on our return."

"Vell, let us divide," assented the amiable naturalist. Indeed he was so
happy that he would have assented to anything--except giving up the
hunt. "Von party can go von vay, anoder can go anoder vay. I vill
continue mine business. Zee place is more of a paradise zan zee last. Ve
must remain two or tree veeks."

The hermit glanced at Nigel.

"I fear it is impossible for me to do so," said the latter. "I am
pledged to return to Batavia within a specified time, and from the
nature of the country I perceive it will take all the time at my
disposal to reach that place so as to redeem my pledge."

"Ha! Zat is a peety. Vell, nevair mind. Let us enchoy to-day. Com', ve
must not vaste more of it in zee mere gratification of our animal
natures."

Acting on this broad hint they all rose and scattered in different
groups--the professor going off ahead of his party in his eager haste,
armed only with a butterfly net.

Now, as the party of natives,--including Baso, who carried the
professor's biggest box, and Grogo, who bore his gun,--did not overtake
their leader, they concluded that he must have joined one of the other
parties, and, as it was impossible to ascertain which of them, they
calmly went hunting on their own account! Thus it came to pass that the
man of science was soon lost in the depths of that primeval forest! But
little cared the enthusiast for that--or, rather, little did he realise
it. With perspiration streaming from every pore--except where the pores
were stopped by mud--he dashed after "bootterflies" with the wisdom of
Solomon and the eagerness of a school-boy, and not until the shades of
evening began to descend did his true position flash upon him. Then,
with all the vigour of a powerful intellect and an enlightened mind, he
took it in at a glance--and came to a sudden halt.

"Vat _shall_ I do?" he asked.

Not even an echo answered, and the animal kingdom was indifferent.

"Lat me see. I have been vandering avay all dis time. Now, I have
not'ing to do but right-about-face and vander back."

Could reasoning be clearer or more conclusive? He acted on it at once,
but, after wandering back a long time, he did not arrive at any place
or object that he had recognised on the outward journey.

Meanwhile, as had been appointed, the rest of the party met a short time
before dark at the rendezvous where they had lunched.

"Where is the professor, Baso?" asked Van der Kemp as he came up.

Baso did not know, and looked at Grogo, who also professed ignorance,
but both said they thought the professor had gone with Nigel.

"I thought he was with _you_," said the latter, looking anxiously at the
hermit.

"He's goed an' lost hisself!" cried Moses with a look of concern.

Van der Kemp was a man of action. "Not a moment to lose," he said, and
organised the band into several smaller parties, each led by a native
familiar with the jungle.

"Let this be our meeting-place," he said, as they were on the point of
starting off together; "and let those of us who have fire-arms discharge
them occasionally."

Meanwhile, the professor was walking at full speed in what he supposed
to be--and in truth was--"back."

He was not alone, however. In the jungle close beside him a tiger
prowled along with the stealthy, lithe, sneaking activity of a cat. By
that time it was not absolutely dark, but the forest had assumed a very
sombre appearance. Suddenly the tiger made a tremendous bound on to the
track right in front of the man. Whether it had miscalculated the
position of its intended victim or not we cannot say, but it crouched
for another spring. The professor, almost instinctively, crouched also,
and, being a brave man, stared the animal straight in the face without
winking! and so the two crouched there, absolutely motionless and with a
fixed glare, such as we have often seen in a couple of tom-cats who were
mutually afraid to attack each other.

What the tiger thought at that critical and crucial moment we cannot
tell, but the professor's thoughts were swift, varied,
tremendous--almost sublime, and once or twice even ridiculous!

"Vat shall I do? Deaf stares me in zee face! No veapons! only a net, ant
he is _not_ a bootterfly! Science, adieu! Home of my chilthood,
farevell! My moder--Hah! zee fusees!"

Such were a few of the thoughts that burned but found no utterance. The
last thought however led to action. Verkimier, foolish man! was a
smoker. He carried fusees. Slowly, with no more apparent motion than the
hour-hand on the face of a watch, he let his hand glide into his
coat-pocket and took out the box of fusees. The tiger seemed uneasy, but
the bold man never for one instant ceased to glare, and no disturbed
expression or hasty movement gave the tiger the slightest excuse for a
spring. Bringing the box up by painfully slow degrees in front of his
nose the man opened it, took out a fusee, struck it, and revealed the
blue binoculars!

The effect on the tiger was instantaneous and astounding. With a
demi-volt or backward somersault it hurled itself into the jungle whence
it had come with a terrific roar of alarm, and its tail--undoubtedly
though not evidently--between its legs!

Heaving a deep, long-drawn sigh, the professor stood up and wiped his
forehead. Then he listened intently.

"A shote, if mine ears deceive me not!" he said, and listened again.

He was right. Another shot, much nearer, was heard, and he replied with
a shout to which joy as much as strength of lung gave fervour. Hurrying
along the track--not without occasional side-glances at the jungle--the
hero was soon again in the midst of his friends; and it was not until
his eyes refused to remain open any longer that he ceased to entertain
an admiring circle that night with the details of his face-to-face
meeting with a tiger.

But Verkimier's anticipations in regard to that paradise were not to be
realised. The evil passions of a wicked man, with whom he had personally
nothing whatever to do, interfered with his plans. In the middle of the
night a native Malay youth named Babu arrived at the village and
demanded an interview with the chief. That worthy, after the interview,
conducted the youth to the hut where his visitors lived, and, rousing
Van der Kemp without disturbing the others, bade him listen to what the
young man had to say. An expression of great anxiety overspread the
hermit's usually placid countenance while Babu was speaking.

"It is fate!" he murmured, as if communing with himself--then, after a
pause--"no, there is no such thing as fate. It is, it must be, the will
of God. Go, young man, mention this to no one. I thank you for the
kindness which made you take so long a journey for my sake."

"It is not kindness, it is love that makes me serve you," returned the
lad earnestly. "Every one loves you, Van der Kemp, because that curse of
mankind, _revenge_, has no place in your breast."

"Strange! how little man does know or guess the secret thoughts of his
fellow!" said the hermit with one of his pitiful smiles. "_Revenge_ no
place in me!--but I thank you, boy, for the kind thought as well as the
effort to save me. My life is not worth much to any one. It will not
matter, I think, if my enemy should succeed. Go now, Babu, and God be
with you!"

"He will surely succeed if you do not leave this place at once,"
rejoined the youth, in a tone of decision. "Baderoon is furious at all
times. He is worse than ever just now, because you have thwarted his
plans--so it is said--very often. If he knew that _I_ am now thwarting
them also, he would hunt me to death. I will not leave you till you are
safe beyond his reach."

The hermit looked at the lad with kindly surprise.

"How comes it," he said, "that you are so much interested in me? I
remember seeing you two years ago, but have no recollection of having
done you any service."

"Do you not remember that my mother was ill when you spent a night in
our hut, and my little sister was dying? You nursed her, and tried your
best to save her, and when you could not save her, and she died, you
wept as if the child had been your own. I do not forget that, Van der
Kemp. Sympathy is of more value than service."

"Strangely mistaken again!" murmured the hermit. "Who can know the
workings of the human mind! Self was mixed with my
feelings--profoundly--yet my sympathy with you and your mother was
sincere."

"We never doubted that," returned Babu with a touch of surprise in his
tone.

"Well now, what do you propose to do, as you refuse to leave me?" asked
the hermit with some curiosity.

"I will go on with you to the next village. It is a large one. The chief
man there is my uncle, who will aid me, I know, in any way I wish. I
will tell him what I know and have heard of the pirate's intention, of
which I have proof. He will order Baderoon to be arrested on suspicion
when he arrives. Then we will detain him till you are beyond his reach.
That is not unjust."

"True--and I am glad to know by your last words that you are sensitive
about the justice of what you propose to do. Indifference to pure and
simple justice is the great curse of mankind. It is not indeed the root,
but it is the fruit of our sins. The suspicion that detains Baderoon is
more than justified, for I could bring many witnesses to prove that he
has vowed to take my life, and I _know_ him to be a murderer."

At breakfast-time Van der Kemp announced to his friends his intention of
quitting the village at once, and gave an account of his interview with
the Malay lad during the night. This, of course, reconciled them to
immediate departure,--though, in truth, the professor was the only one
who required to be reconciled.

"It is _very_ misfortunate," he remarked with a sigh, which had
difficulty in escaping through a huge mass of fish and rice. "You see
zee vonderful variety of ornizological specimens I could find here, ant
zee herbareum, not to mention zee magnificent _Amblypodia eumolpus_ ant
ozer bootterflies--ach!-a leetle mor' feesh if you please. Zanks. My
frond, it is a great sacrifice, but I vill go avay viz you, for I could
not joostify myself if I forzook you, ant I cannot ask you to remain
vile your life is in dancher."

"I appreciate your sentiments and sacrifice thoroughly," said the
hermit.

"So does I," said Moses, helping himself to coffee; "but ob course if I
didn't it would be all de same. Pass de venison, Massa Nadgel, an' don't
look as if you was goin' to gib in a'ready. It spoils my appetite."

"You will have opportunities," continued Van der Kemp, addressing the
professor, "to gather a good many specimens as we go along. Besides, if
you will consent to honour my cave in Krakatoa with a visit, I promise
you a hearty welcome and an interesting field of research. You have no
idea what a variety of species in all the branches of natural history my
little island contains."

Hereupon the hermit proceeded to enter into details of the flora, fauna,
and geology of his island-home, and to expatiate in such glowing
language on its arboreal and herbal wealth and beauty, that the
professor became quite reconciled to immediate departure.

"But how," he asked, "am I to get zere ven ve reach zee sea-coast? for
your canoe holds only t'ree, as you have told me."

"There are plenty of boats to be had. Besides, I can send over my own
boat for you to the mainland. The distance is not great."

"Goot. Zat vill do. I am happay now."

"So," remarked Nigel as he went off with Moses to pack up, "his
'paradise regained' is rather speedily to be changed into paradise
forsaken! 'Off wi' the old love and on wi' the new.' 'The expulsive
power of a new affection!'"

"Das true, Massa Nadgel," observed Moses, who entertained profound
admiration for anything that sounded like proverbial philosophy. "De
purfesser am an affectionit creeter. 'Pears to me dat he lubs de whole
creation. He kills an' tenderly stuffs 'most eberyt'ing he kin lay hands
on. If he could only lay hold ob Baderoon an' stuff an' stick him in a
moozeum, he'd do good service to my massa an' also to de whole ob
mankind."




CHAPTER XIX.

A TERRIBLE MURDER AND A STRANGE REVELATION.


After letting the chief of the village know that the news just received
rendered it necessary that they should proceed at once to the next
town--but carefully refraining from going into particulars lest Baderoon
should by any means be led to suspect their intentions--the party
started off about daybreak under the guidance of the Malay youth Babu.

Anxious as he was that no evil should befall his friend, Nigel could not
help wondering that a man of such a calm spirit, and such unquestionable
courage, should be so anxious to escape from this pirate.

"I can't understand it at all," he said to Moses, as they walked through
the forest together a little in rear of the party.

"No more kin I, Massa Nadgel," answered the negro, with one of those
shakes of the head and glares of solemn perplexity with which he was
wont to regard matters that were too deep for him.

"Surely Van der Kemp is well able to take care of himself against any
single foe."

"Das true, Massa Nadgel,--'gainst any half-dozen foes as well."

"Fear, therefore, cannot be the cause."

The negro received this with a quiet chuckle.

"No," said he. "Massa nebber knowed fear, but ob dis you may be bery
sure, massa's _allers_ got good reasons for what he does. One t'ing's
sartin, I neber saw him do nuffin for fear, nor revenge, nor anger, no,
nor yet for fun; allers for lub--and," added Moses, after a moment's
thought, "sometimes for money, when we goes on a tradin' 'spidition--but
he don't make much account ob dat."

"Well, perhaps the mystery may be cleared up in time," said Nigel, as
they closed up with the rest of the party, who had halted for a short
rest and some refreshment.

This last consisted largely of fruit, which was abundant everywhere, and
a little rice with water from sparkling springs to wash it down.

In the afternoon they reached the town--a large one, with a sort of
market-place in the centre, which at the time of their arrival was
crowded with people. Strangers, especially Europeans, were not often
seen in that region, so that Van der Kemp and his friends at once
attracted a considerable number of followers. Among these was one man
who followed them about very unobtrusively, usually hanging well in
rear of the knot of followers whose curiosity was stronger than their
sense of propriety. This man wore a broad sun-hat and had a bandage
round his head pulled well over one eye, as if he had recently met with
an accident or been wounded. He was unarmed, with the exception of the
kriss, or long knife, which every man in that region carries.

This was no other than Baderoon himself, who had outwitted his enemies,
had somehow discovered at least part of their plans, and had hurried on
in advance of them to the town, where, disguising himself as described,
he awaited their arrival.

Babu conducted his friends to the presence of his kinsman the chief man
of the town, and, having told his story, received a promise that the
pirate should be taken up when he arrived and put in prison. Meanwhile
he appointed to the party a house in which to spend the night.

Baderoon boldly accompanied the crowd that followed them, saw the house,
glanced between the heads of curious natives who watched the travellers
while eating their supper, and noted the exact spot on the floor of the
building where Van der Kemp threw down his mat and blanket, thus taking
possession of his intended couch! He did not, however, see that the
hermit afterwards shifted his position a little, and that Babu,
desiring to be near his friend, lay down on the vacated spot.

In the darkest hour of the night, when even the owls and bats had sought
repose, the pirate captain stole out of the brake in which he had
concealed himself, and, kriss in hand, glided under the house in which
his enemy lay.

Native houses, as we have elsewhere explained, are usually built on
posts, so that there is an open space under the floors, which is
available as a store or lumber-room. It is also unfortunately available
for evil purposes. The bamboo flooring is not laid so closely but that
sounds inside may be heard distinctly by any one listening below. Voices
were heard by the pirate as he approached, which arrested his steps.
They were those of Van der Kemp and Nigel engaged in conversation.
Baderoon knew that as long as his enemy was awake and conversing he
might probably be sitting up and not in a position suitable to his fell
purpose. He crouched therefore among some lumber like a tiger abiding
its time.

"Why are you so anxious not to meet this man?" asked Nigel, who was
resolved, if possible without giving offence, to be at the bottom of the
mystery.
