In three years Caesar had subjugated the enemy in a succession of
victories, and a great part of Europe lay helpless at his feet.  Late
in the summer of 55 B.C. he reached Boulogne on the coast of Gaul.
Standing there, he could see the gleaming chalk cliffs of Britain, so
vividly described in Shakespeare's "King Lear."[1]

[1] Shakespeare's "King Lear," Act IV, scene vi.

While encamped on the shore he "resolved," he says, "to pass over into
Britain, having had trustworthy information that in all his wars with
the Gauls the enemies of the Roman commonwealth had constantly
received help from thence."[2]

[2] Caesar's "Gallic War," Book IV.

Embarking with a force of between eight and ten thousand men[3] in
eighty small vessels, Caesar crossed the Channel and landed not far
from Dover, where he overcame the Britons (S2), who made a desperate
resistance.  After a stay of a few weeks, during which he did not
leave the coast, he returned to Gaul.

[3] Caesar probably sailed about the 25th of August, 55 B.C.  His
force consisted of two legions, the 7th and 10th.  A legion varied at
different times from 3000 foot and 200 horse soldiers to 6000 foot and
400 horse.

19. Caesar's Second Invasion of Britain.

The next year (54 B.C.), a little earlier in the season, Caesar made a
second invasion with a much larger force, and penetrated the country a
short distance north of the Thames.  Before the September gales set
in, he reembarked for the Continent, never to return.

The total results of his two expeditions were a number of natives
carried as hostages to Rome, a long train of captives destined to be
sold in the slave markets, and some promises of tribute which the
Britons never fulfilled.  Tacitus, the Roman historian, says Caesar
"did not conquer Britain; he only showed it to the Romans."

20. The Third Invasion of Britain by the Romans, 43 A.D.

For nearly a hundred years the Romans made no further attempt on
Britain, but in 43 A.D. the Emperor Claudius invaded the island.
After nine years' fighting, he overcame Caractacus, the leader of the
Britons, and carried him in chains to Rome.  The brave chief refused
to beg for life or liberty.  "Can it be possible," said he, as he was
led through the streets, "that men who live in such places as these
envy us our wretched hovels!" "It was the dignity of the man, even in
ruins," says the Roman historian, "which saved him."  The Emperor,
struck with his bearing and his speech, ordered him to be set free.

21. The Romans plant a Colony in Britain, Llyn-din.

Meanwhile the armies of the Empire had established a strong colony at
Colchester in the southeast of Britain.  (See map facing p. 14.)
There they built a temple and set up the statue of the Emperor
Claudius, which the soldiers worshiped, both as a protecting god and
as the representative of the Roman Empire.

The army had also conquered other places.  One of these was a little
native settlement on a bend in the Thames where the river broadened
slightly.  It consisted of a few miserable huts and a row of
intrenched cattle pens.  It was called in the British tongue Llyn-din
or the Fort-on-the-pool.  This name, which was pronounced with
difficulty by Roman lips, eventually became known wherever ships sail,
trade reaches, or history is read,--London.

22. Expedition against the Druids.

But in order to complete the conquest of the country, the Roman
generals resolved to crush the power of the Druids (S3), since these
priests exhorted the Britons to refuse to surrender.  The island of
Anglesey, off the northwest coast of Wales, was the stronghold to
which the Druids had retreated.  (See map facing p. 14.)  As the Roman
soldiers approached to attack them, they beheld the priests and women
standing on the shore, with uplifted hands, uttering "dreadful prayers
and imprecations."

For a moment the Roman troops hesitated; then they rushed upon the
Druids, cut them to pieces, and cast their bodies into their own
sacred fires.  From this blow Druidism as an organized faith never
recovered, though traces of its religious rites still survive in the
use of the mistletoe at Christman and in May-day festivals.

23. Revolt of Boadicea (61).

Still the power of the Latin legions was only partly established, for
while the Roman general was absent with his troops at Anglesey, a
formidable revolt had broken out in the east.  A British chief, in
order to secure half of his property to his family at his death, left
it to be equally divided between his daughters and the Emperor.  The
governor of the district, under the pretext that Boadicea, the widow
of the dead chief, had concealed part of the property, seized the
whole of it.

Boadicea protested.  To punish her presumption, the Romans stripped
and scourged her, and inflicted still more brutal and infamous
treatment on her daughters.  Maddened by these outrages, Boadicea
appealed to her countrymen for vengeance.  The enraged Britons fell
upon London, and other places held by the Romans, burned them to the
ground, and slaughtered many thousand inhabitants.  But in the end
Roman forced gained the victory, and Boadicea took her own life rather
than fall into the hands of her conqueror.

The "warrior queen" died, let us trust, as the poet has represented,
animated by the prophecy of the Druid priest that,--

        "Rome shall perish--write that word
           In the blood that she has spilt;--
         Perish, hopeless and abhorred,
           Deep in ruin, as in guilt."  [1]

[1] Cowper's "Boadicea."

24. Christianity introduced into Britain.

Perhaps it was not long after this that Christianity made its way to
Britain; if so, it crept in so silently that nothing certain can be
learned of its advent.  The first church, it is said, was built at
Glastonbury, in the southeast of the island.  (See map facing p. 38.)
It was a long, shedlike structure of wickerwork.  "Here," says an old
writer,[1] "the converts watched, fasted, preached, and prayed, having
high meditations under a low roof and large hearts within narrow
walls."

[1] Thomas Fuller's "Church History of Britain."

At first no notice was taken of the new religion.  It was the faith of
the poor and the obscure, and the Roman generals treated it with
contempt; but as it continued to spread, it caused alarm.

The Roman Emperor was not only the head of the state, but the head of
religion as well.  He represented the power of God on earth: to him
every knee must bow (S21).  But the Christians refused this homage.
They put Christ first; for that reason they were dagerous to the
state, and were looked--[SECTION MISSING]--rebels, or as men likely to
become so.

25. Persecution of British Christians; [SECTION MISSING]
                                               ________________
last of the third century the Roman Emperor   /                \
root out this pernicious belief.  The first  |                  |
He refused to sacrifice to the Roman         |                  |
                                             |                  |
But the ancient historian[2] says, with      |      SECTION     |
executioner who struck "the wicked stroke    |      MISSING     |
rejoice over the deed, for his eyes dropped  |                  |
together with the blessed martyr's head      |                  |
later the magnificent abbey of St. Albans    |                  |
commemorate him who had fallen there.         \________________/

[2] Bede's "Ecclesiastical History of Britain," completed about the
year 731.
[3] St. Albans: twenty miles northwest of London.  (See map facing
p. 16.)

26. Agricola builds a Line of Forts (7 [END OF LINE MISSING]

When Agricola, a wise and equitable Roman ruler, became governor of
Britain he explored the coast, and first discovered Britain to be an
island.  He gradually extended the limits of the government, and, in
order to prevent invasion from the north, he built a line of forts
(completed by Antoninus) across Scotland, from the mouth of the river
Forth to the Clyde.  (See map facing p. 14.)

From this date the power of Rome was finally fixed.  During the three
hundred years which followed, the surface of the country underwent a
change.  The Romans cut down forests, drained marshes, reclaimed waste
land, and bridged rivers.  Furthermore they made the soil so
productive that Britain became known in Rome as the most important
grain-producing and grain-exporting province in the Empire.

27. Roman Cities; London; York.

Where the Britons had once had a humble village enclosed by a ditch
and protected by a stockade, the Romans built the cities of Chester,
Lincoln, London, York, and other towns, protected by massive walls and
towers of stone.  These places have continued to be centers of
population ever since.

London early became the Roman commercial metropolis, while the city of
York in the north was made the military and civil capital of the
country.  (See map facing p. 14).  There the Sixth Legion was
stationed.  It was the most noted body of troops in the Roman army,
and was called the "Victorious Legion."  It remained there for upwards
of three centuries.  There, too, the governor resided and administered
justice.  For these reasons York got the name of "another Rome."

The city had numerous temples and public buildings, such as befitted
the Roman capital of Britain.  There an event occurred in the fourth
century which made an indelible mark on the history of mankind.
Constantine, the subsequent founder of Constantinople, was proclaimed
Emperor at York, and through his influence Christianity became the
established religion of the entire Roman Empire.[1]

[1] Constantine was the first Christian Emperor of Rome.  The
preceding emperors had generally persecuted the Christians.

28. Roman System of Government; Roads.

During the Roman possession of Britain the country was differently
governed at different periods, but eventually it was divided into five
provinces.  These were intersected by a magnificent system of paved
roads running in direct lines from city to city, and having London as
a common center.  (See map facing p. 14.)

Over these road bodies of troops could march rapidly to any required
point.  By them, and by similar roads, leading through France, Spain,
and Italy, officers of state, mounted on relays of fleet horses, could
pass from one end of the Empire to the other in a few days' time.
(See map below, and that facing p. 14.)

So skillfully and substantially were these highways constructed, that
modern engineers have been glad to adopt them as a basis for their
work.  The four chief Roman roads[1] continue to be the foundation,
not only of numerous turnpikes in different parts of England, but also
of several of the great railway lines, especially those from London to
Chester and from London to York.

[1] The four chief roads were: (1) Watling Street; (2) Icknield
Street; (3) Irmin Street; and (4) The Fosse Way.  (See map facing
p. 14.)

29. Roman Forts and Walls Defenses against Saxon Pirates.

Next in importance to the roads were the fortifications.  In addition
to those which Agricola had built (S26), either Hadrian or Severus
constructed a wall of solid masonry across the country from the shore
of the North Sea to the Irish Sea.  This wall, which was about
seventy-five miles south of Agricola's work, was strengthened by a
deep ditch and a rampart of earth.  (See map facing p. 14.)

It was furthur defended by square stone castles built at regular
intervals of one mile.  Between them were stone watchtowers, used as
sentry boxes; while at every fourth mile there was a stone fort,
covering several acres and occupied by a large body of troops.

But the northern tribes were not the only ones to be guarded against;
bands of pirates prowled along the east and south coasts, burning,
plundering, and kidnaping.  These marauders came from Denmark and the
adjacent countries (S37).

The Britons and Romans called them Saxons, a most significant name if
it refers to the stout sharp knives which made them a terror to every
land on which they set foot.  To repel them, the Romans built a strong
chain of forts along the coast, extending from the Wash on the North
Sea to the Isle of Wight on the south.  (See map facing p. 14.)

The greater part of these Roman walls, fortifications, and cities have
perished.  But those which remain justify the statement that "outside
of England no such monuments exist of the power and military genius of
Rome."

30. Wherein Roman Civilization fell Short.

But this splendid fabric of Roman power signally failed to win the
support of the majority of the Britons.  Civilization, like truth,
cannot be forced on minds unwilling or unable to receive it.  Least of
all can it be forced by the sword's point and the taskmaster's lash.

In order to render his victories on the Continent (S17) secure, Caesar
butchered thousands of prisoners of war, or cut off the right hands of
the entire population of large settlements to prevent them from rising
in revolt.

The policy pursued in Britain, though very different, was equally
heartless and equally fatal.  There were rulers who endeavored to act
justly, but such cases were rare.  One of the leaders of the North
Britons said, "The Romans give the lying name of Empire to robbery and
slaughter; they make a desert and call it peace."

31. The Mass of the Native Population Slaves; Roman Villas.

It is true that the chief cities of Britain were exempt from
oppression.  They elected their own magistrates and made their own
laws.  But they enjoyed this liberty because their inhabitants were
either Roman soldiers or their allies, or Romanized Britons.

Outside these cities the great mass of the native Britons were bound
to the soil and could not leave it, while a large proportion were
absolute slaves.  Their work was in the brickyards, the quarries, the
mines, or in the fields or forests.

The Roman masters of these people lived in stately villas adorned with
pavements of different-colored marbles and beautifully painted walls.
These country houses, often as large as palaces, were warmed in
winter, like our modern dwellings, with currents of heated air.  In
summer they opened on terraces ornamented with vases and statuary, and
on spacious gardens of fruits and flowers.[1]  On the other hand, the
laborers on these great estates lived in wretched cabins plastered
with mud and thatched with straw.

[1] More than a hundred of these villas or country houses, chiefly in
the south and southwest of England, have been exhumed.  Some of them
cover several acres.

32. Roman Taxation and Cruelty.

But if the condition of the British servile classes was hard, many who
were free were but little better off, for nearly all that they could
earn was swallowed up in taxes.  The standing army of Britain, which
the people of the country had to support, rarely numbered less than
forty thousand.  Great numbers of Britons were forced into the ranks,
but most of them appear to have been sent away to serve abroad.  Their
life was one of perpetual exile.  In order to meet the civil and
military expenses entailed upon him, every farmer had to pay a third
of all that his farm could produce, in taxes.  Furthermore, he had to
pay duty on every article that he sold, last of all, he was obliged to
pay a duty or poll tax on his own head.

On the Continent there was a saying that it was better for a property
owner to fall into the hands of savages than into those of the Roman
assessors.  When they went round, they counted not only every ox and
sheep, but every plant, and registered them as well as the owners.
"One heard nothing," says a writer of that time, speaking of the days
when revenue was collected, "but the sound of flogging and all kinds
of torture.  The son was compelled to inform against the father, men
were forced to give evidence against themselves, and were assessed
according to the confession they made to escape torment."[1]

[1] Lactantius, cited in Elton's "Origins of English History,"
p. 334.  It should be noted, however, that Professor C. Oman in his
"England before the Norman Conquest," pp. 175-176, takes a moer
favorable view of the condition of Britain under the Romans than that
which most authorities maintain.

So great was the misery of the land that sometimes parents destroyed
their children, rather than let them grow up to a life of suffering.
This vast system of organized oppression, like all tyranny, "was not
so much an institution as a destitution," undermining and
impoverishing the country.  It lasted until time brought its revenge,
and Rome, which had crushed so many nations of barbarians, was in her
turn threatened with a like fate, by bands of northern barbarians
stronger than herself.

33. The Romans compelled to abandon Britain, 410.

When Caesar returned from his victorious campaigns in Gaul in the
first century B.C., Cicero exultantly exclaimed, "Now let the Alps
sink! the gods raised them to shelter Italy from the barbarians; they
are no longer needed."  For nearly five centuries that continued true;
then the tribes of northern Europe could no longer be held back.  When
the Roman emperors saw that the crisis had arrived, they recalled
their troops from Britain in 410  The rest of the Roman colonists soon
followed.

At this time we find this brief but expressive entry in the
"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" (SS46, 99): "After this the Romans never ruled
in Britain."  A few years later this entry occurs: "418.  This year
the Romans collected all the treasures in Britain; some they hid in
the earth, so that no one since has been able to find them, and some
they carried with them into Gaul."

34. Remains of Roman Civilization.

In the course of the next three generations the political and social
elements of Roman civilization in Britain seem to have disappeared.  A
few words, such as "port" and "street," which may or may not have been
derived from the Latin, have come down to us.  But there was nothing
left, of which we can speak with absolute certainty, save the material
shell,--the walls, roads, forts, villas, arches, gateways, altars, and
tombs, whose ruins are still seen scattered throughout the land.

The soil, also, is full of relics of the same kind.  Twenty feet below
the surface of the London of to-day lie the remains of the London of
the Romans.  In digging in the "City,"[1] the laborer's shovel every
now and then brings to light pieces of carved stone with Latin
inscriptions, bits of rusted armor, broken swords, fragments of
statuary, and gold and silver ornaments.

[1] The "City": This is the name given to that part of central London,
about a mile square, which was formerly enclosed by Roman walls.  It
contains the Bank of England, the Royal Exchange, and other very
important business buildings.  Its limit on the west is the site of
Temple Bar; on the east, the Tower of London.

So, likewise, several towns, long buried in the earth, and the
foundations of upwards of a hundred country houses have been
discovered; but these seem to be about all.  If Rome left any traces
of her literature, law, and methods of government, they are

[TWO PAGES MISSING (21-22)]


FOURTH PERIOD[1]

"The happy ages of history are never the productive ones." -- Hegel

THE COMING OF THE SAXONS, OR ENGLISH
449(?) A.D.

THE BATTLES OF THE TRIBES--BRITAIN BECOMES ENGLAND

36. The Britons beg for Help; Coming of the Jutes, 449 (?).

The Britons were in perilous condition after the Romans had left the
island (S33).  They had lost their old spirit (SS2, 18).[2]  They were
no longer brave in war or faithful in peace.  The Picts and Scots[3]
attacked them on the northwest, and the Saxon pirates (S29) assailed
them on the southeast.  These terrible foes cut down the Britons, says
an old writer, as "reapers cut down grain ready for the harvest."

[1] Reference Books on this Period will be found in the Classified
List of Books in the Appendix.  The pronunciation of names will be
found in the Index.  The Leading Dates stand unenclosed; all others
are in parentheses.
[2] Gildas, in Bohn's "Six Old English Chronicles"; but compare
Professor C. Oman's "England before the Norman Conquest," pp. 175-176.
[3] The Picts and Scots were ancient savage tribes of Scotland.

At length the chief men wrote to the Roman consul, begging him to help
them.  They entitled their piteous and pusillanimous appeal, "The
Groans of the Britons."  They said, "The savages drive us to the sea,
the sea casts us back upon the savages; between them we are either
slaughtered or drowned."  But the consul was busy fighting enemies at
home, and he left the groaning Britons to shift for themselves.

Finally, the courage of despair forced them to act.  They seemed to
have resolved to fight fire with fire.  Acting on this resolution,
they accordingly invited a band of sea rovers to come and help them
against the Picts and Scots.  The chiefs of these Jutes[1] or Saxon
pirates did not wait for a second invitation.  Seizing their
"rough-handled spears and bronze swords," they set sail for the
shining chalk cliffs of Britain, 449(?).  They put an end to the
ravages of the Picts and Scots.  Then instead of going back to their
own country, they took possession of the best lands of Kent and
refused to give them up.  (See map opposite.)

[1] The Jutes, Saxons, and Angles appear to have belonged to the same
Teutonic or German race.  They inhabited the seacoast and vicinity,
from the mouth of the Elbe, northward along the coast of Denmark or
Jutland.  These tribes which conquered England, and settled there,
remained for a long time hostile to each other, but eventually, they
united and came to be known as Anglo-Saxons or English.  (See map
opposite.)

37. The Saxons and Angles conquer Britain.

The success of the first band of sea robbers in Britain (S36)
stimulated other bands to invade the island (477-541).  They
slaughtered multitudes of Britons and made slaves of many more.  The
conquerors named the parts of the country which they settled, from
themselves.  Each independent settlement was hostile to every other.
Thus Sussex was the home of the South Saxons, Wessex of the West
Saxons, Essex of the East Saxons.  (See map opposite.)  Finally, a
band of Angles came from a little corner, south of the peninsula of
Denmark, which still bears the name of Angeln.  They took possession
of all of eastern Britain not already appropriated.  Eventually, they
came to control the greater part of the land, and from them, all the
other tribes, when fused together, got the name of Angles or English
(S50).  (See map opposite.)

38. Resistance made by the Britons; King Arthur.

Meanwhile the Britons had plucked up courage and made the best fight
they could.  They were naturally a brave people (SS2, 18).  The fact
that it took the Saxons more than a hundred years to get a firm grip
on the island shows that fact.  The legend of King Arthur's exploits
also illustrates the valor of the race to which he belonged.
According to tradtion this British Prince, who had become a convert to
Christianity (S25), met and checked the invaders in their isolent
march of triumph.  The battle, it is said, was fought at Mount Badon
or Badbury in Dorsetshire.  There, with his irresistable sword,
"Excalibur," and his stanch British spearmen, Arthur compelled his
foes to acknowledge that he was not a myth but a man[1] able "to break
the heathen and uphold the Christ."

[1] See "Arthur" in the "Dictionary of National British Biography";
and Professor Rowley in Low and Pulling's "Dictionary of English
History," p. 434.  See also Geoffrey of Monmouth's "History of the
Britons" and Tennyson's "Idylls of the King."

39. The Saxons or English force the Britons to retreat.

But though King Arthur may have checked the pagan Saxon invaders, he
could not drive them out of the country.  They had come to stay.  On
the other hand, many Britons were forced to take refuge among the
hills of Wales.  There they continued to abide.  That ancient stock
never lost its love of liberty.  More than eleven centuries later
their spirit helped to shape the destinies of the New World.  Thomas
Jefferson andseveral of the other signers of the Declaration of
American Independence were either of Welsh birth or of direct Welsh
descent.

40. Gregory and the English Slaves.

The next period, of nearly eighty years, is a dreary record of
constant battles and bloodshed.  Out of this very barbarism a
regenerating influence finally arose.

In their greed for grain, some of the English tribes did not hesitate
to sell their own children into bondage.  A number of these slaves,
exposed in the market place in Rome, attracted the attention of a monk
named Gregory.

Struck with the beauty of their clear, ruddy complexions and fair
hair, he inquired from what country they came.  "They are Angles"
(S37), was the dealer's answer.  "No, not Angles, but angels,"
answered the monk; and he resolved that, when he could, he would send
missionaries to convert a race of so much promise.[2]

[2] Bede's "Ecclesiastical History."

41. Coming of Saint Augustine, 597.

When Gregory (S40) became Pope he fulfilled his resolution, and sent
Augustine with a band of forty monks to Britain.  In 597 they landed
on the very spot where the first Saxon war band had set foot on
English soil nearly one hundred and fifty years before.  Like Caesar
and his legions, Augustine and his monks brought with them the power
of Rome.  But this time that power did not come armed with the sword
to force men to submit or die, but inspired with a persuasive voice to
cheer them with new hope.

41. Augustine converts the King of Kent and his People (597).

The English at that time were wholly pagan, and had, in all
probability, destroyed every vesetige of the faith for which the
British martyrs gave their lives (S25).  But the King of Kent had
married a French princess who was a devout Christian.  Through the
Queen's influence, the King was induced to receive Augustine.  He was
afraid, however, of some magical practice, so he insisted that their
meeting should take place in the open air and on the island of
Thanet.  (See map facing p. 32.)

The historian Bede tells us that the monks, holding a tall silver
cross and a picture of Christ in their hands, advanced and saluted the
King.  Augustine delivered his message, was well received, and invited
to Canterbury, the capital of Kent.  There the King became a convert
to his preaching, and before the year had passed ten thousand of his
subjects had received baptism; for to gain the King was to gain his
tribe as well.

43. Augustine builds the First Monastery.

At Canterbury Augustine became the first archbishop over the first
cathedral.  There, too, he established the first monastery in which to
train missionaries to carry on the work which he had begun (S45).
Part of the original monastery of St. Augustine is now used as a
Church of England missionary college, and it continues to bear the
name of the man who brought Christianity to that part of Britain.  The
example of the ruler of Kent was not without its effect on others.

44. Conversion of the North.

The north of England, however, owed its conversion chiefly to the
Irish monks of an earlier age.  They had planted monasteries in
Ireland and Scotland from which colonies went forth, one of which
settled in Durham.  Cuthbert, a Saxon monk of that monastery in the
seventh century, traveled as a missionary throughout Northumbria, and
was afterward recognized as the saint of the North.  Through his
influence that kingdom was induced to accept Christianity.  Other
missionaries went to other districts to carry the "good tidings of
great joy."

In one case an aged chief arose in an assembly of warriors and said:
"O king, as a bird flies through this hall in the winter night, coming
out of the darkness and vanishing into it again, even such is our
life.  If these strangers can tell us aught of what is beyond, let us
give heed to them."

But, as Bede informs us in his history of the English CHurch (S99),
some of the converts were too cautious to commit themselves entirely
to the new religion.  One king, who had set up a large altar devoted
to the worship of Christ, set up a smaller one at the other end of the
hall to the old heathen deities, in order that he might make sure of
the favor of both.

45. Christianity organized; Labors of the Monks.

Gradually, however, the pagan faith was dropped.  Christianity was
largely organized by bands of monks and nuns, who had renounced the
world in order to lead lives of self-sacrifice and service.  They
bound themselves by the three vows of obedience, poverty, and
chastity, and the monastic law forbade them to marry.  Monasteries
existed or were now established in a number of places in England.[1]

[1] For instance, at Lindisfarne, or Holy Island, off the coast of
Northumberland (see Scott's "Marmion," Canto II, 9-10), at Wearmouth
and Jarrow in Durham, at Whitby on the coast of Yorkshire, and at
Peterborough in Northamptonshire.  (See map facing p. 38.)

The monasteries were educational as well as industrial centers.  The
monks spent part of each day in manual toil, for they held that "to
labor is to pray."  They cleared the land, drained he bogs, plowed,
sowed, and reaped.  Another part of the day they spent in religious
exercises, and a third in writing, translating, and teaching.

Each monastery had a school attached to it, and each had, besides, its
library of manuscript books and its room for the entertainment of
travelers and pilgrims.  In these libraries important charters granted
by the King and important laws relating to the kingdom were preserved.

46. Literary Work of the Monks.

It was at the monastery of Jarrow[2] that Bede wrote in rude Latin the
Church history of England.  It was at that in Whitby that the poet
Caedmon composed his poem on the Creation, in which, a thousand years
before Milton, he dealt with Milton's theme in Milton's spirit.

[2] Jarrow, Whitby, etc.; see note 1, above.

It was at the great monasteries of Peterborough and Canterbury that
the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" was probably begun (S99).  It was the
first history of England written in English, and the one from which we
derive very important knowledge of the period extending from the
beginning of the Christian era down to a time nearly a hundred years
after the Norman conquest of the island.  Furthermore we find that the
history of the country was written by the monks in the form of
independent narratives, some of which are of very great value as
sources of information.[1]

[1] See six extracts from the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle," in
E. K. Kendall's "Source-Book of English History," chaps. ii and iii;
also William of Malmesbury's "Conquered and Conquerors" (1066) and
Matthew Paris's "England in 1257," in the same book, pp. 41 and 78.
See also Bogn's "Six Old English Chronicles."

47. Influence of Christianity on Society.

But the power of Christianity for good was not confied to the
monasteries; the priests took their part in it.  Unlike the monks,
they were not bound by monastic rules, though they were forbidden to
marry.  They lived in the world and worked for the world, and had an
immense social influence.  The Church, as a rule, in all forms of its
activity took the side of the weak, the suffering, and the oppressed.
Slavery was then the normal condition of a large class, but when the
Church held slaves it protected them from ill usage.  It secured
Sunday for them as a day of rest, and it often labored effectually for
their emancipation.

48. Political Influence of Christianity, 664.

More than this, Christianity had a powerful political influence.  A
great synod or council was held at Whitby, on the coast of Yorkshire,
664, to decide when Easter should be observed.  Delegates to that
meeting were sent from different parts of the country.  After a
protracted discussion all the churches finally agreed to accept the
Roman custom.  This important decision encouraged a spirit of true
religious unity.  The bishops, monks, and priests who gathered at
Whitby represented Saxon tribes which were often bitterly hostile to
each other (S37), but their action on the Easter question united them
in a certain way.  It made them feel that they had a common interest,
that they were members of the same Church, and that, in that Church,
they were laboring for the same object.  The fact that they bowed to
one supreme spiritual authority had a political significance.  It
suggested that the time might be coming when all the conflicting
tribes or petty kingdoms in Britain would acknowledge the authority of
one King, and form one English nation.

49. Egbert becomes King of Wessex, and Overlord of the Whole Country,
829.

Somewhat more than a hundred and sixty years later a great step was
taken toward the accomplishment of the political union of the
different sections of Britain.  By the death of the King of Wessex
(S37), Egbert, a descendant of Cerdic, the first chief and King of
that country, succeeded to the crown.  He had spent some time in
France at the court of Charlemagne and had seen that great ruler make
himself master of most of western Europe.  Egbert was not content to
remain simply King of Wessex.  He resolved to make himself master of
the whole country.  He began a series of wars by which he, at length,
compelled all the other Saxon Kings to acknowledge him as their
Overlord.  That title marks the beginning, in 829, of a new period in
the history of the island.

50. How Britain got the Name of England.

In making himself supreme ruler over the entire English population of
Britain, Egbert laid the foundations of what was finally to become the
"Kingdom of England."  Several causes contributed to this change of
name.  We can trace the process step by step.  First, the people of
Kent and the great council held at Whitby (SS42, 48) laid the
cornerstone of the National Church; next, the people of Wessex
furnished the National Overlord (S49); finally, the preponderance of
the people called Angles (S37) furnished the National Name of
Angle-Land or England.

It is a fact worthy of notice, in this connection, that from Egbert as
a royal source every subsequent English sovereign (except the four
Danish Kings, Harold II, and William the Conqueror) has directly or
indirectly descended down to the present time.  (See Table of Royal
Descent in the Appendix, p. xlii.)

51. Alfred the Great.

Of these sovereigns the most conspicuous during the period of which we
are writing was Alfred.  He was a grandson of Egbert (S49).  He was
rightly called Alfred the Great, since he was the embodiment of
whatever was best and bravest in the English character.  The keynote
of his life may be found in the words which he spoke at the close of
it, "So long as I have lived, I have striven to live worthily."

52. Danish Invasion.

When Alfred came to the throne (871) the Danes, or Northmen, as they
were often called, were sweeping down upon the country.  A few months
before he became King, he had aided his brother in a desperate
struggle with them.  In the beginning, the object of the Danes was to
plunder, later, to possess, and finally, to rule over the country.
They had already overrun a large portion of England and had invaded
Wessex or the country of the West Saxons.  (See map facing p. 30.)
Wherever their raven flag appeared, destruction and slaughter
followed.

53. The Danes or Northmen destroy the Monasteries.

These terrible pirates despised Christianity.  They scorned it as the
weak religion of a weak people.  They hated the English monasteries
most of all and made them the especial objects of their attacks (SS43,
45, 46).  Many of these institutions had accumulated wealth, and some
had gradually sunk into habits of laziness, luxury, and other evil
courses of life.  The Danes, who were full of the vigorous virtues of
heathenism, liked nothing better than to scourge those effeminate
vices of the cloisters.

From the thorough way in which they robbed, burned, and murdered,
there can be no doubt that they enjoyed their work of destruction.  In
their helplessness and terror, the panic-stricken monks added to their
usual prayers, this fervent petition: "From the fury of the Northmen,
good Lord deliver us!"  The power raised up to answer that
supplication was Alfred the Great.

54. Alfred's Victories over the Danes: the White Horse.
