The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Shining Cow, by Alex James

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Shining Cow

Author: Alex James

Release Date: July 5, 2009 [EBook #29328]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SHINING COW ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _This is NOT a story about sinister aliens from outer space. This is
    simply the story of what happened to poor Junius when she found
    herself much too close to a Flying Saucer, long enough so she could
    be analyzed and long enough to cause some strange happenings on that
    farm._


     the
 shining
     cow

 _by ALEX JAMES_


 Robbie whined and acted like his eyes were burning, as if
 he'd gotten dust or something even stranger into them....


Zack Stewart stared sleepily into the bottom of his cracked coffee cup
as his wife began to gather the breakfast dishes.

Mrs. Stewart was a huge, methodical woman, seasoned to the drudgery of a
farm wife. Quite methodically she'd arise every morning at 4:00 A.M.
with her husband and each would do their respective chores until long
after the sun had set on their forty-acre farm.

"You've jest got to find Junius today, Zack," Mrs. Stewart spoke
worriedly, "Lord only knows her condition, not being milked since
yesterday morning."

"Yeah, I know, Ma," Zack said wearily as he rose from the table, "I'll
search for her again in the north woods, but if she ain't there this
time, I give up."

A dog suddenly howled outside. There was a brief instant when neither
moved, then Zack suddenly exclaimed, "It's Robbie!" and dashed outside.

In the light from the open doorway Zack saw the dog creeping along on
his haunches, howling and whining, and scratching frantically at his
tear-streaming eyes.

"Skunk finally got ya, eh boy?" Zack spoke sympathetically as the dog,
fawning, came closer.

"Stay away, Robbie, stay away now!" he ordered the dog. Robbie whined
and scratched again, furiously. Zack sniffed cautiously, expecting any
moment the pungent smell of skunk fluid to hit his nostrils. He sensed
nothing but the clean, fresh smell of the morning air, so he leaned
closer. Within a foot of Robbie, he sniffed again. Nothing. He realized
it wasn't a skunk that caused Robbie's eyes to burn. He knelt down and
took the dog's head tenderly in his rough, calloused hands and examined
his eyes. They were bloodshot and watery. He took some water from the
well and dashed it into the dog's eyes as Robbie struggled.

"Hold still, boy, I'm trying to help ya," Zack soothed. He took out a
blue work bandanna and wiped tenderly around Robbie's eyes.
