and murmured chant of a Gaelic song, sung in a kind of low
recitative by the steersman, and by the dash of the oars, which
the notes seemed to regulate, as they dipped to them in cadence.
The light, which they now approached more nearly, assumed a
broader, redder and more irregular splendour. It appeared plainly
to be a large fire, but whether kindled upon an island or the
mainland Edward could not determine. As he saw it, the red glaring
orb seemed to rest on the very surface of the lake itself, and
resembled the fiery vehicle in which the Evil Genius of an
Oriental tale traverses land and sea. They approached nearer, and
the light of the fire sufficed to show that it was kindled at the
bottom of a huge dark crag or rock, rising abruptly from the very
edge of the water; its front, changed by the reflection to dusky
red, formed a strange and even awful contrast to the banks around,
which were from time to time faintly and partially illuminated by
pallid moonlight.

The boat now neared the shore, and Edward could discover that this
large fire, amply supplied with branches of pine-wood by two
figures, who, in the red reflection of its light, appeared like
demons, was kindled in the jaws of a lofty cavern, into which an
inlet from the lake seemed to advance; and he conjectured, which
was indeed true, that the fire had been lighted as a beacon to the
boatmen on their return. They rowed right for the mouth of the
cave, and then, shifting their oars, permitted the boat to enter
in obedience to the impulse which it had received. The skiff
passed the little point or platform of rock on which the fire was
blazing, and running about two boats' lengths farther, stopped
where the cavern (for it was already arched overhead) ascended
from the water by five or six broad ledges of rock, so easy and
regular that they might be termed natural steps. At this moment a
quantity of water was suddenly flung upon the fire, which sunk
with a hissing noise, and with it disappeared the light it had
hitherto afforded. Four or five active arms lifted Waverley out of
the boat, placed him on his feet, and almost carried him into the
recesses of the cave. He made a few paces in darkness, guided in
this manner; and advancing towards a hum of voices, which seemed
to sound from the centre of the rock, at an acute turn Donald Bean
Lean and his whole establishment were before his eyes.

The interior of the cave, which here rose very high, was
illuminated by torches made of pine-tree, which emitted a bright
and bickering light, attended by a strong though not unpleasant
odour. Their light was assisted by the red glare of a large
charcoal fire, round which were seated five or six armed
Highlanders, while others were indistinctly seen couched on their
plaids in the more remote recesses of the cavern. In one large
aperture, which the robber facetiously called his SPENCE (or
pantry), there hung by the heels the carcasses of a sheep, or ewe,
and two cows lately slaughtered. The principal inhabitant of this
singular mansion, attended by Evan Dhu as master of the
ceremonies, came forward to meet his guest, totally different in
appearance and manner from what his imagination had anticipated.
The profession which he followed, the wilderness in which he
dwelt, the wild warrior forms that surrounded him, were all
calculated to inspire terror. From such accompaniments, Waverley
prepared himself to meet a stern, gigantic, ferocious figure, such
as Salvator would have chosen to be the central object of a group
of banditti. [Footnote: See Note 15.]

Donald Bean Lean was the very reverse of all these. He was thin in
person and low in stature, with light sandy-coloured hair, and
small pale features, from which he derived his agnomen of BEAN or
white; and although his form was light, well proportioned and
active, he appeared, on the whole, rather a diminutive and
insignificant figure. He had served in some inferior capacity in
the French army, and in order to receive his English visitor in
great form, and probably meaning, in his way, to pay him a
compliment, he had laid aside the Highland dress for the time, to
put on an old blue and red uniform and a feathered hat, in which
he was far from showing to advantage, and indeed looked so
incongruous, compared with all around him, that Waverley would
have been tempted to laugh, had laughter been either civil or
safe. The robber received Captain Waverley with a profusion of
French politeness and Scottish hospitality, seemed perfectly to
know his name and connections, and to be particularly acquainted
with his uncle's political principles. On these he bestowed great
applause, to which Waverley judged it prudent to make a very
general reply.

Being placed at a convenient distance from the charcoal fire, the
heat of which the season rendered oppressive, a strapping Highland
damsel placed before Waverley, Evan, and Donald Bean three cogues,
or wooden vessels composed of staves and hoops, containing
eanaruich, [Footnote: This was the regale presented by Rob Roy to
the Laird of Tullibody.] a sort of strong soup, made out of a
particular part of the inside of the beeves. After this
refreshment, which, though coarse, fatigue and hunger rendered
palatable, steaks, roasted on the coals, were supplied in liberal
abundance, and disappeared before Evan Dhu and their host with a
promptitude that seemed like magic, and astonished Waverley, who
was much puzzled to reconcile their voracity with what he had
heard of the abstemiousness of the Highlanders. He was ignorant
that this abstinence was with the lower ranks wholly compulsory,
and that, like some animals of prey, those who practise it were
usually gifted with the power of indemnifying themselves to good
purpose when chance threw plenty in their way. The whisky came
forth in abundance to crown the cheer. The Highlanders drank it
copiously and undiluted; but Edward, having mixed a little with
water, did not find it so palatable as to invite him to repeat the
draught. Their host bewailed himself exceedingly that he could
offer him no wine: 'Had he but known four-and-twenty hours before,
he would have had some, had it been within the circle of forty
miles round him. But no gentleman could do more to show his sense
of the honour of a visit from another than to offer him the best
cheer his house afforded. Where there are no bushes there can be
no nuts, and the way of those you live with is that you must
follow,'

He went on regretting to Evan Dhu the death of an aged man,
Donnacha an Amrigh, or Duncan with the Cap, 'a gifted seer,' who
foretold, through the second sight, visitors of every description
who haunted their dwelling, whether as friends or foes.

'Is not his son Malcolm taishatr (a second-sighted person)?' asked
Evan.

'Nothing equal to his father,' replied Donald Bean. 'He told us
the other day, we were to see a great gentleman riding on a horse,
and there came nobody that whole day but Shemus Beg, the blind
harper, with his dog. Another time he advertised us of a wedding,
and behold it proved a funeral; and on the creagh, when he
foretold to us we should bring home a hundred head of horned
cattle, we gripped nothing but a fat bailie of Perth.'

From this discourse he passed to the political and military state
of the country; and Waverley was astonished, and even alarmed, to
find a person of this description so accurately acquainted with
the strength of the various garrisons and regiments quartered
north of the Tay. He even mentioned the exact number of recruits
who had joined Waverley's troop from his uncle's estate, and
observed they were PRETTY MEN, meaning, not handsome, but stout
warlike fellows. He put Waverley in mind of one or two minute
circumstances which had happened at a general review of the
regiment, which satisfied him that the robber had been an eye-
witness of it; and Evan Dhu having by this time retired from the
conversation, and wrapped himself up in his plaid to take some
repose, Donald asked Edward, in a very significant manner, whether
he had nothing particular to say to him.

Waverley, surprised and somewhat startled at this question from
such a character, answered, he had no motive in visiting him but
curiosity to see his extraordinary place of residence. Donald Bean
Lean looked him steadily in the face for an instant, and then
said, with a significant nod, 'You might as well have confided in
me; I am as much worthy of trust as either the Baron of
Bradwardine or Vich Ian Vohr. But you are equally welcome to my
house.'

Waverley felt an involuntary shudder creep over him at the
mysterious language held by this outlawed and lawless bandit,
which, in despite of his attempts to master it, deprived him of
the power to ask the meaning of his insinuations. A heath pallet,
with the flowers stuck uppermost, had been prepared for him in a
recess of the cave, and here, covered with such spare plaids as
could be mustered, he lay for some time watching the motions of
the other inhabitants of the cavern. Small parties of two or three
entered or left the place, without any other ceremony than a few
words in Gaelic to the principal outlaw, and, when he fell asleep,
to a tall Highlander who acted as his lieutenant, and seemed to
keep watch during his repose. Those who entered seemed to have
returned from some excursion, of which they reported the success,
and went without farther ceremony to the larder, where, cutting
with their dirks their rations from the carcasses which were there
suspended, they proceeded to broil and eat them at their own
pleasure and leisure. The liquor was under strict regulation,
being served out either by Donald himself, his lieutenant, or the
strapping Highland girl aforesaid, who was the only female that
appeared. The allowance of whisky, however, would have appeared
prodigal to any but Highlanders, who, living entirely in the open
air and in a very moist climate, can consume great quantities of
ardent spirits without the usual baneful effects either upon the
brain or constitution.

At length the fluctuating groups began to swim before the eyes of
our hero as they gradually closed; nor did he re-open them till
the morning sun was high on the lake without, though there was but
a faint and glimmering twilight in the recesses of Uaimh an Ri, or
the King's Cavern, as the abode of Donald Bean Lean was proudly
denominated.





CHAPTER XVIII

WAVERLEY PROCEEDS ON HIS JOURNEY


When Edward had collected his scattered recollection, he was
surprised to observe the cavern totally deserted. Having arisen
and put his dress in some order, he looked more accurately round
him; but all was still solitary. If it had not been for the
decayed brands of the fire, now sunk into grey ashes, and the
remnants of the festival, consisting of bones half burnt and half
gnawed, and an empty keg or two, there remained no traces of
Donald and his band. When Waverley sallied forth to the entrance
of the cave, he perceived that the point of rock, on which
remained the marks of last night's beacon, was accessible by a
small path, either natural or roughly hewn in the rock, along the
little inlet of water which ran a few yards up into the cavern,
where, as in a wetdock, the skiff which brought him there the
night before was still lying moored. When he reached the small
projecting platform on which the beacon had been established, he
would have believed his further progress by land impossible, only
that it was scarce probable but what the inhabitants of the cavern
had some mode of issuing from it otherwise than by the lake.
Accordingly, he soon observed three or four shelving steps, or
ledges of rock, at the very extremity of the little platform; and,
making use of them as a staircase, he clambered by their means
around the projecting shoulder of the crag on which the cavern
opened, and, descending with some difficulty on the other side, he
gained the wild and precipitous shores of a Highland loch, about
four miles in length and a mile and a half across, surrounded by
heathy and savage mountains, on the crests of which the morning
mist was still sleeping.

Looking back to the place from which he came, he could not help
admiring the address which had adopted a retreat of such seclusion
and secrecy. The rock, round the shoulder of which he had turned
by a few imperceptible notches, that barely afforded place for the
foot, seemed, in looking back upon it, a huge precipice, which
barred all further passage by the shores of the lake in that
direction. There could be no possibility, the breadth of the lake
considered, of descrying the entrance of the narrow and low-browed
cave from the other side; so that, unless the retreat had been
sought for with boats, or disclosed by treachery, it might be a
safe and secret residence to its garrison as long as they were
supplied with provisions. Having satisfied his curiosity in these
particulars, Waverley looked around for Evan Dhu and his
attendants, who, he rightly judged, would be at no great distance,
whatever might have become of Donald Bean Lean and his party,
whose mode of life was, of course, liable to sudden migrations of
abode. Accordingly, at the distance of about half a mile, he
beheld a Highlander (Evan apparently) angling in the lake, with
another attending him, whom, from the weapon which he shouldered,
he recognised for his friend with the battle-axe.

Much nearer to the mouth of the cave he heard the notes of a
lively Gaelic song, guided by which, in a sunny recess, shaded by
a glittering birch-tree, and carpeted with a bank of firm white
sand, he found the damsel of the cavern, whose lay had already
reached him, busy, to the best of her power, in arranging to
advantage a morning repast of milk, eggs, barley-bread, fresh
butter, and honey-comb. The poor girl had already made a circuit
of four miles that morning in search of the eggs, of the meal
which baked her cakes, and of the other materials of the
breakfast, being all delicacies which she had to beg or borrow
from distant cottagers. The followers of Donald Bean Lean used
little food except the flesh of the animals which they drove away
from the Lowlands; bread itself was a delicacy seldom thought of,
because hard to be obtained, and all the domestic accommodations
of milk, poultry, butter, etc., were out of the question in this
Scythian camp. Yet it must not be omitted that, although Alice had
occupied a part of the morning in providing those accommodations
for her guest which the cavern did not afford, she had secured
time also to arrange her own person in her best trim. Her finery
was very simple. A short russet-coloured jacket and a petticoat of
scanty longitude was her whole dress; but these were clean, and
neatly arranged. A piece of scarlet embroidered cloth, called the
snood, confined her hair, which fell over it in a profusion of
rich dark curls. The scarlet plaid, which formed part of her
dress, was laid aside, that it might not impede her activity in
attending the stranger. I should forget Alice's proudest ornament
were I to omit mentioning a pair of gold ear-rings and a, golden
rosary, which her father (for she was the daughter of Donald Bean
Lean) had brought from France, the plunder, probably, of some
battle or storm.

Her form, though rather large for her years, was very well
proportioned, and her demeanour had a natural and rustic grace,
with nothing of the sheepishness of an ordinary peasant. The
smiles, displaying a row of teeth of exquisite whiteness, and the
laughing eyes, with which, in dumb show, she gave Waverley that
morning greeting which she wanted English words to express, might
have been interpreted by a coxcomb, or perhaps by a young soldier
who, without being such, was conscious of a handsome person, as
meant to convey more than the courtesy of an hostess. Nor do I
take it upon me to say that the little wild mountaineer would have
welcomed any staid old gentleman advanced in life, the Baron of
Bradwardine, for example, with the cheerful pains which she
bestowed upon Edward's accommodation. She seemed eager to place
him by the meal which she had so sedulously arranged, and to which
she now added a few bunches of cranberries, gathered in an
adjacent morass. Having had the satisfaction of seeing him seated
at his breakfast, she placed herself demurely upon a stone at a
few yards' distance, and appeared to watch with great complacency
for some opportunity of serving him.

Evan and his attendant now returned slowly along the beach, the
latter bearing a large salmon-trout, the produce of the morning's
sport, together with the angling-rod, while Evan strolled forward,
with an easy, self-satisfied, and important gait, towards the spot
where Waverley was so agreeably employed at the breakfast-table.
After morning greetings had passed on both sides, and Evan,
looking at Waverley, had said something in Gaelic to Alice, which
made her laugh, yet colour up to her eyes, through a complexion
well en-browned by sun and wind, Evan intimated his commands that
the fish should be prepared for breakfast. A spark from the lock
of his pistol produced a light, and a few withered fir branches
were quickly in flame, and as speedily reduced to hot embers, on
which the trout was broiled in large slices. To crown the repast,
Evan produced from the pocket of his short jerkin a large scallop
shell, and from under the folds of his plaid a ram's horn full of
whisky. Of this he took a copious dram, observing he had already
taken his MORNING with Donald Bean Lean before his departure; he
offered the same cordial to Alice and to Edward, which they both
declined. With the bounteous air of a lord, Evan then proffered
the scallop to Dugald Mahony, his attendant, who, without waiting
to be asked a second time, drank it off with great gusto. Evan
then prepared to move towards the boat, inviting Waverley to
attend him. Meanwhile, Alice had made up in a small basket what
she thought worth removing, and flinging her plaid around her, she
advanced up to Edward, and with the utmost simplicity, taking hold
of his hand, offered her cheek to his salute, dropping at the same
time her little curtsy. Evan, who was esteemed a wag among the
mountain fair, advanced as if to secure a similar favour; but
Alice, snatching up her basket, escaped up the rocky bank as
fleetly as a roe, and, turning round and laughing, called
something out to him in Gaelic, which he answered in the same tone
and language; then, waving her hand to Edward, she resumed her
road, and was soon lost among the thickets, though they continued
for some time to hear her lively carol, as she proceeded gaily on
her solitary journey.

They now again entered the gorge of the cavern, and stepping into
the boat, the Highlander pushed off, and, taking advantage of the
morning breeze, hoisted a clumsy sort of sail, while Evan assumed
the helm, directing their course, as it appeared to Waverley,
rather higher up the lake than towards the place of his
embarkation on the preceding night. As they glided along the
silver mirror, Evan opened the conversation with a panegyric upon
Alice, who, he said, was both CANNY and FENDY; and was, to the
boot of all that, the best dancer of a strathspey in the whole
strath. Edward assented to her praises so far as he understood
them, yet could not help regretting that she was condemned to such
a perilous and dismal life.

'Oich! for that,' said Evan, 'there is nothing in Perthshire that
she need want, if she ask her father to fetch it, unless it be too
hot or too heavy.'

'But to be the daughter of a cattle-stealer--a common thief!'
'Common thief!--no such thing: Donald Bean Lean never LIFTED less
than a drove in his life.'

'Do you call him an uncommon thief, then?'

'No; he that steals a cow from a poor widow, or a stirk from a
cotter, is a thief; he that lifts a drove from a Sassenach laird
is a gentleman-drover. And, besides, to take a tree from the
forest, a salmon from the river, a deer from the hill, or a cow
from a Lowland strath, is what no Highlander need ever think shame
upon.'

'But what can this end in, were he taken in such an
appropriation?'

'To be sure he would DIE FOR THE LAW, as many a pretty man has
done before him.'

'Die for the law!'

'Ay; that is, with the law, or by the law; be strapped up on the
KIND gallows of Crieff, [Footnote: See Note 16.] where his father
died, and his goodsire died, and where I hope he'll live to die
himsell, if he's not shot, or slashed, in a creagh.'

'You HOPE such a death for your friend, Evan?'

'And that do I e'en; would you have me wish him to die on a bundle
of wet straw in yon den of his, like a mangy tyke?'

'But what becomes of Alice, then?'

'Troth, if such an accident were to happen, as her father would
not need her help ony langer, I ken nought to hinder me to marry
her mysell.'

'Gallantly resolved,' said Edward; 'but, in the meanwhile, Evan,
what has your father-in-law (that shall be, if he have the good
fortune to be hanged) done with the Baron's cattle?'

'Oich,' answered Evan,'they were all trudging before your lad and
Allan Kennedy before the sun blinked ower Ben Lawers this morning;
and they'll be in the pass of Bally-Brough by this time, in their
way back to the parks of Tully-Veolan, all but two, that were
unhappily slaughtered before I got last night to Uaimh an Ri.'

'And where are we going, Evan, if I may be so bold as to ask?'
said Waverley.

'Where would you be ganging, but to the Laird's ain house of
Glennaquoich? Ye would not think to be in his country, without
ganging to see him? It would be as much as a man's life's worth.'

'And are we far from Glennaquoich?'

'But five bits of miles; and Vich Ian Vohr will meet us.'

In about half an hour they reached the upper end of the lake,
where, after landing Waverley, the two Highanders drew the boat
into a little creek among thick flags and reeds, where it lay
perfectly concealed. The oars they put in another place of
concealment, both for the use of Donald Bean Lean probably, when
his occasions should next bring him to that place.

The travellers followed for some time a delightful opening into
the hills, down which a little brook found its way to the lake.
When they had pursued their walk a short distance, Waverley
renewed his questions about their host of the cavern.

'Does he always reside in that cave?'

'Out, no! it's past the skill of man to tell where he's to be
found at a' times; there's not a dern nook, or cove, or corrie, in
the whole country that he's not acquainted with.'

'And do others beside your master shelter him?'

'My master? MY master is in Heaven,' answered Evan, haughtily; and
then immediately assuming his usual civility of manner, 'but you
mean my Chief;--no, he does not shelter Donald Bean Lean, nor any
that are like him; he only allows him (with a smile) wood and
water.'

'No great boon, I should think, Evan, when both seem to be very
plenty.'

'Ah! but ye dinna see through it. When I say wood and water, I
mean the loch and the land; and I fancy Donald would be put till
't if the Laird were to look for him wi' threescore men in the
wood of Kailychat yonder; and if our boats, with a score or twa
mair, were to come down the loch to Uaimh an Ri, headed by mysell,
or ony other pretty man.'

'But suppose a strong party came against him from the Low Country,
would not your Chief defend him?'

'Na, he would not ware the spark of a flint for him--if they came
with the law.'

'And what must Donald do, then?'

