
11. 'All these things seem to take care of each other. First, the green
leaves at the back take care of the yellow cup.'

'And the yellow cup takes care of the yellow threads.'

'And the yellow threads take care of the green cases.'

'And the green cases take care of the seeds.'

[Illustration]




DAISIES AND BUTTERCUPS.

[Illustration: Daisies.]


    mead'-ows
    stalk
    cov'-ered
    yel'-low
    maid'-en
    light'-ly
    ten'-der
    tread
    win'-ter
    cun'-ning
    dai'-sy
    straight
    ground
    chil'-dren
    moss'-y
    but'-ter


                    I.

    1.  I'm a pretty little thing,
        Always coming with the spring;
        In the meadows green I'm found,
        Peeping just above the ground.
        And my stalk is covered flat
        With a white and yellow hat.

    2.  Little maiden, when you pass
        Lightly o'er the tender grass,
        Step aside and do not tread
        On my meek and lowly head;
        For I always seem to say,
        'Chilly winter's gone away.'


                    II.

    1.  I'm a cunning little thing,
        Coming also with the spring.
        Near the daisy I am found,
        Standing straight above the ground;
        And my head is covered flat
        With a glossy, yellow hat.

    2.  Little children, when you pass
        Through the tall and waving grass,
        Do not pluck, but gently tread
        Near my low and mossy bed;
        For I always seem to say,
        'Milk and butter fresh to-day.'




WHEAT.

PART 1.


    field
    fa'-ther
    wheat
    plough
    bas'-ket
    watched
    threw
    har'-row
    grains
    east
    morn'-ing
    earth
    joints
    be-lieve'
    for'-est
    stalks

1. There was a very little field at the bottom of the garden, and father
made up his mind to grow wheat in it.

2. A friend kindly lent him a horse and plough, and the soil was quickly
turned over. A few days afterwards the seed was sown.

3. The children helped to do this.

They got up very early one morning and went out with their father. Harry
had a bag full of wheat, and Dora had a little basket.

[Illustration]

4. They watched what their father did, then dipped their hands into the
wheat, and threw it out over the earth.

5. After that, the horse came again with a harrow, to cover the seed
over with soil, and it was left to grow.

6. It seemed strange to think that those little hard grains would grow
up to be tall plants and have other grains upon them.

7. 'I hope we shall have some nice soft rain,' said father, as they left
the field.

8. Many days went by, rain came again and again. There was sunshine,
too; but sometimes the east winds blew.

9. Dora and Harry went out every morning to look at the field. But they
always came in saying that there was nothing but brown earth to be seen.

10. At last, one morning they came in running and jumping. 'Our wheat is
up! There are tiny green leaves all over the field!'

11. After this there was always something fresh to see. The wheat-plants
grew taller, and put out long leaves.

12. Dora said one day that they looked like grass, and her mother told
her that wheat was a large kind of grass.

'Look at the shape of the leaves,' she said, 'and the joints in the
stems.'

13. The wheat soon grew so tall that it stood above the heads of the
children. They used to go in among it, and make believe that they were
lost in a great forest.

14. One day, when they were lost like this, they saw that the tops of
the stalks had opened. Inside there were green stems with green ears
upon them.




WHEAT.

PART 2.


    heard
    talk'-ing
    har'-vest
    sup'-per
    seemed
    sur-prise'
    rail'-way
    heav'-y
    truck
    mean
    flour
    lis'-ten
    han'-dle
    min'-utes
    treat
    tea

1. Every day the ears grew larger and harder, and then they began to
look yellow.

2. The children, too, heard their father and mother talking about their
golden grain, and saying it was ripe.

3. At last, one very hot day, they found that the time had come to cut
the wheat. A kind friend came to help, and Harry and Dora and the new
dog jumped about and ran in and out, and thought that they helped too.

4. The children talked much about their harvest, and mother made them a
harvest-supper. What a day it was!

5. It seemed so odd to have a bin full of grain just like the grain they
had sown in the spring.

6. And now there was a great surprise for them. A railway-man came with
a heavy box on a truck, and when the box was opened, what do you think
there was inside?

A mill--a fine new wheat-mill!

7. 'We do not need now to go to the miller!' said mother, looking very
glad. 'We are going to have a miller in our own house--no, two millers,
I ought to say!'

8. 'Two millers!' cried Harry.

'Do you mean Harry and me?' asked Dora.

'Yes, my dear children, I mean you. You are going to be my dusty
millers!

9. 'I will show you how much you are to grind, just a little every day.
You must put it into this big red pan, and cover it up, and when I want
to bake I shall always have plenty of flour ready.

10. 'And listen! You shall have a penny each every week for doing the
work.'

At this Dora and Harry jumped for joy, clapped their hands, and ran to
their mother to hug her.

11. Then she put some of the wheat into the mill, took hold of the
handle, and made the wheel go round. Harry next took his turn, and Dora
hers, and in a few minutes they found in the box below a heap of nice
soft flour.

12. 'Now,' said mother, 'let us give father a treat when he comes home!
We will make some nice cakes with this flour, and have them for tea!
Grind a little more, dear millers, while I make up the fire.'

[Illustration]




SLATE.

PART 1.


    rid'-dle
    ex-act'-ly
    guessed
    won'-der
    bought
    Sat'-ur-day
    sup-pose'
    fin'-gers
    met'-al
    smooth
    re-mem'-ber
    piece

1. 'What is the oldest thing in this room?' asked the mother one day.

'Is this a riddle?'

'No, not exactly.'

2. Dora guessed one thing, and Harry another, and at last they gave up
guessing. 'Unless,' said Harry, 'it is the fender, or the poker.'

3. 'It is very likely that the thing you were drawing on just now is
older than any of those.'

4. 'That slate? Why, mother!' cried the children, opening their eyes
wide with wonder, 'you bought it only last Saturday!'

'So I did. But it was not made last Saturday.'

5. 'No, I suppose the man cut it, and made the frame, and fixed it on
before that.'

'Perhaps on Friday,' said Dora.

6. 'But the slate itself,' the mother went on, 'where did that come
from? Did the man make it?'

Harry and Dora looked well at it, turned it over, rubbed their fingers
on it, and said they did not know.

7. 'Well, would you say it is like wood, or like stone, or is it metal
like the poker? Is it a kind of wood, do you think? Did it ever grow?'

'I think it must be a sort of rock, or stone,' said Harry, 'only very
smooth and thin.'

8. 'The man who worked at it before it came to the shop made it smooth
and cut it thin. It was not smooth and thin at first. But you are quite
right; it is a sort of stone.'

[Illustration: A Slate Quarry]

9. 'It is as cold as a stone,' said Dora, putting it against her face.
'Do you remember, Harry, how cold our hands were in winter when we did
sums? Yes, and it is very hard. I am sure it is a piece of rock.'




SLATE.

PART 2.


    should
    laughed
    high'-er
    thought
    laugh'-ing
    pur'-pose
    prop'-er-ly
    please
    set'-tled
    hap'-pened
    deal
    dead
    weighted
    through
    heaved
    brok'-en

1. 'I should like to see a rock all made of slate! Have you ever seen
one, mother?'

'Yes, many, dear. But there are none near.' Then she laughed a little.
'But if you like to go just outside the door you will see rows and rows
of slates.'

2. Out they ran, looked all over the ground, then at the garden-wall,
then back at their mother, who had come to the door.

'Look at the house,' she said, 'look higher!'

3. 'Oh, we never thought of the roof,' they cried, and ran in again
laughing. 'But those slates are not so nice and smooth as our slates.'

'Your slates are made smooth on purpose. Besides, they are made of
better slate--older slate. The older the slate is the better it is.'

4. 'How old?'

'No one knows. It is a long story, and no one can tell it properly.
Shall I tell you as much as I know?'

'Yes, do, please, mother!' and the two settled themselves at her feet.

5. 'Well,' she began, 'once upon a time there was a great stir at the
bottom of the sea. The heat and gas under the ground broke through and
pushed out everything that was in the way.

6. 'Stones, ashes, and dust came flying up through the water, and then
fell back into the water again. When all was quiet, they settled down at
the bottom of the sea, and became mud.

7. 'All this happened many times, till there was a great deal of mud.
Then, little by little, the mud was covered up by other things.'

8. 'What sort of things?'

'Dead fish, perhaps, and shells, and sand and mud that had been brought
by rivers into the sea. These things lay on the top of the mud and
weighed it down.

9. 'The heat under the bottom of the sea still kept up, and made the mud
very hot, and baked it through. At last it gave a great push, and heaved
the mud up above the water, so that it became dry land.

10. 'In other ways it was made harder and harder, until it was turned
into rock. And now we call it slate. Here is a bit of your old broken
slate. See if you can turn it into mud again!'




CHALK.

PART 1.


    a-cross'
    morn'-ing
    chalk'-ing
    picked
    piece
    teach'-er
    black'-board
    spread'-ing
    wheat
    col'-ours
    fetch
    laughed
    earth
    brown
    moist
    through

1. A few days after this, Dora and Harry were going across the fields.
They saw a horse and cart standing, and a man taking white stones out of
the cart and putting them over the ground.

2. 'Why, it is Joe!' they cried, as they came nearer. 'Good-morning,
Joe. What are you doing?'

'Chalking this bit of land, you see. You know what chalk is, do you?'

3. Harry and Dora picked up a piece or two.

'Teacher writes on the blackboard with chalk,' they said.

'Yes, you are right. It is used for many things,' and he went on
spreading it over the field.

4. 'But what is it wanted here for, Joe?'

'No chalk, no wheat!' said Joe.

'Father put no chalk on our field, and we had such a heap of wheat!'

5. 'Yours is good land. This up here has never been used for farming. It
had little old trees on it, you know, and they were cut down and their
roots dug out of the ground; and now, look at it! It is poor soil.'

6. 'How do you know it is poor?'

'Look at the field below, what a nice brown it is! That will grow
anything, but this is all colours--black, red, yellow, and green.

7. 'I have been a long way to fetch this chalk: I started off with old
Dobbin this morning before it was light, and got it out of the
chalk-pit.'

8. 'When we were fast asleep!' said Dora.

'Then you don't buy chalk at a shop?' said Harry.

Joe laughed.

'No; it comes out of the ground.'

'This is like the slate story,' said Dora.

Harry nodded.

9. 'But, Joe, I want to know how the chalk makes the ground good.'

'I don't know how, but it does. If it lies here for a year or more, the
earth will turn brown, and we can grow wheat in it. Besides, chalk holds
water, and so it will keep the ground moist up here.'

10. 'How?'

'Well, when it rains, the water will not run away through the earth, but
will stay in the lumps of chalk. Are you going? Good-bye, then.'




CHALK.

PART 2.

[Illustration: 'Fizz and bubble, bubble and fizz.']


    eve'-ning
    brought
    vin'-e-gar
    bub'-ble
    air
    stirred
    poured
    grains
    hun'-dreds
    smiled
    crowds
    threads
    catch
    died
    dropped
    mixed

1. The children had much to say that evening about Joe and the field.
They had brought home a lump of chalk.

2. 'I will show you something,' said father, and he got a cup of
vinegar, crushed a little of the chalk, and dropped it into the cup.

Fizz and bubble, bubble and fizz!

3. What was going on?

When the stir came to an end, the chalk was not there!
