The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Mother to the Others, by L. T. Meade

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Little Mother to the Others

Author: L. T. Meade

Release Date: January 12, 2006 [EBook #17506]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS ***




Produced by Lenna Knox, Juliet Sutherland, Sankar
Viswanathan, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net










                          A Little Mother to
                              the Others



                                  BY

                            MRS. L.T. MEADE

                               AUTHOR OF
                "POLLY: A NEW-FASHIONED GIRL," "A SWEET
                         GIRL GRADUATE," ETC.





                               NEW YORK

                           GROSSET & DUNLAP

                              PUBLISHERS




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

I. THE POOR INNOCENT,

II. A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS,

III. THE ARRIVAL OF THE AUNT,

IV. RUB-A-DUB,

V. AUNT IS HER NAME,

VI. THE POOR DEAD UN'S,

VII. BUT ANN COULD NOT HELP LETTING OUT NOW AND THEN,

VIII. THE STRAW TOO MUCH,

IX. THE PUNISHMENT CHAMBER,

X. BOW AND ARROW,

XI. JOG'APHY,

XII. A BABY'S HONOR,

XIII. BIRCH ROD,

XIV. DIANA'S REVENGE,

XV. MOTHER RODESIA,

XVI. UNCLE BEN,

XVII. GREASED LIGHTNING,

XVIII. THE HEART OF THE LITTLE MOTHER,

XIX. "A PIGMY I CALL HIM",

XX. "LET'S PERTEND," SAID DIANA,

XXI. POLE STAR,

XXII. THE MILKMAN,

XXIII. FORTUNE,

XXIV. ON THE TRAIL,

XXV. FOUND,

XXVI. THE LITTLE MOTHER TO THE RESCUE,




A LITTLE MOTHER TO THE OTHERS




CHAPTER I.

THE POOR INNOCENT.


The four children had rather peculiar names. The eldest girl was
called Iris, which, as everybody ought to know, means rainbow--indeed,
there was an Iris spoken of in the old Greek legends, who was supposed
to be Hera's chief messenger, and whenever a rainbow appeared in the
sky it was said that Iris was bringing down a message from Hera. The
Iris of this story was a very pretty, thoughtful little girl, aged ten
years. Her mother often talked to her about her name, and told her the
story which was associated with it. The eldest boy was called Apollo,
which also is a Greek name, and was supposed at one time to belong to
the most beautiful boy in the world. The next girl was called Diana,
and the youngest boy's name was Orion.

When this story opens, Iris was ten years old, Apollo nine, Diana six,
and little Orion five. They were like ordinary children in appearance,
being neither particularly handsome nor particularly the reverse; but
in their minds and ways, in their habits and tastes, they seemed to
have inherited a savor of those far-off beings after whom their mother
had called them. They were, in short, very unworldly children--that
does not mean that they were specially religious--but they did not
care for fine clothes, nor the ordinary amusements which ordinary
children delight in. They loved flowers with a love which was almost a
passion, and they also knew a great deal about the stars, and often
coaxed their mother to allow them to sit up late at night to watch the
different constellations; but above all these things they adored, with
a great adoration, the entire animal kingdom.

It so happened that the little Delaneys spent the greater part of
their time in a beautiful garden. I don't think, in all the course of
my wanderings, I ever saw a garden quite to compare to that in which
their early days were spent. Even in the winter they lived the greater
part of their time here, being hardy children and never catching cold.
The house was a fine and beautiful building, having belonged to their
family for several generations, but the children thought nothing at
all of that in comparison with the garden. Here, when possible, they
even had their lessons; here they played all their wonderful and
remarkable games; here they went through their brief sorrows, and
tasted their sweetest joys. But I must hasten to describe the garden
itself. In the first place, it was old-fashioned, having very high
brick walls covered all over with fruit trees. These fruit trees had
grown slowly, and were now in the perfection of their prime. Never
were such peaches to be seen, nor such apricots, nor such cherries, as
ripened slowly on the red brick walls of the old garden. Inside the
walls almost all well-known English flowers flourished in lavish
profusion. There was also fruit to be found here in quantities. Never
were such strawberries to be seen as could be gathered from those
great strawberry beds. Then the gooseberries with which the old bushes
were laden; the currants, red, black, and white; the raspberries, had
surely their match nowhere else on this earth.

The walled-in garden contained quite five acres of ground, and was
divided itself into three portions. In the middle was the flower
garden proper. Here there was a long, straight walk which led to an
arbor at the bottom. The children were particularly fond of this
arbor, for their father had made it for them with his own hands, and
their mother had watched its growth. Mrs. Delaney was very delicate at
the time, and as she looked on and saw the pretty arbor growing into
shape, she used to lean on Iris' arm and talk to her now and then in
her soft, low voice about the flowers and the animals, and the happy
life which the little people were leading. At these moments a look
would often come into her mother's gentle eyes which caused Iris'
heart to beat fast, and made her tighten her clasp on the slender arm.
Then, when the arbor was quite finished, Mr. Delaney put little seats
into it, a rustic chair for each child, which he or she could take in
or out at pleasure. The chairs were carved in commemoration of each
child's name. Iris had the deep purple flowers which go by that name
twined round and round the back of hers. Apollo's chair was made
memorable with his well-known lyre and bow, and these words were
carved round it: "The golden lyre shall be my friend, the bent bow my
delight, and in oracles will I foretell the dark future."

Diana's chair had a bow and quiver engraved on the back, while little
Orion's represented a giant with a girdle and a sword. The children
were very proud of their chairs, and often talked of them to one
another, and Iris, who was the story-teller of the party, was never
tired of telling the stories of the great originals after whom she and
her brothers and sister were named.

Down the straight path which led to the pretty arbor were Scotch
roses, red and white. The smell of these roses in the summer was quite
enough to ravish you. Iris in particular used to sniff at them and
sniff at them until she felt nearly intoxicated with delight.

The central garden, which was mostly devoted to flowers, led through
little, old-fashioned, somewhat narrow postern doors into the fruit
gardens on either side. In these were the gooseberries. Here were to
be found the great beds of strawberries; here, by-and-by, ripened the
plums and the many sorts of apples and pears; here, too, were the
great glass houses where the grapes assumed their deep claret color
and their wonderful bloom; and here also were some peculiar and
marvelous foreign flowers, such as orchids, and many others.

Whenever the children were not in the house they were to be found in
the garden, for, in addition to the abundance of fruit and vegetables,
it also possessed some stately trees, which gave plenty of shade even
when the sun was at its hottest. Here Iris would lie full length on
her face and hands, and dream dreams to any extent. Now and then also
she would wake up with a start and tell marvelous stories to her
brothers and sister. She told stories very well, and the others always
listened solemnly and begged her to tell more, and questioned and
argued, and tried to make the adventures she described come really
into their own lives.

Iris was undoubtedly the most imaginative of all the little party.
She was also the most gentle and the most thoughtful. She took most
after her beautiful mother, and thought more than any of the others of
the peculiar names after which they were all called.

On a certain day in the first week of a particularly hot and lovely
June, Iris, who had been in the house for some time, came slowly out,
swinging her large muslin hat on her arm. Her face looked paler than
usual, and somewhat thoughtful.

"Here you are at last, Iris," called out Diana, in her brisk voice,
"and not a moment too soon. I have just found a poor innocent dead on
the walk; you must come and look at it at once."

On hearing these words, the gloom left Iris' face as if by magic.

"Where is it?" she asked. "I hope you did not tread on it, Diana."

"No; but Puff-Ball did," answered Diana. "Don't blame him, please,
Iris; he is only a puppy and always up to mischief. He took the poor
innocent in his mouth and shook it; but I think it was quite deaded
before that."

"Then, if it is dead, it must be buried," said Iris solemnly. "Bring
it into the arbor, and let us think what kind of funeral we will give
it."

"Why not into the dead-house at once?" queried Diana.

"No; the arbor will do for the present."

Iris quickened her footsteps and walked down the straight path through
the midst of the Scotch roses. Having reached the pretty little
summer-house, she seated herself on her rustic chair and waited until
Diana arrived with the poor innocent. This was a somewhat unsightly
object, being nothing more nor less than a dead earthworm which had
been found on the walk, and which Diana respected, as she did all live
creatures, great or small.

"Put it down there," said Iris; "we can have a funeral when the sun is
not quite so hot."

"I suppose it will have a private funeral," said Apollo, who came into
the summer-house at that moment. "It is nothing but a poor innocent,
and not worth a great deal of trouble; and I do hope, Iris," he added
eagerly, "that you will not expect me to be present, for I have got
some most important chemical experiments which I am anxious to go on
with. I quite hope to succeed with my thermometer to-day, and, after
all, as it is only a worm----"

Iris looked up at him with very solemn eyes.

"_Only_ a worm," she repeated. "Is _that_ its fault, poor thing?"
Apollo seemed to feel the indignant glance of Iris' brown eyes. He sat
down submissively on his own chair. Orion and Diana dropped on their
knees by Iris' side. "I think," said Iris slowly, "that we will give
this poor innocent a simple funeral. The coffin must be made of dock
leaves, and----"

Here she was suddenly interrupted--a shadow fell across the entrance
door of the pretty summer-house. An elderly woman, with a thin face
and lank, figure, looked in.

"Miss Iris," she said, "Mrs. Delaney is awake and would be glad to see
you."

"Mother!" cried Iris eagerly. She turned at once to her sister and
brothers. "The innocent must wait," she said. "Put it in the
dead-house with the other creatures. I will attend to the funeral in
the evening or to-morrow. Don't keep me now, children."

"But I thought you had just come from mother," said Apollo.

"No. When I went to her she was asleep. Don't keep me, please." The
woman who had brought the message had already disappeared down the
long straight walk. Iris took to her heels and ran after her.
"Fortune," she said, looking into her face, "is mother any better?"

"As to that, Miss Iris, it is more than I can tell you. Please don't
hold on to my hand, miss. In hot weather I hate children to cling to
me."

Iris said nothing more, but she withdrew a little from Fortune's side.

Fortune hurried her steps, and Iris kept time with her. When they
