made the best of their way out of sight, never to be seen again in
the neighbourhood where so many perils awaited them.

Rose was rid of her tormentors, but she cast apprehensive glances
in the direction of Tom.

"Can they hurt him?" she asked of Harry.

And he replied, with a light laugh:

"He looks a child that can stand up for himself!"

Nevertheless, after William had taken Rose to his house to pass the
rest of the time of her aunt's absence, and Tom and Harry were
walking southwards again, the latter said to his friend:

"All the same, Tom, I would have you take care of yon braggarts.
They are as evil a set of fellows as walk the streets of this city,
and if they could chance to do you an ill turn, be sure they would
not let it pass."

But Tom only laughed. He had passed through many perils of late,
and he felt that in the heart of this great city he could take care
of himself. A sort of careless self confidence had been his chief
peril through life, and his association with Lord Claud had not
tended to diminish it. In the presence of his patron, indeed, he
often felt of little account; but elsewhere he fancied himself
something of a hero, and was by no means disposed to tremble before
the malevolence of a set of swaggering bullies.

The town was very gay this bright springtide, and Tom was more than
ready to plunge into the vortex of such amusements as were open to
him. His lack of funds did not embarrass him, as Harry was ready to
lend him money, and he had some success at the dicing tables in
those coffee houses which he frequented. Gambling had not any great
attractions for him, but a little excitement did not come amiss,
and the fascination of winning was powerful.

Sometimes he was persuaded to try his luck at basset or ombre, and
here his lack of knowledge of the games often caused him to lose.
But he cared little, telling himself that he should soon have his
share of the reward offered by the Duke to his secret messengers;
and he plunged more and more deeply into debt, rather by way of
passing the time than for any particular delight in play. He had
not yet acquired strength enough to decline to share the amusements
of those about him. He kept up his sword practice in the mornings,
and took long walks with Harry Gay to visit different places of
interest in and about the city; but the afternoon and evening were
usually spent in some place of amusement, and little by little Tom
became impatient for his money. He had borrowed several times from
Harry; but he thought he ought to be hearing something from Lord
Claud.

At last he called at his rooms, and asked for him. He was asked to
wait, as Lord Claud was expected home shortly, and Tom's face was
well known to the valet. He went up to the familiar room, but noted
with surprise how many pictures and curios were missing from their
places. The rooms were comfortable, even luxurious, but they lacked
the costly elegance which had characterized them before. It seemed
to Tom as though Lord Claud must have been in need of money, too,
and have been selling his valuables to keep himself in funds. That
seemed a strange shift for one to whom the state owed so heavy a
debt.

Tom had perhaps sat still waiting for half an hour before the door
opened to admit Lord Claud, who came in with a dark look upon his
face, and threw down his hat and gloves upon the table with a
smothered oath.

Then he saw Tom, and the cloud lightened, although it did not
disappear. He shook the young man warmly by the hand.

"Tom, you are come in a good hour, and an evil one! I was just
wishing I had you to stand by me. What think you is the reply of
those to whom I have proffered my claim on our behalf? They will
have nothing of it. They will scarce give me a hearing. I may go to
the Duke of Marlborough with my tale, they tell me in some scorn,
as though incredulous of my words, but they will have nought to do
with it. And will not even make an advance, whilst they know that
to reach the Duke one must run many a peril and risk much money. It
is a shameful trick! I know they would not have dared treat all men
so, but they think they may put their despite upon me!"

He ground his teeth, and then broke out into strange wild talk
which Tom did not understand, though it inspired him with a sense
of great anger against those in high places.

Moreover, he was not a little disturbed on his own account by the
failure of Lord Claud. How should he pay his debts? How should he
live himself? Had he not risked his life for the sake of his
country? Had he not suffered scourging and sickness on her behalf?
It took very little of Lord Claud's fire to kindle an answering
flame in his own heart. His anger was always readily stirred, and
his appreciation of his own merit caused him to feel the more hot
and aggrieved.

"Tom," said Lord Claud suddenly, "there is one other way. If you
have a clear head, a strong arm, and a stout heart, there is yet a
hope that we may gain our ends."

Tom looked up eagerly. He saw something in Lord Claud's face which
seemed to him strange, and which inspired him with a sense of keen,
quick curiosity and excitement. He felt as though he were on the
verge of some new discovery. His breath came thick and fast, but it
was with eagerness, not fear. He had been so worked upon and played
upon by a master hand, that the thought of fear found no place
within his breast. What was this other way of which his master
spoke?

"The gold is ours, Tom. We have won it with the best that is in
us--with our heart's blood, as men say. It is ours. We have the
right to it. If they withhold it in injustice, have we not the
right to lay hands on it ourselves?"

"Ay, verily!" answered Tom in a whisper, his eyes fixed upon the
burning eyes of Lord Claud, which seemed to fascinate and hold him
as the snake does the bird.

Then Lord Claud approached and laid a hand upon Tom's shoulder, and
standing over him, talked long and earnestly in a low, quiet voice,
which nevertheless sounded trumpet-like in his ears.

Tom sat perfectly still, gazing at him and uttering no word, but
within his heart the fire seemed to glow and kindle; and when Lord
Claud paused and searched his face with his keen glance, he saw no
faltering there.

"Then we are brothers once again, Tom! Brothers now and always!"

"Now and always!" echoed Tom, in a voice almost the echo of Lord
Claud's. "Now and always!"



CHAPTER XIII. ON THE KING'S HIGHWAY.


A handsome and remarkably elegant vehicle stood at the door of Lord
Claud's lodgings, with two fine horses harnessed to it.

Tom had never seen any conveyance at once so light and handsome,
the cumbrous coaches of the times being little to his liking. He
had always travelled afoot or on horseback hitherto, and he had
expected to do the same now, when he received his summons from Lord
Claud.

That gentleman stood at the door, leisurely drawing on a pair of
strong gloves. He nodded to Tom as he came up.

"It begins to get hot for saddle work," he remarked in his
negligent tones; "besides, I want to make trial of this
new-fashioned carriage. I won it from my lord of Gratton three days
since; and he boasts that it has been copied from one in the
possession of the King of France, who is said to be a monarch of a
very excellent taste. At least it will carry us to St. Albans, and
bring us safely back three days hence;" and turning to the valet
who was holding his snuff box and cane, he added:

"If any call and ask for me, tell them I have driven into the
country, but look to be home in three days' time.

"Now, Tom, get up, and we will see if we can reach St. Albans ere
the dusk fall upon us."

Lord Claud was dressed in one of his finest suits; all white and
silver, with here and there a dash of azure blue. His hat was set
jauntily upon his golden curls, innocent today of any touch of
powder. His blue eyes were dreamy and soft in expression. He looked
like one who goes forth a-wooing, in all the gay frippery supposed
to be pleasing in a maiden's eyes. He had even discarded his sword,
and only wore a short jewelled rapier, such as he sometimes put on
rather for ornament than use.

He saluted passers by with an air of negligent grace, replying with
a smile to those friends who paused and bandied jests with him,
asking him where the fair lady was with whom he was going to visit.

Tom was also dressed in his best, and looked a fitting comrade for
the young exquisite now leisurely mounting to the seat beside him.
There was no place for a servant upon the carriage, and Tom had
learned by this time that Lord Claud was no more really dependent
than he was himself upon the attentions of a valet. He was rather
in a fog as to what all this was about, whither they were bound,
and what they were to accomplish; but he was willing to be led by
the strong will of his companion, and to follow him wherever he
went.

Tom's irritation and perplexity had not decreased during the past
days. He was at his wits' end for money; and it seemed to him that
if he could not obtain the payment due, he must either trust to his
luck at gambling for funds, or else go home and settle down at
Gablehurst once again.

For the latter course he was not yet ready. His soul revolted from
the thought of the life of the country squire. He had tasted of the
cup of excitement and pleasure, and was not in the least prepared
to relinquish it. He would rather face almost any alternative than
go back to the life of the Essex village, and sink down into the
old routine.

So he had been gaming somewhat recklessly these past days, and with
varying success. There had been moments when he was plunged into
despair; and then again the luck would shift, and he would feel
that fortune was almost at his feet.

Yet at the end of the time matters were with him very much as they
had been at the beginning; save that Tom himself had grown more
reckless an defiant, most lustful of gold, and less scrupulous how
he obtained it, as is always the way with the true gambler, whether
he is aware of it at the outset or not.

Now they were rolling along together through the gay streets of
London, the hot summer sunshine making everything bright and
joyous, filling Tom with a great longing after the good things of
this life, and a sense of bitter indignation at being defrauded of
his due.

Lord Claud handled the reins and drove his pair of fine horses with
a skill which awoke the youth's admiration, and which attracted the
notice also of the passers by. Lord Claud appeared rather to court
observation than to shun it, and often paused to exchange a word
with friends upon the footpath; always telling the same story of
being on his way to St. Albans; always smiling and evading a reply
when asked to what particular house he was bound.

Nobody who saw the light and remarkable-looking carriage speeding
on its way would be likely to forget it, and Tom could not help
rather wondering at the public fashion in which they took their
journey forth.

He had one encounter which he thought little of at the time, and
certainly made no effort to evade. Lord Claud had pulled up the
carriage to exchange a few words with a knot of dandies who had
hailed him from the footway, and Tom was sitting and looking about
him at the passing throng. Presently he was aware of the fixed
stare of several pairs of eyes at an adjacent tavern window; and
looking fixedly through the rather dull glass, he made out for
certain that his friends, the four swaggering bullies, were the
owners of these eyes. A minute or two later Bully Bullen stepped
forth from the door, and accosted him with swaggering insolence of
demeanour.

"So, Master Tom, you make fine friends! And whither away so fast in
that fine carriage? Egad, there be truth in the old adage, 'Set a
beggar on horseback, and he will ride to the devil.' Fine company,
fine company for a country bumpkin to keep! But you'll find it
finer than you think for one of these days! Ho! ho! ho!"

Lord Claud did not appear to hear or heed this newcomer's talk; but
he showed that he had taken all in by just quietly shifting the
long whip into Tom's hands, whilst himself drawing tighter the
reins.

Tom understood him in a moment. He took the whip, and the next
moment it had whistled through the air, and caught the bully a
stinging lash right across the face. At the sound of the crack of
the lash the horses started forward, and in a moment the carriage
was spinning away over the dusty road, followed by roars of
laughter from Lord Claud's friends, and by roars of a different
character from the indignant and outraged bully.

"You will have to shoot those fellows one of these days," remarked
Lord Claud coolly. "They are becoming a nuisance. Men who are a
nuisance ought to be put out of the way. London would be well rid
of them."

"They have been mine enemies from the very outset," said Tom, "from
the day when first we met, and you came to my rescue when they were
baiting me. They have owed me a grudge ever since; but hitherto I
have had the best of our encounters."

"Drunken sots have no chance against sober fellows with thews and
sinews like yours, good Tom; yet they can give trouble in other
ways, and are better under ground than above it. I marvel they have
all escaped so long; for they are well known for a set of ruffianly
vagabonds, and well deserve the hangman's noose."

The carriage spun fast over the ground, and the westering sun threw
long shadows over their path as they rolled farther and farther
through the country lanes, leaving the racket of the streets far
behind. The country was familiar to Tom, who had ridden over the
same ground early in the year; but how different it all looked in
the vivid green of early summer, instead of draped in a mantle of
frost and snow!

He felt a little elation of spirit as they drove through the old
town, the observed of all observers. Some friends of his own hailed
him with eager nods of recognition, looking with a great admiration
and respect at himself and his companion. Tom felt his heart swell
with pride, knowing that in time it would reach Gablethorpe how he
had been seen sitting in such state. He returned the salutations of
old friends with easy good nature, but felt as though he belonged
now to a quite different world; and his heart swelled with that
sort of pride which is apt to be the forerunner of a disastrous
fall.

They did not stop at St. Albans itself, but at a hostelry a little
to the north of it, standing by itself in a pleasant leafy lane.
Lord Claud appeared known to mine host, who made them welcome to
the best his house had at disposal; and promised all care for the
horses, which, as Lord Claud explained, had to make the return
journey upon the third day.

It was now somewhat late, so the travellers took their supper, and
then went to bed; Tom still in a state of subdued excitement and
expectation, scenting coming adventure, but as yet only very
imperfectly acquainted with the nature of it. He had suspicions of
his own, which caused him alternations of dread and excitement; but
he knew he should be told all in Lord Claud's time, and in the
meanwhile silence was the best policy.

The following day they spent in amusement in the town of St.
Albans. Never were two men more active in the pursuit of pleasure
than they. Lord Claud presented himself at the door of many a fine
house, never failing to obtain an eager welcome both for himself
and his friend. They spent the whole day in a round of amusement,
making themselves mightily popular with their companions. They
remained until hard upon ten o'clock in one house, and from thence
returned straight to their inn, which was already shut up and dark,
although the door had been left open for their return.

Up to their room they went, and there Lord Claud's manner suddenly
changed. He seemed to throw off his careless gaiety as if it had
been a garment, and at once the lines of his face began to change
and harden. His eyes gleamed with a steady fire, and his voice lost
all its soft indolence of tone.

He went to a cupboard, which he unlocked, and there Tom saw two
bundles which appeared to contain clothes, and two saddles and
bridles, which he knew had come from Lord Claud's stables.

He looked from them to Lord Claud in questioning wonder.

"How got they there?"

"We brought them with us--secreted in the carriage. Now, Tom, we
must no longer delay. We have stern and quick work to do this
night; and then back to London with the reward that is ours by
right, though they force us to take it by violence. The people here
will swear that we slept this night within doors. You saw the
landlord look out of his window as we entered to make sure who we
were. He will be in bed now, sleeping the sleep of the just. You
may be sure he will wake no more till five of the clock; and long
ere that we shall be back--our work accomplished.

"Off with those fine trappings, and put on these clothes. Then to
saddle the nags, and so steal forth. I know all the tricks of the
locks; we shall have nought to stay us."

Whilst he was speaking Lord Claud was unrolling one of the bundles,
and quickly transforming himself into such a creature as Tom had
never seen before, though he had heard such described many times.
His fine clothes were exchanged for a strong shabby riding suit of
common cut and texture, that presented no distinct features, and
would be most difficult either to describe or identify. He had a
great pair of horse pistols stuck in his belt, and also wore a
dangerous-looking weapon--something between a sword and a cutlass.
His golden hair was tucked away beneath the collar of his coat, and
his head was covered by a frowzy dark wig, that looked like
untrimmed natural hair. He quickly blackened his face with soot
from the chimney, and put on a black crape mask.

A more villainous-looking creature, and one more utterly unlike
Lord Claud, the exquisite, it would be hard to imagine. It appeared
to Tom as though even his figure had shrunk and become smaller. If
he had not seen the metamorphosis with his own eyes, he would not
have believed that it was his comrade who now stood before him.

But the voice was the same, as Lord Claud quickly assisted him to
change his garments, to assume wig and mask, and soot his forehead
over.

Tom had not been unprepared for this denouement, and yet when he
saw himself in the habiliments of a highway robber, his heart
throbbed with a painful sense of wonderment at how it had all come
about. Yet the fascination exercised over him by his companion, and
his own love of adventure and excitement, were so strong, that he
did not know whether he dreaded or desired the coming struggle.

"What are we going to do?" he asked in a low voice.

"To take our due that they will not give us," was the stern reply.
"They had their choice, and must abide by their blindness and
obstinacy. I am not going to be treated with contempt; no one who
has ever tried to do so has done it with impunity. Every man has a
right to his own--is it not so, honest Tom?"

"Yes, truly," answered Tom, with a note of indignation in his
voice. "Those who withhold our due must suffer for it."

"They shall suffer in pocket; and if what we shall obtain this
night be more than our due, the fault is theirs, not ours. Tom, you
are to taste a new experience this night--one which is full of joy
to those who have drunk often of the cup. There be times when I say
that I am happiest dressed as tonight, a good horse beneath me, a
bright moon above, and a booty worth having well in view. It is so
full of rare surprises and delight; and, if a man but have his wits
about him, it is so monstrous easy, too!"

Tom seemed to catch the spirit of his comrade. Those were days when
crime was lightly thought of, though so heavily punished. A strain
of recklessness in Tom's blood made the notion of even robbery on
the king's highway fascinating rather than terrible--at least when
he could say to himself that he was but "taking his own."

It was plain enough now that this was the secret of Lord Claud's
life--hinted at more or less plainly by many before, but never
altogether understood by Tom. Yet Lord Claud was received, feted,
made much of in the society of the gay city, even by those who more
than suspected where his influx of wealth came from. He had even
received instructions, and been intrusted with an important
commission, by one so high in office as the great Duke of
Marlborough. Surely there could be no great stigma resting upon one
who was thus employed in the service of his country. It seemed to
Tom (as it has seemed to others before and since) that if only
success crowned these efforts, there was no disgrace attached to
them.

But it was a significant if--and he knew it!

"And suppose we are taken?" he said tentatively.

