of royal grace which comes with kingly blood and the daily exercise of
power? Like the rich wonders of the robe she wore, her very barbarism,
of which now I saw but the better side, drew and dazzled my mind's eye,
giving her woman's tenderness some new quality, sombre and strange, an
eastern richness which is lacking in our well schooled English women,
that at one and the same stroke touched both the imagination and the
senses, and through them enthralled the heart.

For Otomie seemed such woman as men dream of but very rarely win, seeing
that the world has few such natures and fewer nurseries where they can
be reared. At once pure and passionate, of royal blood and heart, rich
natured and most womanly, yet brave as a man and beautiful as the night,
with a mind athirst for knowledge and a spirit that no sorrows could
avail to quell, ever changing in her outer moods, and yet most faithful
and with the honour of a man, such was Otomie, Montezuma's daughter,
princess of the Otomie. Was it wonderful then that I found her fair, or,
when fate gave me her love, that at last I loved her in turn? And yet
there was that in her nature which should have held me back had I but
known of it, for with all her charm, her beauty and her virtues, at
heart she was still a savage, and strive as she would to hide it, at
times her blood would master her.

But as I lay in the chamber of the palace of Chapoltepec, the tramp of
the guards without my door reminded me that I had little now to do with
love and other delights, I whose life hung from day to day upon a hair.
To-morrow the priests would decide my fate, and when the priests were
judges, the prisoner might know the sentence before it was spoken. I was
a stranger and a white man, surely such a one would prove an offering
more acceptable to the gods than that furnished by a thousand Indian
hearts. I had been snatched from the altars of Tobasco that I might
grace the higher altars of Tenoctitlan, and that was all. My fate would
be to perish miserably far from my home, and in this world never to be
heard of more.

Musing thus sadly at last I slept. When I woke the sun was up. Rising
from my mat I went to the wood-barred window place and looked through.
The palace whence I gazed was placed on the crest of a rocky hill. On
one side this hill was bathed by the blue waters of Tezcuco, on the
other, a mile or more away, rose the temple towers of Mexico. Along the
slopes of the hill, and in some directions for a mile from its
base, grew huge cedar trees from the boughs of which hung a grey and
ghostly-looking moss. These trees are so large that the smallest of them
is bigger than the best oak in this parish of Ditchingham, while the
greatest measures twenty-two paces round the base. Beyond and between
these marvellous and ancient trees were the gardens of Montezuma, that
with their strange and gorgeous flowers, their marble baths, their
aviaries and wild beast dens, were, as I believe, the most wonderful in
the whole world.*

'At the least,' I thought to myself, 'even if I must die, it is
something to have seen this country of Anahuac, its king, its customs,
and its people.'

     * The gardens of Montezuma have been long destroyed, but
     some of the cedars still flourish at Chapoltepec, though the
     Spaniards cut down many.  One of them, which tradition says
     was a favourite tree of the great emperor's, measures
     (according to a rough calculation the author of this book
     made upon the spot) about sixty feet round the bole.  It is
     strange to think that a few ancient conifers should alone
     survive of all the glories of Montezuma's wealth and state.
     --AUTHOR.



CHAPTER XVI

THOMAS BECOMES A GOD


Little did I, plain Thomas Wingfield, gentleman, know, when I rose that
morning, that before sunset I should be a god, and after Montezuma the
Emperor, the most honoured man, or rather god, in the city of Mexico.

It came about thus. When I had breakfasted with the household of the
prince Guatemoc, I was led to the hall of justice, which was named the
'tribunal of god.' Here on a golden throne sat Montezuma, administering
justice in such pomp as I cannot describe. About him were his
counsellors and great lords, and before him was placed a human skull
crowned with emeralds so large that a blaze of light went up from them.
In his hand also he held an arrow for a sceptre. Certain chiefs or
caciques were on their trial for treason, nor were they left long in
doubt as to their fate. For when some evidence had been heard they were
asked what they had to say in their defence. Each of them told his tale
in few words and short. Then Montezuma, who till now had said and done
nothing, took the painted scroll of their indictments and pricked it
with the arrow in his hand where the picture of each prisoner appeared
upon the scroll. Then they were led away to death, but how they died I
do not know.

When this trial was finished certain priests entered the hall clothed
in sable robes, their matted hair hanging down their backs. They were
fierce, wild-eyed men of great dignity, and I shivered when I saw them.
I noticed also that they alone made small reverence to the majesty of
Montezuma. The counsellors and nobles having fallen back, these priests
entered into talk with the emperor, and presently two of them came
forward and taking me from the custody of the guards, led me forward
before the throne. Then of a sudden I was commanded to strip myself of
my garments, and this I did with no little shame, till I stood naked
before them all. Now the priests came forward and examined every part of
me closely. On my arms were the scars left by de Garcia's sword, and on
my breast the scarcely healed marks of the puma's teeth and claws. These
wounds they scanned, asking how I had come by them. I told them, and
thereupon they carried on a discussion among themselves, and out of my
hearing, which grew so warm that at length they appealed to the emperor
to decide the point. He thought a while, and I heard him say:

'The blemishes do not come from within the body, nor were they upon it
at birth, but have been inflicted by the violence of man and beast.'

Then the priests consulted together again, and presently their leader
spoke some words into the ear of Montezuma. He nodded, and rising from
his throne, came towards me who stood naked and shivering before him,
for the air of Mexico is keen. As he advanced he loosed a chain of
emeralds and gold that hung about his neck, and unclasped the royal
cloak from his shoulders. Then with his own hand, he put the chain about
my throat, and the cloak upon my shoulders, and having humbly bent the
knee before me as though in adoration, he cast his arms about me and
embraced me.

'Hail! most blessed,' he said, 'divine son of Quetzal, holder of the
spirit of Tezcat, Soul of the World, Creator of the World. What have
we done that you should honour us thus with your presence for a season?
What can we do to pay the honour back? You created us and all this
country; behold! while you tarry with us, it is yours and we are nothing
but your servants. Order and your commands shall be obeyed, think and
your thought shall be executed before it can pass your lips. O Tezcat,
I, Montezuma your servant, offer you my adoration, and through me the
adoration of all my people,' and again he bowed the knee.

'We adore you, O Tezcat!' chimed in the priests.

Now I remained silent and bewildered, for of all this foolery I could
understand nothing, and while I stood thus Montezuma clapped his hands
and women entered bearing beautiful clothing with them, and a wreath of
flowers. The clothing they put upon my body and the wreath of flowers on
my head, worshipping me the while and saying, 'Tezcat who died yesterday
is come again. Be joyful, Tezcat has come again in the body of the
captive Teule.'

Then I understood that I was now a god and the greatest of gods, though
at that moment within myself I felt more of a fool than I had ever been
before.

And now men appeared, grave and reverend in appearance, bearing lutes in
their hands. I was told that these were my tutors, and with them a train
of royal pages who were to be my servants. They led me forth from the
hall making music as they went, and before me marched a herald, calling
out that this was the god Tezcat, Soul of the World, Creator of the
World, who had come again to visit his people. They led me through all
the courts and endless chambers of the palace, and wherever I went, man
woman and child bowed themselves to the earth before me, and worshipped
me, Thomas Wingfield of Ditchingham, in the county of Norfolk, till I
thought that I must be mad.

Then they placed me in a litter and carried me down the hill
Chapoltepec, and along causeways and through streets, till we came to
the great square of the temple. Before me went heralds and priests,
after me followed pages and nobles, and ever as we passed the multitudes
prostrated themselves till I began to understand how wearisome a thing
it is to be a god. Next they carried me through the wall of serpents and
up the winding paths of the mighty teocalli till we reached the summit,
where the temples and idols stood, and here a great drum beat, and the
priests sacrificed victim after victim in my honour and I grew sick with
the sight of wickedness and blood. Presently they invited me to descend
from the litter, laying rich carpets and flowers for my feet to tread
on, and I was much afraid, for I thought that they were about to
sacrifice me to myself or some other divinity. But this was not so.
They led me to the edge of the pyramid, or as near as I would go, for
I shrank back lest they should seize me suddenly and cast me over the
edge. And there the high priest called out my dignity to the thousands
who were assembled beneath, and every one of them bent the knee in
adoration of me, the priests above and the multitudes below. And so it
went on till I grew dizzy with the worship, and the shouting, and the
sounds of music, and the sights of death, and very thankful was I, when
at last they carried me back to Chapoltepec.

Here new honours awaited me, for I was conducted to a splendid range of
apartments, next to those of the emperor himself, and I was told that
all Montezuma's household were at my command and that he who refused to
do my bidding should die.

So at last I spoke and said it was my bidding that I should be suffered
to rest a while, till a feast was prepared for me in the apartments of
Guatemoc the prince, for there I hoped to meet Otomie.

My tutors and the nobles who attended me answered that Montezuma my
servant had trusted that I would feast with him that night. Still my
command should be done. Then they left me, saying that they would come
again in an hour to lead me to the banquet. Now I threw off the emblems
of my godhead and cast myself down on cushions to rest and think, and a
certain exultation took possession of me, for was I not a god, and had I
not power almost absolute? Still being of a cautious mind I wondered why
I was a god, and how long my power would last.

Before the hour had gone by, pages and nobles entered, bearing new robes
which were put upon my body and fresh flowers to crown my head, and I
was led away to the apartments of Guatemoc, fair women going before me
who played upon instruments of music.

Here Guatemoc the prince waited to receive me, which he did as though
I, his captive and companion, was the first of kings. And yet I thought
that I saw merriment in his eye, mingled with sorrow. Bending forward I
spoke to him in a whisper:

'What does all this mean, prince?' I said. 'Am I befooled, or am I
indeed a god?'

'Hush!' he answered, bowing low and speaking beneath his breath. 'It
means both good and ill for you, my friend Teule. Another time I will
tell you.' Then he added aloud, 'Does it please you, O Tezcat, god of
gods, that we should sit at meat with you, or will you eat alone?'

'The gods like good company, prince,' I said.

Now during this talk I had discovered that among those gathered in the
hall was the princess Otomie. So when we passed to the low table around
which we were to sit on cushions, I hung back watching where she would
place herself, and then at once seated myself beside her. This caused
some little confusion among the company, for the place of honour had
been prepared for me at the head of the table, the seat of Guatemoc
being to my right and that of his wife, the royal Tecuichpo, to my left.

'Your seat is yonder, O Tezcat,' she said, blushing beneath her olive
skin as she spoke.

'Surely a god may sit where he chooses, royal Otomie,' I answered;
'besides,' I added in a low voice, 'what better place can he find than
by the side of the most lovely goddess on the earth.'

Again she blushed and answered, 'Alas! I no goddess, but only a mortal
maid. Listen, if you desire that I should be your companion at our
feasts, you must issue it as a command; none will dare to disobey you,
not even Montezuma my father.'

So I rose and said in very halting Aztec to the nobles who waited on
me, 'It is my will that my place shall always be set by the side of the
princess Otomie.'

At these words Otomie blushed even more, and a murmur went round among
the guests, while Guatemoc first looked angry and then laughed. But the
nobles, my attendants, bowed, and their spokesman answered:

'The words of Tezcat shall be obeyed. Let the seat of Otomie, the royal
princess, the favoured of Tezcat, be placed by the side of the god.'

Afterwards this was always done, except when I ate with Montezuma
himself. Moreover the princess Otomie became known throughout the city
as 'the blessed princess, the favoured of Tezcat.' For so strong a hold
had custom and superstition upon this people that they thought it the
greatest of honours to her, who was among the first ladies in the land,
that he who for a little space was supposed to hold the spirit of the
soul of the world, should deign to desire her companionship when he ate.
Now the feast went on, and presently I made shift to ask Otomie what all
this might mean.

'Alas!' she whispered, 'you do not know, nor dare I tell you now. But I
will say this: though you who are a god may sit where you will to-day,
an hour shall come when you must lie where you would not. Listen: when
we have finished eating, say that it is your wish to walk in the gardens
of the palace and that I should accompany you. Then I may find a chance
to speak.'

Accordingly, when the feast was over I said that I desired to walk in
the gardens with the princess Otomie, and we went out and wandered under
the solemn trees, that are draped in a winding-sheet of grey moss which,
hanging from every bough as though the forest had been decked with the
white beards of an army of aged men, waved and rustled sadly in the keen
night air. But alas! we might not be alone, for after us at a distance
of twenty paces followed all my crowd of attendant nobles, together with
fair dancing girls and minstrels armed with their accursed flutes, on
which they blew in season and out of it, dancing as they blew. In vain
did I command them to be silent, telling them that it was written of old
that there is a time to play and dance and a time to cease from dancing,
for in this alone they would not obey me. Never could I be at peace
because of them then or thereafter, and not till now did I learn how
great a treasure is solitude.

Still we were allowed to walk together under the trees, and though the
clamour of music pursued us wherever we went, we were soon deep in talk.
Then it was that I learned how dreadful was the fate which overshadowed
me.

'Know, O Teule,' said Otomie, for she would call me by the old name when
there were none to hear; 'this is the custom of our land, that every
year a young captive should be chosen to be the earthly image of the
god Tezcat, who created the world. Only two things are necessary to this
captive, namely, that his blood should be noble, and that his person
should be beautiful and without flaw or blemish. The day that you
came hither, Teule, chanced to be the day of choosing a new captive to
personate the god, and you have been chosen because you are both noble
and more beautiful than any man in Anahuac, and also because being
of the people of the Teules, the children of Quetzal of whom so many
rumours have reached us, and whose coming my father Montezuma dreads
more than anything in the world, it was thought by the priests that you
may avert their anger from us, and the anger of the gods.'

Now Otomie paused as one who has something to say that she can scarcely
find words to fit, but I, remembering only what had been said, swelled
inwardly with the sense of my own greatness, and because this lovely
princess had declared that I was the most beautiful man in Anahuac,
I who though I was well-looking enough, had never before been called
'beautiful' by man, woman, or child. But in this case as in many
another, pride went before a fall.

'It must be spoken, Teule,' Otomie continued. 'Alas! that it should be I
who am fated to tell you. For a year you will rule as a god in this city
of Tenoctitlan, and except for certain ceremonies that you must undergo,
and certain arts which you must learn, none will trouble you. Your
slightest wish will be a law, and when you smile on any, it shall be an
omen of good to them and they will bless you; even my father Montezuma
will treat you with reverence as an equal or more. Every delight shall
be yours except that of marriage, and this will be withheld till the
twelfth month of the year. Then the four most beautiful maidens in the
land will be given to you as brides.'

'And who will choose them?' I asked.

'Nay, I know not, Teule, who do not meddle in such mysteries,' she
answered hurriedly. 'Sometimes the god is judge and sometimes the
priests judge for him. It is as it may chance. Listen now to the end of
my tale and you will surely forget the rest. For one month you will live
with your wives, and this month you will pass in feasting at all the
noblest houses in the city. On the last day of the month, however, you
will be placed in a royal barge and together with your wives, paddled
across the lake to a place that is named "Melting of Metals." Thence you
will be led to the teocalli named "House of Weapons," where your wives
will bid farewell to you for ever, and there, Teule, alas! that I must
say it, you are doomed to be offered as a sacrifice to the god whose
spirit you hold, the great god Tezcat, for your heart will be torn from
your body, and your head will be struck from your shoulders and set upon
the stake that is known as "post of heads."'

Now when I heard this dreadful doom I groaned aloud and my knees
trembled so that I almost fell to the ground. Then a great fury seized
me and, forgetting my father's counsel, I blasphemed the gods of that
country and the people who worshipped them, first in the Aztec and Maya
languages, then when my knowledge of these tongues failed me, in Spanish
and good English. But Otomie, who heard some of my words and guessed
more, was seized with fear and lifted her hands, saying:

'Curse not the awful gods, I beseech you, lest some terrible thing
befall you at once. If you are overheard it will be thought that you
have an evil spirit and not a good one, and then you must die now and by
torment. At the least the gods, who are everywhere, will hear you.'

'Let them hear,' I answered. 'They are false gods and that country
is accursed which worships them. They are doomed I say, and all their
worshippers are doomed. Nay, I care not if I am heard--as well die now
by torment as live a year in the torment of approaching death. But I
shall not die alone, all the sea of blood that your priests have shed
cries out for vengeance to the true God, and He will avenge.'

Thus I raved on, being mad with fear and impotent anger, while the
princess Otomie stood terrified and amazed at my blasphemies, and the
flutes piped and the dancers danced behind us. And as I raved I saw that
the mind of Otomie wandered from my words, for she was staring towards
the east like one who sees a vision. Then I looked also towards the east
and saw that the sky was alight there. For from the edge of the horizon
to the highest parts of heaven spread a fan of pale and fearful light
powdered over with sparks of fire, the handle of the fan resting on the
earth as it were, while its wings covered the eastern sky. Now I ceased
my cursing and stood transfixed, and as I stood, a cry of terror arose
from all the precincts of the palace and people poured from every door
to gaze upon the portent that flared and blazed in the east. Presently
Montezuma himself came out, attended by his great lords, and in that
ghastly light I saw that his lips worked and his hands writhed over each
other. Nor was the miracle done with, for anon from the clear sky that
hung over the city, descended a ball of fire, which seemed to rest upon
the points of the lofty temple in the great square, lighting up the
teocalli as with the glare of day. It vanished, but where it had been
another light now burned, for the temple of Quetzal was afire.

Now cries of fear and lamentation arose from all who beheld these
wonders on the hill of Chapoltepec and also from the city below. Even I
was frightened, I do not know why, for it may well be that the blaze
of light which we saw on that and after nights was nothing but the
brightness of a comet, and that the fire in the temple was caused by
a thunderbolt. But to these people, and more especially to Montezuma,
whose mind was filled already with rumours of the coming of a strange
white race, which, as it was truly prophesied, would bring his empire to
nothingness, the omens seemed very evil. Indeed, if they had any doubt
as to their meaning, it was soon to be dispelled, in their minds at
least. For as we stood wonder-struck, a messenger, panting and soiled
with travel, arrived among us and prostrating himself before the majesty
of the emperor, he drew a painted scroll from his robe and handed it to
an attendant noble. So desirous was Montezuma to know its contents,
that contrary to all custom he snatched the roll from the hands of the
counsellor, and unrolling it, he began to read the picture writing
by the baleful light of the blazing sky and temple. Presently, as we
watched and he read, Montezuma groaned aloud, and casting down the
writing he covered his face with his hands. As it chanced it fell near
to where I stood, and I saw painted over it rude pictures of ships of
the Spanish rig, and of men in the Spanish armour. Then I understood why
Montezuma groaned. The Spaniards had landed on his shores!

Now some of his counsellors approached him to console him, but he thrust
them aside, saying:

'Let me mourn--the doom that was foretold is fallen upon the children
of Anahuac. The children of Quetzal muster on our shores and slay my
people. Let me mourn, I say.'

At that moment another messenger came from the palace, having grief
written on his face.

'Speak,' said Montezuma.

'O king, forgive the tongue that must tell such tidings. Your royal
sister Papantzin was seized with terror at yonder dreadful sight,' and
he pointed to the heavens; 'she lies dying in the palace!'

Now when the emperor heard that his sister whom he loved was dying, he
said nothing, but covering his face with his royal mantle, he passed
slowly back to the palace.

And all the while the crimson light gleamed and sparkled in the east
like some monstrous and unnatural dawn, while the temple of Quetzal
burned fiercely in the city beneath.

Now, I turned to the princess Otomie, who had stood by my side
throughout, overcome with wonder and trembling.

'Did I not say that this country was accursed, princess of the Otomie?'

'You said it, Teule,' she answered, 'and it is accursed.'


Then we went into the palace, and even in this hour of fear, after me
came the minstrels as before.



CHAPTER XVII

THE ARISING OF PAPANTZIN


On the morrow Papantzin died, and was buried with great pomp that
same evening in the burial-ground at Chapoltepec, by the side of the
emperor's royal ancestors. But, as will be seen, she was not content
with their company. On that day also, I learned that to be a god is not
all pleasure, since it was expected of me that I must master various
arts, and chiefly the horrid art of music, to which I never had any
desire. Still my own wishes were not allowed to weigh in the matter,
for there came to me tutors, aged men who might have found better
employment, to instruct me in the use of the lute, and on this
instrument I must learn to strum. Others there were also, who taught me
letters, poetry, and art, as they were understood among the Aztecs, and
all this knowledge I was glad of. Still I remembered the words of the
preacher which tell us that he who increaseth knowledge increaseth
sorrow, and moreover I could see little use in acquiring learning that
was to be lost shortly on the stone of sacrifice.

As to this matter of my sacrifice I was at first desperate. But
reflection told me that I had already passed many dangers and come out
unscathed, and therefore it was possible that I might escape this one
also. At least death was still a long way off, and for the present I
was a god. So I determined that whether I died or lived, while I lived I
would live like a god and take such pleasures as came to my hand, and
I acted on this resolve. No man ever had greater or more strange
opportunities, and no man can have used them better. Indeed, had it not
been for the sorrowful thoughts of my lost love and home which would
force themselves upon me, I should have been almost happy, because of
the power that I wielded and the strangeness of all around me. But I
must to my tale.

During the days that followed the death of Papantzin the palace and
the city also were plunged in ferment. The minds of men were shaken
strangely because of the rumours that filled the air. Every night the
fiery portent blazed in the east, every day a new wonder or omen was
reported, and with it some wild tale of the doings of the Spaniards, who
by most were held to be white gods, the children of Quetzal, come back
to take the land which their forefather ruled.

But of all that were troubled, none were in such bad case as the emperor
himself, who, during these weeks scarcely ate or drank or slept, so
heavy were his fears upon him. In this strait he sent messengers to his
ancient rival, that wise and severe man Neza, the king of the allied
state of Tezcuco, begging that he would visit him. This king came,
an old man with a fierce and gleaming eye, and I was witness to the
interview that followed, for in my quality of god I had full liberty of
the palace, and even to be present at the councils of the emperor and
his nobles. When the two monarchs had feasted together, Montezuma spoke
to Neza of the matter of the omens and of the coming of the Teules,
asking him to lighten the darkness by his wisdom. Then Neza pulled his
long grey beard and answered that heavy as the heart of Montezuma might
be, it must grow still heavier before the end.

'See, Lord,' he said, 'I am so sure that the days of our empire are
