that he produces fixed gas equal to coal gas, much faster, and with
less expense, the wood and water furnishing the hydrogen, and the oil
furnishing the carbon.


IMPROVED FISHING LINE LEADER.

Welmer T. Jahne and Anthony Moors, Jersey City, N.J.--This consists of
a leader made of spring wire, bent into V form, provided with a swivel
and eye at its middle part, and with eyes or loops at its ends to
receive the line and snells. By this construction the snells and hooks
will be kept apart however the line maybe thrown, and however they and
the leader may be turned about by the tide or current. The device is
one well calculated to meet with a favorable reception from fishermen.


IMPROVED ABDOMINAL CORSET.

Christina Lascell, Newark, N.J.--The object of this invention is to
furnish an improved abdominal corset, which supports the weight of the
abdomen in a perfectly comfortable and easy manner, and throws the
strain on the shoulders and hips of the wearer. The corset is
adjustable to the varying conditions of the abdomen, does not
interfere with the motion and different positions of the body, and is
readily put on and taken off. It has adjustable elastic shoulder
straps, and opening at the sides by lacings and elastic bands and
buttons. The front part of the corset is stiffened by a stay that
slides in a pocket to provide for stooping. A central front and lacing
admit the front part of the corset to expand. The lower extension part
of the corset has short stiffening stays, and it is connected
independently of the upper stays by short side lacing and elastic
straps to the side or hip parts of the corset. A hernial band extends
from the lowermost part of the corset-extension between the legs to
the rear, and is attached by adjustable hip straps to the sides of the
corset.


IMPROVED FIRE ESCAPE.

John F. Werner, New York city.--The terrible disaster in the Brooklyn
theater is serving as a stimulus to induce the invention of devices
looking to the prevention of a like occurrence. The present inventor
has devised a new fire escape for theaters, concert halls, and other
public places of amusement, by which the space at the upper parts of
the entrances, halls, or vestibules of the buildings is utilized for
the purpose of forming additional passage ways for the persons in the
buildings, to be used in case of fire for the more convenient and less
dangerous exit of the same. The invention consists, mainly, of a
movable floor, suspended by chains, pulleys, and weights, near the
ceiling of the entrances, and lowered in case of fire. It is supported
on projecting rests of the side walls, at suitable height above the
floor. Sliding extensions and swinging stairs and rear sections
connect with the ground outside of the door, and with the staircases
of the gallery, so as to form separate exits above the regular
entrances.


IMPROVED ELECTRO-MAGNETIC DENTAL PLUGGER.

James E. Dexter, New York city.--This invention consists, first, in a
magnet having a centrally bored iron core, surrounded by a magnetic
coil, which is enveloped by an iron shell that is concentric with the
central core, and is attached to a flange formed on the lower end of
the said central core. One side of both shell and core are split for
the purpose of obviating residual magnetism. The invention also
consists in combining a spring yoke, a vibrator, and a spring contact
piece, as hereinafter particularly described. The third part of this
invention consists in the arrangement of the key for completing the
circuit, which is made with an insulating exterior, and is provided
with one of the termini of the magnet coil, and bears against the side
of the key to insure a constant contact of the surfaces. The various
parts of the plugger are combined, so that pressing the key with the
finger makes the circuit, and a succession of regular strokes is
produced, the force of which may be varied by an adjusting screw.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW MECHANICAL AND ENGINEERING INVENTIONS.


IMPROVED COTTON GIN.

Joseph W. Thorn, Iuka, Miss., assignor to himself and M.W. Beardsley,
of same place.--In this machine there is a new construction of the
brush drum for simplifying the same, and facilitating the application
of the brush wings, so that they can be readily taken off and put on;
also, an arrangement of the ribs between the saws for facilitating the
separating of the seed from the cotton without breaking and injuring
the fiber. There are also ingenious devices for preventing the seed
from gathering and clogging at the ends of the saw drum.


IMPROVED SAFETY CHECK FOR ELEVATORS.

Nathan H. Fogg, Boston, Mass.--When the car is suspended normally from
the rope, the rubber balls, arranged in sockets near the lower part of
the car, are supported on their seats in a state of rest; but the
instant that the rope breaks or gets detached from the bolt the action
of a spiral spring throws an actuating plate downward, and levers and
ball-carrying rods upward. The balls are thus thrown off their seats
and wedged between the inclined sides of the pockets and the guide
posts of the elevator so as to stop thereby the car.


IMPROVED COMBINATION LOCK.

Achille Parise, Naples, Italy.--This is a new combination lock for
doors, trunks, safes, etc., that admits of a large number of
combinations, and may be opened and closed quickly. It consists of
sliding tumbler plates, having longitudinal slots and a number of
perforations placed at different relative positions to the slots of
each tumbler. The trunks are connected by screw set pins attached to
face slides, and passing through any one of the perforations,
admitting the setting of the tumblers and opening of the lock by outer
projections or buttons of the slides to fixed exterior guides.


IMPROVED MACHINE FOR WIRING AND BINDING HATS.

Mari A. Cuming and Judson Knight, New York city.--This is a machine
for binding hats, felt skirts, and similar articles, by a uniform and
parallel pressure on the rims, and by facilitating the applying and
taking off of the articles from the machine, and accomplishing the
cutting of the binding or braid and wire in a reliable and improved
manner. Pressure rollers attach the binding and the wire, if one is
required, in connection with a grooved gage that is supported on a
seat of the shaft of the lower pressure roller. The wire is guided by
annular recesses or chamferings at the rear circumference of the
pressure rollers and the groove of the gage. The gage is so connected
to its seat that it may be turned and another guide groove of the same
be exposed to face the pressure rollers, so as to adapt the same for a
variety of work.

       *       *       *       *       *



BUSINESS AND PERSONAL


_The Charge for Insertion under this head is One Dollar a line for
each insertion. If the Notice exceeds four lines, One Dollar and a
Half per line will be charged._

       *       *       *       *       *


Manufs. of Scissors address J.W.D.E., Harmony Grove, Ga.

For Sale--36 in. Lathe, $4.00; 72 in. Lathe, $4.50; 10 in. Pratt
Whiting Shaper, $2.75; 35 H.P. Loco. Boiler, $300; 12 in. Lathe, $65;
at Shearman's, 132 N. 3d St., Phila.

Iron Tubing--Wanted, a yearly supply of 1-4 in. light Iron Tubing.
Address P.O. box 1250, New York city.

Baxter's Adjustable Wrenches--The best for Farmers, Householders and
Mechanics. Greene, Tweed & Co., 18 Park Place, N.Y.

For Sale--Baldwin No. 4 Foot Lathe and fittings; in perfect order.
Address P.O. Box 196, Clinton, Mich.

National Steam Pump--Simple, durable, economical. Reduced price.
National Iron Works, N. Brunswick, N.J.

Manufs. and dealers in Cotton Gins, Grist Mills, and Rice Hullers and
Polishers, address with terms, Y.L. Ridley, Liberty, Texas.

For Sale--Patent Combination Fruit Press, Filter and Funnel. An
indispensable article in every household. For circulars, address G.A.
Newsam, 118 3d Pl. Brooklyn.

Mill Stone Dressing Diamonds. Simple, effective, and durable. J.
Dickinson, 64 Nassau St., N.Y.

Will purchase or introduce, on a reasonable royalty, some good, useful
article. Address, with description and full particulars, A.E. Lowison,
Boston, Mass.

Mechanical inventors familiar with Envelope Manufacturing. L.J. Henry,
615 Kearny st., San Francisco, Cal.

Set of Mechanical Curves, as illustrated in Sci. Am. Supplement, No.
50, mailed on receipt of $5.25, by Keuffel & Esser, New York.

Hyatt & Co.'s Varnishes and Japans, as to price, color, purity, and
durability, are cheap by comparison than any others extant. 246 Grand
st., N.Y. Factory, Newark, N.J. Send for circular and descriptive
price list.

Lightning Screw Plates. A perfect thread at one cut adjustable for
wear. Frasse & Co., 62 Chatham St., N.Y.

Wire Needle Pointer, W. Crabb, Newark, N.J.

Power & Foot Presses, Ferracute Co., Bridgeton, N.J.

Superior Lace Leather, all sizes, cheap. Hooks and Couplings for flat
and round Belts. Send for catalogue. C.W. Arny, 148 North 3d St.,
Philadelphia, Pa.

F.C. Beach & Co., makers of the Tom Thumb Telegraph and other
electrical machines, have removed to 530 Water St., N.Y.

For Best Presses, Dies, and Fruit Can Tools, Bliss & Williams, cor. of
Plymouth and Jay Sts., Brooklyn, N.Y.

Water, Gas, and Steam Pipe, Wrought Iron. Send for prices. Bailey,
Farrell & Co., Pittsburgh, Pa.

Walrus Leather and supplies for polishing Iron, Steel, and Brass.
Greene, Tweed & Co., 18 Park Place, N.Y.

Hydraulic Presses and Jacks, new and second hand. Lathes and Machinery
for Polishing and Buffing metals. E. Lyon, 470 Grand St., N.Y.

Solid Emery Vulcanite Wheels--The Solid Original Emery Wheel--other
kinds imitations and inferior. Caution.--Our name is stamped in full
on all our best Standard Belting, Packing, and Hose. Buy that only.
The best is the cheapest. New York Belting and Packing Company, 37 and
38 Park Row, New York.

Steel Castings from one lb. to five thousand lbs. Invaluable for
strength and durability. Circulars free. Pittsburgh Steel Casting Co.,
Pittsburgh, Pa.

M. Shaw, Manufacturer of Insulated Wire for galvanic and telegraph
purposes, &c., 259 W. 27th St., N.Y.

Shingle, Heading, and Stave Machine. See advertisement of Trevor &
Co., Lockport, N.Y.

For Solid Wrought iron Beams, etc., see advertisement. Address Union
Iron Mills, Pittsburgh, Pa., for lithograph, etc.

Articles in Light Metal Work, Fine Castings in Brass, Malleable Iron,
&c., Japanning, Tinning, Galvanizing. Welles Specialty Works, Chicago,
Ill.

See Boult's Paneling, Moulding, and Dovetailing Machine at Centennial,
B. 8-55. Send for pamphlet and sample of work. B.C. Mach'y Co., Battle
Creek, Mich.

Wanted--Novel and practical invention, by a reliable house, for
manufacturing. Address Post Office, Box 25, Chillicothe, Ohio.

Chester Steel Castings Co. make castings twice as strong as malleable
iron castings, at about the same price. See their advertisement on
page 125.

Hand Fire Engines, Lift and Force Pumps for fire and all other
purposes. Address Rumsey & Co., Seneca Falls, N.Y., U.S.A.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES & QUERIES


       *       *       *       *       *

S.J.S. will find good recipes for laundry soaps on pp. 331, 379, vol.
31. For toilet soaps, see p. 289, vol. 28.--B.F.T. will find
directions for putting a black finish on brass on p. 362, vol.
25.--J.C.S. will find directions for coloring a meerschaum pipe on p.
90, vol. 36.--A.B. will find a good recipe for Babbitt metal on p.
122, vol. 28.--G.A.D. will find directions for coloring butter with
annatto on p. 187, vol. 31.--L.O.J. will find something on iceboats
sailing faster than the wind on p. 107, vol. 36.--J.M.L. will find
directions for clarifying cotton seed oil on p. 91, vol. 36.--D.V.
will find a good recipe for shoe polish on p. 107, vol. 36.--A.B. will
find directions for japanning on metal on p. 408, vol. 30.--T.S.D.
will find recipes for all kinds of colored fires on p. 203, vol.
34.--G.S.C. can fasten his paper labels to wood with flour
paste.--W.R.B. will find directions for dyeing billiard balls on p.
88, vol. 34.--G.W.M. will find directions for making raisins on p. 59,
vol. 34.--T.F.T. will find something on burning petroleum in steam
boilers on p. 165, vol. 30.--S.B.U. will find some illustrations of
lathes for turning spokes, tool handles, etc., on p. 88, vol.
36.--W.E.P. will find a formula for safety valves on p. 330. vol.
32.--A.O. will find directions for removing mildew on p. 138, vol.
27. For mending rubber boots, etc., see p. 203, vol. 30.--W.C.L. will
find directions for preserving eggs on p. 306, vol. 34.--R.M.G. will
find a recipe for root beer on p. 138, vol. 31.--W.F.H.'s plan for a
refrigerator might answer. See p. 251, vol. 31.--J.C. can remove the
wool from pelts by steeping the skins in water, and hanging them up
till the wool putrifies. Then scrape with a blunt knife. For cleansing
wool, see p. 6, vol. 32.--W.H.J. will find a recipe for a cement for
marble on p. 344, vol. 32.--T.B. can gild his steel scabbard by
following the directions given on p. 106, vol. 34.--A.H.B., J.A.C.,
W.H.H., J.F.P., D.S., J.N.H., J.P., F.F., M.N., M.C., R.C., K.S.W.,
T.J., and others, who ask us to recommend books on industrial and
scientific subjects, should address the booksellers who advertise in
our columns, all of whom are trustworthy firms, for catalogues

