Project Gutenberg's The Thing in the Attic, by James Benjamin Blish

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Thing in the Attic

Author: James Benjamin Blish

Illustrator: Paul Orban

Release Date: May 20, 2010 [EBook #32447]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THING IN THE ATTIC ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                       THE THING IN THE ATTIC

                           By James Blish

                      Illustrated by Paul Orban

[Transcriber Note: This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science
Fiction July 1954. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


[Sidenote: _Honath and his fellow arch-doubters did not believe in the
Giants, and for this they were cast into Hell. And when survival
depended upon unwavering faith in their beliefs, they saw that there
were Giants, after all...._]


     _It is written that after the Giants came to Tellura from the far
     stars, they abode a while, and looked upon the surface of the land,
     and found it wanting, and of evil omen. Therefore did they make men
     to live always in the air and in the sunlight, and in the light of
     the stars, that he would be reminded of them. And the Giants abode
     yet a while, and taught men to speak, and to write, and to weave,
     and to do many things which are needful to do, of which the
     writings speak. And thereafter they departed to the far stars,
     saying, Take this world as your own, and though we shall return,
     fear not, for it is yours._

     --THE BOOK OF LAWS


Honath the Pursemaker was hauled from the nets an hour before the rest
of the prisoners, as befitted his role as the arch-doubter of them all.
It was not yet dawn, but his captors led him in great bounds through the
endless, musky-perfumed orchid gardens, small dark shapes with crooked
legs, hunched shoulders, slim hairless tails carried, like his, in
concentric spirals wound clockwise. Behind them sprang Honath on the end
of a long tether, timing his leaps by theirs, since any slip would hang
him summarily.

He would of course be on his way to the surface, some 250 feet below the
orchid gardens, shortly after dawn in any event. But not even the
arch-doubter of them all wanted to begin the trip--not even at the
merciful snap-spine end of a tether--a moment before the law said, Go.

The looping, interwoven network of vines beneath them, each cable as
thick through as a man's body, bellied out and down sharply as the
leapers reached the edge of the fern-tree forest which surrounded the
copse of fan-palms. The whole party stopped before beginning the descent
and looked eastward, across the dim bowl. The stars were paling more and
more rapidly; only the bright constellation of the Parrot could still be
picked out without doubt.

"A fine day," one of the guards said, conversationally. "Better to go
below on a sunny day than in the rain, pursemaker."

Honath shuddered and said nothing. Of course it was always raining down
below in Hell, that much could be seen by a child. Even on sunny days,
the endless pinpoint rain of transpiration, from the hundred million
leaves of the eternal trees, hazed the forest air and soaked the black
bog forever.

He looked around in the brightening, misty morning. The eastern horizon
was black against the limb of the great red sun, which had already risen
about a third of its diameter; it was almost time for the small,
blue-white, furiously hot consort to follow. All the way to that brink,
as to every other horizon, the woven ocean of the treetops flowed gently
in long, unbreaking waves, featureless as some smooth oil. Only nearby
could the eye break that ocean into its details, into the world as it
was: a great, many-tiered network, thickly overgrown with small ferns,
with air-drinking orchids, with a thousand varieties of fungi sprouting
wherever vine crossed vine and collected a little humus for them, with
the vivid parasites sucking sap from the vines, the trees, and even each
other. In the ponds of rain-water collected by the closely fitting
leaves of the bromeliads tree-toads and peepers stopped down their
hoarse songs dubiously as the light grew and fell silent one by one. In
the trees below the world, the tentative morning screeches of the
lizard-birds--the souls of the damned, or the devils who hunted them, no
one was quite sure which--took up the concert.

A small gust of wind whipped out of the hollow above the glade of
fan-palms, making the network under the party shift slightly, as if in a
loom. Honath gave with it easily, automatically, but one of the smaller
vines toward which he had moved one furless hand hissed at him and went
pouring away into the darkness beneath--a chlorophyll-green snake, come
up out of the dripping aerial pathways in which it hunted in ancestral
gloom, to greet the suns and dry its scales in the quiet morning.
Farther below, an astonished monkey, routed out of its bed by the
disgusted serpent, sprang into another tree, reeling off ten mortal
insults, one after the other, while still in mid-leap. The snake, of
course, paid no attention, since it did not speak the language of men;
but the party on the edge of the glade of fan-palms snickered
appreciatively.

"Bad language they favor below," another of the guards said. "A fit
place for you and your blasphemers, pursemaker. Come now."

The tether at Honath's neck twitched, and then his captors were soaring
in zig-zag bounds down into the hollow toward the Judgment Seat. He
followed, since he had no choice, the tether threatening constantly to
foul his arms, legs or tail, and--worse, far worse--making his every
mortifying movement ungraceful. Above, the Parrot's starry plumes
flickered and faded into the general blue.

Toward the center of the saucer above the grove, the stitched
leaf-and-leather houses clustered thickly, bound to the vines
themselves, or hanging from an occasional branch too high or too slender
to bear the vines. Many of these purses Honath knew well, not only as
visitor but as artisan. The finest of them, the inverted flowers which
opened automatically as the morning dew bathed them, yet which could be
closed tightly and safely around their occupants at dusk by a single
draw-string, were his own design as well as his own handiwork. They had
been widely admired and imitated.

The reputation that they had given him, too, had helped to bring him to
the end of the snap-spine tether. They had given weight to his words
among others--weight enough to make him, at last, the arch-doubter, the
man who leads the young into blasphemy, the man who questions the Book
of Laws.

And they had probably helped to win him his passage on the Elevator to
Hell.

The purses were already opening as the party swung among them. Here and
there, sleepy faces blinked out from amid the exfoliating sections,
criss-crossed by relaxing lengths of dew-soaked rawhide. Some of the
awakening householders recognized Honath, of that he was sure, but none
came out to follow the party--though the villagers should be beginning
to drop from the hearts of their stitched flowers like ripe seed-pods by
this hour of any normal day.

A Judgment was at hand, and they knew it--and even those who had slept
the night in one of Honath's finest houses would not speak for him now.
Everyone knew, after all, that Honath did not believe in the Giants.

Honath could see the Judgment Seat itself now, a slung chair of woven
cane crowned along the back with a row of gigantic mottled orchids.
These had supposedly been transplanted there when the chair was made,
but no one could remember how old they were; since there were no
seasons, there was no particular reason why they should not have been
there forever. The Seat itself was at the back of the arena and high
above it, but in the gathering light Honath could make out the
white-furred face of the Tribal Spokesman, like a lone silver-and-black
pansy among the huge vivid blooms.

At the center of the arena proper was the Elevator itself. Honath had
seen it often enough, and had himself witnessed Judgments where it was
called into use, but he could still hardly believe that he was almost
