His words frightened her. Was he about to ask Ugolini for her hand, and
how would the cardinal deal with that?

"Forgive me if I raise an unpleasant subject," said Ugolini, "but if
your Count Charles d'Anjou accepts the pope's offer of the crown of
southern Italy and Sicily, it may be a long time before any French
nobleman will be welcome in my homeland."

There was no "if" about what Charles d'Anjou would do, Sophia thought.
That was just Ugolini's courtesy.

"I know, Your Eminence," said Simon, looking grim. "I hope you will
still think of me as your friend, despite events. Just as we have been
friends while we disagreed over this matter of the Tartar alliance."

Ugolini clapped his hands suddenly. "Well, it is a happy occasion when
my niece has such a distinguished visitor. Count, this house has a
second-story loggia overlooking the atrium. It is private enough to
shield you from prying eyes, yet not so private as to place you lovely
young people in peril of temptation. Sophia will show you the way."

Bowing and thanking Ugolini, Simon followed Sophia out of the room.

She turned to Simon as soon as the door of Ugolini's audience chamber
had closed behind them and said, "I need my cloak for the cold. Wait
here, and I will go to my room and get it." Without giving him a chance
to answer, she hurried down the corridor, desperately trying to make
sense of her thoughts and feelings.

Their lovemaking had been a terrible mistake. And yet, there had been
times in those two months when the recollection of the two of them,
wrapped in his cloak, lying on a bed of leaves, the depth of his passion
for her and the wildness of her answering feelings, crept up on her
unexpectedly and sent thrills of pleasure coursing through her.

As she rummaged in her chest for a warm cloak, her eyes met those of her
icon of Saint Simon Stylites, and she felt shame wash over her.

_How can I think that I truly love Daoud, when I gave myself so freely
to his enemy?_

But had that not been what Daoud had expected her to do all along? He
had always been jealous, had always made it obvious that he hated the
idea of her letting Simon court her. And yet, from the time he first
encountered Simon, he had made it equally obvious that he expected
Sophia to do whatever was necessary to make Simon fall in love with her.
And from the moment Simon had kissed her in the Contessa di
Monaldeschi's atrium, he had loved her, and never stopped loving her.

But to make him love her, she had pretended to be an innocent young
Sicilian woman who could be overwhelmed by her love for a French
nobleman. Sadly enough, she felt more joy and peace of mind as that
Sicilian girl than she ever had known as a woman of Byzantium. And the
confusion about who she really was had become much worse after she
decided to keep secret from Daoud Simon's destination when he left
Orvieto.

She felt a pounding pain inside her skull, and she pressed her hands
against her bound-up hair. She shut her eyes so tight that she forced
tears from them, and a little groan escaped her.

She was sure of one thing: If she had much more to do with Simon de
Gobignon, the confusion she felt would probably drive her mad.

She fumbled through her chest and found a rose-colored winter cloak
lined with red squirrel fur. She threw it over her shoulders and clasped
it around her neck, the fur collar gently brushing her chin.

Simon was waiting where she had left him. He had allowed his bright blue
cloak to fall closed around his lanky frame, so that he looked like a
pillar. She wrapped her own cloak around herself, and side by side they
walked to the stairs at the end of the corridor.

They said nothing to each other until they were out on the loggia under
a gray sky. A chill wind stung Sophia's cheeks. She looked down at the
rows of fruit trees in the atrium below. Their bare branches reached up
at her like long, slender fingers.

"I cannot understand you," he said. "Why have you been so cruel to me?"

That sounded like typical courtly lover's talk, but she knew he meant
the words literally. She looked at his face and saw the whiteness, the
strain around his mouth, the slight tremor of his lips. He looked like a
mortally wounded man.

"I, cruel to you? Did I not beg you to stay away from my uncle? Look
what you have done today. He will send me to Siracusa for certain."

But she felt something break inside her at the sight of his pain. She
had done this to him. She had hoped to give him something by letting him
possess her one time, to make up for all that she could never give him.
Instead, with the gift of her body she had bound him to her more tightly
than ever. And then, haunted by her own feelings and the memory of what
they had done together, she had simply tried to have nothing further to
do with him. And now her effort to break with him was hurting both of
them far more than if she had refused him that day.

"You drove me to this," he said, his eyes wide with anger. "You did not
answer my letters or acknowledge my poems. When I tried to speak to you
in the street and in church, you avoided me. I sent you gifts, and you
sent them back."

She really would have to get out of Perugia. Back to Daoud. This would
tear her to pieces.

_But what about Rachel?_

If she left Perugia, that would be as good as abandoning Rachel. She had
sworn to herself never to do that.

_Simon guards the Tartars. He must know what has happened to Rachel.
Perhaps he can help her._

She stopped walking and leaned against the stone railing of the loggia.
The leafless branches in the atrium below them rattled in the wind.

"There are many reasons that I did not want to see you. I do not know
whether you would understand all of them. But one is that I have heard
something very ugly about those Tartars of yours." She had decided not
to admit that she knew Rachel. That would take too much explaining and
too many more lies, and the lies would be like hidden holes in a
leaf-strewn path, to trip her up.

"One of the Tartars, those men you guard so carefully, kidnapped a young
girl from Orvieto and is holding her a prisoner now, here in Perugia at
the Baglioni palace. It makes me unhappy to know that you are the
protector of men who would do such things."

Down below, two of Ugolini's servants brought out baskets of newly
washed tablecloths and bedlinens and began spreading them on the
branches of the trees to dry. Sophia spoke in a lower voice, giving
details of the attack on Tilia's house by de Verceuil and the Tartars as
if it were something she knew about only through hearsay, while Simon
looked more and more unhappy.

He frowned at her. "I know of this girl. It is John Chagan who keeps
her. But what is she to you? She is not even a Christian. I am surprised
that a woman of good family like you should worry about a prostitute."

How easy for a count to look down on a girl like Rachel. She felt her
back stiffen with anger.

_How he would despise me if he knew what I was._

_But what am I?_

"Does it lower me in your eyes that I worry about such a girl?"

He waved his hands placatingly. "No, no. Such charitable feelings do you
credit. I _would_ like to help her, and I know Friar Mathieu has already
tried. I just wondered how _you_ came to know and care about this girl's
case." He looked earnestly into her eyes. His eyes were a blue as clear
and bright as that lake where they had lain together.

"The story is talked about by all the servants and common folk of the
town. I feel very sorry for her. She is just a child. I find myself
imagining how she feels--kidnapped, helpless, raped by this barbarian, a
prisoner. Have you not seen her yourself?"

Simon nodded reluctantly, looking away. "Yes, glimpses. She stays in her
room."

"She is forced to stay in her room." Sophia sensed that Simon knew more
than he admitted about what the Tartar had done to Rachel and was
ashamed to be connected with it.

"What has this to do with you and me?" he demanded.

"You are close to the Tartars. You might be able to help her."

Simon glowered. "If I had been there that day in Orvieto, you may be
sure they would not have raided that brothel."

He might be on the enemy side, she thought, but he was not a savage like
the Franks of her childhood. He was a genuinely good man, and that was
what made the hopeless dream of marrying him so painful.

She put her hand on his arm and squeezed. "Will you try to get the
Tartar to release the girl? Cardinal Ugolini will take her in."

When she laid her hand on the hard, wiry muscle in his arm, she did not
want to let go.

_I still want him! My God, what is the matter with me?_

"De Verceuil would oppose me if I tried to take the girl away from John.
Incredible, is it not? A cardinal involved in kidnapping a young girl
for the pleasure of a barbarian?"

Sophia, taught by her Greek Orthodox priests that the Roman Church was a
fountainhead of wickedness, did not think the cardinal's actions all
that incredible. Besides, was she not in league with another cardinal
who was helping the Muslims?

"There _must_ be a way to help Rachel," she said.

He brought his face close to hers. "Sophia, I will speak to Friar
Mathieu. But, as I said, he has already tried to persuade John to let
the girl go free. With no success. And I am sure there is nothing more
Friar Mathieu can do before tomorrow, when I leave Perugia."

She loved that serious, intent look. It was as if light were coming from
his eyes.

But what he had just said took her by surprise.

"Leave Perugia? Where are you going?"

He shook his head. "No one is supposed to know."

"Simon!" She put anger into her voice, knowing he was vulnerable. If she
could get some information of use to Daoud from him, she would have an
excuse for having let Simon make love to her. And with Daoud far away in
Manfred's kingdom, there was no chance this time that he could hurt
Simon.

He touched her cheek with the tips of his long fingers, and she could
feel him struggling with himself.

"Swear you will tell no one."

"Of course."

_He really thinks I can be depended upon to keep an oath._

"All right. I had a message from Count Charles--he who gave me this task
of guarding the Tartars. He calls me to meet him at Ostia. That is why I
came here today, even though I knew you would not want me to. Knowing I
would be leaving here and might not see you for months made me
desperate."

Charles d'Anjou at Ostia--the seaport of Rome!

As she realized what Simon's words meant, terror raced through Sophia.
She was going to fall from the loggia and break into a thousand pieces,
like an icicle.

Anjou was going to take Rome and cut Italy in half. Instead of trying to
cross the Alps and then fight his way through the Ghibellino cities of
northern Italy, Charles must have come by sea. Now he would be able to
strike directly at the heart of Manfred's kingdom.

_What will Daoud do? What will happen to Manfred? If only we had Tilia
here, with her carrier pigeons._

Despite her fur-lined cloak, a chill seized her.

She had feared for Daoud, that he might have to fight a great French
army. And though she had long since ceased to love Manfred, she had
feared for him and his kingdom. But the thought of the many obstacles
between France and southern Italy had comforted her. Now, knowing that
Charles d'Anjou was so close to Manfred's kingdom, she felt herself
actually trembling.

He put his hand on hers. "You're frightened."

Staring down at the bare trees, she whispered, "Yes, for my people."

His hand gripped hers tightly. He bent down so that he was speaking
softly into her ear.

"I know you cannot forget your people, but you could escape this war. My
service is done, now that the new pope has confirmed the alliance with
the Tartars. I do not have to stay in Italy."

She was glad he did not want to fight for Charles. The thought of him
and Daoud meeting on a battlefield was horrible. But surely this brother
of King Louis would make every effort to draw Simon into the war.

"Count Charles will want you to fight."

"If you will marry me and come to Gobignon, nothing else will matter to
me. We will live content in my castle in the heart of my domain. We will
shut out the world and its wars."

She turned to look at him, and the longing on his face was painful to
see.

She felt the tears coming, hot, blurring her vision.

"Simon, I cannot!"

His grip on her hand was painful. "Again and again you say that to me.
And you never tell me _why_. Are you secretly a nun? Have you taken
vows? Does your husband still live? I demand that you tell me! Stop
tormenting me like this." His usually pale face was suddenly scarlet
with rage.

His anger dried up her tears.

_I know how I can put an end to this._

"I will, Simon. But I am not ready to speak of it today."

"Then _when_?"

"Go now and meet your Count Charles at Ostia. By the time you come back
to the papal court we will probably have moved to Viterbo. And when I
see you again, I will tell you why I cannot marry you."

The shadow cleared from his face. "Do you promise with all your heart?
And if I can persuade you that your reason is not good enough, then will
you marry me?"

For a moment she hesitated. Even though her life depended on deceiving
him, she could not bear to make such a promise. But then she saw that
she could honestly agree to what he asked.

"If you still want me to marry you--yes."

_I can say that because if you ever come to know my true reason for not
marrying you, you will hate me more than you have ever hated anyone in
your life._

He left her soon afterward. She went back to her room and cried for most
of the afternoon. Every so often she looked up to see the icon of the
desert saint staring at her. She saw the same reproach in Simon
Stylites's eyes that she had seen in Simon de Gobignon's.




LXI


Though the day was cold and damp, the sky an ugly, unwelcoming gray,
Simon's first view of Rome brought tears to his eyes. He came out of a
small grove of cypresses on the east bank of the Tiber to see gray
walls, punctuated by square towers, spread wide before him. Beyond the
walls, out of a haze of dust and wood smoke, above masses of peaked
roofs, crenellated palace towers rose lordly, vying for ascendancy with
the bell towers of churches. Marble buildings adorned with white columns
crowned the hills.

The swift-moving brown river on his left bent around the walls and
disappeared beyond them.

Even though he did not want to be part of Charles d'Anjou's invasion of
Italy, the thrill of seeing Rome for the first time made up for his
distress.

Rome was by no means as beautiful a sight as Orvieto, but it awed him to
think that this city had ruled the world when Jesus walked the earth.
What must it have been like to be a Roman legionary, returning to this
place from a victory in some far-off land? This dirt track would have
been a well-paved road then. Looking off to his right, he saw fragments
of wall bounding the edge of a field, and a broken, fluted column rising
among olive trees, quiet reminders that the city had once extended into
these fields and beyond.

Simon was mounted on a borrowed war-horse, a mare whose shiny coat
reminded him of Sophia's hair--a brown so dark it might be taken for
black. After many hours of riding, the mare's rocking pace had chafed
the insides of his mail-clad legs.

He rode a few yards behind Count Charles d'Anjou and the three knights
Charles had appointed marshals of his army. When he looked back over his
shoulder, he saw a column of mailed knights riding three abreast strung
out along the Tiber for nearly half a mile, and beyond them, almost
obscured by clouds of yellow dust, clinking files of men-at-arms,
crossbows and spears over their shoulders.

Unimpressed by the sight of Rome, Anjou and his commanders carried on an
argument.

"You are a hard taskmaster, Monseigneur," said Gautier du Mont, whose
bronze hair was cropped in the shape of a bowl, slightly tilted so that
the back was lower than the front. "To make your knights ride half a day
in full armor when they have not seen a denier from your coffers since
we sailed from Marseilles--you demand too much." The points of du Mont's
mustache hung below his chin. Simon had heard he was little better than
a routier, a highwayman, who had begun his knightly career by robbing
travelers who passed his castle in the Pyrenees.

What Simon had seen thus far of Charles's army made the enterprise look
decidedly unsavory. Before reaching Ostia, Simon had expected that the
men Charles commanded would be vassals, men who had received land from
him and were bound by ancient oaths. He quickly realized that all of
these men were adventurers with little or no holdings of their own, in
this enterprise with Charles for whatever they could gain. Charles could
command them only as long as they could hope to grow rich in his
service.

Simon supposed this was the best Charles could do, since King Louis had
refused to help him raise knights and men and insisted that he hire them
himself. Knights willing to go to war for hire could not be expected to
be the better sort. Not only did Simon not want to make war on the
Italians, he wanted even less to be associated with men like the ones
Charles had recruited.

Unlike his three marshals, who were all bareheaded, Charles wore a
helmet. A steel replica of his count's coronet ringed its pointed top.
Beside him rode an equerry with his personal standard, the black
silhouette of a lion rearing up on its hind legs against a flame-red
background. Charles turned so that his big Capetian nose was outlined
against the iron-gray sky.

"You complain, du Mont, because I ordered our knights to wear full
armor?" said Charles. "I did it for their own protection. I expect to
meet resistance."

_Only eight hundred knights and two thousand men-at-arms_, Simon
thought. _Hardly enough to take Rome, if the Romans do decide to fight.
Nowhere near enough to beat Manfred._

He had been shocked when he arrived at Ostia last night and found out
how small Charles's invasion force was. Being a part of this war was
going to be downright dangerous.

"Time enough for us to don armor when the resistance appears," said
Alistair FitzTrinian, a knight from England whose face was a mass of
smallpox scars. Simon had so far been unable to look at the man without
having to freeze the muscles of his face to keep from wincing.

Count Charles sighed, and held out his arm in the direction of Rome.
"Look there, gentlemen," he said in a patient tone, as if instructing
schoolchildren. "The Romans are not waiting for us to put on our armor."

Simon followed his pointing finger and saw a gray mass spreading out
into the field near one of the city's gates, flowing around cottages and
groves of trees. It appeared to be a great crowd of several thousand
citizens. Fully alert now, Simon heard a dull roar, like the hum of a
swarm of bees, that sounded decidedly hostile. He felt a twinge of fear.

"Get your helmets on, the three of you," Charles snapped. "Set an
example for the rest, or may the devil carry you away!"

The three commanders slowly and sullenly pulled on their helmets, which
had been hanging down their backs from straps under their chins. The
manner of the three marshals toward Count Charles shocked Simon. If
these were the leaders, what In God's name could the rank and file be
like?

_Any one of my Venetian archers or the Tartars' Armenian guards would be
worth a dozen of these._

As the army of Anjou, with Charles and Simon and the three marshals in
the lead, advanced slowly, Simon noticed that six or so men, several
hundred paces in front of the shouting citizens, were walking to meet
them.

In a short time the small delegation stood before Count Charles,
blocking his path.

Charles raised his arm, and the knights behind him shouted the order to
halt down the line. How would Count Charles deal with the
representatives of an unfriendly populace, Simon wondered. This should
be interesting. He might learn something.

The count turned to Dietrich von Regensburg, his third commander. "I
want a troop of the Burgundian pikemen up here now. Surround these
fellows." Von Regensburg, a knight with hard blue eyes, a flattened
nose, and a huge jaw, saluted and swung his dun horse around to ride
back to the long line of men-at-arms following Charles and his knights.

Anjou's order made Simon uneasy. Why try to frighten these Romans? Would
it not be better if he could enter the city with their approval?

Then he beckoned Simon to bring his horse up beside him. "No doubt you
speak Italian better than any of us. Translate for me." He glowered down
his long nose at the Romans who had approached him. "I am Count Charles
d'Anjou. I have come here as protector of the city of Rome, at the
request of His Holiness, the pope."

Simon repeated this.

"Rome needs protection only from you!" one of the men shouted.

"There is no pope," another called out. "The old one is dead and the new
one has not been crowned."

Simon could hardly believe his ears. He had heard that Roman citizens
were unruly; that was why the pope had moved away from Rome. But the way
these men addressed the Count of Anjou, the brother of the king of
France--it was unthinkable. It was madness. The count might not
understand their words, but the disrespectful tone was unmistakable.

Hesitantly, he translated. Charles stared at the six Romans, his swarthy
face expressionless.

Charles's great black and white war-horse shifted his legs restlessly,
and Charles stilled him with a jerk of the reins. Even the horse sensed
the Romans' anger.

"Silencio!" ordered a Roman somewhat taller than the others, with a
shock of iron-gray hair and an angular jaw. He wore a mantle of deep
maroon velvet trimmed with white fur, and a longsword hung from his
jeweled belt. He bowed courteously to Count Charles and Simon.

"Your Signory, I am Leone Pedulla, secretary of the Senate of Rome. We
come, with all respect, to pray you to turn back. The city of Rome rules
herself. We are most distressed to see a foreign army, a French army,
approaching our walls. If you wish to visit us and confer with our
leading citizens, leave this army behind. Come to us as a guest,
bringing a few of your barons with you. We will then offer you our
hospitality. We ask you to leave us in peace."

Simon wished himself far away as he translated for Anjou. These Romans
did not know Count Charles.

As Simon was conveying Leone Pedulla's speech, a line of big, bearded
foot soldiers carrying spears taller than a man, wearing leather
cuirasses and wide-brimmed helmets of polished steel, marched forward,
boots crunching on the stubble of the harvested field. At von
Regensburg's command, the pikemen formed a ring around the Roman
delegation. The Romans' eyes darted anxiously from side to side.

Charles said, "Simon, tell this impertinent fellow who calls himself
secretary of the Senate just this: I order him to clear away that rabble
blocking the city gates."

Simon repeated the count's command in Italian. His heart began to beat
more rapidly as he sensed an evil moment coming closer and closer.

"The people standing before the walls are citizens of Rome, Your
Signory, acting legally to protect the city from what seems to us a
foreign invader," Pedulla answered. "I cannot tell them to go away."

Simon wished he could soften this when he translated it. Charles's mouth
drew down in a harsh, inverted V.

"Very well." He turned to von Regensburg and pointed. "I would prefer to
hang them, but it would take too long. Use your spears on them."

_Dear, merciful God, do not let this happen!_ Simon prayed.

"No!" Pedulla cried, his voice shrill with horror as the German knight
shouted a command and the Burgundians leveled their spears. It was the
gray-haired Roman's last word. His hand had not quite reached the hilt
of his sword when a bearlike foot soldier lunged at him, driving a spear
through his embroidered tunic into his chest. The pikeman thrust the
steel point in low enough to miss the breastbone but high enough to
pierce the heart. Pedulla did not even have time enough to finish his
scream.

"Clemenza, per favore!" cried another Roman who a moment ago had been
shouting defiance. A spear point caught him in the throat.

Simon wished he could turn his eyes away, but he did not want Charles
and his marshals to think him squeamish. His heart thundered and his
stomach churned, and he feared that his body would betray him. The other
pikemen moved in quickly, taking long steps as if performing spear
drill, holding their pikes near the points for close work. A moment
later they stepped back from a heap of sprawled, dead bodies.

_God! How little time it takes to kill a man!_

Now Simon did look away. The blood, the staring, dead faces, the twisted
arms and legs, were too pitiful a sight to bear.

Simon remembered de Verceuil's ordering the archers to shoot into the
crowd at Orvieto. This was worse. These men had been discourteous,
perhaps, but they were officials of the city, on an embassy. And Count
Charles had ordered them killed as calmly as he might order his army to
break camp.

This was the man whose wishes had governed Simon's life for over a year.
Simon felt his bond to Charles as a terrible chain and he longed to be
free.

_This is a taste of what will happen to Sophia's people if Charles
conquers Manfred. If only she will let me take her to Gobignon, so she
will not have to see such things._

Count Charles raised a hand encased in a gleaming mail glove. "Forward."

"One moment, Monseigneur," said Gautier du Mont, his sharp voice cutting
through the sounds of the army resuming its march.

Charles turned to him impatiently. "What now, du Mont?"

"Monseigneur, we have just killed the emissaries of the Romans. I fear
we will now have to fight that mob. Look. They are coming at us."

Simon looked over toward the city. The mass that had emerged from the
city, a long line of people stretching eastward from the Tiber to a
distant forest, was moving through the fields and olive groves. To
Simon's eye they appeared to vastly outnumber Charles's army. Simon
could see swords gleaming and spears waving. They formed no ranks and
files as a professional army would, but they came on inexorably like the
waves of the sea, and their shouts were angry.

Simon felt cold fear sweep away the sick pity he had felt for the
executed Roman delegation. That huge mob was a formidable sight.

"Of course we will fight them, du Mont," Charles answered, his voice
rising. "One charge and we will scatter them to the winds."

True, thought Simon. Crowds of villeins or peasants were no match for
disciplined fighting men. But just how disciplined was the force behind
Charles?

"I think, Monseigneur," said du Mont, "that before we do any fighting,
it is appropriate to discuss the terms of our payment."

_Oh, by God's white beard!_ Simon swore to himself. They were about to
be attacked by five or more times their number, and these bastards were
arguing about money. They ought to be stripped of their knighthoods.

"I have told you my gold shipment was late getting from Marseilles to
Ostia," said Charles in a placating tone. "You will be paid. Tonight,
tomorrow, or the next day it will catch up to us."

"Then tonight, tomorrow, or the next day, Monseigneur," said the
pock-marked FitzTrinian, "you can command us to charge that rabble."

The Roman mob was close enough now for Simon to make out what they were
shouting.

"Muorire alla Francia!" _Death to the French!_

The cry sent a bolt of fear through Simon. They would have to do
something at once.

Were Charles's lieutenants actually going to sit on their motionless
horses and haggle with him until these infuriated Romans fell upon them?
Not just Charles's venture was at stake, but their own lives. Could they
be stupid--or greedy--enough to let themselves be overwhelmed while they
argued about money?

_Yes, they could be. That stupid and that greedy._

Simon's fear transmuted itself to anger. These men were a disgrace to
chivalry. Worse, as marshals of an army commanded by King Louis's
brother, they dishonored France. He almost wanted to draw his sword
against them, his disgust was so great.

"You speak of dishonor when you are refusing to attack an enemy in the
field at the order of your seigneur?" Charles shouted.

"We are not refusing, Monseigneur--" Alistair FitzTrinian began.
