
[Hand->]Send for _Descriptive Catalogue_

of

RELIABLE Vegetable and Flower SEEDS containing 192 pages on SEEDS and
Plants mailed free.

H.A. DREER, SEEDSMAN AND FLORIST, PHILADA.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

$100. REWARD. $100.

This MOUSTACHE produced on a smooth face by the use of DYKE'S BEARD
ELIXIR without injury, or will forfeit $100. Price by mail in sealed
package 25 cents, for three 50 cents.

A.L. SMITH & CO., Ag'ts, Palatine, Ill.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

J.H. Blaisdell's MOULDER,

North 4th St., PHILADELPHIA, PA.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration]

Shaping Machines

Have novel device for changing length of stroke while in motion, also,
automatic down feed, and quick return. Four sizes.

Patented 1868, 1871, 1874,

Wood & Light Machine Co. Worcester, Mass.

Manufacturers of all kinds of Iron Working Machinery Shafting,
Pulleys, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *


$12 a day at home. Agents wanted. Outfit and terms free. TRUE & CO.,
Augusta, Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *


Lathes, Planers, Shapers, Drills, Gear & Bolt Cutters, &c. E. GOULD,
Newark, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *


SNYDER'S LITTLE GIANT STEAM ENGINE

The Best SMALL POWER ENGINES IN THE COUNTRY.

WARD B. SNYDER

84 Fulton Str.

New York

[Illustration]

One-Horse Power, with tubular boiler complete, only $150

Two-Horse Power 200

Three-Horse Power 250

Call and Examine OR SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE

       *       *       *       *       *


SEE PHOTOGRAPHIC APPARATUS & CHEMICALS

complete, with directions, $10. No toy; takes pictures 4x51/2 inches.
Send for illustrated circular.

B. MORGAN, 14 Ann St. New York, P.O. Box 4349.

       *       *       *       *       *


WANTED! SALESMEN at a salary of $1200 a year to travel and sell goods
to Dealers. NO PEDDLING. Hotel and traveling expenses paid. Address.
MONITOR MANUFACTURING Co., Cincinnati, Ohio.

       *       *       *       *       *


$39 Each week to Agents. Goods Staple. 10,000 testimonials received.
Terms liberal. Particulars free. J. Worth & Co. St. Louis, Mo.

       *       *       *       *       *


$55 to $77 a Week to Agents. $10 _Outfit Free_. P.O. VICKERY, Augusta,
Maine.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE COMPOUND STEAM PUMP USES

steam expansively, hence economically. Simpler than any other. Only
two moving parts in cylinder. No levers, springs, tappets, or
reversing valves. Critical examination invited. Address E. & A. Betts,
Wilmington, Del.

       *       *       *       *       *


25 Beautiful Cards, with name, 10 cents, post paid. MILLPORT PRINTING
CO., Millport, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPARE THE CROTON AND SAVE THE COST.

Driven or Tube Wells furnished to large consumers of Croton and
Ridgewood Water. WM. D, ANDREWS & BRO., 414 Water St., N.Y. who
control the patent for Green's American Driven Well.

       *       *       *       *       *


VINEGAR.

How made in 10 hours from Cider, Wine or Sorghum without using drugs.
Name paper and address F.I. SAGE, Springfield Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


AGENTS. 64 page Illustrated Catalogue, Free. Boston Novelty Co.,
Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Toll-Gate! PRIZE PICTURE sent free! An ingenious gem! 50 objects
to find! Address, with stamp, E.C. ABBEY, Buffalo, N.Y.

       *       *       *       *       *


$984 Made by one Agent in 57 days. 13 new articles. Samples free.
Address, C.M. LININGTON, CHICAGO.

       *       *       *       *       *


LIGHTNING SCREW PLATE.

[Illustration]

Will make a perfect thread at one cut, and can be adjusted for wear.
Send for catalogue to the agents,

FRASSE & COMPANY,

Dealers in Fine Tools, Files, Steel Wire & Supplies,

62 CHATHAM STREET, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


ADVERTISEMENTS.

INSIDE PAGE, EACH INSERTION--- 75 CENTS A LINE.
BACK PAGE, EACH INSERTION--- $1.00 A LINE.

_Engravings may head advertisements at the same rate per line, by
measurement, as the letter press. Advertisements must be received at
publication office as early as Friday morning to appear in next
issue._


       *       *       *       *       *


GUARDIOLA'S COFFEE & SUGAR MACHINERY

COFFEE, MAIT, CORN, COCOA, AND GRAIN-DRYING MACHINE. COFFEE-HULLING
AND POLISHING MACHINES. COFFEE-WASHING MACHINE. HELIX SUGAR
EVAPORATOR.

MESSRS. C. ADOLPHE LOW & CO., 42 Cedar

Street, MESSRS. MUNOZ & ESPRIELLA, 52 Pine Street, new York, are Mr.
Guardiola's Agents, and they will give prompt attention to all orders
for any of the above machines.

       *       *       *       *       *


FOUR GRAND PRIZE MEDALS!

AWARDED OUR EXHIBIT AT THE CENTENNIAL!

[Illustration: BLISS'S SELECT GARDEN SEEDS.]

BLISS'S ILLUSTRATED SEED CATALOGUE AND AMATEUR'S GUIDE TO THE FLOWER
AND KITCHEN GARDEN.--200 pages, including several hundred finely
executed engravings, and A BEAUTIFULLY COLORED LITHOGRAPH, 35 CENTS.

BLISS'S ILLUSTRATED GARDENER'S ALMANAC AND ABRIDGED CATALOGUE.--128
pages. Embraces a monthly calendar of operations, and a price list of
all the leading GARDEN, FIELD AND FLOWER SEEDS, profusely illustrated,
with brief directions for their culture. 10 CENTS.

BLISS'S ILLUSTRATED POTATO CATALOGUE contains a descriptive list of
all the varieties recently introduced, with many other desirable
sorts; also much useful information upon their cultivation. 10 CENTS.

B.K. BLISS & SONS,

34 BARCLAY ST., (P.O. BOX 5712.) NEW YORK.

Please state that you saw this advertisement in the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN.

       *       *       *       *       *


WANTED.--A FIRST-CLASS MOLD MAKER ON Undertakers' Hardware. Address
CRANE, BREED & CO., Cincinnati, O.

       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: PATENTS]

[ESTABLISHED 1846.]

MUNN & CO.'S PATENT OFFICES.

THE OLDEST AGENCY FOR ELICITING PATENTS IN THE UNITED STATES.

_THIRTY YEARS' EXPERIENCE._

MORE PATENTS have been secured through this agency, at home and
abroad, than through any other in the world.

They employ as their assistants a corps of the most experienced men as
examiners, specification writers, and draughtsmen, that can be found,
many of whom have been selected from the ranks of the Patent Office.

SIXTY THOUSAND inventors have availed themselves of Munn & Co.'s
services in examining their inventions and procuring their patents.

MUNN & CO., in connection with the publication of the SCIENTIFIC
AMERICAN, continue to examine inventions, confer with inventors,
prepare drawings, specifications, and assignments, attend to filing
applications in the Patent Office, paying the Government fees, and
watch each case, step by step, while pending before the examiner. This
is done through their branch office, corner F and 7th Sts.,
Washington. They also prepare and file caveats, procure design
patents, trade marks, and re-issues, attend to rejected cases
(prepared by the inventor or other attorneys), procure copyrights,
attend to interferences, give written opinions on matters of
infringement, furnish copies of patent business, both in this and in
foreign countries.

A special notice IS made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all inventions
patented through this agency, with the name and residence of the
patentee. Patents are often sold, in part or whole, to persons
attracted to the invention by such notice.

Patents obtained in Canada, England, France, Belgium, Germany, Russia,
Prussia, Spain, Portugal, the British Colonies, and all other
countries where patents are granted, at prices greatly reduced from
former rates. Send for pamphlet pertaining specially to foreign
patents, which states the cost, time granted, and the requirements for
each country.

COPIES OF PATENTS.

Persons desiring any patent issued from 1836 to November 26, 1867, can
be supplied with official copies at reasonable cost, the price
depending upon the extent of drawings and length of specifications.

Any patent issued since November 27, 1867, at which time the Patent
Office commenced printing the drawings and specifications, may be had
