similitude, that they have been long confounded, and they can now
scarcely be distinguished, except by the difference of the salts which
they form with acids.

The great source of this alkali is the sea, where, combined with a
peculiar acid, it forms the salt with which the waters of the ocean are
so strongly impregnated.

EMILY.

Is not that the common table salt?

MRS. B.

The very same; but again we must postpone entering into the particulars
of this interesting combination, till we treat of the neutral salts.
Soda may be obtained from common salt; but the easiest and most usual
method of procuring it is by the combustion of marine plants, an
operation perfectly analogous to that by which potash is obtained from
vegetables.

EMILY.

From what does soda derive its name?

MRS. B.

From a plant called by us _soda_, and by the Arabs _kali_, which affords
it in great abundance. Kali has, indeed, given its name to the alkalies
in general.

CAROLINE.

Does soda form glass and soap in the same manner as potash?

MRS. B.

Yes, it does; it is of equal importance in the arts, and is even
preferred to potash for some purposes; but you will not be able to
distinguish their properties till we examine the compound salts which
they form with acids; we must therefore leave soda for the present, and
proceed to AMMONIA, or the VOLATILE ALKALI.

EMILY.

I long to hear something of this alkali; is it not of the same nature as
hartshorn?

MRS. B.

Yes, it is, as you will see by-and-bye. This alkali is seldom found in
nature in its pure state; it is most commonly extracted from a compound
salt, called _sal ammoniac_, which was formerly imported from _Ammonia_,
a region of Libya, from which both these salts and the alkali derive
their names. The crystals contained in this bottle are specimens of this
salt, which consists of a combination of ammonia and muriatic acid.

CAROLINE.

Then it should be called _muriat of ammonia_; for though I am ignorant
what muriatic acid is, yet I know that its combination with ammonia
cannot but be so called; and I am surprised to see sal ammoniac
inscribed on the label.

MRS. B.

That is the name by which it has been so long known, that the modern
chemists have not yet succeeded in banishing it altogether; and it is
still sold under that name by druggists, though by scientific chemists
it is more properly called muriat of ammonia.

CAROLINE.

Both the popular and the common name should be inscribed on labels--this
would soon introduce the new nomenclature.

EMILY.

By what means can the ammonia be separated from the muriatic acid?

MRS. B.

By chemical attractions; but this operation is too complicated for you
to understand, till you are better acquainted with the agency of
affinities.

EMILY.

And when extracted from the salt, what kind of substance is ammonia?

MRS. B.

Its natural form, at the temperature of the atmosphere, when free from
combination, is that of gas; and in this state it is called _ammoniacal
gas_. But it mixes very readily with water, and can be thus obtained in
a liquid form.

CAROLINE.

You said that ammonia was more complicated in its composition than the
other alkalies; pray of what principles does it consist?

MRS. B.

It was discovered a few years since, by Berthollet, a celebrated French
chemist, that it consisted of about one part of hydrogen to four parts
of nitrogen. Having heated ammoniacal gas under a receiver, by causing
the electrical spark to pass repeatedly through it, he found that it
increased considerably in bulk, lost all its alkaline properties, and
was actually converted into hydrogen and nitrogen gases; and from the
latest and most accurate experiments, the proportions appear to be, one
volume of nitrogen gas to three of hydrogen gas.

CAROLINE.

Ammonia, therefore, has not, like the two other alkalies, a metallic
basis?

MRS. B.

It is believed it has, though it is extremely difficult to reconcile
that idea with what I have just stated of its chemical nature. But the
fact is, that although this supposed metallic basis of ammonia has never
been obtained distinct and separate, yet both Professor Berzelius, of
Stockholm, and Sir H. Davy, have succeeded in forming a combination of
mercury with the basis of ammonia, which has so much the appearance of
an amalgam, that it strongly corroborates the idea of ammonia having a
metallic basis.* But these theoretical points are full of difficulties
and doubts, and it would be useless to dwell any longer upon them.

Let us therefore return to the properties of volatile alkali. Ammoniacal
gas is considerably lighter than oxygen gas, and only about half the
weight of atmospherical air. It possesses most of the properties of the
fixed alkalies; but cannot be of so much use in the arts on account of
its volatile nature. It is, therefore, never employed in the manufacture
of glass, but it forms soap with oils equally as well as potash and
soda; it resembles them likewise in its strong attraction for water; for
which reason it can be collected in a receiver over mercury only.

    [Footnote *: This amalgam is easily obtained, by placing a globule
    of mercury upon a piece of muriat, or carbonat of ammonia, and
    electrifying this globule by the Voltaic battery. The globule
    instantly begins to expand to three or four times its former size,
    and becomes much less fluid, though without losing its metallic
    lustre, a change which is ascribed to the metallic basis of
    ammonia uniting with the mercury. This is an extremely curious
    experiment.]

CAROLINE.

I do not understand this?

MRS. B.

Do you recollect the method which we used to collect gases in a
glass-receiver over water?

CAROLINE.

Perfectly.

MRS. B.

Ammoniacal gas has so strong a tendency to unite with water, that,
instead of passing through that fluid, it would be instantaneously
absorbed by it. We can therefore neither use water for that purpose, nor
any other liquid of which water is a component part; so that, in order
to collect this gas, we are obliged to have recourse to mercury,
(a liquid which has no action upon it,) and a mercurial bath is used
instead of a water bath, such as we employed on former occasions. Water
impregnated with this gas is nothing more than the fluid which you
mentioned at the beginning of the conversation--hartshorn; it is the
ammoniacal gas escaping from the water which gives it so powerful a
smell.

EMILY.

But there is no appearance of effervescence in hartshorn.

MRS. B.

Because the particles of gas that rise from the water are too subtle and
minute for their effect to be visible.

Water diminishes in density, by being impregnated with ammoniacal gas;
and this augmentation of bulk increases its capacity for caloric.

EMILY.

In making hartshorn, then, or impregnating water with ammonia, heat must
be absorbed, and cold produced?

MRS. B.

That effect would take place if it was not counteracted by another
circumstance; the gas is liquefied by incorporating with the water, and
gives out its latent heat. The condensation of the gas more than
counterbalances the expansion of the water; therefore, upon the whole,
heat is produced. --But if you dissolve ammoniacal gas with ice or snow,
cold is produced. --Can you account for that?

EMILY.

The gas, in being condensed into a liquid, must give out heat; and, on
the other hand, the snow or ice, in being rarefied into a liquid, must
absorb heat; so that, between the opposite effects, I should have
supposed the original temperature would have been preserved.

MRS. B.

But you have forgotten to take into the account the rarefaction of the
water (or melted ice) by the impregnation of the gas; and this is the
cause of the cold which is ultimately produced.

CAROLINE.

Is the _sal volatile_ (the smell of which so strongly resembles
hartshorn) likewise a preparation of ammonia?

MRS. B.

It is carbonat of ammonia dissolved in water; and which, in its concrete
state, is commonly called salts of hartshorn. Ammonia is caustic, like
the fixed alkalies, as you may judge by the pungent effects of
hartshorn, which cannot be taken internally, nor applied to delicate
external parts, without being plentifully diluted with water. --Oil and
acids are very excellent antidotes for alkaline poisons; can you guess
why?

CAROLINE.

Perhaps, because the oil combines with the alkali, and forms soap, and
thus destroys its caustic properties; and the acid converts it into a
compound salt, which, I suppose, is not so pernicious as caustic alkali.

MRS. B.

Precisely so.

Ammoniacal gas, if it be mixed with atmospherical air, and a burning
taper repeatedly plunged into it, will burn with a large flame of a
peculiar yellow colour.

EMILY.

But pray tell me, can ammonia be procured from this Lybian salt only?

MRS. B.

So far from it, that it is contained in, and may be extracted from, all
animal substances whatever. Hydrogen and nitrogen are two of the chief
constituents of animal matter; it is therefore not surprising that they
should occasionally meet and combine in those proportions that compose
ammonia. But this alkali is more frequently generated by the spontaneous
decomposition of animal substances; the hydrogen and nitrogen gases that
arise from putrefied bodies combine, and form the volatile alkali.

Muriat of ammonia, instead of being exclusively brought from Lybia, as
it originally was, is now chiefly prepared in Europe, by chemical
processes. Ammonia, although principally extracted from this salt, can
also be produced by a great variety of other substances. The horns of
cattle, especially those of deer, yield it in abundance, and it is from
this circumstance that a solution of ammonia in water has been called
hartshorn. It may likewise be procured from wool, flesh, and bones; in a
word, any animal substance whatever yields it by decomposition.

We shall now lay aside the alkalies, however important the subject may
be, till we treat of their combination with acids. The next time we meet
we shall examine the earths.




CONVERSATION XV.

ON EARTHS.


MRS. B.

The EARTHS, which we are to-day to examine, are nine in number:

  SILEX,
  ALUMINE,
  BARYTES,
  LIME,
  MAGNESIA,
  STRONTITES,
  YTTRIA,
  GLUCINA,
  ZIRCONIA.

The last three are of late discovery; their properties are but
imperfectly known; and, as they have not yet been applied to use, it
will be unnecessary to enter into any particulars respecting them; we
shall confine our remarks, therefore, to the first five. They are
composed, as you have already learnt, of a metallic basis combined with
oxygen; and, from this circumstance, are incombustible.

CAROLINE.

Yet I have seen turf burnt in the country, and it makes an excellent
fire; the earth becomes red hot, and produces a very great quantity of
heat.

MRS. B.

It is not the earth that burns, my dear, but the roots, grass, and other
remnants of vegetables that are intermixed with it. The caloric, which
is produced by the combustion of these substances, makes the earth red
hot, and this being a bad conductor of heat, retains its caloric a long
time; but were you to examine it when cooled, you would find that it had
not absorbed one particle of oxygen, nor suffered any alteration from
the fire. Earth is, however, from the circumstance just mentioned, an
excellent radiator of heat, and owes its utility, when mixed with fuel,
solely to that property. It is in this point of view that Count Rumford
has recommended balls of incombustible substances to be arranged in
fire-places, and mixed with the coals, by which means the caloric
disengaged by the combustion of the latter is more perfectly reflected
into the room, and an expense of fuel is saved.

EMILY.

I expected that the list of earths would be much more considerable. When
I think of the great variety of soils, I am astonished that there is not
a greater number of earths to form them.

MRS. B.

You might, indeed, almost confine that number to four; for barytes,
strontites, and the others of late discovery, act but so small a part in
this great theatre, that they cannot be reckoned as essential to the
general formation of the globe. And you must not confine your idea of
earths to the formation of soil; for rock, marble, chalk, slate, sand,
flint, and all kinds of stones, from the precious jewels to the
commonest pebbles; in a word, all the immense variety of mineral
products, may be referred to some of these earths, either in a simple
state, or combined the one with the other, or blended with other
ingredients.

CAROLINE.

Precious stones composed of earth! That seems very difficult to
conceive.

EMILY.

Is it more extraordinary than that the most precious of all jewels,
diamond, should be composed of carbon? But diamond forms an exception,
Mrs. B.; for, though a stone, it is not composed of earth.

MRS. B.

I did not specify the exception, as I knew you were so well acquainted
with it. Besides, I would call a diamond a mineral rather than a stone,
as the latter term always implies the presence of some earth.

CAROLINE.

I cannot conceive how such coarse materials can be converted into such
beautiful productions.

MRS. B.

We are very far from understanding all the secret resources of nature;
but I do not think the spontaneous formation of the crystals, which we
call precious stones, one of the most difficult phenomena to comprehend.

By the slow and regular work of ages, perhaps of hundreds of ages, these
earths may be gradually dissolved by water, and as gradually deposited
by their solvent in the undisturbed process of crystallisation. The
regular arrangement of their particles, during their reunion in a solid
mass, gives them that brilliancy, transparency, and beauty, for which
they are so much admired; and renders them in appearance so totally
different from their rude and primitive ingredients.

CAROLINE.

But how does it happen that they are spontaneously dissolved, and
afterwards crystallised?

MRS. B.

The scarcity of many kinds of crystals, as rubies, emeralds, topazes,
&c. shows that their formation is not an operation very easily carried
on in nature. But cannot you imagine that when water, holding in
solution some particles of earth, filters through the crevices of hills
or mountains, and at length dribbles into some cavern, each successive
drop may be slowly evaporated, leaving behind it the particle of earth
which it held in solution? You know that crystallisation is more regular
and perfect, in proportion as the evaporation of the solvent is slow and
uniform; nature, therefore, who knows no limit of time, has, in all
works of this kind, an infinite advantage over any artist who attempts
to imitate such productions.

EMILY.

I can now conceive that the arrangement of the particles of earth,
during crystallisation, may be such as to occasion transparency, by
admitting a free passage to the rays of light; but I cannot understand
why crystallised earths should assume such beautiful colours as most of
them do. Sapphire, for instance, is of a celestial blue; ruby, a deep
red; topaz, a brilliant yellow?

MRS. B.

Nothing is more simple than to suppose that the arrangement of their
particles is such, as to transmit some of the coloured rays of light,
and to reflect others, in which case the stone must appear of the colour
of the rays which it reflects. But besides, it frequently happens that
the colour of a stone is owing to a mixture of some metallic matter.

CAROLINE.

Pray, are the different kinds of precious stones each composed of one
individual earth, or are they formed of a combination of several earths?

MRS. B.

A great variety of materials enters into the composition of most of
them; not only several earths, but sometimes salts and metals. The
earths, however, in their simple state, frequently form very beautiful
crystals; and, indeed, it is in that state only that they can be
obtained perfectly pure.

EMILY.

Is not the Derbyshire spar produced by the crystallisation of earths, in
the way you have just explained? I have been in some of the
subterraneous caverns where it is found, which are similar to those you
have described.

MRS. B.

Yes; but this spar is a very imperfect specimen of crystallisation; it
consists of a variety of ingredients confusedly blended together, as you
may judge by its opacity, and by the various colours and appearances
which it exhibits.

But, in examining the earths in their most perfect and agreeable form,
we must not lose sight of that state in which they are commonly found,
and which, if less pleasing to the eye, is far more interesting by its
utility.

All the earths are more or less endowed with alkaline properties; but
there are four, barytes, magnesia, lime, and strontites, which are
called _alkaline earths_, because they possess those qualities in so
great a degree, as to entitle them, in most respects, to the rank of
alkalies. They combine and form compound salts with acids, in the same
way as alkalies; they are, like them, susceptible of a considerable
degree of causticity, and are acted upon in a similar manner by chemical
tests. --The remaining earths, silex and alumine, with one or two others
of late discovery, are in some degree more earthy, that is to say, they
possess more completely the properties common to all the earths, which
are, insipidity, dryness, unalterableness in the fire, infusibility, &c.

CAROLINE.

Yet, did you not tell us that silex, or siliceous earth, when mixed with
an alkali, was fusible, and run into glass?

MRS. B.

Yes, my dear; but the characteristic properties of earths, which I have
mentioned, are to be considered as belonging to them in a state of
purity only; a state in which they are very seldom to be met with in
nature. --Besides these general properties, each earth has its own
specific characters, by which it is distinguished from any other
substance. --Let us therefore review them separately.


SILEX, or SILICA, abounds in flint, sand, sandstone, agate, jasper, &c.;
it forms the basis of many precious stones, and particularly of those
which strike fire with steel. It is rough to the touch, scratches and
wears away metals; it is acted upon by no acid but the fluoric, and is
not soluble in water by any known process; but nature certainly
dissolves it by means with which we are unacquainted, and thus produces
a variety of siliceous crystals, and amongst these _rock crystal_, which
is the purest specimen of this earth. Silex appears to have been
intended by Providence to form the solid basis of the globe, to serve as
a foundation for the original mountains, and give them that hardness and
durability which has enabled them to resist the various revolutions
which the surface of the earth has successively undergone. From these
mountains siliceous rocks have, during the course of ages, been
gradually detached by torrents of water, and brought down in fragments;
these, in the violence and rapidity of their descent, are sometimes
crumbled to sand, and in this state form the beds of rivers and of the
sea, chiefly composed of siliceous materials. Sometimes the fragments
are broken without being pulverised by their fall, and assume the form
of pebbles, which gradually become rounded and polished.

EMILY.

Pray what is the true colour of silex, which forms such a variety of
different coloured substances? Sand is brown, flint is nearly black, and
precious stones are of all colours.

MRS. B.

Pure silex, such as is found only in the chemist's laboratory, is
perfectly white, and the various colours which it assumes, in the
different substances you have just mentioned, proceed from the different
ingredients with which it is mixed in them.

CAROLINE.

I wonder that silex is not more valuable, since it forms the basis of so
many precious stones.

MRS. B.

You must not forget that the value we set upon precious stones depends
in a great measure upon the scarcity with which nature affords them;
for, were those productions either common or perfectly imitable by art,
they would no longer, notwithstanding their beauty, be so highly
esteemed. But the real value of siliceous earth, in many of the most
useful arts, is very extensive. Mixed with clay, it forms the basis of
all the various kinds of earthen ware, from the most common utensils to
the most refined ornaments.

EMILY.

And we must recollect its importance in the formation of glass with
potash.

MRS. B.

Nor should we omit to mention, likewise, many other important uses of
silex, such as being the chief ingredient of some of the most durable
cements, of mortar, &c.

I said before, that siliceous earth combined with no acid but the
fluoric; it is for this reason that glass is liable to be attacked by
that acid only, which, from its strong affinity for silex, forces that
substance from its combination with the potash, and thus destroys the
glass.

We will now hasten to proceed to the other earths, for I am rather
apprehensive of your growing weary of this part of our subject.

CAROLINE.

The history of the earths is not quite so entertaining as that of the
simple substances.

MRS. B.

Perhaps not; but it is absolutely indispensable that you should know
something of them; for they form the basis of so many interesting and
important compounds, that their total omission would throw great
obscurity on our general outline of chemical science. We shall, however,
review them in as cursory a manner as the subject can admit of.


ALUMINE derives its name from a compound salt called _alum_, of which it
forms the basis.

CAROLINE.

But it ought to be just the contrary, Mrs. B.; the simple body should
give, instead of taking, its name from the compound.

MRS. B.

That is true; but as the compound salt was known long before its basis
was discovered, it was very natural that when the earth was at length
separated from the acid, it should derive its name from the compound
from which it was obtained. However, to remove your scruples, we will
call the salt according to the new nomenclature, _sulphat of alumine_.
From this combination, alumine may be obtained in its pure state; it is
then soft to the touch, makes a paste with water, and hardens in the
fire. In nature, it is found chiefly in clay, which contains a
considerable proportion of this earth; it is very abundant in fuller's
earth, slate, and a variety of other mineral productions. There is
indeed scarcely any mineral substance more useful to mankind than
alumine. In the state of clay, it forms large strata of the earth, gives
consistency to the soil of valleys, and of all low and damp spots, such
as swamps and marshes. The beds of lakes, ponds, and springs, are almost
entirely of clay; instead of allowing of the filtration of water, as
sand does, it forms an impenetrable bottom, and by this means water is
accumulated in the caverns of the earth, producing those reservoirs
whence springs issue, and spout out at the surface.

EMILY.

I always thought that these subterraneous reservoirs of water were
bedded by some hard stone, or rock, which the water could not penetrate.

MRS. B.

That is not the case; for in the course of time water would penetrate,
or wear away silex, or any other kind of stone, while it is effectually
stopped by clay, or alumine.

The solid compact soils, such as are fit for corn, owe their consistence
in a great measure to alumine; this earth is therefore used to improve
sandy or chalky soils, which do not retain a sufficient quantity of
water for the purpose of vegetation.

Alumine is the most essential ingredient in all potteries. It enters
into the composition of brick, as well as that of the finest porcelain;
the addition of silex and water hardens it, renders it susceptible of a
degree of vitrification, and makes it perfectly fit for its various
purposes.

CAROLINE.

I can scarcely conceive that brick and china should be made of the same
materials.

MRS. B.

Brick consists almost entirely of baked clay; but a certain proportion
of silex is essential to the formation of earthen or stone ware. In
common potteries sand is used for that purpose; a more pure silex is,
I believe, necessary for the composition of porcelain, as well as a
finer kind of clay; and these materials are, no doubt, more carefully
prepared, and curiously wrought, in the one case than in the other.
Porcelain owes its beautiful semitransparency to a commencement of
vitrification.

EMILY.

But the commonest earthen-ware, though not transparent, is covered with
a kind of glazing.

MRS. B.

That precaution is equally necessary for use as for beauty, as the ware
would be liable to be spoiled and corroded by a variety of substances,
if not covered with a coating of this kind. In porcelain it consists of
enamel, which is a fine white opake glass, formed of metallic oxyds,
sand, salts, and such other materials as are susceptible of
vitrification. The glazing of common earthen-ware is made chiefly of
oxyd of lead, or sometimes merely of salt, which, when thinly spread
over earthen vessels, will, at a certain heat, run into opake glass.

CAROLINE.

And of what nature are the colours which are used for painting
porcelain?

MRS. B.

They are all composed of metallic oxyds, so that these colours, instead
of receiving injury from the application of fire, are strengthened and
developed by its action, which causes them to undergo different degrees
of oxydation.

Alumine and silex are not only often combined by art, but they have in
nature a very strong tendency to unite, and are found combined, in
different proportions, in various gems and other minerals. Indeed, many
of the precious stones, such as ruby, oriental sapphire, amethyst, &c.
consist chiefly of alumine.


We may now proceed to the alkaline earths, I shall say but a few words
on BARYTES, as it is hardly ever used, except in chemical laboratories.
It is remarkable for its great weight, and its strong alkaline
properties, such as destroying animal substances, turning green some
blue vegetable colours, and showing a powerful attraction for acids;
this last property it possesses to such a degree, particularly with
regard to the sulphuric acid, that it will always detect its presence in
any substance or combination whatever, by immediately uniting with it,
and forming a sulphat of barytes. This renders it a very valuable
chemical test. It is found pretty abundantly in nature in the state of
carbonat, from which the pure earth can be easily separated.


The next earth we have to consider is LIME. This is a substance of too
great and general importance to be passed over so slightly as the last.

Lime is strongly alkaline. In nature it is not met with in its simple
state, as its affinity for water and carbonic acid is so great, that it
is always found combined with these substances, with which it forms the
common lime-stone; but it is separated in the kiln from these
ingredients, which are volatilised whenever a sufficient degree of heat
is applied.

EMILY.

Pure lime, then, is nothing but lime-stone, which has been deprived, in
the kiln, of its water and carbonic acid?

MRS. B.

Precisely: in this state it is called _quick-lime_, and it is so
caustic, that it is capable of decomposing the dead bodies of animals
very rapidly, without their undergoing the process of putrefaction.
--I have here some quick lime, which is kept carefully corked up in a
bottle to prevent the access of air; for were it at all exposed to the
atmosphere, it would absorb both moisture and carbonic acid gas from it,
and be soon slaked. Here is also some lime-stone--we shall pour a little
water on each, and observe the effects that result from it.

CAROLINE.

How the quick-lime hisses! It is become excessively hot! --It swells,
and now it bursts and crumbles to powder, while the water appears to
produce no kind of alteration on the lime-stone.

MRS. B.

Because the lime-stone is already saturated with water, whilst the
quick-lime, which has been deprived of it in the kiln, combines with it
with very great avidity, and produces this prodigious disengagement of
heat, the cause of which I formerly explained to you; do you
recollect it?

EMILY.

Yes; you said that the heat did not proceed from the lime, but from the
water which was _solidified_, and thus parted with its heat of
liquidity.

MRS. B.

Very well. If we continue to add successive quantities of water to the
lime after being slaked and crumbled as you see, it will then gradually
be diffused in the water, till it will at length be dissolved in it, and
entirely disappear; but for this purpose it requires no less than 700
times its weight of water. This solution is called _lime-water_.

CAROLINE.

How very small, then, is the proportion of lime dissolved!

MRS. B.

Barytes is still of more difficult solution; it dissolves only in 900
times its weight of water: but it is much more soluble in the state of
crystals. The liquid contained in this bottle is lime-water; it is often
used as a medicine, chiefly, I believe, for the purpose of combining
with, and neutralising, the superabundant acid which it meets with in
the stomach.

