and formidable preparations to thwart the schemes of his adversary, in
doing which, of course, he found it advantageous to uphold the Dey.

Achmet also made energetic preparations to defend himself, and was quite
cool and collected when, about the usual breakfast hour, he received the
British consul, and thanked him for the timely warning which he brought.

But the precautions of both were in vain, for Sidi Hamet was a man of
vigour beyond his fellows.

Suddenly, when all seemed profoundly peaceful, some of his followers
rushed upon the palace guards, disarmed them, and hauled down the
standard.  At the same hour--previously fixed--the port, the casba, and
the gates of the city were surprised and taken.  The lieutenants
employed to accomplish these feats at once announced that Sidi Hamet was
about to become Dey of Algiers, in proof whereof they pointed to the
naked flag-staff of the palace.

The janissaries, most of whom were indifferent as to who should rule, at
once sided with the insurrectionists.  Those who favoured Sidi Omar were
cowed, and obliged to follow suit, though some of them--especially those
at the Marina--held out for a time.

And now the reign of anarchy began.  Knowing that, for a few hours, the
city was destitute of a head, the rude Turkish soldiery took the law
into their own hands, and indulged in every excess of riot, entering the
houses of Jews and Moors by force, and ransacking them for hidden
treasure.  Of course, Sidi Hamet attempted to fulfil his engagement with
Bacri, by placing guards over the houses of the more wealthy Jews, as
well as giving orders to the troops not to molest them.  But, like many
other reckless men, he found himself incapable of controlling the forces
which he had set in motion.

Many of the Jews, expecting this, had sought refuge in the houses of
their friends, and in the British consulate, where the consul, finding
himself, as it were, caught and involved in the insurrection, deemed it
wise to remain for a time.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

TELLS OF RIOT AND REVOLUTION IN THE PIRATE CITY.

At the first sound of tumult, Achmet--who was seated at the time on his
accustomed throne of judgment, ready to transact the ordinary business
of the morning--sprang up and roused his pet lion to a sudden and
towering pitch of fury by thrusting the point of his dagger into it.
The result was that when the door burst open the huge creature sprang
into the midst of the insurgents with a tremendous roar.

A volley of balls laid it low for ever, but the incident diverted
attention for a moment from the Dey, and afforded him time to escape
from the audience-chamber.  Darting up a staircase, he gained the
palace-roof, from which he sprang to a neighbouring roof and descended
hastily to the street, throwing off some of his brilliant apparel as he
ran, and snatching up a common burnous in which he enveloped himself.

Every avenue to the palace had been carefully secured by Sidi Hamet, but
it chanced that the one which Achmet selected was guarded by a young
soldier, towards whom at some previous time he had shown acts of
kindness.

On seeing the Dey hastening towards him the soldier lowered his musket,
but appeared undecided how to act.  Achmet, at once taking advantage of
his hesitation, went boldly up to him, and reminding him of what he had
formerly done for him, attempted to bribe him with a magnificent diamond
ring; but the soldier refused the ring.  Placing his left hand on his
eyes he said hurriedly--

"Your servant can neither hear nor see."

The Dey at once took the hint and passed on, but the delay proved fatal,
for a band of Janissaries who were traversing the narrow streets in
search of him came suddenly round a corner.  Achmet instantly turned
back and fled, hotly pursued by the yelling soldiers.  They were quickly
joined by others, and ere long a surging crowd followed the footsteps of
the fugitive as he darted from one to another of the intricate streets.
The Dey was a cool and courageous as well as an active man, and for some
time eluded his pursuers, whose very eagerness to take his life caused
them to thwart each other by getting jammed in several of the narrow
passages.

At last Achmet gained the entrance to the palace of his wives.  The door
was already shut and secured, as well as guarded by two of the insurgent
janissaries.  Rendered desperate and savage by the hopelessness of his
case, he cleft the skulls of these men with his sword, and was about to
dash himself violently against the strong door, in the vain hope of
bursting it open, when he was checked by hearing an appalling shriek
inside.  Next moment the door was flung wide open, and his faithful wife
Ashweesha appeared with a dripping dagger in her hand.

No word was uttered, because none was needed.  The Dey leaped in and
shut the door violently, just as his infuriated pursuers gained it,
while Ashweesha, with cool precision, shot in the heavy bolts, and let
down the ponderous bars.

Achmet sank exhausted on one of the couches of the vestibule, regardless
of the din which was made by the mob outside in their vain endeavours to
batter down the strong oaken door.

"Do not give way," said Ashweesha, falling on her knees beside him, and
resting his head tenderly on her shoulder, "there are many who love you
in the city.  Escape over the terraces to the house of Jacob the Jew.
He has many hiding-places, and will assuredly aid you."

"I will try, for _your_ sake, Ashweesha," said Achmet, starting up; "I
have little hope, it is true, for my enemies are too strong for me, but
it were cowardly to fail for want of an effort.  Allah bless thee, my
wife!"

He kissed her, and immediately made for the staircase that led to the
terrace.

Gaining the roof, he looked over the parapet, and the first glance was
enough to convince him that he must bid adieu to hope.  The palace was
completely surrounded by the insurgents, who set up a fierce shout on
observing him, and fired a volley of balls from many directions, all of
which, however, passed harmlessly over his head.

"Thou seest, Ashweesha," he said, with a sad smile, as the Sultana
followed him to the terrace, "my time has come.  It is fate.  Allah has
willed it so--there is therefore no possibility of averting it."

"Say not so," cried Ashweesha earnestly; "the terrace of Jacob is easily
gained; once there you can descend to some of the back streets where no
one looks for you."

"I will make the attempt," said the Dey, sternly casting his eyes over
the city.

It was a sight that might well lull him with sad thoughts, for the roofs
or terraces everywhere were covered with affrighted women--the houses of
the Jews being especially distinguishable by the frantic manner in which
the Jewesses wrung their hands, and otherwise displayed their grief and
alarm.

A plank thrown from the parapet of his palace to that of the nearest
house enabled Achmet to escape from those of his enemies who had gained
an entrance below, but it was only a momentary respite; while they were
searching for another plank to enable them to follow him, he attempted
to cross over to the house of the Jew above mentioned.  He was at once
observed, on the frail bridge that supported him, and a shout of anger
rose from the populace like a hoarse roar.

During the whole time in which the Dey was thus endeavouring to escape,
his proud spirit fought against him, urging him to turn and dare his
foes to do their worst.  At the moment when their roar burst upon his
ear, all desire to escape seemed to vanish.  He stopped suddenly, drew
himself up with his wonted look of dignified composure, and from his
perilous and elevated position looked down almost reproachfully on those
who had been wont to bow at his footstool.

The act was followed by another roar.  A hundred muskets belched forth
their deadly fire, and Achmet Dey fell headlong into the street.

The shattered body was instantly seized by the soldiers, and the head,
severed from the trunk, was carried off to the palace, there to be
presented as a trophy to Sidi Hamet, the new Dey of Algiers.

So soon as the green standard of the Prophet was run up on the
flag-staff of the palace, announcing that a new ruler had seated himself
on the throne, the period of recognised anarchy came to an end, and
order began to be in some measure restored.  Still, most of the wealthy
inhabitants kept in close retirement, having, of course, hidden away
most of their valuables and cash.  The Jews, especially, were very chary
of showing themselves in public, and those of them who had fled for
refuge to the British consulate remained quiet, and were hospitably
entertained for several days.

Among the first who fled to that shelter was the valiant Rais Ali.  He
entered with a trembling frame and pale visage about the time the
incidents we have described were being enacted, and found Colonel
Langley, with the aid of Ted Flaggan, engaged in preparing the various
rooms of the building for the reception of those who, from past
experience, he expected to require them.

"Why, Rais! what ails you?" demanded Colonel Langley in surprise, not
unmingled with anger, for he had, on leaving home, placed the
interpreter in charge of his family in his suburban villa.

"Oh! mass'r," said Ali piteously; "yous no know wat dangers me hab if de
janissary cotch me.  Life not wuth wone buttin."

"Rascal!" exclaimed the Colonel, "did I not charge you to guard my
household?  How dare you forsake your post?  Are you not under my
protection?"

"Ah! yis, yis, mass'r; but--but--yous no know de greatness of me
danger--"

"Go, scoundrel!" exclaimed the Colonel, losing all patience with him;
"return to your duty as fast as your horse can carry you, else I shall
hand you over to the janissaries."

"You hears what yer master says, don't 'ee?" said Ted Flaggan, who
viewed the infidelity and cowardice of the interpreter with supreme
disgust, as he seized him by the nape of the neck and thrust him towards
the door.  "Git out, ye white-livered spalpeen, or I'll multiply every
bone in yer body by two."

Rais Ali went with extreme reluctance, but there was no resisting the
persuasive violence of Ted's powerful arm, nor the emphatic kick of the
muscular leg with which he propelled his Moorish friend into the street.
He did not wait, however, to remonstrate, but immediately drew forward
the hood of his burnous and hurried away.

Just then Bacri entered, conducting a number of women and children who
sought sanctuary there.

"Some of my people have need of the British arm to protect them," said
the Jew, with a sad smile.

"And they shall have it," said the consul, taking Bacri by the
hand.--"See them attended to, Flaggan," he added, turning to the seaman.

"Ay, ay, sir.--This way, my dears," said Ted, waving his hand with a
fatherly air to the group of weeping women and children, and conducting
them to one of the large chambers of the house, where Mrs Langley and
Paulina had already spread out bedding, and made further preparations
for a large party.

"Do you think, Bacri," said the consul, as the other was about to
depart, "that there is much chance of Hamet succeeding?"

"I do," answered the Jew.  "Achmet is now become very unpopular.  He is
too kind and generous to suit the tastes of the soldiers, and you are
aware that the janissaries have it all their own way in this city."

This was indeed the case.  The Turkish soldiers were extremely insolent
and overbearing, alike to Moors and Jews, one of the privileges they
claimed being to enter the gardens of the inhabitants whenever they
pleased--not excepting those of the consuls--and eat and destroy fruit
and vegetables at will.

"Achmet's party," added Bacri, "is not strong, while that of Hamet is
not only numerous but influential.  I fear much that the sands of his
glass are nearly run out."

"It is a woeful state of things," observed the Colonel, while a slight
flush mantled on his cheek--possibly at the thought of his having, as
the representative of a civilised power, to bow his head and recognise
such barbarians.  "And you, Bacri, will you not also stay here?"

"No.  There are others of my people who require my aid.  I go to join
them.  I trust that Hamet's promise--if he succeeds--will sufficiently
guard me from violence.  It may be that they will respect my position.
In any case I stay not here.--Farewell."

When the Jew had left, the consul turned to superintend the arrangements
of his house, which by this time had assumed the appearance of a
hospital or prison--so numerous and varied were the people who had fled
thither for refuge.

Chief among the busy ones there was the ebony damsel from beyond the
Zahara, whose tendency to damage Master Jim and to alarm Jim's mamma has
already been remarked on more than once.  Zubby's energies were, at the
time, devoted to Paulina, in whom she took a deep interest.  She had
made one little nest of a blanket for her baby Angelina, and another
similar nest for Master Jim, whose head she had bumped against the wall
in putting him into it--without awaking him, however, for Jim was a
sound sleeper, and used to bumps.  She was now tearfully regarding the
meeting of Paulina with her sister Angela.  The latter had been brought
to the consulate by Bacri, along with her mistress and some other
members of the Jew's household, and the delight of the two sisters at
this unexpected meeting afforded the susceptible Zubby inexpressible--we
might almost say inconceivable--joy, as was evidenced by the rising of
her black cheeks, the shutting of her blacker eyes, and the display of
her gorgeous teeth--front and back--as well as her red gums.

"Oh!  I'm _so_ glad," exclaimed Angela, sitting down on a mat beside her
sister, and gazing through her tears.

"So am I, darling," responded Paulina, "and so would baby be if she were
awake and understood it."

Zubby looked as if she were on the point of awaking baby in order to
enable her to understand it; fortunately she thought better of this.

"But I'm _so_ frightened," added Angela, changing rather suddenly from a
smile to a look of horror.

"Why, dearest?" asked Paulina.

"Oh! you've no idea what awful things I have heard since I went to live
with the Jew, who is _very_ kind to me, Paulina.  They said they were
going to kill the Dey."

"Who said, dear?"

"The--the people--you know.  Of course I don't know who all the people
are that come to see us, and I don't like to ask; but some of them are
bad--oh, _so_ bad!" she looked appallingly solemn here--"and then
Mariano--"

"Ah! what of Mariano and Francisco and Lucien?" asked Paulina with
increasing interest, while Zubby became desperately intelligent.

"Oh, he was sent on _such_ a dangerous expedition," continued Angela,
blushing slightly, and more than slightly crying, "and when he was
coming back he was caught in the streets, and carried off to that
dreadful Bagnio, about which he has told me such awful horrors.  So
Bacri told me on his return, for Bacri had tried to save him, but
couldn't, and was nearly lost himself.--But what is all the noise about
outside, sister--and the shooting off of guns?"

The noise referred to by the pretty Sicilian was caused by a party of
rioters who, returning from the slaughter of the Dey, were hurrying
towards the house of Bacri, intent on plunder.  They were led by one of
those big blustering men, styled bullies, who, in all lands, have a
talent for taking the lead and talking loud when danger is slight, and
modestly retiring when it is great.

Waving a scimitar, which already dripped with blood, this man headed the
rushing crowd, and was the first to thunder for admittance at the Jew's
door.  But no one answered his demands.

Shouting for a beam, he ran to a neighbouring pile of timber, and, with
the aid of some others, returned bearing a battering-ram, which would
soon have dashed in the door, if it had not been opened by Bacri
himself, who had returned just in time to attempt to save his house from
being pillaged.

For a few seconds the rioters were checked by surprise at the cool, calm
bearing of the Jew.  Then they dropped the beam, uttered a yell of
execration, and rushed upon him, but were unexpectedly checked by one of
their own number suddenly turning round, and in a voice of stern
authority ordering the crowd to stand back.

The young janissary who acted thus unexpectedly was a tall handsome man
of resolute bearing, but with a frame that rather denoted activity than
strength.  As he held a glittering sword threateningly in his right
hand, his order was obeyed for a few seconds, and then it was observed
that he held in his left hand a rope, which was tied round the neck of a
Christian slave.  This slave was none other than our unfortunate friend
Francisco Rimini.

"Who art thou that issues commands so bravely?" demanded the bully,
stepping forward.

