
Philip took another walk in the afternoon, and was rather amused to
see how much attention he received. When he drew near the hotel he was
stared at by several gaping youngsters, who apparently were stationed
there for no other purpose. He overheard their whispers:

"That's him! That's Philip de Gray, the wonderful fiddler!"

"I never suspected, when I lived at Norton, that I was so much of a
curiosity," he said to himself. "I wish I knew what they'll say about me
to-morrow."

At six o'clock Morris Lovett called and received his ticket.

"You'll have a big house to-night, Philip," he said. "I know a lot of
fellows that are going."

"I am glad to hear it," said Philip, well pleased, for he concluded that
if such were the case his purse would be considerably heavier the next
day.

"It's strange how quick you've come up;" said Morris. "I never expected
you'd be so famous."

"Nor I," said Philip, laughing.

"I'd give anything if I could have my name posted round like yours."

"Perhaps you will have, some time."

"Oh, no! I couldn't play more'n a pig," said Morris decidedly. "I'll
have to be a clerk, and stick to business."

"You'll make more money in the end that way, Morris, even if your name
isn't printed in capitals."

They retired into a small room adjoining the stage, to prepare for their
appearance.

The professor rubbed his hands in glee.

"Did you see what a house we have, Mr. de Gray?"

"Yes, professor."

"I think there'll be a hundred dollars over and above expenses."

"That will be splendid!" said Philip, naturally elated.

"The firm of Riccaboeca and De Gray is starting swimmingly."

"So it is. I hope it will continue so."

"Here is the program, Mr. de Gray. You will observe that I appear first,
in my famous soliloquy. You will follow, with the 'Carnival of Venice.'
Do you feel agitated?"

"Oh, no. I am so used to playing that I shall not feel at all bashful."

"That is well."

"I would like to be on the stage, professor, to hear you."

"Certainly. I have anticipated your desire, and provided an extra
chair."

The time came, and Professor Riccabocca stepped upon the stage, his
manner full of dignity, and advanced to the desk. Philip took a chair a
little to the rear.

Their entrance was greeted by hearty applause. The professor made a
stately bow, and a brief introductory speech, in which he said several
things about Philip and himself which rather astonished our hero. Then
he began to recite the soliloquy.

Probably it was never before so amazingly recited. Professor
Riccabocca's gestures, facial contortions, and inflections were very
remarkable. Philip almost suspected that he was essaying a burlesque
role.

The mature portion of the audience were evidently puzzled, but the small
boys were delighted, and with some of the young men, stamped vigorously
at the close.

Professor Riccabocea bowed modestly, and said:

"Gentlemen and ladies, you will now have the pleasure of listening to
the young and talented Philip de Gray, the wonderful boy-musician, in
his unrivaled rendition of the 'Carnival of Venice.'"

Philip rose, coloring a little with shame a I this high-flown
introduction, and came forward.

All applauded heartily, for sympathy is always felt for a young
performer, especially when he has a manly bearing and an attractive
face, such as our hero possessed.

Philip was determined to do his best. Indeed, after being advertised and
announced as a boy wonder, he felt that he could not do otherwise.

He commenced, and soon lost himself in the music he loved so well, so
that before he had half finished he had quite forgotten his audience,
and half started at the boisterous applause which followed. He bowed his
acknowledgments, but found this would not do.

He was forced to play it a second time, greatly to the apparent
satisfaction of the audience. It was clear that, whatever might be
thought of Professor Riccabocea's recitation, the young violinist had
not disappointed his audience.

Philip could see, in a seat near the stage, the beaming face of his
friend Morris Lovett, who was delighted at the success of his old
acquaintance, and anticipated the reflected glory which he received,
from its being known that he was a friend of the wonderful young
musician.

Professor Riccabocca came forward again, and recited a poem called "The
Maniac," each stanza ending with the line: "I am not mad, but soon shall
be."

He stamped, raved, tore his hair, and made altogether a very grotesque
appearance.

Philip could hardly forbear laughing, and some of the boys in the front
seats didn't restrain themselves, Some of the older people wondered how
such a man should be selected by the Prince of Wales to instruct his
sons in elocution--not suspecting that the newspaper paragraph making
mention of this was only a daring invention of the eminent professor.

Next came another musical selection by Philip, which was as cordially
received as the first.

I do not propose to weary the reader by a recital of the program and a
detailed account of each performance. It is enough to say that Professor
Riccabocca excited some amusement, but was only tolerated for the sake
of Philip's playing.

Naturally, our hero was better received on account of his youth, but
had he been twice as old his playing would have given satisfaction and
pleasure.

So passed an hour and a half, and the musical entertainment was over.
Philip felt that he had reason to be satisfied. Highly as he had been
heralded, no one appeared to feel disappointed by his part of the
performance.

"Mr. de Gray," said the professor, when they reached the hotel, "you did
splendidly. We have made a complete success."

"It is very gratifying," said Philip.

"I felt sure that the public would appreciate us. I think I managed
everything shrewdly."

"How much was paid in at the door?" asked Philip, who naturally felt
interested in this phase of success.

"One hundred and forty-five dollars and a half!" answered the professor.

Philip's eyes sparkled.

"And how much will that be over and above expenses?" he asked.

"My dear Mr. de Gray, we will settle all bills, and make a fair and
equitable division, in the morning. I think there will be a little more
than fifty dollars to come to each of us."

"Fifty dollars for one evening's work!" repeated Philip, his eyes
sparkling.

"Oh, I have done much better than that," said the professor. "I remember
once at St. Louis I made for myself alone one hundred and eighty dollars
net, and in Chicago a little more."

"I didn't think it was such a money-making business," said Philip,
elated.

"Yes, Mr. de Gray, the American people are willing to recognize talent,
when it is genuine. You are on the threshold of a great career, my dear
young friend."

"And only a week since I was in the Norton Poorhouse," thought Philip.
"It is certainly a case of romance in real life."

The two went to bed soon, being fatigued by their exertions. The
apartment was large, and contained two beds, a larger and smaller one.
The latter was occupied by our hero.

When he awoke in the morning, the sun was shining brightly into the
room. Philip looked toward the opposite bed. It was empty.

"Professor Riccabocca must have got up early," he thought. "Probably he
did not wish to wake me."

He dressed and went downstairs.

"Where is the professor?" he asked of the clerk.

"He started away two hours since--said he was going to take a walk. Went
away without his breakfast, too. He must be fond of walking."

Philip turned pale. He was disturbed by a terrible suspicion. Had the
professor gone off for good, carrying all the money with him?



CHAPTER XXIX. BESET BY CREDITORS.



Philip was still a boy, and though he had discovered that the professor
was something of a humbug, and a good deal of a braggart, it had not for
a moment occurred to him that he would prove dishonest. Even now he did
not want to believe it, though he was nervously apprehensive that it
might prove true.

"I will take my breakfast," he said, as coolly as was possible, "and the
professor will probably join me before I am through."

The clerk and the landlord thought otherwise. They were pretty well
convinced that Riccabocca was dishonest, and quietly sent for those to
whom the "combination" was indebted: namely, the printer and publisher
of the Daily Bulletin, the agent of the music-hall, and the bill-sticker
who had posted notices of the entertainment. These parties arrived while
Philip was at breakfast.

"Gentlemen," said the landlord, "the boy is at breakfast. I think he is
all right, but I don't know. The professor, I fear, is a swindle."

"The boy is liable for our debts," said the agent. "He belongs to the
combination."

"I am afraid he is a victim as well as you," said the landlord. "He
seemed surprised to hear that the professor had gone out."

"It may all be put on. Perhaps he is in the plot, and is to meet the
old fraud at some place fixed upon, and divide the booty," suggested the
agent.

"The boy looks honest," said the landlord. "I like his appearance. We
will see what he has to say."

So when Philip had finished his breakfast he was summoned to the parlor,
where he met the creditors of the combination.

"These gentlemen," said the landlord, "have bills against you and the
professor. It makes no difference whether they receive pay from you or
him."

Poor Philip's heart sank within him.

"I was hoping Professor Riccabocca had settled your bills," he said.
"Please show them to me."

This was done with alacrity.

Philip found that they owed five dollars for the hall, five dollars
for advertising and printing, and one dollar for bill-posting--eleven
dollars in all.

"Mr. Gates," said our hero uneasily, to the landlord, "did Professor
Riccabocca say anything about coming back when he went out this
morning?"

"He told my clerk he would be back to breakfast," said the landlord;
adding, with a shrug of the shoulders: "That was two hours and a half
ago. He can't be very hungry."

"He didn't pay his bill, I suppose?"

"No, of course not. He had not given up his room."

Philip became more and more uneasy.

"Didn't you know anything about his going out?" asked the landlord.

"No, sir. I was fast asleep."

"Is the professor in the habit of taking long morning walks?"

"I don't know."

"That is strange, since you travel together," remarked the publisher.

"I never saw him till day before yesterday," said Philip.

The creditors looked at each other significantly. They began to suspect
that Philip also was a victim.

"Do you know how much money was received for tickets last evening?"

"About a hundred and fifty dollars."

"How much of this were you to receive?"

"Half of what was left after the bills were paid."

"Have you received it?" asked the agent.

"Not a cent," answered Philip.

"What do you think about the situation?"

"I think that Professor Riccabocca has swindled us all," answered Philip
promptly.

"Our bills ought to be paid," said the agent, who was rather a hard man
in his dealings.

"I agree with you," said Philip. "I wish I were able to pay them, but I
have only six dollars in my possession."

"That will pay me, and leave a dollar over," suggested the agent.

"If it comes to that," said the printer, "I claim that I ought to be
paid first."

"I am a poor man," said the bill-sticker. "I need my money."

Poor Philip was very much disconcerted. It was a new thing for him to
owe money which he could not repay.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I have myself been cheated out of fifty dollars,
at least--my share of the profits. I wish I could pay you all. I cannot
do so now. Whenever I can I will certainly do it."

"You can pay us a part with the money you have," said the agent.

"I owe Mr. Gates for nearly two days' board," he said. "That is my own
affair, and I must pay him first."

"I don't see why he should be preferred to me," grumbled the agent;
then, with a sudden, happy thought, as he termed it, he said: "I will
tell you how you can pay us all."

"How?" asked Philip.

"You have a violin. You can sell that for enough to pay our bills."

Poor Philip! His violin was his dependence. Besides the natural
attachment he felt for it, he relied upon it to secure him a living, and
the thought of parting with it was bitter.

"Gentlemen," he said, "if you take my violin, I have no way of making
a living. If you will consider that I, too, am a victim of this man, I
think you will not wish to inflict such an injury upon me."

"I do not, for one," said the publisher. "I am not a rich man, and I
need all the money that is due me, but I wouldn't deprive the boy of his
violin."

"Nor I," said the bill-sticker.

"That's all very fine," said the agent; "but I am not so soft as you
two. Who knows but the boy is in league with the professor?"

"I know it!" said the landlord stoutly. "The boy is all right, or I am
no judge of human nature."

"Thank you, Mr. Gates," said Philip, extending his hand to his generous
defender.

"Do you expect we will let you off without paying anything?" demanded
the agent harshly.

"If I live, sir, you shall lose nothing by me," said Philip.

"That won't do!" said the man coarsely. "I insist upon the fiddle being
sold. I'll give five dollars for it, and call it square."

"Mr. Gunn," said the landlord, in a tone of disgust, "since you are
disposed to persecute this boy, I will myself pay your bill, and trust
to him to repay me when he can."

"But, Mr. Gates--" said Philip.

"I accept!" said the agent, with alacrity.

"Receipt your bill," said the landlord.

Mr. Gunn did so, and received a five-dollar bill in return.

"Now sir," said the landlord coldly, "if you have no further business
here, we can dispense with your company."

"It strikes me you are rather hard on a man because he wants to be paid
his honest dues!" whined Gunn, rather uncomfortably.

"We understand you, sir," said the landlord. "We have not forgotten how
you turned a poor family into the street, in the dead of winter, because
they could not pay their rent."

"Could I afford to give them house-room?" inquired Gunn.

"Perhaps not. At any rate, I don't feel inclined to give you house-room
any longer."

Mr. Gunn slunk out of the room, under the impression that his company
was no longer desired.

"Mr. Gray," said the publisher, "I hope you don't class me with the man
who has just gone out. I would sooner never be paid than deprive you of
your violin. Let the account stand, and if you are ever able to pay me
half of my bill--your share--I shall be glad to receive it."

"Thank you, sir!" said Philip, "You shall not repent your confidence in
me."

"I say ditto to my friend, the publisher," said the bill-poster.

"Wait a moment, gentlemen," said Philip. "There is a bare possibility
that I can do something for you."

For the first time since he left Norton he thought of the letter which
he was not to open till he was fifty miles from Norton.

"Mr. Gates," he said, "can you tell me how far Norton is from here?"

"About sixty miles," answered the landlord in surprise.

