genuine.  I am sure _something_ will be found under the Beacon Tree."

Meantime Frank had hurried off to acquaint Arthur with the amazing
discovery, and to warn him against dropping a hint to any one.  My son
soon returned with the word that his friend was "b'iling" with
excitement, but alas! his parents were going to spend that evening with
a neighbor, and since they would not be back until late, there was no
possible way of his joining us.

The boys were not more disappointed than I, and the impulse was strong
upon me to make the venture without the help of Arthur, meaning, of
course that such a proceeding should not affect his share in the find;
but it did not strike me that that would be exactly right, and Arthur
was informed that we three would attend to the business the following
evening.

I could not avoid strolling out to the Beacon Tree the next day.  I did
so in the most off-hand manner and with the most unconcerned expression
I could assume; but had any one scrutinized my countenance, I am sure
he would easily have detected the deep agitation under which I was
laboring.

I was considerably disturbed, upon examining the immediate surroundings
of the tree, to discover signs which looked as if some one had been
digging there quite recently.

"The secret has become known and the treasure has been carried off," I
gasped, with a rapidly throbbing heart.

Reflection, however, reassured me.  No one had seen the writing in the
bottle beside myself (though evidently it must have been known to
others), and it was certain that if any person had succeeded in
unearthing the hidden wealth, he would not have taken the trouble to
hide all signs with such extreme care.  Closer examination, too,
convinced me there had been no digging about the tree at all.  And yet
I was mistaken.

We three reached the old poplar the next evening between ten and eleven
o'clock.  Arthur had escaped inquiry by slipping out of his bedroom
window after bidding his parents good-night; and, inasmuch as the
lantern which I carried was not lit until we arrived at the tree, we
were confident of escaping attention.  Still I watched sharply, and was
greatly relieved to discover no persons abroad at that hour beside
ourselves.

Since the treasure was located but three feet below the surface, in
sandy soil, I brought only one shovel, while the boys watched me, one
holding the lantern, and both casting furtive glances around to guard
against eavesdroppers.  It would be useless to deny my excitement.  My
heart at times throbbed painfully, and more than once I was on the
point of ceasing until I could regain mastery of myself.

"Pop, you must be nearly deep enough," said Frank, in a guarded
undertone.

"I'm pretty near to the place," I replied stopping a minute to draw my
handkerchief across my perspiring forehead.

"I'm afraid there's somebody watching us," added Arthur.

"Where?" I asked in affright, staring around in the gloom.

"I thought I saw a man moving out yonder."

"Well, it's too late for him to interfere now," I said, compressing my
lips and renewing my digging more determinedly than ever; "I carry a
revolver with me, and I don't mean to be robbed."

The next moment my heart gave a great throb, for the shovel struck
something hard.

"Hold the lantern down here, Frank, quick!" I commanded in a hoarse
voice.

He obeyed, but to my disappointment the object proved to be a large
stone.

"I guess it's under that," I whispered, stopping work for a moment.

"Pop, there's another piece of paper," said Frank.

I stooped over and picked it up.  I saw that there was writing on it,
and holding it up beside the lantern read:

"Dig three feet under the Beacon Tree and you will be an April fool."

Once again the truth flashed across me.  The whole thing was a
practical joke.

"Boys," said I, "what day of the month is this?"

They reflected a moment and answered:

"Why, it's the first of April."

"Let's go home," I added, stepping out of the excavation, "and here's a
half a dollar apiece if you don't tell anybody about it."

As we moved mournfully away I was sure I heard a chuckling laugh
somewhere near in the darkness, but the author of it was prudent enough
to keep beyond reach.

It was not until three months afterward that I learned all the facts
connected with the writing found in a bottle.  My neighbor, the father
of Arthur Newman, on whom I had played several jokes, adopted this
means of retaliating on me.  He took my son and his own into his
confidence, and I am grieved to say that the young rascals were just as
eager as he.  When I proposed to make the search on the last day of
March, my friend resorted to the subterfuge I have mentioned, so as to
insure that it should not take place until the following evening, which
was unquestionably appropriate for my first and last essay in digging
for buried treasure.




THAT HORNET'S NEST.

There was an indignation meeting of the boys at Bushville school, one
sultry day in August.  From stress of circumstances it was held at the
noon recess, in the piece of woods back of the old stone building, and
on the banks of the crystal stream in which the youngsters swam and
revelled at morning, noon and night, during the long, delicious days of
summer.

All the lads, not quite a score, belonging to the Bushville school,
were present at the impromptu convention, but the proceedings were
chiefly in charge of the lads, Tom Britt, Dick Culver and Fred
Armstrong.  There were but a few months' difference in their ages, none
of which was more than fourteen years, but all were so much larger and
older than the rest that they were looked up to as leaders in
everything except study.

It cannot be denied that the three were indolent by nature, inclined to
rebel at authority, and their enforced attendance at school was the
affliction of their lives.  They had given their teachers no end of
trouble, and more than once had combined in open rebellion against
their instructors.  Tom's father was a trustee, and like the parents of
many ill-trained youths, including those of Dick and Fred, he could see
nothing wrong in the conduct of his son.  As a consequence, discipline
at times was set at naught in the Bushville institutions, and one of
the best teachers ever employed by the district threw up his situation
in disgust, and went off without waiting to collect his month's salary.

The successor of this gentleman was Mr. Lathrop, a young man barely
turned twenty, with a beardless face, a mild blue eye, a gentle voice,
and such a soft winning manner that the three leaders gave an
involuntary sniff of contempt when they first saw him and agreed that
he would not last more than a week at the most.

"We'll let up on him, for a few days," Tom explained to some of his
friends, "so as to give him time to get acquainted.  I b'lieve in
letting every fellow have a show, but he's got to walk mighty straight
between now and the end of this week," added the youth impressively; "I
ain't in favor of standing any nonsense."

A nodding of heads by Dick and Fred showed that Tom had voiced their
sentiments.

But, somehow or other, Mr. Lathrop was different from the teachers that
had preceded him.  He never spoke angrily or shouted, and his first act
on entering the schoolroom was to break up the long tough hickory "gad"
lying on his desk and to fling it out of the window.  The next thing he
did, after calling the school to order, was to tell the gaping,
open-eyed children the most entertaining story to which they had ever
listened.  The anecdote had its moral too, for woven in and out and
through its charming meshes was the woof of a life of heroic suffering,
of trial and reward.

At its conclusion, the teacher said to the pupils that if they were
studious and transgressed no rules, he would be glad to tell them
another story the next day, if they would remain a few minutes after
the hour of dismissal.  The treat was such a rare one that all the
girls and most of the boys resolved to earn the right to enjoy it.

"I'm going to hear the yarn, too," muttered Tom Britt, "for he knows
how to tell 'em, but as for behaving myself that depends."

On the following afternoon, when five o'clock arrived (in those days
most of the country schools opened at eight and closed at five, with an
hour at noon, and not more than two weeks vacation in summer.  I have
attended school on more than one Saturday, Fourth of July and
Christmas), the school was all expectation.  When Mr. Lathrop saw the
bright eyes turned eagerly toward him, a thrill of pleasure stirred his
heart, for he felt that his was the hand to sow good seed, or this was
the soil where it could be made to spring up and bear fruit a hundred
fold.

"I am glad," said he, in his winning voice, "to know that you have done
well and earned the right to hear the best story that I can tell.  You
have been studious, obedient and careful to break no rules, and I am
sure that as we become better acquainted, we shall like each other and
get on well together.

"I wish I could say you had _all_ done well, but it grieves me to tell
you, what you know, that one boy has neglected his lessons, been tardy
or so indifferent to my wishes that it would not be right that he
should be allowed to sit with the rest of you and listen to the
incident I am about to relate.  I refer to Thomas Britt.  Thomas, you
will please take your books and hat and go home."

The words came like a thunderclap.  No one expected it, least of all
the youth himself.  Every eye was turned toward him and his face
flushed scarlet.  He quickly rallied from the daze into which he was
thrown at first, and with his old swagger, looked at the teacher and
replied with an insolence that was defiance itself:

"My father is trustee, and I've as much right here as you or any one
else, and I'm going to stay till I'm ready to go home and you
can't----" but, before he had completed his defiant sentence, the
slightly built teacher was at his side and had grasped the nape of his
coat.  It seemed to the lad, that an iron vise had caught his garment
and a span of horses were pulling at him.  He clutched desperately at
everything within reach and spread his legs apart and curled up his
toes in the effort to hook into something that would stay proceedings,
but it was in vain.  Out he came from the seat, and to the awed
children who were looking on it seemed that his body was elongated to
double its length during the process,--and he was run through the open
door, and his hat tossed after him.  Then the teacher walked quietly
back to his seat behind the desk on the platform, and without the
slightest sign of flurry or mental disturbance, he told one of the
sweetest and most delightful incidents to which his pupils had ever
listened.  He closed with the promise to give them another at the end
of the week, if they continued in the good course on which they were so
fairly started.

"He catched me foul," explained the indignant Tom Britt the following
day in discussing his hurried exit from the schoolroom; "if he had only
let me know he was coming, it would be him that dove out the door
instead of me."

The sullen youth did not receive much sympathy at first, for Mr.
Lathrop was steadily winning the affections of the pupils; but Dick and
Fred rebelled at such quiet submission to authority, and acted so
sullenly that they, too, were shut out from the privilege of listening
to the next story related by the teacher to the rest of the school.  It
had been agreed among the three boys that they should refuse to depart
when ordered to do so by the instructor, and that when he made a move
toward them, they would assail him simultaneously and rout him "horse,
foot and dragoons."

But the business was conducted with such a cyclone rush that the plan
of campaign was entirely overturned.  Before the rebels could combine,
all three were out doors, so shaken up that they agreed that a new
system of resistance would have to be adopted.

And thus it came about that at the noon recess, one day of the
following week, the boys of Bushville school gathered in the cool shade
of the woods to listen to the plan of the three malcontents for
destroying the authority of the school.  It was mainly curiosity on the
part of the younger portion, who had little sympathy with the motives
of the leaders and were quite sure they would meet with failure.

"I've made up my mind that I won't stand it," announced Tom, after the
situation had been freely discussed; "no boy with any spirit will allow
a teacher to run him out of school in the style he served me."

"What then made you let him do it?" asked little freckled-face Will
Horton, from where he lay on the ground.

"Didn't I tell you he catched me foul?" demanded Tom, glaring at the
urchin; "if I'd knowed what was coming things would have been
different."

"Dick and Fred knowed he was coming for _them_," added Will, "for he
walked clear across the schoolroom."

"You've got too much to say," retorted Dick Culver, angrily; "when we
want your advice we'll ask for it."

"Well, boys, you had better make up your minds to behave yourselves and
then there won't be any trouble," was the sensible advice of Jimmy
Thompson, who had perched himself on a log, and was swinging his bare
feet back and forth; "Mr. Lathrop is the best teacher we ever had and
he suits the rest of us first rate."

"Of course he suits all boys that ha'n't any spirit," was the crushing
response of the leader, "but I've a plan that'll teach him that me and
Dick and Fred ain't that kind of chaps."

"How are you going to help yourself?"

After several mysterious hints and nods of the head, Tom revealed his
stupendous scheme for bringing the teacher to terms.

"You know the big hornet's nest over in Bear Hollow?"

Inasmuch as there wasn't a boy in the crowd who hadn't shied stones at
the object named (always without hitting it), no further information
was necessary.

"Well, I'm going to put that nest in the teacher's desk, and when he
comes in, takes his seat and raises the lid, won't there be music?"

The scheme was so prodigious that for a full half minute all stared
open mouthed at their leader without speaking.

"The teacher never locks his desk at noon, so it will be easy enough to
slip it in before he gets back."

"But when he opens the desk and the hornets sail out, what will become
of _us_?" was the pertinent inquiry of Will Horton.

"Why the minute the things begin to swarm out I'll yell, and we'll all
rush out doors."

"Won't the teacher do the same thing?"

"But he'll be the last and he'll catch it the worst.  He'll be right
among the critters, and they'll just go for him, so his head will swell
up like a bushel basket and we'll have a week's vacation.  By that time
he'll learn how to treat us fellers."

"_I_ am," was the proud reply; "come on and I'll show you."

As he spoke, Tom sprang to his feet and started on a trot toward Bear
Hollow, with the others streaming after him.

It cannot be denied that the youth displayed considerable pluck and
coolness when he came to the test.  There hung the hornet's nest from
the lower limb of an oak, so near the ground that it could be easily
reached by one of the larger boys.  It was gray in color and of
enormous size.  It resembled in shape an overgrown football or
watermelon, pendant by one end.  In some portions faint ridges were
visible, like the prints left by tiny wavelets on the sand.  Near the
base was a circular opening about as large as an old-fashioned penny.
This was the door of the hornets' residence, through which all the
occupants came and went.

The boys halted at a safe distance, and even Tom paused a few minutes
to make a reconnoissance before going nearer.

"You fellows stay here, and don't any of you throw stones or yell!" he
said, in a guarded undertone; "for if them hornets find out what is up,
they'll come swarming out by the million and sting us all to death."

The promise was readily made, and Tom went forward like a hero, the
eyes of all of his playmates fixed upon him.  It was noticed be carried
a large silken handkerchief in his hand--one that he had secured at
home for this special purpose.

He advanced stealthily until within some ten feet, when he halted
again.  With his gaze centered on the gray, oblong object, he saw one
of the dark insects suddenly crawl to view through the opening.

"I wonder if he suspects anything," thought Tom, half disposed to turn
about and run; "no--he's all right," he added, as the hornet spread his
wings, and shot off like a bullet through the air.

Still intently watching the orifice, the boy moved softly forward until
directly under the nest.  Then, with the deliberation of a veteran, he
deftly enfolded it with the large silk handkerchief, easily wrenched it
loose from its support, tied the covering over the top so securely that
not an inhabitant of the nest could possibly escape, and rejoined in
triumph his companions.

"Now you'll see fun!" he exclaimed, as he led the whole party trooping
in the direction of the schoolhouse; "keep mum, and don't tell any of
the girls what's up."

It was a grand scheme and it looked as if there could be no hitch in
it.  What compunctions the other boys might have felt against the
attempt to cause pain to their teacher were forgotten in the excitement
of the coming sport.

The residents of the oblong home must have been surprised, to put it
mildly, when they found the house swinging along, in the grasp of some
great giant, themselves enveloped in gloom, and the only avenue of
escape sealed up.  They hummed, and buzzed and raised a tempest within,
but it was in vain: they were prisoners and must remain such until the
ogre chose to release them.

Everything seemed to join to help the young rebel.  The girls were
playing so far from the school building, that they gave no heed to the
procession which passed into the structure.  One glance told Tom that
it was without an occupant, and he strode hastily to the desk, the
others pausing near the door, ready to dash out in the event of
disaster.

The desk was unlocked and Tom raised the lid.  The nest was laid on its
side, in the middle, but it was so big that he had to displace several
books to make room for it.  Then the knots were untied, the
handkerchief flirted free, the lid lowered, and the deed was done.

Tom joined his companions with a radiant face.  "Not a word," he
cautioned, "be extra good this afternoon; even I'll try to behave
myself for once, but we won't have to wait long."

"S'posin' them hornets lift the lid of the desk and come out before the
teacher gets here?" suggested Will Horton.

"What are you talking about?" was the scornful question of Dick Culver;
"how can a hornet raise the lid of a desk?"

"I don't mean that _one_ will do it, but, if they all join together and
put their shoulders to it, they'll lift more than you think."

But this contingency was too vague to be feared.  A quarter of an hour
later, Mr. Lathrop entered the building with his brisk step, bidding
such children as he met a pleasant good afternoon, and hanging his hat
on the peg in the wall behind his desk, rang the bell for the children
to assemble, and took his seat in his chair on the platform.

The observant instructor quickly saw that something unusual was in the
wind.  There was a score of signs that he detected in the course of a
few minutes, but he could have no idea what it all meant.  He was on
the alert, however, and did not remain long in suspense.

The first hint was the sound of loud and angry buzzing within his desk.
While wondering what it meant, and in doubt whether to investigate, he
observed a hornet emerging through the key-hole.  Before it could shake
itself free, he shoved him back with his key, which was inserted and
turned about, so effectually blocking the opening, that the insects
were held secure.

The teacher read the whole story, and it needed only a brief study of
Tom Britt's actions to make sure that he was the guilty one.

Much to the disappointment of the boys, Mr. Lathrop seemed to find no
occasion for opening his desk.  It remained closed through the whole
afternoon and, when the moment for dismissal arrived, the only one to
remain was Tom Britt, who, while conducting himself fairly well, had
made a bad failure with every recitation.  His mind seemed to be too
pre-occupied with some other matter to absorb book knowledge.

The boys loitered around the playground, waiting to see the end of it
all.  Tom sat with his hands supporting his head, and his elbow on the
desk, morose, sullen and disappointed.

"I wonder if he suspects anything," he muttered; "I don't see how he
can, for nobody told him.  It's queer he has never opened his desk all
the afternoon.  I never knew him to do anything like that
