which Melville regarded him, and, for some reason, it did not please
him.

"You have lost your appetite, Mr. Melville," he said, lightly. "You have
been looking at me until--egad!--if I were a vain man, I should conclude
there was something striking about my appearance."

"I won't gainsay that, Colonel," answered Melville, adroitly. "I confess
I am not very hungry, and I will further confess that I have something
on my mind."

"Indeed! Better make me your father confessor," said the colonel, whose
suspicion or annoyance was removed by this ready reply.

"So I may, after a while," said Melville.

He took the hint, and ceased to regard the colonel.

The latter made himself generally social, and generally popular.

The stage drove round to the door after breakfast, and there was the
usual bustle, as the passengers bestowed themselves inside.

George Melville had intended to watch narrowly the landlord and Col.
Warner, to detect, if possible, the secret understanding which must
exist between them. But he was deprived of an opportunity, for the very
good reason that the landlord had disappeared, and was not again seen
before their departure.

The driver gathered up his reins, cracked his whip, and the stage
started. Herbert looked at George Melville a little anxiously, not
knowing what course he had decided to take. They two, it will be
remembered, were the only ones who knew of the intended attack.

Before the stage started, Melville quietly took the opportunity to hand
his pocketbook to Herbert, saying, briefly: "It will be safer with you
in case of an attack."

"But won't it be considered suspicious that you have no money about
you?" suggested Herbert.

"I have a roll of bills in my pocket-fifty dollars," answered Melville.

They had no further opportunity of speaking, as one of the passengers
came up where they were standing.

Herbert had already taken his seat in the coach, when his employer said:
"Herbert, wouldn't you like to ride outside with the driver?"

"Yes, sir," answered Herbert, promptly, for he understood, that this was
Mr. Melville's wish.

"It will give us more room, and you will have a better view."

"Yes, sir; I shall like it."

In a quick manner Herbert made the change, taking care not to look
significantly at Melville, as some boys might have done, and thus
excited suspicion.

For the first mile there was very little conversation.

Then Col. Warner spoke.

"Well, gentlemen," he said, "we are fairly on our way. Let us hope
nothing will mar our pleasure."

"Do you anticipate anything?" asked George Melville.

"I! Why should I? We have a skillful driver, and I guarantee he won't
tip us over."

"Mr. Melville was, perhaps, referring to the chance of the stage being
stopped by some enterprising road agent," suggested Parker.

"Oho! Sits the wind in that quarter?" said the Colonel, laughing
lightly. "Not the least chance of that--that is, the chance is very
slight."

"You spoke differently yesterday," said the German capitalist.

"Did I? I didn't mean it, I assure you. We are as safe here as if we
were riding in the interior of New York. I suppose I was only whiling
away a few idle minutes."

"I am glad to hear it," said the German. "I shouldn't like to meet any
of these gentlemen."

"Nor I," answered Melville; "but I am prepared to give him or them a
warm reception."

As he spoke he drew a revolver from his pocket. He sat next to the door,
and in an exposed situation.

"Put up your shooting iron, Mr. Melville," said Col. Warner, exhibiting
a slight shade of annoyance. "Let me exchange places with you. I should
prefer the post of danger, if' there is any."

"You are very kind, Colonel," said Melville, quietly, "but I don't care
to change. I am quite satisfied with my seat."

"But, my dear sir, I insist--" said the Colonel, making a motion to
rise.

"Keep your seat, Colonel! I insist upon staying where I am," answered
Melville.

He was physically far from formidable, this young man, but there was a
resolute ring in his voice that showed he was in earnest.

"Really, my dear sir," said the Colonel, trying to conceal his
annoyance, "you have been quite misled by my foolish talk. I did not
suppose you were so nervous."

"Possibly I may have a special reason for being so," returned George
Melville.

"What do you mean?" demanded the Colonel, quickly. "If you have, we are
all interested, and ought to know it."

"The Colonel is right," said the German. "If you know of any danger, it
is only fair to inform us all."

"I am disposed to agree with you, gentlemen," said Melville. "Briefly,
then, I have good reason to think that this company of passengers has
been marked for plunder."

Col. Warner started, but, quickly recovering himself, he laughed
uneasily.

"Tush!" he said, "I put no faith in it. Some one has been deceiving you,
my friend."

But the other passengers took it more seriously.

"You evidently know something that we do not," said Parker.

"I do," answered Melville.

Col. Warner looked at him searchingly, but did not speak.

Now was the time to test George Melville's nerve. He was about to take a
bold step.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I regret to say that I have every reason to
believe there is a man in this stage who is in league with the road
agents."

This statement naturally made a sensation.

There were seven passengers, and each regarded the rest with new-born
suspicion. There seemed, on the whole, about as much reason to suspect
one man as another, and each, with the exception of Melville, found
himself looked upon with distrust.

"Pooh, Melville! You must have had bad dreams!" said Col. Warner, who
was the first to recover his self-possession. "Really, I give you credit
for a first-class sensation. As for you, gentlemen, you may take stock
in this cock-and-bull story, if you like; I shall not. I, for one, have
no fear of my fellow passengers. I regard them all as gentlemen, and
shall not allow myself to be disturbed by any silly fears."

The air of calm composure with which the Colonel spoke served to
tranquilize the rest of the passengers, who wished to put credit in his
assurance.

"The Colonel speaks sensibly," said Mr. Parker, "and unless Mr. Melville
assigns a reason for his remarkable belief, I am disposed to think we
have taken alarm too quick."

"Of course, of course; all sensible men will think so," said the
Colonel. "My friend, we shall be tempted to laugh at you if you insist
on entertaining us with such hobgoblin fancies. My advice is, to put up
that weapon of yours, and turn your attention to the scenery, which
I can assure you, gentlemen, is well worthy of your admiration. Just
observe the walls of yonder canyon, and the trees growing on the
points."

"Gentlemen," said Melville, "I should be glad to take the view of the
last speaker, if I had not positive proof that he is the man who has
agreed to deliver us into the hands of a road agent within the space of
half an I hour!"

"Sir, you shall answer for this!" exclaimed the Colonel, furiously, as
he struggled to secure the weapon, his face livid with passion.

But two passengers, one the German, who, though short, was very
powerful, forcibly prevented him.




CHAPTER XXVI. A COUNCIL OF WAR.



"Are you sure of what you say?" asked a passenger, turning with a
puzzled look from George Melville, who, in the midst of the general
excitement produced by his revelation, sat, not unmoved indeed, but
comparatively calm. Courage and physical strength are by no means
inseparable, and this frail young man, whose strength probably was not
equal to Herbert's, was fearless in the face of peril which would daunt
many a stalwart six-footer.

In reply to this very natural question, George Melville repeated the
essential parts of the conversation which had taken place between Col.
Warner and the landlord.

Col. Warner's countenance changed, and he inwardly execrated the
imprudence that had made his secret plan known to one of the intended
victims.

"Is this true, Col. Warner?" asked Parker.

"No, it's a lie!" returned the colonel, with an oath.

"Gentlemen!" said George Melville, calmly, "you can choose which you
will believe. I will only suggest that this man managed very adroitly
to find out where each one of us kept his money. You can also consider
whether I have any cause to invent this story."

It was clear that the passengers were inclined to put faith in
Melville's story.

"Gentlemen!" said the Colonel, angrily, "I never was so insulted in my
life. I am a man of wealth, traveling on business; I am worth a quarter
of a million at least. To associate me with road agents, whom I have as
much reason to fear as you, is most ridiculous. This young man may be
well-meaning, but he is under a most extraordinary hallucination. It is
my belief that he dreamed the nonsense he has been retailing to you."

"Ask the driver to stop the stage," said Mr. Benson, a gentleman from
Philadelphia. "If Mr. Melville's story is trustworthy, we may at any
time reach the spot where the highwayman is lurking. We must have a
general consultation, and decide what is to be done."

This proposal was approved, and the driver drew up the stage.

"I don't propose to remain in the company of men who so grossly misjudge
me," said the Colonel, with dignity, as he made a motion to leave his
fellow passengers.

"Stay here, sir!" said Mr. Benson, in a tone of authority. "We cannot
spare you yet."

"Do you dare to detain me, sir?" exclaimed Warner, menacingly.

"Yes, we do," said the German. "Just stay where you are, Mr. Colonel,
till we decide what to do."

As each one of the company had produced his revolver, the Colonel
thought it prudent to obey.

"I am disgusted with this fooling," he said, "You're all a pack of
cowards."

"Driver," said George Melville, "has this stage ever been robbed?"

"Several times," the driver admitted.

"When was the last time?"

"Two months since."

"Where did it happen?"

"About a mile further on."

"Did you ever see this gentleman before?" he asked, pointing to the
colonel.

"Yes," answered the driver, reluctantly.

"When did he last ride with you?"

"On the day the stage was robbed," answered the driver.

The passengers exchanged glances, and then, as by a common impulse,
all turned to Col. Warner, to see how he would take this damaging
revelation. Disguise it as he might, he was clearly disconcerted.

"Is this true, colonel?" asked Benson.

"Yes, it is," answered Col. Warner, with some hesitation. "I was robbed,
with the rest. I had four hundred dollars in my wallet, and the road
agent made off with it."

"And yet you just now pooh-poohed the idea of a robbery, and said such
things were gone by."

"I say so now," returned the colonel, sullenly. "I have a good deal of
money with me, but I am willing to take my chances."

"Doubtless. Your money would be returned to you, in all probability, if,
as we have reason to believe, you have a secret understanding with the
thieves who infest this part of the country."

"Your words are insulting. Let go my arm, sir, or it will be the worse
for you."

"Softly, softly, my good friend," said the German. "Have you any
proposal to make, Mr. Melville?"

"Only this. Let us proceed on our journey, but let each man draw his
revolver, and be ready to use it, if need be."

"What about the colonel?"

"He must go along with us. We cannot have him communicating with our
enemies outside."

"Suppose I refuse, sir?"

"Then, my very good friend, I think we shall use a little force," said
the German, carelessly pointing his weapon at the captive.

"I will go upon compulsion," said the colonel, "but I protest against
this outrage. I am a wealthy capitalist from Chicago, who knows no
more about road agents than you do. You have been deceived by this
unsophisticated young man, who knows about as much of the world as a
four-year-old child. It's a fine mare's nest he has found."

This sneer did not disturb the equanimity of George Melville.

"I should be glad to believe the colonel were as innocent as he claims,"
he said, "but his own words, overheard last night, contradict what he
is now saying. When we have passed the spot indicated for the attack, we
will release him, and give him the opportunity he seeks of leaving our
company."

The passengers resumed their places in the stage, with the exception of
Herbert, who again took his seat beside the driver. George Melville had
not mentioned that it was Herbert, not himself, who had overheard the
conversation between the colonel and the land lord, fearing to expose
the boy to future risk.

Col. Warner sat sullenly between the German and Benson. He was evidently
ill at ease and his restless glances showed that he was intent upon some
plan of escape. Of this, however, such was the vigilance of his guards,
there did not seem much chance.

The stage kept on its way till it entered a narrow roadway, lined on one
side by a thick growth of trees.

Melville, watching the colonel narrowly, saw that, in spite of his
attempt at calmness, his excitement was at fever heat.

The cause was very evident, for at this point a tall figure bounded from
the underbrush, disguised by a black half mask, through which a pair of
black eyes blazed fiercely.

"Stop the stage!" he thundered to the driver, "or I will put a bullet
through your head."

The driver, as had been directed, instantly obeyed.




CHAPTER XXVII. COL. WARNER CHANGES FRONT.



It may seem a daring thing for one man to stop a stage full of
passengers, and require them to surrender their money and valuables, but
this has been done time and again in unsettled portions of the West. For
the most part the stage passengers are taken by surprise, and the road
agent is known to be a desperado, ready to murder in cold blood anyone
who dares oppose him.

In the present instance, however, the passengers had been warned of
their danger and were ready to meet it.

Brown--for, of course, the masked man was the landlord--saw four
revolvers leveled at him from inside the stage.

"Let go that horse, my friend, or you are a dead man!" said Conrad
Stiefel, calmly. "Two can play at your game."

Brown was taken by surprise, but he was destined to be still more
astonished.

Col. Warner protruded his head from the window, saying:

"Yes, my friend, you had better give up your little plan. It won't
work."

Such language from his confederate, on whom he fully relied, wholly
disconcerted the masked robber.

"Well, I'll be blowed!" he muttered, staring, in ludicrous perplexity,
at his fellow conspirator.

"Yes, my friend," said the colonel, "I shall really be under the
necessity of shooting you myself if you don't leave us alone. We are all
armed and resolute. I think you had better defer your little scheme."

