her that she should be well for mere tenderness.  But no, she was the
very image of health.   No man, said you, father?  Then it is a woman.
Ah! my Lady Countess is it, bent on making her match her own way?  Sir,
you are too good and upright to let a tyrannous dame like that sever
between us, though she be near of kin to us.  My mother might scruple
to cross her, but you have seen the world, sir."

"My lad, you are right in that it is a woman who stands between you and
Cis, but it is not the Countess.  None would have the right to do so,
save the maiden's own mother."

"Her mother!  You have discovered her lineage!  Can she have ought
against me?--I, your son, sir, of the Talbot blood, and not ill
endowed?"

"Alack, son, the Talbot may be a good dog but the lioness will scarce
esteem him her mate.  Riddles apart, it is proved beyond question that
our little maid is of birth as high as it is unhappy.  Thou canst be
secret, I know, Humfrey, and thou must be silent as the grave, for it
touches my honour and the poor child's liberty."

"Who is she, then?" demanded Humfrey sharply.

His father pointed to the Queen's window.  Humfrey stared at him, and
muttered an ejaculation, then exclaimed, "How and when was this known?"

Richard went over the facts, giving as few names as possible, while his
son stood looking down and drawing lines with the point of his sword.

"I hoped," ended the father, "that these five years' absence might have
made thee forget thy childish inclination;" and as Humfrey, without
raising his face, emphatically shook his head, he went on to add-- "So,
my dear son, meseemeth that there is no remedy, but that, for her peace
and thine own, thou shouldest accept this offer of brave Norreys, and
by the time the campaign is ended, they may be both safe in Scotland,
out of reach of vexing thy heart, my poor boy."

"Is it so sure that her royal lineage will be owned?" muttered Humfrey.
"Out on me for saying so!  But sure this lady hath made light enough of
her wedlock with yonder villain."

"Even so, but that was when she deemed its offspring safe beneath the
waves.  I fear me that, however our poor damsel be regarded, she will
be treated as a mere bait and tool.  If not bestowed on some foreign
prince (and there hath been talk of dukes and archdukes), she may serve
to tickle the pride of some Scottish thief, such as was her father."

"Sir! sir! how can you speak patiently of such profanation and cruelty?
Papist butchers and Scottish thieves, for the child of your hearth!
Were it not better that I stole her safely away and wedded her in
secret, so that at least she might have an honest husband?"

"Nay, his honesty would scarce be thus manifest," said Richard, "even
if the maid would consent, which I think she would not.  Her head is
too full of her new greatness to have room for thee, my poor lad. Best
that thou shouldest face the truth.  And, verily, what is it but her
duty to obey her mother, her true and veritable mother, Humfrey? It is
but making her ease harder, and adding to her griefs, to strive to
awaken any inclination she may have had for thee; and therefore it is
that I counsel thee, nay, I might command thee, to absent thyself while
it is still needful that she remain with us, passing for our daughter."

Humfrey still traced lines with his sword in the dust.  He had always
been a strong-willed though an obedient and honourable boy, and his
father felt that these five years had made a man of him, whom, in spite
of mediaeval obedience, it was not easy to dispose of arbitrarily.

"There's no haste," he muttered.  "Norreys will not go till my Lord of
Leicester's commission be made out.  It is five years since I was at
home."

"My son, thou knowest that I would not send thee from me willingly. I
had not done so ere now, but that it was well for thee to know the
world and men, and Sheffield is a mere nest of intrigue and falsehood,
where even if one keeps one's integrity, it is hard to be believed.
But for my Lord, thy mother, and my poor folk, I would gladly go with
thee to strike honest downright blows at a foe I could see and feel,
rather than be nothing better than a warder, and be driven distracted
with women's tongues.  Why, they have even set division between my Lord
and his son Gilbert, who was ever the dearest to him.  Young as he is,
methinks Diccon would be better away with thee than where the very air
smells of plots and lies."

"I trow the Queen of Scots will not be here much longer," said Humfrey.
"Men say in London that Sir Ralf Sadler is even now setting forth to
take charge of her, and send my Lord to London."

"We have had such hopes too often, my son," said Richard.  "Nay, she
hath left us more than once, but always to fall back upon Sheffield
like a weight to the ground.  But she is full of hope in her son, now
that he is come of age, and hath put to death her great foe, the Earl
of Morton."

"The poor lady might as well put her faith in--in a jelly-fish," said
Humfrey, falling on a comparison perfectly appreciated by the old
sailor.

"Heh?  She will get naught but stings.  How knowest thou?"

"Why, do none know here that King James is in the hands of him they
call the Master of Gray?"

"Queen Mary puts in him her chief hope."

"Then she hath indeed grasped a jelly-fish.  Know you not, father,
those proud and gay ones, with rose-coloured bladders and long blue
beards--blue as the azure of a herald's coat?"

"Ay, marry I do.  I remember when I was a lad, in my first voyage,
laying hold on one.  I warrant you I danced about till I was nearly
overboard, and my arm was as big as two for three days later.  Is the
fellow of that sort?  The false Scot."

"Look you, father, I met in London that same Johnstone who was one of
this lady's gentlemen at one time.  You remember him.  He breakfasted
at Bridgefield once or twice ere the watch became more strict."

"Yea, I remember him.  He was an honest fellow for a Scot."

"When he made out that I was the little lad he remembered, he was very
courteous, and desired his commendations to you and to my mother.  He
had been in Scotland, and had come south in the train of this rogue,
Gray.  I took him to see the old Pelican, and we had a breakfast aboard
there.  He asked much after his poor Queen, whom he loves as much as
ever, and when he saw I was a man he could trust, your true son, he
said that he saw less hope for her than ever in Scotland--her friends
have been slain or exiled, and the young generation that has grown up
have learned to dread her like an incarnation of the scarlet one of
Babylon.  Their preachers would hail her as Satan loosed on them, and
the nobles dread nothing so much as being made to disgorge the lands of
the Crown and the Church, on which they are battening.  As to her son,
he was fain enough to break forth from one set of tutors, and the
messages of France and Spain tickled his fancy--but he is nought.  He
is crammed with scholarship, and not without a shrewd apprehension;
but, with respect be it spoken, more the stuff that court fools are
made of than kings. It may be, as a learned man told Johnstone, that
the shock the Queen suffered when the brutes put Davy to death before
her eyes, three months ere his birth, hath damaged his constitution,
for he is at the mercy of whosoever chooses to lead him, and hath no
will of his own. This Master of Gray was at first inclined to the
Queen's party, thinking more might be got by a reversal of all things,
but now he finds the king's men so strong in the saddle, and the
Queen's French kindred like to be too busy at home to aid her, what
doth he do, but list to our Queen's offers, and this ambassage of his,
which hath a colour of being for Queen Mary's release, is verily to
make terms with my Lord Treasurer and Sir Francis Walsingham for the
pension he is to have for keeping his king in the same mind."

"Turning a son against a mother!  I marvel that honourable counsellors
can bring themselves to the like."

"Policy, sir, policy," said Humfrey.  "And this Gray maketh a fine show
of chivalry and honour, insomuch that Sir Philip Sidney himself hath
desired his friendship; but, you see, the poor lady is as far from
freedom as she was when first she came to Sheffield."

"She is very far from believing it, poor dame.  I am sorry for her,
Humfrey, more sorry than I ever thought I could be, now I have seen
more of her.  My Lord himself says he never knew her break a promise.
How gracious she is there is no telling."

"That we always knew," said Humfrey, looking somewhat amazed, that his
honoured father should have fallen under the spell of the "siren
between the cold earth and moon."

"Yes, gracious, and of a wondrous constancy of mind, and evenness of
temper," said Richard.  "Now that thy mother and I have watched her
more closely, we can testify that, weary, worn, and sick of body and of
heart as she is, she never letteth a bitter or a chiding word pass her
lips towards her servants.  She hath nothing to lose by it. Their
fidelity is proven.  They would stand by her to the last, use them as
she would, but assuredly their love must be doubly bound up in her when
they see how she regardeth them before herself.  Let what will be said
of her, son Humfrey, I shall always maintain that I never saw woman,
save thine own good mother, of such evenness of condition, and
sweetness of consideration for all about her, ay, and patience in
adversity, such as, Heaven forbid, thy mother should ever know."

"Amen, and verily amen," said Humfrey.  "Deem you then that she hath
not worked her own woe?"

"Nay, lad, what saith the Scripture, 'Judge not, and ye shall not be
judged'?  How should I know what hath passed seventeen years back in
Scotland?"

"Ay, but for present plots and intrigues, judge you her a true woman?"

"Humfrey, thou hadst once a fox in a cage.  When it found it vain to
dash against the bars, rememberest thou how it scratched away the earth
in the rear, and then sat over the hole it had made, lest we should see
it?"

"The fox, say you, sir?  Then you cannot call her ought but false."

"They tell me," said Sir Richard, "that ever since an Italian named
Machiavel wrote his Book of the Prince, statecraft hath been craft
indeed, and princes suck in deceit with the very air they breathe. Ay,
boy, it is what chiefly vexes me in the whole.  I cannot doubt that she
is never so happy as when there is a plot or scheme toward, not merely
for her own freedom, but the utter overthrow of our own gracious
Sovereign, who, if she hath kept this lady in durance, hath shielded
her from her own bloodthirsty subjects.  And for dissembling, I never
saw her equal.  Yet she, as thy mother tells me, is a pious and devout
woman, who bears her troubles thus cheerfully and patiently, because
she deems them a martyrdom for her religion. Ay, all women are riddles,
they say, but this one the most of all!"

"Thinkest thou that she hath tampered with--with that poor maiden's
faith?" asked Humfrey huskily.

"I trow not yet, my son," replied Richard;  "Cis is as open as ever to
thy mother, for I cannot believe she hath yet learnt to dissemble, and
I greatly suspect that the Queen, hoping to return to Scotland, may be
willing to keep her a Protestant, the better to win favour with her
brother and the lords of his council; but if he be such a cur as thou
sayest, all hope of honourable release is at an end.  So thou seest,
Humfrey, how it lies, and how, in my judgment, to remain here is but to
wring thine own heart, and bring the wench and thyself to sore straits.
I lay not my commands on thee, a man grown, but such is my opinion on
the matter."

"I will not disobey you, father," said Humfrey, "but suffer me to
consider the matter."




CHAPTER XVIII.

CIS OR SISTER.


  Buxtona, quae calidae celebraris nomine lymphae
  Forte mihi post hac non adeunda, Vale.

  (Buxton of whose warm waters men tell,
  Perchance I ne'er shall see thee more, Farewell.)


Thus wrote Queen Mary with a diamond upon her window pane, smiling as
she said, "There, we will leave a memento over which the admirable Dr.
Jones will gloat his philosophical soul.  Never may I see thee more,
Buxton, yet never thought I to be so happy as I have here been."

She spoke with the tenderness of farewell to the spot which had always
been the pleasantest abode of the various places of durance which had
been hers in England.  Each year she had hoped would be her last of
such visits, but on this occasion everything seemed to point to a close
to the present state of things, since not only were the negotiations
with Scotland apparently prosperous, but Lord Shrewsbury had obtained
an absolute promise from Elizabeth that she would at all events relieve
him from his onerous and expensive charge.  Thus there was general
cheerfulness, as the baggage was bestowed in carts and on beasts of
burthen, and Mary, as she stood finishing her inscription on the
window, smiled sweetly and graciously on Mistress Talbot, and gave her
joy of the arrival of her towardly and hopeful son, adding, "We
surprised him at the well!  May his Cis, who is yet to be found, I
trow, reward his lealty!"

That was all the notice Mary deigned to take of the former relations
between her daughter and young Talbot.  She did not choose again to beg
for secrecy when she was sure to hear that she had been forestalled,
and she was too consummate a judge of character not to have learnt
that, though she might despise the dogged, simple straightforwardness
of Richard and Susan Talbot, their honour was perfectly trustworthy.
She was able for the present to keep her daughter almost entirely to
herself, since, on the return to Sheffield, the former state of things
was resumed.  The Bridgefield family was still quartered in the
Manor-house, and Mistress Talbot continued to be, as it were, Lady
Warder to the captive in the place of the Countess, who obstinately
refused to return while Mary was still in her husband's keeping.
Cicely, as Mary's acknowledged favourite, was almost always in her
apartments, except at the meals of the whole company of Shrewsbury
kinsfolk and retainers, when her place was always far removed from that
of Humfrey.  In truth, if ever an effort might have obtained a few
seconds of private conversation, a strong sense of embarrassment and
perplexity made the two young people fly apart rather than come
together.  They knew not what they wished.  Humfrey might in his secret
soul long for a token that Cis remembered his faithful affection, and
yet he knew that to elicit one might do her life-long injury.  So,
however he might crave for word or look when out of sight of her, an
honourable reluctance always withheld him from seeking any such sign in
the short intervals when he could have tried to go beneath the surface.
On the other hand, this apparent indifference piqued her pride, and
made her stiff, cold, and almost disdainful whenever there was any
approach between them.  Her vanity might be flattered by the knowledge
that she was beyond his reach; but it would have been still more
gratified could she have discovered any symptoms of pining and
languishing after her. She might peep at him from under her eyelashes
in chapel and in hall; but in the former place his gaze always seemed
to be on the minister, in the latter he showed no signs of flagging as
a trencher companion. Both mothers thought her marvellously discreet;
but neither beheld the strange tumult in her heart, where were surging
pride, vanity, ambition, and wounded affection.

In a few days, Sir Ralf Sadler and his son-in-law Mr. Somer arrived at
Sheffield in order to take the charge of the prisoner whilst Shrewsbury
went to London.  The conferences and consultations were endless, and
harassing, and it was finally decided that the Earl should escort her
to Wingfield, and, leaving her there under charge of Sadler, should
proceed to London.  She made formal application for Mistress Cicely
Talbot to accompany her as one of her suite, and her supposed parents
could not but give their consent, but six gentlewomen had been already
enumerated, and the authorities would not consent to her taking any
more ladies with her, and decreed that Mistress Cicely must remain at
home.

"This unkindness has made the parting from this place less joyous than
I looked for," said Mary, "but courage, ma mignonne.  Soon shall I send
for thee to Scotland, and there shalt thou burst thine husk, and show
thyself in thy true colours;" and turning to Susan, "Madam, I must
commit my treasure to her who has so long watched over her."

"Your Grace knows that she is no less my treasure," said Susan.

"I should have known it well," returned the Queen, "from the innocence
and guilelessness of the damsel.  None save such a mother as Mistress
Talbot could have made her what she is.  Credit me, madam, I have
looked well into her heart, and found nought to undo there.  You have
bred her up better than her poor mother could have done, and I gladly
entrust her once more to your care, assured that your well-tried honour
will keep her in mind of what she is, and to what she may be called."

"She shall remember it, madam," said Susan.

"When I am a Queen once more," said Mary, "all I can give will seem too
poor a meed for what you have been to my child.  Even as Queen of
Scotland or England itself, my power would be small in comparison with
my will.  My gratitude, however, no bounds can limit out to me."

And with tears of tenderness and thankfulness she kissed the cheeks and
lips of good Mistress Talbot, who could not but likewise weep for the
mother thus compelled to part with her child.

The night was partly spent in caresses and promises of the brilliant
reception preparing in Scotland, with auguries of the splendid marriage
in store, with a Prince of Lorraine, or even with an Archduke.

Cis was still young enough to dream of such a lot as an opening to a
fairy land of princely glories.  If her mother knew better, she still
looked tenderly back on her beau pays de France with that halo of
brightness which is formed only in childhood and youth.  Moreover, it
might be desirable to enhance such aspiration as might best secure the
young princess from anything derogatory to her real rank, while she was
strongly warned against betraying it, and especially against any
assumption of dignity should she ever hear of her mother's release,
reception, and recognition in Scotland.  For whatever might be the
maternal longings, it would be needful to feel the way and prepare the
ground for the acknowledgment of Bothwell's daughter in Scotland, while
the knowledge of her existence in England would almost surely lead to
her being detained as a hostage.  She likewise warned the maiden never
to regard any letter or billet from her as fully read till it had been
held--without witnesses--to the fire.

Of Humfrey Talbot, Queen Mary scorned to say anything, or to utter a
syllable that she thought a daughter of Scotland needed a warning
against a petty English sailor.  Indeed, she had confidence that the
youth's parents would view the attachment as quite as undesirable for
him as for the young princess, and would guard against it for his sake
as much as for hers.

The true parting took place ere the household was astir.  Afterwards,
Mary, fully equipped for travelling, in a dark cloth riding-dress and
hood, came across to the great hall of the Manor-house, and there sat
while each one of the attendants filed in procession, as it were,
before her.  To each lady she presented some small token wrought by her
own hands.  To each gentleman she also gave some trinket, such as the
elaborate dress of the time permitted, and to each serving man or maid
a piece of money.  Of each one she gravely but gently besought pardon
for all the displeasures or offences she might have caused them, and as
they replied, kissing her hand, many of them with tears, she returned a
kiss on the brow to each woman and an entreaty to be remembered in
their prayers, and a like request, with a pressure of the hand, to each
man or boy.

It must have been a tedious ceremony, and yet to every one it seemed as
if Mary put her whole heart into it, and to any to whom she owed
special thanks they were freely paid.

The whole was only over by an hour before noon.  Then she partook of a
manchet and a cup of wine, drinking, with liquid eyes, to the health
and prosperity of her good host, and to the restoration of his family
peace, which she had so sorely, though unwittingly, disturbed.

Then she let him hand her out, once more kissing Susan Talbot and Cis,
who was weeping bitterly, and whispering to the latter, "Not over much
grief, ma petite; not more than may befit, ma mignonne."

Lord Shrewsbury lifted her on her horse, and, with him on one side and
Sir Ralf Sadler on the other, she rode down the long avenue on her way
to Wingfield.

The Bridgefield family had already made their arrangements, and their
horses were waiting for them amid the jubilations of Diccon and Ned.
The Queen had given each of them a fair jewel, with special thanks to
them for being good brothers to her dear Cis.  "As if one wanted thanks
for being good to one's own sister," said Ned, thrusting the delicate
little ruby brooch on his mother to be taken care of till his days of
foppery should set in, and he would need it for cap and plume.

"Come, Cis, we are going home at last," said Diccon.  "What! thou art
not breaking thine heart over yonder Scottish lady--when we are going
home, home, I say, and have got rid of watch and ward for ever?
Hurrah!" and he threw up his cap, and was joined in the shout by more
than one of the youngsters around, for Richard and most of the elders
were escorting the Queen out of the park, and Mistress Susan had been
summoned on some question of household stuff.  Cis, however, stood
leaning against the balustrade, over which she had leant for the last
glance exchanged with her mother, her face hidden in her hands and
kerchief, weeping bitterly, feeling as if all the glory and excitement
of the last few weeks had vanished as a dream and left her to the
dreary dulness of common life, as little insignificant Cis Talbot again.

It was Humfrey who first came near, almost timidly touched her hand,
and said, "Cheer up.  It is but for a little while, mayhap.  She will
send for thee.  Come, here is thine old palfrey--poor old Dapple. Let
me put thee on him, and for this brief time let us feign that all is as
it was, and thou art my little sister once more."

"I know not which is truth and which is dreaming," said Cis, waking up
through her tears, but resigning her hand to him, and letting him lift
her to her seat on the old pony which had been the playfellow of both.
If it had been an effort to Humfrey to prolong the word Cis into
sister, he was rewarded for it.  It gave the key-note to their
intercourse, and set her at ease with him; and the idea that her
present rustication was but a comedy instead of a reality was consoling
in her present frame of mind.  Mistress Susan, surrounded with
importunate inquirers as to household matters, and unable to escape
from them, could only see that Humfrey had taken charge of the maiden,
and trusted to his honour and his tact.  This was, however, only the
beginning of a weary and perplexing time.  Nothing could restore Cis to
her old place in the Bridgefield household, or make her look upon its
tasks, cares, and joys as she had done only a few short months ago.
Her share in them could only be acting, and she was too artless and
simple to play a part.  Most frequently she was listless, dull, and
pining, so much inclined to despise and neglect the ordinary household
occupations which befitted the daughter of the family, that her adopted
mother was forced, for the sake of her incognito, to rouse, and often
to scold her when any witnesses were present who would have thought
Mrs. Talbot's toleration of such conduct in a daughter suspicious and
unnatural.

Such reproofs were dangerous in another way, for Humfrey could not bear
to hear them, and was driven nearly to the verge of disrespect and
perilous approaches to implying that Cis was no ordinary person to be
sharply reproved when she sat musing and sighing instead of sewing
Diccon's shirts.

Even the father himself could not well brook to hear the girl blamed,
and both he and Humfrey could not help treating her with a kind of
deference that made the younger brothers gape and wonder what had come
to Humfrey on his travels "to make him treat our Cis as a born
princess."

"You irreverent varlets," said Humfrey, "you have yet to learn that
every woman ought to be treated as a born princess."

"By cock and pie," said spoilt Ned, "that beats all!  One's own sister!"

Whereupon Humfrey had the opportunity of venting a little of his
vexation by thrashing his brother for his oath, while sharp Diccon
innocently asked if men never swore by anything when at sea, and
thereby nearly got another castigation for irreverent mocking of his
elder brother's discipline.

At other times the girl's natural activity and high spirits gained the
upper hand, and she would abandon herself without reserve to the old
homely delights of Bridgefield.  At the apple gathering, she was
running about, screaming with joy, and pelting the boys with apples,
more as she had done at thirteen than at seventeen, and when called to
order she inconsistently pleaded, "Ah, mother! it is for the last time.
Do but let me have my swing!" putting on a wistful and caressing look,
which Susan did not withstand when the only companions were the three
brothers, since Humfrey had much of her own unselfishness and
self-command, resulting in a discretion that was seldom at fault.

And that discretion made him decide at a fortnight's end that his
father had been right, and that it would be better for him to absent
himself from where he could do no good, but only added to the general
perplexity, and involved himself in the temptation of betraying the
affection he knew to be hopeless.

Before, however, it was possible to fit out either Diccon or the four
men who were anxious to go under the leadership of Master Humfrey of
Bridgefield, the Earl and Countess of Shrewsbury were returning fully
reconciled.  Queen Elizabeth had made the Cavendishes ask pardon on
their knees of the Earl for their slanders; and he, in his joy, had
freely forgiven all.  Gilbert Talbot and his wife had shared in the
general reconciliation.  His elder brother's death had made him the
heir apparent, and all were coming home again, including the little
Lady Arbell, once more to fill the Castle and the Manor-house, and to
renew the free hospitable life of a great feudal chief, or of the
Queen's old courtier, with doors wide open, and no ward or suspicion.

Richard rejoiced that his sons, before going abroad, should witness the
return to the old times which had been at an end before they could
remember Sheffield distinctly.  The whole family were drawn up as usual
to receive them, when the Earl and Countess arrived first of all at the
Manor-house.

The Countess looked smaller, thinner, older, perhaps a trifle more
shrewish, but she had evidently suffered much, and was very glad to
have recovered her husband and her home.

"So, Susan Talbot," was her salutation, "you have thriven, it seems.
You have been playing the part of hostess, I hear."

"Only so far as might serve his Lordship, madam."

"And the wench, there, what call you her?  Ay, Cicely.  I hear the
Scottish Queen hath been cockering her up and making her her bedfellow,
till she hath spoilt her for a reasonable maiden.  Is it so?  She looks
it."

"I trust not, madam," said Susan.

"She grows a strapping wench, and we must find her a good husband to
curb her pride.  I have a young man already in my eye for her."

"So please your Ladyship, we do not think of marrying her as yet,"
returned Susan, in consternation.

"Tilly vally, Susan Talbot, tell me not such folly as that.  Why, the
maid is over seventeen at the very least!  Save for all the coil this
Scottish woman and her crew have made, I should have seen her well
mated a year ago."

Here was a satisfactory prospect for Mistress Susan, bred as she had
been to unquestioning submission to the Countess.  There was no more to
be said on that occasion, as the great lady passed on to bestow her
notice on others of her little court.

Humfrey meantime had been warmly greeted by the younger men of the
suite, and one of them handed him a letter which filled him with
eagerness.  It was from an old shipmate, who wrote, not without
sanction, to inform him that Sir Francis Drake was fitting out an
expedition, with the full consent of the Queen, to make a descent upon
the Spaniards, and that there was no doubt that if he presented himself
at Plymouth, he would obtain either the command, or at any rate the
lieutenancy, of one of the numerous ships which were to be
commissioned.  Humfrey was before all else a sailor.  He had made no
engagement to Sir John Norreys, and many of the persons engaged on this
expedition were already known to him.  It was believed that the attack
was to be upon Spain itself, and the notion filled him with ardour and
excitement that almost drove Cicely out of his mind, as he laid the
proposal before his father.

Richard was scarcely less excited.  "You young lads are in luck," he
said.  "I sailed for years and never had more than a chance brush with
the Don; never the chance of bearding him on his own shores!"

"Come with us, then, father," entreated Humfrey.  "Sir Francis would be
overjoyed to see you.  You would get the choicest ship to your share."

"Nay, nay, my boy, tempt me not; I cannot leave your mother to meet all
the coils that may fall in her way!  No; I'm too old.  I've lost my sea
legs.  I leave thee to win the fame, son Humfrey!"

The decision was thus made, and Humfrey and Diccon were to start
together for London first, and then for Plymouth, the second day after
a great festival for the wedding of the little Alethea, daughter of
Gilbert, Lord Talbot--still of very tender age--to the young heir of
Arundel.  The Talbot family had been precluded from holding festival
for full fourteen years, or indeed from entertaining any guests, save
the Commissioners sent down to confer from time to time with the
captive Queen, so that it was no wonder that they were in the highest
possible spirits at their release, and determined to take the first
opportunity of exercising the gorgeous hospitality of the Tudor times.

Posts went out, riding round all the neighbourhood with invitations.
The halls were swept and adorned with the best suit of hangings.  All
the gentlemen, young and old, all the keepers and verdurers, were put
in requisition to slaughter all the game, quadruped and biped, that
fell in their way, the village women and children were turned loose on
the blackberries, cranberries, and bilberries, and all the ladies and
serving-women were called on to concoct pasties of many stories high,
subtilties of wonderful curiosity, sweetmeats and comfits, cakes and
marchpanes worthy of Camacho's wedding, or to deck the halls with green
boughs, and weave garlands of heather and red berries.

Cis absolutely insisted, so that the heads of the household gave way,
on riding out with Richard and Humfrey when they had a buck to mark
down in Rivelin Chase.  And she set her heart on going out to gather
cranberries in the park, flinging herself about with petulant
irritation when Dame Susan showed herself unwilling to permit a
proceeding which was thought scarcely becoming in any well-born damsel
of the period.  "Ah, child, child! thou wilt have to bear worse
restraints than these," she said, "if ever thou comest to thy
greatness."

Cis made no answer, but threw herself into a chair and pouted.

The next morning she did not present herself at the usual hour; but
just as the good mother was about to go in quest of her to her chamber,
a clear voice came singing up the valley--


          "Berries to sell! berries to sell!
           Berries fresh from moorland fell!"


And there stood a girl in peasant dress, with short petticoats, stout
shoes soaked in dew, a round face under black brows, and cheeks glowing
in morning freshness; and a boy swung the other handle of the basket
overflowing with purple berries.

It was but a shallow disguise betrayed by the two roguish faces, and
the good mother was so pleased to see Cis smile merrily again, that she
did not scold over the escapade.

Yet the inconsistent girl hotly refused to go up to the castle and help
to make pastry for her mother's bitter and malicious foe, and Sir
Richard shook his head and said she was in the right on't, and should
not be compelled.  So Susan found herself making lame excuses, which
did not avert a sharp lecture from the Countess on the cockering of her
daughter.

