
"There is too much risk."

"Not at all. The distance is short, and we can whistle to each other
every few minutes. Then, you know, as we shall be looking for each
other, we cannot lose ourselves in these still woods. The minute I get
sight of the river I can tell whether we are above or below Tim."

Howard would not consent at first, but his cousin set forth the
advantages of the plan so eloquently that he finally agreed. Arranging
their signals and manner of proceeding, the boys, therefore, separated.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

BACK TO CAMP.


The hill which the boys proposed to pass around was about a quarter of a
mile in length and but slightly less in breadth--much greater than
either of them suspected when they set out. It rose like a peak to the
height of several hundred feet, as if it were an offshoot from the main
ridge of hills, left to flourish by itself.

Howard walked slowly along, after glancing back at his cousin until the
intervening wood concealed him from view, when he gave a short, sharp
whistle, which was immediately answered. Then, appreciating the
necessity of haste, he quickened his footsteps.

As he advanced the hills assumed proportions of which he had not
dreamed, and that raised in his mind strong doubts as to the wisdom of
separating from his companion. He would not have done it had not the
latter urged him so. Misgivings now arose in the mind of the boy. He
looked upon his duty as that of restraining and tempering Elwood's
impulsiveness. He had done so several times to his manifest advantage;
but on this day, as Howard looked back, it really appeared as if he had
bidden good-by to his senses. Their separation from Tim was almost
criminal in its foolishness, and yet he had scarcely raised an
objection; and now, was not the last proceeding still more imprudent? As
it stood, the three members of the little party who should never have
been out of each other's sight, were now a good distance from each
other, and that, too, when in a hostile country.

From these rather sad reflections Howard was roused by the faint,
echoing whistle of Elwood.

"He is all right," thought he, feeling much relieved, as he placed his
fingers to his mouth and returned the whistle. "We are both now passing
around the hill, so that we cannot get further apart, and can keep
within call all the time."

Admonished by the lateness of the hour, Howard almost ran. He grew
somewhat impatient at the unexpected extent of the hill; but finally he
passed beyond the southern point, and as he stood and listened, he heard
the murmur of the river--proof that it was close at hand.

"Now," thought he, "if Elwood will only hurry, we have a good chance of
finding Tim before he gives us up for lost."

The boy could not see that anything at all was gained by their course in
passing around the ridge. Neither of them, were in sight of the river,
and would have to advance still further before they could form any idea
of their whereabouts. He was resolved to do this in company with his
cousin, so that precisely the same thing would have been accomplished
had they remained together.

Howard having hurried a great deal, thought it likely that he was some
distance in advance of his cousin. He stood some minutes listening for
his signals, and then began walking toward the northern end of the hill
that he might meet him as he came around. He observed as he advanced
that they increased in rocky ruggedness, and could see that it was quite
a feat to pass through them.

Going some distance he paused again, and listened intently, but nothing
beside the deep murmur of the woods reached his ear.

"What can it mean?" he finally asked himself, as a vague alarm crept
over him. "We must be much closer together than we were before, and I
haven't heard him whistle for the last half-hour."

He began to doubt whether it was best to proceed further or not. It
might serve only to mislead in case Elwood was searching for him. Still
hearing nothing to indicate the location of his friend, he made the
signal himself--a long, screeching whistle, that rang out in the solemn
stillness with a penetrating clearness that sent the chills over him
from head to foot.

"He must hear that if he is within a mile," was his reflection, as he
leaned his head forward and listened for the first approach of the
answering sound.

Ten, fifteen, twenty minutes passed away, but nothing was heard, and the
poor boy looked around in sore alarm.

"Can it be that Elwood is jesting?" he asked himself. "He would not do
so if he knew what I am suffering."

Howard was now in great distress. He could not decide what to do. If he
advanced he could feel no assurance of meeting his friend, while a
retreat was equally hopeless.

Where was Elwood? Had he wandered off among the hills, tempted by the
wild scenery, and had he lost his way? Was he searching for his cousin?
Or had he been found by Indians?

The last inquiry had been rising in Howard's mind for a half-hour, but
he had resolutely forced it down again, until he could keep it away no
longer. He could find no other reason to account for the silence, and
failure to answer his call. The whistle which he had given must have
spread miles in every direction--so far that Elwood could not have got
beyond its range had the course of both been precisely opposite. No; it
must----

But, hark! A faint, tremulous whistle comes to his ear. It is far away
and sounds among the hills behind, as though it had labored up from some
cave or chasm miles distant. Howard held his breath, and as he
anticipated, it came again so faintly and distantly that had he been
walking he could not have heard it.

On both occasions it sounded behind him among the hills, though its
tremulous faintness made it appear as though it came from far up in the
air, or down deep in some of the gorges of the hills--so uncertain was
the exact point of its starting.

Poor Howard was now in a dilemma. Whether to attempt to follow up the
signal or to go on to the river and search out Tim O'Rooney and the
Newfoundland was a question which was difficult to decide. But his
eagerness to find his cousin led him on into the hills, until he had
penetrated quite a distance. He then paused and listened for the signal,
but none was ever to come to his ears again.

Howard repeated the whistle over and over, and finally fired his gun;
but both were equally fruitless. He waited where he was until dark, when
with a sad heart he withdrew and resumed his tramp toward the river.
Gloomy indeed were his meditations, as he reflected on the occurrences
of the day, and there was scarcely anything he would not do, if by any
means he could recall _his_ part since he landed upon the main shore.

In the course of half an hour he reached the river, and looked intently
out into the semi-darkness to see whether he could recognize anything
familiar; but so far as he was able to see, all was strange, from which
he concluded that he had struck at a point lower down than where Tim had
been left.

He therefore began making his way south, that is, toward the source of
the river, after halting and listening for some sound that might tell
something either of Tim or Elwood. Suddenly a threatening growl startled
him, and then came the welcome bark of Terror, and the next moment the
dog was frolicking around him and showing his delight in the most
extravagant manner.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

WAITING AND WATCHING.


"Worrah! worrah! but this is a fine scare you've been givin' Tim
O'Rooney, so me uncle said whin they towld him his wife was coming over
to Ameriky to see him. Here I've been awake fur the last two hours,
jist, looking and expacting you to come back, and thinking the red
colored gintleman had carried you away entirely----"

Howard impatiently interrupted him.

"Have you seen or heard anything of Elwood?"

"No-o-o!" replied Tim, his answer rising and falling in a circumflex
through a half-dozen notes of the scale.

_"Then he is lost!"_

"What?" fairly shrieked the Irishman.

"He is lost in the woods."

Howard had little heart to go over the experiences of the afternoon. He
simply told his friend that he and Elwood had separated on their return,
and he had been unable to find him again.

"What did you separate for?" asked the listener.

"Because I was a fool; but O, Tim, there is no use of regretting what
has been done. If Elwood is lost, I shall never leave this place."

After a while Howard became more composed, and they conversed rationally
upon the best plan for them to follow. Tim O'Rooney was strenuous in his
belief that Elwood had wandered off among the hills, and finding it
growing dark, had sought some secure shelter for the night. He was sure
that he would give vigorous signs of his whereabouts as soon as day
dawned.

There was something in the daring nature of the boy that made it
probable that Tim was right. Tempted out of his path by some singular or
unexpected sight, he had wandered away until he found it too dark to
return, and so had made the best of the matter and camped in some tree,
or beneath the ledge of some projecting rock.

Such was the theory of Tim O'Rooney, and so ingeniously did he enforce
it that Howard could not avoid its plausibility. None knew better than
he the impulsive nature of the boy, and such an act upon his part would
be in perfect keeping with similar exploits.

There was but one thing that raised a doubt in the mind of Howard--and
slight as was this, it was enough to give him sore uneasiness, and at
times almost to destroy hope. At the time the boys separated, Elwood had
shown a great anxiety to reach Tim, and proposed his plan in the belief
that it would bring them together the more quickly.

This made it seem improbable to Howard that he would have allowed
anything to divert him from his course unless his personal safety caused
him to do so; but Tim said that if such were the case they would have
heard his gun.

"Do you s'pose he's the boy to lit a wild animal or any of them red
gintlemen step up to him without his tachin' thim manners? But he's the
youngster that wouldn't do the same. You'd hear that gun of his cracking
away as long as there was any lift for him to crack."

"It may be as you think, Tim, but I believe it is worse. Suppose he is
in the hands of some of these wandering bands of Indians."

"S'pose he isn't."

"We have done that; but let us face the worst. If he has been taken away
by them, what shall we do?"

"Hunt him up."

"That is true, but how that is to be done is the difficulty. If we only
had Shasta with us."

"Arrah, now, if ye'd had him ye'd've niver gone thramping off in the
woods and having me alone here with the dog. The red gintleman knowed
what was best for us, and do ye mind, he kept his eye upon yez all the
time."

Howard had thought the same thing a score of times since noon, and there
was no need of his being told how the Pah Utah would have acted had he
remained with them.

"I thinks Mr. Shasta isn't a great many miles off. P'rhaps," added Tim,
significantly, "he's kapin' watch upon us and will come to our help in
our throuble."

But the contingency, to Howard at least, was too remote for him to build
any hopes upon it. It seemed more probable that the Indian's friendship
had led him much further out of the way than they had suspected, and
that he was now many a long mile off, speeding toward home.

"He may find out that the youngster is wid 'em," added Tim, "whin he
will hasten to his relaaf."

"That seems the most likely."

"There's but one thing agin it."

"And what is that?"

But the Irishman was silent. The boy repeated his question.

"It's bad--let it be."

But Howard insisted.

"Wal, you know, they may--wal--_put him out the way_."

"O Tim!" groaned Howard, "that cannot be, that cannot be!"

"I hopes not, but there's no telling what these sarpints may take into
their heads to do. They're a bad set of craytures, always barring Mr.
Shasta, and I'd've thought a good daal more of the same if he'd only
staid a few days longer wid us."

"He thought we had enough sense to take care of ourselves, after he had
seen us through the most dangerous part of our journey, otherwise he
would have remained with us to the end. But, as I said a minute ago, it
does no good for us to lament what cannot be helped. As soon as it is
light we must go up among the hills with Terror and make a hunt for
Elwood."

"Yees spake the truth. The dog may be smarter than we is, and I'm
thinkin' it wouldn't have to be very smart to be in that same fix, and
we'll sarch till we finds out something about him."

"It is fortunate for poor Elwood that the night is so mild and
pleasant."

"Fort'nit for ourselves, be the same towken; for without our fire we'd
be rather cool when we slept, and the cold would keep us awake all
night."

"But we have the blanket with us, and that would protect us at any time,
no matter how cold it might be."

"Yis," assented Tim, with a great sigh. "If I only had me pipe under way
I'd faal somewhat more comfortable, barring the worriment I faals at the
absence of the youngster. May God watch over him through the darkniss!"

"Amen!" was this reverent response of Howard.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE SEARCH.


All through the night Tim O'Rooney and Howard Lawrence sat in close
consultation. Hunger and sleep were alike unthought of. Elwood Brandon
was lost, and that was all of which they could think or speak. How they
longed for the morning, and how impatient they were to be on the hunt!
It seemed to Howard as if he could go leaping and flying down the chasms
and gorges among the hills, and never tire until he had hunted out and
brought back his cousin. Where could he be? If nestling in the branches
of a tree, or hid away among the rocks, was he asleep? Or if awake, of
what was he thinking? Did he believe that Howard was searching for him?
Or did he imagine him also lost? It would not be reasonable to suppose
that he had any suspicion of his finding Tim O'Rooney.

If in the hands of California Indians----But it would be vain to trace
out all the thoughts and speculations that ran through the head of the
boy. Some of them were of the wildest and most grotesque character, and
would assume a ludicrous phase to one whose mind was not in such a whirl
of excitement and distress.

In the gloom of the wood the darkness was so intense that neither Tim
nor Howard could distinguish each other, though only a few feet apart.
The Newfoundland lay close to his master, seemingly sound asleep, but
more heedful than the two of the approach of danger.

Occasionally through the night the call of some wild animal was
heard--sometimes distant and sometimes so near that they started to
their feet and were about to enter their canoe and shove out into the
stream; but when it came no more they were reassured. Then something
like the report of a gun came faintly up the river to their ears.

These sounds only served to render the night more gloomy and lonely, and
to make the daylight the more welcome.

"Now let's be off," said Howard, as soon as it was light enough to
distinguish each other's faces.

"We must find some means of remembering this place, or we'll never see
the canoe agin, and will be obliged to sail into San Francisco on fut."

The boat was drawn entirely out of the water and covered as much as
possible with leaves and undergrowth; for it was a loss that under any
circumstances they could not sustain. The feat of marking the place so
that they could readily return to it from any direction was more
difficult; but Howard finally hit upon quite an ingenious scheme. They
waited until the sun had approached near enough to the horizon that they
could tell precisely the point where it would appear, and then turning
their backs against it they walked forward until they reached the hills
where Elwood had disappeared. Here they noticed the character and
formation of the rocks so particularly that they could recognize them
the moment they saw them. Thus the hills were such a conspicuous
landmark as to be seen from a great distance; and, as they did not
intend to go out of their sight, all they had to do was to hunt till
they found this spot, and then walk due east.

All this was agreed upon, and they were among the hills just as the sun
was coming up the horizon. Here, after whistling and shouting for
sometime without receiving any response, they concluded to search for
the point where the boys separated. This was quite distant, and over an
hour was required to find the place, and when it was discovered Howard
could not be positive that he was right.

But as time was of the greatest importance, they pressed on, the dog
snuffing the ground as though he had scented the footprints, but he
failed to follow them with certainty. Several hundred yards brought them
to an opening in the hills just broad enough to admit the body of a man.
It was not a tunnel-like opening, but a rent, as if the hills had been
pulled a few feet asunder by the power of an earthquake.

The two paused in doubt before this.

"He went in there," said Tim. "He couldn't help it, no matter how great
his hurry."

"I am half disposed to believe you; at any rate let us follow it some
ways."

Terror was running over the ground, as though he had made a discovery,
and he finally whisked forward out of sight.

"That looks as if he were upon his trail."

"Yis, or somebody ilse's; maybe some of the rid gintlemen has took his
marnin' walk in this direction."

They followed the path with caution, and were surprised the further they
advanced. It wound around and among the rocks, which came so close
together as to forbid the passage of a man, and the sides never
withdrawing more than a dozen feet.

"It looks as though it had been made on purpose," said Tim, gazing
around him in admiration.

Finally, it was broken up among the hills, after winding through every
point of the compass for fully an eighth of a mile. It gradually rose
from its commencement--occasionally interrupted by sharp ascents--until
its termination, when they found they had reached no mean elevation.

Still the rocks rose on every hand, and shut out their view of the
surrounding country, but showed them a specimen of the wild scenery
produced in California. The interior of the hills was cut up by chasms,
gorges and ravines, and they heard, but did not see, the rush of a small
stream of water.

They stood in silence a few moments and then Howard said:

"If he is lost in here there is no need of us looking for him."

"And why not?"

"We might search till we died of old age, and never find the least trace
of him."

"And might discover the poor youngster's body the first half-hour we
spint in looking."
