to make the "clients" feel comfortable and yet slightly awed by the
ancient atmosphere of mysticism. In the dim light, they looked fairly
impressive, but she knew that if the lights were brighter the
shabbiness would show.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Maybe you could use a redecorating job, then, Doc," she said. With a
gesture born of sudden impulse, she reached into her purse and pulled
out an envelope and pressed it into the man's hands. He started to
protest, but she cut him off. "No, Doc; I want you to have it. You
earned it.

"That San Juan-New York flight, remember?" she went on hurriedly. "You
said not to take it, remember? Well, I ... I sort of forgot about what
you'd said. You know. Anyway, I got a ticket and was ready to go when
the flight was suddenly delayed. Routine, they said. Checking the
engines. But I'd never heard of any such routine as that. I remembered
what you told me, Doc, and I got scared.

"After an hour, they put another plane into service; they were still
working on the other one. I was still worried, so I decided to wait
till the next day.

"I guess you read what happened."

He closed his eyes and nodded slowly. "I read."

"Doc, I'd've been on that flight if you hadn't warned me. All the
money in the world isn't enough to pay for that." The oddly worried
look had come back into her eyes. "Doc, I don't know how you knew that
ship was going to go, and I won't ask. I don't want to know. But, ...
one thing: Was it _me_ they were after?"

_She thinks someone blew up the ship_, he thought. _She thinks I heard
about the plot some way._ For an instant he hesitated, then:

"No, Susan; they weren't after you. No one was trying to kill you.
Don't worry about it."

Relief washed over her face. "O.K., Doc; if you say so. Look, I've got
to run now, but we've got to sit down and have a few drinks together,
now that I'm back. And ... Doc--"

"Yes?"

"Anytime you need anything--if I can ever help you--you let me know,
huh?"

"Certainly, my dear. And don't you worry about anything. The stars are
all on your side right now."

She smiled, patted his hand, and then was gone in a flash of gold and
honey. Dr. Joachim looked at the door that had closed behind her, then
he looked down at the envelope in his hands. He opened it gently and
took out the sheaf of bills. Fifteen hundred dollars!

He smiled and shoved the money into his pocket. After all, he _was_ a
professional fortuneteller, even if he didn't like that particular
label, and he _had_ saved her life, hadn't he?

He returned to the small back room, sat down again at the typer, and,
after a minute, began typing again.

When he was finished, he addressed an envelope and put the letter
inside.

It was signed with his legal name: _Peter J. Forsythe_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It required less than two hours for that letter to end up at its
destination in a six-floor brick building, a rather old-fashioned
affair that stood among similar structures in a lower-middle-class
section of Arlington, Virginia, hardly a hop-skip-and-jump from the
Pentagon, and not much farther from the Capitol.

The letter was addressed to _Mr. J. Harlan Balfour, President, The
Society for Mystical and Metaphysical Research, Inc._, but Mr. Balfour
was not at the Society's headquarters at the time, having been called
to Los Angeles to address a group who were awaiting the Incarnation of
God.

Even if he had been there, the letter wouldn't have reached him first.
All mail was sent first to the office of the Executive Secretary, Mr.
Brian Taggert. Most of it--somewhat better than ninety-nine per
cent--went directly on to Mr. Balfour's desk, if it was so addressed;
Brian Taggert would never have been so cruel as to deprive Mr. Balfour
of the joy of sorting through the thousands of crackpot letters in
search of those who had the true spark of mysticism which so
fascinated Mr. Balfour.

Mr. Balfour was a crackpot, and it was his job to take care of other
crackpots--a job he enjoyed immensely and wholeheartedly, feeling, as
he did, that that sort of thing was the only reason for the Society's
existence. Of course, Mr. Balfour never considered himself or the
others in the least bit crackpottish, in which he was just as much in
error as he was in his assumption of the Society's _raison d'etre_.

Ninety per cent of the members of the Society for Mystical and
Metaphysical Research were just what you would expect them to be.
Anyone who was "truly interested in the investigation of the
supranormal", as the ads in certain magazines put it, could pay five
dollars a year for membership, which, among other things, entitled
him to the Society's monthly magazine, _The Metaphysicist_, a
well-printed, conservative-looking publication which contained
articles on everything from the latest flying saucer report to careful
mathematical evaluations of the statistical methods of the Rhine
Foundation. Within its broad field, the magazine was quite catholic in
its editorial policy.

These members constituted a very effective screen for the real work of
the society, work carried on by the "core" members, most of whom
weren't even listed on the membership rolls. And yet, it was this
group of men and women who made the Society's title true.

Mr. Brian Taggert was a long way from being a crackpot. The big,
dark-haired, dark-eyed, hawknosed man sat at his desk in his office on
the fifth floor of the Society's building and checked over the mail.
Normally, his big wrestler's body was to be found quietly relaxed on
the couch that stood against a nearby wall. Not that he was in any way
averse to action; he simply saw no virtue in purposeless action. Nor
did he believe in the dictum of Miles Standish; if he wanted a thing
done, he sent the man most qualified to do it, whether that was
himself or someone else.

When he came to the letter from Coney Island, New York, he read it
quickly and then jabbed at a button on the intercom switchboard in his
desktop. He said three syllables which would have been meaningless to
anyone except the few who understood that sort of verbal shorthand,
released the button, and closed his eyes, putting himself in
telepathic contact with certain of the Society's agents in New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

Across the river, in the Senate Office Building, a telephone rang in
the office of Senator Mikhail Kerotski, head of the Senate Committee
on Space Exploration. It was an unlisted, visionless phone, and the
number was known only to a very few important officials in the United
States Government, so the senator didn't bother to identify himself;
he simply said: "Hello." He listened for a moment, said, "O.K., fine,"
in a quiet voice, and cut the connection.

