leave anything undone."

"Then I will do so. I don't imagine it will do any good, but we can but
try."

Robert left the office, making up his mind to await the report of the
lawyer's visit before moving further.

That evening, the lawyer called at the house of the superintendent. Mrs.
Davis and Halbert were in the room. After a little unimportant
conversation, he said:

"Mr. Davis, may I ask the favor of a few minutes' conversation with you
in private?"

"Certainly," said the superintendent, quite in the dark as to the
business which had called his guest to the house. He led the way into
another room, and both took seats.

"I may as well say to begin with," commenced the lawyer, "that I call in
behalf of the family of the late Captain Rushton."

The superintendent started nervously.

"That boy has lost no time," he muttered to himself.

"I suppose you understand what I have to say?"

"I presume I can guess," said the superintendent, coldly. "The boy came
into my office this morning, and made a most extraordinary claim, which
I treated with contempt. Finding him persistent I ordered him out of my
office. I need not say that no sane man would for a moment put
confidence in such an incredible story or claim."

"I can't quite agree with you there," said the lawyer, quietly. "There
is nothing incredible about the story. It is remarkable, I grant, but
such things have happened before, and will again."

"I suppose you refer to the picking up of the bottle at sea."

"Yes; I fail to see what there is incredible about it. If the
handwriting can be identified as that of the late Captain Rushton, and
Robert says both his mother and himself recognized it, the story becomes
credible and will meet with general belief."

"I thought you were too sensible and practical a man," said the
superintendent, sneering, "to be taken in by so palpable a humbug. Why,
it reads like a romance."

"In spite of all that, it may be true enough," returned the lawyer,
composedly.

"You may believe it, if you please. It seems to me quite unworthy of
belief."

"Waiving that point, Robert, doubtless, acquainted you with the
statement made in the letter that Captain Rushton, just before sailing
on his last voyage, deposited with you five thousand dollars. What have
you to say to that?"

"What have I to say?" returned the superintendent. "That Captain Rushton
never possessed five thousand dollars in his life. I don't believe he
possessed one quarter of the sum."

"What authority have you for saying that? Did he make you his
confidant?" asked the lawyer, keenly.

"Yes," said the superintendent, promptly. "When last at home, he called
at my house one day, and in the course of conversation remarked that
sailors seldom saved any money. 'For instance,' said he, 'I have
followed the sea for many years, and have many times resolved to
accumulate a provision for my wife and child, but as yet I have scarcely
done more than to begin.' He then told me that he had little more than a
thousand dollars, but meant to increase that, if possible, during his
coming voyage."

To this statement Squire Paine listened attentively, fully believing it
to be an impromptu fabrication, as it really was.

"Did he say anything about what he had done with this thousand dollars
or more?" he asked.

"A part he left for his wife to draw from time to time for expenses; the
rest, I suppose, he took with him."

Mr. Paine sat silent for a moment. Things looked unpromising, he
couldn't but acknowledge, for his young client. In the absence of legal
proof, and with an adroit and unscrupulous antagonist, whose interests
were so strongly enlisted in defeating justice, it was difficult to see
what was to be done.

"I understand then, Mr. Davis," he said, finally, "that you deny the
justice of this claim?"

"Certainly I do," said the superintendent. "It is a palpable fraud. This
boy is a precocious young swindler, and will come to a bad end."

"I have a different opinion of him."

"You are deceived in him, then. I have no doubt he got up the letter
himself."

"I don't agree with you. I have seen the letter; it is in Captain
Rushton's handwriting. Moreover, I have seen the letter of the owners,
which accompanied it."

The superintendent was in a tight place, and he knew it. But there was
nothing to do but to persist in his denial.

"Then I can only say that Captain Rushton was a party to the fraud," he
said.

"You must be aware, Mr. Davis, that when the public learns the facts in
the case, the general belief will be the other way."

"I can't help that," said the other, doggedly. "Whatever the public
chooses to think, I won't admit the justice of this outrageous claim."

"Then I have only to bid you good-evening," said the lawyer, coldly,
affecting not to see the hand which the superintendent extended. The
latter felt the slight, and foresaw that from others he must expect
similar coldness, but there was no help for it. To restore the money
would be ruin. He had entered into the path of dishonesty, and he was
forced to keep on in it.




CHAPTER XXII.


ROBERT'S NEW PROJECT.

Mr. Paine called at Mrs. Rushton's cottage, and communicated the
particulars of his interview with the superintendent.

"It is evident," he said, "that Mr. Davis is swayed by his interests,
and feeling legally secure, prefers to defraud you rather than to
surrender the five thousand dollars."

"I wouldn't have believed it of Mr. Davis," said Mrs. Rushton; "he is
considered such a respectable man."

"I have heard rumors that he is dabbling in speculations, and I suspect
he may find it inconvenient to pay away so large a sum of money."

"He had no right to speculate with my mother's money," said Robert,
indignantly.

"You are right there. He should have invested it securely."

"Mr. Paine," said Robert, after a pause, "I have an idea that father is
still living, and that some day I shall find him."

The lawyer shook his head.

"There is not one chance in ten that he is living," he said. "It is only
a fancy of yours."

"It may be, but I can't get it out of my head."

"I hope you will prove correct, but I need not tell you of the many
arguments against such a theory."

"I know them all, but still I believe he is living. Mr. Paine,"
continued Robert, earnestly, "I feel so strongly on the subject that,
with my mother's permission, I, mean to go out into the world in search
of him."

"I must say, Robert," said Mr. Paine, "I did not expect such a visionary
scheme from a boy of your good sense. You must see yourself how wild it
is."

"I know it," said our hero; "but I want to take a year, at any rate, to
see the world. If, at the end of that time, I discover no trace of my
father, I will come home content."

"But what will become of your mother during that time?"

"I will leave four hundred dollars in your hands for her. The rest I
will draw for my own uses."

"But you don't expect to travel round the world on two hundred dollars,
surely?" said the lawyer.

"I shall work my way as far as I can," said Robert. "I can't afford to
travel as a gentleman."

"Suppose you find yourself without money in a foreign land?"

"I am not afraid. I am willing to work, and I can make my way."

"Surely, Mrs. Rushton, you do not approve Robert's scheme?" said Mr.
Paine.

But to his surprise he found that Mrs. Rushton was inclined to regard it
favorably. She seemed to share Robert's belief that her husband was
still living, and that Robert could find him. She was not a woman in the
habit of reasoning, and had no conception of the difficulties in his
way. The money left behind in the hands of Mr. Paine, supplemented by
her own earnings, would be enough to maintain her for two years, and
this thought made her easy, for she had a great dread of poverty and
destitution.

When the lawyer found how Mrs. Rushton felt on the subject, he ceased
his objections to the plan; for, though he had no confidence in our
young hero's success in the object he had in view, he thought that a
year's tour might benefit him by extending his knowledge of the world
and increasing his self-reliance.

"How soon do you wish to start, Robert?" he asked.

"It will take me a week to get your clothes ready," said Mrs. Rushton.

"Then by a week from Monday I will start," said Robert.

"Have you formed any definite plans about the manner of going?"

"I will go to New York first, and call on the gentleman who got up the
subscription for me. I will tell him my story, and ask his advice."

"The most sensible thing you could do. As to the money, I will have that
ready for you. Of course, you will call on me before you go."

The superintendent had made up his mind that Robert would spread the
report of the deposit, and nervously awaited the result. But to his
relief he observed no change in the demeanor of his fellow-townsmen. He
could only conclude that, for reasons of his own, the boy he had wronged
had concluded to defer the exposure. Next he heard with a feeling of
satisfaction that Robert had decided to go abroad in quest of his
father. He had no doubt that Captain Rushton was dead, and regarded the
plan as utterly quixotic and foolish, but still he felt glad that it had
been undertaken.

"If the boy never comes back, I shan't mourn much," he said to himself.
"His mother is a weak woman, who will never give me any trouble, but
this young rascal has a strong and resolute will, and I shall feel more
comfortable to have him out of the way."

When Robert got ready to leave he made a farewell call on the lawyer,
and drew two hundred dollars of his money.

"I don't know but one hundred will do," he said. "Perhaps I ought to
leave five hundred for my mother."

"You carry little enough, Robert. Don't have any anxiety about your
mother. I will not see her suffer."

Robert grasped his hand in earnest gratitude.

"How can I thank you?" he said.

"You need not thank me. I had a warm regard for your father, and shall
be glad to help your mother if there is any occasion. Not only this, but
if in your wanderings you find yourself in a tight place, and in want of
help, write to me, and I will help you."

"You are a true friend," said Robert, gratefully. "I wish my father had
intrusted his money to you instead of to the superintendent."

"I wish he had as matters have turned out, I should have taken care that
your interests did not suffer."

"Oh," exclaimed Robert, fervently, "if I could only find my father, and
bring him home to confront this false friend, and convict him of his
base fraud, I believe I would willingly give ten years of my life."

"That question can only be solved by time. I, too, should earnestly
rejoice if such an event could be brought about. And now, Robert,
good-by, and Heaven bless you. Don't forget that you can count always on
my friendship and assistance."

On the way home Robert fell in with Halbert Davis. Halbert, of course,
knew nothing of the claim made upon his father, but he had heard that
Robert proposed to leave home. He was both sorry and glad on account of
this--sorry because he had hoped to see our hero fall into poverty and
destitution, and enjoy the spectacle of his humiliation. Now he was
afraid Robert would succeed and deprive him of the enjoyment he had
counted upon. On the other hand, Robert's departure would leave the
field free so far as concerned Hester Paine, and he hoped to win the
favor of that young lady in the absence of any competitor. Of this there
was not the slightest chance, but Halbert was blinded by his own vanity
to the obvious dislike which Hester entertained for him.

Now when he saw Robert approaching he couldn't forego the pleasure of a
final taunt.

"So you're going to leave town, Rushton?'" he commenced.

"Yes, Davis," answered Robert, in the same tone. "Shall you miss me
much?"

"I guess I shall live through it," said Halbert. "I suppose you are
going because you can't make a living here!"

"Not exactly. However, I hope to do better elsewhere."

"If you're going to try for a place, you'd better not mention that you
got turned out of the factory. You needn't apply to my father for a
recommendation."

"I shan't need any recommendation from your father," said Robert. "He is
about the last man that I would apply to."

"That's where you are right," said Halbert. "What sort of a place are
you going to try for?"

He knew nothing of Robert's intention to seek his father, but supposed
he meant to obtain a situation in New York.

"You seem particularly interested in my movements, Davis."

"Call me Mr. Davis, if you please," said Halbert, haughtily.

"When you call me Mr. Rushton, I will return the compliment."

"You are impertinent."

"Not more so than you are."

"You don't seem to realize the difference in our positions."

"No, I don't, except that I prefer my own."

Disgusted with Robert's evident determination to withhold the respect
which he considered his due, Halbert tried him on another tack.

"Have you bidden farewell to Hester Paine?" he asked, with a sneer.

"Yes," said Robert.

"I suppose she was very much affected!" continued Halbert.

"She said she was very sorry to part with me."

"I admire her taste."

"You would admire it more if she had a higher appreciation of you."

"I shall be good friends with her, when you are no longer here to
slander me to her."

"I am not quite so mean as that," said Robert. "If she chooses to like
you, I shan't try to prevent it."

"I ought to be very much obliged to you, I am sure."

"You needn't trouble yourself to be grateful," returned Robert, coolly.
"But I must bid you good-by, as I have considerable to do."

"Don't let me detain you," said Halbert, with an elaborate share of
politeness.

"I wonder why Halbert hates me so much!" he thought. "I don't like him,
but I don't wish him any harm."

He looked with satisfaction upon a little cornelian ring which he wore
upon one of his fingers. It was of very trifling value, but it was a
parting gift from Hester, and as such he valued it far above its cost.




CHAPTER XXIII.


A DISHONEST BAGGAGE-SMASHER.

On the next Monday morning Robert started for the city. At the moment of
parting he began to realize that he had undertaken a difficult task. His
life hitherto had been quiet and free from excitement. Now he was about
to go out into the great world, and fight his own way. With only two
hundred dollars in his pocket he was going in search of a father, who,
when last heard from was floating in an open boat on the South Pacific.
The probabilities were all against that father's being still alive. If
he were, he had no clew to his present whereabouts.

All this Robert thought over as he was riding in the cars to the city.
He acknowledged that the chances were all against his success, but in
spite of all, he had a feeling, for which he could not account, that his
father was still living, and that he should find him some day. At any
rate, there was something attractive in the idea of going out to
unknown lands to meet unknown adventures, and so his momentary
depression was succeeded by a return of his old confidence.

Arrived in the city, he took his carpetbag in his hand, and crossing the
street, walked at random, not being familiar with the streets, as he had
not been in New York but twice before, and that some time since.

"I don't know where to go," thought Robert. "I wish I knew where to find
some cheap hotel."

Just then a boy, in well-ventilated garments and a rimless straw hat,
with a blacking box over his shoulder, approached.

"Shine your boots, mister?" he asked.

Robert glanced at his shoes, which were rather deficient in polish, and
finding that the expense would be only five cents, told him to go ahead.

"I'll give you the bulliest shine you ever had," said the ragamuffin.

"That's right! Go ahead!" said Robert.

When the boy got through, he cast a speculative glance at the carpetbag.

"Smash yer baggage?" he asked.

"What's that?"

"Carry yer bag."

"Do you know of any good, cheap hotel where I can put up?" asked Robert.
