but the fourth time I struck his thigh, laying on with all my strength,
and tare deep into his flesh. And he fell headlong in the dust upon the
ground through the force of my spear-thrust; then truly he would have
been disgraced among the deathless gods, if by my hands he had left
behind his bloody spoils.'

(ll. 368-385) So said he. But Cycnus the stout spearman cared not to
obey him and to pull up the horses that drew his chariot. Then it was
that from their well-woven cars they both leaped straight to the ground,
the son of Zeus and the son of the Lord of War. The charioteers drove
near by their horses with beautiful manes, and the wide earth rang with
the beat of their hoofs as they rushed along. As when rocks leap forth
from the high peak of a great mountain, and fall on one another, and
many towering oaks and pines and long-rooted poplars are broken by them
as they whirl swiftly down until they reach the plain; so did they fall
on one another with a great shout: and all the town of the Myrmidons,
and famous Iolcus, and Arne, and Helice, and grassy Anthea echoed loudly
at the voice of the two. With an awful cry they closed: and wise Zeus
thundered loudly and rained down drops of blood, giving the signal for
battle to his dauntless son.

(ll. 386-401) As a tusked boar, that is fearful for a man to see before
him in the glens of a mountain, resolves to fight with the huntsmen and
white tusks, turning sideways, while foam flows all round his mouth as
he gnashes, and his eyes are like glowing fire, and he bristles the hair
on his mane and around his neck--like him the son of Zeus leaped from
his horse-chariot. And when the dark-winged whirring grasshopper,
perched on a green shoot, begins to sing of summer to men--his food
and drink is the dainty dew--and all day long from dawn pours forth his
voice in the deadliest heat, when Sirius scorches the flesh (then the
beard grows upon the millet which men sow in summer), when the crude
grapes which Dionysus gave to men--a joy and a sorrow both--begin to
colour, in that season they fought and loud rose the clamour.

(ll. 402-412) As two lions [1806] on either side of a slain deer spring
at one another in fury, and there is a fearful snarling and a clashing
also of teeth--like vultures with crooked talons and hooked beak that
fight and scream aloud on a high rock over a mountain goat or fat
wild-deer which some active man has shot with an arrow from the string,
and himself has wandered away elsewhere, not knowing the place; but they
quickly mark it and vehemently do keen battle about it--like these they
two rushed upon one another with a shout.

(ll. 413-423) Then Cycnus, eager to kill the son of almighty Zeus,
struck upon his shield with a brazen spear, but did not break
the bronze; and the gift of the god saved his foe. But the son of
Amphitryon, mighty Heracles, with his long spear struck Cycnus violently
in the neck beneath the chin, where it was unguarded between helm and
shield. And the deadly spear cut through the two sinews; for the hero's
full strength lighted on his foe. And Cycnus fell as an oak falls or a
lofty pine that is stricken by the lurid thunderbolt of Zeus; even so he
fell, and his armour adorned with bronze clashed about him.

(ll. 424-442) Then the stout hearted son of Zeus let him be, and himself
watched for the onset of manslaying Ares: fiercely he stared, like a
lion who has come upon a body and full eagerly rips the hide with his
strong claws and takes away the sweet life with all speed: his dark
heart is filled with rage and his eyes glare fiercely, while he tears
up the earth with his paws and lashes his flanks and shoulders with his
tail so that no one dares to face him and go near to give battle. Even
so, the son of Amphitryon, unsated of battle, stood eagerly face to face
with Ares, nursing courage in his heart. And Ares drew near him with
grief in his heart; and they both sprang at one another with a cry. As
it is when a rock shoots out from a great cliff and whirls down with
long bounds, careering eagerly with a roar, and a high crag clashes with
it and keeps it there where they strike together; with no less clamour
did deadly Ares, the chariot-borne, rush shouting at Heracles. And he
quickly received the attack.

(ll. 443-449) But Athene the daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus came to meet
Ares, wearing the dark aegis, and she looked at him with an angry
frown and spoke winged words to him. 'Ares, check your fierce anger and
matchless hands; for it is not ordained that you should kill Heracles,
the bold-hearted son of Zeus, and strip off his rich armour. Come, then,
cease fighting and do not withstand me.'

(ll. 450-466) So said she, but did not move the courageous spirit of
Ares. But he uttered a great shout and waving his spears like fire, he
rushed headlong at strong Heracles, longing to kill him, and hurled a
brazen spear upon the great shield, for he was furiously angry because
of his dead son; but bright-eyed Athene reached out from the car and
turned aside the force of the spear.

Then bitter grief seized Ares and he drew his keen sword and leaped upon
bold-hearted Heracles. But as he came on, the son of Amphitryon, unsated
of fierce battle, shrewdly wounded his thigh where it was exposed
under his richly-wrought shield, and tare deep into his flesh with the
spear-thrust and cast him flat upon the ground. And Panic and Dread
quickly drove his smooth-wheeled chariot and horses near him and lifted
him from the wide-pathed earth into his richly-wrought car, and then
straight lashed the horses and came to high Olympus.

(ll. 467-471) But the son of Alcmena and glorious Iolaus stripped the
fine armour off Cycnus' shoulders and went, and their swift horses
carried them straight to the city of Trachis. And bright-eyed Athene
went thence to great Olympus and her father's house.

(ll. 472-480) As for Cycnus, Ceyx buried him and the countless people
who lived near the city of the glorious king, in Anthe and the city of
the Myrmidons, and famous Iolcus, and Arne, and Helice: and much people
were gathered doing honour to Ceyx, the friend of the blessed gods. But
Anaurus, swelled by a rain-storm, blotted out the grave and memorial
of Cycnus; for so Apollo, Leto's son, commanded him, because he used to
watch for and violently despoil the rich hecatombs that any might bring
to Pytho.




THE MARRIAGE OF CEYX (fragments)

Fragment #1--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 128: Hesiod in
the "Marriage of Ceyx" says that he (Heracles) landed (from the Argo)
to look for water and was left behind in Magnesia near the place called
Aphetae because of his desertion there.


Fragment #2--Zenobius [1901], ii. 19: Hesiod used the proverb in the
following way: Heracles is represented as having constantly visited the
house of Ceyx of Trachis and spoken thus: 'Of their own selves the good
make for the feasts of good.'


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Homer, Il. xiv. 119: 'And horse-driving Ceyx
beholding...'


Fragment #4--Athenaeus, ii. p. 49b: Hesiod in the "Marriage of
Ceyx"--for though grammar-school boys alienate it from the poet, yet I
consider the poem ancient--calls the tables tripods.


Fragment #5--Gregory of Corinth, On Forms of Speech (Rhett. Gr. vii.
776): 'But when they had done with desire for the equal-shared feast,
even then they brought from the forest the mother of a mother (sc.
wood), dry and parched, to be slain by her own children' (sc. to be
burnt in the flames).




THE GREAT EOIAE (fragments)

Fragment #1--Pausanius, ii. 26. 3: Epidaurus. According to the opinion
of the Argives and the epic poem, the "Great Eoiae", Argos the son of
Zeus was father of Epidaurus.


Fragment #2--Anonymous Comment. on Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, iii.
7: And, they say, Hesiod is sufficient to prove that the word PONEROS
(bad) has the same sense as 'laborious' or 'ill-fated'; for in the
"Great Eoiae" he represents Alcmene as saying to Heracles: 'My son,
truly Zeus your father begot you to be the most toilful as the most
excellent...'; and again: 'The Fates (made) you the most toilful and the
most excellent...'


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Pindar, Isthm. v. 53: The story has been
taken from the "Great Eoiae"; for there we find Heracles entertained by
Telamon, standing dressed in his lion-skin and praying, and there also
we find the eagle sent by Zeus, from which Aias took his name [2001].


Fragment #4--Pausanias, iv. 2. 1: But I know that the so-called "Great
Eoiae" say that Polycaon the son of Butes married Euaechme, daughter of
Hyllus, Heracles' son.


Fragment #5--Pausanias, ix. 40. 6: 'And Phylas wedded Leipephile the
daughter of famous Iolaus: and she was like the Olympians in beauty. She
bare him a son Hippotades in the palace, and comely Thero who was like
the beams of the moon. And Thero lay in the embrace of Apollo and bare
horse-taming Chaeron of hardy strength.'


Fragment #6--Scholiast on Pindar, Pyth. iv. 35: 'Or like her in Hyria,
careful-minded Mecionice, who was joined in the love of golden Aphrodite
with the Earth-holder and Earth-Shaker, and bare Euphemus.'


Fragment #7--Pausanias, ix. 36. 7: 'And Hyettus killed Molurus the dear
son of Aristas in his house because he lay with his wife. Then he
left his home and fled from horse-rearing Argos and came to Minyan
Orchomenus. And the hero received him and gave him a portion of his
goods, as was fitting.'


Fragment #8--Pausanias, ii. 2. 3: But in the "Great Eoiae" Peirene is
represented to be the daughter of Oebalius.


Fragment #9--Pausanias, ii. 16. 4: The epic poem, which the Greek call
the "Great Eoiae", says that she (Mycene) was the daughter of Inachus
and wife of Arestor: from her, then, it is said, the city received its
name.


Fragment #10--Pausanias, vi. 21. 10: According to the poem the "Great
Eoiae", these were killed by Oenomaus [2002]: Alcathous the son of
Porthaon next after Marmax, and after Alcathous, Euryalus, Eurymachus
and Crotalus. The man killed next after them, Aerias, we should judge
to have been a Lacedemonian and founder of Aeria. And after Acrias,
they say, Capetus was done to death by Oenomaus, and Lycurgus, Lasius,
Chalcodon and Tricolonus.... And after Tricolonus fate overtook
Aristomachus and Prias on the course, as also Pelagon and Aeolius and
Cronius.


Fragment #11--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 57: In the
"Great Eoiae" it is said that Endymion was transported by Zeus into
heaven, but when he fell in love with Hera, was befooled with a shape of
cloud, and was cast out and went down into Hades.


Fragment #12--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 118: In the
"Great Eoiae" it is related that Melampus, who was very dear to
Apollo, went abroad and stayed with Polyphantes. But when the king had
sacrificed an ox, a serpent crept up to the sacrifice and destroyed
his servants. At this the king was angry and killed the serpent, but
Melampus took and buried it. And its offspring, brought up by him, used
to lick his ears and inspire him with prophecy. And so, when he was
caught while trying to steal the cows of Iphiclus and taken bound to the
city of Aegina, and when the house, in which Iphiclus was, was about
to fall, he told an old woman, one of the servants of Iphiclus, and in
return was released.


Fragment #13--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. iv. 828: In the
"Great Eoiae" Scylla is the daughter of Phoebus and Hecate.


Fragment #14--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 181: Hesiod in
the "Great Eoiae" says that Phineus was blinded because he told Phrixus
the way [2003].


Fragment #15--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. ii. 1122: Argus.
This is one of the children of Phrixus. These.... ....Hesiod in the
"Great Eoiae" says were born of Iophossa the daughter of Aeetes. And he
says there were four of them, Argus, Phrontis, Melas, and Cytisorus.


Fragment #16--Antoninus Liberalis, xxiii: Battus. Hesiod tells the story
in the "Great Eoiae".... ....Magnes was the son of Argus, the son of
Phrixus and Perimele, Admetus' daughter, and lived in the region of
Thessaly, in the land which men called after him Magnesia. He had a son
of remarkable beauty, Hymenaeus. And when Apollo saw the boy, he was
seized with love for him, and would not leave the house of Magnes. Then
Hermes made designs on Apollo's herd of cattle which were grazing in the
same place as the cattle of Admetus. First he cast upon the dogs which
were guarding them a stupor and strangles, so that the dogs forgot the
cows and lost the power of barking. Then he drove away twelve heifers
and a hundred cows never yoked, and the bull who mounted the cows,
fastening to the tail of each one brushwood to wipe out the footmarks of
the cows.

He drove them through the country of the Pelasgi, and Achaea in the land
of Phthia, and through Locris, and Boeotia and Megaris, and thence into
Peloponnesus by way of Corinth and Larissa, until he brought them to
Tegea. From there he went on by the Lycaean mountains, and past Maenalus
and what are called the watch-posts of Battus. Now this Battus used to
live on the top of the rock and when he heard the voice of the heifers
as they were being driven past, he came out from his own place, and knew
that the cattle were stolen. So he asked for a reward to tell no one
about them. Hermes promised to give it him on these terms, and Battus
swore to say nothing to anyone about the cattle. But when Hermes had
hidden them in the cliff by Coryphasium, and had driven them into a cave
facing towards Italy and Sicily, he changed himself and came again to
Battus and tried whether he would be true to him as he had vowed. So,
offering him a robe as a reward, he asked of him whether he had noticed
stolen cattle being driven past. And Battus took the robe and told him
about the cattle. But Hermes was angry because he was double-tongued,
and struck him with his staff and changed him into a rock. And either
frost or heat never leaves him [2004].




THE MELAMPODIA (fragments)

Fragment #1--Strabo, xiv. p. 642: It is said that Calchis the seer
returned from Troy with Amphilochus the son of Amphiaraus and came on
foot to this place [2101]. But happening to find near Clarus a seer
greater than himself, Mopsus, the son of Manto, Teiresias' daughter,
he died of vexation. Hesiod, indeed, works up the story in some form as
this: Calchas set Mopsus the following problem:

'I am filled with wonder at the quantity of figs this wild fig-tree
bears though it is so small. Can you tell their number?'

And Mopsus answered: 'Ten thousand is their number, and their measure is
a bushel: one fig is left over, which you would not be able to put into
the measure.'

So said he; and they found the reckoning of the measure true. Then did
the end of death shroud Calchas.


Fragment #2--Tzetzes on Lycophron, 682: But now he is speaking of
Teiresias, since it is said that he lived seven generations--though
others say nine. He lived from the times of Cadmus down to those of
Eteocles and Polyneices, as the author of "Melampodia" also says: for he
introduces Teiresias speaking thus:

'Father Zeus, would that you had given me a shorter span of life to
be mine and wisdom of heart like that of mortal men! But now you have
honoured me not even a little, though you ordained me to have a long
span of life, and to live through seven generations of mortal kind.'


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Homer, Odyssey, x. 494: They say that
Teiresias saw two snakes mating on Cithaeron and that, when he killed
the female, he was changed into a woman, and again, when he killed the
male, took again his own nature. This same Teiresias was chosen by Zeus
and Hera to decide the question whether the male or the female has most
pleasure in intercourse. And he said:

'Of ten parts a man enjoys only one; but a woman's sense enjoys all ten
in full.'

For this Hera was angry and blinded him, but Zeus gave him the seer's
power.


Fragment #4--[2102] Athenaeus, ii. p. 40: 'For pleasant it is at a feast
and rich banquet to tell delightful tales, when men have had enough of
feasting;...'

Clement of Alexandria, Stromateis vi. 2 26: '...and pleasant also it
is to know a clear token of ill or good amid all the signs that the
deathless ones have given to mortal men.'


Fragment #5--Athenaeus, xi. 498. A: 'And Mares, swift messenger, came to
him through the house and brought a silver goblet which he had filled,
and gave it to the lord.'


Fragment #6--Athenaeus, xi. 498. B: 'And then Mantes took in his hands
the ox's halter and Iphiclus lashed him upon the back. And behind
him, with a cup in one hand and a raised sceptre in the other, walked
Phylacus and spake amongst the bondmen.'


Fragment #7--Athenaeus, xiii. p. 609 e: Hesiod in the third book of the
"Melampodia" called Chalcis in Euboea 'the land of fair women'.


