work on either side, so as to move her gradually through the water
towards the harbour mouth. The rowers will be charged to let their oars
swing alongside whenever any of their craft dash at them. We shall want
every oar, as well as our sails, to get away when we are once outside.
I do not think we have much chance of finally beating them off if we
stop and fight here. But if we can do so for a time, and can manage to
creep out of the harbour, all may be well."

When daylight fairly broke they were able to make out their enemy. The
vessels were of all sizes, from long, low craft, carrying great sails
and long banks of oars, down to boats of a few tons burden. All seemed
crowded with men.

"None of them are anything like as high out of the water as the
Bonito," the captain said, "and they will find it very difficult to
climb up our sides. Still the odds against us are serious, but we shall
give them a warmer reception than they expect. They will hardly
calculate either on our being so strong handed, or so well prepared for
them."

Everything was indeed ready for the combat. Two or three barrels of the
compound known as Greek fire had been brought up from the hold, and the
cooks had heated cauldrons full of pitch. Thirty men with bows and
arrows were on the poop, and the rest, with spears, axes, and swords,
stood along the bulwarks.

"We may as well get as near the entrance as we can before the fight
begins," the captain said. "Get up the anchor, and as soon as it is
aboard, get out four oars on each side."

The anchor had already been hove short, and was soon in its place. Then
the oars dipped into the water, and slowly the Bonito moved towards the
mouth of the harbour. Scarcely had the oars touched the water, than a
bustle was perceived on board the piratical ships. Oars were put out,
and in two or three minutes the pirates were under way, advancing at a
rapid pace towards the Bonito.

The crew made no reply to the shouts and yells of the pirates, but, in
accordance with the orders of the captain, remained in a stooping
position, so that the figure of the captain, as he hauled up the flag
with the lion of Venice to the masthead, was alone visible to the
pirates. As these approached volleys of arrows were shot at the Bonito,
but not a shot replied until they were within fifty yards of the ship.

Then the captain gave the word. The archers sprang to their feet, and
from their eminence poured their arrows thick and fast on to the
crowded decks of the pirates. The captain gave the word to the rowers,
and they relinquished their oars, which swung in by the side of the
vessel.

A moment later two of the largest craft of the pirates dashed
alongside. The instant they did so they were saluted with showers of
boiling pitch, while pots full of Greek fire were thrown down upon
them. Those who tried to climb up the side of the Bonito were speared
with lances or cut down with battleaxes.

The combat was of short duration. Many of those on whom the boiling
pitch had fallen jumped overboard in their agony, while others did the
same to escape the Greek fire, which they in vain endeavoured to
extinguish. The fire quickly spread to the woodwork, and in five
minutes after the beginning of the fight, the two craft dropped astern
from the Bonito, with the flames already rising fiercely from them.

In the meantime the other vessels had not been idle, and a storm of
missiles was poured upon the Bonito. The fate which befell their
comrades, however, showed them how formidable was the vessel they had
regarded as an easy prey, and when the first assailants of the Bonito
dropped astern, none of the others cared to take their places.

"Man the oars again!" the captain ordered, and the Bonito again moved
forward, her crew stooping behind the bulwarks, while the archers only
rose from time to time to discharge their shafts.

"The thing I am most afraid of," the captain said to Francis, who was
standing beside him, "is, that they will ram us with their prows. The
Bonito is strongly built, but the chances are that they would knock a
hole in her."

"I should think, captain, that if we were to get up some of those bales
of cloth, and fasten ropes to them, we might lower them over the side
and so break the shock."

"It is worth trying, anyhow," the captain said.

And a score of the sailors were at once sent down to fetch up the
bales. Ropes were fastened round these, and they were laid along by the
bulwarks in readiness for being lowered instantly. Ten bales were
placed on each side, and three men told off to each bale.

By this time they were halfway to the mouth of the harbour, and the
preparations were completed just in time, for the small boats suddenly
drew aside, and two of the largest of the pirates' craft, each rowed by
twenty-four oars, dashed at her, one on each side. The captain shouted
the order, and the men all sprang to their feet. It was seen at once
that the vessels would both strike about midships. Three bales on
either side were raised to the bulwarks, and lowered down with the
ropes until close to the water's edge and closely touching each other.
Francis sprang on to the bulwark and superintended the operations on
one side, while the captain did the same on the other.

"A few feet more astern, lads. That is right. Now, keep the bales
touching. You are just in the line."

An instant later the Bonito reeled from the shock of two tremendous
blows. The bows of the pirates were stove in, but the thick bales
enabled the Bonito to withstand the shock, although her sides creaked,
the seams started, and the water flowed in freely. But of this the crew
thought little. They were occupied in hurling darts, arrows, and
combustibles into the pirates as these backed off, in an already
sinking condition.

"Now I think we can go," the captain said, and ordered the whole of the
oars to be manned.

They were speedily got out, and the Bonito made her way out through the
mouth of the harbour. The pirates, in their lighter boats, rowed round
and round her, shooting clouds of arrows, but not venturing to come to
close quarters, after the fate which had befallen the four largest
vessels of their fleet.

As soon as they were clear of the islet the sails were hoisted. The
wind had fallen much during the night, and had worked round to the
east, and under sails and oars the Bonito left the island, none of the
pirates venturing to follow in pursuit. The oars were soon laid in, and
the men, with mallets and chisels, set to work to caulk the seams
through which the water was making its way. The casualties were now
inquired into, and it was found that six men had been shot dead, and
that nine-and-twenty had received wounds more or less severe from the
arrows of the pirates.

Francis had been twice wounded while superintending the placing of the
bales. One arrow had gone through his right leg, another had struck him
in the side and glanced off a rib.

"This won't do, Messer Francisco," the captain said as he assisted
Giuseppi to bandage the wounds. "Signor Polani placed you on board to
learn something of seamanship and commerce, not to make yourself a
target for the arrows of pirates. However, we have to thank you for the
saving of the Bonito, for assuredly she would have been stove in, had
not the happy thought of hanging those bales overboard struck you. It
would be of no use against war galleys, whose beaks are often below the
waterline, but against craft like these pirates it acts splendidly, and
there is no doubt that you saved the ship from destruction, and us from
death, for after the burning of the two first vessels that attacked us,
you may be sure they would have shown but little mercy. I can't think
how you came to think of it."

"Why, I have read in books, captain, of defenders of walls hanging over
trusses of straw, to break the blows of battering rams and machines of
the besiegers. Directly you said they were going to ram us it struck me
we might do the same, and then I thought that bales of cloth, similar
to those you got up on deck to trade with the islanders would be just
the thing."

"It was a close shave," the captain said. "I was leaning over, and saw
the whole side of the ship bend beneath the blow, and expected to hear
the ribs crack beneath me. Fortunately the Bonito was stronger built
than her assailants, and their bows crumpled in before her side gave;
but my heart was in my mouth for a time, I can tell you."

"So was mine, captain. I hardly felt these two arrows strike me. They
must have been shot from one of the other boats. Then I could not help
laughing to see the way in which the men at the oars tumbled backwards
at the moment when their vessel struck us. It was as if an invisible
giant had swept them all off their seats together."

The wind continued favourable until they arrived at Candia, where the
captain reported, to the commander of a Venetian war galley lying in
the port, the attack that had been made upon him; and the galley at
once started for the scene of the action, to destroy any pirates she
might find there or among the neighbouring islands, or in the various
inlets and bays of the mainland.

Having delivered their letters and landed a portion of their cargo for
the use of Polani's agents in the islands, the Bonito proceeded to
Cyprus. For some weeks she cruised along the coast of Syria, trading in
the various Turkish ports, for Venice, although she had shared in some
of the crusades, was now, as she had often been before, on friendly
terms with the Turks. Her interests all lay in that direction. She
carried on a large trade with them; and in the days when she lay under
the interdict of the pope, and all Europe stood aloof from her, she
drew her stores of provisions from the Moslem ports, and was thus
enabled successfully to resist the pressure which she suffered from the
interdict. She foresaw, too, the growing power of the Turks, and
perceived that in the future they would triumph over the degenerate
Greek empire at Constantinople. She had spent her blood and treasure
freely in maintaining that empire; but the weakness and profligacy of
its emperors, the intestine quarrels and disturbances which were
forever going on, and the ingratitude with which she had always treated
Venice, had completely alienated the Venetians from her. Genoa had,
indeed, for many years exercised a far more preponderating influence at
Constantinople than Venice had done.

Having completed the tour of the Syrian ports, the Bonito sailed north,
with the intention of passing the Dardanelles and Bosphorus, and
proceeding to Azoph.

When she reached the little island of Tenedos, a few miles from the
entrance to the strait, she heard news which compelled the captain to
alter his intentions. A revolution had broken out in Constantinople,
aided by the Genoese of Pera. The cruel tyrant Calojohannes the 5th had
been deposed, and his heir Andronicus, whom he had deprived of sight
and thrown into a dungeon, released and placed on the throne.

As a reward for the services she had rendered him, Andronicus issued a
decree conferring Tenedos upon Genoa. The news had just arrived when
the Bonito entered the port, and the town was in a ferment. There were
two or three Venetian warships in the harbour; but the Venetian
admiral, being without orders from home as to what part to take in such
an emergency, remained neutral. The matter was, however, an important
one, for the possession of Tenedos gave its owners the command of the
Dardanelles, and a fleet lying there could effectually block the
passage.

The people thronged up to the governor's house with shouts of "Down
with Genoa!" The governor, being unsupported by any Greek or Genoese
troops, bowed to the popular will, and declared that he did not
recognize the revolution that had taken place in Constantinople, and
refused to submit to the decree of Andronicus. Donato Trono, a Venetian
merchant resident in the island, and other Venetians, harangued the
people, and pointed out to them that alone they could not hope to
resist the united forces of Greece and Genoa, and that their only hope
of safety lay in placing themselves under the protection of Venice. The
people, seeing the justice of the arguments of the Venetians, and
preferring the Venetian rule to that of Genoa, agreed to the proposal.
The banner of St. Mark was raised amid great enthusiasm, and the island
declared subject to Venice.

A Genoese galley in port immediately set sail, and quickly carried the
news to Constantinople, where the emperor at once threw the whole of
the Venetian residents into prison. As soon as the news of this reached
Tenedos the captain of the Bonito held a consultation with Francis.

"It is evident, Messer Francisco, that we cannot proceed upon our
northward voyage. We should be captured and held at Constantinople;
and, even did we succeed in passing at night, we should fall into the
hands of the Genoese--who are far stronger in the Black Sea than we
are--for if Venice accepts the offer of the people of this place, and
takes possession of the island, Genoa is sure to declare war.

"I think, then, that we had better make our way back to Venice with
what cargo we have on board, and there get fresh orders from the
padrone. We have not done badly so far, and it is better to make sure
of what we have got than to risk its loss, for at any day we may fall
in with the Genoese fleet sailing hither."

Francis quite agreed with the captain's opinion, and the Bonito sailed
for the south. They touched, on their way, at several islands, and the
news that an early outbreak of hostilities between Genoa and Venice was
probable--in which case there would be an almost complete cessation of
trade--produced so strong a desire, on the part of the islanders, to
lay in a store of goods, that the captain was able to dispose of the
rest of his cargo on good terms, and to fill up his ship with the
produce of the islands.

Thus the Bonito was deep in the water when she re-entered the port of
Venice after an absence of about three months. As soon as the anchor
was dropped the captain, accompanied by Francis, hired a gondola, and
rowed into the city to give an account to Signor Polani of the success
of his voyage, and to lay before him a list of the cargo with which the
Bonito was laden. The merchant received them with great cordiality, and
embraced Francis with the affection of a father.

"Do you go at once into the salon, Francisco. You will find my
daughters expecting you there, for the news came an hour ago that the
Bonito was entering port. Of course, we heard from the letters from
Candia of your adventures with the pirates, and the gallant way in
which the Bonito defeated them.

"You will find, captain, that I have ordered an extra month's pay to be
given to all on board.

"The captain did full justice, Francisco, in his account of the matter,
to your quickness in suggesting a method by which the effort of the
ramming of the enemy was neutralized, and for the courage you showed in
carrying out your idea; but we will talk of that afterwards. He and I
have business to transact which will occupy us for some time, so the
sooner you go the better."

Francis at once took himself off and joined the girls, who received him
with the heartiest greeting.

"We were glad indeed, Francis," Maria said, "when our father told us
that the Bonito was signalled as entering the port. No letters have
come for some time, and we feared that you must have entered the
Dardanelles, and reached Constantinople, before the news arrived there
of that affair at Tenedos, in which case you would no doubt have been
seized and thrown into the dungeons."

"We were at Tenedos when the affair took place," Francis said, "and
have had no opportunity since of sending a letter by any ship likely to
be here before us. The outbreak made us alter our plans, for, of
course, it would not have been safe to have sailed farther when the
emperor was so enraged against Venice. I need hardly tell you I was not
sorry when we turned our faces again towards Venice. I have enjoyed the
voyage very much, and have had plenty to occupy me. Still, three months
at a time is long enough, and I was beginning to long for a sight of
Venice."

"For a sight of Venice and--" Maria repeated, holding up her finger
reprovingly.

"And of you both," Francis said smiling. "I did not think it necessary
to put that in, because you must know that you are Venice to me."

"That is much better," Maria said approvingly. "I think you have
improved since you have been away. Do you not think so, Giulia?"

"I don't think that sort of nonsense is an improvement," Giulia said
gravely. "Any of the young Venetian gallants can say that sort of
thing. We do not want flattery from Francisco."

"You should say you do not want it, Giulia," Maria said, laughing. "I
like it, I own, even from Francisco. It may not mean anything, but it
is pleasant nevertheless; besides, one likes to think that there is
just a little truth in it, not much, perhaps, but just a little in what
Francisco said, for instance. Of course we are not all Venice to him.
Still, just as we are pleased to see him, he is pleased to see us; and
why shouldn't he say so in a pretty way? It's all very well for you to
set up as being above flattery, Giulia, but you are young yet. I have
no doubt you will like it when you get as old as I am."

Giulia shook her head decidedly.

"I always think," she said, "when I hear a man saying flattering things
to a girl, that it is the least complimentary thing he can do, for it
is treating her as if he considers that she is a fool, otherwise he
would never say such outrageous nonsense to her."

"There, Francisco," Maria laughed, "you are fairly warned now. Beware
how you venture to pay any compliment to Giulia in future.

"It would be a dull world if every one were to think as you do, Giulia,
and to say exactly as they meant. Fancy a young man saying to you: 'I
think you are a nice sort of girl, no prettier than the rest, but good
tempered and pleasant, and to be desired because your father is rich!'
A nice sort of way that would be to be made love to!"

"There is no occasion for them to say anything at all," Giulia said
indignantly. "We don't go about saying to them, 'I think you are good
looking, and well mannered, and witty;' or, 'I like you because they
say you are a brave soldier and a good swordsman.' Why should they say
such things to us? I suppose we can tell if anyone likes us without all
that nonsense."

"Perhaps so," the elder girl assented; "and yet I maintain it's
pleasant, and at any rate it's the custom, and as it's the custom, we
must put up with it.

"What do you say, Francisco?"

"I don't know anything about it," Francis said. "Certainly some of the
compliments I have heard paid were barefaced falsehoods, and I have
wondered how men could make them, and how women could even affect to
believe in them; but, on the other hand, I suppose that when people are
in love, they really do think the person they are in love with is
prettier and more charming, or braver and more handsome, than anyone
else in the world, and that though it may be flattery, it is really
true in the opinion of the person who utters it."

"And now let us leave the matter alone for the present, Francisco. We
are dying to hear all about your adventures, and especially that fight
with the pirates. The captain, in his letter, merely said that you were
attacked and beat the pirates off, and that you would have been sunk if
it hadn't been that, at your suggestion, they lowered bales of cloth
over to break the shock; and that so many men were killed and so many
wounded; and that you were hit twice by arrows, but the wounds were
healing. That's all he said, for papa read that portion of his letter
out to us. Now we want a full and particular account of the affair."

Francis gave a full account of the fight, and then related the other
incidents of the voyage.

"We know many of the ports you touched at," Maria said when he had
finished, "for when we were little girls, papa took us sometimes for
voyages in his ships, when the times were peaceful and there was no
danger. Now let us order a gondola, and go for a row. Papa is sure to
be occupied for ever so long with your captain."



Chapter 9: The Capture Of The Lido.


Signor Polani told Francis, that evening, that he was much pleased with
the report that the captain had given of his eagerness to acquire
information both in mercantile and nautical matters, and of the manner
in which he had kept the ship's books, and the entries of the sales,
and purchases of goods.

"Many young fellows at your age, Francis, when there was no compulsion
for them to have taken these matters into their charge, would have
thought only of amusement and gaiety when they were in port, and I am
glad to see that you have a real interest in them. Whatever the line in
life a young man takes up, he will never excel in it unless he goes
into it with all his heart, and I am very glad to see that you have
thrown yourself so heartily into your new profession. The Bonito made a
most satisfactory voyage, far more so than I anticipated, when I found
that she would not be able to carry out the programme I had laid down
for her; but the rise in the prices in the latter part of your voyage
have more than made up for the loss of the trade in the Black Sea; and
you have done as much in the three months you were absent, as I should
have expected had you been, as I anticipated, six months away.

"You will be some little time before you start again, as I wish to see
how matters are going before I send the Bonito out upon another
adventure. At present nothing is settled here. That there will be war
with Genoa before long is certain, but we would rather postpone it as
long as possible, and the senate has not yet arrived at the decision to
accept the offer of Tenedos. Negotiations are going on with Genoa and
Constantinople, but I have little hope that anything will come of them.

"It is getting late in the season now, and the war will hardly break
out until next spring; but I have no doubt the struggle will then
begin, and preparations are going on with all speed in the dockyards.
We are endeavouring to obtain allies, but the combination is so strong
against Venice that we are meeting with little success, and Ferrara is
really the only friend on whom we can rely, and she is not in a
position to aid us materially, in such a struggle as this will be.

"I am glad to tell you that the affair in which you were concerned,
before you sailed, has now completely dropped. Nothing has been heard
of Mocenigo since he made his escape.

"A decree of banishment was passed against him, but where he is we know
not. That wretched woman was sentenced to four years' imprisonment, but
upon my petition she will be released at the end of six months, on her
promise that she will not again set foot in the territory of the
republic. As Mocenigo has not been brought to trial, there will be no
further official inquiry into the matter, and I have not been further
questioned as to the source from which I obtained my information as to
the girls' hiding place. Your share in the matter is therefore
altogether unsuspected, and I do not think that there is any further
danger to you from Mocenigo's partisans."

"I should be glad enough to remain in Venice a fortnight or so, sir,"
Francis said. "But if, at the end of that time, you have any vessel
