
The army then proceeded north to Dundalk, and bitter was the
disappointment of the troops when, on arriving there, they found that
Schomberg, instead of advancing to give battle, had shut himself up in
the intrenchments he had formed, and could not be induced to sally out.

In vain King James, who accompanied his army, formed it up in order of
battle within sight of the invaders' lines. Schomberg was not to be
tempted out, and, as the position appeared to be too strong to be
attacked, the Irish were forced to endeavour to reduce it by the slow
process of starvation. The English army was soon reduced to pitiable
straits--not from hunger, for they were able to obtain food from the
ships, but from disease. The situation of the camp was low and unhealthy.
Fever broke out, and swept away vast numbers of the men.

The Dutch and Enniskilleners suffered comparatively little--both were
accustomed to a damp climate. But of the English troops, nearly eight
thousand died in the two months that the blockade lasted. Had James
maintained his position, the whole of the army of Schomberg must have
perished; but, most unfortunately for his cause, he insisted on
personally conducting operations, and when complete success was in his
grasp he marched his army away, in the middle of November, to winter
quarters; thereby allowing Schomberg to move, with the eight thousand men
who remained to him, from the pest-stricken camp to healthier quarters.

The disgust, of those of James's officers who understood anything of war,
at this termination of the campaign was extreme. The men, indeed, were
eager to return to their homes, but would gladly have attempted an
assault on the English camp before doing so; and, as the defenders were
reduced to half their original strength, while most of the survivors were
weakened by disease, the attack would probably have been successful.
James himself was several times on the point of ordering an attack, but
his own vacillation of character was heightened by the conflicting
counsels of his generals, who seemed more bent on thwarting each other
than on gaining the cause for which they fought.

The cavalry were not idle, while the blockade of Schomberg's camp
continued, frequently making excursions over the country to bring in
cattle for the army; for the villagers had, for the most part, deserted
their homes, and herds of cattle were grazing without masters. One day,
Captain Davenant's troop had ridden some thirty miles out of camp, and
had halted for the night in a village. In the morning, they broke up into
small parties and scattered round the country. Walter, with fifteen of
the troopers, had collected some cattle and stopped for an hour, to feed
and rest the horses, in a deserted village. He took the precaution to
place two or three men on sentry round it.

The men were sitting on the doorsteps, eating the food they had brought
with them, when one of the outposts dashed in at full gallop, shouting
that the enemy were upon them; but his warning came too late, for, close
behind him, came a body of wild-looking horsemen, shouting and yelling.
There was a cry of "The Enniskilleners!" and the men ran to their horses.

They had scarcely time to throw themselves in the saddle, when the
Enniskilleners charged down. For a minute or two there was a confused
medley, and then three or four of the troopers rode off at full speed,
hotly pursued by the Enniskilleners.

Walter had discharged his pistols and drawn his sword, but before he had
time to strike a blow, his horse was rolled over by the rush of the
enemy, and, as he was falling, he received a blow on the head from a
sabre which stretched him insensible on the ground. He was roused by two
men turning him over and searching his pockets. A slight groan burst from
his lips.

"The fellow is not dead," one of the men said.

"We will soon settle that," the other replied.

"Don't kill him," the first speaker said. "Wait till the captain has
spoken to him. We may be able to get some information from him. We can
finish him afterwards."

Walter lay with his eyes closed. He well knew that the Enniskilleners
took no prisoners, but killed all who fell into their hands, and he
determined to show no signs of returning consciousness. Presently, he
heard the sound of a party of horsemen returning, and by the exclamations
of disappointment which greeted the news they gave, he learned that some,
at least, of his men had made their escape.

Some time later, several men came up to him. One leaned over him, and put
his hand to his heart.

"He is alive."

"Very well," another voice said. "Then we will take him with us. He is an
officer, and will be able to tell us all about their strength.

"Watkins, you have a strong beast, and do not weigh much. Do you mount,
and then we will tie him to your back."

A minute later Walter was lifted up, and felt that he was placed on a
horse with his back to that of the rider. A rope was wound several times
round his body. He remained perfectly passive, with his head hanging down
on his breast. Then a word of command was given, and the troop set off.

For a time, there was no need for him to pretend insensibility, for the
pain of his wound and the loss of blood overpowered him, and for some
time he was unconscious. After two hours' riding, the troop was halted.
Walter felt the rope taken off him. Then he was lifted down, dragged a
short distance, and thrown down on some straw. Then a door shut, and he
heard a key turned. He felt sure that he was alone, but for some time lay
perfectly quiet, as it was possible that one of the men might have
remained to watch him.

After a quarter of an hour, hearing not the slightest sound, he opened
his eyes and looked round. He was, as he supposed, alone. The place in
which he was lying was a stable, lighted only by a small opening high up
in the wall. Certain, therefore, that he was not overlooked, he made an
effort to rise to his feet, but he was so weak and giddy that he was
obliged, for some time, to remain leaning against the wall. Seeing a
bucket in one corner, he made to it, and found, to his delight, that it
was half full of water, for he was parched with a devouring thirst.

After taking a deep draught he felt greatly revived, and then made a
thorough survey of his prison. It evidently formed part of the house of a
well-to-do man, for it was solidly built of stone, and the door was
strong and well fitted.

The opening in the wall was out of his reach. He could, at ordinary
times, by standing on the upturned bucket, have reached it with a spring,
and pulled himself up to it, but at present he was wholly incapable of
such exertion. He thought, however, that after a night's rest he would be
able to do it.

The door was so strong that he had no hope of escape in that direction.
As he might at any moment be disturbed, he returned to the straw on which
he had at first been thrown, laid himself down, and in a very short time
dropped off to sleep.

It was dark, before he was awoke by the turning of the key in the lock,
and two men entered, one of them bearing a horn lantern.

"Where am I?" Walter asked, in a feeble tone, as they approached him.

"Never mind where you are," one said roughly. "Get up."

Walter seemed to make an effort, and then fell back with a groan.

The man repeated his order, emphasizing it with a kick. Walter again made
an effort, and, as before, sank back.

"Here, catch hold of him," the man said, impatiently, "it's no use
fooling here with him."

The men took Walter under the arms and lifted him up, and half dragged,
half carried him out of the stable and into the house adjoining. He was
taken into a room where four or five men were sitting.

"Now, young fellow," one said sharply, "tell us what corps you belong
to."

Walter looked stupidly at his questioner, but made no answer.

"Answer my question," the man said, levelling a pistol at him, "or I will
blow out your brains at once."

Still Walter stared at him stupidly, and made no reply, except to mutter,
"Water."

"It's no use," one of the other men said. "He hasn't got his right senses
yet. It's no use shooting him now, after we have had the trouble of
bringing him here. In the morning, he will be able to answer you."

"He had better," the other said savagely, "or we will light a fire and
roast him over it. There, take him back to the stable, and give him a
drink of water. I don't want him to slip through our fingers, after the
trouble we have had with him."

Walter was taken back, as before, to the stable, and one of the men
brought him a mug of water, and held it to his lips. He drank eagerly,
and then the man placed the mug down beside him, the door was again
closed and locked, and Walter was alone. He rose at once to his feet, and
felt that his sleep had greatly refreshed and strengthened him.

"I will have another sleep, before I try," he said to himself. "It will
not be light till six, and it must be eight or nine o'clock now. I must
make up my mind, before I doze off, to wake in about three or four hours;
but first, I must see what I can find, here."

He felt round the walls, but failed to find anything like a rope.

"I must trust to luck," he said; "I don't suppose they will post many
sentries. These fellows are not real soldiers, and no doubt they will all
be sound asleep in a couple of hours."

So saying, he again lay down, and was speedily asleep. When he woke, he
felt sure that he had not exceeded the time he had given himself. He
listened intently. He could hear a low, confused sound, which he knew was
made by horses feeding, but he could hear no human voices. He drank the
rest of the water in the mug, then he turned up the bucket, placed it
under the opening, and mounted on it.

His first spring failed to reach the sill, and he stood for a few
minutes, before making another attempt. He knew that it was a matter of
life or death, for he had no doubt whatever that, even if he gave the
required information, which he was determined not to do, however much he
might suffer, he would be shot afterwards. He braced himself to the
utmost, took a long breath, and then sprang. His fingers caught on the
ledge of stonework, and, with a desperate effort, he drew himself up,
aided by his feet. He had, before making the attempt, removed his boots,
partly to avoid the scraping noise which these would make, partly to
enable him the better to avail himself of the inequalities in the
stonework.

It was a desperate struggle; and when he got his shoulders in the
opening, which was just wide enough to admit them, he lay for three or
four minutes, panting heavily, with the perspiration streaming down his
face. The aperture was too small to admit of his turning in any way, and
there was nothing for it, as he knew, but to drop head foremost.

Gradually, he drew himself through the opening, lowering himself as much
as he could by holding on to the upper edge by his feet. Then, stretching
out his arms to save himself, he let go. Fortunately, the ground was
soft, for a garden adjoined the stable; but the shock was a heavy one,
and he lay for a minute or two without moving, having some doubt whether
he had not broken his neck. Then he got up, and listened.

Everything was still and quiet, and, indeed, his fall had been almost
noiseless. He rose to his feet, felt along the wall until he encountered
a low paling, climbed over it, and was in the road.

He had, when he jumped for the window, tied his boots to his back, and
now carried them in his hand. The night was very dark; but his eyes,
accustomed to the greater darkness of the stable, had no difficulty in
following the road. He walked slowly, for the exertion he had undergone
and the shock of the fall had drawn greatly from his small stock of
strength.

After going a quarter of a mile, he put on his boots, and, climbing a
wall of sods which bordered the road, struck across country. There were
no stars to guide him, and a slight mist had begun to fall. There was but
little wind, but this was sufficient to give a direction to the rain.
Walter noticed this, and at once struck out in a direction which kept the
rain falling upon the right side of his face; and he knew that, by so
continuing, he was going in a tolerably straight line. As near as he
could tell he walked for two hours, and then, utterly exhausted, lay down
on the lee side of a turf wall.

There was, as yet, no gleam of light in the sky, and in a very few
minutes he was again sound asleep. He woke up with a feeling of bitter
cold, and, on rising, found that his limbs were completely stiffened by
the wet. It was morning now, the wind had got up, and a driving rain shut
out the view on all sides. Walter stamped his feet and swung his arms for
some time to restore the circulation.

He had no idea in which direction he had been travelling, for he did not
know whether the road from which he had started ran north, south, east,
or west. He noticed that the wind had changed; for, whereas he had lain
down under the lee of the wall, it was now the weather side. He walked in
the same direction as before for two hours, and could then go no farther.
He had seen no signs of human habitation, and had not crossed a road or
even a footpath. Since starting in the morning he had passed no more
walls or fences, and, as far as his eye could reach through the driving
rain, nothing was to be seen save a desolate expanse of moor and bog. He
was, at any rate, free from pursuit for the time, and he thought more of
obtaining food and shelter than of the Enniskilleners.

It was useless pushing further on, even had he been able to do so, while
the rain lasted; for he might have passed within a quarter of a mile of a
habitation without seeing it. He accordingly threw himself down beside
some low bushes, which afforded him some slight protection from the rain.



Chapter 7: The Coming Battle.


Some hours passed, and he was on the point of dropping off to sleep
again, when he heard a whistle repeated once or twice, followed by the
sharp bark of a dog. It was but a short distance away, and, leaping to
his feet, he saw a peasant standing at a distance of two or three hundred
yards.

Walter hurried towards him at a speed of which, a few minutes before, he
would have thought himself incapable. The man continued whistling, at
short intervals, and did not notice Walter till he was within twenty
yards distant; then he turned sharply round.

"Who are you?" he asked, clubbing a heavy stick which he held in his
hand, and standing on the defensive.

The dress and appearance of the man assured Walter that he was a
Catholic, and therefore a friend, and he replied at once:

"I belong to one of the Irish troops of horse. The Enniskilleners
surprised a party of us, yesterday, and wounded me, as you see.
Fortunately, I escaped in the night, or they would have finished me this
morning. I have been out all night in the rain, and am weak from loss of
blood and hunger. Can you give me shelter?"

"That I can," the man said, "and gladly. Those villains have been killing
and destroying all over the country, and there's many a one of us who,
like myself, have been driven to take refuge in the bogs."

"Is it far?" Walter asked; "for I don't think I could get more than a
mile or two."

"It is not half a mile," the man said. "You do look nearly done for.
Here, lean on me, I will help you along; and if you find your strength
go, I will make a shift to carry you."

"It is lucky I heard you whistle," Walter said.

"It is, indeed," the man replied, "for it is not likely anyone else would
have come along today. My dog went off after a rabbit, and I was
whistling to him to come to me again.

"Ah! Here he is. He has got the rabbit, too. Good dog! Well done!"

He took the rabbit and dropped it into the pocket of his coat. Seeing
that Walter was too exhausted to talk, he asked no questions, and said
nothing till he pointed to a low mound of earth, and said: "Here we are."

He went round by the side; and Walter perceived that there was a sharp
dip in the ground, and that the hut was dug out in the face of the slope;
so that, if it were approached either from behind or on either side, it
would not be noticed, the roof being covered with sods, and closely
matching the surrounding ground.

The man went to the low door, and opened it.

"Come in, sir," he said; "you are quite welcome."

The hut contained two other men, who looked up in surprise at the
greeting.

"This is a young officer, in one of our horse regiments," the man said.
"He has been in the hands of the Enniskilleners, and has got out from
them alive--which is more than most can say. He has had a bad wound, has
been wet through for hours, and is half starving. Look sharp, lads, and
get something hot, as soon as possible.

"Now, sir, if you will take off those wet things of yours, and wrap
yourself in that rug, you will find yourself the better for it. When a
man is in health, a few hours wet will not do him any harm; but when he
