The Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No. 648,
June 2, 1888., by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Scientific American Supplement, No. 648, June 2, 1888.

Author: Various

Release Date: December 24, 2011 [EBook #38403]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SC. AMERICAN SUPP., JUNE 2, 1888 ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Henry Gardiner and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.






       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: The original publication has been replicated
faithfully except as shown in the Transcriber's Amendments at the end of
the text. Words in italics are indicated like _this_. Text emphasized with
bold characters or other treatment is shown like =this=. Superscripts are
indicated like this: S^{ta} Maria. Subscripts are indicated like this:
H_{2}O.

       *       *       *       *       *




                           SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN

                               SUPPLEMENT

                         NEW YORK, JUNE 2, 1888


           Scientific American Supplement, Vol. XXV., No. 648.
                 Scientific American, established 1845.

              Scientific American Supplement, $5 a year.
            Scientific American and Supplement, $7 a year.




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS.


                                                                      PAGE

    I. ARCHITECTURE.--Evolution of the Modern Mill.--By C. J. H.
    WOODBURY.--Continuation of this Sibley College lecture, treating
    of the practical details of mill structures.                     10346

    II. ASTRONOMY.--Changes in the Stellar Heavens.--By J. E. GORE,
    F.R.A.S.--Changes of color, brightness, and position in the
    fixed stars as attested to by the records of the ancient and
    modern astronomers.                                              10355

    Distance and Constitution of the Sun.--Modern theories of the
    sun and difficulties in formulating a satisfactory explanation
    of all of its phenomena.                                         10354

    III. BOTANY.--The Common Dandelion.--By FREDERICK LEROY
    SARGENT.--The properties and life history of this common plant.--
    Its wonderful seed-distributing apparatus.--8 illustrations.     10355

    IV. CHEMISTRY.--Poison of the Somalis extracted from the Wood of
    the Ouabaio.--A recently investigated plant principle.           10358

    V. CIVIL ENGINEERING.--Test of a Wrought Iron Double Track Floor
    Beam.--By ALFRED P. BOLLER.--A test pushed to actual rupture of
    a full-sized member of a bridge.--1 illustration.                10344

    Timber and Some of its Diseases.--By H. MARSHALL WARD.--Part V.
    of this exhaustive treatise of the deterioration of one of the
    great structural materials.--1 illustration.                     10345

    Improved Torpedo Boat.--1 illustration.                          10348

    VI. ELECTRICITY.--Effect of Chlorine on the Electro-motive Force
    of a Voltaic Couple.--By D. G. GORE, F.R.S.--A very curious
    investigation, disclosing the sudden change in E. M. F. produced
    by a definite addition of chlorine.                              10351

    On a Theory Concerning the Sudden Loss of Magnetic Properties of
    Iron and Nickel.--By Mr. A. TOMLINSON, B.A.--A new theory,
    involving the probable rearrangement of the molecules or
    "magnetic atoms" of the metals in question.                      10358

    The Passive State of Iron and Nickel.--Note of this curious
    phenomenon.                                                      10347

    The Wimshurst Electric Machine.--Illustration of 13-1/2 inch sparks
    produced by it.--1 illustration.                                 10352

    The Application of Electricity to Lighting and Working.--By W.
    H. PREECE.--Lecture I.                                           10350

    VII. ENTOMOLOGY.--Systematic Relations of Platypsyllus as
    determined by the Larva.--By Dr. C. V. RILEY.--An important
    contribution to entomological science, a paper read at the
    meeting of the National Academy of Science, April 20, 1888.--4
    illustrations.                                                   10356

    VIII. HYGIENE.--Reducing Obesity--Note of general principles to
    be applied to diet and life. {Transcriber: Omitted by publisher.}
                                                                     10352

    The Care of the Eyes.--By Prof. DAVID WEBSTER.--A practical and
    scientific examination of how to preserve the eyesight and of
    the use and abuse of this important organ of sense.              10352

    Sanitation in Massachusetts.                                     10352

    IX. MECHANICAL ENGINEERING.--Hydraulic Tube Press.--An
    extraordinarily powerful press for striking up tubes from flat
    plates.                                                          10345

    The Distribution of Hydraulic Power in London.--A recent system
    introduced in London, with description of the plant and
    distribution pipes.                                              10344

    The One Hundred and Twenty Ton Shears of the Port of Marseilles.--
    An immense set of hoisting apparatus described and illustrated.--
    3 illustrations.                                                 10343

    X. PHOTOGRAPHY.--Colored Photography.--Mr. J. E. MAYALL'S recent
    advances in this phase of photography.                           10349

    XI. PHYSICS.--Scientific Apparatus at the Manchester Royal
    Jubilee Exhibition.--Notes of the most interesting electrical,
    photometrical, and communicating apparatus.                      10348

    The Spectra of Oxygen.--Interesting investigations of absorption
    spectra of oxygen.                                               10358

    XII. SURGERY.--Papillomatous Tumor of the Bladder, demonstrated
    by Means of Lister's Electro-cystoscope.--By F. N. OTIS, M.D.--
    An interesting instance of the use of an exploratory electric
    light.--2 illustrations.                                         10354

    Tumors of the Bladder Diagnosed by Means of the
    Electro-Endoscopic Cystoscope.--By Dr. MAX NITZE.--The same
    general subject in further detail, giving the German practice.--
    5 illustrations.                                                 10353

    XIII. TECHNOLOGY.--Future Prospects for Gas Companies.--By Mr.
    THOS. WOOD.--Fuel and oil gas and the future Utopia of improved
    gas manufacturing.--The ideal gas company of after days.--A
    valuable and suggestive paper.                                   10349

    Advertisements.                                                  10358




     THE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY TON SHEARS OF THE PORT OF MARSEILLES.


For a quarter of a century maritime nations have been continuously engaged
in improving the mechanical appliances of their large ports. The use of
tracks to bring goods to be placed on vessels as near as possible to the
shipping point, the substitution of oblique moles for perpendicular ones
in large docks, the creation of a hydraulic method of loading and
unloading through movable cranes (which will perhaps in a near future cede
to an electrical one), constitute the means most used for expediting
transshipments and reducing the expense of them to a minimum. But, at the
same time that the facilities for all kinds for handling packages have
been increased, it has also become necessary to greatly increase the power
of the machines applied to them. The construction of large packets now
requires the putting in place of boilers of great weight, and the adoption
of the huge pieces that compose the artillery of ironclads necessitates
the use of force that has been unknown up to recent times.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--DIAGRAM OF SHEARS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY TON SHEARS OF THE PORT OF
MARSEILLES.]

At present, then, we could no longer be content with manual power, acting
upon windlasses or capstans, for lifting and shifting. It has become
necessary to apply steam or hydraulic motors to these operations. Of
these, the latter are the most used, on account of their easy operation
and their submitting to the greatest stresses with a very satisfactory
proportionality of the expenditure of motive power. One of the most
remarkable of such apparatus is the one that the Compagnie de Fives-Lille
has recently set up on one of the moles of the national dock at
Marseilles, for the service of the chamber of commerce, and this merits a
description so much the more in that it is an important improvement upon
the analogous apparatus now in use in other ports.

According to the conditions of the programme, powers of 25, 75, and 120
tons had to be obtained at will, with a proportional output of water, and
the load had to be lifted 22 ft. above the quay and carried horizontally
from 28 ft. beyond the edge to 16 ft. in the rear, so that the load might
be taken from a ship and deposited upon a wagon, and _vice versa_. The
shears, then, had to be capable of performing two operations, viz., of
lifting the load and of carrying it horizontally. To facilitate the
description, we shall first make known the arrangements that assure the
second operation.

The apparatus is of the type known as oscillating tripod. The tripod
consists of two lateral iron plate uprights, A A (Fig. 1), resting upon
the wharf wall, and of a beam, B, jointed to them above and connected
below with the head of the piston of a hydraulic press. This latter rests
upon an iron plate frame, solidly bolted to masonry. The piston pulls the
beam, B, toward it when it descends, and carries along in the same motion
the shears, A, as well as the load suspended from their point of junction,
and the load is thus carried to a distance of 16 ft. from the edge of the
wharf in order to be placed upon a wagon. Conversely, if the piston rises,
it pushes before it the entire framework, as well as the lifting
apparatus, the hook of which travels 28 ft. beyond the edge of the wharf.

The lifting apparatus consists likewise of a hydraulic press suspended
from the summit of the tripod; but, in order to prevent the joints of the
cylinder from working under the action of the load, which would tend to
open them and cause leakages, it is not suspended from the very axis of
the junction of the shears. The cylinder rests directly upon a huge
stirrup 45 ft. in length, the arms alone of which are affixed to the axis,
through a Cardan joint. Under such circumstances, the stress of the load
carried by the piston rod is exerted solely upon the branches of the
stirrup, and the sides of the cylinder work only under the pressure of the
motive water. The latter is introduced at the base of the press, through a
valve that a special workman, standing upon a platform supported by the
stirrup, maneuvers at will.

It will be seen that the general principle applied for utilizing the
motive power is that of direct action. It has already been employed in a
few analogous apparatus constructed by Sir William Armstrong, especially
those of the arsenal of Spezia and of the Elswick cannon foundry, but
solely for the lifting press. This is the first time that use has been
made of it to effect the oscillating motion corresponding to the
horizontal shifting of the load. This was formerly done through the
intermedium of a mechanism that, aside from its complication and higher
cost, presented the inconvenience of absorbing a large quantity of force
in friction; besides, the direct action permits of performing the
maneuvers much more quickly by the use of the water in reserve contained
in the accumulators.

Another important improvement, likewise due to the Compagnie Fives-Lille,
consists in the addition of safety clicks, which engage with racks
parallel with the piston rod of each of the presses and movable with it.
The clicks, on the contrary, are jointed to axes fixed on the bottom of
the cylinders. This arrangement presents the following advantages: If a
leakage occurs in the joints or feed pipe of the hoisting press, the
descent of the load can be stopped instantaneously, thus preventing the
grave damage that would be done to ships and even to the shears themselves
by the descent of a 120 ton load, however slow it might be. As regards the
oscillating press, this arrangement permits of fixing the base of the
connecting beam at any point whatever of its travel, when it is desired to
dismount the piston. Further, it permits of maintaining the shears in an
invariable position in case of sudden damages to the piping.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.--AUTOMATIC MULTIPLIER.]

In order to produce the three powers of 25, 75, and 120 tons required by
the programme, and at the same time expend in each case a corresponding
quantity of water under pressure, it is of course necessary to cause the
pressure of the motive water to vary in the same proportion as the stress
to be extended. This result is reached by calculating the diameter of the
two cylinders in such a way as to obtain the mean power of 75 tons, in
making the water of the general conduit act directly under the normal
pressure of 50 atmospheres. For the powers of 25 and 120 tons, use is made
of an automatic multiplier, that consists of two cylinders arranged end to
end, in which move pistons, A and B (Fig. 3), of different diameters. When
it is a question of lifting 120 tons, the water at 50 atmospheres actuates
the piston, A, and the other forces into the lifting cylinder motive water
under a much greater pressure. If the load to be lifted is but 25 tons,
the water at 50 atmospheres actuates the piston, B, and A forces the water
into the same cylinder at a much lower pressure. The same operations are
effected in the other cylinder when the extreme loads of 25 and 120 tons
are moved.

The shears are likewise provided with a hydraulic cylinder, E (Fig. 1),
placed on the back of the beam, B, and serving, through a cable, to bring
the piston of the large cylinder to the end of its upward stroke, and for
certain accessory work.

Finally, the apparatus as a whole is completed by an accumulator
containing in reserve a large part of the water necessary for each
operation.

The apparatus is capable of lifting a maximum load of 120 tons from 22
feet beneath the wharf to 22 feet above, and of moving it from 28 feet
beyond the edge to 16 feet back of it, say a total of 44 feet. The
cylinders of the lifting and oscillating presses are 1-3/4 feet in diameter
and 4 inches in thickness. The stroke of the second is 22-1/2 feet. The
length of the uprights is 110-1/2 feet and that of the connecting beam is 109
feet. The apparatus has been tested under satisfactory conditions with a
load of 140 tons.--_La Nature._




              THE DISTRIBUTION OF HYDRAULIC POWER IN LONDON.


At a recent meeting of the Institution of Civil Engineers, a paper on the
above subject was read by Mr. Edward Bayzand Ellington, M. Inst. C. E. The
author observed that water power was no new force, but that, as formerly
understood, it was limited in its application to systems of mechanism
suitable for the low pressures found in nature. The effects obtained by
the use of high pressure were so different in degree from all previous
experience, that a new name was needed, and had been found in the term
"hydraulic power." Bramah's genius produced the hydraulic press, and he
clearly foresaw the future development and great capabilities of his
system; but it was reserved for Lord Armstrong to work out and superintend
the intricate details that had to be developed before the system could be
made fully serviceable. The public supply of hydraulic power in London
constituted the latest development of this system. The hydraulic power was
supplied through mains charged by pumping at a pressure of 700 lb. per
square inch. The first and largest pumping station had been erected on a
site known as Falcon Wharf, about 200 yards east of Blackfriars Bridge.
The engine house at present contained four sets of pumping engines, each
set being capable of exerting 200 I. H. P.

The engines were vertical compound, of a type comprising the advantages of
a three-throw pump with direct connection between the pump plungers and
the steam pistons. Each set of engines would deliver 240 gallons of water
per minute into the accumulators at 750 lb. pressure per square in. at a
piston speed of 200 ft. per minute. This was the normal speed of working;
but, when required, they could be worked at 250 ft. per minute, the
maximum delivery being 300 gallons per minute. The condensing water was
obtained from storage tanks over the engine house, and was returned by
circulating pumps to one or other of those tanks. The water delivered into
the mains was maintained all the year round at temperatures of between 60 deg.
and 85 deg. The boilers were of the double flued Lancashire type, and were
made of steel. All were fitted with Vicars' mechanical stokers. At the
back of the boilers was a Green's economizer, consisting of ninety-six
tubes. The economizer and the stoker gear and worm were driven by a
Brotherhood three cylinder hydraulic engine. The reservoir of power
consisted of accumulators. The accumulators at the pumping station were
two in number, each having a ram 20 in. in diameter and 23 ft. stroke.

The weight cases were of wrought iron, and were filled with iron slag. The
total weight of the case and load on each ram was approximately 106 tons,
corresponding to a pressure of 750 lb. per square in. The storage tanks
formed the roofs for the engine and boiler houses. The water for the power
supply was obtained from the river Thames, and was pumped into the tank
over the engines. The water passed through the filtering apparatus by
gravity into the filtered water tank over the boiler house, which was 7
ft. below the level of the unfiltered water tank. The filters consisted of
cast iron cylinders, and each contained a movable perforated piston and a
perforated diaphragm, between which was introduced a quantity of broken
sponge; the sponge was compressed by means of hydraulic pressure from the
mains. The delivery of power water from the Falcon Wharf pumping station
was through four 6 in. mains. The most distant point of the mains from the
accumulators was at the west end of Victoria Street, and was 5,320 yards,
or just over three miles. To provide for all frictional loss in the pipes
and valves, the accumulators had been loaded to 750 lb., the stated
pressure supplied being 700 lb. per square in. The total length of the
mains at present laid was nearly twenty-seven miles. The mains were laid
in circuit, and there were stop valves at about every 400 yards, so that
any such section of main could be isolated.

The method employed for detecting leakage was based upon an automatic
record of the number of gallons delivered into the mains, and in cases of
abnormal increase during the night, if found to arise during the early
hours of the morning, the mains were tested. The power water used was
invariably registered through meters on the exhaust pipes from the
machines, and from the meters passed to the drains. There was a sliding
scale of charges from 8s. to 2s. per 1,000 gallons at 700 lb. pressure per
square inch, designed to meet, as nearly as possible, the variable
conditions and requirements of consumers. The more continuous the use, the
lower the charges. The scale was intended chiefly for intermittently
acting machinery, and experience had fully proved that these rates were
sufficiently low to effect a large saving to the consumer in almost all
cases, whether for a large or a small plant. The author believed any idea
of supplying power from a central source at rates much below these to be
chimerical. The practical efficiency of the hydraulic system might be
fixed at from 50 to 60 per cent. of the power developed at the central
station. No other method of transmission would, he thought, show a better
result; and the general convenience and simplicity of the hydraulic system
were such that its use would hardly be affected, even if there were no
direct economy in the cost of working.

In addition to the general supply of hydraulic power, in the City and
adjoining districts, to the six hundred and fifty machines at present
worked, a new departure had been taken by the application of hydraulic
power to an estate at Kensington Court--the name given to an area of about
seven acres opposite Kensington Gardens. Seventy houses and dwellings were
to be built on this estate, of which thirty had been already erected. Each
house was fitted with a hydraulic lift, taking the place of a back
staircase, and the power supply was provided on the estate expressly for
working these lifts. The driven machinery was of as great importance to an
economical and satisfactory result as the distributing plant, but this
obvious fact was not always understood. General regulations had been
prepared by the author, defining the conditions to be observed by
manufacturers in fitting up machinery for connection to the power mains.

They were intended to secure safety, and an efficient registration of the
quantity of power used; but they left the question of the economy and of
the efficiency of the machines to be settled between the consumers and the
makers. In London more lifts were working from the mains and more power
was used by them than by any other description of machinery. The number of
all classes at present at work was over four hundred. The principal types
in use were fully described. In some cases there had been, by adopting the
public supply, a saving in the cost of working of about 30 per cent., as
compared with the steam pumping plant previously in use.

Lifts were now becoming so general, and the number of persons who used
them was so great, that the author considered it necessary to urge the
importance of securing the greatest possible safety in their construction,
by the general adoption of the simple ram. Suspended lifts depended on the
sound condition of the ropes or chains from which the cages hung. As they
became worn and unreliable after a short period, it was usual to add
safety appliances to stop the fall of the cage in case of breakage of the
suspending ropes; but they could not be expected to act under all
circumstances. As an indication of the important part which lifts occupied
in a modern hotel, it might be mentioned that at the Hotel Metropole there
were, including the two passenger lifts and that for the passengers'
luggage, no less than seventeen hydraulic lifts in use day and night,
while the work done represented about 2,000 tons lifted 40 ft. in this
time. The next largest use of the power was for working hydraulic cranes
and hoists of various kinds along the river side, and in the city
warehouses. It often happened that the pressure in the power mains was not
sufficient for pressing purposes.

The apparatus known as an intensifier was then used, by which any pressure
required could be obtained. Hydraulic power was also used at Westminster
Chambers, and elsewhere, for the purpose of pumping water from the chalk
for domestic use. The pump was set going in the evening and continued
working till the tanks were full, or until it was stopped in the morning.
For work of this kind, done exclusively at night, a discount was allowed
from the usual rates. Mr. Greathead's injector hydrant, made at the
Elswick works, had been in use to a limited extent in London in connection
with the power mains.

A small jet of high pressure water, injected into a larger jet from the
water works mains, intensified the pressure of the latter in the delivery
hose, and also increased the quantity. By this means a jet of great power
could be obtained at the top of the highest building without the
intervention of fire engines. This apparatus enabled the hydraulic power
supply to act as a continuous fire engine wherever the mains were laid,
and was capable of rendering the greatest assistance in the extinction of
fire; but there was an apathy on the subject of its use difficult to
understand. In Hull the corporation had put down a number of these
hydrants in High Street, where the hydraulic power mains were laid, and
they had been used with great success at a fire in that street. The number
of machines under contract to be supplied with power was sufficient, with
a suitable reserve, to absorb the full capacity of the station at Falcon
Wharf, and another station of about equal capacity was now in course of
erection at Millbank Street, Westminster. The works had been carried out
jointly by the author and Mr. Corbet Woodall, M. Inst. C. E.; Mr. G.
Cochrane had been resident engineer and superintendent. The pumping
engines, accumulators, valves, etc., and a considerable portion of the
consumers' machinery, had been constructed at the Hydraulic Engineering
Works, Chester. Sir James Allport, Assoc. Inst. C. E., who was the first
to adopt hydraulic power for railway work, had been associated with the
enterprise from the commencement of its operations in 1882. His wide
influence and extended experience had greatly assisted the commercial
development of the undertaking.




          TEST OF A WROUGHT IRON DOUBLE TRACK FLOOR BEAM.[1]

               By ALFRED P. BOLLER, Mem. Am. Soc. C. E.


Testing to rupture actual bridge members is always a matter of great
scientific interest, and while the record is quite extensive in eye bars,
posts, or small parts, the great cost, time, and inconvenience of handling
heavy girders has prevented experiment in that direction. In fact, the
writer is unaware of any experiment upon compound riveted beams on a large
scale, as actually used, until the experiment recorded below was made
under his supervision. The beam was an exact duplicate of those in use on
