wonder."

But we knew that we could bide here for this night safe as if no Danes
were nearer than the Scaw.

After that rest we rode on through the woodland path, down which they
had come to exorcise me, till we saw before us in the gray twilight the
church and houses of the village, pleasant with light from door and
window, and noise of barking dogs, as we crossed the open mark [viii].

Dudda the Collier led us to the largest house which stood on the little
central green round which the buildings clustered, and there the door
stood open, and a tall man with a small boy beside him looked out to see
what was disturbing the dogs. Behind them the firelight shone red on a
pleasant and large room where we could see men at supper.

And the light shone out on me, for the boy sprang out from his father's
side, shouting that it was "Grendel come back again", and running to me
to greet me.

So we found a welcome in that quiet place, and soon the good franklin's
wife came out, bustling and pitiful in her care for Alswythe and sorrow
for her need to fly from her lost home, for it took but few words to
explain what had befallen.

They brought us in, and the thralls left supper to tend our horses,
though Wulfhere would go with them to see that done before he joined us
in the wide oak-built room that made all the lower floor of the house.
Overhead was the place where Alswythe and her maidens should be, and
built against the walls outside were the thralls' quarters, save for a
few who slept in the lower room round the great fire.

Now, how they treated us it needs not to be told, for it was in the way
of a good Somerset franklin, and that is saying much. But that night he
would talk little, seeing that I and Wulfhere were overdone with want of
sleep. Indeed it was but the need of caution that had kept me from
falling asleep on my horse more than once on the road. So very soon they
brought us skins and cloaks, and we stretched ourselves before the fire,
and warmed, and cleansed, and well refreshed with food and drink, fell
to sleep on the instant.

Yet not so soundly could I sleep at first, but that I woke once,
thinking I heard the yells of the Danes close on us: but it was some
farmyard sound from without, and peaceful.

Then I slept again until, towards dawning I think, I awoke, shivering,
and with a great untellable fear on me, and saw a tall, gray figure
standing by my couch. And I looked, and lo it was Matelgar the Thane.

Then I went to rouse Wulfhere, but my hand would not be stretched out,
and the other men slept heavily, so that I lay still and looked in the
dead thane's face and grew calmer.

For his face was set with a look of sorrow such as I had never seen
there, and he gazed steadfastly at me and I at him, and the grief in his
face did but deepen. And at last he spoke, and the voice was his own,
and yet not his own.

"Heregar, sorely have I wronged you," he said, "and my rest is troubled
therefor. Yet, when I heard what you had done for mine last night, my
heart was sore within me, and I repented of all, and would surely have
made amends. And now it is too late, and my body lies dishonoured on
Parret side while I am here. Yet do you forgive, and mayhap I shall rest."

Then I strove to speak, bidding him know that I forgave, but I could
not, and he seemed to grow more sad, watching me yet. And when I saw
that, I made a great effort, and stretching my hand towards him signed
the blessed sign in token that that should bid me forgive him, so
leaving my hand outstretched towards him.

And then his face changed and grew brighter, and he took my hand in his,
as I might see, though I could feel nought but a chill pass on it, as it
were, and spoke again, saying:

"It is well, and shall be, both with you and me. And when you need me I
shall stand by you once again and make amends."

Then he was gone, and my hand fell from where his had been, and
straightway I slept again in a dreamless sleep till Wulfhere roused me
in the full morning light.

And in that light this matter seemed to me but a dream that had come to
me. Yet even as I should have wished to speak to Alswythe's father, had
I done, and I would not have had it otherwise. Then the dream in a way
comforted me, being good to think on, for I would not willingly be at
enmity with any man, or living or dead. But that it was only a dream
seemed more sure, because in it Matelgar had said he knew of my saving
Alswythe. And Wulfhere and I had agreed not to tell him that. Also I had
little need of Matelgar living, in good truth, and surely less need of
him now that he was gone past making amends.

Down into the great chamber to break her fast with us came Alswythe,
bright and fresh, and with her grief put on one side, for our sakes who
served her. And Turkil talked gaily with both Alswythe and me and
Wulfhere, and would fain tell all the story of how he sought the
fire-spitting fiend and was disappointed.

Then I missed the collier, and asked where he was. He had gone to bring
the good hermit the franklin told me, and would be back shortly.

Now, when we had broken our fast it was yet very early, and the
villagers must needs hear all the news of the great fight and terror
beyond the fens, and as they heard, a growl of wrath went round, and the
men grasped spade and staff and fork fiercely, bidding the franklin lead
them at once to join the levy.

But Wulfhere told them that they needs must now wait a second raising,
and that I was even now on my way to Eanulf the Ealdorman to tell him of
the need. Then the franklin asked that he and his might go with me, but
I, seeing that for an outlaw to take a following with him was not to be
thought of, bade them wait for word and sure tidings of the gathering
place.

While we talked thus the little bell in the church turret began to ring,
and we knew that the hermit, Leofwine the priest, had come, and would
say mass for us. Then, perhaps, was such a gathering to pray for relief
for their land, as had not been since those days, far off now, when the
British prayed, in that same place, the like prayers for deliverance
from my own forbears. And as I prayed, looking on the calm face of the
old man who had bidden me take heart and forgive, I knew that last
night's dream was true in this, that I had forgiven.

So when the mass was over, and Wulfhere had begged Alswythe to take
order at once for our going on our journey, I found the old man, and
could greet him with a light heart. And he, looking on me, could read,
as he had read the trouble, how that that had passed, and asked me if
all was well, as my face seemed to say.

I told him how I had fared, and how my outlawry, though still in force,
was now light on me as the sheriff's messenger--though this I thought
was but because, flying with Alswythe, I might as well take the message
as one who could be less easily spared.

Then he said that already he deemed the prophecy that had been given him
was coming true, and spoke many good and loving words to me to
strengthen my thoughts of peace withal.

Presently he looked at our horses, now standing ready at the franklin's
door, and would have me go back with him into his own chamber in the
little timber-walled church. And there he found writing things in a
chest, and wrote on a slip of parchment a letter which he bade me give
to the bishop when I came to him, signing it with his name at the end,
as he told me, though I could not read it, for one who has been bred a
hunter and warrior has no need for the arts of the clerk. Indeed, I had
seen but two men write before, and one was our old priest at Cannington,
and the other was Matelgar, and I ever wondered that this latter should
be able to do so, and why of late he was often sending men with letters.
Yet it seems to me now that surely they had to do with his schemes that
had so come to nought.

Then the old man blessed me, telling me again that I should surely
prosper unless that I failed by my own fault, and that it seemed to him
that there was yet work for me to do that should set me again in my
place, and maybe higher.

So talking with him, Wulfhere called me, and I must needs say farewell
to Turkil and his father, and they bade us return, when the time came,
by this way back to our own place. And Turkil wept, and would fain have
gone with us, but I promised to see him again, and waved hand to him
before the broad meadows of the mark were passed, and the woods hid the
village from us.

Then did Alswythe, in her kindness, fall into a like mistake as that I
had made with the boy; for she turned to me, smiling, and said that she
would surely take him into her service at Stert, and see to his training
hereafter, but then remembered that she had no longer home, and her
smile faded into tears.

My heart ached for her, knowing I could give her no comfort. After that
we rode in silence, and quickly, for the track was good.

Now there is little to tell of that ride till we reached the hilltop
that Wulfhere knew, and where we could look down on the land we were to
cross, and fancy we could see Glastonbury far away. Here Dudda the
Collier's task was ended, and I called him to me, pulling out the purse
the good prioress had given me, that I might give him a gold piece for
his faithful service.

He stood before me, cap in hand, and I gave him a bright new coin, and
he took it, turning it over curiously.

"Take it, Dudda," I said, "you have earned it well."

Then he grinned in his way, and answered: "It is no good to me, master.
I pray you give me silver instead. Like were I to starve if life lay in
the changing of this among our poor folk."

So I turned over the money to find silver, but there was not enough, and
so I took out that bag which I had found in the roadway, and had not
opened since, having almost forgotten it. There was silver and copper
only in that, and I began to give him his reward.

But still the man hesitated, and seemed anxious to ask me something,
and, while I counted out the money, he spoke: "Master, the men call you
Heregar, and that is an outlaw's name."

"Well." said I, fearing no reproach from that just now, and being sure
that by this time the man knew all about me from our thralls with us.
"Heregar, the outlawed thane I was, and am, except that the sheriff has
bid me ride on his business."

"Then, master," said he, "give me no reward but to serve you. No man's
man am I, either free or unfree, but son of escaped thralls who are dead
long ago. Therefore am I outlaw also by all rights, and would fain
follow you. And it seems to me that you will need one to mind your steed."

Now this was a long speech for the collier, who, as I had learnt, could
hold his tongue: and we were short-handed also, with all these horses.
Therefore I told him that it should be as he would, for service offered
freely in this way was like to be faithful, seeing that there had been
trial on both sides. But I gave him four silver pennies, which he would
have refused, but that I bade him think of them as fasten pennies, which
contented him well.

This, too, pleased both Alswythe and Wulfhere, who were glad of the
addition to our party. So we rode on. But many were the far-off columns
of smoke we looked back on beyond Parret, before the hills rose behind
us and hid them.



CHAPTER XI. EALHSTAN THE BISHOP.


It was in the late afternoon when we rode into Glastonbury town, past
the palisadings of the outer works, and then among cottages, and here
and there a timber house of the better sort, till we came to the great
abbey. It was not so great then as now, nor is it now as it will be, for
ever have pious hands built so that those who come after may have room
to add if they will. But it was the greatest building that I had ever
seen, and, moreover, of stone throughout, which seemed wonderful to me.
And there, too, Wulfhere showed me the thorn tree which sprang from the
staff of the blessed Joseph of Arimathea, which flowers on Christmas
Day, ever.

Then we came to the nunnery where we should leave Alswythe, and I, for
my part, was sorry that the journey was over, sad though it had been in
many ways, for when I must leave her I knew not how long it should be,
if ever, before I saw her again.

And I think the same thought was in her heart, for, when Wulfhere showed
her the great house, she sighed, looking at me a little, and I could say
nothing. But she began to thank us two for our care of her, as though we
could have borne to take less than we had. And her words were so sweet
and gracious that even the old warrior could not find wherewith to
answer her, and we both bowed our heads in thanks, and rode, one on each
side of her, in silence.

Then she must ask Wulfhere what he would do when she was safely
bestowed. And that was a plain question he could answer well.

"Truly, lady, if you will give me leave, I would see Heregar, our
master, through whatever comes of his messages."

Then was I very glad, and the more that, though I might not think myself
such, the old warrior would call me his master, for that told me that he
had full belief in me.

Yet I could but say: "Friend should you call me, Wulfhere, my good
counsellor, not master."

And I reached out my hand to him, bowing to Alswythe, whose horse's neck
I must cross. And Wulfhere took it, and on our two rough hands Alswythe
laid her white fingers, pressing them, and, looking from one to the
other, said:

"Two such friends I think no woman ever had, or wiser, or braver. Go on
together as you will, and yet forget not me here in Glastonbury."

Then we loosed our hands, looking, maybe, a little askance, for our
Saxon nature will oft be ashamed, if one may call it so, of a good
impulse acted on, and Wulfhere said that we must think of those things
hereafter.

When we came to the gate there was a little crowd following us, for word
had gone round in some way that we were fugitives from Parret side. But
Wulfhere had bade the men answer no questions till we had seen the
bishop, lest false reports should go about the place. So the crowd
melted away soon, and we knocked, asking admission, and showing the
letter from the prioress of Bridgwater.

Now here there was much state, as it seemed, and we must wait for a
little, but then the gates were thrown open, and we rode through them
into the courtyard, which was large and open. Then opened a great door
on the left, and there was the abbess with many sisters, and one asked
me for the letter we bore. So I gave it, and, standing there, the abbess
read it while we waited.

As she read she grew pale, and then flushed again, and at last, after
twice reading, came down the steps, all her state forgotten, and with
tears embraced Alswythe, giving thanks for her safety. And then, leaving
her, she came to me where I sat, unhelmed, and gave me her hand,
thanking me for all I had done, and, as she said, perhaps for the safety
of the Bridgwater sisters also.

Then all of a sudden she went back up the steps, where the sisters were
whispering together, and became cold and stately again, so that I
wondered if I had offended her in not speaking, which I dared not.

When she was back again in her place, she bade Alswythe and her maidens
welcome, and added that all her sister prioress asked her she would do.
Also, that one would come and show us lodging for men and horses, which
should be at the expense of the nunnery.

So Alswythe must needs part from us coldly, even as she had joined us at
Bridgwater, as a noble lady from her attendants, giving us her hand to
kiss only. But I went back to my horse well content, knowing that her
love and thoughts went out to me.

She went through the great door, but it closed not so fast but that I
might see the abbess put her arm around her very tenderly, her state
forgotten again, and I knew that she was in good hands.

Now when the horses were stabled, and our men knew where they should
bide in the strangers' lodgings--set apart for the trains of guests to
the nunnery, which were very spacious--Wulfhere and I must needs find
the way to get audience of the bishop. As far as the doors of the abbey
where he abode was easy enough, but there, waiting for alms and broken
meats, were crowds of beggars, sitting and lying about in the sun, with
their eyes ever on the latch to be first when it was lifted for the
daily dole. And again, round the gate were many men of all sorts,
suitors, as we deemed for some favour at the hands of bishop or abbot--
for the Abbot of Glastonbury was nigh as powerful as Ealhstan himself,
in his own town at least.

When we came among these we were told that we must bide our time, for
audience was not given but at stated hours. And one man, grumbling, said
that that was not Ealhstan's way in his own place at Sherborne, for
there the doors were open ever.

But I knew that my business might not wait, and so, after a little of
this talk, went up to the gate and thundered thereon in such sort that
the wicket opened, and the porter's face looked through it angrily
enough, and he would have bidden us begone, for war and travel had
stained us both, so that doubtless we were in no better case, as to
looks, than the crowd that pressed after us--very quietly, indeed--
to hear the parley.

One difference in our looks there was, however, which made the porter
silent--we wore mail and swords, and at that he seemed to stare in
wonder.

Then I held up the ring and said, "Messages from Osric the Sheriff."

Whereupon the wicket closed suddenly, and there was a sound of
unbarring, and the door opened and we were let in, the rest, who must
wait, grumbling loudly at the preference shown to us, while the beggars,
who had roused at the sound of the hinges creaking, went back whining in
their disappointment.

Then one came and bade us follow him, and we were led into the abbey
hall and there waited for a little. There were a few monks about,
passing and repassing, but they paid no attention to us, and we, too,
were silent in that quiet place. Only a great fire crackled at one end
of the hall, else there would have been no noise at all. It was, I
thought, a strangely peaceful place into which to bring news of war and
tumult.

Then I thought of Ealhstan the Bishop, as he had seemed to me when he
judged me, and that seemed years ago, nor could I think of myself as the
same who had stood a prisoner before him. So I wondered if I should seem
the same to him.

Now it is strange that of Eanulf, the mighty ealdorman who had
pronounced my doom, I thought little at all, but as of one who was by
the bishop. All that day's doings seemed to have been as a dream,
wherein I and Wulfhere had living part with this bishop, while the rest,
Eanulf and Matelgar and the others, were but phantoms standing by.

Maybe this is not so wonderful, for the doom was the doom of the Moot,
and spoken by Eanulf as its mouthpiece, and that passed on my body only.
And Matelgar had found a new place in my thoughts, but Wulfhere was my
friend, and the bishop had spoken to my heart, so that his words and
looks abode there.

Then the servant cut short my thoughts, and led us to the bishop,
bidding me unhelm first.

