grave, and scowled furtively at his host, as if he felt that he had
committed himself.

"You are right," replied Bladud, affecting not to observe the scowl.
"My pup often speaks to me with his eyes, but I am not so good at
understanding the language as you appear to be.  No doubt I shall
acquire it in time."

"Then you don't like being alone?" said the hunter, after a pause,
during which Bladud saw that he was eyeing him keenly, though he
pretended not to observe this.

"No, I don't like it at all, but it can't be helped."

"Well, it might have been helped, for I could have sent them to you."

"Sent whom?"

"A man and a boy.  They were not together, but came to my hut at
different times inquiring for you, but, knowing your desire for
solitude, I turned them away on the wrong scent."

"I'm glad you did," returned the prince, "for I want to be troubled by
neither man nor boy.  Yet I wonder who they could be.  Did they say why
they wanted to find me?"

"No, they did not say, and I would not ask; what cared I about their
reasons?"

"Yet you care enough for me, it appears, to say you would have sent them
to me if you knew I had been lonely.  What was the appearance of the
man?"

"He was old, but very strong, though not so big as me--or you.  His hair
was long and white; so was his beard.  He wore a long dark robe, and
carried a very big staff."

Bladud had no difficulty in recognising the description of his friend
the Hebrew.

"And the boy; what was he like?"

"Like all boys, active and impudent."

"I am afraid," returned the prince with a slight smile, "that your
acquaintance with boys cannot have been extensive--they are not all
active and impudent."

"Most of those that have crossed my path are so.  At all events, this
one was, for when I pointed out the direction you had gone--which was
just the opposite way from here--he said, `I don't believe you!' and
when I leaped on him to give him his deserts, he dodged me, and fled
into the woods like a squirrel.  It was as well, for I should have
killed him."

"I am not sorry he escaped you, then," said Bladud, with a laugh,
"though I scarcely think you would have killed the poor lad even if you
had caught him."

"Oh yes, I would.  And I'll kill _you_ if you venture to doubt my word."

As he said this the hunter sprang to his feet, and, drawing his knife,
seemed about to leap upon his host, who, however, sat perfectly still.

"I should be sorry that you should die," said Bladud in a calm voice,
while he kept his eyes steadily fixed on those of the maniac.  "_You_
have heard, have you not, of that terrible disease of the East, called
leprosy?"

"Yes--the ship-captains have often spoken of it," said the madman, whose
mind, like that of a child, could be easily turned into new channels.

"Look!  I have got that disease.  The Power which you profess to despise
has sent it to me.  If you so much as touch me, your doom is fixed."

He uncovered his shoulder as he spoke and displayed the white spot.

Bladud felt quite uncertain how this would be received by the madman,
but he was scarcely prepared for what followed.  No sooner did the
hunter see the spot and realise what it meant, than without a word he
turned, caught up his bundle, uttered a yell of terror, and fled from
the spot, closely followed by his dogs, which howled as if in sympathy.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

A STRANGE ENCOUNTER AND A FRIEND IN NEED.

About a week after the events narrated in the last chapter, an incident
occurred which, trifling in itself, was nevertheless the cause of
momentous issues in the life of our hero.

He was returning one evening from a long ramble with his dog, when the
screams of a pig in evident distress attracted his attention.  Hastening
to the place he found that a small member of his charge had fallen over
a cliff into a crevice in the rock, where it stuck fast and was unable
to extricate itself.  The violent nature of the porcine family is well
known.  Although very little hurt, this little pig felt its position so
unbearable that it immediately filled the woods with agonising shrieks
until Bladud dragged it out of the cleft, and carried it in his arms to
the foot of the precipice, where he set it free.  Then the whirlwind of
its outcry came to a sudden stop, thereby proving beyond a doubt that
passion, not pain, was the cause of its demonstrations.

From that date many of the pigs became affected by a cutaneous disease,
which gradually spread among all the herds.  It was some time before
Bladud observed this; but when he did notice it, he jumped at once to
the conclusion that he must have communicated leprosy to his unfortunate
herds while rescuing the little pig.  Whether or not he was right in
this conjecture, we cannot say; but the probability of his mere touch
being so contaminating was sufficient to increase greatly the depression
of spirits which had been stealing over him--a condition which was not a
little aggravated by the fact that the white spot on his arm was slowly
but surely spreading.  Still the disease had not, so far, affected his
general health or strength in any serious degree.

About that time there set in a long period of fine sunny weather, during
which Bladud busied himself in hunting and drying meat, as well as fish,
which he stored in his larder for future use.  He also cut a large
quantity of firewood, and built another booth in which to protect it
from the weather, and otherwise made preparation for the winter when it
should arrive.

One day he had wandered a considerable way into the forest, and was
about to turn to retrace his steps homeward, when he was surprised to
hear some creature crashing through the woods towards him.  It could not
have been startled by himself, else it would have run away from him.
Stepping behind a tree, he strung his bow, called Brownie close to his
heel, and waited.  A few seconds later a deer dashed close past him,
but, as his belt was already hung round with game, and home was still
far distant, he did not shoot.  Besides, he was curious to know what had
startled the deer.  A few minutes revealed that, for suddenly the sound
of footsteps was heard; then the bushes opposite were parted, and a boy,
or youth just emerging from boyhood, ran past him at full speed, with an
arrow sticking through his left sleeve.  He was unarmed, and gasped like
one who runs for his life.  Catching sight of the prince as he passed
the tree that had concealed him, the boy doubled like a hare, ran up to
Bladud, and, grasping one of his hands, cried--"O! save me!--save me!--
from robbers!" in the most agonising tones.

"That will I, poor lad, if I can."

He had barely time to make this reply when a man burst from the
shrubbery on the other side of the tree, and almost plunged into his
arms.  So close was he, and so unexpected the meeting, that the prince
had not time or space to use his bow, but saluted the man's forehead
with such an Olympic crack from his fist, that he fell prone upon the
ground and remained there.  Bladud had dropped his bow in the act, but
his club leant handily against the tree.  Catching it up, he wheeled
round just in time to face three tall and strong men, with bows in their
hands.  Seeing their leader on the ground, they simultaneously
discharged three arrows, which were well aimed, and struck the prince
full on the chest; but they did not penetrate far, for, in anticipation
of some such possible encounter with foes, he had covered his chest with
a breastplate of thick double-ply hide, which effectually checked them.

Before they could draw other arrows Bladud rushed at them with a
terrific shout, hurling his mighty club in advance.  The weapon caught
the nearest robber full in the chest and laid him flat on the grass.
The other two, dropping their bows, turned and fled.

"Guard them, Brownie!" cried Bladud, as he followed.

The dog obediently took up a position between the two fallen men, and
eyed them in a way and with an ominous growl, that meant mischief if
they dared to stir.

Bladud easily overtook the other two, grasped them by their necks, and,
using their heads as battering-rams, rapped them together.  They sank
half-stunned upon their knees, and begged for mercy.

"You shall have it," said Bladud, "on the condition that you go and tell
your comrades that if they ever come within twenty miles of the Swamp,
they shall find a man in the woods who will turn them inside out, and
roast them all alive!  Away!"

They went precipitately, as may be readily believed, and, as the prince
had intended, spread a report that gave to him thenceforth the rank of a
sorcerer, and secured him from future annoyance.

Returning to the tree, Bladud found the fallen robbers beginning to
recover consciousness--the one being held in submission by the fugitive
youth, who stood, bow in hand, pointing an arrow at his throat; the
other by Brownie, who merely curled his nose, displayed his magnificent
teeth, and uttered a low growl of remonstrance.

"Get up!" he said to the one he had knocked down with his fist.

But as the order was not obeyed with sufficient promptitude, he lifted
the man up by the collar, like a kitten, and sent him staggering against
the tree with a violence that astounded him.  Calling off the dog, he
gave a similar order to the second robber, who displayed much greater
agility in his movements.

Repeating the little threat with which he had dismissed their comrades,
Bladud ordered them to be off.  The second robber thankfully turned and
took to his heels; but the first stooped to pick up his bow, whereupon
Bladud wrenched it from his grasp, broke it over his head, and
belaboured him with the wreck for a couple of hundred yards through the
woods, while the robber ran as if he thought the evil spirit was at his
heels.

Returning somewhat blown from this unusual exercise, he found the youth
in a state of great amusement and satisfaction.

"Hah! you may laugh, my lad; but I can assure you it would have been no
laughing matter if these scoundrels had caught you."

"You speak but the sober truth," returned the boy, still smiling; "for
well assured am I that it would have cost me my life if they had caught
me.  But, believe me, I am not only pleased to see such villains get a
little of what they deserve, but am exceedingly grateful to you for so
kindly and effectually coming to my aid."

"As to that, I would aid any one in distress--especially if pursued by
robbers.  But, come, sit down and tell me how you fell into their power.
This bout has winded me a little.  I will sit down on this bank; do you
sit on the bank opposite to me."

"The explanation is simple and short," replied the boy; "I wanted to
have my own way, like most other boys, so I left home without leave, or
saying farewell."

"That was bad," said the prince, shaking his head.  He was on the point
of advancing some profitable reflections on this head, but the memory of
his own boyhood checked him.

"I know it was bad, and assuredly I have been well punished," returned
the boy, "for these robbers caught me and have kept me with them for a
long time, so long that I have quite lost count of the days now."

"Does your father live far from here?"

"Yes, very, very far, and I know not where to go or what to do,"
answered the boy, with a pitiful look.

"Never mind, you are safe at present, and no doubt I shall find means of
having you sent safe home--though I see not the way just yet."

"Is that blood on your coat?" asked the lad anxiously, as he pointed to
the prince's breast.

"It is.  The arrow-heads must have gone through the breastplate and
scratched the skin.  I will look to it."

"Let me help you," said the boy, rising and approaching.

"Back! you know not what you do," said the prince sternly.  "You must
not touch me.  You have done so once to-day.  It may cost you your life.
Ask not why, but obey my orders."

Not less surprised at the nature of these remarks than at the severe
tone in which they were uttered, the boy re-seated himself in silence,
while Bladud removed the breastplate and examined his wounds.

They were deeper than he had imagined, the three arrow-heads being half
imbedded in his flesh.

"Nothing serious," he said, drawing out the heads and stanching the flow
of blood with a little moss.  "Come, now, I will show you my home, and
give you something to eat before you tell me more of your history.  You
shall have a couch in one of my outhouses.  Have a care as you walk with
me that you do not come against me, or touch me even with a finger.  My
reasons you may not know, but--remember what I say."

Bladud spoke the last words with the severity that he had assumed
before; then, dismissing the subject, he commented on the beauty of the
landscape, the wickedness of robbers, the liveliness of animated nature
and things in general with the cheerful air that had been habitual to
him before he was compelled to flee the face of man.  The pleasure he
had felt in his brief intercourse with the gruff hunter of the Swamp had
remained a bright spot in his lonely life.  He naturally enjoyed with
much greater zest the company of the lively boy who had thus
unexpectedly crossed his path, but when he retired for the night--having
told the lad to make for himself a couch in the fire-wood hut--the utter
desolation of his life became, if possible, more deeply impressed on
him.

During the night his wounds inflamed and became much more painful, and
in the morning--whether from this cause or not, we cannot say--he found
himself in a high fever.

His new friend, like most healthy boys, was a profound sleeper, and when
the time for breakfast arrived he found it necessary to get up and awake
him.

"Ho! lad, rise," he cried at the entrance to the firewood hut, "you
slumber soundly.  Come out and help me to get ready our morning meal."

The lad obeyed at once.

"What is your name?" he asked, as the lad appeared.

"Cormac," he replied.

"Well, Cormac, do you roast the meat this morning.  Truly, it seems that
you have come just in the nick of time, for I feel so ill that my head
seems like a lump of stone, and my skin is burning.  It is not often
that I have had to ask the aid of man in such matters.  Will you get me
a draught of water from the spring hard by?  I will lie down again for a
little."

Cormac willingly ran to a neighbouring spring and filled thereat a cup
made of the bark of the birch tree, with which he returned to Bladud's
hut.

"Just put it inside the door where I can reach it," shouted the prince.
"Do not enter on any account."

Lifting a corner of the skin that covered the entrance, the lad placed
the cup inside, and then, sitting down by the fire outside, proceeded to
prepare breakfast.

When it was ready he called to Bladud to say whether he would have some,
at the same time thrusting a savoury rib underneath the curtain; but the
prince declined it.

"I cannot eat," he said; "let me lie and rest if possible.  My poor boy,
this is inhospitable treatment.  Yet I cannot help it."

"Never mind me," returned Cormac, lightly.  "I like to nurse the sick,
and I'll keep you well supplied with water, and cook venison or birds
too if you want them.  I can even shoot them if required."

"No need for that," returned Bladud, "there is plenty of food laid up
for winter.  But don't come inside my hut, remember.  It will be death
if you do!"

All that day the lad sat by the fire or went to the well for water, of
which his patient drank continuously.  During the night the prince was
very restless, and groaned a good deal, so the boy resolved to sit up
and watch by the fire.  Next morning Bladud was delirious, and as he
could not rise even to fetch from the door the water for which he
thirsted, Cormac resolved to disobey orders and risk the consequences.
Entering the hut, therefore, and sitting down beside the patient, he
tended him for many days and nights--taking what rest he could obtain by
snatches beside the camp-fire.

CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

THE PIGS' CURE.

It was not long before our hero recovered from his delirium.  Leading,
as he had been doing, an abstemious and healthy life, ordinary disease
could not long maintain its grasp of him.  His superabundant life seemed
to cast it off with the ease with which his physical frame was able to
cast aside human foes.  But he could not thus shake off the leprosy.

One of the first things he did on recovering consciousness was to
uncover his arm.  The fatal spot had increased considerably in size.
