
"Well, if it comes to that, Captain, I'll ride as far and as fast as any
man to rescue a girl, pretty or plain, from the Redskins," said Jake,
recovering his good-humour.

"Well, then, cram as much grub as you can into you in five minutes, for
we must be off by that time.  Rise, sir," said Buck, shaking Charlie
with some violence.  "We ride on a matter of life an' death--to save
women.  Will you join us?"

"Of course I will!" cried Charlie, starting up with a degree of alacrity
and vigour that favourably impressed the outlaws, and shaking off his
simulated sleep with wonderful facility.

"Follow me, then," cried Buck, hastening out of the cave.

"But what of Shank?" asked Charlie, in some anxiety, when they got
outside.  "He cannot accompany us; may we safely leave him behind?"

"Quite safely.  This place is not known to the savages who are on the
warpath, and there is nothing to tempt them this way even if it were.
Besides, Shank is well enough to get up and gather firewood, kindle his
fire, and boil the kettle for himself.  He is used to being left alone.
See, here is our stable under the cliff, and yonder stands your horse.
Saddle him.  The boys will be at our heels in a moment.  Some of them
are only too glad to have a brush wi' the Redskins, for they killed two
of our band lately."

This last remark raised an uncomfortable feeling in the mind of Charlie,
for was he not virtually allying himself with a band of outlaws, with
intent to attack a band of Indians of whom he knew little or nothing,
and with whom he had no quarrel?  There was no time, however, to weigh
the case critically.  The fact that savages were about to attack the
ranch in which his comrade Dick Darvall was staying, and that there were
females in the place, was enough to settle the question.  In a minute or
two he had saddled his horse, which he led out and fastened to a tree,
and, while the outlaws were busy making preparations for a start, he ran
back to the cave.

"Shank," said he, sitting down beside his friend and taking his hand,
"you have heard the news.  My comrade Darvall is in great danger.  I
must away to his rescue.  But be sure, old fellow, that I will return to
you soon."

"Yes, yes--I know," returned Shank, with a look of great anxiety; "but,
Charlie, you don't know half the danger you run.  Don't fight with Buck
Tom--do you hear?"

"Of course I won't," said Charlie, in some surprise.

"No, no, that's not what I mean," said Shank, with increasing anxiety.
"Don't fight _in company with him_."

At that moment the voice of the outlaw was heard at the entrance
shouting, "Come along, Brooke, we're all ready."

"Don't be anxious about me, Shank; I'll take good care," said Charlie,
as he hastily pressed the hand of the invalid and hurried away.

The ten men with Buck at their head were already mounted when he ran
out.

"Pardon me," he said, vaulting into the saddle, "I was having a word
with the sick man."

"Keep next to me, and close up," said Buck, as he wheeled to the right
and trotted away.

Down the Traitor's Trap they went at what was to Charlie a break-neck
but satisfactory pace, for now that he was fairly on the road a
desperate anxiety lest they should be too late took possession of him.
Across an open space they went at the bottom of which ran a brawling
rivulet.  There was no bridge, but over or through it went the whole
band without the slightest check, and onward at full gallop, for the
country became more level and open just beyond.

The moon was still shining although sinking towards the horizon, and now
for the first time Charlie began to note with what a stern and reckless
band of men he was riding, and a feeling of something like exultation
arose within him as he thought on the one hand of the irresistible sweep
of an onslaught from such men, and, on the other, of the cruelties that
savages were known to practise.  In short, rushing to the rescue was
naturally congenial to our hero.

About the same time that the outlaws were thus hastening for once on an
honourable mission--though some of them went from anything but
honourable motives--two other bands of men were converging to the same
point as fast as they could go.  These were a company of United States
troops, guided by Hunky Ben, and a large band of Indians under their
warlike chief Bigfoot.

Jackson, _alias_ Roaring Bull, had once inadvertently given offence to
Bigfoot, and as that chief was both by nature and profession an
unforgiving man he had vowed to have his revenge.  Jackson treated the
threat lightly, but his pretty daughter Mary was not quite as
indifferent about it as her father.

The stories of Indian raids and frontier wars and barbarous cruelties
had made a deep impression on her sensitive mind, and when her mother
died, leaving her the only woman at her father's ranch--with the
exception of one or two half-breed women, who could not be much to her
as companions--her life had been very lonely, and her spirit had been
subjected to frequent, though hitherto groundless, alarms.

But pretty Moll, as she was generally called, was well protected, for
her father, besides having been a noted pugilist in his youth, was a
big, powerful man, and an expert with rifle and revolver.  Moreover,
there was not a cow-boy within a hundred miles of her who would not (at
least thought he would not) have attacked single-handed the whole race
of Redskins if Moll had ordered him to do so as a proof of affection.

Now, when strapping, good-looking Dick Darvall came to the ranch in the
course of his travels and beheld Mary Jackson, and received the first
broadside from her bright blue eyes, he hauled down his colours and
surrendered with a celerity which would have mightily amused the many
comrades to whom he had said in days of yore that his heart was as hard
as rock, and he had never yet seen the woman as could soften it!

But Dick, more than most of his calling, was a modest, almost a bashful,
man.  He behaved to Mary with the politeness that was natural to him,
and with which he would have approached any woman.  He did not make the
slightest attempt to show his admiration of her, though it is quite
within the bounds of possibility that his "speaking" brown eyes may have
said something without his permission!  Mary Jackson, being also modest
in a degree, of course did not reveal the state of her feelings, and
made no visible attempt to ascertain his, but her bluff sagacious old
father was not obtuse--neither was he reticent.  He was a man of the
world--at least of the back-woods world--and his knowledge of life, as
there exhibited, was founded on somewhat acute experience.  He knew that
his daughter was young and remarkably pretty.  He saw that Dick Darvall
was also young--a dashing and unusually handsome sailor--something like
what Tom Bowling may have been.  Putting these things together, he came
to the very natural conclusion that a wedding would be desirable;
believing, as he did, that human nature in the Rockies is very much the
same as to its foundation elements as it is elsewhere.  Moreover,
Roaring Bull was very much in want of a stout son-in-law at that time,
so he fanned the flame which he fondly hoped was beginning to arise.
This he did in a somewhat blundering and obvious manner, but Dick was
too much engrossed with Mary to notice it and Mary was too ignorant of
the civilised world's ways to care much for the proprieties of life.

Of course this state of things created an awful commotion in the breasts
of the cow-boys who were in the employment of Mary's father and herded
his cattle.  Their mutual jealousies were sunk in the supreme danger
that threatened them all, and they were only restrained from picking a
quarrel with Dick and shooting him by the calmly resolute look in his
brown eyes, coupled with his great physical power and his irresistible
good-nature.  Urbanity seemed to have been the mould in which the spirit
of this man-of-the-sea had been cast and gentleness was one of his chief
characteristics.  Moreover, he could tell a good story, and sing a good
song in a fine bass voice.  Still further, although these gallant
cow-boys felt intensely jealous of this newcomer, they could not but
admit that they had nothing tangible to go upon, for the sailor did not
apparently pay any pointed attention to Mary, and she certainly gave no
special encouragement to him.

There was one cow-boy, however, of Irish descent, who could not or would
not make up his mind to take things quietly, but resolved, as far as he
was concerned, to bring matters to a head.  His name was Pat Reilly.

He entered the kitchen on the day after Dick's arrival and found Mary
alone and busily engaged with the dinner.

"Miss Jackson," said Pat, "there's a question I've bin wantin' to ax ye
for a long time past, an' with your lave I'll putt it now."

"What is it Mr Reilly?" asked the girl somewhat stiffly, for she had a
suspicion of what was coming.  A little negro girl in the back kitchen
named Buttercup also had a suspicion of what was coming, and stationed
herself with intense delight behind the door, through a crack in which
she could both hear and see.

"Mary, my dear," said Pat insinuatingly, "how would you like to jump
into double harness with me an' jog along the path o' life together?"

Poor Mary, being agitated by the proposal, and much amused by the manner
of it, bent over a pot of something and tried to hide her blushes and
amusement in the steam.  Buttercup glared, grinned, hugged herself, and
waited for more.

Pat, erroneously supposing that silence meant consent, slipped an arm
round Mary's waist.  No man had ever yet dared to do such a thing to
her.  The indignant girl suddenly wheeled round and brought her pretty
little palm down on the cow-boy's cheek with all her might--and that was
considerable!

"Who's a-firin' off pistles in de kitchen?" demanded Buttercup in a
serious tone, as she popped her woolly head through the doorway.

"Nobody, me black darlin'," said Pat; "it's only Miss Mary expressin'
her failin's in a cheeky manner.  That's all!"

So saying the rejected cow-boy left the scene of his discomfiture,
mounted his mustang, took his departure from the ranch of Roarin' Bull
without saying farewell, and when next heard of had crossed the lonely
Guadaloupe mountains into Lincoln County, New Mexico.

But to return.  While the troops and the outlaws were hastening thus to
the rescue of the dwellers in Bull's ranch, and the blood-thirsty
Redskins were making for the same point, bent on the destruction of all
its inhabitants, Roaring Bull himself, his pretty daughter, and Dick
Darvall, were seated in the ranch enjoying their supper, all ignorant
alike of the movements of friend and foe, with Buttercup waiting on
them.

One messenger, however, was speeding on his way to warn them of danger.
This was the cowboy Crux, who had been despatched on Bluefire by Hunky
Ben just before that sturdy scout had started to call out the cavalry at
Quester Creek.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE ALARM AND PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE.

"From what you say I should think that my friend Brooke won't have much
trouble in findin' Traitor's Trap," remarked Dick Darvall, pausing in
the disposal of a venison steak which had been cooked by the fair bands
of Mary Jackson herself, "but I'm sorely afraid o' the reception he'll
meet with when he gets there, if the men are such awful blackguards as
you describe."

"They're the biggest hounds unhung," growled Roaring Bull, bringing one
hand down on the board by way of emphasis, while with the other he held
out his plate for another steak.

"You're too hard on some of them, father," said Mary, in a voice the
softness of which seemed appropriate to the beauty of her face.

"Always the way wi' you wenches," observed the father.  "Some o' the
villains are good-lookin', others are ugly; so, the first are not so bad
as the second--eh, lass?"

Mary laughed.  She was accustomed to her fathers somewhat rough but not
ill-natured rebuffs.

"Perhaps I may be prejudiced, father," she returned; "but apart from
that, surely you would never compare Buck Tom with Jake the Flint,
though they do belong to the same band."

"You are right, my lass," rejoined her father.  "They do say that Buck
Tom is a gentleman, and often keeps back his boys from devilry--though
he can't always manage that, an' no wonder, for Jake the Flint is the
cruellest monster 'tween this an' Texas if all that's said of him be
true."

"I wish my comrade was well out o' their clutches," said Dick, with a
look of anxiety; "an' it makes me feel very small to be sittin' here
enjoyin' myself when I might be ridin' on to help him if he should need
help."

"Don't worry yourself on that score," said the host.  "You couldn't find
your way without a guide though I was to give ye the best horse in my
stable--which I'd do slick off if it was of any use.  There's not one o'
my boys on the ranch just now, but there'll be four or five of 'em in
to-morrow by daylight an' I promise you the first that comes in.  They
all know the country for three hundred miles around--every inch--an' you
may ride my best horse till you drop him if ye can.  There, now, wash
down your victuals an' give us a yarn, or a song."

"I'm quite sure," added Mary, by way of encouragement, "that with one of
the outlaws for an old friend, Mr Brooke will be quite safe among
them."

"But he's _not_ an outlaw, Miss Mary," broke in Darvall.  "Leastwise we
have the best reason for believin' that he's detained among them against
his will.  Hows'ever, it's of no use cryin' over spilt milk.  I'm bound
to lay at anchor in this port till mornin', so, as I can't get up steam
for a song in the circumstances, here goes for a yarn."

The yarn to which our handsome seaman treated his audience was nothing
more than an account of one of his numerous experiences on the ocean,
but he had such a pleasant, earnest, truth-like, and confidential way of
relating it and, withal, interlarded his speech with so many little
touches of humour, that the audience became fascinated, and sat in
open-eyed forgetfulness of all else.  Buttercup, in particular, became
so engrossed as to forget herself as well as her duties, and stood
behind her master in an expectant attitude, glaring at the story-teller,
with bated breath, profound sympathy, and extreme readiness to
appreciate every joke whether good or bad.

In the midst of one of the most telling of his anecdotes the speaker was
suddenly arrested by the quick tramp of a galloping horse, the rider of
which, judging from the sound, seemed to be in hot haste.

All eyes were turned inquiringly on the master of the ranch.  That cool
individual, rising with quiet yet rapid action, reached down a magazine
repeating rifle that hung ready loaded above the door of the room.

Observing this, Dick Darvall drew a revolver from his coat-pocket and
followed his host to the outer door of the house.  Mary accompanied
them, and Buttercup retired to the back kitchen as being her appropriate
stronghold.

They had hardly reached and flung open the door when Bluefire came
foaming and smoking into the yard with Crux the cow-boy on his back.

"Wall, Roaring Bull," cried Crux, leaping off his horse and coming
forward as quietly as if there were nothing the matter.  "I'm glad to
see you OK, for the Cheyenne Reds are on the war-path, an' makin' tracks
for your ranch.  But as they've not got here yet, they won't likely
attack till the moon goes down.  Is there any chuck goin'?  I'm half
starved."

"Ay, Crux, lots o' chuck here.  Come in an' let's hear all about it.
Where got ye the news?"

"Hunky Ben sent me.  He wasn't thinkin' o' you at first but when a boy
came in wi' the news that a crowd o' the reds had gone round by Pine
Hollow--just as he was fixin' to pull out for Quester Creek to rouse up
the cavalry--he asked me to come on here an' warn you."

While he was speaking the cow-boy sat down to supper with the air of a
man who meant business, while the host and his sailor guest went to look
after the defences of the place.

"I'm glad you are here, Dick Darvall," said the former, "for it's a bad
job to be obliged to fight without help agin a crowd o' yellin' Reds.
My boys won't be back till sun-up, an' by that time the game may be
played out."

"D'ee think the Redskins 'll attack us to-night then?" asked the sailor
as he assisted to close the gates of the yard.

"Ay, that they will, lad.  They know the value o' time better than most
men, and, when they see their chance, are not slow to take advantage of
it.  As Crux said, they won't attack while the moon shines, so we have
plenty of time to git ready for them.  I wish I hadn't sent off my boys,
but as bad luck would have it a bunch o' my steers have drifted down
south, an' I can't afford to lose them--so, you see, there's not a man
left in the place but you an' me an' Crux to defend poor Mary."

For the first time in his life Dick Darvall felt a distinct tendency to
rejoice over the fact that he was a young and powerful man!  To live
and, if need be, die for Mary was worth living for!

"Are you well supplied with arms an' ammunition?" he asked.

"That am I, and we'll need it all," answered the host as he led Dick
round to the back of the yard where another gate required fastening.

"I don't see that it matters much," said Dick in a questioning tone,
"whether you shut the gates or not.  With so few to defend the place the
house will be our only chance."

"When you've fought as much wi' Reds as I have, Dick, you'll larn that
delay, even for five minutes, counts for a good deal."

"Well, there's somethin' in that.  It minds me o' what one o' my
shipmates, who had bin in the London fire brigade, once said.  `Dick,'
said he, `never putt off what you've got to do.  Sometimes I've bin at a
fire where the loss of only two minutes caused the destruction of a
store worth ten thousand pound, more or less.  We all but saved it as it
was--so near were we, that if we had bin _one_ minute sooner I do
believe we'd have saved it.

"`But when we was makin' for that fire full sail, a deaf old apple-woman
came athwart our bows an got such a fright that she went flop down right
in front of us.  To steer clear of her we'd got to sheer off so that we
all but ran into a big van, and, what wi' our lights an' the yellin',
the horses o' the van took fright and backed into us as we flew past, so
that we a'most went down by the starn.  One way or another we lost two
minutes, as I've said, an' the owners o' that store lost about ten
thousand pounds--more or less.'"

"That was a big pile, Dick," observed the ranchman, as they turned from
the gate towards the house, "not easy to replace."

"True--my shipmate never seemed to be quite sure whether it was more or
less that was lost, but he thought the Insurance offices must have found
it out by that time.  It's a pity there's only three of us, for that
will leave one side o' the house undefended."

"All right Dick; you don't trouble your head about that for Buttercup
fights like a black tiger.  She's a'most as good as a man--only she
can't manage to aim, so it's no use givin' her a rifle.  She's game
enough to fire it, but the more she tries to hit, the more she's sure to
miss.  However she's got a way of her own that sarves well enough to
defend her side o' the house.  She always takes charge o' the front.  My
Mary can't fight, but she's a heroine at loadin'--an' that's somethin'
