cost, for their mother's father was alive, and sold wood and fir
cones and coke, and never grudged them to his grandchildren,
though he grumbled at Strehla's improvidence and hapless, dreamy
ways.

"Father says we are never to wait for him: we will have supper,
now you have come home, dear," said Dorothea, who, however she
might fret her soul in secret as she knitted their hose and
mended their shirts, never let her anxieties cast a gloom on the
children; only to August she did speak a little sometimes,
because he was so thoughtful and so tender of her always, and
knew as well as she did that there were troubles about money,--though,
these troubles were vague to them both, and the debtors were
patient and kindly, being neighbors all in the old twisting
streets between the guard-house and the river.

Supper was a huge bowl of soup, with big slices of brown bread
swimming in it and some onions bobbing up and down: the bowl was
soon emptied by ten wooden spoons, and then the three eldest boys
slipped off to bed, being tired with their rough bodily labor in
the snow all day, and Dorothea drew her spinning-wheel by the
stove and set it whirring, and the little ones got August down
upon the old worn wolf-skin and clamored to him for a picture or
a story. For August was the artist of the family.

He had a piece of planed deal that his father had given him, and
some sticks of charcoal, and he would draw a hundred things he
had seen in the day, sweeping each out with his elbow when the
children had seen enough of it and sketching another in its
stead,--faces and dogs' heads, and men in sledges, and old women
in their furs, and pine-trees, and cocks and hens, and all sorts
of animals, and now and then--very reverently--a Madonna and
Child. It was all very rough, for there was no one to teach him
anything. But it was all life-like, and kept the whole troop of
children shrieking with laughter, or watching breathless, with
wide open, wondering, awed eyes.

They were all so happy: what did they care for the snow outside?
Their little bodies were warm, and their hearts merry; even
Dorothea, troubled about the bread for the morrow, laughed as she
spun; and August, with all his soul in his work, and little rosy
Ermengilda's cheek on his shoulder, glowing after his frozen
afternoon, cried out loud, smiling, as he looked up at the stove
that was shedding its heat down on them all,--

"Oh, dear Hirschvogel! you are almost as great and good as the
sun! No; you are greater and better, I think, because he goes
away nobody knows where all these long, dark, cold hours, and
does not care how people die for want of him; but you--you are
always ready: just a little bit of wood to feed you, and you will
make a summer for us all the winter through!"

The grand old stove seemed to smile through all its iridescent
surface at the praises of the child. No doubt the stove, though
it had known three centuries and more, had known but very little
gratitude.

It was one of those magnificent stoves in enamelled faience which
so excited the jealousy of the other potters of Nuernberg that in
a body they demanded of the magistracy that Augustin Hirschvogel
should be forbidden to make any more of them,--the magistracy,
happily, proving of a broader mind, and having no sympathy with
the wish of the artisans to cripple their greater fellow.

It was of great height and breadth, with all the majolica lustre
which Hirschvogel learned to give to his enamels when he was
making love to the young Venetian girl whom he afterwards
married. There was the statue of a king at each corner, modelled
with as much force and splendor as his friend Albrecht Duerer
could have given unto them on copperplate or canvas. The body of
the stove itself was divided into panels, which had the Ages of
Man painted on them in polychrome; the borders of the panels had
roses and holly and laurel and other foliage, and German mottoes
in black letter of odd Old-World moralizing, such as the old
Teutons, and the Dutch after them, love to have on their
chimney-places and their drinking-cups, their dishes and flagons.
The whole was burnished with gilding in many parts, and was
radiant everywhere with that brilliant coloring of which the
Hirschvogel family, painters on glass and great in chemistry as
they were, were all masters.

The stove was a very grand thing, as I say: possibly Hirschvogel
had made it for some mighty lord of the Tyrol at that time when
he was an imperial guest at Innspruck and fashioned so many
things for the Schloss Amras and beautiful Philippine Welser, the
burgher's daughter, who gained an archduke's heart by her beauty
and the right to wear his honors by her wit. Nothing was known of
the stove at this latter day in Hall. The grandfather Strehla,
who had been a master-mason, had dug it up out of some ruins
where he was building, and, finding it without a flaw, had taken
it home, and only thought it worth finding because it was such a
good one to burn. That was now sixty years past, and ever since
then the stove had stood in the big desolate empty room, warming
three generations of the Strehla family, and having seen nothing
prettier perhaps in all its many years than the children tumbled
now in a cluster like gathered flowers at its feet. For the
Strehla children, born to nothing else, were all born with
beauty: white or brown, they were equally lovely to look upon,
and when they went into the church to mass, with their curling
locks and their clasped hands, they stood under the grim statues
like cherubs flown down off some fresco.




                              III


"Tell us a story, August," they cried, in chorus, when they had
seen charcoal pictures till they were tired; and August did as he
did every night pretty nearly,--looked up at the stove and told
them what he imagined of the many adventures and joys and sorrows
of the human being who figured on the panels from his cradle to
his grave.

To the children the stove was a household god. In summer they
laid a mat of fresh moss all round it, and dressed it up with
green boughs and the numberless beautiful wild flowers of the
Tyrol country. In winter all their joys centred in it, and
scampering home from school over the ice and snow they were
happy, knowing that they would soon be cracking nuts or roasting
chestnuts in the broad ardent glow of its noble tower, which rose
eight feet high above them with all its spires and pinnacles and
crowns.

Once a travelling peddler had told them that the letters on it
meant Augustin Hirschvogel, and that Hirschvogel had been a great
German potter and painter, like his father before him, in the
art-sanctified city of Nuernberg, and had made many such stoves,
that were all miracles of beauty and of workmanship, putting all
his heart and his soul and his faith into his labors, as the men
of those earlier ages did, and thinking but little of gold or
praise.

An old trader, too, who sold curiosities not far from the church
had told August a little more about the brave family of
Hirschvogel, whose houses can be seen in Nuernberg to this day; of
old Veit, the first of them, who painted the Gothic windows of
St. Sebald with the marriage of the Margravine; of his sons and
of his grandsons, potters, painters, engravers all, and chief of
them great Augustin, the Luca della Robbia of the North. And
August's imagination, always quick, had made a living personage
out of these few records, and saw Hirschvogel as though he were
in the flesh walking up and down the Maximilian-Strass in his
visit to Innspruck, and maturing beautiful things in his brain as
he stood on the bridge and gazed on the emerald-green flood of
the Inn.

So the stove had got to be called Hirschvogel in the family, as
if it were a living creature, and little August was very proud
because he had been named after that famous old dead German who
had had the genius to make so glorious a thing. All the children
loved the stove, but with August the love of it was a passion;
and in his secret heart he used to say to himself, "When I am a
man, I will make just such things too, and then I will set
Hirschvogel in a beautiful room in a house that I will build
myself in Innspruck just outside the gates, where the chestnuts
are, by the river: that is what I will do when I am a man."

For August, a salt-baker's son and a little cow-keeper when he
was anything, was a dreamer of dreams, and when he was upon the
high Alps with his cattle, with the stillness and the sky around
him, was quite certain that he would live for greater things than
driving the herds up when the spring-tide came among the blue sea
of gentians, or toiling down in the town with wood and with
timber as his father and grandfather did every day of their
lives. He was a strong and healthy little fellow, fed on the free
mountain-air, and he was very happy, and loved his family
devotedly, and was as active as a squirrel and as playful as a
hare; but he kept his thoughts to himself, and some of them went
a very long way for a little boy who was only one among many, and
to whom nobody had ever paid any attention except to teach him
his letters and tell him to fear God. August in winter was only a
little, hungry school-boy, trotting to be catechised by the
priest, or to bring the loaves from the bake-house, or to carry
his father's boots to the cobbler; and in summer he was only one
of hundreds of cow-boys, who drove the poor, half-blind,
blinking, stumbling cattle, ringing their throat-bells, out into
the sweet intoxication of the sudden sunlight, and lived up with
them in the heights among the Alpine roses, with only the clouds
and the snow-summits near. But he was always thinking, thinking,
thinking, for all that; and under his little sheepskin winter
coat and his rough hempen summer shirt his heart had and much
courage in it as Hofer's ever had,--great Hofer, who is a
household word in all the Innthal, and whom August always
reverently remembered when he went to the city of Innspruck and
ran out by the foaming water-mill and under the wooded height of
Berg Isel.

August lay now in the warmth of the stove and told the children
stories, his own little brown face growing red with excitement as
his imagination glowed to fever-heat. That human being on the
panels, who was drawn there as a baby in a cradle, as a boy
playing among flowers, as a lover sighing under a casement, as a
soldier in the midst of strife, as a father with children round
him, as a weary, old, blind man on crutches, and, lastly, as a
ransomed soul raised up by angels, had always had the most
intense interest for August, and he had made, not one history for
him, but a thousand; he seldom told them the same tale twice. He
had never seen a story-book in his life; his primer and his
mass-book were all the volumes he had. But nature had given him
Fancy, and she is a good fairy that makes up for the want of very
many things! only, alas! her wings are so very soon broken, poor
thing, and then she is of no use at all.

"It is time for you all to go to bed, children," said Dorothea,
looking up from her spinning. "Father is very late to-night; you
must not sit up for him."

"Oh, five minutes more, dear Dorothea!" they pleaded; and little
rosy and golden Ermengilda climbed up into her lap. "Hirschvogel
is so warm, the beds are never so warm as he. Cannot you tell us
another tale, August?"

"No," cried August, whose face had lost its light, now that his
story had come to an end, and who sat serious, with his hands
clasped on his knees, gazing on to the luminous arabesques of the
stove.

"It is only a week to Christmas," he said, suddenly.

"Grandmother's big cakes!" chuckled little Christof, who was five
years old, and thought Christmas meant a big cake and nothing
else.

"What will Santa Claus find for 'Gilda if she be good?" murmured
Dorothea over the child's sunny head; for, however hard poverty
might pinch, it could never pinch so tightly that Dorothea would
not find some wooden toy and some rosy apples to put in her
little sister's socks.

"Father Max has promised me a big goose, because I saved the
calf's life in June," said August; it was the twentieth time he
had told them so that month, he was so proud of it.

"And Aunt Maila will be sure to send us wine and honey and a
barrel of flour; she always does," said Albrecht. Their aunt
Maila had a chalet and a little farm over on the green slopes
towards Dorp Ampas.

"I shall go up into the woods and get Hirschvogel's crown," said
August; they always crowned Hirschvogel for Christmas with pine
boughs and ivy and mountain-berries. The heat soon withered the
crown; but it was part of the religion of the day to them, as
much so as it was to cross themselves in church and raise their
voices in the "O Salutaris Hostia."

And they fell chatting of all they would do on the Christ-night,
and one little voice piped loud against another's, and they were
as happy as though their stockings would be full of golden purses
and jewelled toys, and the big goose in the soup-pot seemed to
them such a meal as kings would envy.




                              IV


In the midst of their chatter and laughter a blast of frozen air
and a spray of driven snow struck like ice through the room, and
reached them even in the warmth of the old wolf-skins and the
great stove. It was the door which had opened and let in the
cold; it was their father who had come home.

The younger children ran joyous to meet him. Dorothea pushed the
