and burdens so much that his earls had greater power and income than the
kings had before, and when this became known at Drontheim many of the
great men of that district joined the King.

Wherever Harald went, submission or extinction were the alternatives;
and as he carried things with a high hand, using fire and sword freely,
it is not a matter of wonder that his conquests were rapid and complete.
It has been said of Harald Fairhair by his contemporaries, handed down
by the scalds, and recorded in the Icelandic Sagas, that he was of
remarkably handsome appearance, great and strong, and very generous and
affable to his men.

But to return.

It was late in the evening, as we have said, when Erling and Glumm
reached the vicinity of Jarl Rongvold's dwelling.  Before coming in
sight of it they were met by two of the mounted guards that were posted
regularly as sentries round the King's quarters.  These challenged them
at once, and, on being informed that they desired to have speech with
the King on matters of urgency, conveyed them past the inner guard to
the house.

The state of readiness for instant action in which the men were kept did
not escape the observant eyes of the visitors.  Besides an outlying
mounted patrol, which they had managed to pass unobserved, and the
sentries who conducted them, they found a strong guard round the range
of farm buildings where the King and his men lay.  These men were all
well armed, and those of them who were not on immediate duty lay at
their stations sound asleep, each man with his helmet on his head, his
sword under it, his right hand grasping the hilt, and his shield serving
the purpose of a blanket to cover him.

Although the young men observed all this they did not suffer their looks
to betray idle curiosity, but rode on with stern countenances, looking,
apparently, straight before them, until they reined up at the front door
of the house.

In a few minutes a stout handsome man with white hair came out and
saluted Erling in a friendly way.  This was Jarl Rongvold, who was
distantly related to him.

"I would I could say with truth that I am glad to see thee, cousin," he
said, "but I fear me that thine errand to the King is not likely to end
in pleasant intercourse, if all be true that is reported of the folk in
Horlingdal."

"Thanks, kinsman, for the wish, if not for the welcome," replied the
youth, somewhat stiffly, as he dismounted; "but it matters little to me
whether our intercourse be pleasant or painful, so long as it is
profitable.  The men of Horlingdal send a message to Harald Haarfager;
can my companion and I have speech with him?"

"I can manage that for thee, yet would I counsel delay, for the King is
not in a sweet mood to-night, and it may go ill with thee."

"I care not whether the King's mood be sweet or sour," replied Erling
sternly.  "Whatever he may become in the future, Harald is not yet the
all-powerful king he would wish to be.  The men of Horlingdal have held
a Thing, and Glumm and I have been deputed to see the King, convey to
him their sentiments, and ask his intentions."

A grim smile played on the jarl's fine features for a moment, as he
observed the blood mantling to the youth's forehead.

"No good will come to thee or thine, kinsman, by meeting the King with a
proud look.  Be advised, Erling," he continued in a more confidential
tone; "it is easier to swim with the stream than against it--and wiser
too, when it is impossible to turn it.  Thou hast heard, no doubt, of
Harald's doings in the north."

"I have heard," said Erling bitterly.

"Well, be he right or be he wrong, it were easier to make the Glommen
run up the fells than to alter the King's determination; and it seems to
me that it behoves every man who loves his country, and would spare
further bloodshed, to submit to what is inevitable."

"Every lover of his country deems bloodshed better than slavery," said
Erling, "because the death of a few is not so great an evil as the
slavery of all."

"Aye, when there is hope that good may come of dying," rejoined the
jarl, "but now there is no hope."

"That is yet to be proved," said the youth; and Glumm uttered one of
those emphatic grunts with which men of few words are wont to signify
their hearty assent to a proposition.

"Tut, kinsman," continued Rongvold, with a look of perplexity, "I don't
like the idea of seeing so goodly a youth end his days before his right
time.  Let me assure thee that, if thou wilt join us and win over thy
friends in Horlingdal, a splendid career awaits thee, for the King loves
stout men, and will treat thee well; he is a good master."

"It grieves me that one whose blood flows in my veins should call any
man master!" said Erling.

"Now a plague on thee, for a stupid hot-blood," cried the jarl; "if thou
art so displeased with the word, I can tell thee that it need never be
used, for, if ye will take service with the King, he will give thee the
charge and the revenues of a goodly district, where thou shalt be master
and a jarl too."

"I am a king!" said Erling, drawing himself proudly up.  "Thinkest thou
I would exchange an old title for a new one, which the giver has no
right to create?"

Glumm uttered another powerfully emphatic grunt at this point.

"Besides," continued Erling, "I have no desire to become a
scatt-gatherer."

The jarl flushed a little at this thrust, but mastering his indignation
said, with a smile--

"Nay, then, if ye prefer a warrior's work there is plenty of that at the
disposal of the King."

"I have no particular love for war," said Erling.  Jarl Rongvold looked
at his kinsman in undisguised amazement.

"Truly thou art well fitted for it, if not fond of it," he said curtly;
"but as thou art bent on following thine own nose, thou art like to have
more than enough of that which thou lovest not.--Come, I will bring thee
to the King."

The jarl led the two young men into his dwelling, where nearly a hundred
men-at-arms were carousing.  The hall was a long, narrow, and high
apartment, with a table running down each side, and one at either end.
In the centre of each table was a raised seat, on which sat the chief
guests, but, at the moment they entered, the highest of these seats was
vacant, for the King had left the table.  The fireplace of the hall was
in the centre, and the smoke from it curled up among the rafters, which
it blackened before escaping through a hole in the roof.

As all the revellers were armed, and many of them were moving about the
hall, no notice was taken of the entrance of the strangers, except that
one or two near whom they passed remarked that Jarl Rongvold owned some
stout men-at-arms.

The King had retired to one of the sleeping-chambers off the great halt
in which he sat at a small window, gazing dreamily upon the magnificent
view of dale, fell, fiord, and sea, that lay stretched out before the
house.  The slanting rays of the sun shone through the window, and
through the heavy masses of the King's golden hair, which fell in
enormous volumes, like a lion's mane, on a pair of shoulders which were
noted, even in that age of powerful men, for enormous breadth and
strength.  Like his men, King Harald was armed from head to foot, with
the exception of his helmet, which lay, with his shield, on the low
wolf-skin couch on which he had passed the previous night.

He did not move when the jarl and the young men entered, but on the
former whispering in his ear he let his clenched fist fall on the window
sill, and, turning, with a frown on his bold, handsome face, looked long
and steadily at Erling.  And well might he gaze, for he looked upon one
who bore a singularly strong resemblance to himself.  There was the same
height and width and massive strength, the same bold, fearless look in
the clear blue eyes, and the same firm lips; but Erling's hair fell in
softer curls on his shoulders, and his brow was more intellectual.
Being a younger man, his beard was shorter.

Advancing a step, after Jarl Rongvold had left the room, Erling stated
the sentiments of the men of Horlingdal in simple, blunt language, and
ended by telling the King that they had no wish to refuse due and lawful
allegiance to him, but that they objected to having the old customs of
the land illegally altered.

During the progress of his statement both Erling and Glumm observed that
the King's face flushed more than once, and that his great blue eyes
blazed with astonishment and suppressed wrath.  After he had concluded,
the King still gazed at him in ominous silence.  Then he said, sternly:

"For what purpose camest thou hither if the men of Horlingdal hold such
opinions?"

"We came to tell you, King Harald, what the men of Horlingdal think, and
to ask what you intend to do."

There was something so cool in this speech that a sort of grin curled
the King's moustache, and mingled with the wrath that was gathering on
his countenance.

"I'll tell thee what I will do," he said, drawing his breath sharply,
and hissing the words; "I will march into the dale, and burn and s--" He
stopped abruptly, and then in a soft tone added, "But what will _they_
do if I refuse to listen to them?"

"I know not what the men of Horlingdal will do," replied Erling; "but I
will counsel them to defend their rights."

At this the King leaped up, and drew his sword half out of its scabbard,
but again checked himself suddenly; for, as the Saga tells us, "it was
his invariable rule, whenever anything raised his anger, to collect
himself and let his passion run off, and then take the matter into
consideration coolly."

"Go," he said, sitting down again at the window, "I will speak with thee
on this subject to-morrow."

Erling, who during the little burst of passion had kept his blue eyes
unflinchingly fixed on those of the King, bowed and retired, followed by
Glumm, whose admiration of his friend's diplomatic powers would have
been unbounded, had he only wound up with a challenge to the King, then
and there, to single combat!



CHAPTER TWELVE.

DESCRIBES A TERRIFIC AND UNEQUAL COMBAT.

"Now, kinsman, let me endeavour to convince thee of thy folly," said
Jarl Rongvold to Erling, on the morning that followed the evening in
which the interview with the King had taken place, as they walked in
front of the house together.

"It needs no great power of speech to convince me of that," said Erling.
"The fact that I am still here, after what the King let out last night,
convinces me, without your aid, that I am a fool."

"And pray what said he that has had such powerful influence on thine
obtuse mind?"

"Truly he said little, but he expressed much.  He gave way to an
unreasonable burst of passion when I did but claim justice and assert
our rights; and the man must be slow-witted indeed who could believe
that subdued passion is changed opinion.  However, I will wait for
another interview until the sun is in the zenith--after that I leave,
whatever be the consequences.  So it were well, kinsman, that you should
see and advise with your _master_."

The jarl bit his lip, and was on the point of turning away without
replying, when a remarkably stout and tall young man walked up and
accosted them.

"This is my son Rolf," said the jarl, turning round hastily.--"Our
kinsman, Erling the Bold.  I go to attend the King.  Make the most of
each other, for ye are not likely to be long in company."

"Are you that Rolf who is styled Ganger?" enquired Erling with some
interest.

"Aye," replied the other gruffly.  "At least I am Rolf.  Men choose to
call me Ganger because I prefer to gang on my legs rather than gang on
the legs of a horse.  They say it is because no horse can carry me; but
thou seest that that is a lie, for I am not much heavier than thyself."

"I should like to know thee better, kinsman," said Erling.

Rolf Ganger did not respond so heartily to this as Erling wished, and he
felt much disappointed; for, being a man who did not often express his
feelings, he felt all the more keenly anything like a rebuff.

"What is your business with the King?" asked Rolf, after a short pause.

"To defy him," said our hero, under the influence of a burst of mingled
feelings.

Rolf Ganger looked at Erling in surprise.

"Thou dost not like the King, then?"

"I hate him!"

"So do I," said Rolf.

This interchange of sentiment seemed to break down the barriers of
diffidence which had hitherto existed between the two, for from that
moment their talk was earnest and confidential.  Erling tried to get
Rolf to desert the King's cause and join his opponents, but the latter
shook his head, and said that they had no chance of success; and that it
was of no use joining a hopeless cause, even although he had strong
sympathy with it.  While they were conversing, Jarl Rongvold came out
and summoned Erling to the presence of the King.

This was the first and last interview that our hero had with that Rolf
Ganger, whose name--although not much celebrated at that time--was
destined to appear in the pages of history as that of the conqueror of
Normandy, and the progenitor of line of English kings.

"I have sent for thee, Erling," said the King, in a voice so soft, yet
so constrained, that Erling could not avoid seeing that it was forced,
"to tell thee thou art at liberty to return to thy dalesmen with this
message--King Harald respects the opinions of the men of Horlingdal, and
he will hold a Thing at the Springs for the purpose of hearing their
views more fully, stating his own, and consulting with them about the
whole matter.--Art satisfied with that?" he asked, almost sternly.

"I will convey your message," said Erling.

"And the sooner the better," said the King.  "By the way, there are two
roads leading to the Springs, I am told; is it so?" he added.

"There are," said Erling; "one goes by the uplands over the fells, the
other through the forest."

"Which would you recommend me to follow when I fare to the Springs?"

"The forest road is the best."

"It is that which thou wilt follow, I suppose?"

"It is," replied Erling.

"Well, get thee to horse, and make the most of thy time; my berserk here
will guide thee past the guards."

As he spoke, a man who had stood behind the King motionless as a statue
advanced towards the door.  He was one of a peculiar class of men who
formed part of the bodyguard of the King.  On his head there was a plain
steel helmet, but he wore no "serk", or shirt of mail (hence the name of
berserk, or bare of serk), and he was, like the rest of his comrades,
noted for being capable of working himself up into such a fury of
madness while in action, that few people of ordinary powers could stand
before his terrible onset.  He was called Hake, the berserk of Hadeland,
and was comparatively short in stature, but looked shorter than he
really was, in consequence of the unnatural breadth and bulk of his
chest and shoulders.  Hake led Erling out to the door of the house,
where they found Glumm waiting with two horses ready for the road.

"Thou art sharp this morning, Glumm."

"Better to be too sharp than too blunt," replied his friend.  "It seemed
to me that whatever should be the result of the talk with the King
to-day, it were well to be ready for the road in good time.  What is
yonder big-shouldered fellow doing?"

"Hush, Glumm," said Erling, with a smile, "thou must be respectful if
thou wouldst keep thy head on thy shoulders.  That is Hake of Hadeland,
King Harald's famous berserk.  He is to conduct us past the guards.  I
only hope he may not have been commissioned to cut off our heads on the
way.  But I think that perchance you and I might manage him together, if
our courage did not fail us!"

Glumm replied with that expression of contempt which is usually styled
turning up one's nose, and Erling laughed as he mounted his horse and
rode off at the heels of the berserk.  He had good reason to look grave,
however, as he found out a few moments later.  Just as they were about
to enter the forest, a voice was heard shouting behind, and Jarl
Rongvold was seen running after them.

"Ho! stay, kinsman, go not away without bidding us farewell.  A safe and
speedy journey, lad, and give my good wishes to the old folk at
Haldorstede.  Say that I trust things may yet be happily arranged
between the men of Horlingdal and the King."

As he spoke the jarl managed to move so that Erling's horse came between
him and the berserk; then he said quickly, in a low but earnest whisper:

"The King means to play thee false, Erling.  I cannot explain, but do
thou be sure to take _the road by the fells_, and let not the berserk
know.  Thy life depends on it.  I am ordered to send this berserk with a
troop of nineteen men to waylay thee.  They are to go _by the forest
road_.--There, thou canst not doubt my friendship for thee, for now my
life is in thy hands!  Haste, thou hast no chance against such odds.
Farewell, Glumm," he added aloud; "give my respects to Ulf, when next ye
see him."

Jarl Rongvold waved his hand as he turned round and left his friends to
pursue their way.

They soon reached the point where they had met the two guards on the
previous day.  After riding a little farther, so as to make sure of
being beyond the outmost patrol, the berserk reined up.
