
1. Child, amid the flowers at play,
   While the red light fades away;
   Mother, with thine earnest eye,
   Ever following silently;
   Father, by the breeze at eve
   Called thy harvest work to leave;
   Pray! Ere yet the dark hours be,
   Lift the heart, and bend the knee.

2. Traveler, in the stranger's land,
   Far from thine own household band;
   Mourner, haunted by the tone
   Of a voice from this world gone;
   Captive, in whose narrow cell
   Sunshine hath not leave to dwell;
   Sailor, on the darkening sea;
   Lift the heart and bend the knee.

3. Warrior, that from battle won,
   Breathest now at set of sun;
   Woman, o'er the lowly slain
   Weeping on his burial plain;
   Ye that triumph, ye that sigh,
   Kindred by one holy tie,
   Heaven's first star alike ye see;
   Lift the heart, and bend the knee.



LIV. THE WILL.

Characters.--SWIPES, a brewer; CURRIE, a saddler; FRANK MILLINGTON; and
SQUIRE DRAWL.

Swipes. A sober occasion, this, brother Currie. Who would have thought the
old lady was so near her end?

Currie. Ah! we must all die, brother Swipes; and those who live the
longest outlive the most.

Swipes. True, true; but, since we must die and leave our earthly
possessions, it is well that the law takes such good care of us. Had the
old lady her senses when she departed?

Cur. Perfectly, perfectly. Squire Drawl told me she read every word of the
will aloud, and never signed her name better.

Swipes. Had you any hint from the Squire what disposition she made of her
property?

Cur. Not a whisper; the Squire is as close as an underground tomb; but one
of the witnesses hinted to me that she had cut off her graceless nephew,
Frank, without a shilling.

Swipes. Has she, good soul, has she? You know I come in,
then, in right of my wife.

Cur. And I in my own right; and this is no doubt the reason why we have
been called to hear the reading of the will. Squire Drawl knows how things
should be done, though he is as air-tight as one of your beer barrels. But
here comes the young reprobate. He must be present, as a matter of course,
you know. [Enter FRANK MILLINGTON.] Your servant, young gentleman. So your
benefactress has left you at last.

Swipes. It is a painful thing to part with old and good friends, Mr.
Millington.

Frank. It is so, sir; but I could bear her loss better had I not so often
been ungrateful for her kindness. She was my only friend, and I knew not
her value.

Cur. It is too late to repent, Master Millington. You will now have a
chance to earn your own bread.

Swipes. Ay, ay, or the sweat of your brow, as better people are obliged
to. You would make a fine brewer's boy, if you were not too old.

Cur. Ay, or a saddler's lackey, if held with a tight rein.

Frank. Gentlemen, your remarks imply that my aunt has treated me as I
deserved. I am above your insults, and only hope you will bear your
fortune as modestly as I shall mine submissively. I shall retire. [Going:
He meets SQUIRE DRAWL.]

Squire. Stop, stop, young man. We must have your presence. Good morning,
gentlemen; you are early on the ground.

Cur. I hope the Squire is well to-day.

Squire. Pretty comfortable, for an invalid.

Swipes. I trust the damp air has not affected your lungs again.

Squire. No, I believe not. But, since the heirs at law are all convened, I
shall now proceed to open the last will and testament of your deceased
relative, according to law.

Swipes. [While the SQUIRE is breaking the seal,] It is a trying thing to
leave all one's possessions, Squire; in this manner.

Cur. It really makes me feel melancholy when I look around and see
everything but the venerable owner of these goods. Well did the Preacher
say, "All is vanity."

Squire. Please to be seated, gentlemen. [He puts on his spectacles and
begins to read slowly.] "Imprirmis; whereas, my nephew, Francis
Millington, by his disobedience and ungrateful conduct, has shown himself
unworthy of my bounty, and incapable of managing my large estate, I do
hereby give and bequeath all my houses, farms, stocks, bonds, moneys, and
property, both personal and real, to my dear cousins, Samuel Swipes, of
Malt Street, brewer, and Christopher Currie, of Fly Court, saddler." [The
SQUIRE here takes off his spectacles, and begins to wipe them very
leisurely.]

Swipes. Generous creature! kind soul! I always loved her!

Cur. She was good, she was kind;--and, brother Swipes, when we divide, I
think I'll take the mansion house.

Swipes. Not so fast, if you please, Mr. Currie. My wife has long had her
eye upon that, and must have it.

Cur. There will be two words to that bargain, Mr. Swipes. And, besides, I
ought to have the first choice. Did I not lend her a new chaise every time
she wished to ride? And who knows what influence--

Swipes. Am I not named first in her will? and did I not furnish her with
my best small beer for more than six months? And who knows--

Frank. Gentlemen, I must leave you. [Going.] Squire. [Putting on his
spectacles very deliberately.] Pray, gentlemen, keep your seats, I have
not done yet. Let me see; where was I? Ay, "All my property, both personal
and real, to my dear cousins, Samuel Swipes, of Malt Street, brewer,"--

Swipes. Yes!

Squire. "And Christopher Currie, of Fly Court, saddler,"

Cur. Yes!

Squire. "To have and to hold, IN TRUST, for the sole and exclusive benefit
of my nephew, Francis Millington, until he shall have attained the age of
twenty-one years, by which time I hope he will have so far reformed his
evil habits, as that he may safely be intrusted with the large fortune
which I hereby bequeath to him."

Swipes. What is all this? You don't mean that we are humbugged? In trust!
How does that appear? Where is it?

Squire. There; in two words of as good old English as I ever penned.

Cur. Pretty well, too, Mr. Squire, if we must be sent for to be made a
laughingstock of. She shall pay for every ride she has had out of my
chaise, I promise you.

Swipes. And for every drop of my beer. Fine times, if two sober,
hard-working citizens are to be brought here to be made the sport of a
graceless profligate. But we will manage his property for him, Mr. Currie;
we will make him feel that trustees are not to be trifled with.

Cur. That we will.

Squire. Not so fast, gentlemen; for the instrument is dated three years
ago; and the young gentleman must be already of age, and able to take care
of himself. Is it not so, Francis?

Frank. It is, your worship. Squire. Then, gentlemen, having attended to
the breaking of the seal, according to law, you are released from any
further trouble about the business.

DEFINITIONS.--Dis-po-si'tion, disposal. Grace'less, depraved, corrupt.
Rep'ro-bate, one morally lost. Lack'ey, an attending servant, a footman.
De-ceased', dead. Con-vened', met together, assembled. Im-pri'mis (Latin),
in the first place. Chaise (pro. shaz), a kind of two-wheeled carriage.
Re-formed', returned to a good state. Prof'li-gate, a person openly and
shamelessly vicious. In'stru-ment (a term in law), a writing expressive of
some act, con-tract, etc.


NOTES.--Terms having the same, or nearly the same, meaning, as, "will and
testament," "give and bequeath," "to have and to hold," "sole and
exclusive," are commonly joined in this way in legal documents.

Personal property usually consists of things temporary and movable, while
real property includes things fixed and immovable such as lands and
tenements.



LV. THE NOSE AND THE EYES.

William Cowper (b. 1731, d. 1800) was the son of an English clergyman, and
was born in Great Berkhamstead, Hertfordshire, England. He was sent to
Westminster School when he was ten years of age, and he remained there, a
diligent student, eight years. He then studied law, and was admitted to
the bar, but he never practiced his profession. He was appointed to a
clerkship in the House of Lords when he was about thirty years old, but he
never entered upon the discharge of his duties. He became insane, and was
sent to a private asylum. After his recovery, he found a home in the
family of the Rev. Mr. Unwin. On the death of this gentleman, he resided
with the widow till her death--most of the time at Olney. His first
writing's were published in 1782. "The Task," some hymns, a number of
minor poems, and his translations or Homer, composed his published works.
His insanity returned at times, and darkened a pure and gentle life at its
close.

1. Between Nose and Eyes a strange contest arose;
     The spectacles set them, unhappily, wrong;
   The point in dispute was, as all the world knows,
     To which the said spectacles ought to belong.

2. So Tongue was the lawyer, and argued the cause,
     With a great deal of skill and a wig full of learning,
   While chief baron Ear sat to balance the laws,
     So famed for his talent in nicely discerning.

3. "In behalf of the Nose, it will quickly appear,
     And your lordship," he said, "will undoubtedly find,
   That the Nose has the spectacles always to wear,
     Which amounts to possession, time out of mind."

4. Then, holding the spectacles up to the court,
     "Your lordship observes, they are made with a straddle
   As wide as the ridge of the Nose is; in short,
     Designed to sit close to it, just like a saddle.

5. "Again, would your lordship a moment suppose
     ('T is a case that has happened, and may happen again)
   That the visage or countenance had not a Nose,
     Pray, who would or who could wear spectacles then?

6. "On the whole it appears, and my argument shows,
     With a reasoning the court will never condemn,
   That the spectacles plainly were made for the Nose,
     And the Nose was as plainly intended for them."

7. Then shifting his side (as a lawyer knows how),
     He pleaded again in behalf of the Eyes:
   But what were his arguments, few people know,
     For the court did not think them equally wise.

8. So his lordship decreed, with a grave, solemn tone,
     Decisive and clear, without one if or but,
   That whenever the Nose put his spectacles on,
     By daylight or candlelight,--Eyes should be shut.


DEFINITIONS.--2. Ar'gued, discussed, treated by reasoning. Dis-cern'ing
(pro. diz-zern'ing), marking as different, distinguishing, 3. Be-half',
support, defense. 8. De-creed', determined judicially by authority,
ordered,



LVI. AN ICEBERG.

Louis Legrand Noble (b. 1813, d. 1882) was horn in Otsetgo County, New
York. When twelve years of age, he removed with his family to the wilds of
Michigan, but after the death of his father he returned to New York to
study for the ministry, which he entered in 1840. About this time he
published his first productions, two Indian romances in the form of poems,
entitled "Pewatem" and "Nimahmin." Mr. Noble lived for a time in North
Carolina, and later at Catskill on the Hudson, where he became a warm
friend of the artist Cole. After the latter's death he wrote a memorial of
him. Other works of this author are "The Hours, and other Poems," and
"After Icebergs with a Painter," from which this selection is taken.

1. We have just passed a fragment of some one of the surrounding icebergs
that had amused us. It bore the resemblance of a huge polar bear, reposing
upon the base of an inverted cone, with a twist of a seashell, and
whirling slowly round and round. The ever-attending green water, with its
aerial clearness, enabled us to see its spiral folds and horns as they
hung suspended in the deep.

2. The bear, a ten-foot mass in tolerable proportion, seemed to be
regularly beset by a pack of hungry little swells. First, one would take
him on the haunch, then whip back into the sea over his tail and between
his legs. Presently a bolder swell would rise and pitch into his back with
a ferocity that threatened instant destruction. It only washed his satin
fleece the whiter.

3. While Bruin was turning to look the daring assailant in the face, the
rogue had pitched himself back into his cave. No sooner that, than a very
bulldog of a billow would attack him in the face. The serenity with which
the impertinent assault was borne was complete. It was but a puff of
silvery dust, powdering his mane with fresher brightness. Nothing would be
left of bull but a little froth of all the foam displayed in the fierce
onset. He too would turn and scud into his hiding place.

4. Persistent little waves! After a dash, singly, all around, upon the
common enemy, as if by some silent agreement underwater, they would all
rush on at once, with their loudest roar and shaggiest foam, and overwhelm
poor bear so completely that nothing less might be expected than to behold
him broken in four quarters, and floating helplessly asunder. Mistaken
spectators! Although, by his momentary rolling and plunging, he was
evidently aroused, yet neither Bruin nor his burrow was at all the worse
for all the wear and washing.

5. The deep fluting, the wrinkled folds, and cavities, over and through
which the green and silvery water rushed back into the sea, rivaled the
most exquisite sculpture. And nature not only gives her marbles, with the
finest lines, the most perfect lights and shades, she colors them also.
She is no monochromist, but polychroic, imparting such touches of dove
tints, emerald, and azure as she bestows upon her gems and skies.

6. We are bearing up under the big berg as closely as we dare. To our
delight, what we have been wishing and watching for is actually taking
place: loud explosions, with heavy falls of ice, followed by the
cataract-like roar, and the high, thin seas, wheeling away beautifully
crested with sparkling foam. If it is possible, imagine the effect upon
the beholder: this precipice of ice, with tremendous cracking, is falling
toward us with a majestic and awful motion.

7. Down sinks the long water line into the black deep; down go the
porcelain crags and galleries of glassy sculpture--a speechless and awful
baptism. Now it pauses, and returns: up rise sculptures and crags
streaming with the shining white brine; up comes the great encircling
line, followed by things new and strange--crags, niches, balconies, and
caves; up, up, it rises, higher and higher still, crossing the very breast
of the grand ice, and all bathed with rivulets of gleaming foam. Over goes
the summit, ridge, pinnacles, and all, standing off obliquely in the
opposite air. Now it pauses in its upward roll: back it comes again,
cracking, cracking, cracking, "groaning out harsh thunder" as it comes,
and threatening to burst, like a mighty bomb, into millions of glittering
fragments. The spectacle is terrific and magnificent. Emotion is
irrepressible, and peals of wild hurrah burst forth from all.


DEFINITIONS.--1. Cone, a solid body having a circular base, from which it
tapers gradually to a point. 2. Swells, waves. 3. Se-ren'i-ty, quietness,
calmness. 5. Ex'qui-site, exceedingly nice, giving rare satisfaction.
Sculp'ture, carved work. Mon'o-chro-mist, one who paints in a single
color. Pol-y-chro'ic, given to the use of many colors. 7. Pin'na-cles,
high, spirelike points. Ob-lique'ly, slantingly. Ir-re-press'i-ble, not to
be restrained.


Notes--Only about one eighth of an iceberg appears above the surface of
the water. When one side of it grows heavier than another, through unequal
melting and the action of the waves, the whole mass rolls over in the
water in the manner so well described in this lesson.



LVII. ABOUT QUAIL.

William Post Hawes (b. 1803, d.1842) was born in New York City. and was a
graduate of Columbia College. He was a lawyer by profession. His writings
consist mainly of essays, contributed to various newspapers and magazines,
and show great descriptive power. He was a frequent contributor to the
"Spirit of the Times," under the title of "Cypress, Jr.," on various
sporting topics. After his death a collection of his writings was
published in two volumes, entitled, "Sporting Scenes" and "Sundry
Sketches."

1. The quail is peculiarly a domestic bird, and is attached to his
birthplace and the home of his forefathers. The various members of the
aquatic families educate their children in the cool summer of the far
north, and bathe their warm bosoms in July in the iced waters of Hudson
Bay; but when Boreas scatters the rushes where they had builded their
bedchambers, they desert their fatherland, and fly to disport in the sunny
waters of the south.

2. The songsters of the woodland, when their customary crops of insects
and berries are cut off in the fall, gather themselves to renew their
loves and get married in more genial climes. Presently, the groves so
vocal, and the sky so full, shall be silent and barren. The "melancholy
days" will soon be here; only thou, dear Bob White, wilt remain.

3. The quail is the bird for me. He is no rover, no emigrant. He stays at
home, and is identified with the soil. Where the farmer works, he lives,
and loves, and whistles. In budding springtime, and in scorching
summer--in bounteous autumn, and in barren winter, his voice is heard from
the same bushy hedge fence, and from his customary cedars. Cupidity and
cruelty may drive him to the woods, and to seek more quiet seats; but be
merciful and kind to him, and he will visit your barnyard, and sing for
you upon the boughs of the apple tree by your gateway.

4. When warm May first wooes the young flowers to open and receive her
breath, then begin the cares and responsibilitie of wedded life. Away fly
the happy pair to seek some grassy tussock, where, safe from the eye of
the hawk and the nose of the fox, they may rear their expectant brood in
peace.

5. Oats harvest arrives, and the fields are waving with yellow grain. Now
be wary, O kind-hearted cradler, and tread not into those pure white eggs
ready to burst with life! Soon there is a peeping sound heard, and lo! a
proud mother walketh magnificently in the midst of her children,
scratching and picking, and teaching them how to swallow. Happy she, if
she may be permitted to bring them up to maturity, and uncompelled to
renew her joys in another nest.

6. The assiduities of a mother have a beauty and a sacredness about them
that command respect and reverence in all animal nature, human or
inhuman--what a lie does that word carry--except, perhaps, in monsters,
insects, and fish. I never yet heard of the parental tenderness of a
trout, eating up his little baby, nor of the filial gratitude of a spider,
nipping the life out of his gray-headed father, and usurping his web.

7. But if you would see the purest, the sincerest, the most affecting
piety of a parent's love, startle a young family of quails, and watch the
conduct of the mother. She will not leave you. No, not she. But she will
fall at your feet, uttering a noise which none but a distressed mother can
make, and she will run, and flutter, and seem to try to be caught, and
cheat your outstretched hand, and affect to be wing-broken and wounded,
and yet have just strength to tumble along, until she has drawn you,
fatigued, a safe distance from her threatened children and the young hopes
of her heart; and then will she mount, whirring with glad strength, and
away through the maze of trees you have not seen before, like a close-shot
bullet, fly to her skulking infants,

8. Listen now. Do you hear those three half-plaintive notes, quickly and
clearly poured out? She is calling the boys and girls together. She sings
not now "Bob White!" nor "Ah! Bob White!" That is her husband's love call,
or his trumpet blast of defiance. But she calls sweetly and softly for her
lost children. Hear them "Peep! peep! peep!" at the welcome voice of their
mother's love! They are coming together. Soon the whole family will meet
again.

9. It is a foul sin to disturb them; but retread your devious way, and let
her hear your coming footsteps, breaking down the briers, as you renew the
danger. She is quiet. Not a word is passed between the fearful fugitives.
Now, if you have the heart to do it, lie low, keep still, and imitate the
call of the hen quail. O mother! mother! how your heart would die if you
could witness the deception! The little ones raise up their trembling
heads, and catch comfort and imagined safety from the sound. "Peep! peep!"
They come to you, straining their little eyes, and, clustering together
and answering, seem to say, "Where is she? Mother! mother! we are here!"


DEFINITIONS.--1. A-quat'ic, frequenting the water. 2. Vo'cal, having a
voice. 3. I-den'ti-fied, united. Cu-pid'i-ty, eager desire to possess
something. 4. Tus'sock, a tuft of grass or twigs. 5. Cra'dler, one who
uses a cradle, which is an instrument attached to a scythe in cutting
grain. 6. U-surp'ing, seizing and holding in possession by force. 7.
Af-fect', to pretend. 9. De'vi-ous, winding.


NOTE.--l. Boreas is the name which the ancient Greeks gave to
the north wind.



