decide by a single word the most insurmountable difficulties which
theology presents to us on all sides, they simply cry out: "Mysteries!"




CXI.--ABSURDITY AND INUTILITY OF THE MYSTERIES FORGED IN THE SOLE
INTEREST OF THE PRIESTS.

What is a mystery? If I examine the thing closely, I discover very soon
that a mystery is nothing but a contradiction, a palpable absurdity, a
notorious impossibility, on which theologians wish to compel men to
humbly close the eyes; in a word, a mystery is whatever our spiritual
guides can not explain to us.

It is advantageous for the ministers of religion that the people should
not comprehend what they are taught. It is impossible for us to examine
what we do not comprehend. Every time that we can not see clearly, we
are obliged to be guided. If religion was comprehensible, priests would
not have so many charges here below.

No religion is without mysteries; mystery is its essence; a religion
destitute of mysteries would be a contradiction of terms. The God which
serves as a foundation to natural religion, to theism or to deism, is
Himself the greatest mystery to a mind wishing to dwell upon Him.




CXII.--CONTINUATION.

All the revealed religions which we see in the world are filled with
mysterious dogmas, unintelligible principles, of incredible miracles, of
astonishing tales which seem imagined but to confound reason. Every
religion announces a concealed God, whose essence is a mystery;
consequently, it is just as difficult to conceive of His conduct as of
the essence of this God Himself. Divinity has never spoken to us but in
an enigmatical and mysterious way in the various religions which have
been founded in the different regions of our globe. It has revealed
itself everywhere but to announce mysteries, that is to say, to warn
mortals that it designs that they should believe in contradictions, in
impossibilities, or in things of which they were incapable of forming
any positive idea.

The more mysteries a religion has, the more incredible objects it
presents to the mind, the better fitted it is to please the imagination
of men, who find in it a continual pasturage to feed upon. The more
obscure a religion is, the more it appears divine, that is to say, in
conformity to the nature of an invisible being, of whom we have no idea.

It is the peculiarity of ignorance to prefer the unknown, the concealed,
the fabulous, the wonderful, the incredible, even the terrible, to that
which is clear, simple, and true. Truth does not give to the imagination
such lively play as fiction, which each one may arrange as he pleases.
The vulgar ask nothing better than to listen to fables; priests and
legislators, by inventing religions and forging mysteries from them,
have served them to their taste. In this way they have attracted
enthusiasts, women, and the illiterate generally. Beings of this kind
resign easily to reasons which they are incapable of examining; the love
of the simple and the true is found but in the small number of those
whose imagination is regulated by study and by reflection. The
inhabitants of a village are never more pleased with their pastor than
when he mixes a good deal of Latin in his sermon. Ignorant men always
imagine that he who speaks to them of things which they do not
understand, is a very wise and learned man. This is the true principle
of the credulity of nations, and of the authority of those who pretend
to guide them.




CXIII.--CONTINUATION.

To speak to men to announce to them mysteries, is to give and retain, it
is to speak not to be understood. He who talks but by enigmas, either
seeks to amuse himself by the embarrassment which he causes, or finds it
to his advantage not to explain himself too clearly. Every secret
betrays suspicion, weakness, and fear. Princes and their ministers make
a mystery of their projects for fear that their enemies in penetrating
them would cause them to fail. Can a good God amuse Himself by the
embarrassment of His creatures? A God who enjoys a power which nothing
in the world can resist, can He apprehend that His intentions could be
thwarted? What interest would He have in putting upon us enigmas and
mysteries? We are told that man, by the weakness of his nature, is not
capable of comprehending the Divine economy which can be to him but a
tissue of mysteries; that God can not unveil secrets to him which are
beyond his reach. In this case, I reply, that man is not made to trouble
himself with Divine economy, that this economy can not interest him in
the least, that he has no need of mysteries which he can not understand;
finally, that a mysterious religion is not made for him, any more than
an eloquent discourse is made for a flock of sheep.




CXIV.--A UNIVERSAL GOD SHOULD HAVE REVEALED A UNIVERSAL RELIGION.

Divinity has revealed itself in the different parts of our globe in a
manner of such little uniformity, that in matters of religion men look
upon each other with hatred and disdain. The partisans of the different
sects see each other very ridiculous and foolish. The most respected
mysteries in one religion are laughable for another. God, having
revealed Himself to men, ought at least to speak in the same language to
all, and relieve their weak minds of the embarrassment of seeking what
can be the religion which truly emanated from Him, or what is the most
agreeable form of worship in His eyes.

A universal God ought to have revealed a universal religion. By what
fatality are so many different religions found on the earth? Which is
the true one amongst the great number of those of which each one
pretends to be the right one, to the exclusion of all the others? We
have every reason to believe that not one of them enjoys this advantage.
The divisions and the disputes about opinions are indubitable signs of
the uncertainty and of the obscurity of the principles which they
profess.




CXV.--THE PROOF THAT RELIGION IS NOT NECESSARY, IS THAT IT IS
UNINTELLIGIBLE.

If religion was necessary to all men, it ought to be intelligible to all
men. If this religion was the most important thing for them, the
goodness of God, it seems, ought to make it for them the clearest, the
most evident, and the best demonstrated of all things. Is it not
astonishing to see that this matter, so essential to the salvation of
mortals, is precisely the one which they understand the least, and about
which, during so many centuries, their doctors have disputed the most?
Never have priests, of even the same sect, come to an agreement among
themselves about the manner of understanding the wishes of a God who has
truly revealed Himself to them. The world which we inhabit can be
compared to a public place, in whose different parts several charlatans
are placed, each one straining himself to attract customers by
depreciating the remedies offered by his competitors. Each stand has its
purchasers, who are persuaded that their empiric alone possesses the
good remedies; notwithstanding the continual use which they make of
them, they do not perceive that they are no better, or that they are
just as sick as those who run after the charlatans of another stand.
Devotion is a disease of the imagination, contracted in infancy; the
devotee is a hypochondriac, who increases his disease by the use of
remedies. The wise man takes none of it; he follows a good regimen and
leaves the rest to nature.




CXVI.--ALL RELIGIONS ARE RIDICULED BY THOSE OF OPPOSITE THOUGH EQUALLY
INSANE BELIEF.

Nothing appears more ridiculous in the eyes of a sensible man than for
one denomination to criticize another whose creed is equally foolish. A
Christian thinks that the Koran, the Divine revelation announced by
Mohammed, is but a tissue of impertinent dreams and impostures injurious
to Divinity. The Mohammedan, on his side, treats the Christian as an
idolater and a dog; he sees but absurdities in his religion; he imagines
he has the right to conquer his country and force him, sword in hand, to
accept the faith of his Divine prophet; he believes especially that
nothing is more impious or more unreasonable than to worship a man or to
believe in the Trinity. The Protestant Christian, who without scruple
worships a man, and who believes firmly in the inconceivable mystery of
the Trinity, ridicules the Catholic Christian because the latter
believes in the mystery of the transubstantiation. He treats him as a
fool, as ungodly and idolatrous, because he kneels to worship the bread
in which he believes he sees the God of the universe. All the Christian
denominations agree in considering as folly the incarnation of the God
of the Indies, Vishnu. They contend that the only true incarnation is
that of Jesus, Son of the God of the universe and of the wife of a
carpenter. The theist, who calls himself a votary of natural religion,
is satisfied to acknowledge a God of whom he has no conception; indulges
himself in jesting upon other mysteries taught by all the religions of
the world.




CXVII.--OPINION OF A CELEBRATED THEOLOGIAN.

Did not a famous theologian recognize the absurdity of admitting the
existence of a God and arresting His course? "To us," he said, "who
believe through faith in a true God, an individual substance, there
ought to be no trouble in believing everything else. This first mystery,
which is no small matter of itself, once admitted, our reason can not
suffer violence in admitting all the rest. As for myself, it is no more
trouble to accept a million of things that I do not understand, than to
believe the first one."

Is there anything more contradictory, more impossible, or more
mysterious, than the creation of matter by an immaterial Being, who
Himself immutable, causes the continual changes that we see in the
world? Is there anything more incompatible with all the ideas of common
sense than to believe that a good, wise, equitable, and powerful Being
presides over nature and directs Himself the movements of a world which
is filled with follies, miseries, crimes, and disorders, which He could
have foreseen, and by a single word could have prevented or made to
disappear? Finally, as soon as we admit a Being so contradictory as the
theological God, what right have we to refuse to accept the most
improbable fables, the most astonishing miracles, the most profound
mysteries?




CXVIII.--THE DEIST'S GOD IS NO LESS CONTRADICTORY, NO LESS FANCIFUL, THAN
THE THEOLOGIAN'S GOD.

The theist exclaims, "Be careful not to worship the ferocious and
strange God of theology; mine is much wiser and better; He is the Father
of men; He is the mildest of Sovereigns; it is He who fills the universe
with His benefactions!" But I will tell him, do you not see that
everything in this world contradicts the good qualities which you
attribute to your God? In the numerous family of this mild Father I see
but unfortunate ones. Under the empire of this just Sovereign I see
crime victorious and virtue in distress. Among these benefactions, which
you boast of, and which your enthusiasm alone sees, I see a multitude of
evils of all kinds, upon which you obstinately close your eyes.



Compelled to acknowledge that your good God, in contradiction with
Himself, distributes with the same hand good and evil, you will find
yourself obliged, in order to justify Him, to send me, as the priests
would, to the other life. Invent, then, another God than the one of
theology, because your God is as contradictory as its God is. A good God
who does evil or who permits it to be done, a God full of equity and in
an empire where innocence is so often oppressed; a perfect God who
produces but imperfect and wretched works; such a God and His conduct,
are they not as great mysteries as that of the incarnation? You blush,
you say, for your fellow beings who are persuaded that the God of the
universe could change Himself into a man and die upon a cross in a
corner of Asia. You consider the ineffable mystery of the Trinity very
absurd Nothing appears more ridiculous to you than a God who changes
Himself into bread and who is eaten every day in a thousand different
places.

Well! are all these mysteries any more shocking to reason than a God who
punishes and rewards men's actions? Man, according to your views, is he
free or not? In either case your God, if He has the shadow of justice,
can neither punish him nor reward him. If man is free, it is God who
made him free to act or not to act; it is God, then, who is the
primitive cause of all his actions; in punishing man for his faults, He
would punish him for having done that which He gave him the liberty to
do. If man is not free to act otherwise than he does, would not God be
the most unjust of beings to punish him for the faults which he could
not help committing? Many persons are struck with the detail of
absurdities with which all religions of the world are filled; but they
have not the courage to seek for the source whence these absurdities
necessarily sprung. They do not see that a God full of contradictions,
of oddities, of incompatible qualities, either inflaming or nursing the
imagination of men, could create but a long line of idle fancies.




CXIX.--WE DO NOT PROVE AT ALL THE EXISTENCE OF A GOD BY SAYING THAT IN
ALL AGES EVERY NATION HAS ACKNOWLEDGED SOME KIND OF DIVINITY.

They believe, to silence those who deny the existence of a God, by
telling them that all men, in all ages and in all centuries, have
believed in some kind of a God; that there is no people on the earth who
have not believed in an invisible and powerful being, whom they made the
object of their worship and of their veneration; finally, that there is
no nation, no matter how benighted we may suppose it to be, that is not
persuaded of the existence of some intelligence superior to human
nature. But can the belief of all men change an error into truth? A
celebrated philosopher has said with all reason: "Neither general
tradition nor the unanimous consent of all men could place any
injunction upon truth." [Bayle.] Another wise man said before him, that
"an army of philosophers would not be sufficient to change the nature of
error and to make it truth." [Averroes]

There was a time when all men believed that the sun revolved around the
earth, while the latter remained motionless in the center of the whole
system of the universe; it is scarcely more than two hundred years since
this error was refuted. There was a time when nobody would believe in
the existence of antipodes, and when they persecuted those who had the
courage to sustain it; to-day no learned man dares to doubt it. All
nations of the world, except some men less credulous than others, still
believe in sorcerers, ghosts, apparitions, spirits; no sensible man
imagines himself obliged to adopt these follies; but the most sensible
people feel obliged to believe in a universal Spirit!




CXX.--ALL THE GODS ARE OF A BARBAROUS ORIGIN; ALL RELIGIONS ARE ANTIQUE
MONUMENTS OF IGNORANCE, SUPERSTITION, AND FEROCITY; AND MODERN RELIGIONS
ARE BUT ANCIENT FOLLIES REVIVED.

All the Gods worshiped by men have a barbarous origin; they were visibly
imagined by stupid nations, or were presented by ambitious and cunning
legislators to simple and benighted people, who had neither the capacity
nor the courage to examine properly the object which, by means of
terrors, they were made to worship. In examining closely the God which
we see adored still in our days by the most civilized nations, we are
compelled to acknowledge that He has evidently barbarous features. To be
barbarous is to recognize no right but force; it is being cruel to
excess; it is but following one's own caprice; it is a lack of
foresight, of prudence, and reason. Nations, who believe yourselves
civilized! do you not perceive this frightful character of the God to
whom you offer your incense? The pictures which are drawn of Divinity,
are they not visibly borrowed from the implacable, jealous, vindictive,
