"And what you saw decided you to bring it here to us."

"That's right. I saw--"

"Don't tell me what you saw. Give me your name and address and
don't say anything about this. You understand that we're grateful
to you for thinking of us, but we'd rather you said nothing."

"Mum's the word," the little clerk assured him, full of vast
importance.

The FBI phoned Dr. Ambrose Amberly, Smithsonian expert on
paleontology.

"We've got something, Doctor, that we'd like you to have a look
at. A lot of movie film."

"I'll be most happy to. I'll come down as soon as I get clear. End
of the week, perhaps?"

"This is very urgent, Doctor. Damnest thing you ever saw. Big,
shaggy elephants and tigers with teeth down to their necks.
There's a beaver the size of a bear."

"Fakes," said Amberly, disgusted. "Clever gadgets. Camera angles."

"That's what we thought first, but there are no gadgets, no camera
angles. This is the real McCoy."

"I'm on my way," the paleontologist said, hanging up.

_Snide item in smug, smartaleck gossip column: Saucers are passe
at the Pentagon. There's another mystery that's got the high brass
very high._




II


President Wesley Adams and Secretary of State John Cooper sat
glumly under a tree in the capital of Mastodonia and waited for
the ambassador extraordinary to return.

"I tell you, Wes," said Cooper, who, under various pseudonyms, was
also the secretaries of commerce, treasury and war, "this is a
crazy thing we did. What if Chuck can't get back? They might throw
him in jail or something might happen to the time unit or the
helicopter. We should have gone along."

"We had to stay," Adams said. "You know what would happen to this
camp and our supplies if we weren't around here to guard them."

"The only thing that's given us any trouble is that old mastodon.
If he comes around again, I'm going to take a skillet and bang him
in the brisket."

"That isn't the only reason, either," said President Adams, "and
you know it. We can't go deserting this nation now that we've
created it. We have to keep possession. Just planting a flag and
saying it's ours wouldn't be enough. We might be called upon for
proof that we've established residence. Something like the old
homestead laws, you know."

"We'll establish residence sure enough," growled Secretary Cooper,
"if something happens to that time unit or the helicopter."

"You think they'll do it, Johnny?"

"Who do what?"

"The United States. Do you think they'll recognize us?"

"Not if they know who we are."

"That's what I'm afraid of."

"Chuck will talk them into it. He can talk the skin right off a
cat."

"Sometimes I think we're going at this wrong. Sure, Chuck's got
the long-range view and I suppose it's best. But maybe what we
ought to do is grab a good, fast profit and get out of here. We
could take in hunting parties at ten thousand a head or maybe we
could lease it to a movie company."

"We can do all that and do it legally and with full protection,"
Cooper told him, "if we can get ourselves recognized as a
sovereign nation. If we negotiate a mutual defense pact, no one
would dare get hostile because we could squawk to Uncle Sam."

"All you say is true," Adams agreed, "but there are going to be
questions. It isn't just a matter of walking into Washington and
getting recognition. They'll want to know about us, such as our
population. What if Chuck has to tell them it's a total of three
persons?"

Cooper shook his head. "He wouldn't answer that way, Wes. He'd
duck the question or give them some diplomatic double-talk. After
all, how can we be _sure_ there are only three of us? We took over
the whole continent, remember."

"You know well enough, Johnny, there are no other humans back here
in North America. The farthest back any scientist will place the
migrations from Asia is 30,000 years. They haven't got here yet."

"Maybe we should have done it differently," mused Cooper. "Maybe
we should have included the whole world in our proclamation, not
just the continent. That way, we could claim quite a population."

"It wouldn't have held water. Even as it is, we went a little
further than precedent allows. The old explorers usually laid
claim to certain watersheds. They'd find a river and lay claim to
all the territory drained by the river. They didn't go grabbing
off whole continents."

"That's because they were never sure of exactly what they had,"
said Cooper. "We are. We have what you might call the advantage of
hindsight."

He leaned back against the tree and stared across the land. It was
a pretty place, he thought--the rolling ridges covered by vast
grazing areas and small groves, the forest-covered, ten-mile river
valley. And everywhere one looked, the grazing herds of mastodon,
giant bison and wild horses, with the less gregarious fauna
scattered hit and miss.

Old Buster, the troublesome mastodon, a lone bull which had been
probably run out of a herd by a younger rival, stood at the edge
of a grove a quarter-mile away. He had his head down and was
curling and uncurling his trunk in an aimless sort of way while he
teetered slowly in a lazy-crazy fashion by lifting first one foot
and then another.

The old cuss was lonely, Cooper told himself. That was why he hung
around like a homeless dog--except that he was too big and awkward
to have much pet-appeal and, more than likely, his temper was
unstable.

The afternoon sun was pleasantly warm and the air, it seemed to
Cooper, was the freshest he had ever smelled. It was, altogether,
a very pleasant place, an Indian-summer sort of land, ideal for a
Sunday picnic or a camping trip.

The breeze was just enough to float out from its flagstaff before
the tent the national banner of Mastodonia--a red rampant mastodon
upon a field of green.

"You know, Johnny," said Adams, "there's one thing that worries me
a lot. If we're going to base our claim on precedent, we may be
way off base. The old explorers always claimed their discoveries
for their nations or their king, never for themselves."

"The principle was entirely different," Cooper told him. "Nobody
ever did anything for himself in those days. Everyone was always
under someone else's protection. The explorers either were
financed by their governments or were sponsored by them or
operated under a royal charter or a patent. With us, it's
different. Ours is a private enterprise. You dreamed up the time
unit and built it. The three of us chipped in to buy the
helicopter. We've paid all of our expenses out of our own pockets.
We never got a dime from anyone. What we found is ours."

"I hope you're right," said Adams uneasily.

Old Buster had moved out from the grove and was shuffling warily
toward the camp. Adams picked up the rifle that lay across his
knees.

"Wait," said Cooper sharply. "Maybe he's just bluffing. It would
be a shame to plaster him; he's such a nice old guy."

Adams half raised the rifle.

"I'll give him three steps more," he announced. "I've had enough
of him."

Suddenly a roar burst out of the air just above their heads. The
two leaped to their feet.

"It's Chuck!" Cooper yelled. "He's back!"

The helicopter made a half-turn of the camp and came rapidly to
Earth.

Trumpeting with terror, Old Buster was a dwindling dot far down
the grassy ridge.




III


They built the nightly fires circling the camp to keep out the
animals.

"It'll be the death of me yet," said Adams wearily, "cutting all
this wood."

"We have to get to work on that stockade," Cooper said. "We've
fooled around too long. Some night, fire or no fire, a herd of
mastodon will come busting in here and if they ever hit the
helicopter, we'll be dead ducks. It wouldn't take more than just
five seconds to turn us into Robinson Crusoes of the Pleistocene."

"Well, now that this recognition thing has petered out on us,"
said Adams, "maybe we can get down to business."

