weather, and the man who held the tiller of the little boat which danced
on the white crests of the waves that night had many and many a time
come through such trifling danger scatheless.

"Look out, Bill," cried Orrick, as the thunder of the waves on the beach
sounded in his ears, and the great chalk cliffs rose up, ghostlike and
dim, before him.  To one unaccustomed to such scenes it might have
appeared an act of madness to run ashore on such a night.  But the
danger was not so great as it seemed.

The man at the bow stood ready with a boat-hook.  In a moment the keel
grated on the shingle.  Instantly the men were over the side, and the
boat was hauled up the beach.

"Now, then, for the tubs.  Make for the cave straight.  Rodney Nick will
be here in a minute.  Ah, here he comes!  Well, Rodney, we've done it
pretty smart," said Long Orrick, wading with a keg of brandy towards a
figure which approached him from the beach.  "Here you are! there's lots
more of 'em.  We're in luck.  Look alive.  The coast's clear, I
suppose?"

"Hall right," said the dark figure in a hoarse whisper, which terminated
in a low chuckle, as Long Orrick placed the keg innocently in the arms
of old Coleman and returned to the boat for more!

It may be as well to remark here--in order to clear up this mystery--
that although Coleman had not observed the flash of Rodney Nick's
lantern, his sharp eye had observed the gleam of the light in the boat,
when one of the men, as already mentioned, threw it on the face of his
timepiece.

Supposing, erroneously, that this latter was a signal to the shore,
Coleman, nevertheless, came to the correct conclusion that some one must
be awaiting Long Orrick near at hand, and felt convinced that the
Smugglers' Cave must needs be the rendezvous.

Hastening cautiously to Bax, whose station was not far distant from the
cave, he communicated his suspicions, and they went together towards the
place.

"I'll go in first," said Coleman, "'cause I know the place better than
you do."

"Very good," assented Bax, "I'll stand by to lend a hand."

Arrived at the cavern, Bax waited outside, and Coleman went in so
stealthily that he was at Rodney Nick's side before that worthy had the
smallest suspicion of his presence.  Indeed, Coleman would certainly
have run against the smuggler in the dark, had not the latter happened
to have been muttering savage threats against wind and tide, friends and
foes, alike, in consequence of the non-appearance of the boat.

Seizing him suddenly from behind, Coleman placed his knee in the small
of his back, forced him almost double, and then laid him flat on the
ground.

At the same moment Bax knelt by his side, put one of his strong hands on
the smuggler's right arm--thereby rendering it powerless--and placed the
other on his mouth.

So quickly was it all done that Rodney was bound and gagged in less than
two minutes.  Coleman then ran out just in time to receive the first
instalment of the brandy, as already related.  Being much the same in
build and height with Rodney Nick, he found no difficulty in passing for
him in the darkness of the night and violence of the wind, which latter
rendered his hoarse whispers almost unintelligible.

In this way several kegs of brandy, boxes of cigars, and bundles of
tobacco were landed and conveyed to the cavern by Coleman, who refused
to allow Bax to act as an assistant, fearing that his great size might
betray him.

On the fifth or sixth trip he found Long Orrick waiting for him somewhat
impatiently.

"You might have brought a hand with ye, man," said the latter, testily.

"Couldn't git one," said Coleman, taking the keg that was delivered to
him.

"What say?" cried Orrick.

"Couldn't git one," repeated the other, as loudly and hoarsely as he
could whisper.

"Speak out, man," cried Long Orrick, with an oath; "you ain't used to
have delicate lungs."

"I couldn't git nobody to come with me," said Coleman, in a louder
voice.

The tone was not distinct, but it was sufficient to open the eyes of the
smuggler.  Scarcely had the last word left his lips when Coleman
received a blow between the eyes that laid him flat on the beach.
Fortunately the last wave had retired.  There was only an inch or so of
foam around him.  Long Orrick knelt on his foe, and drew a knife from
his girdle.  Before the next wave came up, Coleman with one hand caught
the uplifted arm of his adversary, and with the other discharged a
pistol which he had drawn from his breast.  In another instant they were
struggling with each other in the wave which immediately swept over the
beach, and Bax was standing over them, uncertain where to strike, as the
darkness rendered friend and foe alike undistinguishable.

The men in the boat at once rushed to the rescue, omitting to take
weapons with them in their haste.  Seeing this, Bax seized the
struggling men by their collars, and exerting his great strength to the
utmost, dragged them both high upon the beach.  He was instantly
assailed by the crew, the first and second of whom he knocked down
respectively with a right and left hand blow; but the third sprang on
him behind and two others came up at the same moment--one on each side--
and seized his arms.

Had Bax been an ordinary man, his case would have been hopeless; but
having been endowed with an amount of muscular power and vigour far
beyond the average of strong men, he freed himself in a somewhat curious
manner.  Bending forward, he lifted the man who grasped him round the
neck from behind quite off his legs, and, by a sudden stoop, threw him
completely over his head.  This enabled him to hurl his other assailants
to the ground, where they lay stunned and motionless.  He then darted at
Coleman and Long Orrick, who were still struggling together with
tremendous fury.

Seeing his approach, the smuggler suddenly gave in, relaxed his hold,
and exclaimed, with a laugh, as Bax laid hold of him--

"Well, well, I see it's all up with me, so it's o' no use resistin'."

"No, that it ain't, my friend," said Coleman, rising and patting his foe
on the back.  "I can't tell ye how pleased I am to meet with ye.  You're
gettin' stouter, I think.  Smugglin' seems to agree with ye!--hey?"

He said this with a leer, and Bax laughed as he inspected Long Orrick
more narrowly.

The fact was that the smuggler's clothing was so stuffed in all parts
with tobacco that his lanky proportions had quite disappeared, and he
had become so ludicrously rotund as to be visibly altered even in a dark
night!

"Well, it does agree with me, that's a fact," said Long Orrick, with a
savage laugh; in the tone of which there was mingled however, quite as
much bitterness as merriment.

Just at this moment the rest of Coleman's friends, including Tommy Bogey
and Peekins, appeared on the scene in breathless haste, having been
attracted by the pistol-shot.

In the eager question and answer that followed, Long Orrick was for a
moment not sufficiently guarded.  He wrenched himself suddenly from the
loosened grasp of Bax, and, darting between several of the party, one of
whom he floored in passing with a left-handed blow, he ran along the
shore at the top of his speed!

Bax, blazing with disappointment and indignation, set off in fierce
pursuit, and old Coleman, bursting with anger, followed as fast as his
short legs and shorter wind would permit him.  Guy Foster and several of
the others joined in the chase, while those who remained behind
contented themselves with securing the men who had been already
captured.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE STORM--THE WRECK OF THE HOMEWARD BOUND--THE LIFEBOAT.

A stern chase never was and never will be a short one.  Old Coleman, in
the course of quarter of a mile's run, felt that his powers were limited
and wisely stopped short; Bax, Guy, and Tommy Bogey held on at full
speed for upwards of two miles along the beach, following the road which
wound along the base of the chalk cliffs, and keeping the fugitive well
in view.

But Long Orrick was, as we have seen, a good runner.  He kept his ground
until he reached a small hamlet named Kingsdown, lying about two and a
half miles to the north of Saint Margaret's Bay.  Here he turned
suddenly to the left, quitted the beach, and made for the interior,
where he was soon lost sight of, and left his disappointed pursuers to
grumble at their bad fortune and wipe their heated brows.

The strength of the gale had now increased to such an extent that it
became a matter not only of difficulty but of danger to pass along the
shore beneath the cliffs.  The spray was hurled against them with great
violence, and as the tide rose the larger waves washed up with a
magnificent and overwhelming sweep almost to their base.  In these
circumstances Guy proposed to go back to Saint Margaret's Bay by the
inland road.

"It's a bit longer," said he, as they stood under the lee of a wall,
panting from the effects of their run, "but we shall be sheltered from
the gale; besides, I doubt if we could pass under the cliffs now."

Bax made no reply, but, placing his hand on his friend's arm, stood for
a few seconds in the attitude of one who listens with profound
attention.

"There it is," said he at last.  "Do ye hear that, Guy?"

"_I_ hear it," cried Tommy Bogey, with some excitement.

"I hear nothing but the howling of the wind," said Guy, "and the roaring
of the sea."

"Hush! listen! the minute-gun," said Bax in a low voice; "it comes from
Saint Margaret's Bay; there, did you not--"

"Ah!  I heard it," cried the other; "come, let us run down along the
beach a bit, and see if we can make out whereabouts she is."

Guy spoke as if he had no doubt whatever of the cause of the sounds
which had attracted the attention of himself and his friends.  Without
another word they all bent their heads to the storm, and forced their
way out upon the exposed beach, where they found some fishermen
assembled in the lee of a boat-house, looking eagerly towards the
direction whence the sounds came.

"I'm afear'd she's got on the rocks to the nor'ard o' the bay," said one
of the men, as Bax and his companions ran towards them; "there goes
another gun."

A faint flash was seen for an instant away to the southward.  It was
followed in a few seconds by the low boom of a distant gun.  Almost at
the same moment the black heavens seemed to be cleft by a sheet of vivid
flame, which towered high into the sky, and then went out, leaving the
darkness blacker than before.

"That's a rocket," cried the fishermen.

"Heaven help them," said Bax, as he hastily buttoned his oilskin coat
close up to his chin.  "Come, Guy, we'll away and do what we can.  Will
any of you lads join us?"

Most of the younger men on the ground at once volunteered.

"Stop," cried one of the older men, "the tide's too high; ye can't pass
the cliff, I tell ye."

The man was left abruptly by the whole party, for they knew well enough
that if they took the inland road they might be too late to render
effectual assistance, and any needless delay in attempting the beach
road could only make matters worse.

There was no lifeboat on this part of the Kentish coast at that time,
and the great distance of the spot from Ramsgate or Broadstairs rendered
it highly improbable that either of the lifeboats belonging to these
ports could be in time to render effectual assistance.  Besides, the men
knew well that on such a night the crews of these boats would have
enough of work to do in attending to the wrecks in their own immediate
neighbourhood.

They followed Bax, therefore, at a steady trot until they reached a part
of the perpendicular cliff which projected somewhat towards the sea.  At
the foot of this the waves which on this coast roll to the shore with
tremendous volume and power, burst with a loud roar and rushed up in
thick foam.

"Don't any of you come on that don't feel up to it," cried Bax, as he
awaited the retreat of a wave, and prepared to make a dash.  At that
moment he wheeled round with the look and air of one who had forgotten
something.

"Tommy," said he, laying his hand on the boy's head, "go back, lad,
round by the land road."

"No, Bax, _I won't_," replied Tommy, with a fervour of determination
that would at any other time have raised a laugh in those who heard it.

"Come along, then, you obstinate beggar," said Bax, sternly, seizing the
boy by the arms, and throwing him over his shoulder as if he had been a
lamb!

Tommy's dignity was hurt.  He attempted to struggle, but he might as
well have hoped to free himself from the hug of a brown bear as to
escape from the vice-like grip of his big friend.  In another moment Bax
was whelmed in spray and knee-deep in rushing water.

It was a short dangerous passage, but the whole party got round the
cliff in safety, and hastened as rapidly as possible towards the scene
of the wreck.

We must now beg the reader to follow us to another scene, and to go back
a few hours in time.

Shortly after the sun set that night, and before the full fury of the
storm broke forth, a noble ship of two thousand tons' burden beat up the
Channel and made for the Downs.  She was a homeward bound ship, just
arrived from Australia with a valuable cargo, and between two and three
hundred passengers, many of whom were gold-diggers returning to their
native land, and nearly all of whom were possessed of a considerable sum
in nuggets and gold-dust.  The ship was owned by the house of Denham,
Crumps, and Company.  Her arrival had been already telegraphed to the
firm in Redwharf Lane.

There was rejoicing that evening on board the "Trident."  Men and women
and children crowded the high sides of the weather-worn ship, and,
holding on by shrouds, ratlines and stays, standing on tip-toe,
clambering on carronades, and peeping through holes, gazed long and
ardently at the white cliffs of dear Old England.

Some of them had not set eyes on the "old country," as it is
affectionately called in our colonies, for many years.  Some there were
who had gone out as boys, and were returning bald-headed and
grey-bearded men.  There were others who had been out only a few years,
but who, happening to be on the spot when the goldfields were
discovered, had suddenly made fortunes.  They were returning to surprise
and gladden the hearts of those who, perchance, had sent them off to
seek their fortunes with the sad feeling that there was little chance of
seeing them again in this world.

There were ladies, also, who had gone out to the distant land with an
unbelieving, almost despairing, hope of finding employment for those
talents which they had, alas! found to be of but little value at home.
These were, in some cases, returning with lucky gold-diggers and
blooming children to their native land.  In other cases they were merely
about to visit home to induce some parent or sister, perhaps, to venture
out to the land of gold.

But all, whether young or old, male or female, gentle or simple, were
merry and glad of heart that night as they clustered on the bulwarks of
the "Trident," and gazed at the longed-for and much loved shore.  There
was no distinction of ranks now.  The cabin and the 'tween-deck
passengers mingled together and tried to relieve the feelings of their
hearts by exchanging words of courtesy and goodwill.

The stormy and threatening aspect of the sky had no terrors now for the
passengers on board the "Trident."  For weeks and months they had tossed
on the bosom of the great deep.  They were familiar with the varied
moods of wind and wave; they had faced the dangers of the sea so often
that they scarce believed that any real dangers could exist.  The very
children had become sailors; they were precociously weather-wise, and
rather fond of being tossed on the waves than otherwise.  The prospect
of a storm no longer filled them with alarm, as it used to do at the
beginning of the voyage, for they had encountered many storms and
weathered them all.  Yes, they had experienced all the dangers of the
sea, but it was reserved for that night--that last night of the long,
long voyage--to teach them the dangers of the land; the terrors of a
storm in narrow waters, among shallows and on a lee-shore,--and to
convince them that for man there is no real safety whatever in this
