returning to Boston in the carriage. While the coachman and a servant
were replacing the wheel the lady and gentleman sheltered themselves
beneath the maple trees, and there espied the bubbling fountain and
David Swan asleep beside it. Impressed with the awe which the humblest
sleeper usually sheds around him, the merchant trod as lightly as the
gout would allow, and his spouse took good heed not to rustle her silk
gown lest David should start up all of a sudden.

"How soundly he sleeps!" whispered the old gentleman. "From what a
depth he draws that easy breath! Such sleep as that, brought on
without an opiate, would be worth more to me than half my income, for
it would suppose health and an untroubled mind."

"And youth besides," said the lady. "Healthy and quiet age does not
sleep thus. Our slumber is no more like his than our wakefulness."

The longer they looked, the more did this elderly couple feel
interested in the unknown youth to whom the wayside and the maple
shade were as a secret chamber with the rich gloom of damask curtains
brooding over him. Perceiving that a stray sunbeam glimmered down upon
his face, the lady contrived to twist a branch aside so as to
intercept it, and, having done this little act of kindness, she began
to feel like a mother to him.

"Providence seems to have laid him here," whispered she to her
husband, "and to have brought us hither to find him, after our
disappointment in our cousin's son. Methinks I can see a likeness to
our departed Henry. Shall we waken him?"

"To what purpose?" said the merchant, hesitating. "We know nothing of
the youth's character."

"That open countenance!" replied his wife, in the same hushed voice,
yet earnestly. "This innocent sleep!"

While these whispers were passing, the sleeper's heart did not throb,
nor his breath become agitated, nor his features betray the least
token of interest. Yet Fortune was bending over him, just ready to let
fall a burden of gold. The old merchant had lost his only son, and had
no heir to his wealth except a distant relative with whose conduct he
was dissatisfied. In such cases people sometimes do stranger things
than to act the magician and awaken a young man to splendor who fell
asleep in poverty.

"Shall we not waken him?" repeated the lady, persuasively.

"The coach is ready, sir," said the servant, behind.

The old couple started, reddened and hurried away, mutually wondering
that they should ever have dreamed of doing anything so very
ridiculous. The merchant threw himself back in the carriage and
occupied his mind with the plan of a magnificent asylum for
unfortunate men of business. Meanwhile, David Swan enjoyed his nap.

The carriage could not have gone above a mile or two when a pretty
young girl came along with a tripping pace which showed precisely how
her little heart was dancing in her bosom. Perhaps it was this merry
kind of motion that caused--is there any harm in saying it?--her
garter to slip its knot. Conscious that the silken girth--if silk it
were--was relaxing its hold, she turned aside into the shelter of the
maple trees, and there found a young man asleep by the spring.
Blushing as red as any rose that she should have intruded into a
gentleman's bedchamber, and for such a purpose too, she was about to
make her escape on tiptoe. But there was peril near the sleeper. A
monster of a bee had been wandering overhead--buzz, buzz, buzz--now
among the leaves, now flashing through the strips of sunshine, and now
lost in the dark shade, till finally he appeared to be settling on the
eyelid of David Swan. The sting of a bee is sometimes deadly. As
free-hearted as she was innocent, the girl attacked the intruder with
her handkerchief, brushed him soundly and drove him from beneath the
maple shade. How sweet a picture! This good deed accomplished, with
quickened breath and a deeper blush she stole a glance at the youthful
stranger for whom she had been battling with a dragon in the air.

"He is handsome!" thought she, and blushed redder yet.

How could it be that no dream of bliss grew so strong within him that,
shattered by its very strength, it should part asunder and allow him
to perceive the girl among its phantoms? Why, at least, did no smile
of welcome brighten upon his face? She was come, the maid whose soul,
according to the old and beautiful idea, had been severed from his
own, and whom in all his vague but passionate desires he yearned to
meet. Her only could he love with a perfect love, him only could she
receive into the depths of her heart, and now her image was faintly
blushing in the fountain by his side; should it pass away, its happy
lustre would never gleam upon his life again.

"How sound he sleeps!" murmured the girl. She departed, but did not
trip along the road so lightly as when she came.

Now, this girl's father was a thriving country merchant in the
neighborhood, and happened at that identical time to be looking out
for just such a young man as David Swan. Had David formed a wayside
acquaintance with the daughter, he would have become the father's
clerk, and all else in natural succession. So here, again, had good
fortune--the best of fortunes--stolen so near that her garments
brushed against him, and he knew nothing of the matter.

The girl was hardly out of sight when two men turned aside beneath the
maple shade. Both had dark faces set off by cloth caps, which were
drawn down aslant over their brows. Their dresses were shabby, yet had
a certain smartness. These were a couple of rascals who got their
living by whatever the devil sent them, and now, in the interim of
other business, had staked the joint profits of their next piece of
villainy on a game of cards which was to have been decided here under
the trees. But, finding David asleep by the spring, one of the rogues
whispered to his fellow:

"Hist! Do you see that bundle under his head?"

The other villain nodded, winked and leered.

"I'll bet you a horn of brandy," said the first, "that the chap has
either a pocketbook or a snug little hoard of small change stowed away
amongst his shirts. And if not there, we will find it in his
pantaloons pocket."

"But how if he wakes?" said the other.

His companion thrust aside his waistcoat, pointed to the handle of a
dirk and nodded.

"So be it!" muttered the second villain.

They approached the unconscious David, and, while one pointed the
dagger toward his heart, the other began to search the bundle beneath
his head. Their two faces, grim, wrinkled and ghastly with guilt and
fear, bent over their victim, looking horrible enough to be mistaken
for fiends should he suddenly awake. Nay, had the villains glanced
aside into the spring, even they would hardly have known themselves as
reflected there. But David Swan had never worn a more tranquil aspect,
even when asleep on his mother's breast.

"I must take away the bundle," whispered one.

"If he stirs, I'll strike," muttered the other.

But at this moment a dog scenting along the ground came in beneath the
maple trees and gazed alternately at each of these wicked men and then
at the quiet sleeper. He then lapped out of the fountain.

"Pshaw!" said one villain. "We can do nothing now. The dog's master
must be close behind."

"Let's take a drink and be off," said the other.

The man with the dagger thrust back the weapon into his bosom and drew
forth a pocket-pistol, but not of that kind which kills by a single
discharge. It was a flask of liquor with a block-tin tumbler screwed
upon the mouth. Each drank a comfortable dram, and left the spot with
so many jests and such laughter at their unaccomplished wickedness
that they might be said to have gone on their way rejoicing. In a few
hours they had forgotten the whole affair, nor once imagined that the
recording angel had written down the crime of murder against their
souls in letters as durable as eternity. As for David Swan, he still
slept quietly, neither conscious of the shadow of death when it hung
over him nor of the glow of renewed life when that shadow was
withdrawn. He slept, but no longer so quietly as at first. An hour's
repose had snatched from his elastic frame the weariness with which
many hours of toil had burdened it. Now he stirred, now moved his lips
without a sound, now talked in an inward tone to the noonday spectres
of his dream. But a noise of wheels came rattling louder and louder
along the road, until it dashed through the dispersing mist of David's
slumber; and there was the stagecoach. He started up with all his
ideas about him.

"Halloo, driver! Take a passenger?" shouted he.

"Room on top!" answered the driver.

Up mounted David, and bowled away merrily toward Boston without so
much as a parting glance at that fountain of dreamlike vicissitude. He
knew not that a phantom of Wealth had thrown a golden hue upon its
waters, nor that one of Love had sighed softly to their murmur, nor
that one of Death had threatened to crimson them with his blood, all
in the brief hour since he lay down to sleep. Sleeping or waking, we
hear not the airy footsteps of the strange things that almost happen.
Does it not argue a superintending Providence that, while viewless and
unexpected events thrust themselves continually athwart our path,
there should still be regularity enough in mortal life to render
foresight even partially available?




SIGHTS FROM A STEEPLE.


So! I have climbed high, and my reward is small. Here I stand with
wearied knees--earth, indeed, at a dizzy depth below, but heaven far,
far beyond me still. Oh that I could soar up into the very zenith,
where man never breathed nor eagle ever flew, and where the ethereal
azure melts away from the eye and appears only a deepened shade of
nothingness! And yet I shiver at that cold and solitary thought. What
clouds are gathering in the golden west with direful intent against
the brightness and the warmth of this summer afternoon? They are
ponderous air-ships, black as death and freighted with the tempest,
and at intervals their thunder--the signal-guns of that unearthly
squadron--rolls distant along the deep of heaven. These nearer heaps
of fleecy vapor--methinks I could roll and toss upon them the whole
day long--seem scattered here and there for the repose of tired
pilgrims through the sky. Perhaps--for who can tell?--beautiful
spirits are disporting themselves there, and will bless my mortal eye
with the brief appearance of their curly locks of golden light and
laughing faces fair and faint as the people of a rosy dream. Or where
the floating mass so imperfectly obstructs the color of the firmament
a slender foot and fairy limb resting too heavily upon the frail
support may be thrust through and suddenly withdrawn, while longing
fancy follows them in vain. Yonder, again, is an airy archipelago
where the sunbeams love to linger in their journeyings through space.
Every one of those little clouds has been dipped and steeped in
radiance which the slightest pressure might disengage in silvery
profusion like water wrung from a sea-maid's hair. Bright they are as
a young man's visions, and, like them, would be realized in dullness,
obscurity and tears. I will look on them no more.

In three parts of the visible circle whose centre is this spire I
discern cultivated fields, villages, white country-seats, the waving
lines of rivulets, little placid lakes, and here and there a rising
ground that would fain be termed a hill. On the fourth side is the
sea, stretching away toward a viewless boundary, blue and calm except
where the passing anger of a shadow flits across its surface and is
gone. Hitherward a broad inlet penetrates far into the land; on the
verge of the harbor formed by its extremity is a town, and over it am
I, a watchman, all-heeding and unheeded. Oh that the multitude of
chimneys could speak, like those of Madrid, and betray in smoky
whispers the secrets of all who since their first foundation have
assembled at the hearths within! Oh that the Limping Devil of Le Sage
would perch beside me here, extend his wand over this contiguity of
roofs, uncover every chamber and make me familiar with their
inhabitants! The most desirable mode of existence might be that of a
spiritualized Paul Pry hovering invisible round man and woman,
witnessing their deeds, searching into their hearts, borrowing
brightness from their felicity and shade from their sorrow, and
retaining no emotion peculiar to himself. But none of these things are
possible; and if I would know the interior of brick walls or the
mystery of human bosoms, I can but guess.

Yonder is a fair street extending north and south. The stately
mansions are placed each on its carpet of verdant grass, and a long
flight of steps descends from every door to the pavement. Ornamental
trees--the broadleafed horse-chestnut, the elm so lofty and bending,
the graceful but infrequent willow, and others whereof I know not the
names--grow thrivingly among brick and stone. The oblique rays of the
sun are intercepted by these green citizens and by the houses, so that
one side of the street is a shaded and pleasant walk. On its whole
extent there is now but a single passenger, advancing from the upper
end, and he, unless distance and the medium of a pocket spyglass do
him more than justice, is a fine young man of twenty. He saunters
slowly forward, slapping his left hand with his folded gloves, bending
his eyes upon the pavement, and sometimes raising them to throw a
glance before him. Certainly he has a pensive air. Is he in doubt or
in debt? Is he--if the question be allowable--in love? Does he strive
to be melancholy and gentlemanlike, or is he merely overcome by the
heat? But I bid him farewell for the present. The door of one of the
houses--an aristocratic edifice with curtains of purple and gold
waving from the windows--is now opened, and down the steps come two
ladies swinging their parasols and lightly arrayed for a summer
ramble. Both are young, both are pretty; but methinks the left-hand
lass is the fairer of the twain, and, though she be so serious at this
moment, I could swear that there is a treasure of gentle fun within
her. They stand talking a little while upon the steps, and finally
proceed up the street. Meantime, as their faces are now turned from
me, I may look elsewhere.

Upon that wharf and down the corresponding street is a busy contrast
to the quiet scene which I have just noticed. Business evidently has
its centre there, and many a man is wasting the summer afternoon in
labor and anxiety, in losing riches or in gaining them, when he would
be wiser to flee away to some pleasant country village or shaded lake
in the forest or wild and cool sea-beach. I see vessels unlading at
the wharf and precious merchandise strown upon the ground abundantly
as at the bottom of the sea--that market whence no goods return, and
where there is no captain nor supercargo to render an account of
sales. Here the clerks are diligent with their paper and pencils and
sailors ply the block and tackle that hang over the hold, accompanying
their toil with cries long-drawn and roughly melodious till the bales
and puncheons ascend to upper air. At a little distance a group of
gentlemen are assembled round the door of a warehouse. Grave seniors
be they, and I would wager--if it were safe, in these times, to be
responsible for any one--that the least eminent among them might vie
with old Vincentio, that incomparable trafficker of Pisa. I can even
select the wealthiest of the company. It is the elderly personage in
somewhat rusty black, with powdered hair the superfluous whiteness of
which is visible upon the cape of his coat. His twenty ships are
wafted on some of their many courses by every breeze that blows, and
his name, I will venture to say, though I know it not, is a familiar
sound among the far-separated merchants of Europe and the Indies.

But I bestow too much of my attention in this quarter. On looking
again to the long and shady walk I perceive that the two fair girls
have encountered the young man. After a sort of shyness in the
recognition, he turns back with them. Moreover, he has sanctioned my
taste in regard to his companions by placing himself on the inner side
of the pavement, nearest the Venus to whom I, enacting on a
steeple-top the part of Paris on the top of Ida, adjudged the golden
apple.

In two streets converging at right angles toward my watch-tower I
distinguish three different processions. One is a proud array of
voluntary soldiers in bright uniform, resembling, from the height
whence I look down, the painted veterans that garrison the windows of
a toy-shop. And yet it stirs my heart. Their regular advance, their
nodding plumes, the sun-flash on their bayonets and musket-barrels,
the roll of their drums ascending past me, and the fife ever and anon
piercing through,--these things have wakened a warlike fire, peaceful
though I be. Close to their rear marches a battalion of schoolboys
ranged in crooked and irregular platoons, shouldering sticks, thumping
a harsh and unripe clatter from an instrument of tin and ridiculously
aping the intricate manoeuvres of the foremost band. Nevertheless, as
slight differences are scarcely perceptible from a church-spire, one
might be tempted to ask, "Which are the boys?" or, rather, "Which the
men?" But, leaving these, let us turn to the third procession, which,
though sadder in outward show, may excite identical reflections in the
thoughtful mind. It is a funeral--a hearse drawn by a black and bony
steed and covered by a dusty pall, two or three coaches rumbling over
the stones, their drivers half asleep, a dozen couple of careless
mourners in their every-day attire. Such was not the fashion of our
fathers when they carried a friend to his grave. There is now no
doleful clang of the bell to proclaim sorrow to the town. Was the King
of Terrors more awful in those days than in our own, that wisdom and
philosophy have been able to produce this change? Not so. Here is a
proof that he retains his proper majesty. The military men and the
military boys are wheeling round the corner, and meet the funeral full
in the face. Immediately the drum is silent, all but the tap that
regulates each simultaneous footfall. The soldiers yield the path to
the dusty hearse and unpretending train, and the children quit their
ranks and cluster on the sidewalks with timorous and instinctive
curiosity. The mourners enter the churchyard at the base of the
steeple and pause by an open grave among the burial-stones; the
lightning glimmers on them as they lower down the coffin, and the
thunder rattles heavily while they throw the earth upon its lid.
Verily, the shower is near, and I tremble for the young man and the
girls, who have now disappeared from the long and shady street.

How various are the situations of the people covered by the roofs
beneath me, and how diversified are the events at this moment
befalling them! The new-born, the aged, the dying, the strong in life
and the recent dead are in the chambers of these many mansions. The
full of hope, the happy, the miserable and the desperate dwell
together within the circle of my glance. In some of the houses over
which my eyes roam so coldly guilt is entering into hearts that are
still tenanted by a debased and trodden virtue; guilt is on the very
edge of commission, and the impending deed might be averted; guilt is
done, and the criminal wonders if it be irrevocable. There are broad
thoughts struggling in my mind, and, were I able to give them
distinctness, they would make their way in eloquence. Lo! the
raindrops are descending.

The clouds within a little time have gathered over all the sky,
hanging heavily, as if about to drop in one unbroken mass upon the
earth. At intervals the lightning flashes from their brooding hearts,
quivers, disappears, and then comes the thunder, travelling slowly
after its twin-born flame. A strong wind has sprung up, howls through
the darkened streets, and raises the dust in dense bodies to rebel
against the approaching storm. The disbanded soldiers fly, the funeral
has already vanished like its dead, and all people hurry homeward--all
that have a home--while a few lounge by the corners or trudge on
desperately at their leisure. In a narrow lane which communicates with
the shady street I discern the rich old merchant putting himself to
the top of his speed lest the rain should convert his hair-powder to a
paste. Unhappy gentleman! By the slow vehemence and painful moderation
wherewith he journeys, it is but too evident that Podagra has left its
thrilling tenderness in his great toe. But yonder, at a far more rapid
pace, come three other of my acquaintance, the two pretty girls and
the young man unseasonably interrupted in their walk. Their footsteps
are supported by the risen dust, the wind lends them its velocity,
they fly like three sea-birds driven landward by the tempestuous
breeze. The ladies would not thus rival Atalanta if they but knew that
any one were at leisure to observe them. Ah! as they hasten onward,
laughing in the angry face of nature, a sudden catastrophe has
chanced. At the corner where the narrow lane enters into the street
they come plump against the old merchant, whose tortoise-motion has
just brought him to that point. He likes not the sweet encounter; the
darkness of the whole air gathers speedily upon his visage, and there
is a pause on both sides. Finally he thrusts aside the youth with
little courtesy, seizes an arm of each of the two girls, and plods
onward like a magician with a prize of captive fairies. All this is
easy to be understood. How disconsolate the poor lover stands,
regardless of the rain that threatens an exceeding damage to his
well-fashioned habiliments, till he catches a backward glance of mirth
from a bright eye, and turns away with whatever comfort it conveys!

The old man and his daughters are safely housed, and now the storm
lets loose its fury. In every dwelling I perceive the faces of the
chambermaids as they shut down the windows, excluding the impetuous
shower and shrinking away from the quick fiery glare. The large drops
descend with force upon the slated roofs and rise again in smoke.
There is a rush and roar as of a river through the air, and muddy
streams bubble majestically along the pavement, whirl their dusky foam
into the kennel, and disappear beneath iron grates. Thus did Arethusa
sink. I love not my station here aloft in the midst of the tumult
which I am powerless to direct or quell, with the blue lightning
wrinkling on my brow and the thunder muttering its first awful
syllables in my ear. I will descend. Yet let me give another glance to
the sea, where the foam breaks out in long white lines upon a broad
expanse of blackness or boils up in far-distant points like snowy
mountain-tops in the eddies of a flood; and let me look once more at
the green plain and little hills of the country, over which the giant
of the storm is striding in robes of mist, and at the town whose
obscured and desolate streets might beseem a city of the dead; and,
turning a single moment to the sky, now gloomy as an author's
prospects, I prepare to resume my station on lower earth. But stay! A
little speck of azure has widened in the western heavens; the sunbeams
find a passage and go rejoicing through the tempest, and on yonder
darkest cloud, born like hallowed hopes of the glory of another world
and the trouble and tears of this, brightens forth the rainbow.




THE HOLLOW OF THE THREE HILLS.


In those strange old times when fantastic dreams and madmen's reveries
were realized among the actual circumstances of life, two persons met
together at an appointed hour and place. One was a lady graceful in
form and fair of feature, though pale and troubled and smitten with an
untimely blight in what should have been the fullest bloom of her
years; the other was an ancient and meanly-dressed woman of
ill-favored aspect, and so withered, shrunken and decrepit that even
the space since she began to decay must have exceeded the ordinary
term of human existence. In the spot where they encountered no mortal
could observe them. Three little hills stood near each other, and down
in the midst of them sunk a hollow basin almost mathematically
circular, two or three hundred feet in breadth and of such depth that
a stately cedar might but just be visible above the sides. Dwarf pines
were numerous upon the hills and partly fringed the outer verge of the
intermediate hollow, within which there was nothing but the brown
grass of October and here and there a tree-trunk that had fallen long
ago and lay mouldering with no green successor from its roots. One of
these masses of decaying wood, formerly a majestic oak, rested close
beside a pool of green and sluggish water at the bottom of the basin.
Such scenes as this (so gray tradition tells) were once the resort of
a power of evil and his plighted subjects, and here at midnight or on
the dim verge of evening they were said to stand round the mantling
pool disturbing its putrid waters in the performance of an impious
baptismal rite. The chill beauty of an autumnal sunset was now gilding
the three hill-tops, whence a paler tint stole down their sides into
the hollow.

"Here is our pleasant meeting come to pass," said the aged crone,
"according as thou hast desired. Say quickly what thou wouldst have of
me, for there is but a short hour that we may tarry here."

As the old withered woman spoke a smile glimmered on her countenance
like lamplight on the wall of a sepulchre. The lady trembled and cast
her eyes upward to the verge of the basin, as if meditating to return
with her purpose unaccomplished. But it was not so ordained.

"I am stranger in this land, as you know," said she, at length.
"Whence I come it matters not, but I have left those behind me with
whom my fate was intimately bound, and from whom I am cut off for
ever. There is a weight in my bosom that I cannot away with, and I
have come hither to inquire of their welfare."

"And who is there by this green pool that can bring thee news from the
ends of the earth?" cried the old woman, peering into the lady's face.
"Not from my lips mayst thou hear these tidings; yet be thou bold, and
the daylight shall not pass away from yonder hilltop before thy wish
be granted."

"I will do your bidding though I die," replied the lady, desperately.

The old woman seated herself on the trunk of the fallen tree, threw
aside the hood that shrouded her gray locks and beckoned her companion
to draw near.

"Kneel down," she said, "and lay your forehead on my knees."

She hesitated a moment, but the anxiety that had long been kindling
burned fiercely up within her. As she knelt down the border of her
garment was dipped into the pool; she laid her forehead on the old
woman's knees, and the latter drew a cloak about the lady's face, so
that she was in darkness. Then she heard the muttered words of prayer,
in the midst of which she started and would have arisen.

"Let me flee! Let me flee and hide myself, that they may not look upon
me!" she cried. But, with returning recollection, she hushed herself
and was still as death, for it seemed as if other voices, familiar in
infancy and unforgotten through many wanderings and in all the
vicissitudes of her heart and fortune, were mingling with the accents
of the prayer. At first the words were faint and indistinct--not
rendered so by distance, but rather resembling the dim pages of a book
which we strive to read by an imperfect and gradually brightening
light. In such a manner, as the prayer proceeded, did those voices
strengthen upon the ear, till at length the petition ended, and the
conversation of an aged man and of a woman broken and decayed like
himself became distinctly audible to the lady as she knelt. But those
strangers appeared not to stand in the hollow depth between the three
hills. Their voices were encompassed and re-echoed by the walls of a
chamber the windows of which were rattling in the breeze; the regular
vibration of a clock, the crackling of a fire and the tinkling of the
embers as they fell among the ashes rendered the scene almost as vivid
as if painted to the eye. By a melancholy hearth sat these two old
people, the man calmly despondent, the woman querulous and tearful,
and their words were all of sorrow. They spoke of a daughter, a
wanderer they knew not where, bearing dishonor along with her and
leaving shame and affliction to bring their gray heads to the grave.
They alluded also to other and more recent woe, but in the midst of
