Project Gutenberg's Woman's Life in Colonial Days, by Carl Holliday

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Woman's Life in Colonial Days

Author: Carl Holliday

Release Date: March 28, 2005 [EBook #15488]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WOMAN'S LIFE IN COLONIAL DAYS ***




Produced by Mark C. Orton, Karen Dalrymple and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.





[Transcriber's Note: In the original text, some footnotes were referenced
more than once in the text.  For clarity, these references have had a
letter added to the number, for example, 26a.]



  WOMAN'S LIFE IN COLONIAL DAYS


  CARL HOLLIDAY

  _Professor of English_
  _San Jose State College, California_

  AUTHOR OF

     THE WIT AND HUMOR OF COLONIAL DAYS, ENGLISH FICTION FROM THE FIFTH
     TO THE TWENTIETH CENTURY, A HISTORY OF SOUTHERN LITERATURE, THE
     WRITINGS OF COLONIAL VIRGINIA, THE CAVALIER POETS, THREE CENTURIES
     OF SOUTHERN POETRY, ETC.


  CORNER HOUSE PUBLISHERS
  WILLIAMSTOWN, MASSACHUSETTS


  _First Printed in 1922_
  _Reprinted in 1968_
  _by_
  CORNER HOUSE PUBLISHERS


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




PREFACE


This book is an attempt to portray by means of the writings of colonial
days the life of the women of that period,--how they lived, what their
work and their play, what and how they thought and felt, their strength
and their weakness, the joys and the sorrows of their everyday
existence. Through such an attempt perhaps we can more nearly understand
how and why the American woman is what she is to-day.

For a long time to come, one of the principal reasons for the study of
the writings of America will lie, not in their intrinsic merit alone,
but in their revelations of American life, ideals, aspirations, and
social and intellectual endeavors. We Americans need what Professor
Shorey has called "the controlling consciousness of tradition." We have
not sufficiently regarded the bond that connects our present
institutions with their origins in the days of our forefathers. That is
one of the main purposes of this study, and the author believes that
through contributions of such a character he can render the national
intellectual spirit at least as valuable a service as he could through a
study of some legend of ancient Britain or some epic of an extinct race.
As Mr. Percy Boynton has said, "To foster in a whole generation some
clear recognition of other qualities in America than its bigness, and of
other distinctions between the past and the present than that they are
far apart is to contribute towards the consciousness of a national
individuality which is the first essential of national life.... We
must put our minds upon ourselves, we must look to our past and to our
present, and then intelligently to our future."

The author has endeavored to follow such advice by bringing forward
those qualities of colonial womanhood which have made for the
refinement, the intellectuality, the spirit, the aggressiveness, and
withal the genuine womanliness of the present-day American woman. As the
book is not intended for scholars alone, the author has felt free when
he had not original source material before him to quote now and then
from the studies of writers on other phases of colonial life--such as
the valuable books by Dr. Philip Alexander Bruce, Dr. John Bassett, Dr.
George Sydney Fisher, Charles C. Coffin, Alice Brown, Alice Morse Earle,
Anna Hollingsworth Wharton, and Geraldine Brooks.

The author believes that many misconceptions have crept into the mind of
the average reader concerning the life of colonial women--ideas, for
instance, of unending long-faced gloom, constant fear of pleasure,
repression of all normal emotions. It is hoped that this book will go
far toward clearing the mind of the reader of such misconceptions, by
showing that woman in colonial days knew love and passion, felt longing
and aspiration, used the heart and the brain, very much as does her
descendant of to-day.

For permission to quote from the works mentioned hereafter, the author
wishes to express his gratitude to Sydney G. Fisher and the J.B.
Lippincott Company (_Men, Women and Manners in Colonial Days_), Ralph L.
Bartlett, executor for Charles C. Coffin, (_Old Times in Colonial
Days_), Alice Brown and Charles Scribner's Sons (_Mercy Warren_), Philip
Alexander Bruce and the Macmillan Company (_Institutional History of
Virginia in the Seventeenth Century_), Anne H. Wharton (_Martha
Washington_), John Spencer Bassett (_Writings of Colonel Byrd_), Alice
Earle Hyde (_Alice Morse Earl's Child Life in Colonial Days_), Geraldine
Brooks and Thomas Y. Crowell Company (_Dames and Daughters of Colonial
Days_). The author wishes to acknowledge his deep indebtedness to the
late Sylvia Brady Holliday, whose untiring investigations of the subject
while a student under him contributed much to this book.

C.H.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I--COLONIAL WOMAN AND RELIGION

  I. The Spirit of Woman--The Suffering of Women--The Era of
     Adventure--Privation and Death in the First Colonial
     Days--Descriptions by Prince, Bradford, Johnson, etc.--Early
     Concord.

  II. Woman and Her Religion--Its Unyielding Quality--Its
     Repressive Effect on Woman--Wigglesworth's _Day of Doom_--What
     It Taught Woman--Necessity of Early Baptism--Edward's _Eternity of
     Hell Torment_--_Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God_--Effect
     on Womanhood--Personal Devils--Dangers of Earthly Love--God's
     Sudden Punishments.

  III. Inherited Nervousness--Fears in Childhood--Theological Precocity.

  IV. Woman's Day of Rest--Sabbath Rules and Customs--A Typical Sabbath.

  V. Religion and Woman's Foibles--Religious Regulations--Effect on
     Dress--Women's Singing in Church--Southern Opinion of Northern
     Severity--Effect of Feminine Repression.

  VI. Woman's Comfort in Religion--An Intolerant Era--Religious
     Gatherings for Women--Formal Meetings with Mrs. Hutchinson--Causes
     of Complaint--Meetings of Quaker Women.

  VII. Female Rebellion--The Antinomians--Activities of Anne
     Hutchinson--Her Doctrines--Her Banishment--Emotional Starvation--Dread
     of Heresy--Anne Hutchinson's Death.

  VIII. Woman and Witchcraft--Universal Belief in Witchcraft--Signs
     of Witchcraft--Causes of the Belief--Lack of Recreation--Origin
     of Witchcraft Mania--Echoes from the Trials--Waning of the Mania.

  IX. Religion Outside of New England--First Church in Virginia--Southern
     Strictness--Woman's Religious Testimony--Religious Sanity--The
     Dutch Church--General Conclusions.


CHAPTER II--COLONIAL WOMAN AND EDUCATION

  I. Feminine Ignorance--Reasons--The Evidence in Court Records--Dame's
     Schools--School Curriculum--Training in Home Duties.

  II. Woman's Education in the South--Jefferson's Advice--Private
     Tutors--General Interest in Education--Provision in Wills.

  III. Brilliant Exceptions to Female Ignorance--Southern and
     Northern Women Contrasted--Unusual Studies for Women--Eliza
     Pinckney--Jane Turell--Abigail Adams.

  IV. Practical Education--Abigail Adams' Opinion--Importance of
     Bookkeeping--Franklin's Advice.

  V. Educational Frills--Female Seminaries--Moravian
     Schools--Dancing--Etiquette--Rules for Eating--Mechanical Arts
     Toward Uprightness--Complaints of Educational Poverty--Fancy
     Sewing--General Conclusions.


CHAPTER III--COLONIAL WOMAN AND THE HOME

  I. Charm of the Colonial Home--Lack of Counter Attractions--Neither
     Saints nor Sinners in the Home.

  II. Domestic Love and Confidence--The Winthrop Love Letters--Edwards'
     Rhapsody--Further Examples--Descriptions of Home Life--Mrs.
     Washington and Mrs. Hamilton at Home.

  III. Domestic Toil and Strain--South _vs._ North--Lack of
     Conveniences--Silver and Linen--Colonial Cooking--Cooking
     Utensils--Specimen Meals--Home Manufactures.

  IV. Domestic Pride--Effect of Anti-British Sentiment--Spinning
     Circles--Dress-Making.

  V. Special Domestic Tasks--Supplying Necessities--Candles--Soap--Herbs
     --Neighborly Co-operation--Social "Bees."

  VI. The Size of the Family--Large Families an Asset--Astonishing
     Examples--Infant Death-Rate--Children as Workers.

  VII. Indian Attacks--Suffering of Captive Women--Mary Rowlandson's
     Account--Returning the Kidnapped.

  VIII. Parental Training--Co-operation Between Parents--Cotton Mather
     as Disciplinarian--Sewall's Methods--Eliza Pinckney's
     Motherliness--New York Mothers--Abigail Adams to Her Son.

  IX. Tributes to Colonial Mothers--Judge Sewall's Noble Words--Other
     Specimens of Praise--John Lawson's Views--Woman's Strengthening
     Influence.

  X. Interest in the Home--Franklin's Interest--Evidence from
     Jefferson--Sewall's Affection--Washington's Relaxation--John Adams
     with the Children--Examples of Considerateness--Mention of Gifts.

  XI. Woman's Sphere--Opposition to Broader Activities--A Sad
     Example--Opinions of Colonial Leaders--Woman's Contentment with Her
     Sphere--Woman's Helpfulness--Distress of Mrs. Benedict Arnold.

  XII. Women in Business--Husbands' Confidence in Wives'
     Shrewdness--Evidence from Franklin--Abigail Adams as Manager--General
     Conclusions.


CHAPTER IV--COLONIAL WOMAN AND DRESS

  I. Dress Regulation by Law--Magistrate _vs._ Women--Fines.

  II. Contemporary Descriptions of Dress--Effect of Wealth and
     Travel--Madame Knight's Descriptions--Testimony by Sewall, Franklin,
     Abigail Adams.

  III. Raillery and Scolding--Nathaniel Ward on Woman's Costume--Newspaper
     Comments--Advertisement of _Hoop Petticoats_--Evidence on the Size
     of Hoops--Hair-Dressing--Feminine Replies to Raillery.

  IV. Extravagance in Dress--Chastellux's Opinion--Evidence from Account
     Books--Children's Dress--Fashions in Philadelphia and New York--A
     Gentleman's Dress--Dolly Madison's Costume--The Meschianza--A Ball
     Dress--Dolls as Models--Men's Jokes on Dress--Increase in Cost of
     Raiment.


CHAPTER V--COLONIAL WOMAN AND SOCIAL LIFE

  I. Southern Isolation and Hospitality--Progress through Wealth--Care-free
     Life of the South--Social Effect of Tobacco Raising--Historians'
     Opinions of the Social Life--Early Growth of Virginia
     Hospitality--John Hammond's Description in 1656--Effect of Cavalier
     Blood--Beverly's Description of Virginia Social Life--Foreign
     Opinions of Virginia Luxury and Culture.

  II. Splendor in the Home--Pitman's Description of a Southern
     Mansion--Elegant Furnishings of the Time.

  III. Social Activities--Evidence in Invitations--Eliza Pinckney's Opinion
     of Carolinians--Open-House--Washington's Hospitable
     Record--Art and Music in the South--A Reception to a Bride--Old-Time
     Refreshments--Informal Visiting--A Letter by Mrs. Washington--Social
     Effects of Slow Travel.

  IV. New England Social Life--Social Influence of Public
     Opinion--Cautious Attitude Toward Pleasure--Social Origin of Yankee
     Inquisitiveness--Sewall's Records of Social Affairs--Pynchon's Records
     of a Century Later.

  V. Funerals as Recreations--Grim Pleasure in Attending--Funeral
     Cards--Gifts of Gloves, Rings, and Scarfs--Absence of
     Depression--Records of Sewall's Attendance--Wane of Gift-Giving--A
     New Amsterdam Funeral.

  VI. Trials and Executions--Puritan Itching for Morbid and
     Sensational--Frankness of Descriptions--Treatment of Condemned
     Criminals--The Public at Executions--Sewall's Description of an
     Execution--Coming of More Normal Entertainments--The Dancing
     Master Arrives.

  VII. Special Social Days--Lecture Day--Prayers for the Afflicted--Fast
     Days--Scant Attention to Thanksgiving and Christmas--How Bradford
     Stopped Christmas Observation--Sewall's Records of Christmas--A
     Century Later.

  VIII. Social Restrictions--Josselyn's Account of New England
     Restraints--Growing Laxity--Sarah Knight's Description--Severity
     in 1780--Laws Against Lodging Relatives of the Opposite Sex--What
     Could not be Done in 1650--Husking Parties and Other Community
     Efforts.

  IX. Dutch Social Life--Its Pleasant Familiarity--Mrs. Grant's
     Description of Early New York--Normal Pleasures--Love of Flowers
     and Children--Love of Eating--Mrs. Grant's Record--Disregard for
     Religion--Mating the Children--Picnicking--Peculiar Customs at
     Dutch Funerals.

  X. British Social Influences--Increase of Wealth--The Schuyler
     Home--Mingling of Gaiety and Economy--A Description in 1757--Foreign
     Astonishment at New York Display--Richness of Woman's
     Adornment--Card-Playing and Dancing--Gambling in Society.

  XI. Causes of Display and Frivolity--Washington's Punctiliousness--Mrs.
     Washington's Dislike of Stateliness--Disgust of the
     Democratic--Senator Maclay's Description of a Dinner by
     Washington--Permanent Benefit of Washington's Formality--Elizabeth
     Southgate's Record of New York Pastimes.

  XII. Society in Philadelphia--Social Welcome for the British--Early
     Instruction in Dancing--Formal Dancing Assemblies.

  XIII. The Beauty of Philadelphia Women--Abigail Adams' Description--The
     Accomplished Mrs. Bingham--Introduction of Social Fads--Contrasts
     with New York Belles.

  XIV. Social Functions--Lavish Use of Wealth at Philadelphia--Washington's
     Birthday--Martha Washington in Philadelphia--Domestic Ability of the
     Belles--Franklin and his Daughter--General Wayne's Statement about
     Philadelphia Gaiety.

  XV. Theatrical Performances--Their Growth in Popularity--Washington's
     Liking for Them--Mrs. Adams' Description--First Performance in
     New York, Charleston, Williamsburg, Baltimore--Invading the
     Stage--Throwing Missiles.

  XVI. Strange Customs in Louisiana--Passion for Pleasure--Influence of
     Creoles and Negroes--Habitat for Sailors and West Indian
     Ruffians--Reasons for Vice--Accounts by Berquin-Duvallon--Commonness
     of Concubinage--Alliott's Description--Reasons for Aversion to
     Marriage--Corruptness of Fathers and Sons--Drawing the Color
     Line--Race Prejudice at Balls--Fine Qualities of Louisiana White
     Women--Excess in Dress--Lack of Education--Berquin-Duvallon's
     Disgust--The Murder of Babes--General Conclusions.


CHAPTER VI--COLONIAL WOMAN AND MARRIAGE

  I. New England Weddings--Lack of Ceremony and Merrymaking--Freedom of
     Choice for Women--The Parents' Permission--Evidence from
     Sewall--Penalty for Toying with the Heart--The Dowry.
