except the aim, even as the eye never dwelleth on anything that is not
beautiful. And as the track of a herd of elephants marching through the
forest is made of itself, so was the track was made of itself for the
car of Kiritin. And struck and mangled by Partha, the hostile warriors
thought that,--_Verily, Indra himself, desirous of Partha's victory,
accompanied by all the immortals is slaying us_! And they also regarded
Vijaya, who was making a terrible slaughter around, to be none else than
Death himself who having assumed the form of Arjuna, was slaying all
creatures. And the troops of the Kurus, struck by Partha, were so
mangled and shattered that the scene looked like the achievement of
Partha himself and could be compared with nothing else save what was
observable in Partha's combats. And he severed the heads of foes, even
as reapers cut off the tops of deciduous herbs. And the Kurus all lost
their energy owing to the terror begot of Arjuna. And tossed and mangled
by the Arjuna-gale, the forest of Arjuna's foes reddened the earth with
purple secretions. And the dust mixed with blood, uplifted by the wind,
made the very rays of the sun redder still. And soon the sun-decked sky
became so red that it looked very much like the evening. Indeed, the sun
ceaseth to shed his rays as soon as he sets, but the son of Pandu ceased
not to shoot his shafts. And that hero of inconceivable energy
overwhelmed, by means of all celestial weapons, all the great bowmen of
the enemy, although they were possessed of great prowess. And Arjuna
then shot three and seventy arrows of sharp points at Drona, and ten at
Dussaha and eight at Drona's son, and twelve at Duhsasana, and three at
Kripa, the son of Saradwat. And that slayer of foes pierced Bhishma, the
son of Santanu, with arrows, and king Duryodhana with a hundred. And,
lastly, he pierced Karna in the ear with a bearded shaft. And when that
great bowmen Karna, skilled in all weapons, was thus pierced, and his
horses and car and car-driver were all destroyed, the troops that
supported him began to break. And beholding those soldiers break and
give way the son of Virata desirous of knowing Partha's purpose,
addressed him on the field of battle, and said, 'O Partha, standing on
this beautiful car, with myself as charioteer, towards which division
shall I go? For, commanded by thee, I would soon take thee thither.'

"Arjuna replied, 'O Uttara, yonder auspicious warrior whom thou seest
cased in coat of tiger-skin and stationed on his car furnished with a
blue-flag and drawn by red steeds, is Kripa. There is to be seen the van
of Kripa's division. Take me thither. I shall show that great bowman my
swift-handedness in archery. And that warrior whose flag beareth the
device of an elegant water-pot worked in gold, is the preceptor
Drona--that foremost of all wielders of weapons. He is always an object
of regard with me, as also with all bearers of arms. Do thou, therefore,
circumambulate that great hero cheerfully. Let us bend our heads there,
for that is the eternal virtue. If Drona strikes my body first, then I
shall strike him, for then he will not be able to resent it. There,
close to Drona, that warrior whose flag beareth the device of a bow, is
the preceptor's son, the great car-warrior Aswatthaman, who is always an
object of regard with me as also with every bearer of arms. Do thou,
therefore, stop again and again, while thou comest by his car. There,
that warrior who stayeth on his car, cased in golden mail and surrounded
by a third part of the army consisting of the most efficient troops, and
whose flag beareth the device of an elephant in a ground of gold, is the
illustrious king Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra. O hero, take
before him this thy car that is capable of grinding hostile cars. This
king is difficult of being vanquished in battle and is capable of
grinding all foes. He is regarded as the first of all Drona's disciples
in lightness of hand. I shall, in battle, show him my superior swiftness
in archery. There, that warrior whose flag beareth the device of a stout
chord for binding elephants, is Karna, the son of Vikartana, already
known to thee. When thou comest before that wicked son of Radha, be thou
very careful, for he always challengeth me to an encounter. And that
warrior whose flag is blue and beareth the device of five stars with a
sun (in the centre), and who endued with great energy stayeth on his car
holding a huge bow in hand and wearing excellent fences, and over whose
head is an umbrella of pure white, who standeth at the head of a
multitudinous array of cars with various flags and banners like the sun
in advance of masses of black clouds, and whose mail of gold looks
bright as the sun or the moon, and who with his helmet of gold striketh
terror into my heart, is Bhishma, the son of Santanu and the grandsire
of us all. Entertained with regal splendour by Duryodhana, he is very
partial and well-affected towards that prince. Let him be approached
last of all, for he may, even now, be an obstacle to me. While fighting
with me, do thou carefully guide the steeds.' Thus addressed by him,
Virata's son, O king, guided Savyasachin's car with great alacrity
towards the spot where Kripa stood anxious to fight."


SECTION LVI

Vaisampayana said, "And the ranks of those fierce bowmen, the Kurus,
looked like masses of clouds in the rainy season drifting before a
gentle wind. And close (to those ranks of foot-soldiers) stood the
enemy's horses ridden by terrible warriors. And there were also
elephants of terrible mien, looking resplendent in beautiful armour,
ridden by skilled combatants and urged on with iron crows and hooks.
And, O king, mounted on a beautiful car, Sakra came there accompanied by
the celestials,--the _Viswas_ and _Maruts_. And crowded with gods,
_Yakshas, Gandharvas_ and _Nagas_, the firmament looked as resplendent
as it does when bespangled with the planetary constellation in a
cloudless night. And the celestials came there, each on his own car,
desirous of beholding the efficacy of their weapons in human warfare,
and for witnessing also the fierce and mighty combat that would take
place when Bhishma and Arjuna would meet. And embellished with gems of
every kind and capable of going everywhere at the will of the rider, the
heavenly car of the lord of the celestials, whose roof was upheld by a
hundred thousand pillars of gold with (a central) one made entirely of
jewels and gems, was conspicuous in the clear sky. And there appeared on
the scene three and thirty gods with Vasava (at their head)--and (many)
_Gandharvas_ and _Rakshasas_ and _Nagas_ and _Pitris_, together with the
great _Rishis_. And seated on the car of the lord of the celestials,
appeared the effulgent persons of kings, Vasumanas and Valakshas and
Supratarddana, and Ashtaka and Sivi and Yayati and Nahusha and Gaya and
Manu and Puru and Raghu and Bhanu and Krisaswa and Sagara and Nala. And
there shone in a splendid array, each in its proper place the cars of
Agni and Isa and Soma and Varuna and Prajapati and Dhatri and Vidhatri
and Kuvera and Yama, and Alamvusha and Ugrasena and others, and of the
_Gandharva_ Tumburu. And all the celestials and the _Siddhas_, and all
the foremost of sages came there to behold that encounter between Arjuna
and the Kurus. And the sacred fragrance of celestial garlands filled the
air like that of blossoming woods at the advent of spring. And the red
and reddish umbrellas and robes and garlands and _chamaras_ of the gods,
as they were stationed there, looked exceedingly beautiful. And the dust
of the earth soon disappeared and (celestial) effulgence lit up
everything. And redolent of divine perfumes, the breeze began to soothe
the combatants. And the firmament seemed ablaze and exceedingly
beautiful, decked with already arrived and arriving cars of handsome and
various make, all illumined with diverse sorts of jewels, and brought
thither by the foremost of the celestials. And surrounded by the
celestials, and wearing a garland of lotuses and lilies the powerful
wielder of the thunderbolt looked exceedingly beautiful on his car. And
the slayer of Vala, although he steadfastly gazed at his son on the
field of battle, was not satiated with such gazing."


SECTION LVII

Vaisampayana said, "Beholding the army of the Kurus arrayed in order of
battle, that descendant of the Kuru race, Partha, addressing Virata's
son, said, 'Do thou proceed to the spot where Kripa, the son of
Saradwat, is going by the southern side of that car whose flag is seen
to bear the device of a golden altar.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Dhananjaya, the son of
Virata urged, without a moment's delay, those steeds of silvery hue
decked in golden armour. And making them adopt, one after another, every
kind of the swifter paces, he urged those fiery steeds resembling the
moon in colour. And versed in horse-lore, Uttara, having approached the
Kuru host, turned back those steeds endued with the speed of the wind.
And skilled in guiding vehicles, the prince of Matsya, sometimes
wheeling about, and sometimes proceeding in circular mazes, and
sometimes turning to the left, began to be wilder than the Kurus. And
wheeling round, the intrepid and mighty son of Virata at last approached
the car of Kripa, and stood confronting him. Then announcing his own
name, Arjuna powerfully blew that best of conchs called _Devadatta_, of
loud blare. And blown on the field of battle by the mighty Jishnu, the
blare of that conch was heard like the splitting of a mountain. And
seeing that the conch did not break into a hundred fragments when blown
by Arjuna, the Kurus with all their warriors began to applaud it highly.
And having reached the very heavens, that sound coming back was heard
even like the crash of the thunderbolt hurled by Maghavat on the
mountain breast. Thereupon that heroic and intrepid and mighty
car-warrior, Saradwat's son Kripa, endued with strength and prowess,
waxing wroth at Arjuna, and unable to bear that sound and eager for
fight, took up his own sea-begotten conch and blew it vehemently. And
filling the three worlds with that sound, that foremost of car-warriors
took up a large bow and twanged the bow-string powerfully. And those
mighty car-warriors, equal unto two suns, standing opposed to each
other, shone like two masses of autumnal clouds. Then Saradwat's son
quickly pierced Partha, that slayer of hostile heroes, with ten swift
and whetted arrows capable of entering into the very vitals. And
Pritha's son also, on his part, drawing that foremost of weapons, the
_Gandiva_, celebrated over the world, shot innumerable iron-arrows, all
capable of penetrating into the very core of the body. Thereupon Kripa,
by means of whetted shafts, cut into hundreds and thousands of
fragments, those blood-drinking arrows of Partha before they could come
up. Then that mighty car-warrior, Partha also, in wrath displaying
various manoeuvres, covered all sides with a shower of arrows. And
covering the entire welkin with his shafts, that mighty warrior of
immeasurable soul, the son of Pritha, enveloped Kripa with hundreds of
shafts. And sorely afflicted by those whetted arrows resembling flames
of fire, Kripa waxed wroth and quickly afflicting the high-souled Partha
of immeasurable prowess with ten thousand shafts, set up on the field of
battle a loud roar. Then the heroic Arjuna quickly pierced the four
steeds of his adversary with four fatal arrows shot from the _Gandiva_,
sharp and straight, and furnished with golden wings. And pierced by
means of those whetted arrows resembling flames of fire those steeds
suddenly reared themselves, and in consequence Kripa reeled off his
place. And seeing Gautama thrown off his place, the slayer of hostile
heroes, the descendant of the Kuru race, out of regard for his
opponent's dignity, ceased to discharge his shafts at him. Then
regaining his proper place, Gautama quickly pierced Savyasachin with ten
arrows furnished with feathers of the _Kanka_ bird. Then with a
crescent-shaped arrow of keen edge, Partha cut off Kripa's bow and
leathern fences. And soon Partha cut off Kripa's coat of mail also by
means of arrows capable of penetrating the very vitals, but he did not
wound his person. And divested of his coat of mail, his body resembled
that of a serpent which hath in season cast off its slough. And as soon
as his bow had been cut off by Partha, Gautama took up another and
stringed it in a trice. And strange to say, that bow of him was also cut
off by Kunti's son, by means of straight shafts. And in this way that
slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pandu, cut off other bows as soon
as they were taken up, one after another, by Saradwat's son. And when
all his bows were thus cut off, that mighty hero hurled, from his car,
at Pandu's son, a javelin like unto the blazing thunderbolt. Thereupon,
as the gold-decked javelin came whizzing through the air with the flash
of a meteor, Arjuna cut it off by means of ten arrows. And beholding his
dart thus cut off by the intelligent Arjuna, Kripa quickly took up
another bow and almost simultaneously shot a number of crescent-shaped
arrows. Partha, however, quickly cut them into fragments by means of ten
keen-edged shafts, and endued with great energy, the son of Pritha then,
inflamed with wrath on the field of battle, discharged three and ten
arrows whetted on stone and resembling flames of fire. And with one of
these he cut off the yoke of his adversary's car, and with four pierced
his four steeds, and with the sixth he severed the head of his
antagonist's car-driver from off his body. And with three that mighty
car-warrior pierced, in that encounter, the triple bamboo-pole of
Kripa's car and with two, its wheels. And with the twelfth arrow he cut
off Kripa's flagstaff. And with the thirteenth Phalguna, who was like
Indra himself as if smiling in derision, pierced Kripa in the breast.
Then with his bow cut off, his car broken, his steeds slain, his
car-driver killed, Kripa leapt down and taking up a mace quickly hurled
it at Arjuna. But that heavy and polished mace hurled by Kripa was sent
back along its course, struck by means of Arjuna's arrows. And then the
warriors (of Kripa's division), desirous of rescuing the wrathful son of
Saradwat encountered Partha from all sides and covered him with their
arrows. Then the son of Virata, turning the steed to the left began to
perform circuitous evolution called _Yamaka_ and thus withstood all
those warriors. And those illustrious bulls among men, taking Kripa with
them who had been deprived of his car, led him away from the vicinity of
Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti."


SECTION LVIII

Vaisampayana said, "After Kripa had thus been taken away, the invincible
Drona of red steeds, taking up his bow to which he had already stringed
an arrow, rushed towards Arjuna of white steeds. And beholding at no
great distance from him the preceptor advancing on his golden car,
Arjuna that foremost of victorious warriors, addressing Uttara, said,
'Blessed be thou, O friend, carry me before that warrior on whose high
banner-top is seen a golden altar resembling a long flame of fire and
decked with numerous flags placed around, and whose car is drawn by
steeds that are red and large, exceedingly handsome and highly-trained,
of face pleasant and of quiet mien, and like unto corals in colour and
with faces of coppery hue, for that warrior is Drona with whom I desire
to fight. Of long arms and endued with mighty energy possessed of
strength and beauty of person, celebrated over all the worlds for his
prowess, resembling Usanas himself in intelligence and Vrihaspati in
knowledge of morality, he is conversant with the four _Vedas_ and
devoted to the practice of _Brahmacharya_ virtues. O friend, the use of
the celestial weapons together with the mysteries of their withdrawal
and the entire science of weapons, always reside in him. Forgiveness,
self-control, truth, abstention from injury, rectitude of
conduct,--these and countless other virtues always dwell in that
regenerate one. I desire to fight with that highly-blessed one on the
field. Therefore, take me before the preceptor and carry me thither, O
Uttara.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Arjuna, Virata's son urged
his steeds decked with gold towards the car of Bharadwaja's son. And
Drona also rushed towards the impetuously advancing Partha, the son of
Pandu,--that foremost of car-warriors,--like an infuriate elephant
rushing towards an infuriate compeer. And the son of Bharadwaja then
blew his conch whose blare resembled that of a hundred trumpets. And at
that sound the whole army become agitated like the sea in a tempest. And
beholding those excellent steeds red in hue mingling in battle with
Arjuna's steeds of swan-like whiteness endued with the speed of the
mind, all the spectators were filled with wonder. And seeing on the
field of battle those car-warriors--the preceptor Drona and his disciple
Partha--both endued with prowess, both invincible, both well-trained,
both possessed of great energy and great strength, engaged with each
other, that mighty host of the Bharatas began to tremble frequently. And
that mighty car-warrior Partha, possessed of great prowess and filled
with joy upon reaching Drona's car on his own, saluted the preceptor.
And that slayer of hostile heroes, the mighty armed son of Kunti, then
addressed Drona in an humble and sweet tone, saying, 'Having completed
our exile in the woods, we are now desirous of avenging our wrongs. Even
invincible in battle, it doth not behove thee to be angry with us. O
sinless one, I will not strike thee unless thou strikest me first. Even
this is my intention. It behoveth thee to act as thou choosest.' Thus
addressed Drona discharged at him more than twenty arrows. But the
light-handed Partha cut them off before they could reach him. And at
this, the mighty Drona, displaying his lightness of hand in the use of
weapons, covered Partha's car with a thousand arrows. And desirous of
angering, Partha, that hero of immeasurable soul, then covered his
steeds of silvery whiteness with arrows whetted on stone and winged with
the feathers of the _Kanka_ bird. And when the battle between Drona and
Kiritin thus commenced, both of them discharging in the encounter arrows
of blazing splendour, both well-known for their achievements, both equal
to the wind itself in speed, both conversant with celestial weapons, and
both endued with mighty energy, began shooting clouds of arrows to
bewilder the royal Kshatriyas. And all the warriors that were assembled
there were filled with wonder at sight of all this. And they all admired
Drona who quickly shot clouds of arrows exclaiming,--_Well done! Well
done_! Indeed, _who else save Phalguna, is worthy of fighting with Drona
in battle? Surely the duties of a Kshatriya are stern, for Arjuna
fighteth with even his own preceptor_!--And it was thus that they who
stood on the field of battle said unto one another. And inflamed with
fire, those mighty-armed heroes standing before other, and each
incapable of overcoming the other, covered each other with arrowy
showers. And Bharadwaja's son, waxing wroth, drew his large and
unconquerable bow plated on the back with gold, and pierced Phalguna
with his arrows. And discharging at Arjuna's car innumerable whetted
arrows possessed of solar effulgence, he entirely shrouded the light of
the sun. And that great car-warrior of mighty arms, violently pierced
Pritha's son with keen-edged shafts even as the clouds shower upon a
mountain. Then taking up that foremost of bows, the _Gandiva_,
destructive of foes and capable of withstanding the greatest strain, the
impetuous son of Pandu cheerfully discharged countless shafts of various
kinds adorned with gold, and that powerful warrior also baffled in a
moment Drona's arrowy shower by means of those shafts shot from his own
bow. And at this the spectators wondered greatly. And the handsome
Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, ranging on his car, displayed his weapons
on all sides at the same time. And the entire welkin covered with his
arrows, became one wide expanse of shade. And at this Drona become
invisible like the sun enveloped in mist. And shrouded by those
excellent arrows on all sides, Drona looked like a mountain on fire. And
beholding his own car completely enveloped by the arrows of Pritha's
son, Drona that ornament of battle, bent his terrible and foremost of
bows whose noise was as loud as that of the clouds. And drawing that
first of weapons, which was like unto a circle of fire, he discharged a
cloud of keen-edged shafts. And then there were heard on the field loud
sounds like the splitting of bamboos set on fire. And that warrior of
immeasurable soul, shooting from his bow arrows furnished with golden
wings, covered all sides, shrouding the very light of the sun. And those
arrows with knots well-peeled off, and furnished with golden wings,
looked like flocks of birds in the sky. And the arrows discharged by
