"There is something the matter, Dias," he cried; "the llamas are
standing up with their ears forward. They see or hear something."

"It may be pumas or jaguars," Dias said. "Take your gun, senor."

He picked up his rifle, and Harry and Bertie followed suit, and further
armed themselves with their shot-guns.

"You had best come with us, Maria," her husband said. "There is no
saying where the beasts may be. See! the mules are standing up now and
pulling at their head-ropes. Let us go among them, senors, our presence
will pacify them."

They all moved towards the mules, which were standing huddled together.
Dias and Jose spoke to them and patted them.

"You stand at their heads, Maria," the former said, "and keep on
talking to them. We must see if we can discover the beasts. There is
one of them!" he exclaimed, but in a low tone. "Do you see the two
bright points of light? That is the reflection of the fire in his eyes."

"Shall I fire?"

"No, senor, not yet. If we were only to wound him he would charge us;
let us wait till he gets closer. Probably there are two of them, male
and female, they generally go about in pairs."

Even as he spoke the seeming sparks disappeared.

"He has moved," Dias said; "he will probably walk round us two or three
times before he makes up his mind to attack."

"If he would go near the fire we could get a fair shot at him, Dias."

"He won't do that, senor; he will most likely go backwards and forwards
in a semicircle, getting perhaps a little closer each time."

Ten minutes passed and then Maria said:

"There are two of them. I can see their outlines distinctly."

"Do you think, if we were to fire a gun, they would move off, Dias?"

"They might for a time, senor, but the probability is that they would
come back again. They have smelt the mules, and are probably hungry. It
is better to let them attack us at once and have done with it."

A minute or two later there was a snarling growl.

"They are jaguars," Dias said.

Again and again the threatening sound was heard, and in spite of
Maria's efforts the mules were almost mad with fright.

"We had better lie down beyond them," Dias said. "There is no doubt the
beasts will come from that side. If we posted ourselves behind them the
mules might break loose and knock us over just as we were taking aim."

They lay down side by side on the grass with their rifles at their
shoulders.

"I can see them now, Dias," Harry whispered, "not more than fifty yards
away. I think we could hardly miss them now."

"You could not if it were daylight, senor; but in the dark, when you
can't see the end of your rifle, you can never be certain about
shooting."

The beasts had now apparently made up their minds to attack. They
crouched low, almost dragging their bellies on the ground, and one was
somewhat in advance of the other.

"That is the male ahead," Dias whispered. "Do you and your brother take
aim. I will take the female, and Jose will hold his fire of buck-shot
till she is within a length of us."

"How shall I know when it is going to spring?"

"When it stops, senor. It is sure to stop before it springs."

"Aim between the eyes, Bertie, and fire when I do," Harry whispered to
his brother, who was lying next to him.

When within twelve yards the jaguar halted.

"Now!" Harry said, and they discharged their rifles at the same moment,
and, dropping them, grasped the shot-guns.

The jaguar fell over on one side, clawing the air, and then recovered
himself. As he did so two charges of buck-shot struck him on the head,
and he rolled over and remained motionless.

Dias had fired at the same moment, but he had not stopped the second
jaguar. Jose, instead of waiting, hastily discharged his gun, and in
another instant a dark body bounded over their heads on to the back of
one of the mules, which it struck to the ground.

Harry and Bertie leapt to their feet, and discharged their second
barrels into the jaguar's body. It turned suddenly round and attempted
to spring, but its hindquarters were paralysed; and Bertie, pulling out
his pistol, fired both barrels into its head. The brute at once fell
over dead, and the lad gave a shout of triumph.

"Thank goodness that is over without accident!" Harry said. "They are
formidable beasts, Dias."

"In the daytime, when one can see to aim, they can be killed easily
enough, senor; at night their presence is to be dreaded."

"I am afraid we have lost a mule."

"I think not, senor. He was knocked down by the shock, but he had his
saddle on, and the brute had no time to carry him off."

The mule rose to its feet as they spoke; Jose ran and brought a flaming
brand from the fire. Blood was streaming from both the animal's
shoulders.

"It stuck its claws in, senor, but has not made long gashes. I should
say that these wounds were caused by the contraction of the claws when
you finished her with your pistol. The animal will be all right in a
day or two; and as our stores have diminished, we need not put any load
on it for a time."

"I hope you were not frightened, Maria?" Bertie said

"I was a little frightened," she said, "when the mule came tumbling
down close to me, and I could see the jaguar's eyes within a few yards
of me, but I had my dagger ready."

"It would not have been much good," Dias said, "if the beast had
attacked you."

"I think you showed no end of pluck," Bertie said. "If he had come
close to me, and I had got nothing but that little dagger in my hand, I
should have bolted like a shot."

"I am sure that you would not, senor," she said. "You are a great deal
too brave for that."

Bertie laughed.

"It is all very well to be brave with a rifle in your hand and another
gun ready, to say nothing of the pistols. By the way, I thought Harry
had given you one of his?

"So he did, but I had forgotten all about it. If I had thought of it I
should have used it."

"It is just as well that you did not," Harry said. "If you had done so,
the brute would have made for you instead of turning round to attack
us."

"Now, senor," Dias put in, "we had better drag the jaguars away; the
mules will never get quiet with the bodies so close to them."

It needed all his strength and that of his companions to drag each of
the bodies fifty yards away.

"Now, Jose," Dias said when they returned, "you had better give the
animals a feed of maize all round. They will settle down after that. I
shall keep watch to-night, senor. It is not likely that any more of
these beasts are in the neighbourhood; but it is as well to be careful,
and I don't think any of us would sleep if someone were not on the
look-out."

"I will relieve you at two o'clock," Harry said.

"No, senor, I have not been on the watch for the past two nights. I
would rather sit up by the fire to-night."

Two days later they arrived at the foot of the pass. Just as they
gained it they met two muleteers coming down it. Dias entered into
conversation with them, while the others erected tents, preparing to
camp.

"What is the news, Dias?" Harry asked as he returned.

"The men say, senor, that the pass is very unsafe. Many robberies have
taken place in it, and several men, who endeavoured to defend
themselves against the brigands, have been killed. They were questioned
by four armed men as they came down, and the goods they were carrying
down to Ayapata were taken from them. They say that traffic has almost
ceased on the road."

"That is bad, Dias."

"Very bad, senor. We need not be afraid of brigands if they meet us as
we travel along the foot of the hills, but it would be another thing in
the passes. There are many places where the mules would have to go in
single file, and if we were caught in such a spot by men on the
heights, we might be shot down without any chance of defending
ourselves successfully."

"That is awkward, Dias. It is a scandal that these brigands are not
rooted out."

"People are thinking too much of fighting each other or their
neighbours to care anything about the complaints of a few muleteers,
senor."

"Is there no other way of crossing the mountains than by this pass?"

"There is a pass, senor, between Ayapata and Crucero, but it is a very
bad one."

"And where should we be then, Dias?"

"Well, senor, it would take us along the other side of the mountains to
Macari. From that place there is an easy path to La Raya; there we are
on the plateau again, and have only to travel by the road through
Sicuani to Cuzco."

"In fact, it would double the length of our journey to Cuzco?"

"Yes, senor; but if you liked, from Crucero you might go down to Lake
Titicaca. There are certainly good mines in the mountains there."

"Yes, but is there any chance of our finding them?"

"I can't say that, senor, but I fear that the chance would be very
small."

"Then it is of no use trying, Dias. We saw at the last place what pains
the old people took to hide places where gold could be found, and if
there had been rich mines among these mountains you speak of, no doubt
they would have hidden them just as carefully. The question is, shall
we go up this pass as we intended, and take our chance, or shall we go
by this roundabout way?"

By this time Jose had lit a fire, and they had seated themselves by it.

"One hates turning back, but we are not pressed for time. As far as I
can see, my only chance is the feeble one of finding treasure in the
place you spoke of up the coast above Callao. It is now four months
since we left Lima. Travelling straight to that place would take us how
long?"

"Well, senor, if we go round by Ayapata to Crucero, and then to Macari,
it would be nearly a thousand miles."

"Quite a thousand, I should think. That is three months' steady work.
By the time we get there it will be about a year from the time we left
England. I have seen quite enough of the mountains to know that our
chance of finding anything among them is so small that it is not worth
thinking of. It seems to me, therefore, Dias, that we might just as
well, instead of going south over these difficult passes, return by the
foot of the mountains as we have come, going through Paucartambo,
crossing the rivers that flow north and fall somewhere or other into
the Amazon, and keeping along it till we come to Cerro de Pasco. There
we should be nearly in a line with this place you know of, and can keep
due west--that is to say, as nearly due west as the mountains will
allow. It would be three or four hundred miles shorter than by taking
the pass at Ayapata. We should have a good deal of sport by the way,
and should certainly have no trouble with the brigands till we got to
Cerro. Of course it is possible that we might fall in with savages
again, but at any rate they are not so formidable as brigands in the
passes. What do you say to that?"

"It is certainly shorter, senor; and, as you say, we should have no
trouble with the brigands, and we should also escape the troubles that
have been going on for some years, and are likely, as far as anyone can
see, to go on for ever. We were very fortunate in not meeting any of
the armies that are always marching about."




CHAPTER XI

BRIGANDS


Three months were spent in the journey to the foot of the pass leading
up to Cerro. They had good shooting, and found no difficulty in
providing themselves with food. Fish were plentiful in the streams, and
in some of the long-deserted plantations they found bananas, grapes,
and other fruits in abundance, together with sugar-canes, tomatoes,
maize growing wild, and potatoes which were reverting to the wild type.
They met neither with alligators nor large serpents, for they kept on
the lower slopes of the foot-hills, as much as possible avoiding the
low forest lands, where they might come in contact with the savages.
For the same reason, they had no opportunity of taking any of the great
fish found in the sluggish rivers, but had an abundance of smaller fish
in the bright mountain streams. They killed two tapirs and several
pumas and jaguars. Their two llamas, having one night wandered away
from the mules, were killed by these beasts. But as the stores were a
good deal lighter than when they started, this was no great misfortune.
Occasionally they followed streams up into the hills, and did a little
washing for gold when they halted for a day or two there.

"We have had a good time of it," Harry said as they sat round the fire,
"and I am almost sorry that it is over, and that this is our last day
of wandering where we like, shooting and fishing, and above all,
camping in pleasant places. We have been very fortunate in not meeting
any of the savages since the fight we had with them four or five months
ago. It is a splendid country for sport, and except that we should like
it a bit cooler, and could have done without some of the
thunder-storms, it is a grand life. For a time now we are going back to
a sort of civilization, filthy inns, swarms of fleas, and
fifteenth-rate cooking."

"It is not so much the fault of the cooking," Maria said, "as of the
meat. Here we get fish fresh out of the stream, and birds shot an hour
or two before they are eaten. We pick our fruit from the trees, instead
of buying it after it has been carried miles and miles to the market.
We have a capital stock of coffee, tea, and sugar. Among the old
plantations we pick cocoa and pound it fresh, and boil it. As we
brought plenty of pepper and spices, it would be hard indeed if one
could not turn out a good meal. And then, senors, you always come to
eat it with a good appetite, which is all in favour of the cook."

"Yes, I grant that you have had all those advantages, Maria, but it is
not everybody who makes the best of them. I can safely say that since
we started we have never sat down to a bad breakfast or dinner. Now,
for a bit, we are going to lead a different sort of life. We shall be
on beaten tracks. We shall meet lots of people. It is strange to think
that, except for those peasant muleteers we met at the foot of the pass
by the Tinta volcano, we have not seen a soul except the savages--who
have souls, I suppose--since we left Paucartambo more than six months
ago; and yet somehow we do not seem to have missed them. I wonder what
we shall find when we get up to Cerro, and who will be president then."

"I wonder what they are doing in Europe!" Bertie said. "We have heard
no later news than what we had when we went on board a ship sixteen
months ago. There may have been great wars all over Europe."

"I don't think there is much chance of that, Bertie. India was the only
place where there was any fighting going on, and it seemed as if, since
Napoleon was crushed, Europe would become permanently pacific. Still, I
do hope that when we are at Lima we shall get hold of a pile of English
newspapers. The consul is sure to have them."

"I don't suppose we shall want to stay there many days, Harry, for we
shall be eager to start the search for the enchanted castle Dias has
told us of. We saw quite enough of Lima during the ten days that we
were there."

"Is the pass a bad one up to Cerro, Dias?"

"There are some very bad points, senor. It never was a good one, but as
nothing has been done to the roads for at least a hundred years, it
must have got into a very bad state. I have been down it twice with
travellers, the second time ten years ago, and it was bad enough then.
It is likely to be worse now."

"Well, as the road is used so little, Dias," Harry said, "there is no
fear of brigands."

"I hope not, senor; but there may be some, though they would not be
there in the hope of plundering travellers. But desperate men are
always to be found in the mountains--men who have committed murders and
fled from justice. They are able to live on what they can shoot, and of
course they can get fish in the streams, and when they are tired of
that can come down here, where they will find plenty of turkeys, and
pheasants, and other game, besides the maize, and fruits, and other
things in the old plantations. Sometimes they will take a little
plunder from the small villages. Anyhow, they do not fare altogether
badly. Therefore one can never feel certain that one is safe from them,
even when travelling over tracks where travellers seldom pass. Still,
we may very well hope that we shall not have the bad luck to fall in
with them."

"I hope so, Dias. We did not come out here to fight. So far we have
been very fortunate, and have not had to fire a shot, except at those
wretched savages."

The next day's journey took them far up into the hills, and they camped
that night at the upper end of a deep ravine. It had been a hard day's
work, for at several points the mules had to be unloaded and taken up
singly, and the loads then carried up. Fortunately, the packs were now
very light, and were carried or hauled up without much difficulty.

In the morning they again started. They were just issuing from the
ravine when a party of ten armed men made their appearance from amongst
some rocks, and shouted to them to halt. Dias rode in front.

"You speak to them, Dias. Keep them for a minute in talk if you can,
and then take shelter behind that boulder."

Then Harry ran back to Jose, who was walking with a leading mule twenty
paces behind.

"Turn them back again, Jose. Halt a little way down, and then come up;
there are some brigands ahead. Bertie, bring up your rifle and the two
shot-guns. Tell Maria to remain with the mules."

Then he ran back again just as a shot rang out, and, dodging among the
fallen rocks, he took shelter behind one abreast with Dias. "Was it you
who fired?" he asked.

"No, one of the brigands. The ball went through the brim of my
sombrero. I think they are talking to each other, they know there is no
hurry."

"Hail them again, Dias, but don't show yourself above the rock."

"What do you want? Why did you fire at me?"

"We want everything you have got," a voice came back--"your mules and
their burdens, and your arms. If you will give them up without
resistance, we will let you up the pass without hindering you."

"Tell them that you must talk it over with the others, Dias."

"Well, we will give you five minutes," the man called back. "If you do
not accept our terms, we will cut your throats."

Dias stood up, and walked quietly down the rugged pass. At the point
where the mules stopped, the rock rose almost perpendicularly on each
side.

"Maria," he said, "do you and Jose take off the saddles and bags and
fill up the spaces between these rocks on each side. Get the animals in
behind them. You stop with them, Maria. I have got five minutes, and
will help you."

"You had better go up at once, senor," he went on to Bertie, "and help
your brother, so that they may not get sight of you. However, I am
afraid they know how many we are. It was foolish to light that fire
yesterday evening, I expect they were somewhere near and caught sight
of us, and no doubt one of them crept quietly down to find out what our
force was. Seeing there were but four of us, they thought they could
take us all easily here in the morning without firing a shot. But as
your brother and I happened to be going on first, they thought they
would parley. They would be sure that if they attacked us, we should
kill two or three of them at least before we had finished with them.
And as they reckoned that we should gladly accept their terms, they
would get all they wanted without trouble, and could shoot us
afterwards if they felt inclined."

Bertie had by this time got the guns unstrapped, and had filled his
pockets with cartridges. He now went forward, and as he kept among the
rocks he was able to get within four or five yards of his brother
without being seen, as the mouth of the pass was almost blocked with
great boulders.

"I cannot get any nearer without running the risk of being seen. I have
loaded the double-barrelled guns."

