Richard Dewey was likely to be found. The direction given them was,
it must be confessed, not very definite, and the chances seemed very
much against their succeeding in the object of their search.

A week later we will look in upon them toward nightfall. They were
among the mountains now.

After the close of a laborious day they had tethered their animals
to a tree, and were considering a very important subject, namely,
where to find anything that would serve for supper. Their supply of
provisions was exhausted, and there was no means of purchasing a
fresh supply.

Bradley took out his supply of gold, and surveyed it ruefully.

"Ben," said he, "I never knew before how little good there is in
bein' rich. Here we've both got money, and we can't get anything for
it. It's cheap traveling for we haven't spent anything sence we've
left Murphy's."

"I wish we could spend some of our money," said Ben uneasily. "If
there was only a baker's, or an eating-house here, I'd be willing to
pay five dollars for a good square meal."

"So would I. Somehow, gold don't look as good to me as it used to.
We may starve to death with money in our pockets."

Ben's eyes were fixed upon a slender brook not far away that
threaded its silvery way down a gentle incline from the midst of
underbrush.

"I wonder if we can't catch some trout," he said. "Don't they have
trout in these mountains?"

"To be sure they do; and the best in the world," said Bradley
briskly. "The California mountain trout can't be beat."

"But we have no fishing-tackle," suggested Ben.

"Never mind, we have our guns."

"How will that help us?"

"We can shoot them, to be sure."

Ben looked surprised.

"Didn't you ever shoot pickerel? We can shoot trout in the same way.
Come, Ben, follow me, and we'll see if we can't have a good supper,
after all."

Leaving their mustangs to gather a supper from the scanty herbage in
their neighborhood, the two friends made their way to the brook. It
had seemed very near, but proved to be fully a quarter of a mile
away. When they reached it they brought their guns into requisition,
and soon obtained an appetizing mess of trout, which only needed the
service of fire to make a meal fit for an epicure.

"I can hardly wait to have them cooked," sard Ben. "I'm as hungry as
a hunter. I understand what that means now."

"I sha'n't have any trouble in keeping up with you, Ben," said his
companion. "We'll have a supper fit for a king."

They gathered some dry sticks, and soon a fire was blazing, which,
in the cool night air, sent out a welcome heat.

After supper they lay down on their backs and looked up into the
darkening sky. Ben felt that it was a strange situation. They were
in the heart of the Sierras, miles, perhaps many miles, away from
any human being, thousands of miles away from the quiet village
where Ben had first seen the light. Yet he did not feel disturbed or
alarmed. His wanderings had inspired self-reliance, and he did not
allow himself to be troubled with anxious cares about the future. If
by a wish he could have been conveyed back to his uncle's house in
the far East, he would have declined to avail himself of the
privilege. He had started out to make a living for himself, and he
was satisfied that if he persevered he would succeed in the end.

"What are you thinking about, Ben?" asked Bradley, after a long
pause.

"I was thinking how strange it seems to be out here among the
mountains," answered Ben, still gazing on the scenery around him.

"I don't see anything strange about it," said his less imaginative
comrade. "Seein' we came here on our horses, it would be strange to
be anywhere else."

"I mean it is strange to think we are so far away from everybody."

"I don't foller you, Ben. I suppose it's sorter lonelylike, but that
ain't new to me."

"I never realized how big the world was when I lived at home," said
Ben, in a slow, thoughtful way.

"Yes, it's a pretty largish place, that's a fact."

"What were you thinking of, Jake?" asked Ben, in his turn.

"I was thinkin' of two things: whereabouts Dewey has managed to hide
himself, and then it occurred to me how consolin' it would be to me
if I could light on a pound of smokin'-tobacco. I've got a pipe, but
it ain't no good without tobacco."

"That don't trouble me much, Jake," said Ben, with a smile.

"It's the next thing to a good supper, Ben," said Bradley; "but I
might as well wish for the moon."

"You needn't wish in vain for that," said Ben, pointing out the orb
of evening, with its pale-yellow light peeping over the tall
tree-tops, and irradiating the scene with its pensive shimmer.

"I can see it, but that don't help me any," said Bradley. "If I saw
a world made of tobacco up in yonder sky, it would only make me feel
worse because I couldn't get any."

"What was it you was a-wishin' for, friend?" asked an unfamiliar
voice.

Bradley sprang to his feet, and Ben followed suit.

They saw two strange figures, clad in Spanish style, with large,
napping sombreros on their heads, who unheard, had descended the
mountains, and were now close upon them.

"Who are you?" asked Bradley doubtfully.

"Friends," was the reassuring reply. "We'll join your little party
if you have no objection. I'd invite you to take a drink if there
was any saloon handy. As there isn't, jest help yourself to this,"
and he drew out a pouch of smoking-tobacco.

"Just what I was wantin'," said Bradley, delighted. "You're welcome,
whoever you are."

"Ben, can't you get together some sticks and light the fire? It's
coolish."




CHAPTER XXIV.

BEATEN AT HIS OWN GAME.


Bradley was of a social disposition, and even without the gift of
tobacco would have been glad of an addition to their small party.

"I'm glad to see you," he said, repeating his welcome. "I wonder I
didn't hear you comin'. Have you been long in Californy?"

"Well onto a year," said the one who seemed the elder of the two.
"How is it with you, stranger?"

"I have been here about as long," answered Bradley. "Ben has only
just come out."

"What luck have you had?" pursued the questioner.

"Good and bad. I made quite a pile, and went to 'Frisco and gambled
it away like a fool. Now I've come back for another trial."

'"What might your name be?"

"Bradley-Jake Bradley. It isn't much of a name, but it'll do for me.
The boy is Ben Stanton--come from the East."

"My name is Bill Mosely," said the other. "My friend's Tom Hadley.
We're both from Missouri, and, though I say it, we're about as
wide-awake as they make 'em. We don't stand no back talk, Tom and
me. When a man insults me, I drop him," and the speaker rolled his
eyes in what was meant to stimulate ferocity.

Bradley eyed him shrewdly, and was not quite so much impressed as
Mosely intended him to be. He had observed that the greatest
boasters did not always possess the largest share of courage.

"Isn't that so, Tom?" asked Bill Mosely, appealing to his friend.

"I should say so," answered Tom, nodding emphatically.

"You've seen me in a scrimmage more than once?"

"I should say I have."

"Did you ever see me shoot a man that riled me?"

"Dozens of times," returned Hadley, who appeared to play second
fiddle to his terrible companion.

"That's the kind of man I am," said Bill Mosely, in a tone of
complacency.

Still, Bradley did not seem particularly nervous or frightened. He
was fast making up his mind that Mosely was a cheap bully, whose
words were more terrible than his deeds. Ben had less experience of
men, and he regarded the speaker as a reckless desperado, ready to
use his knife or pistol on the least provocation. He began to think
he would have preferred solitude to such society. He was rather
surprised to hear Bradley say quietly:

"Mosely, you're a man after my own heart. That's the kind of man I
be. If a man don't treat me right, I shoot him in his tracks. One
day I was drinkin' in a saloon among the foothills, when I saw a man
winkin' at me. I waited to see if he would do it again. When he did,
I hauled out my revolver and shot him dead."

"You did?" exclaimed Mosely uneasily.

"Of course I did; but I was rather sorry afterward when I heard that
his eyelids were weak and he couldn't help it."

"Did you get into any trouble about it, stranger?" asked Mosely,
with a shade of anxiety.

"No; none of the party dared touch me. Besides, I did the handsome
thing. I had the man buried, and put a stone over him. I couldn't do
any more, could I?"

"No," said Mosely dubiously, and he drew a little farther away from
Bradley.

"What do you find to eat?" he inquired, after a pause. "Tom and I
are as hungry as if we hadn't eaten anything for a week. You haven't
got any provisions left over?"

"No; but you can have as good a supper as we had, and we had a good
one. What do you say to trout, now?"

Bill Mosely smacked his lips.

"Jest show me where I'll find some," he said.

Bradley pointed to the brook from which he had drawn his supply.

"I don't mind helping you," he said. "Ben, are you tired?"

"No, Jake."

"Then come along, and we'll try to get some supper for our friends."

"All right!" said Ben cheerfully.

In a short time a fresh supply of trout was drawn from the brook,
and they were roughly cooked at the fire, Bradley officiating as
cook.

"Now, my friends, set up," said he. "I'm sorry I can't give you any
potatoes, but the barrel's out, and it's too late to get any at the
store. Likewise, you must excuse the puddin', as it's too late to
make any."

The two visitors appeared to think no apologies were needful, for
they made short work with the trout. From the manner in which they
devoured their supper, it was quite evident that it was some time
since they had eaten. Ben and Bradley did not join them, having
already eaten heartily.

"I hope you relished your supper, gentlemen," said Bradley politely.

"I should say we did," responded Tom Hadley.

"I say, them trout beat the world."

"I'll shoot the man that says they don't!" said Bill Mosely,
relapsing into his old tone.

"So will I!" exclaimed Bradley, springing to his feet and
brandishing his revolver.

Ben began to see that he was playing a part, and, with assumed
gravity, he looked to see what effect it would have on their new
friend.

"I say, stranger, don't handle that weapon of yours so careless,"
said Mosely uneasily.

"I guess you're right," said Bradley, appearing to calm down. "Once
I was swingin' my gun kinder careless, and it went off and hit my
friend, Jim Saunders, in his shoulder. Might have been worse. He had
a narrer escape. But Jim couldn't complain. I jest took care of him,
night and day, till he got well. I couldn't do any more'n that, now,
could I?"

"I reckon he'd rather you hadn't shot him," said Mosely dryly.

"I reckon you're right," said Bradley, with equanimity. "Such little
accidents will happen sometimes, Mosely. Somehow, you can't always
help it."

"It's best to be keerful," observed Mosely uneasily.

"I should say so," echoed his friend, Tom Hadley.

"Right you both are!" said Bradley affably. "I say, Mosely, I like
you. You're jest such a sort of man as I am. You'd jest as lieve
shoot a man as to eat your dinner; now, wouldn't you?"

"If he'd insulted me," said Mosely hesitatingly.

"Of course. Come, now, how many men have you killed, first and
last?"

"About twenty, I should think," answered the bully, who seemed to
grow meeker and more peaceable as Bradley's apparent reckless
ferocity increased.

"Only twenty!" exclaimed Bradley contemptuously. "Why, that's
nothing at all!"

"How many have you killed?" asked Mosely uneasily.

"Seventy or eighty, I should say," answered Bradley carelessly. "Of
course, a man can't keep an account of all these little affairs. I
did once think I'd keep a list, but I got tired of it after a short
time, and gave it up after I'd got up to forty-seven."

"Where was you raised, stranger?" asked Mosely.

"In Kentucky-glorious old Kentuck! and if there's a man dares to say
a word against my State, I'll take his life!" and Bradley sprang to
his feet.

"Lay down again, stranger," interposed Bill Mosely hastily. "There's
no one here wants to say a word agin' Kentuck. It's a glorious old
State, as you say. Isn't it, Tom?"

"I should say so," responded Tom Hadley, using his customary
formula.

"Are you in search of gold, Mosely?" asked Bradley, in a more quiet
manner.

"We're kinder prospectin' among the hills," answered Mosely.

"You haven't come across anything yet, have you?"

"Not yet. Have you?"

"We're looking for a friend that's gone ahead. Maybe he's struck it
rich. When we find him we'll turn in and help him."

"You've got one advantage of us, stranger. You've got hosses, and
we've had to walk."

"Why didn't you buy animals?"

"We did, but they were stolen from us a little way back."

"If our hosses should be stolen," said Bradley, "the thieves would
