are already tied to the yokes for fear lest they should stray."

"Then be off and sit in it and smoke till I come to call you," I
replied, and away they walked shamefacedly enough, Ralph first, and Jan
following him.

At twelve o'clock I went for them, and found them both seated on the
waggon-chest smoking like chimneys, and saying nothing.

"Come, Ralph," I said, "it is quite time for you to be married," and he
came, looking very pale, and walking unsteadily as though he had been
drinking, while after him, as usual, marched Jan, still pulling at the
pipe which he had forgotten to take out of his mouth.

Somehow I do not recollect much of the details of that wedding; they
seem to have slipped my mind, or perhaps they are buried beneath the
memories of all that followed hard upon it. I remember Suzanne standing
before the little table, behind which was the _predicant_ with his book.
She wore a white dress that fitted her very well, but had no veil
upon her head after the English fashion, which even Boer girls follow
nowadays, only in her hand she carried a bunch of rare white flowers
that Sihamba had gathered for her in a hidden kloof where they grew.
Her face was somewhat pale, or looked so in the dim room, but her lips
showed red like coral, and her dark eyes glowed and shone as she turned
them upon the lover at her side, the fair-haired, grey-eyed, handsome
English lad, whose noble blood told its tale in every feature and
movement, yes, and even in his voice, the man whom she had saved from
death to be her life-mate.

A few whispered words, the changing of a ring, and one long kiss, and
these two, Ralph Kenzie and Suzanne Botmar, were husband and wife in the
eyes of God and man. Ah! me, I am glad to think of it, for in the end,
of all the many marriages that I have known, this proved the very best
and happiest.

Now I thought that it was done with, for they had knelt down and the
_predicant_ had blessed them; but not so, for the good man must have his
word, and a long word it was. On and on he preached about the duties of
husbands and wives, and many other matters, till at last, as I expected,
he came to the children. Now I could bear it no longer.

"That is enough, reverend Sir," I said, "for surely it is scarcely
needful to talk of children to people who have not been married five
minutes."

That pricked the bladder of his discourse, which soon came to an end,
whereon I called to the Kaffirs to bring in dinner.

The food was good and plentiful, and so was the Hollands, or Squareface
as they call it now, to say nothing of the Constantia and peach-brandy
which had been sent to me many years before by a cousin who lived at
Stellenbosch; and yet that meal was not as cheerful as it might have
been. To begin with, the _predicant_ was sulky because I had cut him
short in his address, and a holy man in the sulks is a bad kind of
animal to deal with. Then Jan tried to propose the health of the new
married pair and could not do it. The words seemed to stick in his
throat, for at the best Jan was never a speaker. In short, he made a
fool of himself as usual, and I had to fill up the gaps in his head.

Well, I talked nicely enough till in an evil moment I overdid it a
little by speaking of Ralph as one whom Heaven had sent to us, and of
whose birth and parents we knew nothing. Then Jan found his tongue
and said: "Wife, that's a lie, and you know it," for, doubtless, the
Hollands and the peach-brandy had got the better of his reason and
his manners. I did not answer him at the time, for I hate wrangling in
public, but afterwards I spoke to him on the subject once and for all.
Luckily, the _predicant_ took no notice of this incident, for he was
thinking about himself as he was too prone to do.

Then, to make matters worse, Suzanne must needs throw her arms round her
father's neck and begin to cry--thanks be to my bringing up of her, she
knew better than to throw them round mine. "Good Lord!" I said, losing
my temper, "what is the girl at now? She has got the husband for whom
she has been craving, and the first thing she does is to snivel. Well,
if I had done that to my husband I should have expected him to box my
ears, though Heaven knows that I should have had excuse for it."

Here the _predicant_ woke up, seeing his chance.

"Vrouw Botmar," he said, blinking at me like an owl, "it is my duty to
reprove your irreverent language even at this festive board, for a
word must be spoken both in and out of season, and without respect
of persons. Vrouw Botmar, I fear that you do not remember the Third
Commandment, therefore I will repeat it to you," and he did so, speaking
very slowly.

What I answered I cannot recollect, but even now I seem to see that
_predicant_ flying out of the door of the room holding his hands above
his head. Well, for once he met his match, and I know that afterwards he
always spoke of me with great respect.

After this again I remember little more till the pair started upon their
journey. Suzanne asked for Sihamba to say good-bye to her, and when she
was told that she was not to be found she seemed vexed, which shows that
the little doctoress did her injustice in supposing that just because
she was married she thought no more of her. Then she kissed us all in
farewell--ah! we little knew for how long that farewell was to be--and
went down to the waggon to which the sixteen black oxen, a beautiful
team, were inspanned, and standing there ready to start. But Ralph and
Suzanne were not going to ride in the waggon, for they had horses
to carry them. At the last moment, indeed, Jan, whose head was still
buzzing with the peach-brandy, insisted upon giving Ralph the great
_schimmel_, that same stallion which Sihamba had ridden when she warned
us of the ambush in the pass, galloping twenty miles in the hour. This
shows me that Providence can turn even a man's vices to account, for
afterwards the _schimmel_ was very useful.

So there was much kissing and many good-byes; Ralph and Suzanne saying
that they would soon be back, which indeed was the case with one of
them, till at last they were off, Jan riding with them a little way
towards their first outspan by the sea, fourteen miles distant, where
they were to sleep that night.

When they had gone I went into my bedroom, and sitting down, I cried,
for I was sorry to lose Suzanne, even for a little and for her own good,
and my heart was heavy. Also my quarrel with the _predicant_ had put
me out of temper. When I had got over this fit I set to work to tidy
Suzanne's little sleeping place, and that I found a sad task. Then Jan
returned from the waggon, having bid farewell to the young couple, an
hour's trek away, and his head being clear by now, we talked over the
plans of the new house which was to be built for them to live in, and,
going down to the site of it, set it out with sticks and a rule, which
gave us occupation till towards sunset, when it was time for him to go
to see to the cattle.

That night we went to bed early, for we were tired, and slept a heavy
sleep, till at length, about one in the morning, we were awakened by the
shoutings of the messengers who came bearing the terrible news.



CHAPTER XV

RALPH RETURNS INTO THE SEA

Ralph and Suzanne reached their outspan place in safety a little before
sunset. I used to know the spot well; it is where one of the numerous
wooden kloofs that scar the mountain slopes ends on a grassy plain
of turf, short but very sweet. This plain is not much more than five
hundred paces wide, for it is bordered by the cliff, that just here is
not very high, against which the sea beats at full tide.

When the oxen had been turned loose to graze, and the voorlooper set to
watch them, the driver of the waggon undid the cooking vessels and built
a fire with dry wood collected from the kloof. Then Suzanne cooked their
simple evening meal, of which they partook thankfully. After it was
done the pair left the waggon and followed the banks of the little
kloof stream, which wandered across the plain till it reached the cliff,
whence it fell in a trickling waterfall into the sea. Here they sat down
upon the edge of the cliff, and locked in each other's arms, watched the
moon rise over the silver ocean, their young hearts filled with a joy
that cannot be told.

"The sea is beautiful, is it not, husband?" whispered Suzanne into his
ear.

"To-night it is beautiful," he answered, "as our lives seem to be; yet I
have seen it otherwise," and he shuddered a little.

She nodded, for she knew of what he was thinking, and did not wish to
speak of it. "Neither life nor ocean can be always calm," she said, "but
oh! I love that great water, for it brought you to me."

"I pray that it may never separate us," answered Ralph.

"Why do you say that, husband?" she asked. "Nothing can separate us now,
for even if you journey far away to seek your own people, as sometimes I
think you should, I shall accompany you. Nothing can separate us except
death, and death shall bind us more closely each to each for ever and
for ever."

"I do not know why I said it, Sweet," he answered uneasily, and just
then a little cloud floated over the face of the moon, darkening the
world, and a cold wind blew down the kloof, causing its trees to rustle
and chilling the pair, so that they clung closer to each other for
comfort.

The cloud and the wind passed away, leaving the night as beautiful as
before, and they sat on for a while to watch it, listening to the music
of the waterfall that splashed into the deep sea pool below, and to the
soft surge of the waves as they lapped gently against the narrow beach.

At length Ralph spoke in a low voice. "Sweet, it is time to sleep," he
said, and kissed her.

"It is time," she whispered back, "but, husband, first let us kneel
together here and pray to the Almighty to bless our married life and
make us happy."

"That is a good thought," he answered, for in those days young men who
had been brought up as Christians were not ashamed to say their prayers
even in the presence of others.

So they knelt down side by side upon the edge of the cliff, with their
faces set towards the open sea.

"Pray for us both aloud, Ralph," said Suzanne, "for though my heart is
full enough I have no words."

So Ralph prayed very simply, saying: "Oh, God, Who madest us, hear us,
Thy son and daughter, and bless us. This night our married life begins;
be Thou with us ever in it, and if it should please Thee that we should
have children, let Thy blessing go with them all their days. Oh! God, I
thank Thee that Thou didst save me alive from the sea and lead the feet
of the child who is now my wife to the place where I was starving, and
Suzanne thanks Thee that through the whisperings of a dream her feet
were led thus. Oh! God, as I believe that Thou didst hear my prayer when
as a lost child I knelt dying on the rock, so I believe that Thou dost
hear this the first prayer of our wedded life. We know that all life is
not made up of such joy as Thou hast given us this day, but that it has
many dangers and troubles and losses, therefore we pray Thee to comfort
us in the troubles, to protect us in the dangers, and to give us
consolation in the losses; and most of all we pray Thee that we who love
each other, and whom Thou hast joined together, may be allowed to live
out our lives together, fearing nothing, however great our peril, since
day and night we walk in the shadow of Thy strength, until we pass into
its presence."

This was Ralph's prayer, for he told it to me word by word afterwards
when he lay sick. At the time the answer to it seemed to be a strange
one, an answer to shake the faith out of a man's heart, and yet it was
not lost or mocked at, for the true response came in its season. Nay, it
came week by week and hour by hour, seeing that every day through those
awful years the sword of the Strength they had implored protected those
who prayed, holding them harmless in many a desperate peril to reunite
them at the last. The devil is very strong in this world of ours, or so
it seems to me, who have known much of his ways, so strong that perhaps
God must give place to him at times, for if He rules in heaven, I think
that Satan shares His rule on earth. But in the end it is God who wins,
and never, never, need they fear who acknowledge Him and put their faith
in Him, trying the while to live uprightly and conquer the evil of their
hearts. Well, this is only an old woman's wisdom, though it should not
be laughed at, since it has been taught to her by the experience of a
long and eventful life. Such as it is I hope that it may be of service
to those who trust in themselves and not in their Maker.



As the last words of his prayer left Ralph's lips he heard a man laugh
behind him. The two of them sprang to their feet at the sound, and faced
about to see Swart Piet standing within five paces of them, and with him
eight or ten of his black ruffians, who looked upon him as their chief,
and did his needs without question, however wicked they might be.

Now Suzanne uttered a low cry of fear and the blood froze about Ralph's
heart, for he was unarmed and their case was hopeless. Black Piet saw
their fear and laughed again, since like a cat that has caught a mouse
for which it has watched long, he could not resist the joy of torture
before he dealt the death blow.

"This is very lucky," he said, "and I am glad that I have to do with
such pious people, since it enabled us to creep on you unawares; also
I much prefer to have found you engaged in prayer, friend Englishman,
rather than in taking the bloom off my peach with kisses, as I feared
might be the case. That was a pretty prayer, too; I almost felt as
though I were in church while I stood listening to it. How did it end?
You prayed that you might be allowed to live together, fearing nothing,
however great your peril, since you walked always in the shadow of God's
strength. Well, I have come to answer your petition, and to tell you
that your life together is ended before it is begun. For the rest, your
peril is certainly great, and now let God's strength help you if it can.
Come, God, show Your strength. He does not answer, you see, or perhaps
He knows that Swart Piet is god here and is afraid."

"Cease your blasphemy," said Ralph in a hoarse voice, "and tell me what
you want with us."

"What do I want? I want her whose scorn and beauty have driven me mad,
her for whom I have been seeking this long time--Suzanne Botmar."

"She is my wife," said Ralph; "would you steal away my wife?"

"No, friend, for that would not be lawful. I will not take your wife,
but I shall take your widow, as will be easy, seeing that you are armed
with God's strength only."

Now understanding all this man's devilish purpose, Suzanne fell upon
her knees before him, imploring him with many piteous words. But
knowing that death was at hand Ralph's heart rose to it, as that of a
high-couraged man will do, and he bade her to cease her supplications
and rise. Then in a loud, clear voice he spoke in the Kaffir tongue, so
that those who were with Piet Van Vooren should understand him.

"It seems, Piet Van Vooren," he said, "that you have stolen upon us
here to carry off my wife by violence after you have murdered me. These
crimes you may do, though I know well that if you do them they will be
revenged upon you amply, and upon you men also who take part in them.
And now I will not plead to you for mercy, but I ask one thing which you
cannot refuse, because those with you, Kaffirs though they be, will not
suffer it--five short minutes of time in which to bid farewell to my
new-wed wife."

"Not an instant," said Swart Piet, but at the words the black men who
were with him, and whose wicked hearts were touched with pity, began to
murmur so loudly, that he hesitated.

"At your bidding, Bull-Head," said one of them, "we have come to kill
this man and to carry away the white woman, and we will do it, for you
are our chief and we must obey you. But, if you will not give him the
little space for which he asks, wherein to bid farewell to his wife
before she becomes your wife, then we will have nothing more to do
with the matter. I say that our hearts are sick at it already, and,
Bull-Head, you kill a man, not a dog, and that by murder, not in fair
fight."

"As you will, fool," said Swart Piet. "Englishman, I give you five
minutes," and he drew a large silver watch from his pocket and held it
in his hand.

"Get out of hearing then, murderer," said Ralph, "for I have no breath
left to waste on you," and Piet obeying him, fell back a little and
stood gnawing his nails and staring at the pair.

"Suzanne, wife Suzanne," whispered Ralph, "we are about to part, since,
as you see, I must die, and your fate lies in the Hand of God. Yes, you
are made a widow before you are a wife; and, Suzanne, ah! that is the
worst of it, another takes you, even my murderer."

Now Suzanne, who till this moment had been as one stupefied, seemed to
gather up her strength and answered him calmly, saying:

"Truly, husband, things appear to be as you say, though what we have
done that they should be so, I cannot tell. Still comfort yourself, for
death comes to all of us soon or late, and whether it comes soon or late
makes little difference in the end, seeing that come it must."

"No, not death, it is your fate that makes the difference. How can I
bear to die and leave you the prey of that devil? Oh my God! my God! how
can I bear to die!"

"Have no fear, husband," went on Suzanne in the same clear, indifferent
voice, "for you do not leave me to be his prey. Say, now; if we walk
backwards swiftly before they could catch us we might fall together into
the pit of the sea beneath."

"Nay, wife, let our deaths lie upon their heads and not upon ours, for
self-murder is a crime."

"As you will, Ralph; but I tell you, and through you I tell Him who
made me, that it is a crime which I shall dare if need be. Have no fear,
Ralph, as I leave your arms, so shall I return to them, whether it be
in Heaven or upon earth. That man thinks he has power over me, but I say
that he has none, seeing that at the last God will protect me with His
hand, or with my own."

"I cannot blame you, Suzanne, for there are some things which are not to
be borne. Do therefore as your conscience teaches you, if you have the
means."

"I have the means, Ralph. Hidden about me is a little knife which I have
carried since I was a child; and if that fails me there are other ways."

"Time is done," said Swart Piet, replacing the watch in his pocket.

"Farewell, sweet," whispered Ralph.

"Farewell, husband," she answered bravely, "until we meet again, whether
it be here on earth or above in Heaven; farewell until we meet again,"
and she flung her arms about his neck and kissed him.

For a moment Ralph clung to her muttering some blessing above her bowed
head; then he unloosed her clasping arms, letting her fall gently upon
the ground and saying: "Lie thus, shutting your ears and hiding your
eyes till all is done. Afterwards you must act as seems best to you.
Escape to your father if you can, if not--tell me, do you understand?"

"I understand," she murmured, and hid her face in a tuft of thick grass,
placing her hands upon her ears.

Ralph bowed his head for an instant in prayer. Then he lifted it and
