
"But what become of all the craturs?" persisted Mickey, who was anything
but satisfied at this plodding along. "Lone Wolf and his spalpeens did not
ride away upon their horses."

"No, but yer may skulp me if any of 'em are big enough fools to leave
their animals where there seems to be any danger of other folks layin'
hands on 'em. When the rest of his band come over arter him, as they
s'posed in answer to their signal, they took mighty good care not to leave
their hosses where thar war any chance for the Kiowas to put their claws
onto 'em. They rode off up the pass till they could reach a place whar the
brutes could climb up and jine thar owners."

"Then I'm to consider the question settled," responded Mickey, "and we're
to tramp all the way to New Bosting, ef the place is still standing. Av
coorse we can do the same, which I take to be three or four thousand
miles, provided we have the time to do it and ain't disturbed."

Sut, after permitting his friend to hold this opinion for a time,
corrected it in his own way.

"Thar ain't no use of tryin' to reach home on foot, any more than thar is
of climbing up that wall with yer toes. Arter we strike camp, we'll stop
long enough to eat two or three bufflers, and rest, and while yer at that
sort of biz, I'll 'light out, and scare up something in the way of hoss
flish. Thar's plenty of it in this part of the world, and a man needn't
hunt long to find it. Are ye satisfied Mickey?"

The Irishman could not feel otherwise, and he expressed his profound
obligations to the scout for the invaluable services he had already
rendered them.

"Lone Wolf knows me," said Sut, making a rather sudden turn in the
conversation. "Me and him have had some tough scrimmages years ago, as I
was tellin' that ar Barnwell, or Big Fowl, rather, that has had the charge
of starting the place called New Boston. I've got 'nough scars to remember
him by, and he carries a few that he got from me. I have a style of
sliding his warriors under, when I run a-foul of 'em, that Lone Wolf
understands, and he's larned long ago who it was that wiped out them two
varmints that he sent out to look around arter me. Halloa! here we air!"

As he spoke, he reached a break in the continuity of the wall to which
they had been clinging. The opening was somewhat similar to that into
which Mickey and Fred had been driven in such a hurry, except that it was
broader and the slope seemed more gradual.

Simpson turned abruptly to the left, and they began clambering upward. It
took a considerable time to reach the level, and when they did so the
scout led them back to the edge of the pass, which wound along fifty or a
hundred feet below them.

"Thar's whar we've come from," said he, as they looked down in the moonlit
gorge; "and while that's mighty handy at times, yet it's a bad place to
get cotched in, as yer found out for yerselves."

"No one will dispoot ye, Soot, especially when Lone Wolf and a score of
spalpeens appears in front of ye, and whin ye turn about to lave, ye find
him and a dozen more in your rear. That was a smart thrick was the same;
but if he hadn't showed himsilf in both places at the same time, we would
have stood a chance of giving him the slip, as we had good horses under
us."

"Can't always be sartin of that. Them varmints have ways of telegraphing
ahead of ye to some of thar friends, so that ye'r'll run heels over head
into some trap, onless yer understands thar devilments and tricky ways."

"When we were in camp," said Fred, "we saw the smoke of a little fire near
by. Was it yours?"

"It war," replied Sut, with a curious solemnity. "I kindled that fire, and
nussed it."

"Well, it bothered us a good deal. We didn't know what to make of it,
Mickey and I."

"It bothered the varmints a good deal more, which war what it war intended
for. I meant it far a Kiowa signal-fire, and if it hadn't been started
'bout that time, you'd had some other grizzly b'ars down on ye in the
shape of 'Paches."

"But it didn't help us all the way through; they came down on us a little
while afterward."

"That war accident," said Sut. "the purest kind of accident--one of them
things that is like to happen, and which we don't look for--a kinder of
surprise like."

"As me father obsarved when he found we had twins in the family,"
interrupted Mickey.

"The chances are ten to one that thing couldn't happen ag'in; but luck,
just then, war t'other way. Lone Wolf and his men war on their way home,
and had no more idea of meeting yer folks than he had of axing me to come
down and act as bridesmaid for his darter, when she gits married."

"Do ye s'pose he knowed us, Soot?" asked the Irishman.

"It isn't likely that he did at first, but the sight of the younker must
have made him 'spicious, and arter he rammed you into the rocks, I guess
he knowed pretty well how things stood, and he war bound to have both of
yer."

"What made him want _me_ so bad?" asked Fred. "I never understood how that
was."

The tall scout, standing on the edge of the broad, deep ravine, looked
down at the handsome face of the boy, to whom he felt attracted by a
stronger affection than either he or the Irishman suspected.

"Bless your soul, my younker, that ere Lone Wolf that they call such a
great chief (and I may as well own up and say that he is), is heavy on
ransoms and he ain't the only chief that's in that line. That skunk runs
off with men, women and boys, and his rule is not to give 'em up ag'in
till he gits a good round price. He calculated on making a good thing off
you, and I rather think he would."

"Does he always give up those, then, that their friends want to ransom?"

"Not by any means; it's altogether as the notion takes him. He sports more
skulps and topknots than any of his brother-chiefs, and he never lets his
stock run low. As them other varmints creep up onto him, he shoots ahead
by scooping in more topknots, and thar's no use of thar trying to butt
ag'in him. He's 'way ahead of 'em, and there he's bound to stay, and they
can't help it."

"Then he might have used me the same way, after all the pains he took to
get me."

"Jest as like as not. He is as ugly as the devil himself. Two years ago he
stole a good-looking gal up near Santa Fe. He had a chance for the biggest
kind of ransom; but the poor gal had long, golden hair, and the skunk
wanted it for an ornament, and he took it, too, and thinks more of it than
any out of his hundred and more. Arter getting yer home among his people,
and arter he'd found out thar's a good show fur a big ransom from yer
father, jest as like as not he'd make up his mind that the best thing he
could do would be to knock ye on ther head and raise yer ha'r, and he'd do
it, too."

"Well, thank heaven, none of us are in his hands now, and I pray that he
may never get us."

The three were still standing as close to the edge of the ravine as was
prudent, so that the moonlight fell about them. They were enabled to see
quite a long distance up and down the pass, the uncertain light, however,
causing objects to assume a fantastic contour, which would have made an
inexperienced person uncertain whether he was looking down upon animate or
inanimate objects. They were on the point of moving away, when Fred Munson
exclaimed, with some excitement:

"The country seems to be full of camp-fires or signal-fires. Yonder is one
just started!"

He pointed up the ravine, and to the other side, where an unusually bright
star seemed to be rising over the solitude beyond. It was about a quarter
of a mile away, and its brightness such as to show its nature.

"Yes, that's one of 'em," said the scout, in a tone which showed that he
had no particular interest in it.

"Can ye rade what the same manes?" asked Mickey, who was gradually
accumulating a wonderful faith in the woodcraft of the scout.

But the latter laughed. It would have been the height of absurdity for him
to have pretended that he could make anything of the meaning of a simple
fire burning at night. It was only when actual signals were made that he
could tell what they were intended for.

"It's some of the 'Paches, I s'pose. Lone Wolf is in trouble, but I don't
know as we've got anything to do with it. The night is getting along, and
we ought to be back to camp by this time."

Without waiting longer, he turned about and moved back into the wood,
followed by his two friends.

It seemed strange to both of the latter that he could have left his
mustang so far away from the place where his self-imposed duties had
called him to bring to naught the cunning of his great enemy, the
principal war-chief of the Apaches. But the truth was, the camps of the
scout and the redskins were not so widely separated as Mickey and Fred
believed. He had selected the best site possible, and took a roundabout
course in going to or from it, as he had more means given him of
concealing his trail. There were places where the soil was so rocky and
stony that the foot left not the slightest imprint of its passage.

They had gone but a short distance from the ravine when they encountered
one of the very stretches so valuable to persons in their predicament. No
grass or vegetation of any kind impeded their way, and it was like walking
over a hard, uncarpeted floor. Making their way across this, they struck
into a wood that was denser than any they had encountered thus far. There
their progress was slow, but they continued steadily forward, talking but
little, and then in guarded tones. About the hour of midnight the camp of
Sut Simpson was reached.




CHAPTER XXI.

SAFETY AND SLEEP.


There was nothing especially noticeable in the site which the scout had
selected for his camp fire. His principal object had been secrecy and he
had obtained it beyond all peradventure. The place was more like a cavern
than anything else, except that it was open at the top, but it was walled
in on the four sides, so there was barely room for the three to enter. As
the scout explained, he was perfectly familiar with that section of the
country, and he lost no time in hunting out the spot. He had his horse
with him at the time the Apaches drove Mickey and Fred in among the rocks,
and he staid until pretty certain they could keep the Apaches at bay until
dark, when he made his way to a level spot inclosed by rocks. There he
kindled a fire, cooked some antelope and left his mustang to graze and
browse near by, while he returned to the assistance of his friends.

"Where did ye shoot that uncleope, or antelope?" asked Mickey.

"I didn't shoot him at all; he's the one you fetched down. Yer left enough
for me, so I didn't run the risk of firing my gun when the varmints were
so close by, so I sliced out a hunk or two from the carcass, and fetched
it along."

"Ye haven't got any of it about ye?"

"Not enough for yer folks--no more than three or four pounds."

"Be the powers but ye're right. That's 'nough to stay our stomach, as me
sick aunt remarked after swallowing her twenty-third dumpling."

At the moment the party walked in among the rocks the smoldering embers of
the camp-fire were plainly seen. They needed but a little stirring to
break forth into flame again, so as to light up the interior, which was
about a dozen feet square, with a height of a dozen feet, more or less.
When the Irishman signified that something in the way of food would be
acceptable, the scout produced it from among the leaves near at hand, and
it was devoured with the heartiest kind of appetite. They had drank all
the water they needed, and the three assumed easy, lounging attitudes,
Mickey lighting his pipe and enjoying himself immensely.

"This is what I call comfortable," he remarked, "as me friend Patsey
McFadden observed when the row began at the fair and the whacks came from
every quarter. I enjoy it; it's refining, it's soothing; it makes a man
glad that he's alive."

"What do you think of it?" asked the scout, turning to Fred, who was
reclining upon the heavy Apache blanket, with the appearance of one who
was upon the verge of sleep.

"I feel very grateful to you," said he, rousing up, "and I am more
contented than I have been in a long time; but I'm afraid all the time
that Lone Wolf or some of his braves might find where we are."

Sut smiled in a pitying way, as he replied:

"Don't ye s'pose I'm old 'nough to fix all that? Haven't I larned 'nough
of the 'Paches and thar devilments to keep 'em back? Wall, I rather guess
I have."

As the night remained so warm that no comfort at all was derived from the
fire, it was agreed that it should be left to burn out gradually. It had
been kindled originally by Sut for the purpose of cooking his meat, and he
had renewed it that his friends might see exactly where they were, and, at
the same time, look into each other's faces.

"Let me ax ye," said Mickey, puffing away at his pipe, "whether, whin we
start for home, we're going to take the pass, which seems as full of the
spalpeens as me head is of grand ideas?"

"I can't be sartin of that," replied Sut, thoughtfully. "We can strike the
prairie by going off here in another course; but it will take a long time,
and the road is harder to travel. I like the pass a good deal the best,
and unless the varmints seem too thick, we'll take it."

"If we could get a good, fair start in the pass, we could kape ahead of
'em all the way till we struck the open prairie, when it would be illigant
to sail away and watch them falling behind, like a snail trying to catch a
hare."

The scout pointed to the lad, and, turning his head, Mickey saw that he
was sound asleep. The poor fellow was so wearied and worn that he could
not resist the approach "tired nature's sweet restorer," which carried him
off so speedily into the land of dreams.

"I'm glad to obsarve it," said the Irishman, "for the poor chap needs it.
He's too young to be in this sort of business, but he couldn't prevint the
soorcumstances, and we must help him out of the scrape as best we can."

"I'm with yer," responded the scout. "He's one of the most likely
youngsters I've ever met, and I'll risk a good deal to fetch him along.
I'm in hopes that we're purty well out of the woods, though we may have
some trouble afore we get cl'ar of Lone Wolf and the rest."

"As soon as we get the critters to ride, I s'pose we kin be off."

"That's all, and that won't take me long. I'm used to finding horses that
the varmints are fools 'nough to say are thars. One day last spring, I war
over near the staked plain all alone, when I got cotched in one of them
awful nor'easters, and I never came so near freezin' to death in all my
life. Them sort of winds go right to the marrer of yer bones, and it takes
yer a week to thaw out. Wall, sir, while I war tryin' to start a fire, a
couple of Comanches managed to slip up and steal my mustang. I didn't find
it out till three or four hours arter, and then I war mad. I couldn't
stand no such loss, so I took the trail, and started off on a deer-trot
arter 'em. Wall, sir, I chased them infernal varmints close on to twenty
miles afore I run 'em to earth. Then I found 'em down into a deep holler,
where I come nigh tumblin' heels over head right in atween 'em afore I
knowed who they war. Yer see it war a piece of the meanest kind of
business on thar part, 'cause they each had a mustang, and I hadn't any,
and they war leadin' mine.

"I laid low for them varmints till night, when I mounted my critter, and
struck off over the country leadin' thar two beasts with me. I expected
they'd foller, of course, for the two animals that I captured were such
beauties as you don't meet every day, so I kept 'em on the go purty steady
for two days and nights, when I struck into the chapparal, tethered all
three horses, tumbled over onto the ground, and put in four hours of
straight solid sleep, such as makes a new man of a feller. Wall, sir,
would you believe it? When I woke up and went to mount my hoss, he wasn't
thar. Them same three skunks had managed to keep so close onto the trail,
that, afore I woke, they slipped up, took all three of the animals, and
were miles away when I opened my eyes.

"Wall, yer may skulp me if I wasn't mad, and I couldn't help laughin',
too, to think how nice they had come it over me. As the game had begun
atween us, I took the trail and follered it for half a week. Yer see, them
skunks didn't mean that I shouldn't get the best of 'em agin. They rode
fast, and kept it up as long as thar horses could stand it, by which time
they had every reason to think they war a hundred miles ahead of me, and
so they went in for a good rest, intending when they had got that to keep
up thar flight till they reached thar village up near the headwaters of
