"Masson," corrected Eg-Anteouen quietly.

"Captain Masson," I repeated in concert with Morhange.

We laughed again.

"Ha! Ha! Ha! Captain Masson.... Colonel Flatters.... The well of
Garama. They killed him to take his pipe ... that pipe. It was
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh who killed Captain Masson."

"It was Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," repeated the Targa with imperturbable
calm.

"Captain Masson and Colonel Flatters had left the convoy to look for
the well," said Morhange, laughing.

"It was then that the Tuareg attacked them," I finished, laughing as
hard as I could.

"A Targa of Ahagga seized the bridle of Captain Masson's horse," said
Morhange.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh had hold of Colonel Flatters' bridle," put in
Eg-Anteouen.

"The Colonel puts his foot in the stirrup and receives a cut from
Cegheir-ben-Cheikh's saber," I said.

"Captain Masson draws his revolver and fires on Cegheir-ben-Cheikh,
shooting off three fingers of his left hand," said Morhange.

"But," finished Eg-Anteouen imperturbably, "but Cegheir-ben-Cheikh,
with one blow of his saber, splits Captain Masson's skull."..

He gave a silent, satisfied laugh as he spoke. The dying flame lit up
his face. We saw the gleaming black stem of his pipe. He held it in
his left hand. One finger, no, two fingers only on that hand. Hello! I
had not noticed that before.

Morhange also noticed it, for he finished with a loud laugh.

"Then, after splitting his skull, you robbed him. You took his pipe
from him. Bravo, Cegheir-ben-Cheikh!"

Cegheir-ben-Cheikh does not reply, but I can see how satisfied with
himself he is. He keeps on smoking. I can hardly see his features now.
The firelight pales, dies. I have never laughed so much as this
evening. I am sure Morhange never has, either. Perhaps he will forget
the cloister. And all because Cegheir-ben-Cheikh stole Captain
Masson's pipe....

Again that accursed song. "The seventh is a boy, one of whose eyes has
flown away." One cannot imagine more senseless words. It is very
strange, really: there seem to be four of us in this cave now. Four, I
say, five, six, seven, eight.... Make yourselves at home, my friends.
What! there are no more of you?... I am going to find out at last how
the spirits of this region are made, the _Gamphasantes_, the
_Blemyens_.... Morhange says that the _Blemyens_ have their faces on
the middle of their chests. Surely this one who is seizing me in his
arms is not a _Blemyen_! Now he is carrying me outside. And Morhange
... I do not want them to forget Morhange....

They did not forget him; I see him perched on a camel in front of that
one to which I am fastened. They did well to fasten me, for otherwise
I surely would tumble off. These spirits certainly are not bad
fellows. But what a long way it is! I want to stretch out. To sleep. A
while ago we surely were following a long passage, then we were in the
open air. Now we are again in an endless stifling corridor. Here are
the stars again.... Is this ridiculous course going to keep on?...

Hello, lights! Stars, perhaps. No, lights, I say. A stairway, on my
word; of rocks, to be sure, but still, a stairway. How can the
camels...? But it is no longer a camel; this is a man carrying me. A
man dressed in white, not a _Gamphasante_ nor a _Blemyen_. Morhange
must be giving himself airs with his historical reasoning, all false,
I repeat, all false. Good Morhange. Provided that his _Gamphasante_
does not let him fall on this unending stairway. Something glitters on
the ceiling. Yes, it is a lamp, a copper lamp, as at Tunis, at
Barbouchy's. Good, here again you cannot see anything. But I am making
a fool of myself; I am lying down; now I can go to sleep. What a silly
day!... Gentlemen, I assure you that it is unnecessary to bind me: I
do not want to go down on the boulevards.

Darkness again. Steps of someone going away. Silence.

But only for a moment. Someone is talking beside me. What are they
saying?... No, it is impossible. That metallic ring, that voice. Do
you know what it is calling, that voice, do you know what it is
calling in the tones of someone used to the phrase? Well, it is
calling:

"Play your cards, gentlemen, play your cards. There are ten thousand
_louis_ in the bank. Play your cards, gentlemen."

In the name of God, am I or am I not at Ahaggar?




VIII

AWAKENING AT AHAGGAR


It was broad daylight when I opened my eyes. I thought at once of
Morhange. I could not see him, but I heard him, close by, giving
little grunts of surprise.

I called to him. He ran to me.

"Then they didn't tie you up?" I asked.

"I beg your pardon. They did. But they did it badly; I managed to get
free."

"You might have untied me, too," I remarked crossly.

"What good would it have done? I should only have waked you up. And I
thought that your first word would be to call me. There, that's done."

I reeled as I tried to stand on my feet.

Morhange smiled.

"We might have spent the whole night smoking and drinking and not been
in a worse state," he said. "Anyhow, that Eg-Anteouen with his
hasheesh is a fine rascal."

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh," I corrected.

I rubbed my hand over my forehead.

"Where are we?"

"My dear boy," Morhange replied, "since I awakened from the
extraordinary nightmare which is mixed up with the smoky cave and the
lamp-lit stairway of the Arabian Nights, I have been going from
surprise to surprise, from confusion to confusion. Just look around
you."

I rubbed my eyes and stared. Then I seized my friend's hand.

"Morhange," I begged, "tell me if we are still dreaming."

We were in a round room, perhaps fifty feet in diameter, and of about
the same height, lighted by a great window opening on a sky of intense
blue.

Swallows flew back and forth, outside, giving quick, joyous cries.

The floor, the incurving walls and the ceiling were of a kind of
veined marble like porphyry, panelled with a strange metal, paler than
gold, darker than silver, clouded just then by the early morning mist
that came in through the window in great puffs.

I staggered toward this window, drawn by the freshness of the breeze
and the sunlight which was chasing away my dreams, and I leaned my
elbows on the balustrade.

I could not restrain a cry of delight.

I was standing on a kind of balcony, cut into the flank of a mountain,
overhanging an abyss. Above me, blue sky; below appeared a veritable
earthly paradise hemmed in on all sides by mountains that formed a
continuous and impassable wall about it. A garden lay spread out down
there. The palm trees gently swayed their great fronds. At their feet
was a tangle of the smaller trees which grow in an oasis under their
protection: almonds, lemons, oranges, and many others which I could
not distinguish from that height. A broad blue stream, fed by a
waterfall, emptied into a charming lake, the waters of which had the
marvellous transparency which comes in high altitudes. Great birds
flew in circles over this green hollow; I could see in the lake the
red flash of a flamingo.

The peaks of the mountains which towered on all sides were completely
covered with snow.

The blue stream, the green palms, the golden fruit, and above it all,
the miraculous snow, all this bathed in that limpid air, gave such an
impression of beauty, of purity, that my poor human strength could no
longer stand the sight of it. I laid my forehead on the balustrade,
which, too, was covered with that heavenly snow, and began to cry like
a baby.

Morhange was behaving like another child. But he had awakened before I
had, and doubtless had had time to grasp, one by one, all these
details whose fantastic _ensemble_ staggered me.

He laid his hand on my shoulder and gently pulled me back into the
room.

"You haven't seen anything yet," he said. "Look! Look!"

"Morhange!"

"Well, old man, what do you want me to do about it? Look!"

I had just realized that the strange room was furnished--God forgive
me--in the European fashion. There were indeed, here and there, round
leather Tuareg cushions, brightly colored blankets from Gafsa, rugs
from Kairouan, and Caramani hangings which, at that moment, I should
have dreaded to draw aside. But a half-open panel in the wall showed a
bookcase crowded with books. A whole row of photographs of
masterpieces of ancient art were hung on the walls. Finally there was
a table almost hidden under its heap of papers, pamphlets, books. I
thought I should collapse at seeing a recent number of the
_Archaeological Review_.

I looked at Morhange. He was looking at me, and suddenly a mad laugh
seized us and doubled us up for a good minute.

"I do not know," Morhange finally managed to say, "whether or not we
shall regret some day our little excursion into Ahaggar. But admit, in
the meantime, that it promises to be rich in unexpected adventures.
That unforgettable guide who puts us to sleep just to distract us
from the unpleasantness of caravan life and who lets me experience, in
the best of good faith, the far-famed delights of hasheesh: that
fantastic night ride, and, to cap the climax, this cave of a Nureddin
who must have received the education of the Athenian Bersot at the
French _Ecole Normale_--all this is enough, on my word, to upset the
wits of the best balanced."

"What do I think, my poor friend? Why, just what you yourself think. I
don't understand it at all, not at all. What you politely call my
learning is not worth a cent. And why shouldn't I be all mixed up?
This living in caves amazes me. Pliny speaks of the natives living in
caves, seven days' march southwest of the country of the Amantes, and
twelve days to the westward of the great Syrte. Herodotus says also
that the Garamentes used to go out in their chariots to hunt the
cave-dwelling Ethopians. But here we are in Ahaggar, in the midst of
the Targa country, and the best authorities tell us that the Tuareg
never have been willing to live in caves. Duveyrier is precise on that
point. And what is this, I ask you, but a cave turned into a workroom,
with pictures of the Venus de Medici and the Apollo Sauroctone on the
walls? I tell you that it is enough to drive you mad."

And Morhange threw himself on a couch and began to roar with laughter
again.

"See," I said, "this is Latin."

I had picked up several scattered papers from the work-table in the
middle of the room. Morhange took them from my hands and devoured them
greedily. His face expressed unbounded stupefaction.

"Stranger and stranger, my boy. Someone here is composing, with much
citation of texts, a dissertation on the Gorgon Islands: _de Gorgonum
insulis_. Medusa, according to him, was a Libyan savage who lived near
Lake Triton, our present Chott Melhrir, and it is there that Perseus
... Ah!"

Morhange's words choked in his throat. A sharp, shrill voice pierced
the immense room.

"Gentlemen, I beg you, let my papers alone."

I turned toward the newcomer.

One of the Caramani curtains was drawn aside, and the most unexpected
of persons came in. Resigned as we were to unexpected events, the
improbability of this sight exceeded anything our imaginations could
have devised.

On the threshold stood a little bald-headed man with a pointed sallow
face half hidden by an enormous pair of green spectacles and a pepper
and salt beard. No shirt was visible, but an impressive broad red
cravat. He wore white trousers. Red leather slippers furnished the
only Oriental suggestion of his costume.

He wore, not without pride, the rosette of an officer of the
Department of Education.

He collected the papers which Morhange had dropped in his amazement,
counted them, arranged them; then, casting a peevish glance at us, he
struck a copper gong.

The portiere was raised again. A huge white Targa entered. I seemed to
recognize him as one of the genii of the cave.[8]

[Footnote 8: The Negro serfs among the Tuareg are generally called
"white Tuareg." While the nobles are clad in blue cotton robes, the
serfs wear white robes, hence their name of "white Tuareg." See, in
this connection, Duveyrier: _les Tuareg du Nord_, page 292. (Note by
M. Leroux.)]

"Ferradji," angrily demanded the little officer of the Department of
Education, "why were these gentlemen brought into the library?"

The Targa bowed respectfully.

"Cegheir-ben-Cheikh came back sooner than we expected," he replied,
"and last night the embalmers had not yet finished. They brought them
here in the meantime," and he pointed to us.

"Very well, you may go," snapped the little man.

Ferradji backed toward the door. On the threshold, he stopped and
spoke again:

"I was to remind you, sir, that dinner is served."

"All right. Go along."

And the little man seated himself at the desk and began to finger the
papers feverishly.
