and pointed at me.

"Good afternoon," I said into the camera, "here we go again with another
half hour of fun and prizes on television's newest, most exciting, game,
'Parlor Quiz.' In a moment I'll introduce you to our first contestant.
But first here is a special message to you mothers ..."

The baby powder commercial appeared on the monitor and I walked over to
the next set. They had the first contestant lined up for me. I smiled
and took her card from the floor man. She was a middle-aged woman with a
faded print dress and old-style shoes. I never saw the contestants
until we were on the air. They were screened before the show by the
staff. They usually tried to pick contestants who would make good show
material--an odd name or occupation--or somebody with twenty kids.
Something of that nature.

I looked at the card for the tip off. "Mrs. Freda Dunny," the card said.
"Ask her where she comes from."

I smiled at the contestant again and took her by the hand. The tally
light went on again and I grinned into the camera.

"Well, now, we're all set to go ... and our first contestant today is
this charming little lady right here beside me. Mrs. Freda Dunny." I
looked at the card. "How are you, Mrs. Dunny?"

"Fine! Just fine."

"All set to answer a lot of questions and win a lot of prizes?"

"Oh, I'll win all right," said Mrs. Dunny, smiling around at the
audience.

The audience tittered a bit at the remark. I looked at the card again.

"Where are you from, Mrs. Dunny?"

"Mars!" said Mrs. Dunny.

"Mars!" I laughed, anticipating the answer. "Mars, Montana? Mars, Peru?"

"No, _Mars_! Up there," she said, pointing up in the air. "The planet
Mars. The fourth planet out from the sun."

My assistant looked unhappy.

I smiled again, wondering what the gag was. I decided to play along.

"Well, well," I said, "all the way from Mars, eh? And how long have you
been on Earth, Mrs. Dunny?"

"Oh, about thirty or forty years. I've been here nearly all my life.
Came here when I was a wee bit of a girl."

"Well," I said, "you're practically an Earthwoman by now, aren't you?"
The audience laughed. "Do you plan on going back someday or have you
made up your mind to stay here on Earth for the rest of your days?"

"Oh, I'm just here for the invasion," said Mrs. Dunny. "When that's over
I'll probably go back home again."

"The invasion?"

"Yes, the invasion of Earth. As soon as enough of us are here we'll get
