
!Answers!: (a) 0.1434; (b) 0.053; (c) 0.1079; (d) 0.0279; (e) 0.04765,
and 0.022.

14. If 30.00 grams of potassium tetroxalate
(KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O) are dissolved and the solution
diluted to exactly 1 liter, and 40 cc. are neutralized with 20 cc.
of a potassium carbonate solution, what is the normal value of the
carbonate solution?

!Answer!: 0.7084 N.

15. How many cubic centimeters of 0.3 normal sulphuric acid will be
required to neutralize (a) 30 cc. of 0.5 normal potassium hydroxide;
(b) to neutralize 30 cc. of 0.5 normal barium hydroxide; (c) to
neutralize 20 cc. of a solution containing 10.02 grams of potassium
bicarbonate per 100 cc.; (d) to give a precipitate of barium sulphate
weighing 0.4320 gram?

!Answers!: (a) 50 cc.; (b) 50 cc.; (c) 66.73 cc.; (d) 12.33 cc.

16. It is desired to dilute a solution of sulphuric acid of which 1
cc. is equivalent to 0.1027 gram of pure sodium carbonate to make it
exactly 1.250 normal. 700 cc. of the solution are available. To what
volume must it be diluted?

!Answer!: 1084 cc.

17. Given the following data: 1 cc. of NaOH = 1.117 cc. HCl. The HCl
is 0.4876 N. How much water must be added to 100 cc. of the alkali to
make it exactly 0.5 N.?

!Answer!: 9.0 cc.

18. What is the normal value of a sulphuric acid solution which has a
specific gravity of 1.839 and contains 95% H_{2}SO_{4} by weight?

!Answer!: 35.61 N.

19. A sample of Rochelle Salt (KNaC_{4}H_{4}O_{6}.4H_{2}O), after
ignition in platinum to convert it to the double carbonate, is
titrated with sulphuric acid, using methyl orange as an indicator.
From the following data calculate the percentage purity of the sample:

Wt. sample = 0.9500 gram
H_{2}SO_{4} used = 43.65 cc.
NaOH used = 1.72 cc.
1 cc. H_{2}SO_{4} = 1.064 cc. NaOH
Normal value NaOH = 0.1321 N.

!Answer!: 87.72 cc.

20. One gram of a mixture of 50% sodium carbonate and 50% potassium
carbonate is dissolved in water, and 17.36 cc. of 1.075 N acid is
added. Is the resulting solution acid or alkaline? How many cubic
centimeters of 1.075 N acid or alkali will have to be added to make
the solution exactly neutral?

!Answers!: Acid; 1.86 cc. alkali.

21. In preparing an alkaline solution for use in volumetric work, an
analyst, because of shortage of chemicals, mixed exactly 46.32 grams
of pure KOH and 27.64 grams of pure NaOH, and after dissolving in
water, diluted the solution to exactly one liter. How many cubic
centimeters of 1.022 N hydrochloric acid are necessary to neutralize
50 cc. of the basic solution?

!Answer!: 74.18 cc.

22. One gram of crude ammonium salt is treated with strong potassium
hydroxide solution. The ammonia liberated is distilled and collected
in 50 cc. of 0.5 N acid and the excess titrated with 1.55 cc. of 0.5 N
sodium hydroxide. Calculate the percentage of NH_{3} in the sample.

!Answer!: 41.17%.


23. In titrating solutions of alkali carbonates in the presence of
phenolphthalein, the color change takes place when the carbonate has
been converted to bicarbonate. In the presence of methyl orange, the
color change takes place only when the carbonate has been completely
neutralized. From the following data, calculate the percentages of
Na_{2}CO_{3} and NaOH in an impure mixture. Weight of sample, 1.500
grams; HCl (0.5 N) required for phenolphthalein end-point, 28.85 cc.;
HCl (0.5 N) required to complete the titration after adding methyl
orange, 23.85 cc.

!Answers!: 6.67% NaOH; 84.28% Na_{2}CO_{3}.

24. A sample of sodium carbonate containing sodium hydroxide weighs
1.179 grams. It is titrated with 0.30 N hydrochloric acid, using
phenolphthalein in cold solution as an indicator and becomes colorless
after the addition of 48.16 cc. Methyl orange is added and 24.08 cc.
are needed for complete neutralization. What is the percentage of NaOH
and Na_{2}CO_{3}?

!Answers!: 24.50% NaOH; 64.92% Na_{2}CO_{3}.

25. From the following data, calculate the percentages of Na_{2}CO_{3}
and NaHCO_{3} in an impure mixture. Weight of sample 1.000 gram;
volume of 0.25 N hydrochloric acid required for phenolphthalein
end-point, 26.40 cc.; after adding an excess of acid and boiling out
the carbon dioxide, the total volume of 0.25 N hydrochloric acid
required for phenolphthalein end-point, 67.10 cc.

!Answer!: 69.95% Na_{2}CO_{3}; 30.02% NaHCO_{3}.

26. In the analysis of a one-gram sample of soda ash, what must be the
normality of the acid in order that the number of cubic centimeters of
acid used shall represent the percentage of carbon dioxide present?

!Answer!: 0.4544 gram.

27. What weight of pearl ash must be taken for analysis in order that
the number of cubic centimeters of 0.5 N acid used may be equal to one
third the percentage of K_{2}CO_{3}?

!Answer!: 1.152 grams.

28. What weight of cream of tartar must have been taken for analysis
in order to have obtained 97.60% KHC_{4}H_{4}O_{6} in an analysis
involving the following data: NaOH used = 30.06 cc.; H_{2}SO_{4}
solution used = 0.50 cc.; 1 cc. H_{2}SO_{4} sol. = 0.0255 gram
CaCO_{3}; 1 cc. H_{2}SO_{4} sol. = 1.02 cc. NaOH sol.?

!Answer!: 2.846 grams.

29. Calculate the percentage of potassium oxide in an impure sample of
potassium carbonate from the following data: Weight of sample = 1.00
gram; HCl sol. used = 55.90 cc.; NaOH sol. used = 0.42 cc.; 1 cc. NaOH
sol. = 0.008473 gram of KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O; 2 cc.
HCl sol. = 5 cc. NaOH sol.

!Answer!: 65.68%.

30. Calculate the percentage purity of a sample of calcite
(CaCO_{3}) from the following data: (Standardization); Weight of
H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O = 0.2460 gram; NaOH solution used = 41.03
cc.; HCl solution used = 0.63; 1 cc. NaOH solution = 1.190 cc. HCl
solution. (Analysis); Weight of sample 0.1200 gram; HCl used = 36.38
cc.; NaOH used = 6.20 cc.

!Answer!: 97.97%.

31. It is desired to dilute a solution of hydrochloric acid to exactly
0.05 N. The following data are given: 44.97 cc. of the hydrochloric
acid are equivalent to 43.76 cc. of the NaOH solution. The NaOH
is standardized against a pure potassium tetroxalate
(KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O) weighing 0.2162 gram and
requires 49.14 cc. How many cc. of water must be added to 1000 cc. of
the aqueous hydrochloric acid?

!Answer!: 11 cc.

32. How many cubic centimeters of 3 N phosphoric acid must be added to
300 cc. of 0.4 N phosphoric acid in order that the resulting solution
may be 0.6 N?

!Answer!: 25 cc.

33. To oxidize the iron in 1 gram of
FeSO_{4}(NH_{4})_{2}SO_{4}.6H_{2}O (mol. wgt. 392) requires 3 cc. of
a given solution of HNO_{3}. What is the normality of the nitric
acid when used as an acid? 6FeSO_{4} + 2HNO_{3} + 2H_{2}SO_{4} =
3Fe_{2}(SO_{4})_{3} + 2NO + 4H_{2}O.

!Answer!: 0.2835 N.

34. The same volume of carbon dioxide at the same temperature and the
same pressure is liberated from a 1 gram sample of dolomite, by adding
an excess of hydrochloric acid, as can be liberated by the addition of
35 cc. of 0.5 N hydrochloric acid to an excess of any pure or impure
carbonate. Calculate the percentage of CO_{2} in the dolomite.

!Answer!: 38.5%.

35. How many cubic centimeters of sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1.84,
containing 96% H_{2}SO_{4} by weight) will be required to displace the
chloride in the calcium chloride formed by the action of 100 cc. of
0.1072 N hydrochloric acid on an excess of calcium carbonate, and how
many grams of CaSO_{4} will be formed?

!Answers!: 0.298 cc.; 0.7300 gram.

36. Potassium hydroxide which has been exposed to the air is found on
analysis to contain 7.62% water, 2.38% K_{2}CO_{3}. and 90% KOH. What
weight of residue will be obtained if one gram of this sample is added
to 46 cc. of normal hydrochloric acid and the resulting solution,
after exact neutralization with 1.070 N potassium hydroxide solution,
is evaporated to dryness?

!Answer!: 3.47 grams.

37. A chemist received four different solutions, with the statement
that they contained either pure NaOH; pure Na_{2}CO_{3}; pure
NaHCO_{3}, or mixtures of these substances. From the following data
identify them:

Sample I. On adding phenolphthalein to a solution of the substance, it
gave no color to the solution.

Sample II. On titrating with standard acid, it required 15.26 cc. for
a change in color, using phenolphthalein, and 17.90 cc. additional,
using methyl orange as an indicator.

Sample III. The sample was titrated with hydrochloric acid until the
pink of phenolphthalein disappeared, and on the addition of methyl
orange the solution was colored pink.

Sample IV. On titrating with hydrochloric acid, using phenolphthalein,
15.00 cc. were required. A new sample of the same weight required
exactly 30 cc. of the same acid for neutralization, using methyl
orange.

!Answers!: (a) NaHCO_{3}; (b) NaHCO_{3}+Na_{2}CO_{3}; (c)NaOH; (d)
Na_{2}CO_{3}.

38. In the analysis of a sample of KHC_{4}H_{4}O_{6} the following
data are obtained: Weight sample = 0.4732 gram. NaOH solution used =
24.97 cc. 3.00 cc. NaOH = 1 cc. of H_{3}PO_{4} solution of which 1
cc. will precipitate 0.01227 gram of magnesium as MgNH_{4}PO_{4}.
Calculate the percentage of KHC_{4}H_{4}O_{6}.

!Answer!: 88.67%.

39. A one-gram sample of sodium hydroxide which has been exposed to
the air for some time, is dissolved in water and diluted to exactly
500 cc. One hundred cubic centimeters of the solution, when titrated
with 0.1062 N hydrochloric acid, using methyl orange as an indicator,
requires 38.60 cc. for complete neutralization. Barium chloride in
excess is added to a second portion of 100 cc. of the solution, which
is diluted to exactly 250 cc., allowed to stand and filtered. Two
hundred cubic centimeters of this filtrate require 29.62 cc. of 0.1062
N hydrochloric acid for neutralization, using phenolphthalein as an
indicator. Calculate percentage of NaOH, Na_{2}CO_{3}, and H_{2}O.

!Answers!: 78.63% NaOH; 4.45% Na_{2}CO_{3}; 16.92% H_{2}O.

40. A sodium hydroxide solution (made from solid NaOH which has been
exposed to the air) was titrated against a standard acid using methyl
orange as an indicator, and was found to be exactly 0.1 N. This
solution was used in the analysis of a material sold at 2 cents per
pound per cent of an acid constituent A, and always mixed so that
it was supposed to contain 15% of A, on the basis of the analyst's
report. Owing to the carelessness of the analyst's assistant, the
sodium hydroxide solution was used with phenolphthalein as an
indicator in cold solution in making the analyses. The concern
manufacturing this material sells 600 tons per year, and when the
mistake was discovered it was estimated that at the end of a year
the error in the use of indicators would either cost them or their
customers $6000. Who would lose and why? Assuming the impure NaOH used
originally in making the titrating solution consisted of NaOH and
Na_{2}CO_{3} only, what per cent of each was present?

!Answers!: Customer lost; 3.94% Na_{2}CO_{3}; 96.06% NaOH.

41. In the standardization of a K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} solution against iron
wire, 99.85% pure, 42.42 cc. of the solution were added. The weight of
the wire used was 0.22 gram. 3.27 cc. of a ferrous sulphate solution
having a normal value as a reducing agent of 0.1011 were added
to complete the titration. Calculate the normal value of the
K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7}.

!Answer!: 0.1006 N.

42. What weight of iron ore containing 56.2% Fe should be taken to
standardize an approximately 0.1 N oxidizing solution, if not more
than 47 cc. are to be used?

!Answer!: 0.4667 gram.

43. One tenth gram of iron wire, 99.78% pure, is dissolved in
hydrochloric acid and the iron oxidized completely with bromine water.
How many grams of stannous chloride are there in a liter of solution
if it requires 9.47 cc. to just reduce the iron in the above? What
is the normal value of the stannous chloride solution as a reducing
agent?

!Answer!: 17.92 grams; 0.1888 N.

44. One gram of an oxide of iron is fused with potassium acid sulphate
and the fusion dissolved in acid. The iron is reduced with stannous
chloride, mercuric chloride is added, and the iron titrated with a
normal K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} solution. 12.94 cc. were used. What is the
formula of the oxide, FeO, Fe_{2}O_{3}, or Fe_{3}O_{4}?

!Answer!: Fe_{3}O_{4}.

45. If an element has 98 for its atomic weight, and after reduction
with stannous chloride could be oxidized by bichromate to a state
corresponding to an XO_{4}^{-} anion, compute the oxide, or valence,
corresponding to the reduced state from the following data: 0.3266
gram of the pure element, after being dissolved, was reduced with
stannous chloride and oxidized by 40 cc. of K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7}, of which
one cc. = 0.1960 gram of FeSO_{4}(NH_{4})_{2}SO_{4}.6H_{2}O.

!Answer!: Monovalent.

46. Determine the percentage of iron in a sample of limonite from the
following data: Sample = 0.5000 gram. KMnO_{4} used = 50 cc. 1 cc.
KMnO_{4} = 0.005317 gram Fe. FeSO_{4} used = 6 cc. 1 cc. FeSO_{4} =
0.009200 gram FeO.

!Answer!: 44.60%.

47. If 1 gram of a silicate yields 0.5000 gram of Fe_{2}O_{3} and
Al_{2}O_{3} and the iron present requires 25 cc. of 0.2 N KMnO_{4},
calculate the percentage of FeO and Al_{2}O_{3} in the sample.

!Answer!: 35.89% FeO; 10.03% Al_{2}O_{3}.

48. A sample of magnesia limestone has the following composition:
Silica, 3.00%; ferric oxide and alumina, 0.20%; calcium oxide, 33.10%;
magnesium oxide, 20.70%; carbon dioxide, 43.00%. In manufacturing lime
from the above the carbon dioxide is reduced to 3.00%. How many cubic
centimeters of normal KMnO_{4} will be required to determine the
calcium oxide volumetrically in a 1 gram sample of the lime?

!Answer!: 20.08 cc.

49. If 100 cc. of potassium bichromate solution (10 gram
K_{2}Cr_{2}O_{7} per liter), 5 cc. of 6 N sulphuric acid, and 75 cc.
of ferrous sulphate solution (80 grams FeSO_{4}.7H_{2}O per liter) are
mixed, and the resulting solution titrated with 0.2121 N KMnO_{4}, how
many cubic centimeters of the KMnO_{4} solution will be required to
oxidize the iron?

!Answer!: 5.70 cc.

50. If a 0.5000 gram sample of limonite containing 59.50 per cent
Fe_{2}O_{3} requires 40 cc. of KMnO_{4} to oxidize the iron, what
is the value of 1 cc. of the permanganate in terms of (a) Fe, (b)
H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O?

!Answers!: (a) 0.005189 gram; (b) 0.005859 gram.

51. A sample of pyrolusite weighing 0.6000 gram is treated with 0.9000
gram of oxalic acid. The excess oxalic acid requires 23.95 cc. of
permanganate (1 cc. = 0.03038 gram FeSO_{4}.7H_{2}O). What is the
percentage of MnO_{2}, in the sample?

!Answer!: 84.47%.

52. A solution contains 50 grams of
KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O per liter. What is the normal
value of the solution (a) as an acid, and (b) as a reducing agent?

!Answers!: (a) 0.5903 N; (b) 0.7872 N.

53. In the analysis of an iron ore containing 60% Fe_{2}O_{3}, a
sample weighing 0.5000 gram is taken and the iron is reduced with
sulphurous acid. On account of failure to boil out all the excess
SO_{2}, 38.60 cubic centimeters of 0.1 N KMnO_{4} were required to
titrate the solution. What was the error, percentage error, and what
weight of sulphur dioxide was in the solution?

!Answers!: (a) 1.60%; (b) 2.67%; (c) 0.00322 gram.

54. From the following data, calculate the ratio of the nitric acid as
an oxidizing agent to the tetroxalate solution as a reducing agent:
1 cc. HNO_{3} = 1.246 cc. NaOH solution; 1 cc. NaOH = 1.743 cc.
KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O solution; Normal value NaOH =
0.12.

!Answer!: 4.885.

55. Given the following data: 25 cc. of a hydrochloric acid, when
standardized gravimetrically as silver chloride, yields a precipitate
weighing 0.5465 gram. 24.35 cc. of the hydrochloric acid are exactly
equivalent to 30.17 cc. of KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O
solution. How much water must be added to a liter of the oxalate
solution to make it exactly 0.025 N as a reducing agent?

!Answer!: 5564 cc.

56. Ten grams of a mixture of pure potassium tetroxalate
(KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O) and pure oxalic acid
(H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O) are dissolved in water and diluted to
exactly 1000 cc. The normal value of the oxalate solution when used as
an acid is 0.1315. Calculate the ratio of tetroxalate to oxalate used
in making up the solution and the normal value of the solution as a
reducing agent.

!Answers!: 2:1; 0.1577 N.

57. A student standardized a solution of NaOH and one of KMnO_{4}
against pure KHC_{2}O_{4}.H_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.2H_{2}O and found the former
to be 0.07500 N as an alkali and the latter exactly 0.1 N as an
oxidizing agent. By coincidence, exactly 47.26 cc. were used in each
standardization. Find the ratio of the oxalate used in the
NaOH standardization to the oxalate used in the permanganate
standardization.

!Answer!: 1:1.

58. A sample of apatite weighing 0.60 gram is analyzed for its
phosphoric anhydride content. If the phosphate is precipitated as
(NH_{4})_{3}PO_{4}.12MoO_{3}, and the precipitate (after solution and
reduction of the MoO_{3} to Mo_{24}O_{37}), requires 100 cc. of normal
KMnO_{4} to oxidize it back to MoO_{3}, what is the percentage of
P_{2}O_{5}?

!Answer!: 33.81%.

59. In the analysis of a sample of steel weighing 1.881 grams the
phosphorus was precipitated with ammonium molybdate and the yellow
precipitate was dissolved, reduced and titrated with KMnO_{4}. If the
sample contained 0.025 per cent P and 6.01 cc. of KMnO_{4} were used,
to what oxide was the molybdenum reduced? 1 cc. KMnO_{4} = 0.007188
gram Na_{2}C_{2}O_{4}.

!Answer!: Mo_{4}O_{5}.

60. What is the value of 1 cc. of an iodine solution (1 cc. equivalent
to 0.0300 gram Na_{2}S_{2}O_{3}) in terms of As_{2}O_{3}?

!Answer!: 0.009385 gram.

61. 48 cc. of a solution of sodium thiosulphate are required to
titrate the iodine liberated from an excess of potassium iodide
solution by 0.3000 gram of pure KIO_{3}. (KIO_{3} + 5KI + 3H_{2}SO_{4}
= 3K_{2}SO_{4} + 3I_{2} + 3H_{2}O.) What is the normal strength of the
sodium thiosulphate and the value of 1 cc. of it in terms of iodine?

!Answers!: 0.1753 N; 0.02224 gram.

62. One thousand cubic centimeters of 0.1079 N sodium thiosulphate
