problem.

Abe offered me five thousand for her as she stood--but I wasn't having
any--at least not until I'd gotten rid of the gold in her fuel reels.
That stuff's worth money to the spacelines--about fifty munits per
ounce. It's better even than lead as fuel--doesn't clog the tubes and
gives better acceleration.

Well--like I said--I was flusher than I had been since Triworld
Freight Lines ran afoul of the cops on Callisto for smuggling tekla
nuts. So I went down to Otto's place on the strip to wash some of that
Dryland dust off my tonsils. And that's where I met Redman.

He came up the street from the South airlock--a big fellow--walking
kinda unsteady, his respirator hanging from his thick neck. He was
burned a dark reddish black from the Dryland sun and looked like he
was on his last legs when he turned into Otto's. He staggered up to
the bar.

"Water," he said.

Otto passed him a pitcher and damned if the guy didn't drink it
straight down!

"That'll be ten munits," Otto said.

"For water?" the man asked.

"You're on Mars," Otto reminded him.

"Oh," the big fellow said, and jerked a few lumps of yellow metal out
of a pocket and dropped it on the bar. "Will this do?" he asked.

       *       *       *       *       *

Otto's eyes damn near bulged out of their sockets. "Where'd you get
that stuff?" he demanded. "That's gold!"

"I know."

"It'll do fine." Otto picked out a piece that musta weighed an ounce.
"Have another pitcher."

"That's enough," the big fellow said. "Keep the change."

"Yes, sir!" You'da thought from Otto's voice that he was talking to
the Prince Regent. "Just _where_ did you say you found it."

"I didn't say. But I found it out there." He waved a thick arm in the
direction of the Drylands.

By this time a couple of sharpies sitting at one of the tables pricked
up their ears, removed their pants from their chairs and began closing
in. But I beat them to it.

"My name's Wallingford," I said. "Cyril Wallingford."

"So what?" he snaps.

"So if you don't watch out you'll be laying in an alley with all that
nice yellow stuff in someone else's pocket."

"I can take care of myself," he said.

"I don't doubt it," I said, looking at the mass of him. He was sure
king-sized. "But even a guy as big as you is cold meat for a little
guy with a Kelly."

He looked at me a bit more friendly. "Maybe I'm wrong about you,
friend. But you look shifty."

"I'll admit my face isn't my fortune," I said sticking out what little
chin I had and looking indignant. "But I'm honest. Ask anyone here." I
looked around. There were three men in the place I didn't have
something on, and I was faster than they. I was a fair hand with a
Kelly in those days and I had a reputation. There was a chorus of nods
and the big fellow looked satisfied. He stuck out a hamsized hand.

"Me name's Redman," he said. "Noble Redman. My father had a sense of
humor." He grinned at me, giving me a good view of his pink teeth.

I grinned back. "Glad to know you," I replied. I gave the sharpies a
hard look and they moved off and left us alone. The big fellow
interested me. Fact is--anyone with money interested me--but I'm not
stupid greedy. It took me about three minutes to spot him for a phony.
Anyone who's lived out in the Drylands knows that there just _isn't_
any gold there. Iron, sure, the whole desert's filthy with it, but if
there is anything higher on the periodic table than the rare earths,
nobody had found it yet--and this guy with his light clothes, street
boots and low capacity respirator--Hell! he couldn't stay out there
more than two days if he wanted to--and besides, the gold was refined.
The lumps looked like they were cut off something bigger--a bar, for
instance.

       *       *       *       *       *

A bar!--a bar of gold! My brain started working. K'nar was about two
days out, and there had always been rumors about Martian gold even
though no one ever found any. Maybe this tourist had come through. If
so, he was worth cultivating. For he was a tourist. He certainly
wasn't a citizen. There wasn't a Martian alive with a skin like his.
Redman--the name fitted all right. But what was his game? I couldn't
figure it. And the more I tried the less I succeeded. It was a
certainty he was no prospector despite his burned skin. His hands gave
him away. They were big and dirty, but the pink nails were smooth and
the red palms soft and uncalloused. There wasn't even a blister on
them. He could have been fresh from the Mercury Penal Colony--but
those guys were burned black--not red, and he didn't have the hangdog
look of an ex-con.

He talked about prospecting on Callisto--looking for heavy metals. Ha!
There were fewer heavy metals on Callisto than there were on Mars. But
he had listeners. His gold and the way he spent it drew them like
honey draws flies. But finally I got the idea. Somehow, subtly, he
turned the conversation around to gambling which was a subject
everyone knew. That brought up tales of the old games, poker, faro,
three card monte, blackjack, roulette--and crapshooting.

"I'll bet there isn't a dice game in town." Redman said.

"You'd lose," I answered. I had about all this maneuvering I could
take. Bring it out in the open--see what this guy was after. Maybe I
could get something out of it in the process. From the looks of his
hands he was a pro. He could probably make dice and cards sing sweet
