after he called to see him, and was received with such a storm of
indignation that he begged for mercy and implored his forgiveness.
Kepler forgave him, but insisted on his making amends. He writes: 'I
have taken him again into favour upon this preliminary condition, to
which he has agreed--that I am to show him Jupiter's satellites, _and he
is to see them_, and own that they are there.'

The evidence in support of the existence of Jupiter's satellites became
so conclusive that the opponents of Galileo were compelled to renounce
their disbelief in those bodies, whether real or pretended. The Grand
Duke, preferring to trust to his eyes rather than believe in the
arguments of the professor at Padua, observed the satellites on several
occasions, along with Galileo, at Pisa, and on his departure bestowed
upon him a gift of one thousand florins. Several of Galileo's enemies,
as a result of their observations, now arrived at the conclusion that
his discovery was incomplete, and that Jupiter had more than four
satellites in attendance upon him. Scheiner counted five, Rheita nine,
and other observers increased the number to twelve. But it was found to
be quite as hazardous to exceed the number stated by Galileo as it was
to deny the existence of any; for, when Jupiter had traversed a short
distance of his path among the fixed stars, the only bodies that
accompanied him were his four original attendants, which continued to
revolve round him with unerring regularity in every part of his orbit.

Galileo did not afford his opponents much time to oppose or controvert
with argument the discoveries made by him with the telescope before his
announcement of a new one attracted public attention from those already
known. He, however, exercised greater caution in disclosing the results
of his observations, as other persons laid claim to having made similar
discoveries prior to the time at which his were announced. He therefore
adopted a method in common use among astronomers in those days, by which
the letters in a sentence announcing a discovery were transposed so as
to form an anagram.

Galileo announced his next discovery in this manner, and which read as
follows:--

    Smaismrmilme poeta leumi bvne nugttaviras.

This, when deciphered, formed the sentence:--

    Altissimum planetam tergeminum observavi.

    I have observed that the remotest planet is triple.

Galileo perceived that Saturn presented a triform appearance, and that,
instead of one body, there were three, all in a straight line, and
apparently in contact with each other, the middle one being larger than
the two lateral ones. In a letter to Kepler he remarked: 'Now I have
discovered a Court for Jupiter, and two servants for this old man, who
aid his steps and never quit his side.' Kepler, who excelled as an
imaginative writer, replied: 'I will not make an old man of Saturn, nor
slaves of his attendant globes; but rather let this tricorporate form be
Geryon--so shall Galileo be Hercules, and the telescope his club, armed
with which he has conquered that distant planet, and dragged him from
the remotest depths of Nature, and exposed him to the view of all.'
Continuing his observations, Galileo perceived that the two lateral
objects gradually decreased in size, and at the expiration of two years
entirely disappeared, leaving the central globe visible only. He was
unable to assign any reason for this peculiar occurrence, which caused
him much perplexity, and he expresses himself thus: 'What is to be said
concerning so strange a metamorphosis? Are the two lesser stars consumed
after the manner of the solar spots? Have they vanished and suddenly
fled? Has Saturn, perhaps, devoured his own children? Or were the
appearances, indeed, illusion or fraud, with which the glasses have so
long deceived me, as well as many others to whom I have shown them? Now,
perhaps, is the time to revive the well-nigh withered hopes of those
who, guided by more profound contemplations, have discovered the fallacy
of the new observations, and demonstrated the utter impossibility of
their existence. I do not know what to say in a case so surprising, so
unlooked-for, and so novel. The shortness of the time, the unexpected
nature of the event, the weakness of my understanding, and the fear of
being mistaken, have greatly confounded me.' After a certain interval
those bodies reappeared; but Galileo's glass was not sufficiently
powerful to enable him to ascertain their nature nor solve the mystery,
which for upwards of half a century perplexed the ablest astronomers.

The elucidation of this inexplicable phenomenon was reserved for
Christian Huygens, who, with an improved telescope of his own
construction, was able to declare that Saturn's appendages were portions
of a ring which surrounds the planet, and is everywhere distinct from
its surface.

Galileo next directed his attention to the planet Venus, and as a result
of his observations was led to communicate to the public another
anagram:--

    Haec immatura a me jam frustra leguntur oy.

This, when rendered correctly, reads:--

    Cynthiae figuras aemulatur mater amorum.

    Venus rivals the appearances of the Moon.

The phases of Venus were one of the most interesting of Galileo's
discoveries with the telescope. When observed near inferior conjunction
the planet presents the appearance of a slender crescent, resembling
the Moon when a few days old. Travelling from this point to superior
conjunction, the illumined portion of her disc gradually increases,
until it becomes circular, like the full Moon. This changing appearance
of Venus afforded Galileo irresistible proof that the planet is an
opaque body, which derives its light from the Sun, and that it circles
round the orb--convincing evidence of the accuracy and truthfulness of
the Copernican theory.

It was in this manner that Galileo announced his discovery of the phases
of Venus, the peerless planet of our morning and evening skies, whose
slender crescent forms such a beautiful object in the telescope, and
who, as she traverses her orbit, exhibits all the varied changes of form
presented by the Moon in her monthly journey round the Earth. These
varying aspects of Venus were not unknown to Milton; and, indeed, he may
have been informed of them by Galileo in his conversation with him at
Arcetri; nor has he failed to introduce an allusion to this beautiful
phenomenon in his poem. In his description of the Creation, after the
Sun was formed, he adds:--

    Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
    Repairing, in their golden urns draw light,
    And hence the morning planet gilds her horns.--vii. 364-66.

Galileo also discovered that the planet Mars does not always present the
appearance of a circular disc. When near opposition the full disc of the
planet is visible, but at all other times it is gibbous, and approaches
nearest to that of a half-moon when at the quadratures.

In the year 1610, on directing his telescope to the Sun, Galileo
detected dark spots on the solar disc. Similar spots, sufficiently large
to be distinguished by the naked eye, had been observed from time to
time for centuries prior to the invention of the telescope, but nothing
was known of their nature. In 1609 Kepler observed a spot on the Sun,
which he thought was the planet Mercury in conjunction with the orb; the
short time during which it was visible, in consequence of clouds having
obscured the face of the luminary, prevented him from being able to
determine the accuracy of his surmise, but since then it has been
ascertained that no transit of Mercury took place at that time, and
Kepler afterwards acknowledged that he had arrived at an erroneous
conclusion. Galileo was much puzzled in trying to find out the true
nature of the spots. At first he was led to imagine that planets like
Mercury and Venus revolved round the Sun at a short distance from the
orb, and that their dark bodies, travelling across the solar disc, gave
rise to the phenomenon of the spots. After further observation, he
ascertained that the spots were in actual contact with the Sun; that
they were irregular in shape and size, and continued to appear and
disappear. Sometimes a large spot would break up into several smaller
ones, and at other times three or four small spots would unite to form a
large one. They all had a common motion, and appeared to rotate with
the Sun, from which Galileo concluded that the orb rotated on his axis
in about twenty-eight days. Galileo believed that the spots were clouds
floating in the solar atmosphere, and that they intercepted a portion of
the light of the Sun.

The Milky Way, that wondrous zone of light which encircles the heavens,
remained for many ages a source of perplexity to ancient astronomers and
philosophers, who, in their endeavours to ascertain its nature, had
arrived at various absurd and erroneous conclusions. On directing his
telescope to this luminous tract, Galileo discovered, to his
inexpressible admiration, that it consists of a vast multitude of stars,
too minute to be visible to the naked eye. He also discerned that its
milky luminosity is created by the blended light of myriads of stars, so
remote as to be incapable of definition by his telescope. In his
'Nuncius Sidereus' he gives an account of his observations of the Galaxy
and expresses his satisfaction that he has been enabled to terminate an
ancient controversy by demonstrating to the senses the stellar structure
of the Milky Way. When engaged in exploring the celestial regions with
his telescope, Galileo observed a marked difference in the appearance of
the fixed stars, as compared with that of the planets. Each of the
latter showed a rounded disc resembling that of a small moon, but the
stars exhibited no disc, and shone as vivid sparkling points of light;
all of them, whether of large or small magnitude, presenting the same
appearance in the telescope. This led him to conclude that the fixed
stars were not illumined by the Sun, because their brilliancy in all
their changes of position remained unaltered. But, in the case of the
planets, he found that their lustre varied according to their distance
from the Sun; consequently, he believed they were opaque bodies which
reflected the solar rays. On directing his telescope to the Pleiades,
which, to the naked eye, appear as a group of seven stars, he succeeded
in counting forty lucid points. The nebula Praesepe in Cancer, he was
also able to resolve into a cluster of stars. Galileo made many other
observations of the heavenly bodies with his telescope, all of which he
describes as having afforded him 'incredible delight.'

Shortly before the failure of his eyesight, Galileo discovered the
Moon's diurnal libration, a variation in the visible edges of the Moon
caused by its oscillatory motion, and the diurnal rotation of the Earth
on her axis.

Though Milton has not favoured us with any interesting details of his
interview with Galileo, nor expressed his opinions with regard to the
controversies which at that time agitated both the religious and
scientific worlds of thought, and which eventually culminated in a storm
of rancour and hatred that burst over the devoted head of the aged
astronomer, and brought him to his knees, yet he informs us that he
'found and visited' Galileo, whom he describes as 'grown old,' and
cynically remarks that he 'was held a prisoner of the Inquisition for
thinking in astronomy otherwise than the Franciscan and Dominican
licensers thought.' Milton does not allude to his blindness, and yet it
would be natural to imagine that, had his host suffered from this
affliction at the time of his visit, he would have referred to it. We
learn that Milton arrived in Italy in the spring of 1638. In 1637, the
affection which, in the preceding year, deprived Galileo of the use of
his right eye, attacked the left also, which began to grow dim, and in
the course of a few months became sightless; so that, although Milton
has not alluded to this calamity, Galileo had become totally blind at
the time of his visit.

How much Milton was impressed with the fame of Galileo and his telescope
becomes apparent on referring to his 'Paradise Lost.' In it he alludes
to the instrument upon three different occasions, twice when in the
hands of Galileo; and the remembrance of the same artist was doubtless
in his mind when he mentions the 'glazed optic tube' in another part of
his poem. The interval that elapsed from the date of Milton's visit to
Galileo in 1638, to the publication of 'Paradise Lost' in 1667, included
a period of about thirty years, yet this length of time did not erase
from Milton's memory his recollection of Galileo and of his pleasant
sojourn at Florence.

The first allusion in the poem to the Italian astronomer is in the lines
in which Milton describes the shield carried by Satan:--

                      The broad circumference
    Hung on his shoulders like the Moon, whose orb
    Through optic glass the Tuscan artist views
    At evening, from the top of Fesole,
    Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands,
    Rivers, or mountains, in her spotty globe.--i. 286-91.

Galileo is described as having observed the Moon from the heights of
Fesole, which formed part of the suburbs of Florence, or from Valdarno,
the valley of the Arno, in which the city is situated. The belief that
Galileo had discovered continents and seas on the Moon justified Milton
in imagining the existence of rivers and mountains on the lunar surface.
The expression 'spotty globe' is more descriptive of the appearance of
our satellite when observed with the telescope, than when seen with the
naked eye. Galileo's attention was attracted by the freckled aspect of
the Moon--a visual effect created by the number of extinct volcanoes
scattered over the surface of the orb.

In his next allusion to the telescope Milton associates Galileo's name
with the instrument:--

                      As when by night the glass
    Of Galileo, less assured, observes
    Imagined lands and regions in the Moon.--v. 261-63.

In these lines Milton describes with accuracy the extent of Galileo's
knowledge of our satellite. The conclusions which the Italian astronomer
arrived at with regard to its habitability were not supported by
telescopic evidence sufficient to justify such a belief. Galileo writes:
'Had its surface been absolutely smooth it would have been but a vast,
unblessed desert, void of animals, of plants, of cities and men; the
abode of silence and inaction--senseless, lifeless, soulless, and
stripped of all those ornaments which now render it so variable and so
beautiful:'--

    There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps
    Astronomer in the Sun's lucent orb
    Through his glazed optic tube yet never saw.--iii. 588-90.

Milton may have remembered that Galileo was the first astronomer who
directed a telescope to the Sun; and that he discovered the dark spots
frequently seen on the solar disc.

Anyone who has read a history of the life of Galileo, and contemplated
the career of this remarkable man, his ardent struggles in the cause of
freedom and philosophic truth, his victories and reverses, his brilliant
astronomical discoveries, and his investigation of the laws of motion,
and other natural phenomena, will arrive at the conclusion that he
merited the distinction conferred upon him by our great English poet,
when he included him among the renowned few whose names are found in the
pages of 'Paradise Lost.'




CHAPTER V

THE SEASONS


The great path of the Sun among the constellations as seen from the
Earth is called the Ecliptic. It is divided into 360 deg., and again into
twelve equal parts of 30 deg., called Signs. As one half of the ecliptic is
north, and the other half south, of the equator, the line of
intersection of their planes is at two points which are known as the
equinoctial points, because, when the Sun on his upward and downward
journey arrives at either of them the days and nights are of equal
length all over the world. The equinoctial points are not stationary,
but have a westerly motion of 50'' annually along the ecliptic; at this
rate they will require a period of 25,868 years to complete an entire
circuit of the heavens.

Milton alludes to the ecliptic when he mentions the arrival of Satan
upon the Earth:--

    Down from the ecliptic, sped with hoped success,
    Throws his steep flight in many an airy wheel,
    Nor staid till on Niphates top he lights.--iii. 740-42.

Extending for 9 deg. on each side of the ecliptic is a zone or belt called
the Zodiac, the mesial line of which is occupied by the Sun, and within
this space the principal planets perform their annual revolutions. It
was for long believed that the paths of all the planets lay within the
zodiac, but on the discovery of the minor planets, Ceres, Pallas, and
Juno, it was ascertained that they travelled beyond this zone. The stars
