Project Gutenberg's The Eagle of the Empire, by Cyrus Townsend Brady

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Eagle of the Empire
       A Story of Waterloo

Author: Cyrus Townsend Brady

Release Date: February 4, 2007 [EBook #20515]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EAGLE OF THE EMPIRE ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: The Little Countess takes Arms for Her Defence.]






THE EAGLE OF THE EMPIRE

A STORY OF WATERLOO


By CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY



AUTHOR OF

  "The Island of Regeneration," "The Island of the Stairs,"
  "Britton of the Seventh," Etc.



With Frontispiece

By THE KINNEYS



A. L. BURT COMPANY

Publishers

New York

Published by Arrangements with GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




Copyright, 1915,

By GEORGE H. DORAN COMPANY




DEDICATION

Dedications have gone out of vogue save with the old fashioned.  The
ancient idea of an appeal to a patron has been eliminated from modern
literature.  If a man now inscribes a book to any one it is that he may
associate with his work the names of friends he loves and delights to
honor.  There is always a certain amount of assurance in any such
dedication, the assurance lying in the assumption that there is honor
to the recipient in the association with the book.  Well, there is no
mistaking the purpose anyway.

One of my best friends, and that friendship has been proved in war and
peace, at home and abroad, is a Bank!  The Bank is like Mercy in more
ways than one, but particularly in that it is twice blessed; it is
blessed in what it receives, I hope, and in what it gives, I know.
From the standpoint of the depositor sometimes it is better to receive
than to give.  It has been so in my case and I have been able to
persuade the Bank to that way of thinking.

Therefore, in grateful acknowledgment of the very present help it has
been to me in time of need and in public recognition of many courtesies
from its officers and directors, and as some evidence of my deep
appreciation of its many kindnesses to me, I dedicate this book to

THE MOUNT VERNON TRUST COMPANY

of

MOUNT VERNON, NEW YORK




PREFACE

The Battle of Waterloo, which was fought just one hundred years ago and
with which the story in this book ends, is popularly regarded as one of
the decisive battles of the world, particularly with reference to the
career of the greatest of all Captains.  Personally some study has led
me to believe that Bautzen was really the decisive battle of the
Napoleonic wars.  If the Emperor had there won the overwhelming victory
to which his combinations and the fortunes of war entitled him he would
still have retained his Empire.  Whether he would have been satisfied
or not is another question; and anyway as I am practically alone among
students and critics in my opinions about Bautzen they can be
dismissed.  And that he lost that battle was his own fault anyway!

However Napoleon's genius cannot be denied any more than his failure.
In this book I have sought to show him at his best and also almost at
his worst.  For sheer brilliance, military and mental, the campaigning
in France in 1814 could not be surpassed.  He is there with his raw
recruits, his beardless boys, his old guard, his tactical and
strategical ability, his furious energy, his headlong celerity and his
marvelous power of inspiration; just as he was in Italy when he
revolutionized the art of war and electrified the world.  Many of these
qualities are in evidence in the days before Waterloo, but during the
actual battle upon which his fate and the fate of the world turned, the
tired, broken, ill man is drowsily nodding before a farmhouse by the
road, while Ney, whose superb and headlong courage was not accompanied
by any corresponding military ability, wrecks the last grand army.

And there is no more dramatic an incident in all history, I believe,
than Napoleon's advance on the Fifth-of-the-line drawn up on the
Grenoble Road on the return from Elba.

Nor do the Roman Eagles themselves seem to have made such romantic
appeal or to have won such undying devotion as the Eagles of the Empire.

This story was written just before the outbreak of the present European
war and is published while it is in full course.  Modern commanders
wield forces beside which even the great Army of the Nations that
invaded Russia is scarcely more than a detachment, and battles last for
days, weeks, even months--Waterloo was decided in an afternoon!--yet
war is the same.  If there be any difference it simply grows more
horrible.  The old principles, however, are unchanged, and over the
fields upon which Napoleon marched and fought, armies are marching and
fighting in practically the same way to-day.  And great Captains are
still studying Frederick, Wellington and Bonaparte as they have ever
done.

The author modestly hopes that this book may not only entertain by the
love story, the tragic yet happily ended romance within its pages--for
there is romance here aside from the great Captain and his
exploits--but that in a small way it may serve to set forth not so much
the brilliance and splendor and glory of war as the horror of it.

We are frightfully fascinated by war, even the most peaceable and
peace-loving of us.  May this story help to convey to the reader some
of the other side of it; the hunger, the cold, the weariness, the
suffering, the disaster, the despair of the soldier; as well as the
love and the joy and the final happiness of the beautiful Laure and the
brave Marteau to say nothing of redoubtable old Bal-Arret, the
Bullet-Stopper--whose fates were determined on the battlefield amid the
clash of arms.

CYRUS TOWNSEND BRADY.

  THE HEMLOCKS,
  EDGECLIFF TERRACE, PARK-HILL-ON-HUDSON.
  YONKERS, N. Y.

EPIPHANY-TIDE, 1915.




CONTENTS


         PROLOGUE
           VIVE L'EMPEREUR


         BOOK I: THE EMPEROR AT BAY

Chapter

      I.  BEARERS OF EVIL TIDINGS
     II.  THE EMPEROR DREAMS
    III.  THE ARMY MARCHES AWAY
     IV.  MARTEAU AND BAL-ARRET RIDE
      V.  WHEN THE COSSACKS PASSED
     VI.  MARTEAU BARGAINS FOR THE WOMAN
    VII.  A RESCUE AND A SIEGE
   VIII.  A TRIAL OR ALLEGIANCE
     IX.  THE EMPEROR EATS AND RIDES
      X.  HOW MARTEAU WON THE CROSS
     XI.  AN EMPEROR AND A GENTLEMAN
    XII.  AN ALLIANCE DECLINED
   XIII.  THE THUNDERBOLT STROKE
    XIV.  THE HAMMER OF THE WAR GOD


          BOOK II: THE EAGLE'S FLIGHT

     XV.  THE BRIDGE AT ARCIS
    XVI.  THE GATE IN THE WALL
   XVII.  A VETERAN OF THE ARMY OF ITALY
  XVIII.  ALMOST A GENTLEMAN
    XIX.  THE GREAT HONOR ROLL
     XX.  WHEN THE VIOLETS BLOOM AGAIN
    XXI.  LIKE A THIEF IN THE NIGHT
   XXII.  IN THE COUNTESS LAURE'S BED-CHAMBER
  XXIII.  THE MARQUIS GRANTS AN INTERVIEW
   XXIV.  ON THE WHOLE DEATH MAY BE BETTER THAN LIFE
    XXV.  NOT EVEN LOVE CAN FIND A WAY
   XXVI.  THEY MEET A LION IN THE WAY
  XXVII.  COMRADE!  GENERAL!  EMPEROR!


          BOOK III: THE LAST TRY

 XXVIII.  AT THE STAMP OF THE EMPEROR'S FOOT
   XXIX.  WATERLOO--THE FINAL REVIEW
    XXX.  WATERLOO--THE CHARGE OF D'ERLON
   XXXI.  WATERLOO--THE LAST OF THE GUARD
  XXXII.  AT LAST THE EAGLE AND THE WOMAN




PROLOGUE

VIVE L'EMPEREUR

The weatherworn Chateau d'Aumenier stands in the midst of a noble park
of trees forming part of an extensive domain not far to the northwest
of the little town of Sezanne, in the once famous county of Champagne,
in France.  The principal room of the castle is a great hall in the
oldest part of the venerable pile which dates back for eight hundred
years, or to the tenth century and the times of the famous Count Eudes
himself, for whom it was held by one of his greatest vassals.

The vast apartment is filled with rare and interesting mementos of its
distinguished owners, including spoils of war and trophies of the
chase, acquired in one way or another in the long course of their
history, and bespeaking the courage, the power, the ruthlessness, and,
sometimes, the unscrupulousness of the hard-hearted, heavy-handed line.
Every country in Europe and every age, apparently, has been levied upon
to adorn this great hall, with its long mullioned windows, its enormous
fireplace, its huge carved stone mantel, its dark oak paneled walls and
beamed ceiling.  But, the most interesting, the most precious of all
the wonderful things therein has a place of honor to itself at the end
farthest from the main entrance.

Fixed against this wall is a broken staff, or pole, surmounted by a
small metallic figure.  The staff is fastened to the wall by clamps of
tempered steel which are further secured by delicate locks of skillful
and intricate workmanship.  The pole is topped by the gilded effigy of
an eagle.

In dimensions the eagle is eight inches high, from head to feet, and
nine and a half inches wide, from wing tip to wing tip.  Heraldically,
"_Un Aigle Eploye_" it would be called.  That is, an eagle in the act
of taking flight--in the vernacular, a "spread eagle."  The eagle looks
to the left, with its wings half expanded.  In its talons it grasps a
thunderbolt, as in the old Roman standard.  Those who have ever
wandered into the Monastery of the Certosa, at Milan, have seen just
such an eagle on one of the tombs of the great Visconti family.  For,
in truth, this emblem has been modeled after that one.

Below the thunderbolt is a tablet of brass, three inches square, on
which is a raised number.  In this instance, the number is five.  The
copper of which the eagle is molded was originally gilded, but in its
present battered condition much of the gilt has been worn off, or shot
off, and the original material is plainly discernible.  If it could be
lifted its weight would be found to be about three and a half pounds.

Around the neck of the eagle hangs a wreath of pure gold.  There is an
inscription on the back of it, which says that the wreath was presented
to the regiment by the loyal city of Paris after the wonderful Ulm
campaign.

One of the claws of the eagle has been shot away.  The gold laurel
wreath has also been struck by a bullet, and some of its leaves are
gone.  The tip of one wing is missing.  The head of the eagle,
originally proudly and defiantly erect, has been bent backward so that,
instead of a level glance, it looks upward, and there is a deep dent in
it, as from a blow.  And right in the breast gapes a great ragged
shot-hole, which pierces the heart of the proud emblem.  The eagle has
seen service.  It has been in action.  It bears its honorable wounds.
No attempt has been made to repair it.

The staff on which the eagle stands has been broken at about half its
length, presumably by a bullet.  The shattered, splintered end
indicates that the staff is made of oak.  It had been painted blue
originally.  The freshness of the paint has been marred.  On one side,
a huge slice has been cut out of it as if by a mighty sword stroke.
The tough wood is gashed and scarred in various places, and there is a
long, dark blur just above the broken part, which looks as if it might
be a blood stain.

Below the eagle, and attached to the remainder of the staff for about
three-fourths of its length, is what remains of a battle flag.  The
material of it was originally rich and heavy crimson silk, bordered
with gold fringe.  It is faded, tattered, shot-torn, bullet-ridden,
wind-whipped; parts of it have disappeared.  It has been carefully
mounted, and is stretched out so as to present its face to the
beholder.  In dull, defaced letters of gold may be read
inscriptions--the imagination piecing out the missing parts.  Here is a
line that runs as follows:

  _Napoleon, Empereur des Francais, au 5e Infanterie
    de la Ligne._


And underneath, in smaller and brighter letters, as if a later addition:

  _Grenadiers du Garde Imperiale._


There has been some sort of device in the middle, but most of it has
disappeared.  From what remains, one guesses that it was a facsimile of
the eagle on the staff-head.  There are little tarnished spots of gold
here and there.  A close observation discloses that they are golden
bees.  In the corners near the staff, the only ones that are left are
golden wreaths in the center of which may be seen the letter "N".

On the other side of the flag, hidden from the beholder, are a series
of names.  They have been transcribed upon a silver plate, which is
affixed to the wall below the broken staff.  They read as follows:

"Marengo; Ulm; Austerlitz; Jena; Berlin; Eylau; Friedland; Madrid;
Eckmuhl; Wagram; Vienna; Smolensk; Moskowa; Bautzen; Leipsic;
Montmirail; Arcis."

Beneath this list is a heavy dash and below all in larger letters,
which unlike the rest have been filled with black enamel, is the last
word,

