The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Politeness of Princes, by P. G. Wodehouse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Politeness of Princes
       And Other School Stories

Author: P. G. Wodehouse

Posting Date: August 27, 2012 [EBook #8178]
Release Date: May, 2005
First Posted: June 26, 2003

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE POLITENESS OF PRINCES ***




Produced by Suzanne L. Shell, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team










THE POLITENESS OF PRINCES
and Other School Stories



By
P. G. Wodehouse




[Transcriber's note: This selection of early Wodehouse stories was
assembled for Project Gutenberg. The original publication date of
each story is listed in square brackets in the Table of Contents.]




CONTENTS


THE POLITENESS OF PRINCES [1905]

SHIELDS' AND THE CRICKET CUP [1905]

AN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIR [1905]

THE GUARDIAN [1908]

A CORNER IN LINES [1905]

THE AUTOGRAPH HUNTERS [1905]

PILLINGSHOT, DETECTIVE [1910]




THE POLITENESS OF PRINCES


The painful case of G. Montgomery Chapple, bachelor, of Seymour's
house, Wrykyn. Let us examine and ponder over it.

It has been well said that this is the age of the specialist.
Everybody, if they wish to leave the world a better and happier place
for their stay in it, should endeavour to adopt some speciality and
make it their own. Chapple's speciality was being late for breakfast.
He was late not once or twice, but every day. Sometimes he would
scramble in about the time of the second cup of coffee, buttoning his
waistcoat as he sidled to his place. Generally he would arrive just as
the rest of the house were filing out; when, having lurked hidden
until Mr. Seymour was out of the way, he would enter into private
treaty with Herbert, the factotum, who had influence with the cook,
for Something Hot and maybe a fresh brew of coffee. For there was
nothing of the amateur late-breakfaster about Chapple. Your amateur
slinks in with blushes deepening the naturally healthy hue of his
face, and, bolting a piece of dry bread and gulping down a cup of cold
coffee, dashes out again, filled more with good resolutions for the
future than with food. Not so Chapple. He liked his meals. He wanted a
good deal here below, and wanted it hot and fresh. Conscience had but
a poor time when it tried to bully Chapple. He had it weak in the
first round.

But there was one more powerful than Conscience--Mr. Seymour. He had
marked the constant lateness of our hero, and disapproved of it.

Thus it happened that Chapple, having finished an excellent breakfast
one morning some twenty minutes after everybody else, was informed as
he sat in the junior day-room trying, with the help of an illustrated
article in a boys' paper, to construct a handy model steam-engine out
of a reel of cotton and an old note-book--for his was in many ways a
giant brain--that Mr. Seymour would like to have a friendly chat with
him in his study. Laying aside his handy model steam-engine, he went
off to the housemaster's study.

"You were late for breakfast to-day," said Mr. Seymour, in the horrid,
abrupt way housemasters have.

"Why, yes, sir," said Chapple, pleasantly.

"And the day before."

"Yes, sir."

"And the day before that."

Chapple did not deny it. He stood on one foot and smiled a
propitiating smile. So far Mr. Seymour was entitled to demand a cigar
or cocoanut every time.

The housemaster walked to the window, looked out, returned to the
mantelpiece, and shifted the position of a china vase two and a
quarter inches to the left. Chapple, by way of spirited repartee,
stood on the other leg and curled the disengaged foot round his ankle.
The conversation was getting quite intellectual.

"You will write out----"

"Sir, please, sir----" interrupted Chapple in an "I-represent-the
defendant-m'lud" tone of voice.

"Well?"

"It's awfully hard to hear the bell from where I sleep, sir."

Owing to the increased numbers of the house this term Chapple had been
removed from his dormitory proper to a small room some distance away.

"Nonsense. The bell can be heard perfectly well all over the house."

There was reason in what he said. Herbert, who woke the house of a
morning, did so by ringing a bell. It was a big bell, and he enjoyed
ringing it. Few sleepers, however sound, could dream on peacefully
through Herbert's morning solo. After five seconds of it they would
turn over uneasily. After seven they would sit up. At the end of the
first quarter of a minute they would be out of bed, and you would be
wondering where they picked up such expressions.

Chapple murmured wordlessly in reply. He realised that his defence was
a thin one. Mr. Seymour followed up his advantage.

"You will write a hundred lines of Vergil," he said, "and if you are
late again to-morrow I shall double them."

Chapple retired.

This, he felt, was a crisis. He had been pursuing his career of
unpunctuality so long that he had never quite realised that a time
might come when the authorities would drop on him. For a moment he
felt that it was impossible, that he could not meet Mr. Seymour's
wishes in the matter; but the bull-dog pluck of the true Englishman
caused him to reconsider this. He would at least have a dash at it.

"I'll tell you what to do," said his friend, Brodie, when consulted on
the point over a quiet pot of tea that afternoon. "You ought to sleep
without so many things on the bed. How many blankets do you use, for
instance?"

"I don't know," said Chapple. "As many as they shove on."

It had never occurred to him to reckon up the amount of his bedclothes
before retiring to rest.

"Well, you take my tip," said Brodie, "and only sleep with one on.
Then the cold'll wake you in the morning, and you'll get up because
it'll be more comfortable than staying in bed."

This scientific plan might have worked. In fact, to a certain extent
it did work. It woke Chapple in the morning, as Brodie had predicted;
but it woke him at the wrong hour. It is no good springing out of bed
when there are still three hours to breakfast. When Chapple woke at
five the next morning, after a series of dreams, the scenes of which
were laid mainly in the Arctic regions, he first sneezed, then he
piled upon the bed everything he could find, including his boots, and
then went to sleep again. The genial warmth oozed through his form, and
continued to ooze until he woke once more, this time at eight-fifteen.
Breakfast being at eight, it occurred to him that his position with
Mr. Seymour was not improved. While he was devoting a few moments'
profound meditation to this point the genial warmth got in its fell
work once again. When he next woke, the bell was ringing for school.
He lowered the world's record for rapid dressing, and was just in time
to accompany the tail of the procession into the form-room.

"You were late again this morning," said Mr. Seymour, after dinner.

"Yes, sir. I overslebbed myselb, sir," replied Chapple, who was
suffering from a cold in the head.

"Two hundred lines."

"Yes, sir."

Things had now become serious. It was no good going to Brodie again
for counsel. Brodie had done for himself, proved himself a fraud, an
idiot. In fine, a rotter. He must try somebody else. Happy thought.
Spenlow. It was a cold day, when Spenlow got left behind. He would
know what to do. _There_ was a chap for you, if you liked! Young,
mind you, but what a brain! Colossal!

"What _I_ should do," said Spenlow, "is this. I should put my
watch on half an hour."

"What 'ud be the good of that?"

"Why, don't you see? You'd wake up and find it was ten to eight, say,
by your watch, so you'd shove on the pace dressing, and nip
downstairs, and then find that you'd really got tons of time. What
price that?"

"But I should remember I'd put my watch on," objected Chapple.

"Oh, no, probably not. You'd be half asleep, and you'd shoot out of
bed before you remembered, and that's all you'd want. It's the getting
out of bed that's so difficult. If you were once out, you wouldn't
want to get back again."

"Oh, shouldn't I?" said Chapple.

"Well, you might want to, but you'd have the sense not to do it."

"It's not a bad idea," said Chapple. "Thanks."

That night he took his Waterbury, prised open the face with a
pocket-knife as if he were opening an oyster, put the minute hand
on exactly half an hour, and retired to bed satisfied. There was
going to be no nonsense about it this time.

I am sorry to disappoint the reader, but facts are facts, and I must
not tamper with them. It is, therefore, my duty to state, however
reluctantly, that Chapple was not in time for breakfast on the
following morning. He woke at seven o'clock, when the hands of
the watch pointed to seven-thirty. Primed with virtuous resolutions,
he was just about to leap from his couch, when his memory began to
work, and he recollected that he had still an hour. Punctuality, he
felt, was an excellent thing, a noble virtue, in fact, but it was no
good overdoing it. He could give himself at least another half hour.
So he dozed off. He woke again with something of a start. He seemed
to feel that he had been asleep for a considerable time. But no. A
glance at the watch showed the hands pointing to twenty-five to eight.
Twenty-five minutes more. He had a good long doze this time. Then,
feeling that now he really must be getting up, he looked once more
at the watch, and rubbed his eyes. It was still twenty-five to eight.

The fact was that, in the exhilaration of putting the hands on, he had
forgotten that other and even more important operation, winding up.
The watch had stopped.

There are few more disturbing sensations than that of suddenly
discovering that one has no means of telling the time. This is
especially so when one has to be in a certain place by a certain hour.
It gives the discoverer a weird, lost feeling, as if he had stopped
dead while all the rest of the world had moved on at the usual rate.
It is a sensation not unlike that of the man who arrives on the
platform of a railway station just in time to see the tail-end of his
train disappear.

Until that morning the world's record for dressing (set up the day
before) had been five minutes, twenty-three and a fifth seconds. He
lowered this by two seconds, and went downstairs.

The house was empty. In the passage that led to the dining-room he
looked at the clock, and his heart turned a somersault. _It was five
minutes past nine._ Not only was he late for breakfast, but late
for school, too. Never before had he brought off the double event.

There was a little unpleasantness in his form room when he stole in at
seven minutes past the hour. Mr. Dexter, his form-master, never a
jolly sort of man to have dealings with, was rather bitter on the
subject.

"You are incorrigibly lazy and unpunctual," said Mr. Dexter, towards
the end of the address. "You will do me a hundred lines."

"Oo-o-o, sir-r," said Chapple. But he felt at the time that it was not
much of a repartee. After dinner there was the usual interview with
Mr. Seymour.

"You were late again this morning," he said.

"Yes, sir," said Chapple.

"Two hundred lines."

"Yes, sir."

The thing was becoming monotonous.

Chapple pulled himself together. This must stop. He had said that
several times previously, but now he meant it. Nor poppy, nor
mandragora, nor all the drowsy syrups of the world should make him
oversleep himself again. This time he would try a combination of
schemes.

Before he went to bed that night he put his watch on half an hour,
wound it up, and placed it on a chair at his bedside. Then he seized
his rug and all the blankets except one, and tore them off. Then he
piled them in an untidy heap in the most distant corner of the room.
He meant to put temptation out of his reach. There should be no genial
warmth on this occasion.

Nor was there. He woke at six feeling as if he were one solid chunk of
ice. He put up with it in a torpid sort of way till seven. Then he
could stand it no longer. It would not be pleasant getting up and
going downstairs to the cheerless junior day-room, but it was the only
thing to do. He knew that if he once wrapped himself in the blankets
which stared at him invitingly from the opposite corner of the room,
he was lost. So he crawled out of bed, shivering, washed
unenthusiastically, and he proceeded to put on his clothes.

Downstairs it was more unpleasant than one would have believed
possible. The day-room was in its usual state of disorder. The fire
was not lit. There was a vague smell of apples. Life was very, very
grey. There seemed no brightness in it at all.

He sat down at the table and began once more the task of constructing
a handy model steam-engine, but he speedily realised, what he had
suspected before, that the instructions were the work of a dangerous
madman. What was the good of going on living when gibbering lunatics
were allowed to write for weekly papers?

About this time his gloom was deepened by the discovery that a tin
labelled mixed biscuits, which he had noticed in Brodie's locker, was
empty.

He thought he would go for a stroll. It would be beastly, of course,
but not so beastly as sitting in the junior day-room.

It is just here that the tragedy begins to deepen.

Passing out of Seymour's gate he met Brooke, of Appleby's. Brooke wore
an earnest, thoughtful expression.

"Hullo, Brooke," said Chapple, "where are you off to?"

It seemed that Brooke was off to the carpenter's shop. Hence the
earnest, thoughtful expression. His mind was wrestling with certain
pieces of wood which he proposed to fashion into photograph frames.
There was always a steady demand in the school for photograph frames,
and the gifted were in the habit of turning here and there an honest
penny by means of them.

The artist soul is not always unfavourable to a gallery. Brooke said
he didn't mind if Chapple came along, only he wasn't to go rotting
about or anything. So Chapple went along.

Arrived at the carpenter's shop, Brooke was soon absorbed in his
labours. Chapple watched him for a time with the interest of a
brother-worker, for had he not tried to construct handy model
steam-engines in his day? Indeed, yes. After a while, however, the
_role_ of spectator began to pall. He wanted to _do_ something.
Wandering round the room he found a chisel, and upon the instant,
in direct contravention of the treaty respecting rotting, he sat down
and started carving his name on a smooth deal board which looked
as if nobody wanted it. The pair worked on in silence, broken only
by an occasional hard breath as the toil grew exciting. Chapple's
tongue was out and performing mystic evolutions as he carved the
letters. He felt inspired.

He was beginning the A when he was brought to earth again by the voice
of Brooke.

