He not only cared for the souls of His people, but for their physical
comfort as well; for His heart was ever open to the cry of human need.

One of the first acts by which He manifested His power to the men who
afterwards became His disciples, was an act of helpfulness.

He saw two ships by the Lake of Gennesaret with the fishermen near by
washing their nets, and going aboard one of the ships, which belonged to
Simon Peter, He asked him to put out a little way from land; then, when
His request had been complied with, He taught the people from the ship.

After He had finished His teaching, He said to Simon, "Launch out into
the deep and let down your nets for a draught." Simon told Him that they
had worked all night and had caught no fish, but that they would do as
He bade them.

And when they had done so, the net was filled so that it broke, and they
had to call to their partners in the other ship to come and help them;
and both ships were filled. Then Peter and James and John left all to
follow Jesus.




JESUS CALMS THE TEMPEST.


At one time when Jesus had entered a ship to cross the Sea of Galilee
with His disciples, a great storm arose and the waves nearly covered the
little vessel, so that they were apparently in great danger.

The disciples were frightened, but Jesus was asleep and the storm did
not disturb Him. As it grew worse and worse and the disciples became
more than ever afraid, they went back to where Jesus lay and wakened
Him, crying out, "Master, dost Thou not care that we perish?"

When they said this, Jesus arose and spoke to the winds and the sea,
saying, "Peace, be still!" Then at once the wind went down and the sea
became calm, and the hearts of the men were filled with wonder and still
greater faith and awe, while they said to one another, "What manner of
man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey Him?" They had not yet
learned that Jesus had power over all things whenever He chose to
exercise it.

At another time when the disciples had crossed the Sea of Galilee,
expecting that Jesus would join them upon the other side, a storm came
up, suddenly as before, and the waters were quickly piled up in great
waves; for the lake was narrow and deep, and the storms usually burst in
full fury with little warning, doing much harm before there was a chance
to escape. At this time the disciples had hard work to row the boat
against the wind, and it was tossed about here and there by the waves in
the middle of the sea until, toward morning, Jesus went out toward it,
walking upon the water.

When the disciples saw Him coming they thought it was a spirit and
were frightened: but He spoke to them, saying, "Be of good cheer; it is
I, be not afraid."

[Illustration: JESUS WALKING UPON THE WATERS.]

Then Peter said: "Lord, if it be Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the
water."

Jesus said, "Come," and Peter stepped out upon the water and started
toward the Master; but his faith was not strong enough, and as he began
to sink he cried, "Lord, save me!"

Jesus stretched out His hand and held him up. "O thou of little faith,"
He said, "wherefore didst thou doubt?"

When Jesus came into the boat the storm ceased, and soon they reached
the shore. Then the disciples worshiped Him and said, "Of a truth Thou
art the Son of God."




RUTH AND NAOMI.


The story of Ruth and Naomi is one of the sweetest and most touching of
all the Bible stories. It shows the beauty of unselfish devotion and
constant love, and the happiness which they brought, and teaches a
lesson which is very helpful to us all.

A long time ago, in the days of the judges of Israel, there was a famine
in the land of Canaan, and a man named Elimelech, whose home was in
Bethlehem, went with his wife Naomi and his two sons to live in Moab.

After they had been there a while Naomi's husband died, leaving her with
the two sons. Then, by and by, the sons married, and their wives were
very good to Naomi, and loved her. But it was only ten years before both
of the sons died, and Naomi thought it was best for her to go back to
her old home in Canaan; for she had been told that there was plenty in
the land once more, and she wanted to see her own people and the
relatives of her husband who was dead. So Naomi told her
daughters-in-law to return to their own homes, because she could not
expect them to be willing to leave everything for her sake.

"Go, each of you, to your mother's house," she said; "the Lord deal
kindly with you as ye have dealt with the dead and with me." But they
both wept and clung to her, saying, "Surely we will return with thee
into thy land."

Naomi, however, thought they would be unhappy if they left their own
country, and she urged them to stay there and let her go alone; so one
of them kissed her over and over again and promised to do as she bade;
but the other, who was named Ruth, would not leave her.

"Entreat me not to leave thee," she pleaded, "or to return from
following after thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou
lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God;
where thou diest I will die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so
to me and more, also, if aught but death part thee and me."

Then Naomi stopped urging her to return, and they went together to
Bethlehem, where the friends of Naomi were very glad to welcome her and
greeted her in a very friendly manner, saying again and again, "Is this
Naomi?"

[Illustration: THE ASCENSION INTO HEAVEN.]
