The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Ontario Readers: Fourth Book, by Various


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Ontario Readers: Fourth Book


Author: Various



Release Date: June 27, 2006  [eBook #18702]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ONTARIO READERS: FOURTH BOOK***


E-text prepared by Suzanne Lybarger, Paul Ereaut, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from
page images generously made available by Internet Archive/Canadian
Libraries (http://www.archive.org/details/toronto)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 18702-h.htm or 18702-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/7/0/18702/18702-h/18702-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/8/7/0/18702/18702-h.zip)

      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/OSIEontarioreadersfourth00miniuoft





THE ONTARIO READERS

FOURTH BOOK

AUTHORIZED BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION







Entered, according to Act of the Parliament of Canada, in the year 1909,
in the office of the Minister of Agriculture by the Minister of
Education for Ontario

Toronto:
The T. EATON Co Limited
'14-1




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


The Minister of Education is indebted to Goldwin Smith, Rudyard Kipling,
Henry Newbolt, The Earl of Dunraven, Sir W. F. Butler, Frank T. Bullen,
Charles G. D. Roberts, W. Wilfred Campbell, Frederick George Scott,
Agnes Maule Machar, Agnes C. Laut, Marjorie L. C. Pickthall, and S. T.
Wood, for special permission to reproduce, in this Reader, selections
from their writings.

He is indebted to Lord Tennyson for special permission to reproduce the
poems from the works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson; to Lloyd Osbourne for
permission to reproduce the extract from Robert Louis Stevenson's
"Kidnapped"; and to C. Egerton Ryerson for permission to reproduce the
extract from Egerton Ryerson's "The Loyalists of America and their
Times."

He is also indebted to Macmillan & Co., Limited, for special permission
to reproduce selected poems from the works of Alfred, Lord Tennyson,
Rudyard Kipling, Sir F. H. Doyle, Cecil Frances Alexander; to Longmans,
Green & Co., for the selections from Froude's "Short Studies on Great
Subjects" and from his "History of England"; to Smith, Elder & Co., for
the extract from F. T. Bullen's "The Cruise of the Cachalot"; to Elkin
Mathews for Henry Newbolt's poem from "The Island Race"; to Thomas
Nelson & Sons for the extract from W. F. Collier's "History of the
British Empire"; to The Copp Clark Co., Limited, for selected poems from
the works of Charles G. D. Roberts, and of Agnes Maule Machar; to the
Hunter-Rose Company for the extract from Canniff Haight's "Country Life
in Canada"; to Morang & Company for selected poems from the works of
Archibald Lampman, and for the extract from Roberts' "History of
Canada"; and to Houghton Mifflin Company for the article from "_The
Atlantic Monthly_" on "British Colonial and Naval Power."

The Minister is grateful to these authors and publishers and to others,
not mentioned here, through whose courtesy he has been able to include
in this Reader so many copyright selections.

Toronto, May, 1909.




  CONTENTS


  _The Children's Song_                   _Rudyard Kipling_
  _Our Country_                           _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
  Tom Tulliver at School                  _George Eliot_
  _Ingratitude_                           _William Shakespeare_
  _The Giant_                             _Charles Mackay_
  The Discovery of America                _William Robertson_
  _The First Spring Day_                  _Christina G. Rossetti_
  The Battle of the Pipes                 _Robert Louis Stevenson_
  _Bega_                                  _Marjorie L. C. Pickthall_
  _A Musical Instrument_                  _Elizabeth Barrett Browning_
  Wolfe and Montcalm                      _Francis Parkman_
  _Canada_                                _Charles G. D. Roberts_
  Scrooge's Christmas                     _Charles Dickens_
  _Hands All Round_                       _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
  Judah's Supplication to Joseph          _Bible_
  _Miriam's Song_                         _Thomas Moore_
  _The Destruction of Sennacherib_        _George Gordon, Lord Byron_
  The Lark at the Diggings                _Charles Reade_
  _The Ancient Mariner_                   _Samuel Taylor Coleridge_
  At the Close of the French Period
  in Canada                               _Charles G. D. Roberts_
  _A Hymn of Empire_                      _Frederick George Scott_
  Story of Absalom                        _Bible_
  _The Burial of Moses_                   _Cecil Frances Alexander_
  The Crusader and the Saracen            _Sir Walter Scott_
  _Mercy_                                 _William Shakespeare_
  _From "An August Reverie"_              _William Wilfred Campbell_
  Work and Wages                          _John Ruskin_
  _Untrodden Ways_                        _Agnes Maule Machar_
  _The First Ploughing_                   _Charles G. D. Roberts_
  The Archery Contest                     _Sir Walter Scott_
  _In November_                           _Archibald Lampman_
  _Autumn Woods_                          _William Cullen Bryant_
  In a Canoe                              _Lord Dunraven_
  _Afton Water_                           _Robert Burns_
  David Copperfield's First
    Journey Alone                         _Charles Dickens_
  _The Barefoot Boy_                      _John G. Whittier_
  Country Life in Canada in
    the "Thirties"                        _Canniff Haight_
  _Heat_                                  _Archibald Lampman_
  The Two Paths                           _Bible_
  _Bernardo del Carpio_                   _Felicia Hemans_
  Moses' Bargains                         _Oliver Goldsmith_
  _The Maple_                             _Charles G. D. Roberts_
  _The Greenwood Tree_                    _William Shakespeare_
  Lake Superior                           _Major W. F. Butler_
  The Red River Plain                     _Major W. F. Butler_
  _The Unnamed Lake_                      _Frederick George Scott_
  Life in Norman England                  _William F. Collier_
  _Ye Mariners of England_                _Thomas Campbell_
  Instruction                             _Bible_
  _Home Thoughts From Abroad_             _Robert Browning_
  _The Bells of Shandon_                  _Francis Mahony_
  The Vision of Mirzah                    _Joseph Addison_
  _Forbearance_                           _Ralph Waldo Emerson_
  _Mercy to Animals_                      _William Cowper_
  The United Empire Loyalists             _Egerton Ryerson_
  _Oft, in the Stilly Night_              _Thomas Moore_
  _The Harp That Once Through
    Tara's Halls_                         _Thomas Moore_
  Hudson Strait                           _Agnes C. Laut_
  _Scots, Wha Hae_                        _Robert Burns_
  St. Ambrose Crew Win Their
    First Race                            _Thomas Hughes_
  _Hunting Song_                          _Sir Walter Scott_
  _Border Ballad_                         _Sir Walter Scott_
  The Great Northern Diver                _Samuel T. Wood_
  _To the Cuckoo_                         _William Wordsworth_
  _On the Grasshopper and Cricket_        _John Keats_
  The Great Northwest                     _Major W. F. Butler_
  _Rule, Britannia_                       _James Thomson_
  The Commandment and the Reward          _Bible_
  _The Spacious Firmament_                _Joseph Addison_
  _June_                                  _James Russell Lowell_
  The Fifth Voyage of Sinbad the Sailor  "_The Arabian Nights
                                                    Entertainments_"
  _Ocean_                                 _George Gordon, Lord Byron_
  Pontiac's Attempt to Capture Fort
    Detroit                               _Major Richardson_
  _My Native Land_                        _Sir Walter Scott_
  _Morning on the Lievre_                 _Archibald Lampman_
  _Evening_                               _Archibald Lampman_
  An Elizabethan Seaman                   _James Anthony Froude_
  _The Sea-King's Burial_                 _Charles Mackay_
  My Castles in Spain                     _George William Curtis_
  _Aladdin_                               _James Russell Lowell_
  Drake's Voyage Round the World          _James Anthony Froude_
  _The Solitary Reaper_                   _William Wordsworth_
  Clouds, Rains, and Rivers               _John Tyndall_
  _Fitz-James and Roderick Dhu_           _Sir Walter Scott_
  The Indignation of Nicholas Nickleby    _Charles Dickens_
  _Dickens in Camp_                       _Bret Harte_
  _Dost Thou Look Back on What
    Hath Been_                            _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
  The Passing of Arthur                   _Sir Thomas Malory_
  _The Armada_                            _Thomas Babington, Lord Macaulay_
  Departure and Death of Nelson           _Robert Southey_
  _Waterloo_                              _George Gordon, Lord Byron_
  _Ode Written in 1746_                   _William Collins_
  Balaklava                               _William Howard Russell_
  _Funeral of Wellington_                 _Alfred, Lord Tennyson_
  In a Cave with a Whale                  _Frank T. Bullen_
  _The Glove and the Lions_               _Leigh Hunt_
  Three Scenes in the Tyrol               _Richter_
  _Marston Moor_                          _William Mackworth Praed_
  London                                  _Goldwin Smith_
  _How They Brought the Good News
    from Ghent to Aix_                    _Robert Browning_
  _An Incident of the French Camp_        _Robert Browning_
  British Colonial and Naval Power       "_Atlantic Monthly_"
  _England, My England_                   _William Ernest Henley_
  _A Good Time Going_                     _Oliver Wendell Holmes_
  God is Our Refuge                       _Bible_
  _Indian Summer_                         _Susanna Moodie_
  _The Skylark_                           _James Hogg_
  What is War                             _John Bright_
  _The Homes of England_                  _Felicia Hemans_
  _To a Water-Fowl_                       _William Cullen Bryant_
  The Fascination of Light                _Samuel T. Wood_
  _Daffodils_                             _William Wordsworth_
  _To the Dandelion_                      _James Russell Lowell_
  True Greatness                          _George Eliot_
  _The Private of the Buffs_              _Sir Francis Hastings Doyle_
  Honourable Toil                         _Thomas Carlyle_
  _On his Blindness_                      _John Milton_
  _Mysterious Night_                      _Joseph Blanco White_
  _Vitai Lampada_                         _Henry Newbolt_
  The Irreparable Past                    _Frederick W. Robertson_
  _A Christmas Hymn, 1837_                _Alfred Domett_
  _The Quarrel_                           _William Shakespeare_
  _Recessional_                           _Rudyard Kipling_




The Good Land


For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land, a land of brooks of
water, of fountains and depths, springing forth in valleys and hills; a
land of wheat and barley, and vines and fig trees and pomegranates; a
land of oil olives and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eat bread
without scarceness, thou shalt not lack anything in it; a land whose
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass.

And thou shalt eat and be full, and thou shalt bless the Lord thy God
for the good land which He hath given thee.

Deuteronomy. VIII.




FOURTH READER




THE CHILDREN'S SONG


    Land of our Birth, we pledge to thee
    Our love and toil in the years to be,
    When we are grown and take our place,
    As men and women with our race.

    Father in Heaven who lovest all,
    Oh help Thy children when they call;
    That they may build from age to age,
    An undefiled heritage.

    Teach us to bear the yoke in youth
    With steadfastness and careful truth;
    That, in our time, Thy Grace may give
    The Truth whereby the Nations live.

    Teach us to rule ourselves alway,
    Controlled and cleanly night and day,
    That we may bring, if need arise,
    No maimed or worthless sacrifice.

    Teach us to look in all our ends,
    On Thee for judge, and not our friends;
    That we, with Thee, may walk uncowed
    By fear or favour of the crowd.

    Teach us the Strength that cannot seek,
    By deed or thought, to hurt the weak;
    That, under Thee, we may possess
    Man's strength to comfort man's distress.

    Teach us Delight in simple things,
    And Mirth that has no bitter springs,
    Forgiveness free of evil done,
    And Love to all men 'neath the sun!

    Land of our Birth, our faith, our pride,
    For whose dear sake our fathers died,
    Oh Motherland, we pledge to thee,
    Head, heart, and hand through years to be!

Kipling




OUR COUNTRY


    Love thou thy land, with love far-brought
      From out the storied Past, and used
      Within the Present, but transfused
    Thro' future time by power of thought.

Tennyson




TOM TULLIVER AT SCHOOL


It was Mr. Tulliver's first visit to see Tom, for the lad must learn not
to think too much about home.

"Well, my lad," he said to Tom, when Mr. Stelling had left the room to
announce the arrival to his wife, and Maggie had begun to kiss Tom
freely, "you look rarely. School agrees with you."

Tom wished he had looked rather ill.

"I don't think I _am_ well, father," said Tom; "I wish you'd ask Mr.
Stelling not to let me do Euclid--it brings on the toothache, I think."

(The toothache was the only malady to which Tom had ever been subject.)

"Euclid, my lad; why, what's that?" said Mr. Tulliver.

"Oh, I don't know. It's definitions, and axioms, and triangles, and
