The clergy state that the physician cures disease through the mediation
of God, the physician merely playing the part of the agent of God,
through whom the real cure is effected. Is anything more ridiculous and
at the same time more contradictory, than to suppose that an
all-powerful god should have to appoint an intermediary to perform his
work? And if it is only by God's will and aid that a cure takes place,
then it follows that God must be willing for the individual to be cured;
why in the name of reason, did He not prevent the initial step, the
contracting of the disease? What a mass of suffering, of mental anguish
might thus have been spared us! Thus, this omnipotent being either did
not desire to spare us this misery and suffering, in which case he must
surely be a monster incarnate; or, on the other hand, he is powerless
to halt it, and thus cannot be omnipotent.

While the clergy maintain that a cure is only effected by God's will,
the physician knows otherwise. The physician accomplishes his cures
alone, and definitely cures and saves the lives of human beings by his
own skill, intelligence, and application of methods which have been
developed by the exercise of secular knowledge, not theological
nonsense. When man is so unfortunate as to contract an infection of the
appendix, and that inflammation succeeds to pus-formation so that this
diseased and non-essential part of the human anatomy is on the point of
rupturing and causing a fatal peritonitis, it is not by God's will and
intervention that a cure is effected, but by the intervention of the
surgeon who removes the diseased part. If man depended upon God's will
to save him, as he did in the past, the appendix would rupture,
peritonitis would set in, and despite prayers and sacrificial offerings,
the Deity would exact his life.

When an innocent infant, in the first few weeks of life, develops an
intussusception (an infolding of the bowel which causes an acute
obstruction), the prayers and supplication of the parents avail not a
particle; if the surgeon did not save the infant's life by operating and
removing the obstruction, the benevolent being would allow the child to
die.

The adult who develops a hernia, which is due to a defect in the
construction of the human body, which is assigned to an omniscient being
who still persists in forming bodies that are defective, and this hernia
becomes strangulated (twisted), the deity sits calmly by in omnipotent
inaction, while the prompt interference of the surgeon saves the
individual's life.

When the surgeon observes a superficial cancerous growth, or an internal
growth which can be removed in its entirety, does he trust to the Lord
to halt this pernicious development? No, the surgeon does not consult
God, but resorts to his own knowledge and skill to save a human life.

The diphtheritic child who is strangling to death with a diphtheritic
membrane in its throat is not permitted by the physician to be left to
the benevolent being's will, nor to the prayers of the parents. The
physician's prayer is the diphtheria antitoxin, which in his hands is
the life-saving device.

When the physician administers quinine for malaria, or salvarsan for
syphilis, he effects cures for these diseases by using agents to which
the clergy strenuously objected when they were first introduced. And
when the ecclesiastic attributes to the Deity whatever laws man has been
able to evolve out of his own experience and wisdom, he establishes,
fallaciously, the corollary that if God is responsible for the cures, He
is also responsible for the non-cures. Then what of the countless number
that died of disease before man evolved those cures, and what of the
wholesale murder of His children in the past ages?

Do certain diseases still baffle the physician? Surely it is less often
than the pestilences of old which baffled sacrifice and prayer. The
cruelest laws ever devised by man have more equity and benevolence in
them than the appalling and irrational jurisprudence of the Deity.

Do certain diseases as yet remain to plague man? Then it is only because
religion has for the past 2000 years been the greatest obstacle in the
development of cures for these diseases. Every single individual, in the
past 2000 years, who has succumbed to a disease for which medical
science has no cure, has died directly at the hands of religion. The
obstruction which religion has placed on the development of medical
science has laid at its feet the responsibility for the deaths of
countless millions throughout the ages.

The religionist replies that man's mind cannot fathom the will of God.
Which is an irrational statement for it is a well established fact, and
indeed, a criterion of insanity, that when the deranged are confronted
with facts which are conclusive and with creations of the imagination,
they cannot differentiate fact from fancy, and maintain, instead, that
fancy is the real fact. The religionists are guilty of the same breach
of reason. They suffer with what may be termed, "dementia religiosa."
The remarkable feature of the latter disease is its wide prevalence.

Dr. Haggard in his book, "Devils, Drugs, and Doctors," declares, "The
early and Medieval Christians accepted the doctrine of the power of
demons in the lives of men; they saw this power particularly in the
demoniac production of diseases. They believed in miracles and
especially in the miraculous healing of diseases. The demonological
belief of the Christians was inherited from the doctrine of the Jews,
who were believers in demons and the 'possession by the devil.' Jesus
himself cured by casting out of devils. Following his example,
Christians everywhere became exorcists. Jewish demonology was continued
among Christian converts, and the belief in supernatural interpositions
in human affairs was widely accepted. _Nothing has retarded the growth
of scientific medicine during the past 2000 years so much as the iron
grip of theology in maintaining practices based on belief in this
supernatural origin of disease._" The fabled curing of disease by
casting out devils, and the New Testament recordings of Jesus's
conviction that disease was caused by evil spirits, have had an
inestimable detrimental result on the development of medical science.
The fact that Jesus believed in the demoniacal production of diseases
and cured them by exorcism was deemed so important by the author of the
Gospel according to Mark that he has actually recorded the Aramaic words
Jesus was reported to have used in addressing his patients. In Mark
V:41, Jesus is reported to have given the command "Talitha cumi" to a
little Jewish girl whom her parents believed dead. In Mark VII:34, Jesus
is reported as uttering the magical word "Ephphatha," as he "put his
fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue" in behalf of
"one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech."

An excellent and timely illustration of what occurs when secular
knowledge has not yet replaced ecclesiastical ignorance and bigotry,
particularly in the field of medicine, is furnished by an article from
one of Philadelphia's leading newspapers, _The Evening Bulletin_, of
December 23, 1932. We quote it verbatim:

"Faith Healers Arrested; Two Charged with Choking to Death 5-Year-Old
Girl, Linden, Texas, Dec. 23, 1932. Despite a purported confession,
officers to-day continued an investigation of the death of a
five-year-old girl, allegedly at the hands of two itinerant preachers
who sought to 'drive out the devil' they believed responsible for her
partial paralysis. Murder charges were filed against Paul Oaks and his
brother, Coy Oaks, and precautions taken to prevent possible mob
vengeance. Sheriff Nat Curtright said the accused men admitted they had
choked the child to death in an attempt to cure her. Officers said the
preachers had been conducting meetings in rural communities and had
preached on the subject of faith healing. George Wilson, a neighbor,
officers said, found the two men kneeling over the prostrate form of the
child. They ordered him to leave, declaring he was a 'devil.' He said
the child's father was in the room."

Medieval exorcism still practised in one of the leading nations of the
world! In America, which prides itself on its scientific advances,
towards whom the rest of the world looks for guidance in scientific
discoveries and practices!

To have retarded the growth of medicine for the past 2000 years! Think
of the strides made in medicine in the past hundred years, and dwell on
the comfort humanity derives from it, in contrast to the filth, misery,
and pestilences of the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries.
Would so much progress have been possible had man still persisted in the
belief that disease was due to demoniac intervention, and that the sum
total of all knowledge humanly possible was contained in the Bible?

It is no longer necessary for children to choke to death with
diphtheria. Yellow fever, and small pox in civilized countries are, or
could be, wiped from the face of the earth. Malaria is controlled;
tuberculosis will shortly be a rarity; typhoid fever and cholera have
been eradicated wherever there is sanitation; erysipelas can be
controlled; hydrophobia prevented; childbirth fever has lost its
tremendous mortality; tetanus can be checked; syphilis and gonorrhea can
be controlled; diabetes and pernicious anemia can be controlled; surgery
is reclaiming vast multitudes and restoring to useful and happy lives
thousands who would have hitherto died. So much has been done; but it is
especially true that there is as much, at least, yet to be done. But all
this has been achieved so recently. What might not have been won had not
the minds of men been polluted from infancy, warped by the first
professional holy men, the religionists, the priests? Had the idea of a
supernatural force been allowed to die in the Dark Ages, as it surely
would have, as man's mind expanded and developed, humanity would today
find itself more advanced on the road to progress. But as it was, the
myth of religion was foisted on the superstitious brain, and man
resigned himself to his fate, and lived in such a manner as to please
this hypothetical supernatural being. The inevitable result was the
abject misery, both material and spiritual, of Europe during the period
when the Church was in absolute control.

If this myth and mystification had died with the dead ages, as it should
have done, what a fitter place to live in this world would be today!
Consider the needless misery and the agony of those who died of the
various plagues; and think of the advanced stage of medicine of
Alexandria, three hundred years before the Christian era, where the
physicians were welcomed to the famous library by the emperors. The
state gave them their livelihood and their duties were to advance
medicine by study and research. Anatomy was studied and dissection was
allowed. With the coming of Christianity, the remnants of this library
were destroyed, and with them went all progress in that field. If such
had been the enlightened state in Egypt three hundred years before
Christianity appeared, then why had not science made the same progress
then as it does now? Because, to the knowledge stored in the library at
Alexandria had not been added a progression of learning, a continued
process of research; if this had not been halted by Christianity, how
much vaster would our achievements be today?

It was not necessary for all of those millions to have been the victims
of plagues, of inquisitions, of witchcraft burnings, of religious
persecutions and wars. The sorrow and pain brought to untold numbers
throughout the centuries could have been prevented; and would have been
if man had been interested in the welfare of his fellowmen instead of
the glorification of an almighty being. Future generations may well
declare religion to have been the curse of humanity. The Church had
cursed the human intellect by cursing the doubts which are the
necessary consequence of its exercise. She had cursed even the moral
faculty by asserting the guilt of honest error.

Medicine which has for its sole objects the alleviation of man's
sufferings, to cure them when possible, to relieve more often the pains
and ills which make this life a living hell, what might it not have
accomplished ages ago had religion not interfered with its progress?
Whatever cures are known, and preventions that are practiced now, could
have been common knowledge centuries ago. And what of the multitudes
that perished who might have been saved, and what of the misery which
might have been prevented, had not this curse fallen upon man?

Since 1906, there have been only five deaths from yellow fever in the
United States. Outbreaks of cholera and plague are unknown. In former
years, puerperal fever took the lives of from five to fifty of each one
hundred parturient mothers. At present, an average of one out of 1250
mothers dies of this infection following childbirth. Deaths from many
diseases are less than one-tenth of their former number. These include
wound infections, diphtheria, scarlet fever, malaria, dysentery,
typhoid, small pox, and many dietary and metabolic diseases. Since 1880,
the medical sciences have accomplished a total net saving of human life
from all diseases which, if equally distributed among the population,
would add sixteen years to the life span of each person. In 1880, the
average duration of human life, that is, the average age at which death
occurred, was 41.78 years. In 1925, the average duration of life was
58.29 years. In other words, those born at this time live on the average
16.5 years longer than those born at any time prior to 1880. In a
population of 120,000,000 this would mean a total of 1,920,000,000
additional years of life. Such a figure is as difficult to conceive of
as are the interstellar spaces. This is one contribution, numerically
expressed, which medical science and its offspring, preventive medicine,
have made to humanity in the short space of fifty years.

Indeed if, as the religionists believe, there is a god, he could not
have punished his subjects more than by instilling in them the "dementia
religiosa." If the Church had not taught that the sum total of all
knowledge was contained in the Bible, and prohibited, on pain of death
and confiscation of property, the promulgation of any discoveries, men
would have reasoned as they are accustomed to at the present day, and we
would not be 2000 years behind in all branches of learning.

But there has never been an advance in science of widespread importance,
which in some manner endangered some mouldy religious concept, that the
Church has not bitterly opposed; an advance which in time has proven of
inestimable good for all mankind. (A glance at the history of human
progress will reveal scores of such instances.) The opposition to
medicine, as previously noted, is only one of many examples which might
have been chosen. In proportion, as the grasp of theology upon education
tightened, medicine declined, and in proportion, as the grip relaxed,
medicine developed.




CHAPTER VIII

RELIGION AND ASTRONOMY


In the early Church, astronomy, like other branches of science, was
looked upon as futile, since the New Testament taught that the earth was
soon to be destroyed and new heavens created.

The heavenly bodies were looked upon by the theologians as either living
beings possessing souls, or as the habitation of the angels. However, as
time passed, the geocentric doctrine, the doctrine that the earth is the
center of the universe and that the sun and planets revolve about it,
was the theory that held the highest respect.

Copernicus, in 1543, was first to bring clearly before the world the
then astounding theory that the earth and planets revolve about the sun.
But not until he was on his deathbed did he dare to publish it, for he
well knew the opposition with which it would be met. Even then he
published it with an apologetic lie by a friend Osiander, that
Copernicus had propounded the doctrine of the earth's movement not as a
fact, but as a hypothesis.

"Thus was the greatest and most ennobling, perhaps, of scientific
truths--a truth not less ennobling to religion than to science--forced
in coming before the world, to sneak and crawl." (_White: "History of
Warfare of Science with Theology."_)

During the next seventy years the matter slumbered, until Galileo upheld
the Copernican doctrine as the truth, and proved it to be the truth by
his telescope. Immediately the Church condemned the statements of
Copernicus and forbade Galileo to teach or discuss them. All books which
affirmed the motion of the earth were forbidden, and to read the work of
Copernicus was declared to risk damnation. All branches of the
Protestant Church, Lutheran, Calvinist, Anglican, vied with each other
in denouncing the Copernican doctrine.

One man, Giordano Bruno dared to assert the truth in the hearing of the
Papacy. For this heresy he was hunted from land to land, finally trapped
in Venice, imprisoned at Rome, burned alive, and his ashes scattered to
the winds!

Against Galileo, the war against the Copernican theory was concentrated.
His discoveries were declared to be deceptions, and his announcements
blasphemy when, in 1610, he announced that his telescope had revealed
the moons of the planet Jupiter.

In 1615, Galileo was summoned before the Inquisition at Rome, and forced
to promise that he would "relinquish altogether the opinion that the sun
is the center of the world, and immovable, and that the earth moves, nor
henceforth to hold, teach, or defend it in any way whatsoever verbally
or in writing."

Pope Paul V solemnly rendered the decree that "the doctrine of the
double motion of the earth about its axis and about the sun is false and
entirely contrary to Holy Scripture."

The climax of this instance of the infallibility of the Church occurred
when in his seventieth year Galileo was again brought before the
Inquisition; he was forced to abjure under threats of torture and
imprisonment by command of Pope Urban a truth which, in this day, is
taken for granted by the youngest of children. Galileo was then kept in
exile for the rest of his days, died, and was buried ignobly, apart
from his family, without fitting ceremony, without monument or epitaph.

As late as 1873 there was published, in St. Louis, a work by a president
of a Lutheran teachers' seminary in which he stated that the earth is
the principal body of the universe, that it stands fixed, and that the
sun and moon only serve to light it.

Astronomy brings forth a noble array of men who have, by their intense
desire for the truth, persevered against the Church, and in spite of the
vilest opposition of that Church, brought to the attention of man laws
that have given a meaning and order to our universe.

Copernicus escaping persecution only by death; Bruno burned alive;
