The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dictator, by Milton Lesser

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Dictator

Author: Milton Lesser

Release Date: April 25, 2010 [EBook #32134]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DICTATOR ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from Imagination Stories of Science and
    Fantasy January 1955. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence
    that the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.


                             THE DICTATOR


                                 _By_

                           _Milton Lesser_


     Ellaby's society was a perfect democracy, where all men were
     equal. But some still wanted more personal attention, and
     they got it,  like--

       *       *       *       *       *




Just looking at Ellaby, you could tell he was going places. He was
five feet nine inches tall and weighed a hundred and fifty pounds. He
had an I. Q. of ninety-eight point five-seven, less than four
hundredths off the mode. His hair was mousey and worn slightly long
for a man, slightly short for a woman. Back in High Falls, where he
was born, he was physically weaker than sixty percent of the men but
stronger than sixty percent of the women.

He had been in training since his twentieth birthday to assassinate
the Dictator. Ellaby was now thirty years old.

Dorcas Sinclair met Ellaby at the pneumo-station. She was too big and
strapping for a woman, but otherwise not unattractive with her
lusterless hair, slightly thick-featured face, small sagging bosom and
heavy-calved legs.

"I'll take your bags," she told Ellaby, and led him from the station.
She walked quickly, but not too quickly. You always had to find the
happy medium, thought Ellaby. For Ellaby, finding the happy medium had
always come easy. Ten years ago, when Ellaby had been graduated from
the High Falls secondary school, the four words MOST LIKELY TO SUCCEED
had been printed under his picture in the yearbook. It was expected by
everyone: young Ellaby had learned his three R's--rules, rights,
responsibilities--satisfactorily. Ellaby had neither excelled nor
failed: he was by nature a first class citizen.

Running to keep up with the too big, too long-legged Dorcas Sinclair
who was carrying one of his suitcases in each hand, Ellaby was led
from the pneumo-station. The splendid, unimaginative geometric
precision of the Capitol stretched out before him in the dazzling
summer sunlight, the view serving as a leaven for Ellaby's usually
phlegmatic disposition. He could feel his spirits rise, his heart
thump more rapidly, speeding the sudden flow of adrenalin through his
body.

[Illustration]

This was the city. It was here where the fruits of whatever had gone
wrong in Ellaby's upbringing or whatever had gone wrong in the linear
arrangement of his genes would ripen. It was here where Ellaby, modal
Ellaby would pass his tests for top-secret work; unsuspected, average
Ellaby, would write his name in flaming letters across the pages of
history. It was here where Ellaby would kill the Dictator.

And after that--what? Chaos? A new order based not on modality but
something else? Ellaby wasn't sure. No one in the organization knew
for sure. The concept was staggering to Ellaby. It was the system--or
