The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Velvet Glove, by Harry Harrison

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Velvet Glove

Author: Harry Harrison

Release Date: July 21, 2009 [EBook #29471]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VELVET GLOVE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









    _SF writer and editor Harry Harrison explores a not too distant
    future where robots--particularly specialist robots who don't know
    their place--have quite a rough time of it. True, the Robot Equality
    Act had been passed--but so what?_


    the
 velvet
  glove

 _by ... Harry Harrison_


 New York was a bad town for robots this year. In fact,
 all over the country it was bad for robots....


Jon Venex fitted the key into the hotel room door. He had asked for a
large room, the largest in the hotel, and paid the desk clerk extra for
it. All he could do now was pray that he hadn't been cheated. He didn't
dare complain or try to get his money back. He heaved a sigh of relief
as the door swung open, it was bigger than he had expected--fully three
feet wide by five feet long. There was more than enough room to work in.
He would have his leg off in a jiffy and by morning his limp would be
gone.

There was the usual adjustable hook on the back wall. He slipped it
through the recessed ring in the back of his neck and kicked himself up
until his feet hung free of the floor. His legs relaxed with a rattle as
he cut off all power from his waist down.

The overworked leg motor would have to cool down before he could work on
it, plenty of time to skim through the newspaper. With the chronic worry
of the unemployed, he snapped it open at the want-ads and ran his eye
down the _Help Wanted--Robot_ column. There was nothing for him under
the Specialist heading, even the Unskilled Labor listings were bare and
unpromising. New York was a bad town for robots this year.

The want-ads were just as depressing as usual but he could always get a
lift from the comic section. He even had a favorite strip, a fact that
he scarcely dared mention to himself. "Rattly Robot," a dull-witted
mechanical clod who was continually falling over himself and getting
into trouble. It was a repellent caricature, but could still be very
funny. Jon was just starting to read it when the ceiling light went out.

It was ten P.M., curfew hour for robots. Lights out and lock yourself in
until six in the morning, eight hours of boredom and darkness for all
except the few night workers. But there were ways of getting around the
letter of a law that didn't concern itself with a definition of visible
light. Sliding aside some of the shielding around his atomic generator,
Jon turned up the gain. As it began to run a little hot the heat waves
streamed out--visible to him as infra-red rays. He finished reading the
paper in the warm, clear light of his abdomen.

The thermocouple in the tip of his second finger left hand, he tested
the temperature of his leg. It was soon cool enough to work on. The
waterproof gasket stripped off easily, exposing the power leads, nerve
wires and the weakened knee joint. The wires disconnected, Jon unscrewed
the knee above the joint and carefully placed it on the shelf in front
of him. With loving care he took the replacement part from his hip
pouch. It was the product of toil, purchased with his savings from three
months employment on the Jersey pig farm.

Jon was standing on one leg testing the new knee joint when the ceiling
fluorescent flickered and came back on. Five-thirty already, he had just
finished in time. A shot of oil on the new bearing completed the job; he
stowed away the tools in the pouch and unlocked the door.

The unused elevator shaft acted as waste chute, he slipped his newspaper
through a slot in the door as he went by. Keeping close to the wall, he
picked his way carefully down the grease-stained stairs. He slowed his
pace at the 17th floor as two other mechs turned in ahead of him. They
were obviously butchers or meat-cutters; where the right hand should
have been on each of them there stuck out a wicked, foot-long knife. As
they approached the foot of the stairs they stopped to slip the knives
into the plastic sheaths that were bolted to their chestplates. Jon
followed them down the ramp into the lobby.

The room was filled to capacity with robots of all sizes, forms and
colors. Jon Venex's greater height enabled him to see over their heads
to the glass doors that opened onto the street. It had rained the night
before and the rising sun drove red glints from the puddles on the
sidewalk. Three robots, painted snow white to show they were night
workers, pushed the doors open and came in. No one went out as the
curfew hadn't ended yet. They milled around slowly talking in low
voices.

The only human being in the entire lobby was the night clerk dozing
behind the counter. The clock over his head said five minutes to six.
Shifting his glance from the clock, Jon became aware of a squat black
robot waving to attract his attention. The powerful arms and compact
build identified him as a member of the Diger family, one of the most
numerous groups. He pushed through the crowd and clapped Jon on the back
