certainly thought, vaguely, that he should like Claire Conyers to know
that he was still within sight of her house; but the possibility of
sending her word had not occurred to him, until his follower suggested
it. Larry's suggestion of possible danger to her made him uneasy. Even if
her father was with the king, and had already returned home, he would
frequently be absent in the camp, and who could tell but some band of
plunderers might visit the house in his absence! The Protestants had been
plundered and ill-used by William's men round Athlone, and might be here.
It would certainly be well to know what was going on across the water.

After the kindness they had received, surely it would be only civil to
let the Conyers know where they were posted. At any rate, Claire could
not be offended at his writing; besides, he might arrange some plan by
which he might get news from Larry's friend, Pat Ryan.

As he went down to the village he heard roars of laughter, and, passing a
cottage, saw Larry with five or six of the troopers round him. Larry was
seated on the ground, making a framework in the shape of a saucer four
feet in diameter.

"And what are you wanting a boat for, Larry?"

"Sure, I am mighty fond of fishing," Larry said. "Didn't you know that?"

"I know you are a fisherman at home, Larry; but if it's fishing you want,
there are two large boats hauled up on the bank."

"They are too big," Larry said. "I should want half a dozen men to launch
them, and then you would want to go with me, and the bare sight of you
would be enough to frighten away all the fish in the Shannon. But I will
have a look at the boats. The captain might want a party to cross the
river, and it's as well to see that they are in good order, and have got
the oars and thole pins handy. I will see to them myself, for there are
not half a dozen of ye know one end of the boat from the other."

When Walter reached his quarters, he at once sat down to write. After
many attempts he finished one as follows:

"Dear Miss Conyers:

"After the kindness shown to us by Mrs. Conyers and yourself, I feel sure
that you will like to know where we are posted. We are at Ballygan, just
across the Shannon opposite to your house, and I can see your roof from a
spot fifty yards from the village. It seems a pleasure to me to be so
close, even though we are as much divided as if there were the sea
between us.

"I hope that Mr. Conyers has returned, and that you will have no trouble
with William's troops, whose reputation for good behaviour is not of the
best. I hope that, now that you are among your friends, you have not
quite forgotten us, and that you will let me have a line to say how you
are, and how things are going on with you. My boy Larry is going to take
this across, and will call tomorrow night for an answer, if you are good
enough to send one."

"When will your boat be finished, Larry?" he asked his follower, as the
latter came in, just as it was getting dusk.

"She will be finished tomorrow. The framework is done, and I could make a
shift, if your honour wished, just to fasten the skin on so that it would
take me tonight."

"If you could, I would rather, Larry."

"All right, your honour!" Larry said, with a slight smile. "Two hours'
work will do it."

"I know where you are making it, Larry, and will come round when I go to
inspect sentries, at eleven o'clock. We shall post ten men, a quarter of
a mile apart, on the bank, and I will give orders for them to look out
for you. The word will be 'Wicklow;' so when you come across they will
shout to you, 'Who comes there?' You say, 'Wicklow;' and it will be all
right."

At the hour he had named, Walter went round for Larry, who was working by
the light of a torch stuck in the ground.

"I have just finished it, yer honour; but I was obliged to stop till the
boys got quiet; they were so mighty inquisitive as to what I was in such
a hurry about, that I had to leave it alone for a while."

"Look here, Larry, here is the letter, but that's not the principal
reason why I am sending you across. You will give it to Pat Ryan, as you
suggested, to pass on through Bridget to Miss Conyers; but I want you to
arrange with him that he shall, tomorrow, get some dry sticks put
together on the bank opposite, with some straw, so that he can make a
blaze in a minute. Then do you arrange with him that, if any parties of
William's troops come to the house in the absence of Mr. Conyers, and
there should seem likely to be trouble, he is to run as hard as he can
down to the river. If it is day, he is to wave a white cloth on a stick.
If it is night, he is to light the fire. Tell him to arrange with Bridget
to run at once to him and tell him, if there is trouble in the house,
for, as he is in the stables, he may not know what is going on inside.

"I have been looking at those boats. They will carry fifteen men each at
a pinch; and if the signal is made, we shall not be long in getting
across. Pat would only have about half a mile to run. We will get the
boats down close to the water's edge, and it won't take us many minutes
to get across. Anyhow, in twenty minutes from the time he starts, we
might be there."

"That will be a moighty good plan, yer honour. Now, if you will go down
to the water with me, I will be off at once. I sha'n't be away half an
hour; and I can slip up into the loft where Pat sleeps, and not a sowl be
the wiser, if there was a regiment of William's troops about the house."

"All right, Larry! I shall wait here for you till you get back."

Larry raised the light craft and put it on his head. He had made a couple
of light paddles, by nailing two pieces of wood on to mop sticks.

Walter accompanied him to the water's edge, and told the sentry there
that Larry was crossing the river on business, and would return in half
an hour's time, and that he was not to challenge loudly when he saw him
returning.

The night was dark, and Walter soon lost sight of the little boat. Then
he waited anxiously. He had, however, but little fear that the enemy
would have posted sentries so far down the river, especially as he would
only just have pitched his camp opposite Limerick.

It was three-quarters of an hour before he heard a faint splash in the
water. The sentry heard it, too.

"Shall I challenge, sir?"

"No. Wait for a minute. We shall soon see whether it is Larry. Should
there be anyone on the opposite bank, he might hear the challenge, and
they would keep a sharp lookout in future."

The sound came nearer and nearer.

"Who goes there?" Walter said in a quiet voice.

"'Wicklow!' and it's mighty glad I am to hear your voice, for it's so
dark I began to think I had lost myself entirely."

"Is all well, Larry?" Walter asked, as the light boat touched the bank.

"All is well, your honour," Larry said, stepping ashore, and lifting the
light boat on to his head.

"You had better stow it away close here, Larry, till the morning. It's so
dark that you will be sure to pitch over something, if you go further.

"Now, tell me all about it," he went on, as Larry stowed away the boat
among some bushes.

"There is little enough to tell, yer honour. I just rowed across and
landed, and made straight for the house. Everything was quiet and still.
I went round to the stables, and up into the loft where Pat sleeps.

"'Are you there, Pat Ryan,' says I?

"'Who is it calls Pat Ryan?' says he.

"'It's myself, Larry, Mr. Davenant's boy.'

"'Why, I thought you had gone,' says he. 'Are you sure it's yourself?'
says he.

"'And who else should it be, Pat Ryan? Don't yer know my voice?'

"By this time I had got into the corner where he slept, and touched him.

"'I am glad to feel you, Larry,' says he, 'for I wasn't sure that you
hadn't fallen in with the troopers, and it wasn't your ghost that come to
visit me.'

"'Whist,' says I, 'I have no time to waste upon ye. The master and the
troops are stationed just across the river, at Ballygan. Mr. Davenant has
given me a letter for Miss Conyers, telling her all about it. I don't
exactly know what he said, and maybe she would like it given privately,
so do you hand it to Bridget in the morning, and ask her to give it to
her mistress, and to hand over to you any answer there may be. I will
come across for it tomorrow night. But that's not all, Pat. You know the
devil's work that William's men have been carrying on, on the march.'

"'Av course, everyone has heard the tales of the villains' doings,
Larry.'

"'Well, the young master is mighty anxious about it, as you may guess.
Has Mr. Conyers come?'

"'Yes. He rode in at four this afternoon.'

"'Well, Mr. Davenant says you will all be safe as long as he's here, but
maybe that at some time, when he's away, you may have a troop of these
villains of the world ride in here, and little they care whether it's
Protestants or Catholics that they plunder. So, if they come here and
begin their devilries, you run for your life down to the river, opposite
Ballygan, with a white cloth or a shirt, if it's daytime, and wave it.
You are to have a pile of sticks and straw ready, and, if it's night, ye
will just set it in a blaze, and there will be help over before many
minutes. You stop there till they come, to tell them how strong the enemy
are.

"'The master says you are to tell Bridget about it, so that, if they
misbehave themselves inside the house, she can slip out and let you know.
You understand that?'

"'I do,' says he; 'and its a comfort to me, for it's fretting I have been
over what might happen, if a troop of those murderin' villains were to
come here, and not a sowl save me and the other boys to take the part of
the mistress and Miss Claire.'

"'Well, you know now, Pat, what's to be done, and see you do it; and now
I must go, for the master is waiting for me. I will be with you tomorrow
night for the answer.'

"And so I came back, and I lost ten minutes looking about for the boat,
for it was so mighty dark that I could not see a fut. I kicked against it
and very near fell over it. It's well I didn't, for I should have knocked
it into smithereens, entirely!"

"Capital, Larry! you couldn't have done better. Now I shall feel
comfortable."

After breakfast, Walter told his father of the mission on which he had
sent Larry, and the arrangement he had made with Pat Ryan.

"You ought to have told me at first, Walter. I do not blame you, but you
should not do things on your own responsibility."

"But so far, father, it has not been a regimental affair. I simply sent
my own boy with a note to Miss Conyers, just to say where we were; but,
as it may be an affair in which some of the troop may have to act, I have
told you about it, so that you can make what arrangements you like."

"It's rather a fine distinction, Walter," his father said, smiling. "It
seems to me that you have engaged us to send a detachment across the
river, in case of trouble at Mrs. Conyers'. However, I heartily agree
with you that our kind friends should be protected from injury and
insult.

"How many will the boats hold?"

"Thirteen or fourteen men each."

"Very well, then. I authorize you, at any time, if I am away with a
portion of the troop, to take twenty-five men across if the signal is
made. If I am here I shall, of course, go over myself. You can take any
measures of preparation you may think necessary."

Walter availed himself of the permission, and at once gave orders to the
sentry posted on the river, in front of the village, that if a white flag
was waved by day, or a fire lit by night on the opposite bank, he was to
shout loudly and fire his pistol, and that these orders were to be passed
on to the sentry who succeeded him at the post. Then he picked out
twenty-five men, and told them that, at any time in the night or day, if
they heard a shot fired by the sentry they were to seize their arms, rush
down to the boats, launch them and take their places, and wait for
orders. He told them to sleep without removing any of their clothes, so
as to be ready for instant action.

The next night, Larry again crossed and brought back a little note from
Claire Conyers, thanking Walter for letting her know they were so close,
telling him of her father's return, and saying that there was no fear of
her mother or herself forgetting their late visitors. It was a prettily
written little note, and Walter was delighted at receiving it.

"Well, my boy," Captain Davenant said with a little smile, when Walter
told him next morning that he had heard from Miss Conyers, "as you seem
specially interested in this affair, I will let you have the honour and
glory of being the first to come to the rescue of Miss Conyers and her
mother, if they should need it; and therefore, whether I am here or not,
I give you permission to cross at once, in the two boats, if you get the
signal. But on reaching the other side you are to send the two boats back
at once, with two men in each, and I will bring the rest of the troop
across as fast as possible. There is no saying what force you may find
there. I shall leave it to your discretion to attack at once, or to wait
until I come up with reinforcements. You will, of course, be guided
partly by the strength of the enemy, partly by the urgency for instant
interference for the protection of the ladies."

Four days passed quietly. There was but little for the cavalry to do.
Small parties were posted at various spots, for some miles down the
river, to give notice should the enemy appear on the opposite bank and
show any intention of making a crossing; and, beyond furnishing these
guards, the troop had little to do.

Walter spent much of his time watching the opposite bank. He hardly knew
whether he wished the signal to be displayed or not--he certainly desired
no trouble to befall the ladies; but, on the other hand, the thought of
rushing to their rescue was undoubtedly a pleasant one. Larry spent much
of his time at the water's edge, fishing--a pursuit in which many of the
troopers joined; and they were able to augment the daily rations by a
good supply of salmon.

On the fifth day, the officers had just finished supper, when the sound
of a pistol shot was heard. Walter leaped from his seat, snatched up his
sword and pistols, and ran down to the river. The men were already
clustering round the boats. A minute later these were in the water, and
the men jumped on board. They too were eager for the work, for Larry had
whispered among them that, if the signal was made, it would signify that
a band of the enemy's marauders were at Mrs. Conyers'; and all had been
so kindly treated there that they were eager to repay the treatment they
had received. Besides, there was not a man in the Irish army whose heart
had not been fired at the recitals of the brutality of the enemy, and
filled with deep longings for vengeance upon the perpetrators of the
deeds.

Walter counted the men as they rowed across, and was pleased to find that
not one of them was missing. He ordered the two men who were at the oars
in each boat to return, the instant the rest had landed, to fetch another
detachment across.

As they reached the land, the men sprang out. Pat Ryan was standing at
the landing place.

"Well, Pat, what is it?"

"A troop of Hessian horse, your honour. Half an hour ago they rode up to
the doors. Mrs. Conyers came out to meet them, and told them that she was
a loyal Protestant, and wife of a gentleman high in the king's councils,
who was in the camp. The blackguards only laughed. The officers, with
some of the men, dismounted and pushed their way past her into the house,
and the rest of the troop tied their horses up to the trees on the lawn,
and shouted to me, and some of the other boys who were looking on, to
bring forage. I suppose we weren't quick enough for them, for one of them
drew his pistol and fired at me. Fortunately, he only hit the truss of
straw I was carrying. Then I went round to the back door, where I had
agreed that Bridget was to come to me, if things were going wrong in the
house. A few minutes afterwards she came out, with a white face, and
said: 'For the sake of the Holy Virgin, run for your life, Pat, and warn
the soldiers!' So I slipped away and ran my hardest."

All this was told as the party were running at full speed towards the
house.

"How strong was the troop?" Walter asked.

"About eighty men, yer honour."

"We must trust to a surprise," Walter said. "We can get round to the back
of the house without being seen. If we burst in there suddenly, we can
