
He smiled. A giant fellow, but spindly. He spoke good English. He
seemed anxious to be friendly.

"We are glad to have you and George Prince's sister with us." He shot
Anita an admiring glance. "I will show you our controls, Haljan."

"All right," I said. "Whatever I can do to help...."

"But not now. It will be some hours before we are ready."

I nodded, and he wandered away. Anita whispered:

"Did he mean that signal room up here in the tower? Oh, Gregg, maybe
it's only the ship's control room!"

"I don't know. But the projector range-finders are up there, and I
think it's the signal room."

"Suppose we go up and see? Gregg, Miko's signals might start any
minute."

       *       *       *       *       *

And the electronic projector now seemed about ready. It was time for
me to act. But a reluctant instinct was upon me. Our Erentz suits were
here close behind us in Potan's cubby. I hated to leave them: if
anything happened and we had to make a sudden dash, there would be no
time to garb ourselves in the suits. To adjust the helmets was bad
enough.

I whispered swiftly, "We must get into our suits--find some pretext."
I drew her back through the cubby doorway where we would be more
secluded.

"Anita, listen: I've been a fool not to plan our escape more
carefully! We're in too great a danger here."

It seemed to me suddenly that we were in desperate plight. Was it
premonition?

"Anita, listen: if anything happens and we have to make a dash--"

"Up through that dome-lock, Gregg? It's a manual control; you can see
the levers."

"Yes. It's a manual. But up there--how would we get down?"

She was far calmer than I. "There may be an outside ladder, Gregg."

"I don't think so. I haven't seen it."

"Then we can get out the way they brought us in. The hull-porte--it's
a manual, too."

"Yes, I think I can find our way down through the hull corridors. I
mean, for a quick run. If we have to run, you stay close behind me.
I've this bullet projector, and evidently there aren't many men in the
lower corridors."

"There are guards outside on the rocks."

We had seen them through the dome windows. But there were not
many--only two or three. A surprise rush at them would turn the trick.

       *       *       *       *       *

We donned our Erentz suits.

"What will we do with the helmets?" Anita demanded. "Leave them here?"

"No--take them with us. I'm not going to get separated from them; it's
too dangerous."

"We'll look strange going up to that signal room equipped like this,"
she commented.

"I can't help it. We'll figure out something to explain it."

She stood before me, a queer-looking little figure in the now
deflated, bagging suit with her slim neck and head protruding above
the metal circle of its collar.

"Carry your helmet, Anita. I'll take mine."

We could adjust the helmets and start the Erentz motors all within a
few seconds.

"I'm ready, Gregg."

"Come on, then. Let me go first."

I had the bullet projector in an outer pouch of the suit where I could
instantly reach it. This was more rational: we had a fighting chance
now. The fear which had swept me so suddenly began to recede. I was
calm.

"We'll climb the tower to the signal room," I whispered. "Do it
boldly."

We stepped from the cubby. Potan was not in sight; he was on the
further deck beyond the central cabin structure perhaps, or had gone
below.

On the deck, we were immediately accosted. This was different--our
appearance in the Erentz suits!

"Where are you going?"

This fellow spoke in Martian. I answered in English.

"Up there."

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood before us, towering over me. I saw a group of nearby workers
stop to regard us. In a moment we would be causing a commotion, and it
was the last thing I desired.

I said in Martian, "Commander Potan told me, what I wish I can do.
From the dome we look around--see where is the Grantline camp--I am
pilot of this ship to go there."

The man who had called himself Brotow passed near us. I appealed to
him.

"We put on our suits. I thought we might go up on the dome for a
minute and look around. If I'm to pilot the ship...."

He hesitated, his glance sweeping the deck as though to ask Potan.
Someone said in Martian:

"The commander is down in the stern storeroom."

It decided Brotow. He waved away the Martian who had stopped me.

"Let them alone."

Anita and I gave him our most friendly smiles.

"Thanks."

He bowed to Anita with a sweeping gesture. "I will show you over the
control room presently."

His gaze went to the peak of the bow. The little hooded cubby there
was the control room. Satisfaction swept me. Then this, above us in
the tower, must surely be the signal room. Would Brotow follow us up?
I hoped not. I wanted to be alone with the duty-man up there, giving
me a chance to get at the projector controls if Miko's signal should
come.

I drew Anita past Brotow, who had stood aside. "Thanks," I repeated.
"We won't be long."

We mounted the little ladder.


CHAPTER XXXI

_In the Tower Cubby_

"Hurry, Anita!"

I feared that Potan might come up from the hull at any moment and stop
us. The duty-man over us gazed down, his huge head and shoulders
blocking the small signal room window. Brotow called up in Martian,
telling him to let us come. He scowled, but when we reached the trap
in the room floor-grid, we found him standing aside to admit us.

I flung a swift glance around. It was a metallic cubby, not much over
fifteen feet square, with an eight-foot arched ceiling. There were
instrument panels. The range-finder for the giant projector was here;
its little telescope with the trajectory apparatus and the firing
switch were unmistakable. And the signalling apparatus was here! Not a
Martian set, but a fully powerful Botz ultra-violet helio sender with
its attendant receiving mirrors. The _Planetara_ had used the Botz
system, so I was thoroughly familiar with it. I saw, too, what seemed
to be weapons: a row of small fragile glass globes, hanging on clips
along the wall--bombs, each the size of a man's fist. And a broad belt
with bombs in its padded compartments.

My heart was pounding as my first quick glance took in these details.
I saw also that the room had four small oval window openings. They
were breast-high above the floor; from the deck below I knew that the
angle of vision was such that the men down there could not see into
this room except to glimpse its upper portion near the ceiling. And
the helio set was banked on a low table near the floor.

In a corner of the room a small ladder led through a ceiling trap to
the cubby roof. This upper trap was open. Four feet above the
room-roof was the arch of the dome, with the entrance to the upper
exit-lock directly above us. The weapons and the belt of bombs were
near this ascending ladder, evidently placed here as equipment for use
from the top of the dome.

       *       *       *       *       *

I turned to the solitary duty-man. I must gain his confidence at once.
Anita had laid her helmet aside. She spoke first.

"We were with Set Miko," she said smilingly, "in the wreck of the
_Planetara_. You heard of it? We know where the treasure is."

This duty-man was a full seven feet tall, and the most heavy-set
Martian I had ever seen. A tremendous, beetling-browed, scowling
fellow. He stood with hands on his hips, his leather-garbed legs
spread wide; and as I fronted him I felt like a child. He was silent,
glaring down at me as I drew his attention from Anita.

"You speak English? We are not skilled with Martian."

I wondered if at the next time of sleep this fellow would be on duty
here. I hoped not; it would not be easy to trick him and find an
opportunity to flash a signal. But that task was some hours away as
yet; I would worry about it when the time came. Just now I was
concerned with Miko and his little band, who at any moment might
arrive in sight. If we could persuade this scowling duty-man to turn
the projector on them....

He answered me in ready English:

"You are the man Gregg Haljan? And this is the sister of George
Prince--what do you want up here?"

"I am a navigator. Brotow wants me to pilot the ship when we advance
to attack Grantline."

"This is not the control room."

"No, I know it isn't."

I put my helmet carefully on the floor-grid beside Anita's. I
straightened to find the brigand gazing at her. He did not speak; he
was still scowling. But in the dim blue glow of the cubby I caught the
look in his eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

I said hastily, "Grantline knows your ship has landed here on
Archimedes. His camp is off there on the Mare Imbrium. He sent up a
signal--you saw it, didn't you?--just before Miss Prince and I came
aboard. He was trying to pretend that he was your Earth-party, Miko
and Coniston."

"Why?"

The fellow turned his scowl on me, but Anita brought his gaze back to
her. She put in quickly:

"Grantline, as Brother always said, has no great cunning. I believe
he's planning now to creep up on us, catch us unaware by pretending
that he is Miko."

"If he does that," I said, "we will turn this electronic projector on
him and annihilate him. You have its firing mechanism here."

"Who told you so?" he shot at me.

I gestured. "I see it here. It's obvious. I'm skilled at
trajectory-firing. If Grantline appears down there now, I'll help
you--"

"Is it connected?" Anita demanded boldly.

"Yes," he said. "You have on your Erentz suits: are you going to the
dome-roof? Then go."

But that was what we did not want to do. Anita's glance seemed to tell
me to let her handle this. I turned toward one of the cubby windows;
she said sweetly:

"Are you in charge of this room? Show me how that projector is
operated; it will be invincible against the Grantline camp."

"Yes."

       *       *       *       *       *

I had my back to them for a moment. Through the breast-high oval I
could see down across the deck-space and out through the side dome
windows. And my heart suddenly leaped into my throat. It seemed that
down there in the Earthlit shadows, where the spreading base of the
giant crater joined the plains, a light was bobbing. I gazed,
stricken. Miko's lights? Was he advancing, preparing to signal? I
tried to gauge the distance; it was not over two miles from here.

Or was it not a light at all? With the naked eye, I could not be sure.
Perhaps there was a telescopic finder here in the cubby....

I was subconsciously aware of the voices of Anita and the duty-man
behind me. Then abruptly I heard Anita's low cry. I whirled around.

The giant Martian had gathered her into his huge arms, his
heavy-jowled gray face with a leering grin close to hers!

He saw me coming. He held her with one arm: his other flung at me,
caught me, knocked me backward. He rasped:

"Get out of here! Go up to the dome, leave us."

Anita was silently struggling with her little hands at his thick
throat. His blow flung me against a settle. But I held my feet. I was
partly behind him. I leaped again, and as he tried to disengage
himself from Anita to front me, her clutching fingers impeded him.

My bullet projector was in my hand. But in that second as I leaped, I
had the sense to realize I should not fire it and with its noise alarm
the ship. I grasped its barrel, reached upward and struck with its
heavy metal butt. The blow caught the Martian on the skull, and
simultaneously my body struck him.

We went down together, falling partly upon Anita. But the giant had
not cried out, and as I gripped him now, I felt his body limp. I lay
panting. Anita squirmed silently from under us. Blood from the giant's
head was welling out, hot and sticky against my face as I lay sprawled
on him.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cast him off. He was dead, his fragile Martian skull split open by
my blow.

There had been no alarm. The slight noise we made had not been heard
down on the busy deck. Anita and I crouched by the floor. From the
deck all this part of the room could not be seen.

"Dead!"

"Oh, Gregg--"

It forced our hand. I could not wait now for Miko to come. But I could
flash the Earth signal now, and then we would have to make our run to
escape.

Abruptly I remembered that light down at the crater-base! I kept Anita
out of sight on the floor and went cautiously to a window. The deck
was in turmoil with brigands moving about excitedly. Not because of
what had happened in our tower signal room; they were unaware of that.

Miko's signals were showing! I could see them now plainly, down at the
crater-base. A group of hand-lights and a small waving helio-beam.

And they were being answered from the ship! Potan was on the deck--a
babble of voices, above which his rose with roars of command. At one
of the dome windows a brigand with a hand search-beam was sending its
answering light. And I saw that Potan was working over a deck
telescope-finder.

It had all come so suddenly that I was stunned. But I did not wait to
read the signals. I swung back at Anita.

"It's Miko! And they are answering him! Get your helmet; I'll try
firing the projector."

Or would I instead try to send a brief flash-signal to Earth? There
would be no time to do both: we must escape out of here. The route up
through the dome was the only feasible one now.

This range mechanism of the projector was reasonably familiar, and I
felt that I could operate it. The range-finder and switch were on a
ledge at one of the windows. I rushed to it. As I swung the little
telescope, training it down on Miko's lights, I could see the huge
projector on the deck swinging similarly. Its movement surprised the
