but whenever her small imaginative power had succeeded in doing so--not
unfrequently at first--she had seen him as in the last moments of his
life, a curse on his only son on his trembling lips. This horrible
impression deprived her of the last consolation of the mourner: a
beautiful memory, while it destroyed her proud and glad satisfaction in
her only child. The youth, who had till now been her soul's idol, was
stigmatized and branded in her eyes. She might not ignore the burden
laid on Orion by that most just man; instead of taking him to her heart
with double tenderness and softening or healing the fearful punishment
inflicted by his father, she could only pity him. When Orion came to see
her she would stroke his waving hair and, as she desired not to wound
him and make him even more unhappy than he must be already, she neither
blamed nor admonished him, and never reminded him of his father's curse.
And how beggared was that frugal heart, accustomed to spend all its
store of love on so few objects--nay, chiefly on one alone who was now
no more!

The happy voices of the children had always given her pleasure, so
long as they did not disturb her suffering husband; now, they too were
silent. She had withdrawn the sunshine of her narrow affection from her
only grandchild, who had hitherto held a place in it, for little Mary
had had a share in the horrors that had come upon her and Orion in her
husband's last moments. Indeed, the bereaved woman's excited fancy had
firmly conceived the mad notion that the child was the evil genius of
the house and the tool of Satan.

Neforis had, however, enjoyed some hours of greater ease during the last
two days. In the misery of wakefulness which was beginning to torture
her like an acute pain, she had suddenly recollected what relief from
sleeplessness her husband had been wont to find in the opium pillules,
and a box of the medicine, only just opened, was at hand. And was not
she, too, suffering unutterable wretchedness? Why should she neglect
the remedy which had so greatly mitigated her husband's distress? It was
said to have a bad effect after long and frequent use, and she had often
checked the Mukaukas in taking it too freely; but could her sufferings
be greater? Would she not, indeed, be thankful to the drug if it should
shorten her miserable existence?

So she took the familiar remedy, at first hesitatingly and then more
freely; and on the second day again, with real pleasure and happy
expectancy, for it had not merely procured her a good night but had
brought her joy in the morning: The dead had appeared to her, and for
the first time not in the act of cursing, but as a young and happy man.

No one in the house knew what comfort the widow had had recourse to; the
physician and her son had been glad yesterday to find her more composed.

When Orion returned home, after concluding his business with the
money-changer at Fostat, he had to make his way through a crowd of
people, and found the court-yard full of men, and the guards and
servants in the greatest excitement. No less a personage than the
Patriarch had arrived on a visit, and was now in conference with
Neforis. Sebek, the steward, informed Orion that he had asked for him,
and that his mother wished that he should immediately join them and pay
his respects to the very reverend Father.

"She wished it?" asked the young man, as he tossed his riding-hat to a
slave, and he stood hesitating.

He was too much a son of his time, and the Church and her ministers had
exercised too marked influence on his education, for the great prelate's
visit to be regarded otherwise than as a high honor. At the same time
he could not forget the insult done to his father's vanes, nor the Arab
general's warning to be on his guard against Benjamin's enmity; and
perhaps, he said to himself, it might be better to avoid a meeting with
the powerful priest than to expose himself to the danger of losing his
self-control and finding fresh food for his wrath.

However, he had in fact no choice, for the patriarch just now came out
of the fountain-hall into the viridarium. The old man's tall figure was
not bent, his snowy hair flowed in abundance round his proud head, and a
white beard fell in soft waves far down his breast. His fine eyes rested
on the young man with a keen glance, and though he had last seen Orion
as a boy he recognized him at once as the master of the house. While
Orion bowed low before him, the patriarch, in his deep, rich voice,
addressed him with cheerful dignity.

"All hail, son of my never-to-be-forgotten friend! The child I remember,
has, I see, grown to a fine man. I have devoted a short time to the
mother, and now I must say what is needful to the son."

"In my father's study," Orion said to the steward; and he led the way
with the ceremonious politeness of a chamberlain of the imperial court.

The patriarch, as he followed him, signed to his escort to remain
behind, and as soon as the door was closed upon them, he went up to
Orion and exclaimed: "Again I greet you! This, then, is the descendant
of the great Menas, the son of Mukaukas George, the adored ruler of my
flock at Memphis, who held the first place among the gilded youth of
Constantinople in their gay whirl! A strange achievement for an Egyptian
and a Christian! But first of all, child, first give me your hand!" He
held out his right hand and Orion accepted it, but not without reserve,
for he had suspected a scornful ring in the patriarch's address, and he
could not help asking himself whether this man honestly meant so well
by him, that he could address him thus paternally as "child" in all
sincerity of heart? To refuse his hand was, however, impossible; still,
he found courage to reply:

"I can but obey your desire, holy Father; but, at the same time, I do
not know whether it becomes the son to grasp the hand of the foe who was
not to be appeased even by Death, the reconciler--who grossly insulted
the father, the noblest of men, and, in him, the son too, at the grave
itself."

The patriarch shook his head with a supercilious smile, and a hot thrill
shot through Orion as Benjamin laid his hand on his shoulder and said
with grave kindness:

"A Christian does not find it hard to forgive a sinner, an antagonist,
an enemy; and it is a joy to me to pardon the son who feels himself
injured through his lost father, blind and foolish as his indignation
may be. Your wrath can no more affect me, Child, than the Almighty in
Heaven, and it would not even be blameworthy, but that--and of this
we must speak presently--but that--well, I will be frank with you at
once--but that your manner clearly and unmistakably betrays what you
lack to make you a true Christian, and such a man as he must be who
fills so conspicuous a position in this land governed by infidels. You
know what I mean?"

The prelate let his hand slip from the young man's shoulder, looking
enquiringly in his face; and when Orion, finding no reply ready, drew
back a step or two, the old man went on with growing excitement:

"It is humility, pious and submissive faith, that I find you lack, my
friend. Who, indeed, am I? But as the Vicar, the representative of Him
before whom we all are as worms in the dust, I must insist that every
man who calls himself a Christian, a Jacobite, shall submit to my will
and orders, without hesitation or doubt, as obediently and unresistingly
as though salvation or woe had fallen on him from above. What would
become of us, if individuals were to take upon themselves to defy me and
walk in their own way? In one miserable generation, and with the death
of the elders who had grown up as true Christians, the doctrine of the
Saviour would be extinct on the shores of the Nile, the crescent would
rise in the place of the Cross, and our cry would go up to Heaven for so
many lost souls. Learn, haughty youth, to bow humbly and submissively
to the will of the Most High and of His vicar on earth, and let me show
you, from your demeanor to myself especially, how far your own judgment
is to be relied on. You regard me as your father's enemy?"

"Yes," said Orion firmly.

"And I loved him as a brother!" replied the patriarch in a softer voice.
"How gladly would I have heaped his bier with palm branches of peace,
such as the Church alone can grow, wet with my own tears!"

"And yet," cried Orion, "you denied to him, whom you call your friend,
what the Church does not refuse to thieves and murderers, if only they
desire forgiveness and have received absolution from a priest;
and that...."

"And that your father did!" interrupted the old man. "Peace be to him!
He is now, no doubt, gazing on the glory of the Lord. And nevertheless
I could forbid the priesthood here showing him honor at the grave.--Why?
For what urgent reason was such a prohibition spoken by a friend against
a friend?"

"Because you wished to brand him, in the eyes of the world, as the man
who lent his support to the unbelievers and helped them to victory,"
said Orion gloomily.

"How well the boy can read the thoughts of men!" exclaimed the prelate,
looking at the young man with approbation in which, however, there was
some irony and annoyance. "Very good. We will assume that my object
was to show the Christians of Memphis what fate awaits the man,
who surrenders his country to the enemy and walks hand-in-hand with
unbelievers? And may I not possibly have been right?"

"Do you suppose my father invited the Arabs?" interrupted the young man.

"No, Child," replied the patriarch, "the enemy came of his own free
will."

"And you," Orion went on, "after the Greeks had driven you into exile,
prophesied from the desert that they would come and overthrow the
Melchites, the Greek enemies of our faith, drive them out of the
country."

"It was revealed to me by the Lord!" replied the old man, bowing his
head reverently. "And yet other things were shown to me while I dwelt
a devout ascetic, mortifying my flesh under the scorching sun of the
desert. Beware my son, beware! Heed my warning, lest it should be
fulfilled and the house of Menas vanish like clouds swept before the
wind.--Your father, I know, regarded my prophecy as advice given by me
to receive the infidels as the instrument of the Almighty and to support
them in driving the Melchite oppressors out of the land."

"Your prophecy," replied Orion, "had, no doubt, a marked effect on my
father; and when the cause of the emperor and the Greeks was lost,
your opinion that the Melchites were unbelievers as much as the sons
of Islam, was of infinite comfort to him. For he, if any one--as you
know--had good reason to hate the sectarians who killed his two sons in
their prime. What followed, he did to rescue his and your unfortunate
brethren and dependants from destruction. Here, here in this desk,
lies his answer to the emperor's accusations, as given to the Greek
deputation who had speech of him in this very room. He wrote it down as
soon as they had left him. Will you hear it?"

"I can guess its purport."

"No, no!" cried the excited youth; he hastily opened his father's desk,
laid his hand at once on the wax tablet, and exclaimed: "This was his
reply!" And he proceeded to read:

"These Arabs, few as they are, are stronger and more powerful than we
with all our numbers. One man of them is equal to a hundred of us, for
they rush on death and love it better than life. Each of them presses
to the front in battle, and they have no longing to return home and
to their families. For every Christian they kill they look for a great
reward in Heaven, and they say that the gates of Paradise open at once
for those who fall in the fight. They have not a wish in this world
beyond the satisfaction of their barest need of food and clothing. We,
on the contrary, love life and dread death;--how can we stand against
them? I tell you that I will not break the peace I have concluded with
the Arabs. ..."

"And what is the upshot of all this reply?" interrupted the patriarch
shrugging his shoulders.

"That my father found himself compelled to conclude a peace, and
that--but read on.--That as a wise man he was forced to ally himself
with the foe."

"The foe to whom he yielded more readily and paid much greater honor
than became him as a Christian!--Does not this discourse convey the idea
that the joys of Paradise solely and exclusively await our damned and
blood-thirsty oppressors?--And the Moslem Paradise! What is it but a
gulf of iniquity, in which they are to wallow in sensual delight? The
false prophet invented it to tempt his followers to force his lying
creed, by might of arms and in mad contempt of death, on nation after
nation. Our Lord, the Word made flesh, came down on earth to win hearts
and souls by the persuasive power of the living truth, one and eternal,
which emanates from Him as light proceeds from the sun; this Mohammed,
on the contrary, is a sword made flesh! For me, then, there is no choice
but to submit to superior strength; but I can still hate and loathe
their accursed and soul-destroying superstition.--And so I do, and so I
shall, to the last throb of this old heart, which only longs for rest,
the sooner the better....

"But you? And your father? Verily, verily, the man who, even for an
instant, ceases to hate unbelief or false doctrine has sinned for his
whole life on this side of the grave and beyond it; sinned against
the only true and saving faith and its divine Founder. Blasphemous and
flattering praise of the piety and moderation of our foes, the very
antichrist incarnate, who kill both body and soul.--With these your
father fouled his heart and tongue..."

"Fouled?" cried Orion and the blood tingled in his cheeks. "He kept his
heart and tongue alike pure and honorable; never did a false word pass
his lips. Justice, justice to all, even to his enemies, was the ruling
principle, the guiding clue of his blameless life; and the noblest of
the heathen Greeks admired the man who could so far triumph over himself
as to recognize what was fine and good in a foe."

"And they were right," replied the patriarch, "for they were not yet
acquainted with truth. In a worldly sense, even now, each of us may aim
at such magnanimity; but the man who forgives those who tamper with
the sacred truth, which is the bread, meat, and wine of the Christian's
soul, sins against that truth; and, if he is a leader of men, he draws
on those who look up to him, and who are only too ready to follow his
example, into everlasting fire. Where your father ought to have been a
recalcitrant though conquered enemy, he became an ally; nay, so far as
the leader of the infidels was concerned, a friend--how many tears it
cost me! And our hapless people were forced to see this attitude
of their chief, and imitated it.--Forgive their seducer, Merciful
God!--forming their conduct on his. Thousands fell away from our saving
faith and went over to those, who in their eyes could not be reprobate,
could not be damned, since they saw them dwelling and working
hand-in-hand with their wise and righteous leader; and it was simply and
solely to warn his misguided people that I did not hesitate to wound my
own heart, to raise the voice of reproof at the grave of a dear friend,
and to refuse the honor and blessing of which his just and virtuous life
rendered him more worthy than thousands of others. I have spoken, and
now your foolish anger must be appeased; now you will grasp the hand
held out to you by the shepherd of the souls entrusted to him with an
easy and willing heart."

And again he offered his hand to Orion, who, however, again took it
doubtfully, and instead of looking the prelate in the face, cast down
his eyes in gloomy bewilderment. The patriarch appeared not to observe
the young man's repulsion and clasped his hand warmly. Then he changed
the subject, speaking of the grieving widow, of the decadence of
Memphis, of Orion's plans for the future, and finally of the gems
dedicated to the Church by the deceased Mukaukas. The dialogue had taken
a calm, conversational tone; the patriarch was sitting in the dead man's
arm-chair, and there was nothing forced or unnatural in his asking,
in the course of discussing the jewels, what had become of the great
emerald.

Orion replied, in the same tone, that this stone was not, strictly
speaking, any part of his father's gift; but Benjamin expressed an
opposite opinion.

All the tortures Orion had endured since that luckless deed in the
tablinum revived in his soul during this discussion; however, it was
some small relief to him to perceive, that neither his mother nor Dame
Susannah seemed to have told the patriarch the guilt he had incurred
by reason of that gem. Susannah, of course, had said nothing of the
incident in order to avoid speaking of her daughter's false evidence;
still, this miserable business might easily have come to the ears of the
stern old man, and to the guilty youth no sacrifice seemed too great to
smother any enquiry for the ill-fated jewel. He unhesitatingly explained
that the emerald had disappeared, but that he was quite ready to make
good its value. Benjamin might fix his own estimate, and name any sum he
wished for some benevolent purpose, and he, Orion, was ready to pay it
to him on the spot.

The prelate, however, calmly persisted in his demand, enjoined Orion to
have a diligent search made for the gem, and declared that he regarded
it as the property of the Church. He added that, when his patience was
at an end, he should positively insist on its surrender and bring every
means at his disposal into play to procure it.

Orion had no choice but to say that he would prosecute his search for
the lost stone; but his acquiescence was sullen, as that of a man who
accedes to an unreasonable demand.

At first the patriarch took this coolly; but presently, when he rose to
take leave, his demeanor changed; he said, with stern solemnity:

"I know you now, Son of Mukaukas George, and I end as I began: The
humility of the Christian is far from you, you are ignorant of the
power and dignity of our Faith, you do not even know the vast love that
animates it, and the fervent longing to lead the straying sinner back to
the path of salvation.--Your admirable mother has told me, with tears in
her eyes, of the abyss over which you are standing. It is your desire
to bind yourself for life to a heretic, a Melchite--and there is another
thing which fills her pious mother's heart with fears, which tortures it
as she thinks of you and your eternal welfare. She promised to confide
this to my ear in church, and I shall find leisure to consider of it on
my return home; but at any rate, and be it what it may, it cannot more
greatly imperil your soul than marriage with a Melchite.

"On what have you set your heart? On the mere joys of earth! You sue for
the hand of an unbeliever, the daughter of an unbelieving heretic;
you go over to Fostat--nay, hear me out--and place your brain and your
strong arm at the service of the infidels--it is but yesterday; but I,
I, the shepherd of my flock, will not suffer that he who is the highest
in rank, the richest in possessions, the most powerful by the mere
dignity of his name, shall pervert thousands of the Jacobite brethren. I
have the will and the power too, to close the sluice gates against such
a disaster. Obey me, or you shall rue it with tears of blood."

The prelate paused, expecting to see Orion fall on his knees before
him; but the young man did nothing of the kind. He stood looking at him,
open-eyed and agitated, but undecided, and Benjamin went on with added
vehemence:

"I came to you to lift up my voice in protest, and I desire, I require,
I command you: sever all ties with the enemies of your nation and of
your faith, cast out your love for the Melchite Siren, who will seduce
your immortal part to inevitable perdition...."

Till this Orion had listened with bowed head and in silence to the
diatribe which the patriarch had hurled at him like a curse; but at this
point his whole being rose in revolt, all self-control forsook him, and
he interrupted the speaker in loud tones:

"Never, never, never will I do such a thing! Insult me as you will. What
I am, I will still be: a faithful son of the Church to which my fathers
belonged, and for which my brothers died. In all humility I acknowledge
Jesus Christ as my Lord. I believe in him, believe in the God-made-man
who died to save us, and who brought love into the world, and I will
remain unpersuaded and faithful to my own love. Never will I forsake her
who has been to me like a messenger from God, like a good angel to teach
me how to lay hold on what is earnest and noble in life-her whom my
father, too, held dear. Power, indeed, is yours. Demand of me anything
reasonable, and within my attainment, and I will try to force myself to
obedience; but I never can and never will be faithless to her, to prove
my faith to you; and as to the Arabs...."

"Enough!" exclaimed the prelate. "I am on my way to Upper Egypt. Make
your choice by my return. I give you till then to come to a right mind,
to think the matter over; and it is quite deliberately that I bid you to
forget the Melchite. That you, of all men, should marry a heretic would
be an abomination not to be borne. With regard to your alliance with the
Arabs, and whether it becomes you--being what you are--to take service
with them, we will discuss it at a future day. If, by the time I return,
you have thought better of the matter as regards your marriage--and you
are free to choose any Jacobite maiden--then I will speak to you in a
different tone. I will then offer you my friendship and support; instead
of the Church's curse I will pronounce her blessing on you--the pardon
and grace of the Almighty, a smooth path to eternity and peace, and the
prospect of giving new joy to the aching heart of your sorrowing mother.
My last word is that you must and shall give up the woman from whom you
can look for nothing but perdition."

"I cannot, and shall not, and I never will!" replied Orion firmly.

"Then I can, and shall, and will make you feel how heavily the curse
falls which, in the last resort, I shall not hesitate to pronounce upon
you!"

"It is in your power," said Orion. "But if you proceed to extremities
with me, you will drive me to seek the blessing for which my soul
thirsts more ardently than you, my lord, can imagine, and the salvation
I crave, with her whom you hold reprobate, and on the further side of
the Nile."

"I dare you!" cried the patriarch, quitting the room with a resolute
step and flaming cheeks.




CHAPTER II.

Orion was alone in the spacious room, feeling as though the whole world
were sinking into nothingness after the rack of storm and tempest.
At first he was merely conscious of having gone through a fearful
experience, which threatened to fling him far outside the sphere of
everything he was wont to reverence and hold sacred. For love and honor
of his guardian angel he had declared war to the patriarch, and that
man's power was as great as his stature. Still, the image of Paula rose
high and supreme above that of the terrible old man, in Orion's fancy,
and his father, as it seemed to him, was like an ally in the battle he
was destined to wage in his own strength.

The young man's vivid imagination and excellent memory recapitulated
every word the prelate had uttered. The domineering old man, overflowing
with bigoted zeal, had played with him as a cat with a mouse. He had
tried to search his soul and sift him to the bottom before he attacked
the subject with which he ought to have begun, and concerning which
he was fully informed when he offered him his hand that first time--as
cheerfully, too, as though he had no serious grievance seething in
his soul. Orion resolved that he would cling fast to his faith without
Benjamin's interposition, and not allow his hold on the two other
Christian graces, Hope and Love, to be weakened by his influence.

By some miracle his mother had not yet told the prelate of his father's
curse, in spite of the anguish of her aching heart; and what a weapon
would not that have been in Benjamin's hand. It was with the deepest
pity that he thought of that poor, grief-stricken woman, and the idea
flashed through his mind that the patriarch might have gone back to his
mother to accuse him and to urge her to further revelations.

Many minutes had passed since the patriarch had left him; Orion had
allowed his illustrious guest to depart unescorted, and this could
not fail to excite surprise. Such a breach of good manners, of the
uncodified laws of society, struck Orion, the son of a noble and ancient
house, who had drunk in his regard for them as it were with his mother's
milk, as an indignity to himself; and to repair it he started
up, hastily smoothing down his tumbled hair, and hurried into the
viridarium. His fears were confirmed, for the patriarch's following were
standing in the fountain-hall close to the exit; his mother, too, was
there and Benjamin was in the act of departure.

The old man accepted his offered escort with dignified affability, as if
nothing but what was pleasant had passed between him and Orion. As they
crossed the viridarium he asked his young host what was the name of some
rare flower, and counselled him to take care that shade-giving trees
were planted in abundance on his various estates. In the outer hall, on
either side of the door, was a statue: Truth and justice, two fine works
by Aristeas of Alexandria, who flourished in the time of the Emperor
Hadrian. Justice held the scales and sword, Truth was gazing into her
mirror. As the patriarch approached them, he said to the priest who
walked by his side: "Still here!" Then, standing still, he said, partly
to Orion and partly to his companion:

"Your father, I see, neglected my suggestion that these heathen images
had no place in any Christian house, and least of all in one attached,
as this is, to a public function. We, no doubt, know the meaning of the
symbols they bear; but how easily might the ordinary man, waiting here,
mistake the figure with the mirror for Vanity and that with the scales
Venality: 'Pay us what we ask,' she might be saying, 'or else your life
is a forfeit,'--so the sword would imply."

He smiled and walked on, but added airily to Orion:

"When I come again--you know--I shall be pleased if my eye is no longer
offended by these mementos of an extinct idolatry."

"Truth and justice!" replied Orion in a constrained voice. "They have
dwelt on this spot and ruled in this house for nearly five hundred
years."

"It would look better, and be more suitable," retorted the patriarch,
"if you could say that of Him to whom alone the place of honor is due
in a Christian house; in His presence every virtue flourishes of itself.
The Christian should proscribe every image from his dwelling; at the
door of his heart only should he raise an image on the one hand of Faith
and on the other of Humility."

By this time they had reached the court-yard, where Susannah's chariot
was waiting. Orion helped the prelate into it, and when Benjamin offered
him his hand to kiss, in the presence of several hundred slaves and
servants, all on their knees, the young man lightly touched it with
his lips. He stood bowed low in reverence so long as the holy father
remained visible, in the attitude of blessing the crowd from the open
side of the chariot; then he hurried away to join his mother.

He expected to find her exhausted by the excitement of the patriarch's
visit; but, in fact, she was more composed than he had seen her yet
since his father's death. Her eyes indeed, commonly so sober in their
expression, were bright with a kind of rapture which puzzled Orion. Had
she been thinking of his father? Could the patriarch have succeeded in
inspiring her pious fervor to such a pitch, that it had carried her, so
to speak, out of herself?

She was dressed to go to church, and after expressing her delight at the
honor done to herself and her whole household by the prelate's visit,
she invited Orion to accompany her. Though he had proposed devoting the
next few hours to a different purpose, the dutiful son at once acceded
to this wish; he helped her into her chariot, bid the driver go slowly,
and seated himself by her side.

As they drove along he asked her what she had told the patriarch, and
her replies might have reassured him but that she filled him with grave
anxiety on fresh grounds. Her mind seemed to have suffered under the
stress of grief. It was usually so clear, so judicious, so reasonable;
and now all she said was incoherent and not more than half intelligible.
Still, one thing he distinctly understood: that she had not confided to
the patriarch the fact of his father's curse. The prelate must certainly
have censured the conduct of the deceased to her also and that had
sealed her lips. She complained to her son that Benjamin had never
understood her lost husband, and that she had felt compelled to repress
her desire to disclose everything to him. Nowhere but in church, in the
very presence of the Redeemer, could she bring herself to allow him to
read her heart as it were an open book. A voice had warned her that in
the house of God alone, could she find salvation for herself and her
son; that voice she heard day and night, and much as it pained her to
grieve him he must hear it now--: That voice never ceased to enjoin her
to tear asunder his connection with the Melchite maiden. Last evening
it had seemed to her that it was her eldest son, who had died for the
Jacobite faith, that was speaking to her. The voice had sounded like
his, and it had warned her that the ancient house of Menas must perish,
if a Melchite should taint the pure blood of their race. And Benjamin
had confirmed her fears; he had come back to her on purpose to beseech
her to oppose Orion's sinful affection for Thomas' daughter with the
utmost maternal authority, and, as the patriarch expressed the same
desire as the voice, it must be from God and she must obey it.

Her old grudge against Paula had revived, and her very tones betrayed
that it grew stronger with every word she spoke which had any reference
to the girl.

At this Orion begged her to be calm, reminding her of the promise she
had made him by his father's deathbed; and just as his mother was about
to reply in a tone of pitiful recrimination, the chariot stopped at the
door of the church. He did everything in his power to soothe her;
his gentle and tender tones comforted her, and she nodded to him more
happily, following him into the sanctuary.

Beyond the narthex--the vestibule of the church, where three penitents
were flaying their backs with scourges by the side of a small marble
fountain, and in full view of the crowd--they were forced to part,
as the women were divided from the men by a screen of finely-carved
woodwork.

As Neforis went to her place, she shook her bowed head: she was
meditating on the choice offered her by Orion, of yielding to the
patriarch's commands or to her son's wishes. How gladly would she have
seen her son in bright spirits again. But Benjamin had threatened her
with the loss of all the joys of Heaven, if she should agree to Orion's
alliance with the heretic--and the joys of Heaven to her meant a
meeting, a recognition, for which she would willingly have sacrificed
her son and everything else that was dear to her heart.

Orion assisted at the service in the place reserved for the men of his
family, close to the hekel, or holy of holies, where the altar stood
and the priests performed their functions. A partition, covered with
ill-wrought images and a few gilt ornaments, divided it from the main
body of the church, and the whole edifice produced an impression that
was neither splendid nor particularly edifying. The basilica, which had
once been richly decorated, had been plundered by the Melchites in a
fight between them and the Jacobites, and the impoverished city had
not been in a position to restore the venerable church to anything
approaching its original splendor. Orion looked round him; but could see
nothing calculated to raise his devotion.

The congregation were required to stand all through the service; and
as it often was a very long business, not the women only, behind the
screen, but many of the men supported themselves like cripples on
crutches. How unpleasing, too, were the tones of the Egyptian chant,
accompanied by the frequent clang of a metal cymbal and mingled with the
babble of chattering men and women, checked only when the talk became a
quarrel, by a priest who loudly and vehemently shouted for silence from
the hekel.

Generally the chanted liturgy constituted the whole function, unless the
Lord's Supper was administered; but in these anxious times, for above
a week past, a priest or a monk preached a daily sermon. This began a
short while after the young man had taken his place, and it was with
painful feelings that he recognized, in the hollow-eyed and ragged monk
who mounted the pulpit, a priest whom he had seen more than once drunk
to imbecility, in Nesptah's tavern, And the revolting creature, who thus
flaunted his dirty, dishevelled person even in the pulpit, thundered
down on the trembling congregation declarations that the delay in
the rising of the Nile was the consequence of their sins, and God's
punishment for their evil deeds. Instead of comforting the terrified
souls, or encouraging their faith and bidding them hope for better
times, he set before them in burning words the punishment that awaited
their wicked despondency.

God Almighty was plaguing them and the land with great heat; but this
was like the cool north wind at Advent-tide, as compared with the
fierceness of the furnace of hell which Satan was making hot for them.
The scorching sun on earth at any rate gave them daylight, but the
flames of hell shed no light, that the terrors might never cease of
those whom the devil's myrmidons drove over the narrow bridge leading to
his horrible realm, goading them with spears and pitchforks, with heavy
cudgelling or gnawing of their flesh. In the anguish of death, and the
crush by the way, mothers trod down their infants and fathers their
daughters; and when the damned reached the spiked threshold of hell
itself, a hideous and poisoned vapor rose up to meet them, choking
them, and yet giving them renewed strength to feel fresh torments with
increased keenness of every sense. Then the devil's shrieks of anguish,
which shake the vault of hell, came thundering on their ears; with
hideous yells he snatched at them from the grate on which he lay,
crushed and squeezed them in his iron jaws like a bunch of grapes, and
swallowed them into his fiery maw; or else they were hung up by their
tongues by attendant friends in Satan's fiery furnace, or dragged
alternately through ice and flames, and finally beaten to pieces on
the anvil of hell, or throttled and wrung with ropes and cloths.--As
compared with the torments they would suffer there, every present
anxiety was as the kiss of a lover. Mothers would hear the brain
seething in their infants' skulls....

At this point of the monk's grewsome discourse, Orion turned away with a
shudder. The curse with which the patriarch had threatened him recurred
to his mind; he could have fancied that the hot, stuffy, incense-laden
air of the church was full of flapping daws and hideous bats. Deadly
horror crept over him; but then, suddenly, the rebound came of youthful
vigor, longing for freedom and joy in living; a voice within cried out:
"Away with coercion and chains! Winged spirit, use your pinions! Down
with the god of terrors! He is not that Heavenly Father whose love
embraces mankind. Forward, leap up and be free! Trusting in your
own strength, guided by your own will, go boldly forth into the open
sunshine of life! Be free, be free!--Still, be not like a slave who is
no sooner cut adrift and left to himself than he falls a slave again to
his own senses. No; but striving unceasingly and of your own free will,
in the sweat of your brow, to reach the high goal, to work out to its
fulfilment and fruition everything that is best in your soul and mind.
Yes--life is a ministry.... I, like the disciples of the Stoa, will
strive after all that is known as virtue, with no other end in view than
to practise it for its own sake, because it is fair and gives unmixed
joys. I will rely on myself to seek the truth--and do what I feel to
be right and good; this, henceforth, shall be the lofty aim of my
existence. To the two chief desires of my heart--: atonement to my
father and union with Paula, I here add a third: the attainment of the
loftiest goal that I may reach, by valiant striving to get as near to it
as my strength will allow. The road thither is by Work; the guiding star
I must keep before me that I may not go astray is my Love!"

His cheeks were burning, and with a deep breath he looked about him as
though to find an adversary with whom he might measure his strength. The
horrible sermon was ended and the words of the chanting crowd fell on
his ear. "Lord, reward me not according to mine iniquities!" The load of
his own sin fell on his heart again, and his dying father's curse;
his proud head drooped on his breast, and he said to himself that his
burthen was too heavy for him to venture on the bold flight for which he
had but now spread his wings. The ban was not yet lifted; he was not yet
redeemed from its crushing weight. But the mere word "redeemed" brought
to his mind the image of Him who took on Himself the sins of the world;
and the more deeply he contemplated the nature of the Saviour whom he
had loved from his childhood, the more surely he felt that it would
be doing no violence to the freedom of his own will, but rather be the
fulfilment of a long-felt desire, if he were to tell Jesus simply all
that oppressed him; that his love for Him, his faith in Him, had a
saving power even for his soul. He lifted up his eyes and heart to
Him, and to Him, as to a trusted friend, confided all that troubled and
hindered him and besought His aid.

In loving Him, he and Paula were one, he knew, though they had not the
same idea of His nature.

Orion, as he meditated, thought out the points on which her views
deviated from his own: she believed that the divine and the human
natures were distinct in the person of Christ. And as he reflected on
this creed, till now so horrible in his eyes, he felt that the unique
individuality of the Saviour, shedding forth love and truth, came home
to him more closely when he pictured Him perfect and spotless, yet
feeling as a man; walking among men with all their joy in life in
His heart, alive to every pang and sorrow which can torture mortals,
rejoicing with them, and taking upon Himself unspeakable humiliation,
suffering, and death, with a stricken, bleeding, and yet self-devoting
heart, for pure love of the wretched race to which He could stoop from
His glory. Yes, this Christ could be his Redeemer too. The Almighty Lord
had become his perfect and most loving friend, his glorious, but lenient
and tender brother, to whom he could gladly give his whole heart, who
understood everything, who was ready to forgive everything--even all
that was seething in his aching heart which longed for purification--and
all because He once had suffered as a man suffers.

For the first time he, the Jacobite, dared to confess so much to
himself; and not solely for Paula's sake. A violent clanging on a
cracked metal plate roused him from his meditations by its harsh clamor;
the sacrament of the Last Supper was about to be administered: the
invariable conclusion of the Jacobite service. The bishop came forth
from behind the screen of the inner sanctuary, poured some wine into a
silver cup and crumbled into it two little cakes stamped with the Coptic
cross. Of this mixture he first partook, and then gave it in a spoon
to each member of the congregation who came up to receive it. Orion
approached after two elders of the Church. Finally the priest rinsed
out the cup, and drained the very washings, that no drop of the saving
liquid should be lost.

How high had Orion's heart throbbed when, as a youth, he had been
admitted for the first time to this most sacred of all Christian
privileges! He was instructed in its deep and glorious symbolism, and
had often felt the purifying, saving, and refreshing effect of the
sacrament, strengthening him in all goodness, when he had partaken of it
with his parents and brothers. Hand-in-hand, they had gone home feeling
as if newly robed in body and soul and more closely bound together than
before. And to-day, insensible as he was to the repulsiveness of the
forms of worship of his confession he felt as though the bread and
wine--the Flesh and Blood of the Saviour--had sealed the bond he had
silently entered into with himself; as though the Lord had put forth
an invisible hand to remove the guilt and the curse that crushed him
so sorely. Deep devotion fell on his soul: his future life, he thought,
should bring him nearer to God than ever before, and be spent in loving,
and in the more earnest, full, and laborious exercise of the gifts
Heaven had bestowed on him.




CHAPTER III.

Orion had dreaded the drive home with his mother, but after complaining
to him of Susannah's conduct in having made a startling display of her
vexation in the women's place behind the screen, she had leaned on him
and fallen fast asleep. Her head was on her son's shoulder when they
reached home, and Orion's anxiety for the mother he truly loved was
enhanced when he found it difficult to rouse her. He felt her stagger
like a drunken creature, and he led her not into the fountain-room but
to her bed-chamber, where she only begged to lie down; and hardly had
she done so when she was again overcome by sleep.

Orion now made his way to Gamaliel the jeweller, to purchase from him a
very large and costly diamond, plainly set, and the Israelite's brother
undertook to deliver it to the fair widow at Constantinople, who
was known to him as one of his customers. Orion, in the jeweller's
sitting-room, wrote a letter to his former mistress, in which he begged
her in the most urgent manner to accept the diamond, and in exchange
to return to him the emerald by a swift and trustworthy messenger, whom
Simeon the goldsmith would provide with everything needful.

After all this he went home hungry and weary, to the late midday meal
which he shared, as for many days past, with no one but Eudoxia, Mary's
governess. The little girl was not yet allowed to leave her room, and of
this, for one reason, her instructress was glad, for a dinner alone with
the handsome youth brought extreme gratification to her mature heart.
How considerate was the wealthy and noble heir in desiring the slaves to
offer every dish to her first, how kind in listening to her stories of
her young days and of the illustrious houses in which she had formerly
given lessons! She would have died for him; but, as no opportunity
offered for such a sacrifice, at any rate she never omitted to point
out to him the most delicate morsels, and to supply his room with fresh
flowers.

Besides this, however, she had devoted herself with the most admirable
unselfishness to her pupil, since the child had been ill and her
grandmother had turned against her, noticing, too, that Orion took a
tender and quite fatherly interest in his little niece. This morning
the young man had not had time to enquire for Mary, and Eudoxia's report
that she seemed even more excited than on the day before disturbed him
so greatly, that he rose from table, in spite of Eudoxia's protest,
