The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Sweet Girl Graduate, by Mrs. L.T. Meade

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: A Sweet Girl Graduate

Author: Mrs. L.T. Meade

Release Date: January, 2004  [EBook #4989]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on April 7, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, A SWEET GIRL GRADUATE ***




This eBook was produced by Jim Weiler, xooqi.com



                          A SWEET GIRL GRADUATE

by MRS. L. T. MEADE, 1891
  _________________________________________________________________

  CHAPTER I

 GOING OUT INTO THE WORLD

PRISCILLA'S trunk was neatly packed. It was a new trunk and had a nice
canvas covering over it. The canvas was bound with red braid, and
Priscilla's initials were worked on the top in large plain letters.
Her initials were P. P. P., and they stood for Priscilla Penywern
Peel. The trunk was corded and strapped and put away, and Priscilla
stood by her aunt's side in the little parlor of Penywern Cottage.

"Well, I think I've told you everything," said the aunt.

"Oh, yes, Aunt Raby, I sha'n't forget. I'm to write once a week, and
I'm to try not to be nervous. I don't suppose I shall be-- I don't see
why I should. Girls aren't nervous nowadays, are they?"

"I don't know, my dear. It seems to me that if they aren't they ought
to be. I can understand girls doing hard things if they must. I can
understand any one doing anything that has to be done, but as to not
being nervous-- well-- there! Sit down, Prissie, child, and take your
tea."

Priscilla was tall and slight. Her figure was younger than her years,
which were nearly nineteen, but her face was older. It was an almost
careworn face, thoughtful, grave, with anxious lines already deepening
the seriousness of the too serious mouth.

Priscilla cut some bread and butter and poured out some tea for her
aunt and for herself.

Miss Rachel Peel was not the least like her niece. She was short and
rather dumpy. She had a sensible, downright sort of face, and she took
life with a gravity which would have oppressed a less earnest spirit
than Priscilla's.

"Well, I'm tired," she said, when the meal was over. "I suppose I've
done a great deal more than I thought I had all day. I think I'll go
to bed early. We have said all our last words, haven't we, Priscilla?"

"Pretty nearly, Aunt Raby."

"Oh, yes, that reminds me-- there's one thing more. Your fees will be
all right, of course, and your traveling, and I have arranged about
your washing money."

"Yes, Aunt Raby, oh, yes; everything is all right."

Priscilla fidgeted, moved her position a little and looked longingly
out of the window.

"You must have a little money over and above these things," proceeded
Miss Peel in her sedate voice. "I am not rich, but I'll allow you--
yes, I'll manage to allow you two shillings a week. That will be for
pocket-money, you understand, child."

The girl's old-young face flushed painfully.

"I'll want a few pence for stamps, of course," she said. "But I
sha'n't write a great many letters. I'll be a great deal too busy
studying. You need not allow me anything like so large a sum as that,
Aunt Raby."

"Nonsense, child. You'll find it all too small when you go out into
the world. You are a clever girl, Prissie, and I'm going to be proud
of you. I don't hold with the present craze about women's education.
But I feel somehow that I shall be proud of you. You'll be learned
enough, but you'll be a woman with it all. I wouldn't have you stinted
for the world, Prissie, my dear. Yes, I'll make it ten shillings a
month-- yes, I will. I can easily screw that sum out of the butter
money. Now, not another word. I'm off to bed. Good night, my love."

Priscilla kissed her aunt and went out. It was a lovely autumn
evening. She stepped on to the green sward which surrounded the little
cottage, and with the moonlight casting its full radiance on her slim
figure, looked steadily out over the sea. The cottage was on the top
of some high cliffs. The light of the moon made a bright path over the
water, and Priscilla had a good view of shining, silvered water and
dark, deep blue sky.

She stood perfectly still, gazing straight out before her. Some of the
reflection and brightness of the moonlight seemed to get into her
anxious eyes and the faint dawn of a new-born hope to tremble around
her lips. She thought herself rich with ten shillings a month
pocket-money. She returned to the house, feeling overpowered at Aunt
Raby's goodness.

Upstairs in Prissie's room there were two beds. One was small; in this
she herself slept. The other had now three occupants. Three heads were
raised when Prissie entered the room and three shrill voices
exclaimed:

"Here we are, all wide awake, Prissie, darling!"

This remark, made simultaneously, was followed by prolonged peals of
laughter.

"Three of you in that small bed!" said Priscilla.

She stood still, and a smile broke all over her face. "Why, Hattie,"
she said, catching up the eldest of the three girls and giving her a
fervent hug-- "how did you slip out of Aunt Raby's room?"

"Oh, I managed to," said Hattie in a stage whisper. "Aunt Raby came
upstairs half an hour ago, and she undressed very fast, and got into
bed, and I heard her snoring in about a minute. It was then I slipped
away. She never heard."

"Hop up on the bed now, Prissie," exclaimed Rose, another of the
children, "and let us all have a chat. Here, Katie, if you'll promise
not to cry, you may get into the middle, between Hattie and me, then
you'll be very close to darling Prissie."

Katie was the youngest of the three occupants of the bed; she was
about eight years old; her small face was delicate in its outline, her
mouth peevish; she did not look a strong child, and self-control could
scarcely be expected of her.

Priscilla placed her candle on the chimney-piece, jumped on the bed
according to orders and looked earnestly at her three small sisters.

"Now, Prissie," said Hattie in the important little voice which she
always used, "begin, go on-- tell us all about your grand college
life."

"How can I, Hattie, when I don't know what to say. I can't guess what
I am to do at college."

"Oh, dear," sighed Rose, "I only wish I were the one to go! It will be
very dull living with Aunt Raby when you are away, Priscilla. She
won't let us take long walks, and if ever we go in for a real, jolly
lark we are sure to be punished. Oh, dear, oh, dear!"

"Even though it is for your good, I wish with all my heart you were
not going away, Prissie," said Hattie in her blunt fashion.

Katie burst into sudden loud wails.

Priscilla colored. Then she spoke with firmness. "We have had enough
of this kind of talk. Katie, you shall come and sit in my lap,
darling. I'll wrap you up quite warm in this big shawl. Now, girls,"
she said, "what is the use of making things harder? You know,
perfectly, you two elder ones, why I must go away, and you, Katie, you
know also, don't you, pet?"

"Yes, Prissie," answered Katie, speaking in a broken, half-sobbing
voice, "only I am so lonely."

"But you're not going to be selfish, darling. By and by I'll come back
to you all. Once every year, at least, I'll come back. And then, after
I've gone through my course of study, I'll get a situation of some
sort-- a good situation-- and you three shall come and live with me.
There, what do you say to that? Only three years, and then such a
jolly time. Why, Katie will be only eleven then."

Priscilla spoke in a remarkably cheerful voice, but the appalling
magnitude of three years could not be diminished, and the three little
sisters who were to stay behind with Aunt Raby were still disposed to
view things dismally.

"If she wasn't just what she is----" began Hattie.

"If she didn't think the least tiny morsel of a lark wrong----"
continued Rose.

"Why, then we could pull along somehow," sighed Hattie.

"Oh, you'll pull along as it is," said Priscilla "I'll write to you as
often as ever I can. If possible I'll keep a sort of journal and send
it to you. And perhaps there'll be stories and larks in it. Now you
really must go to sleep, for I have to get up so early in the morning.
Katie, darling, I'll make a corner for you in my bed to-night. Won't
that be a treat?"

"Oh, yes, Prissie."

Katie's pale face was lit up by a radiant smile; Hattie and Rose lay
down side by side and closed their eyes. In a few moments they were
sound asleep.

As they lay in the sound, happy sleep of healthy childhood Priscilla
bent over them and kissed them. Then before she lay down herself she
knelt by the window, looked up at the clear, dark sky in which the
moon sailed in majesty, bent her head, murmured a few words of prayer,
then crept into bed by her little sister's side.

Prissie felt full of courage and good resolves. She was going out into
the world to-morrow, and she was quite determined that the world
should not conquer her, although she knew that she was a very poor
maiden with a specially heavy load of care on her young shoulders.

  CHAPTER II

 THE DELIGHTS OF BEING A FRESHER

THE college was quite shut away in its own grounds, and only from the
upper windows did the girls get a peep of the old university town of
Kingsdene. From these, however, particularly in the winter, they could
see the gabled colleges, the chapels with their rich glory of
architecture and the smooth lawns of the college gardens as they
sloped gently down to the river.

St. Benet's, the college for women, was approached by a private road,
and high entrance gates obstructed the gaze of the curious. Inside
there were cheerful halls and pleasant gardens and gay, fresh,
unrestrained life. But the passer-by got no peep of these things
unless the high gates happened to be open.

This was the first evening of term, and most of the girls were back.
There was nothing very particular going on, and they were walking
about the gardens, and greeting old friends, and telling each other
their experiences, and more or less picking up the threads which had
been broken or loosened in the long vacation.

The evenings were drawing in, but the pleasant twilight which was soon
to be rendered brilliant by the full moon seemed to the girls even
nicer than broad daylight to linger about in. They did not want to go
into the houses; they flitted about in groups here and there, chatting
and laughing merrily.

St. Benet's had three halls, each with its own vice-principal, and a
certain number of resident students. Each hall stood in its own
grounds and was more or less a complete home in itself. There were
resident lecturers and demonstrators for the whole college and one
lady principal, who took the lead and was virtually head of the
college.

Miss Vincent was the name of the present principal. She was an old
lady and had a vice-principal under her at Vincent Hall, the largest
and newest of these spacious homes, where young women received the
advantages of university instruction to prepare them for the battle of
life.

Priscilla was to live at Heath Hall-- a slightly smaller house, which
stood at a little distance away-- its grounds being divided from the
grounds of Vincent Hall by means of a rustic paling. Miss Heath was
the very popular vice-principal of this hall, and Prissie was
considered a fortunate girl to obtain a home in her house. She sat now
a forlorn and rather scared young person, huddled up in one corner of
the fly which turned in at the wide gates, and finally deposited her
and her luggage at the back entrance of Heath Hall.

Priscilla looked out in the darkness of the autumn night with
frightened eyes. She hated herself for feeling nervous. She had told
Aunt Raby that, of course, she would have no silly tremors, yet here
she was trembling and scarcely able to pay the cabman his fare.

She heard a girl's laugh in the distance, and it caused her to start
so violently that she dropped one of her few treasured sixpences,
which went rolling about aimlessly almost under the horse's hoofs.

"Stop a minute, I'll find it for you," said a voice. A tall girl with
big, brown eyes suddenly darted into view, picked up the sixpence as
if by magic, popped it into Priscilla's hand and then vanished.
Priscilla knew that this was the girl who had laughed; she heard her
laughing again as she turned to join some one who was standing beside
a laurel hedge. The two linked their arms together and walked off in
the darkness.

"Such a frightened poor fresher!" said the girl who had picked up the
