"I want to ask all the children in Riverdale," said Flora,
promptly.

"Not all, I think," replied Mrs. Lee.

"Yes, mother, all of them."

"But you know there are a great many bad boys in town. Do
you wish to invite them?"

"Perhaps, if we treat them well, they will be made better by
it."

"Would you like to have Joe Birch come to the party?"

"I don't know, mother," said Flora, musing.

"I think you had better invite only those who will enjoy the
party, and who will not be likely to spoil the pleasure of
others. We will not invite such boys as Joe Birch."

"Just as you think best, dear mother," replied Flora. "Shall
I ask such boys as Tommy Woggs?"

"Tommy isn't a bad boy," said Mrs. Lee, with a smile.

"I don't know that he is; but he is a very queer fellow.
You said I had better not ask those who would be likely to
spoil the pleasure of others."

"Do you think, my child, Tommy Woggs will do so?"

"I am afraid he would; he is such a queer boy."

"But Tommy is a great traveller, you know," added Mrs. Lee,
laughing.

"The boys and girls don't like him, he pretends to be such
a big man. He knows more than all the rest of the world put
together--at least, he thinks he does."

"I think you had better ask him, for he will probably feel
slighted if you don't."

"Very well, mother."

"Now, Flora, I will take a pencil and paper and write down the
names of all the boys and girls with whom you are acquainted;
and you must be careful not to forget any. Here comes Frank;
he will help you."

Frank was told about the party, and he was quite as much
pleased with the idea as his sister had been; and both of
them began to repeat the names of all the boys and girls
they could remember.

For half an hour they were employed in this manner, and then
the list was read over to them, so as to be sure that no
names had been omitted.

Flora and Frank now went through all the streets of
Riverdale, in imagination, thinking who lived in each house;
and when they had completed their journey in fancy, they
felt sure they had omitted none.

"But we must invite cousins Sarah and Henry," said Flora.
"O, I hope they will come! Henry is so funny; we can't do
without them."

"Perhaps they will come; at any rate we will send them
invitations," replied Mrs. Lee.

The next day, when the children had gone to school, Mrs. Lee
went to the office of the Riverdale Gazette, which was the
village newspaper, and had the invitations printed on nice
gilt-edged paper.

By the following day Mrs. Lee had written in the names of
the children invited, enclosed the notes in envelopes, and
directed them. I will give you a copy of one of them, that
you may know how to write them when you have a birthday
party, though I dare say it would do just as well if you go
to your friends and ask them to attend. If you change the
names and dates, this note will answer for any party.

     _Miss Flora Lee presents her compliments to Miss Nellie
     Green, and requests the pleasure of her company on
     Wednesday afternoon, July 20._

              _Riverdale, July 15._

"Those are very fine indeed," said Flora: "shall I put on my
bonnet, and carry out some of them to-day?"

"No, my child; it is not quite the thing for you to carry
your own invitations. I will tell you what you may do. You
may hire David White to deliver them for you. You must pay
him for it; give him half a dollar, which will be a good
thing for him."

This plan was adopted, and Frank was sent with the notes and
the money over to the poor widow's cottage.

"Don't you think it is very wicked, mother, for rich folks
to have parties, when the money they cost will do so much
good to the poor?" asked Flora.

"I do not think so, my dear child."

"Well, I think so, mother," added Flora, warmly.

"Perhaps you do not fully understand it."

"I think I do."

"Why should it be wicked for you to enjoy yourself?"

"I don't think it is wicked to enjoy myself, but only to
spend money for such things. You said you were going to have
the Riverdale Band, and that the music would cost more than
twenty dollars."

"I did, and the supper will cost at least twenty more; for I
have spoken to the confectioner to supply us with ice cream,
cake, jellies, and other luxuries. We shall have a supply
of strawberries and cream, and all the nice things of the
season. We must also erect a tent in the garden, in which we
shall have the supper; but after tea I will tell you all
