His chubby features twisted into a scowl of concentration as he
visualized reality. The scowl became a deeper grimace as he negated that
reality, step by step, and substituted another.

    _F is for Phildee._
    _O is for Out._
    _R is for Reimann._
    _T is for Topology._
    _H is for heartsick hunger._

Abruptly, the Reimann fold became a concrete visualization. As though
printed clearly in and around the air, which was simultaneously both
around him and not around him, which existed/not existed in spacetime,
he saw the sideslip diagram.

He twisted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Spring had come to Riya's world; spring and the thousand sounds of it.
The melted snow in the mountaintops ran down in traceries of leaping
water, and the spring-crests raced along the creeks into the rivers. The
riverbank grasses sprang into life; the plains turned green again.

Riya made her way up the path across the foothills, conscious of her
shame. The green plain below her was dotted, two by two, with the
figures of her people. It was spring, and Time. Only she was alone.

There was a special significance in the fact that she was here on this
path in this season. The plains on either side of the brown river were
her people's territory. During the summer, the couples ranged over the
grass until the dams were ready to drop their calves. Then it became the
bulls' duty to forage for their entire families until the youngsters
were able to travel south to the winter range.

Through the space of years, the people had increased in numbers, the
pressure of this steady growth making itself felt as the yearlings
filled out on the winter range. It had become usual, as the slow drift
northward was made toward the end of winter, for some of the people to
split away from the main body and range beyond the gray mountains that
marked the western limits of the old territories. Since these wanderers
were usually the most willful and headstrong, they were regarded as
quasi-outcasts by the more settled people of the old range.

But--and here Riya felt the shame pierce more strongly than ever--they
had their uses, occasionally. Preoccupied in her shame, she
involuntarily turned her head downward, anxious that none of the people
be staring derisively upward at the shaggy brown hump of fur that was
she, toiling up the path.

She was not the first--but that was meaningless. That other female
people had been ugly or old, that the same unforgotten force that urged
her up the mountain path had brought others here before her, meant only
that she was incapable of accepting the verdict of the years that had
thinned her pelt, dimmed her eyes, and broken the smooth rhythm of her
gait.

In short, it meant that Riya Sair, granddam times over, spurned by every
male on the old range, was willing to cross the gray mountains and risk
death from the resentful wild dams for the thin hope that there was a
male among the wildlings who would sire her calf.

She turned her head back to the path and hurried on, cringing in inward
self-reproach at her speed.

Except for her age, Riya presented a perfect average of her people. She
stood two yards high and two wide at the shoulders, a yard at the
haunches, and measured three and a half yards from her muzzle to the
rudimentary tail. Her legs were short and stumpy, cloven-hooved. Her
massive head hung slightly lower than her shoulders, and could be
lowered to within an inch or two of the ground. She was herbivorous,
ruminant, and mammalian. Moreover, she had intelligence--not of a very
high order, but adequate for her needs.

From a Terrestrial point of view, none of this was remarkable. Many
years of evolution had gone into her fashioning--more years for her one
species than for all the varieties of man that have ever been.
Nevertheless, she did have some remarkable attributes.

It was one of these attributes that now enabled her to sense what
happened on the path ahead of her. She stopped still, only her long fur
moving in the breeze.

