had been on the river.

Scott was not quite satisfied with the steering under the altered
conditions, and he went to the wheel himself. He was a very skilful
boatman in a sailing-craft, as had been fully proved by his bringing his
yacht, the Seahound, from New York through the Bahama Islands. The
seaman was inclined to follow the compass too closely, while Scott
regarded the effect of the sail.

"We are gaining on the Delhi," said Louis, as he seated himself near the
captain.

"Of course we are; I knew she would do it with the sail in this wind,"
replied Scott. "The Blanchita is a light craft, and skims over the water
like a racer."

"But it is a little too much sail for her," suggested Louis. "She is
taking in a bucket of water over her lee rail once in a while."

"Try the pump, Lane," added the captain. "I don't believe she has
shipped more than a teaspoonful or two."

"We are pretty well down in the water," added Louis.

"Clingman, let off about six inches of the sheet," continued Scott; and
the order was promptly obeyed. "I think you are getting a little
nervous, my dear fellow," he added to Louis.

"Perhaps I am; I should not like to see the yacht heel over and take in
a couple of hogsheads of water, for she is loaded so heavily with coal
that she would go to the bottom."

"But I should not let her ship such a sea as that. The wind is quite
steady, with no heavy flaws, and the boat is under perfect control. I
should like it better to sail the Blanchita with less cargo in her, but
she is doing splendidly."

"But a flaw might come, even if we have had none to-day; what could you
do in that case?" asked Louis.

"Clingman, stand by the sheet!" called the captain.

The seaman was seated on a box not more than three feet from the cleat
at which the sheet was made fast. He took his place within reach of it.

"Now she heels over again!" exclaimed Louis, as the water came quite up
to the rail, though she took none in.

"Cast off the sheet, Clingman!" called the captain; and the order was
obeyed in an instant.

The boat flew up to an even keel almost as though she had been hoisted
up by some giant power.

"That is how I should keep her from shipping a big sea," said Scott, as
he looked at his companion with a smile on his brown face.

"I give it up, Captain Scott. Of course you know what you are about
every time, and I won't say a word again about the boat. But suppose you
were not looking when the flaw came?"

"It is not necessary to be looking; for a skipper steers more by the
feeling of the boat than by sight. Make fast the sheet, Clingman."

The Blanchita went ahead again; and by this time she was abreast of the
Delhi, and gaining upon her. Captain Rayburn was on his quarter-deck.

"Don't run away from me, and I won't run away from you!" he shouted.

But he had hardly spoken before a noise like the distant report of a
cannon was heard on board of the yacht.

"He has split his fore squaresail; and if his game was not up before, it
is now," said Captain Scott. "The sail was old and rotten, and I don't
believe he would have attempted to carry it except on an occasion like
the present."

"He was a little too pronounced when he expressed his fears that the
Blanchita would not be able to keep up with him, and I fancy he is sorry
he said anything about it by this time," added Louis.

The split sail could not be repaired at once; and if it could it was not
strong enough to be of any use in the fresh breeze. The crew took it in
at once, the yard being lowered to enable them to do so. The captain of
the yacht ordered the engineer to reduce his speed to the ordinary rate,
though the sail was not furled. Between the steam and the wind the
Blanchita ran ahead of the Delhi. The sheet was slacked off as far as it
could be without permitting the sail to shake, and the two craft kept
well together the rest of the day, passing Great Natuna Island at four
in the afternoon.

The captain took the sun at noon, and worked up the position of the
boat. The run from the mouth of the Sarawak at that time was two hundred
and four sea miles.




CHAPTER XVII

THE END OF THE VOYAGE TO BANGKOK


The routine of daily duty on board of the Blanchita has been given; and
after the race in the China Sea had proved that she could run away from
the Delhi, there was no further excitement on the voyage. On the
contrary, it was rather monotonous, and there were no incidents worthy
of record. After passing Great Natuna on the afternoon of the second day
from the mouth of the Sarawak, no land was seen again till the island of
Pulo Obi, about twenty miles south-west of Point Cambodia, was seen on
the third day; and the Point on the mainland was passed a little later.

At noon on this day the two vessels were forty-four miles up the Gulf of
Siam. The prophecies of Captain Rayburn and Achang in regard to the
weather proved to be correct. The monsoon blew steadily all the way, and
the yacht carried her sail. Not even a squall disturbed the serenity of
the voyage, and everything went on as during the first and second days.
The "Four" would have been glad to explore the Great Natuna Island, and
determine whether or not it was inhabited; for they could obtain no
information in regard to it from any of the books they had brought from
the ship, and they forgot to inquire about it at Kuching.

At noon on the third day, in the Gulf, the captain of the Delhi hailed
the yacht, and came on board of her.

"I shall have to bear more to the eastward now, Captain Scott, and we
shall soon part company," said the commander of the Delhi. "We had quite
a lively race on our second day out, and you beat me handsomely. I had
no idea that your yacht could sail so fast. I was afraid you could not
keep up with me; but I found that you could run away from me, as you
suggested before we sailed."

"I did not know myself what speed the Blanchita could make, though I was
informed that she had gone nine knots for twelve hours together,"
replied Scott.

"I am very glad that I met you, and I hope I shall see you again. You
have a very agreeable party, and I should think you might enjoy
yourselves."

"I think we are likely to meet again at Saigon. The Guardian-Mother will
be there, and I hope you will come on board of her," replied Captain
Scott, as they shook hands at parting, and the visitor returned to the
Delhi.

The Blanchita started her screw again; and the captain gave out
north-west as the course for the mouth of the Menan River, on which
Bangkok is situated.

"Where do you expect to find the Guardian-Mother, Captain Scott?" asked
Louis.

"At Bangkok," replied the captain, as he took his memorandum-book from
his pocket. "Captain Ringgold gave me his time for leaving there, and
also of sailing from Saigon."

"When was he to leave the capital of Siam?"

"On the first tide Monday morning. This is Saturday, a little after
noon," replied Scott. "We have three hundred and twenty-five miles to
make. The monsoon is about as fresh here as it has been all the voyage;
and we have used up about half of our coal, so that we are considerably
lighter than when we left Kuching, and with the sail we can easily log
nine knots an hour. We shall go into the Menan River before sundown
to-morrow, and it will take two or three hours to go up to the city. We
shall be alongside the ship some time in the evening; and that is just
the time I should like to be there."

"We shall give our friends a tremendous surprise," added Louis.

"That is so; for while your anxious mamma is worrying for fear you have
been chewed up by an orang-outang, and Flix's grandma is dreaming that
he has been swallowed whole by a big boa-constrictor, we shall drop in
on them while they are singing gospel hymns in the music-room."

"I shall be sorry to disappoint grandma; but if she insists upon
dreaming such nonsense, it is not my fault," added Felix. "She ought to
know by this time that snakes don't swallow me till they get a bullet
through their heads."

"I don't think my mother has been greatly worried about me, for she has
learned that I am able to take care of myself," said Louis.

"But the mothers will hug their boys as soon as they get hold of them."

"I wish the hugging might be confined to the mothers, for it is
perfectly proper for them to do that thing; but when it comes to a
grandma who hasn't a drop of Irish blood in her veins, I beg to be
excused, and, what is more, I won't stand it," protested Felix, making a
very comical face.

"But you can't help yourself, Flix," laughed the captain.

"You see if I don't!" replied the Milesian, shaking his head as though
his plan to avoid the endearing reception had already been formed.

"We shall see what we shall see," added the captain. "It seems to me
that the breeze is stronger here than it was out at sea."

"There is a hot country to the east of us, and perhaps the wind is
hurrying up to fill a partial vacuum there," suggested Louis.

"You are a philosopher, my darling Louis, and that must be the reason,"
added Felix.

The Blanchita seemed to be flying through the water, for her speed had
sensibly increased since she came into the Gulf. There were several
large islands along the coast of Cambodia; but the course was fifty
miles outside of the mainland, which could not be seen.

"Why do you keep so far from the shore, Captain Scott?" asked Louis; for
all the party would have been glad to observe the shore.

"Because we all wish to get to Bangkok to-morrow evening. What is the
shortest way between two points, Louis?"

"A straight line, of course."

"That's the reason we keep her so far from the land. A north-west course
from a point outside of Obi Island to Cape Liant takes the yacht on the
course we are running now."

"That explains it all," replied Louis.

The watches were regularly kept, and the captain was satisfied that the
Blanchita was making over nine knots an hour. There was no excitement of
any kind on board, and the rest of the day was without anything worthy
of note. The Delhi had gone in behind an island, and in a few hours she
was no longer to be seen. And so it was all day Sunday. Cape Liant was
passed about one o'clock. A river pilot was taken about five o'clock. He
could not speak English, but Achang spoke to him in Malay.

"Ask him if the Guardian-Mother is in the river, Achang," said the
captain.

The pilot could not make out the name, and the interpreter described the
ship so that he understood him at last. The face of the Siamese lighted
up when he got the idea, and it was seen by the four that the ship was
there. Achang informed them that the Guardian-Mother was anchored in the
river.

The river was full of boats, and on many of them houses were built. The
people were new to the Americans, though they were not very different to
the ordinary observer from the Burmese and other natives they had seen.
Before the yacht was half-way up to the city, it was too dark to see
anything distinctly, and the party were more interested in the expected
surprise of their friends on board the ship than anything else.

When the yacht was within a short distance of the ship, the pilot
pointed her out. The singing in the music-room could be distinctly
heard, and everything was working precisely as Scott had said it would.
At the gangway the barge of the Blanche was made fast; and it was
evident that General Noury and his wife were on board, and perhaps
Captain Sharp and his lady. The boat was worked very carefully and
noiselessly up to the platform of the gangway, where several sailors
were seated.

"The Blanchita!" exclaimed Quartermaster Bangs, as he recognized the
craft. "Captain Scott! I will inform the captain that you are
alongside."

"Don't do anything of the kind, Bangs!" replied Scott. "Don't say a
word, and don't make any noise, any of you. We want to drop in on the
party without any notice."

The quartermaster was a very intelligent fellow, and he took in the
situation at a glance. The "Big Four" stepped lightly on the platform,
and Felix had taken pains to be the last one to mount the gangway. Scott
led the way, and halted at the door of the music-room. He waited there
till the hymn they were singing was finished, and then threw open the
door, and marched in. He took off his cap, and bowed as gracefully as a
dancing-master to the assembly.

Louis and Morris followed him, and imitated the example he had given
them; but Felix had disappeared, and they did not know what had become
of him. The musical party seemed to be so utterly confounded at the
sudden and unexpected appearance of the hunters from Borneo that they
seemed to be struck dumb with amazement.

"Louis, my son!" Mrs. Belgrave screamed as she rushed upon her boy, and
folded him in her arms, kissing him as though he had come back to her
from a tomb or a grave beneath the ocean.

"Morris!" cried Mrs. Woolridge, as she imitated the example of Mrs.
Belgrave.

"My brother!" exclaimed Miss Blanche, as she divided the neck and arms
of the returned hunter with her mother.

"This is somewhat unexpected, Captain Scott," said Captain Ringgold, as
he came forward, and took the hand of the captain of the Blanchita, who
alone of the trio was not in the arms of a mother.

"I should say that it might be, Captain," replied Scott as coolly as
though the meeting was nothing unusual.

"But how under the sun did you get here, Scott?" demanded the commander,
scrutinizing the expression of the third officer,--which was his rank on
board of the ship,--to ascertain if there were any signs of a calamity
there.

"We came by water, Captain," answered the young officer, with a cheerful
smile, which indicated anything but a disaster.

"Of course you did, inasmuch as there is no other way to get here. In
what steamer did you come? for I believe there is no regular line from
Sarawak to Bangkok," added Captain Ringgold.

"We came by the steamer Blanchita."

"I don't understand it at all," said the commander with a perplexed look
on his face. "Do you mean that you made the voyage in the steam-yacht,
Mr. Scott?" and there was a decided expression of incredulity on his
face.

"That is exactly what I mean to assert; and if you have any doubts about
the truth of what I say, I appeal to Louis and Morris to substantiate my
assertion."

"If you really say so, I do not doubt the truth of what you declare. It
looks like a foolhardy risk, but boys will be boys. I will not detain
you now; for others wish to welcome you back, and I know they are all
glad to see you, unexpected as your return is."

[Illustration: "BUT WHERE IS FELIX?" DEMANDED MRS. BLOSSOM.

_Page 161._]

As soon as his mother released him from the bondage of her loving arms,
Louis hastened to Miss Blanche, and she grasped his hand as he
approached. No loving expressions passed between them, but what they
might have said that could be classed under this head was seen on their
telltale faces.

"But where is Felix?" demanded Mrs. Blossom, who had been looking for
him since Scott came into the room. "Where is he, Mr. Scott?"

"I am sorry to say that he was swallowed by a big boa-constrictor one
hundred and sixty feet long, and twelve feet in circumference," replied
the captain of the Blanchita, as seriously as though there had been such
a monster snake in existence.

The poor lady was impervious to a joke; she screamed once, and then
dropped in a sitting posture on a divan. Nearly all the rest of the
party laughed heartily. At this point the head of Felix dropped down a
foot through the skylight over the centre of the room. He had made his
way to the upper deck, and stationed himself where he could see and hear
all that passed in the apartment.

"Good-mahrnin' to ye's all this foine avenin'!" he shouted. "Don't ye's
make a row, Aunty. The schnake was a bit troubled wid indigestion of the
brain, and, faix! I was too much for him! Loike the sodjers surrounded
by the inimy, Oi cut me way out, and here Oi am."

"I don't believe you were swallowed by a snake," protested Mrs.
Blossom.

"Don't you believe that Jonah swallowed the whale, Aunty?" demanded
Felix.

"Of course I believe that because it is in the Bible. If you had told me
that you had swallowed the snake, I might have believed that," added the
good lady.

At this point General Noury came forward, and grasped the hand of Scott,
passing from him to Louis and Morris, and then doing the same with
Felix, who had dropped down from his perch at the skylight. As soon as
