Perhaps Aunt Church will be a little nicer to me now that you have taken
her up. I'll threaten to complain to you if she doesn't behave."

Here Susy laughed merrily.

"That's all right, Susan," said Kathleen. "I must go back now, for I
have promised to go for a walk with Mrs. Tennant. No one ever thinks
about her as she ought to be thought of; so I have some plans in my head
for her, too. Oh, my head is full of plans, and I do wish--yes, I do,
Susy--that I could make a lot of people happy."

"You are a splendid girl," said Susy. "I wish there were others like you
in the world."

"No, I am not splendid," said Kathleen, her lovely dark eyes looking
wistful. "I have heaps and lashons of faults; but I do like to make
people happy. I always did since I was a little child. The person I am
most anxious about at present is Ruth: I love Ruth so very much. You
will be sure to see her this evening, won't you?"

"Sure and certain," said Susy. "I am very much obliged to you, Kathleen;
you have made a great difference in my life."

The two girls parted just by the turnstile. Kathleen passed through on
her way across the common to Mrs. Tennant's house, and Susy went slowly
back to the High Street and the little stationer's shop.

She found Mrs. Church in the act of being deposited in her bath-chair,
and Tom, looking proud and flushed, attending on her. Mrs. Hopkins was
also standing just outside the shop, putting a wrap round the old lady
and tucking her up. When Susy appeared her mother called out to her:

"Come along, you ungrateful girl. Here's Aunt Church going, and
wondering why you have deserted her during the last hour."

"That's just like you, Mary Hopkins," said old Mrs. Church. "You scold
when there's no occasion to, and you withhold scolding when it's due. I
don't blame your daughter Susan for going out with that nice young lady.
I am only too pleased to think that any daughter of yours should be
taken notice of by a young lady of the Miss Kathleen O'Hara type. She's
a splendid girl; and, to tell you the honest truth, none of you are fit
for her to touch you with a pair of tongs."

"Dear, dear!" said Susy. "But she has touched me pretty often. I don't
think you ought to say nasty things of that sort, Aunt Church, for if
you do I may be able to--"

Aunt Church fixed her glittering black eyes on Susan.

"Come here, child," she said.

Susy went up to her somewhat unwillingly.

"My bark is worse than my bite," said old Mrs. Church. "Now look here;
if you bring that charming young lady to see me, and give me notice a
day or so before--Tom can run over and tell me--if you and Tom and Miss
Kathleen O'Hara would come and have tea at my place, why, it's the
freshest of the plumcakes we'd have, not the stalest. And the microscope
should be out handy and in order, and with some prepared plates that my
poor husband used, which I have never shown to anybody from the time of
his death. I have a magnifying-glass, too, that I can put into the
microscope; it will make you see the root of a hair on your head. And I
will--Whisper, Susy!"

Susy somewhat unwillingly bent forward.

"I will give you five shillings. You'd like to trim your hat to match
that handsome blouse, wouldn't you?"

Susy's eyes could not help dancing.

"Five shillings all to yourself; and I won't press your mother about the
installment which was due to me yesterday. I'll manage without it
somehow. But I want to see that beautiful young lady in my cottage, and
you will get the money when you bring her. That's all. You are a queer
little girl, and not altogether to my taste, but you are no fool."

Susy stood silent. She put her hand on the moth-eaten cushion of the old
bath-chair, bent forward, and looked into Mrs. Church's face.

"Will you take back the words you said?"

"Will I take back what?"

"If not the words, at least the thought? Will you say that you know that
I got this blouse honestly?"

"Oh, yes, child! I'd quite forgotten all about it. Now just see that you
do what I want; and the sooner the better, you understand. And, oh,
Susy, mum's the word with regard to me being well off. I ain't, I can
tell you; I am quite a poor body. But I could do a kindness to you and
your mother if--if certain things were to come to pass. Now that's about
all.--Pull away, Tom, my boy. I have a rosy apple which shall find its
way into your pocket if you take me home in double-quick time."

Tom pulled with a will; the little bath-chair creaked and groaned, and
Mrs. Church nodded her wise old head and she was carried over the
country roads.

Meanwhile Susy entered the house with her mother.

"What a blessing," said Mrs. Hopkins, "that that pretty young lady
happened to call! I never saw such a change in any one as what took
place in your aunt after she had seen her."

"Well, mother, you know what it is all about," said Susy. "Aunt Church
wants to get into one of those almshouses."

"Just like her--stingy old thing!" said Mrs. Hopkins.

"I don't want her to get in, I can tell you, mother; and when Kathleen
and I were out I told Kathleen that she was a great deal too rich. She
asked me what her means were, and I said I believed she has three
hundred pounds put by. Now, mother, don't you call that riches?"

"Three hundred pounds!" said Mrs. Hopkins. "That depends, child. To some
it is wealth; to others it is a decent competence; to others, again, it
is poverty."

"Kathleen didn't think much of it, mother."

"Well," said Mrs. Hopkins, "I have notions in my head. Maybe this very
thing can be turned to good for us; there's no saying. I think if your
aunt was sure and certain to get into one of those almshouses she might
do a good turn to you, Susy; and she's sure and certain to help Tom a
little. But there! we can't look into the future. I am tired out with
one thing and another. Susan, my dear child, where did you get that
beautiful pale-blue blouse?"

"I didn't get it through theft, mother, if that's what you are thinking
of. I got it honestly, and I am not obliged to tell; and what's more, I
won't tell."

Mrs. Hopkins sighed.

"Dear, dear!" she said, and she sat down in the easy-chair which Mrs.
Church had occupied and stared into the fire.

"I am not nearly as low-spirited as I was," she said after a pause. "If
Miss Kathleen will do something for Aunt Church, it stands to reason
that Aunt Church won't be hard on us."

Susy made no answer to this. She stood quiet for a minute or two, and
then she went slowly upstairs. She removed the beautiful blouse and put
on a common one. She then wrapped herself in an old waterproof
cloak--for the sunshiny morning had developed into an evening of thick
clouds and threatening rain--and went downstairs.

"Where in the world are you going?" said her mother in a fretful tone.
"I did think you'd sit quietly with me and learn your collect. If you
are going out, it ought to be to church. I don't see what call you have
to be going anywhere else on Sunday evening."

"I want to see Ruth Craven. Don't keep me, please; it is very
important."

"But I don't know who Ruth Craven is."

"Oh, mother, I thought every one knew her. She is the very, very pretty
little granddaughter of old Mr. Craven, who lives in that cottage close
to the station."

"A handsome old man, too," said Mrs. Hopkins, "but I confess I don't
know anything about him."

"Well, he and his old wife have got this one beautiful grandchild, and
she has joined the foundationers at the Great Shirley School. Miss
Kathleen O'Hara has taken up with her as well as with me and other
foundation girls, and instead of having a miserable, dull, down-trodden
life, we are extremely likely to have the best life of any girls in the
school. Anyhow, I have a message for Ruth and I promised to deliver it."

"All right, child; don't be longer away than you can help."

Susy left the house. The distance from her mother's shop to the Cravens'
cottage was a matter of ten minutes' quick walking. She soon reached her
destination, walked up the little path which led to the tiny cottage,
and tapped with her fingers on the door. The door was opened for her by
old Mrs. Craven. Mrs. Craven was in her Sunday best, and looked a very
beautiful and almost aristocratic old lady.

"Do you want my grandchild?" she said, observing Susy's size and dress.

"Yes; is she within?" asked Susy.

"No, dear; she has gone to church. Would you like to wait in for her, or
would you rather go and meet her? She has gone to St. James the Less,
the church just around the corner; you know it?"

"Yes, I know it," said Susy.

"They'll be coming out now," said Mrs. Craven, looking up at the
eight-day clock which stood in the passage. "If you go and stand by the
principal entrance, you are safe to see her."

"Thank you," said Susy.

"You are sure you wouldn't rather wait in the house?"

"No, really. Mother expects me back. My name is Susan Hopkins. My
mother keeps the stationer's shop in the High Street."

"To be sure," said Mrs. Craven gently. "I know the shop quite well."

Susy said good-bye, and then stepped down the little path. What a humble
abode the prime favorite, Ruth Craven, lived in! Susy's own home was a
palace in comparison. Ruth lived in a cottage which was little better
than a workman's cottage.

"There can't be more than two bedrooms upstairs," thought Susy. "And I
wonder if there is a sitting-room? Certainly there can't be more than
one. The old lady looked very nice; but, of course, she is quite a
common person. I should love to be Prime Minister to Kathleen O'Hara.
And why should there be such a fuss made about Ruth? I only wish the
post was mine--shouldn't I do a lot! Couldn't I help mother and Tom and
all of us? And there is that stupid little Ruth--oh, dear! oh, dear!
Well, I suppose I must give her the message."

She hurried her steps as these last thoughts came to her, and presently
she stood outside the principal entrance of the little church. St. James
the Less was by no means remarkable for beauty of architecture or
adornment of any sort; nevertheless the vicar was a man of great
eloquence and earnestness, and in the evenings it was the custom for the
little church to be packed.

By-and-by the sermon came to an end, the voluntary rolled forth from the
organ, and the crowd of worshippers poured out. Susy stretched out her
hand and clutched that of a slim girl who was following in the train of
people.

"Ruth, it is me. I have something to say to you."

Ruth's face, until Susy touched her, had been looking like a piece of
heaven itself, so calm and serene were the eyes, and so beautiful the
expression which lingered round her lips. Now she seemed to awaken and
pull herself together. She did not attempt to avoid Susy, but slipping
out of the crowd of people who were leaving the church, she found
herself by the girl's side.

"Come just a little way home with me," said Susy. "It won't take me long
to say what I want to say."

She linked her hand in her companion's as she spoke. Yes, there was
little doubt of it, Ruth was lovable. One forgot her low birth, her low
surroundings, when one looked at her. Susy had heard of those few people
of rare character and rare natures who are, as it is expressed,
"Nature's ladies." There are Nature's gentlemen as well, and Nature's
ladies and Nature's gentlemen are above mere external circumstances;
they are above the mere money's worth or the mere accident of birth.
Now, Ruth belonged to this rare class, and Susy, without quite
understanding it, felt it. She forgot the humble little house, the lack
of rooms, and the workmanlike appearance of the whole place. She said in
a deferential tone:

"I have come to you, from Kathleen O'Hara. You have done something which
has distressed her very much. She wants you to meet her to-morrow at the
White Cross Corner on your way to school; she wants you to be there at a
quarter to nine. That is all, Ruth. You will be sure to attend? I
promised Kathleen most faithfully that I would deliver her message. She
is very unhappy about something. I don't know what you have done to vex
her."

"But I do," said Ruth. "And I can't help going on vexing her."

"But what is it?" said Susy, whose curiosity was suddenly awakened. "You
might tell me. I wish you would."

"I can't tell you, Susan; it has nothing to do with you. It is a matter
between Kathleen and myself. Very well, I will meet her. There is no use
in shirking things. Good-night, Susan. It was good of you to come and
give me Kathleen's message."




CHAPTER XIV.

RUTH RESIGNS THE PREMIERSHIP.


The next morning Kathleen O'Hara was downstairs betimes. She ran into
the kitchen and suggested to Maria that she should help her to toast the
bread. Maria, who was somewhat lazy, and who had already begun to
appreciate Kathleen's extreme good-nature, handed her the toasting-fork
and pointed to a heap of bread which lay cut and ready for toasting on
the deal table in the center of the kitchen.

"Dear me, Miss Kathleen!" she said; "if only Miss Alice was as
good-natured as you, why, the house would go on wheels."

"I often helped the servants at home," said Kathleen. "Why isn't Alice
good-natured?"

"She's made contrairy, I expect, miss."

"Cut on the cross, I call it," said cook, who came forward at this
juncture and offered a chair to Kathleen.

"Well, if that's the case I'm sorry for her," said Kathleen. "It must be
very unpleasant to feel sort of peppery-and-salty and cross-grained all
the time."

"It isn't what you ever feel, miss," said cook with an admiring glance
at the young lady.

Kathleen fixed her deep-blue roguish eyes on the good woman's face.

"No," she said, "I don't think I am cross-grained. By the way, cook,
wouldn't you like a black silk apron embroidered with violets to wear
when you have done all your dirty work in the kitchen?"

"Cooks don't wear black silk aprons embroidered with violets," was the
good woman's answer.

"But this cook might, if a nice Irish girl, who has plenty of money,
gave it to her. I have it in the bottom of my trunk. I asked Aunt Katie
O'Flynn to send it to me for your mistress, but your mistress doesn't
care for it. I will give it to you, cook.--And, Maria, I've got a little
toque for you. It is sky-blue with forget-me-nots. Have you a young man,
Maria? Most girls have, haven't they? Wouldn't you like to walk out with
him in a sky-blue toque trimmed with forget-me-nots?"

"It puts me all in a flutter to think of it, miss," said Maria. "I am
sure a sweeter young lady never came into this house."

Kathleen chatted on to the retainers, as she called cook and Maria,
until she had toasted enough bread. She then went into the dining-room.
Alice was there, looking pale and headachy. The day was a very cold one,
and the fire was by no means bright. Kathleen's intensely rosy
cheeks--for the fire had considerably scorched them--attracted Alice's
attention.

"I do wish you wouldn't do servant's work," she said. "You annoy me
terribly by the way you go on."

"Oh, don't be annoyed, darling," said Kathleen softly. "Just regard me
as a necessary evil. You see, Alice, however cross you are, I'd have the
others all on my side. There's your mother and David and Ben and the two
servants. It isn't worth while, Alice. If they all like me, why
shouldn't you?"

Alice made no reply. Kathleen stood still for a moment; then she
glanced at the clock. It was a quarter past eight. She must be out of
the house in a little over a quarter of an hour if she was to meet Ruth
Craven at the White Cross Corner. She sat down to the table, helped
herself to a piece of toast, and spread some butter on it.

"A cup of tea, please, Alice," she said.--"Oh, what letters are those?
Any for me? David, if you give me a letter I'll--I'll love you ever so
much. Ah, two! Dave, you are a treasure; you are a darling; you are
everything that is exquisite."

It was Alice's place to pour out the tea. She poured some out now, very
unwillingly, for Kathleen, who drew the cup towards her, stirred it
absently, and began to read her letters. Presently she uttered a little
shriek.

"It is from Aunt Katie O'Flynn, and she is crossing the Channel, the
darling colleenoge. She is coming to London, and she wants me to see
her. Oh, golloptious! What fun I shall have! Boys, aren't you delighted?
It was Aunt Katie O'Flynn who sent me that wonderful trunk of clothes.
Won't she give us a time now? I declare I scarcely know whether I'm on
my head or my heels.--Alice, you'd best make yourself agreeable and join
in the fun, for I can assure you it's theaters and concerts and teas and
dinners and--oh! shopping, and every conceivable thing that can delight
the heart of man or woman, boy or girl, that will be our portion while
Aunt Katie--the duck, the darling, the treasure!--is in London. Let me
see; what hotel is she going to? Oh, the Metropole. Where is the
Metropole?"

"In Northumberland Avenue. But, of course, we are not going up to
London," said Alice. "We are only schoolgirls. We are at school and must
mind our lessons. I am trying for my scholarship, and I mean to get it.
And I don't suppose, even if your aunt is coming at a most inopportune
time, that she is going to upset everything."

"That remains to be proved," said Kathleen. "I am not going to have Aunt
Katie so close to me without having my bit of fun. Oh, dear, dear! look
at the time. I must be off."

"Why are you going so early? It is only half-past eight."

"I have business, darling--a friend to meet. Have you any objection?"

Kathleen did not wait for Alice's answer. She dashed upstairs, and on
the first landing she met Mrs. Tennant, who had been suffering from
headache, and was in consequence a little late for breakfast.

"Mrs. Tennant," shouted Kathleen, "I have the top of the morning as far
as news is concerned. It is herself that is crossing the briny. She'll
be in London to-night. Oh, did you ever hear of anything quite so
scrumptious? But what's the matter, dear?"

"Kathleen, I wish you wouldn't wear that really good dress going to
school."

"Is it my old lavender, and my old satin blouse?" said Kathleen, looking
down at herself with a momentary glance. "Ah, then, my dear tired one,
it isn't dresses I'll be thinking of when Aunt Katie is in London.
She'll get me more than I can wear. She'll fig you all out, every one of
you, if you like--you and Alice and David and Ben and cook and Maria.
Maria is keeping company, she tells me, and would like a few fine
clothes--naturally, the creature! Well, Mrs. Tennant, it's herself that
is crossing, as I said; even now she is in the big steamer, coming
nearer and nearer to England. Shan't we have fun when she arrives?"
