The Project Gutenberg EBook of Turning Point, by Alfred Coppel

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Turning Point

Author: Alfred Coppel

Illustrator: Philip Parsons

Release Date: April 23, 2010 [EBook #32104]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TURNING POINT ***




Produced by Sankar Viswanathan, Greg Weeks, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







                         Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from If Worlds of Science Fiction November
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.


                            TURNING POINT


                           By Alfred Coppel


                    Illustrated by Philip Parsons


     _The man is rare who will give his life for what is merely
      the lesser of two evils. Merrick's decision was even
      tougher: to save human beings at the expense of humanity, or
      vice versa?_

       *       *       *       *       *




_This, then, was the Creche, Anno Domini 2500. A great, mile-square
blind cube topping a ragged mountain; bare escarpments falling away to
a turbulent sea. For five centuries the Creche had stood so, and the
Androids had come forth in an unending stream to labor for Man, the
Master...._

                           --_Quintus Bland, The Romance of Genus Homo._

Director Han Merrick paced the floor nervously. His thin, almost
ascetic face was pale and drawn.

"We can't allow it, Virginia," he said, "Prying of this sort can only
precipitate a pogrom or worse. Erikson is a bigot of the worst kind.
The danger--" He broke off helplessly.

His wife shook her head slowly. "It cannot be prevented, Han. Someone
was bound to start asking questions sooner or later. History should
have taught us that. And five hundred years of secrecy was more than
anyone had a right to expect. Nothing lasts forever."

_The trouble is_, Merrick told himself, _simply that I am the wrong
man for this job. I should never have taken it. There's a wrongness in
what we are doing here that colors my every reaction and makes me
incapable of acting on my own. Always the doubts and secret
questioning. If the social structure of our world weren't moribund, I
wouldn't be here at all...._

"History, Virginia," he said, "can't explain what there is no
precedent for. The Creche is unique in human experience."

"The Creche may be, Han, but Sweyn Erikson is not. Consider his
background and tell me if there hasn't been an Erikson in every era
of recorded history. He is merely another obstacle in the path of
progress that must be overcome. The job is yours, Han."

"A pleasant prospect," Merrick replied bleakly. "I am an organizer,
not a psychotechnician. How am I supposed to protect the Creche from
the likes of Erikson? What insanity bore this fruit, Virginia? The
Prophet, the number one Fanatic, coming here as an _investigator_ in
the name of the Council of Ten! I realize the Council turns pale at
the thought of the vote the Fanatics control, but surely _something_
could have been done! Have those idiots forgotten what we do here? Is
that possible?"
