The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Great Potlatch Riots, by Allen Kim Lang

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Great Potlatch Riots

Author: Allen Kim Lang

Release Date: March 18, 2008 [EBook #24864]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GREAT POTLATCH RIOTS ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









 THE GREAT
 POTLATCH RIOTS

 By ALLEN KIM LANG


 _Oh, leave it to the bureaucrats and
 they'll figure out new ways to make
 you buy more and more.... But there
 was only one way the poor consumer
 could rise up in his wrath._


"I've sweated for months over the plans for this campaign," Captain
Wesley Winfree told the Major. "Just nod, sir; that's all I ask; and
I'll throw my forces into the field."

"I admire your audacity, Winfree," Major Stanley Dampfer said, "but
don't you think we'd be wise to consolidate our current positions before
launching a fresh offensive?"

Captain Winfree, straight in his scarlet-trimmed winter greens, tapped
the toe of one boot with his swagger-stick. "With all respect, sir," he
said, "I feel that if we do no more than hold the line, we're lending
moral comfort to the foes of prosperity. Attack! That's my battle-plan,
sir. Attack! And attack again!"

Major Dampfer, seated behind Winfree's desk, stretched out his legs and
sighed. "You younger officers, men who've never in your lives tasted
defeat, are an inspiration and a trial to us old field-graders," he
said. "Captain, a project that failed could set your District back
fifteen years."

"I realize that, sir," Winfree said. "I'm placing my career in the
balance. If I attempt this, and goof, ship me to the sticks, Major. I'd
rather spend the rest of my BSG years as a corporal, a simple Potlatch
Observer in a downstate village, than never to have embarked on this
campaign."

"Young Napoleon must have been very like you, Winfree," Major Dampfer
mused. "Very well, lad. Brief me."

"Yes, sir!" Captain Winfree marched over to the giant calendar that
covered one wall of his office and tapped his stick against the three
dates circled in red. "We've established this triangle of
strong-points," he said. "We control the second Sunday in May and the
third Sunday in June in addition to our first and most vital holding,
the twenty-fifth of December. I regard these three victories, sir, as
only beachheads, only the softening-up phases of a still greater
campaign. We must press on toward Total Prosperity."

"How, Winfree?" Major Dampfer asked.

"By adding three hundred and sixty-two days a year to our laurels, sir,"
Winfree said, sweeping his swagger-stick across the face of the
calendar. "My plan is to make every consumer's birthday a Gratuity Day
for each of his Nearest-and-Dearest."

Major Dampfer sat up straight. "Captain," he said softly, "this is
Thinking Big. This could lend billions a year to the Gross National
Product. It could mean a major break-through on the Prosperity front.
Are you really proposing that each consumer be required to give birthday
presents to the same people, and on the same scale, as he now gives Xmas
Gratuities?"

"Precisely, sir," Captain Winfree said. "My staff has in the files the
birthdate of every consumer in the District. Enforcement of the new
quotas I propose will be no more difficult than the old: the same scale
of fines for non-compliance, the same terms of imprisonment for repeated
offenses will be imposed. The dates-of-destruction to be marked on
Birthday Gratuities will be set as the next Potlatch Day, plus one year.
Merchandise will be marked with the year-date precisely as is now done
for Xmas, Dad's Day, and Mom's Day gifts. Birthday-cards will be
addressed and sent from this office, just like Xmas cards."

       *       *       *       *       *

Major Dampfer stood and drew on his uniform gauntlets. "May I assume
that you've covered the field public-relations-wise?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," Captain Winfree said. "I've composed a slogan for this
year's drive in my District: 'Make the Magi Come the Year
'Round--Birthday Gratuities for All!'"

"It sings, Winfree," Major Dampfer said. "I like it. Captain, you have
my nod. Carry on with this program. If you win the battle for this
District, I'll get you a desk in Washington and Divisional Command;
you'll help us tailor your plan to fit the entire nation."

"Thank you, sir," Winfree said, grinning. "I won't disappoint you."

"You'd best not," the Major said. He paused by the office door. "Captain
Winfree, the word is on the grapevine that you're planning to marry one
