Onondaga, and a mind already inflamed against the Americans and the
Hodenosaunee cherished a bitter personal hate. Robert knew that
Willet, Tayoga and he must be eternally on guard against his murderous
attacks.

The savages built their fires higher, as if in defiance and
triumph. They could defend themselves against cold, because the forest
furnished unending fuel, but rain or hail, sleet or snow would bring
severe hardship. The day, however, favored them to the utmost. It
had seemed at dawn that it could not be more brilliant, but as the
morning advanced the world fairly glowed with color. The sky was
golden save in the east, where it burned in red, and the trunks and
black boughs of the forest, to the last and least little twig, were
touched with it until they too were clothed in a luminous glow.

The besiegers seemed lazy, but Robert knew that the watch upon the
fort and its approaches was never neglected for an instant. A fox
could not steal through their lines, unseen, and yet he never doubted.
Tayoga would come, and moreover he would come at the time
appointed. Toward the middle of the morning the Indians shot some
arrows that fell inside the palisade, and uttered a shout or two of
defiance, but nobody was hurt, and nobody was stirred to action. The
demonstration passed unanswered, and, after a while, Wilton called
Robert's attention to the fact that it was only two hours until
noon. Robert did not reply, but he knew that the conditions could not
be more unfavorable. Rain or hail, sleet or snow might cover the
passage of a warrior, but the dazzling sunlight that enlarged twigs
two hundred yards away into boughs, seemed to make all such efforts
vain. Yet he knew Tayoga, and he still believed.

Soon a stir came in the forest, and they heard a long, droning
chant. A dozen warriors appeared coming out of the north, and they
were welcomed with shouts by the others.

"Hurons, I think," said Willet. "Yes, I'm sure of it. They've
undoubtedly sent away for help, and it's probable that other bands
will come about this time."  He reckoned right, as in half an hour a
detachment of Abenakis came, and they too were received with approving
shouts, after which food was given to them and they sat luxuriously
before the fires. Then three runners arrived, one from the north, one
from the west, and one from the east, and a great shout of welcome was
uttered for each.

"What does it mean?" Wilton asked Robert.

"The runners were sent out by De Courcelles and Tandakora to rally
more strength for our siege. They've returned with the news that
fresh forces are coming, as the exultant shout from the warriors
proves."

The young Philadelphian's heart sank. He knew that it was only a half
hour until noon, and noon was the appointed time. Nor did the heavens
give any favoring sign. The whole mighty vault was a blaze of gold and
blue. Nothing could stir in such a light and remain hidden from the
warriors. Wilton looked at his comrade and he caught a sudden glitter
in his eyes. It was not the look of one who despaired. Instead it was
a flash of triumph, and the young Philadelphian wondered. Had Robert
seen a sign, a sign that had escaped all others? He searched the
forest everywhere with his own eyes, but he could detect nothing
unusual. There were the French, and there were the Indians. There were
the new warriors, and there were the three runners resting by the
fires.

The runners rose presently, and the one who had come out of the north
talked with Tandakora, the one who had come out of the west stood near
the edge of the forest with an Abenaki chief and looked at the
fort. The one who had come out of the east joined De Courcelles
himself and they came nearer to the fort than any of the others,
although they remained just beyond rifle shot. Evidently De Courcelles
was explaining something to the Indian as once he pointed toward the
blockhouse.

Wilton heard Robert beside him draw a deep breath, and he turned in
surprise. The face of young Lennox was tense and his eyes fairly
blazed as he gazed at De Courcelles and the warrior. Then looking back
at the forest Robert uttered a sudden sharp, Ah! the release of
uncontrollable emotion, snapping like a pistol shot.

"Did you see it, Will? Did you see it?" he exclaimed. "It was quicker
than lightning!"

The Indian runner stooped, snatched the pistol from the belt of De
Courcelles, struck him such a heavy blow on the head with the butt of
it that he fell without a sound, and then his brown body shot forward
like an arrow for the fort.

"Open the gate! Open the gate!" thundered Willet, and strong arms
unbarred it and flung it back in an instant. The brown body of Tayoga
flashed through, and, in another instant, it was closed and barred
again.

"He is here with five minutes to spare!" said Robert as he left the
palisade with Wilton, and went toward the blockhouse to greet his
friend.

Tayoga, painted like a Micmac and stooping somewhat hitherto, drew
himself to his full height, held out his hand in the white man's
fashion to Robert, while his eyes, usually so calm, showed a passing
gleam of triumph.

"I said, Tayoga, that you would be back on time, that is by noon
today," said Robert, "and though the task has been hard you're with us
and you have a few minutes to spare. How did you deceive the sharp
eyes of Tandakora?"

"I did not let him see me, knowing he would look through my disguise,
but I asked the French colonel to come forward with me at once and
inspect the fort, knowing that it was my only chance to enter here,
and he agreed to do so. You saw the rest, and thus I have come. It is
not pleasant to those who besiege us, as your ears tell you."

Fierce yells of anger and disappointment were rising in the
forest. Jumonville and two French soldiers had rushed forward, seized
the reviving De Courcelles and were carrying him to one of the fires,
where they would bind up his injured head. But inside the fort there
was only exultation at the arrival of Tayoga and admiration for his
skill. He insisted first on being allowed to wash off the Micmac
paint, enabling him to return to his true character. Then he took food
and drink.

"Tayoga," said Wilton, "I believed you could not come. I said so often
to Lennox. You would never have known my belief, because Lennox would
not have told it to you, but I feel that I must apologize to you for
the thought. I underrated you, but I underrated you because I did not
believe any human being could do what you have done."

Tayoga smiled, showing his splendid white teeth. "Your thoughts did
me no wrong," he said in his precise school English, "because the
elements and chance itself seemed to have conspired against me."

Later he told what he had heard in the vale of Onondaga where the
sachems and chiefs kept themselves well informed concerning the
movements of the belligerent nations. The French were still the more
active of the rival powers, and their energy and conquests were
bringing the western tribes in great numbers to their flag. Throughout
the Ohio country the warriors were on the side of the French who were
continuing the construction of the powerful fortress at the junction
of the Alleghany and the Monongahela. The French were far down in the
province of New York, and they held control of Lake Champlain and of
Lake George also. More settlements had been cut off, and more women
and children had been taken prisoners into Canada.

But the British colonies and Great Britain too would move, so Tayoga
said. They were slow, much slower than Canada, but they had the
greater strength and the fifty sachems in the vale of Onondaga knew
it. They could not be moved from their attitude of friendliness toward
the English, and the Mohawks openly espoused the English side. The
American, Franklin, was very active, and a great movement against Fort
Duquesne would be begun, although it might not start until next
spring. An English force under an English general was coming across
the sea, and the might of England was gathering for a great blow.

The Onondaga had few changes in the situation to report, but he at
least brought news of the outside world, driving away from the young
soldiers the feeling that they were cut off from the human
race. Wilton was present when he was telling of these things and when
he had finished Robert asked:

"How did you make your way through the great snow, Tayoga?"

"It is well to think long before of difficulties," he replied. "Last
year when the winter was finished I hid a pair of snow shoes in this
part of the forest, and when the deep snow came I found them and used
them."

Robert glanced at Wilton, whose eyes were widening.

"And the great rain and flood, how did you meet that obstacle?" asked
Robert.

"That, too, was forethought. I have two canoes hidden in this region,
and it was easy to reach one of them, in which I traveled with speed
and comfort, until I could use it no longer. Then I hid it away again
that it might help me another time."

"And what did you do when the hurricane came, tearing up the bushes,
cutting down the trees, and making the forest as dangerous as if it
were being showered by cannon balls?"

"I crept under a wide ledge of stone in the side of a hill, where I
lay snug, dry and safe."

Wilton looked at Tayoga and Robert, and then back at the Onondaga.

"Is this wizardry?" he cried.

"No," replied Robert.

"Then it's singular chance."

"Nor that either. It was the necessities that confronted Tayoga in the
face of varied dangers, and my knowledge of what he would be likely to
do in either case. Merely a rather fortunate use of the reasoning
faculties, Will."

Willet, who had come in, smiled.

"Don't let 'em make game of you, Mr. Wilton," he said, "but there's
truth in what Robert tells you. He understands Tayoga so thoroughly
that he knows pretty well what he'll do in every crisis."

After the Onondaga had eaten he wrapped himself in blankets, went to
sleep in one of the rooms of the blockhouse and slept twenty-four
hours. When he awoke he showed no signs of his tremendous journey and
infinite dangers. He was once more the lithe and powerful Tayoga of
the Clan of the Bear, of the nation Onondaga of the great League of
the Hodenosaunee.

The besiegers meanwhile undertook no movement, but, as if in defiance,
they increased the fires in the red ring around the fort and they
showed themselves ostentatiously. Robert several times saw De
Courcelles with a thick bandage about his head, and he knew that the
Frenchman's mortification and rage at being tricked so by the Onondaga
must be intense.

Now the weather began to grow very cold again, and Robert saw the
number of tepees in the forest increase. The Indians, not content
with the fires, were providing themselves with good shelters, and to
every one it indicated a long siege. There was neither snow, nor hail,
but clear, bitter, intense cold, and again the timbers of the
blockhouse and outbuildings popped as they contracted under the lower
temperature.

The horses were pretty well sheltered from the cold, and Willet, with
his usual foresight, had suggested before the siege closed in that a
great deal of grass be cut for them, though should the French and
Indians hang on for a month or two, they would certainly become a
problem. Food for the men would last indefinitely, but a time might
arrive when none would be left for the horses.

"If the pinch comes," said Willet, "we know how to relieve it."

"How?" asked Colden.

"We'll eat the horses."

Colden made a wry face.

"It's often been done in Europe," said the hunter. "At the famous
sieges of Leyden and Haarlem, when the Dutch held out so long against
the Spanish, they'd have been glad enough to have had horseflesh."

"I look ahead again," said Robert, hiding a humorous gleam in his eyes
from Colden, "and I see a number of young men behind a palisade which
they have held gallantly for months. They come mostly from
Philadelphia and they call themselves Quakers. They are thin, awfully
thin, terribly thin, so thin that there is scarcely enough to make a
circle for their belts. They have not eaten for four days, and they
are about to kill their last horse. When he is gone they will have to
live on fresh air and scenery."

"Now I know Lennox that you're drawing on your imagination and that
you're a false prophet," said Colden.

"I hope my prediction won't come true, and I don't believe it will,"
said Robert cheerfully.

Several nights later when there was no moon, and no stars, Willet and
Tayoga slipped out of the fort. Colden was much opposed to their
going, fearing for their lives, and knowing, too, how great a loss
they would be if they were taken or slain, but the hunter and the
Onondaga showed the utmost confidence, assuring him they would return
in safety.

Colden became quite uneasy for them after they had been gone some
hours, and Robert, although he refused to show it, felt a trace of
apprehension. He knew their great skill in the forest, but Tandakora
was a master of woodcraft too, and the Frenchmen also were experienced
and alert. As he, Colden, Wilton and Carson watched at the palisade he
was in fear lest a triumphant shout from the Indian lines would show
that the hunter and the Onondaga had been trapped.

But the long hours passed without an alarm and about three o'clock in
the morning two shadows appeared at the palisade and whispered to
them. Robert felt great relief as Willet and Tayoga climbed silently
over.

"We're half frozen," said the hunter. "Take us into the blockhouse and
over the fire we'll tell you all we've seen."

They always kept a bed of live coals on the hearth in the main
building, and the two who had returned bent over the grateful heat,
warming their hands and faces. Not until they were in a normal
physical condition did Colden or Robert ask them any questions and
then Willet said:

"Their ring about the fort is complete, but in the darkness we were
able to slip through and then back again. I should judge that they
have at least three hundred warriors and Tandakora is first among
them. There are about thirty Frenchmen. De Courcelles has taken off
his bandage, but he still has a bruise where Tayoga struck
him. Peeping from the bushes I saw him and his face has grown more
evil. It was evident to me that the blow of Tayoga has inflamed his
mind. He feels mortified and humiliated at the way in which he was
outwitted, and, as Tandakora also nurses a personal hatred against us,
it's likely that they'll keep up the siege all winter, if they think
in the end they can get us.

"Their camp, too, shows increasing signs of permanency. They've built
a dozen bark huts in which all the French, all the chiefs and some of
the warriors sleep, and there are skin lodges for the rest. Oh, it's
quite a village! And they've accumulated game, too, for a long time."

Colden looked depressed.

"We're not fulfilling our mission," he said. "We've come out here to
protect the settlers on the border, and give them a place of
refuge. Instead, it looks as if we'd pass the winter fighting for our
own lives."

"I think I have a plan," said Robert, who had been very thoughtful.

"What is it?" asked Colden.

"I remember something I read in our Roman history in the school at
Albany. It was an event that happened a tremendously long time ago,
but I fancy it's still useful as an example. Scipio took his army over
to Africa to meet Hannibal, and one night his men set fire to the
tents of the Carthaginians. They destroyed their camp, created a
terrible tumult, and inflicted great losses."

Tayoga's eyes glistened.

"Then you mean," he said, "that we are to burn the camp of the French
and their allies?"

"No less."

"It is a good plan. If Great Bear and the captain agree to it we will
do it."

"It's fearfully risky," said Colden.

"If Great Bear and I can go out once and come back safely," said
Tayoga, "we can do it twice."

The young captain looked at Willet.

"It's the best plan," said the hunter. "Robert hasn't read his Roman
history in vain."

"Then it's agreed," said Colden, "and as soon as another night as dark
as this comes we'll try it."

The plan being formed, they waited a week before a night, pitchy
black, arrived.




CHAPTER VII

THE RED WEAPON


The night was admirably suited to their purpose--otherwise they would
not have dared to leave Fort Refuge--and Willet, Tayoga and Robert
alone undertook the task. Wilton, Carson and others were anxious to
go, but, as an enterprise of such great danger required surpassing
skill, the three promptly ruled them out. The hunter and young Lennox
would have disguised themselves as Indians, but as they did not have
any paint in the fort they were compelled to go forth in their own
garb.

The cold had softened greatly, and, as heavy clouds had come with it,
there was promise of snow, which in truth the three hoped would fall,
since it would be an admirable cloak for their purpose. But in any
event theirs was to be a perilous path, and Colden shook hands with
the three as they lowered themselves softly from the palisade.

"Come back," he whispered. "If you find the task too dangerous let it
go and return at once. We need you here in the fort."

"We'll come back as victors," Robert replied with confidence. Then he
and his comrades crouched, close against the palisade and
listened. The Indian fires showed dimly in the heavy dusk, and they
