
"Oh, nice. I don't know of any people I'd rather have on it. But what I
want to gripe about is calling our new home world such a horrible name
as 'Fuel Bin,' as though it were a wood-box or a coal-scuttle or
something. And just think of the complexes it would set up in those
super-children we're going to have so many of."

"What would you suggest?" Hilton asked.

"'Ardvor', of course," Hermione said, before her sister could answer.
"We've had 'Arth' and 'Ardu' and 'Ardry' and you--or somebody--started
calling us 'Ardans' to distinguish us converts from the Terrans. So
let's keep up the same line."

There was general laughter at that, but the name was approved.

       *       *       *       *       *

About midnight the meeting ended and the _Orion_ set out for Ardvor. It
reached it and slanted sharply downward. The whole BuSci staff was in
the lounge, watching the big tri-di.

"Hey! That isn't Omlu!" Stella exclaimed. "It isn't a city at all and it
isn't even in the same place!"

"No, ma'am," Larry said. "Most of you wanted the ocean, but many wanted
a river or the mountains. Therefore we razed Omlu and built your new
city, Ardane, at a place where the ocean, two rivers, and a range of
mountains meet. Strictly speaking, it is not a city, but a place of
pleasant and rewardful living."

The space-ship was coming in, low and fast, from the south. To the left,
the west, there stretched the limitless expanse of ocean. To the right,
mile after mile, were rough, rugged, jagged, partially-timbered
mountains, mass piled upon mass. Immediately below the speeding vessel
was a wide, white-sand beach all of ten miles long.

Slowing rapidly now, the _Orion_ flew along due north.

[Illustration]

"Look! Look! A natatorium!" Beverly shrieked. "I know I wanted a nice
big place to swim in, besides my backyard pool and the ocean, but I
didn't tell anybody to build _that_--I swear I didn't!"

"You didn't have to, pet." Poynter put his arm around her curvaceous
waist and squeezed. "They knew. And I did a little thinking along that
line myself. There's our house, on top of the cliff over the
natatorium--you can almost dive into it off the patio."

"Oh, wonderful!"

Immediately north of the natatorium a tremendous river--named at first
sight the "Whitewater"--rushed through its gorge into the ocean; a river
and gorge strangely reminiscent of the Colorado and its Grand Canyon. On
the south bank of that river, at its very mouth--looking straight up
that tremendous canyon; on a rocky promontory commanding ocean and beach
and mountains--there was a house. At the sight of it Temple hugged
Hilton's arm in ecstasy.

"Yes, that's ours," he assured her. "Just about everything either of us
has ever wanted." The clamor was now so great--everyone was recognizing
his-and-her house and was exclaiming about it--that both Temple and
Hilton fell silent and simply watched the scenery unroll.

Across the turbulent Whitewater and a mile farther north, the mountains
ended as abruptly as though they had been cut off with a cleaver and an
apparently limitless expanse of treeless, grassy prairie began. And
through that prairie, meandering sluggishly to the ocean from the
northeast, came the wide, deep River Placid.

The _Orion_ halted. It began to descend vertically, and only then did
Hilton see the spaceport. It was so vast, and there were so many
spaceships on it, that from any great distance it was actually
invisible! Each six-acre bit of the whole immense expanse of level
prairie between the Placid and the mountains held an Oman
superdreadnought!

       *       *       *       *       *

The staff paired off and headed for the airlocks. Hilton said: "Temple,
have you any reservations at all, however slight, as to having Dark Lady
as a permanent fixture in your home?"

"Why, of course not--I like her as much as you do. And besides--" she
giggled like a schoolgirl--"even if she _is_ a lot more beautiful than I
am--I've got a few things she never will have ... but there's something
else. I got just a flash of it before you blocked. Spill it, please."

"You'll see in a minute." And she did.

Larry, Dark Lady and Temple's Oman maid Moty were standing beside the
Hilton's car--and so was another Oman, like none ever before seen. Six
feet four; shoulders that would just barely go through a door; muscled
like Atlas and Hercules combined; skin a gleaming, satiny bronze; hair a
rippling mass of lambent flame. Temple came to a full stop and caught
her breath.

"The Prince," she breathed, in awe. "Da Lormi's Prince of Thebes. The
ultimate bronze of all the ages. _You_ did this, Jarve. How did you ever
dig him up out of my schoolgirl crushes?"

All six got into the car, which was equally at home on land or water or
in the air. In less than a minute they were at Hilton House.

The house itself was circular. Its living-room was an immense annulus of
glass from which, by merely moving along its circular length, any
desired view could be had. The pair walked around it once. Then she took
him by the arm and steered him firmly toward one of the bedrooms in the
center.

"This house is just too much to take in all at once," she declared.
"Besides, let's put on our swimsuits and get over to the Nat."

In the room, she closed the door firmly in the faces of the Omans and
grinned. "Maybe, sometime, I'll get used to having somebody besides you
in my bedroom, but I haven't, yet.... Oh, do you itch, too?"

Hilton had peeled to the waist and was scratching vigorously all around
his waistline, under his belt. "Like the very devil," he admitted, and
stared at her. For she, three-quarters stripped, was scratching, too!

"It started the minute we left the _Orion_," he said, thoughtfully. "I
see. These new skins of ours like hard radiation, but don't like to be
smothered while they're enjoying it. By about tomorrow, we'll be a
nudist colony, I think."

"I could stand it, I suppose. What makes you think so?"

"Just what I know about radiation. Frank would be the one to ask. My
hunch is, though, that we're going to be nudists whether we want to or
not. Let's go."

       *       *       *       *       *

They went in a two-seater, leaving the Omans at home. Three-quarters of
the staff were lolling on the sand or were seated on benches beside the
immense pool. As they watched, Beverly ran out along the line of
springboards; testing each one and selecting the stiffest. She then
climbed up to the top platform--a good twelve feet above the board--and
plummeted down upon the board's heavily padded take-off. Legs and back
bending stubbornly to take the strain, she and the board reached
low-point together, and, still in sync with it, she put every muscle she
had into the effort to hurl herself upward.

She had intended to go up thirty feet. But she had no idea whatever as
to her present strength, or of what that Oman board, in perfect
synchronization with that tremendous strength, would do. Thus, instead
of thirty feet, she went up very nearly two hundred; which of course
spoiled completely her proposed graceful two-and-a-half.

In midair she struggled madly to get into some acceptable position.
Failing, she curled up into a tight ball just before she struck water.

_What_ a splash!

"It won't hurt her--you couldn't hurt her with a club!" Hilton snapped.
He seized Temple's hand as everyone else rushed to the pool's edge.
"Look--Bernadine--that's what I was thinking about."

Temple stopped and looked. The platinum-haired twins had been basking on
the sand, and wherever sand had touched fabric, fabric had disappeared.

Their suits had of course approached the minimum to start with. Now
Bernadine wore only a wisp of nylon perched precariously on one breast
and part of a ribbon that had once been a belt. Discovering the
catastrophe, she shrieked once and leaped into the pool any-which-way,
covering her breasts with her hands and hiding in water up to her neck.

Meanwhile, the involuntarily high diver had come to the surface,
laughing apologetically. Surprised by the hair dangling down over her
eyes, she felt for her cap. It was gone. So was her suit. Naked as a
fish. She swam a couple of easy strokes, then stopped.

"Frank! Oh, Frank!" she called.

"Over here, Bev." Her husband did not quite know whether to laugh or
not.

"Is it the radiation or the water? Or both?"

"Radiation, I think. These new skins of ours don't want to be covered
up. But it probably makes the water a pretty good imitation of a
universal solvent."

"Good-by, clothes!" Beverly rolled over onto her back, fanned water
carefully with her hands, and gazed approvingly at herself. "I don't
itch any more, anyway, so I'm very much in favor of it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus the Ardans came to their new home world and to a life that was to
be more comfortable by far and happier by far than any of them had known
on Earth. There were many other surprises that day, of course; of which
only two will be mentioned here. When they finally left the pool, at
about seventeen hours G.M.T.[2], everybody was ravenously hungry.

[2] Greenwich Mean Time. Ardvor was, always and everywhere, full
daylight. Terran time and calendar were adapted as a matter of course.

"But why _should_ we be?" Stella demanded. "I've been eating everything
in sight, just for fun. But now I'm actually hungry enough to eat a
horse and wagon and chase the driver!"

"Swimming makes everybody hungry," Beverly said, "and I'm awfully glad
_that_ hasn't changed. Why, I wouldn't feel _human_ if I didn't!"

Hilton and Temple went home, and had a long-drawn-out and very wonderful
supper. Prince waited on Temple, Dark Lady on Hilton; Larry and Moty ran
the synthesizers in the kitchen. All four Omans radiated happiness.

Another surprise came when they went to bed. For the bed was a raised
platform of something that looked like concrete and, except for an
uncanny property of molding itself somewhat to the contours of their
bodies, was almost as hard as rock. Nevertheless, it was the most
comfortable bed either of them had ever had. When they were ready to go
to sleep, Temple said:

"Drat it, those Omans _still_ want to come in and sleep with us. In the
room, I mean. And they suffer so. They're simply _radiating_ silent
suffering and oh-so-submissive reproach. Shall we let 'em come in?"

"That's strictly up to you, sweetheart. It always has been."

"I know. I thought they'd quit it sometime, but I guess they never will.
I _still_ want an illusion of privacy at times, even though they know
all about everything that goes on. But we might let 'em in now, just
while we sleep, and throw 'em out again as soon as we wake up in the
morning?"

"You're the boss." Without additional invitation the four Omans came in
and arranged themselves neatly on the floor, on all four sides of the
bed. Temple had barely time to cuddle up against Hilton, and he to put
his arm closely around her, before they both dropped into profound and
dreamless sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

At eight hours next morning all the specialists met at the new Hall of
Records.

This building, an exact duplicate of the old one, was located on a mesa
in the foothills southwest of the natatorium, in a luxuriant grove at
sight of which Karns stopped and began to laugh.

"I thought I'd seen everything," he remarked. "But yellow pine, spruce,
tamarack, apples, oaks, palms, oranges, cedars, joshua trees and
_cactus_--just to name a few--all growing on the same quarter-section of
land?"

"Just everything anybody wants, is all," Hilton said. "But are they
really growing? Or just straight synthetics? Lane--Kathy--this is your
dish."

"Not so fast, Jarve; give us a chance, _please_!" Kathryn, now Mrs. Lane
Saunders, pleaded. She shook her spectacular head. "We don't see how any
stable indigenous life can have developed at all, unless ..."

"Unless what? Natural shielding?" Hilton asked, and Kathy eyed her
husband.

"Right," Saunders said. "The earliest life-forms must have developed a
shield before they could evolve and stabilize. Hence, whatever it is
that is in our skins was not a triumph of Masters' science. They took it
from Nature."

"Oh? Oh!" These were two of Sandra's most expressive monosyllables,
followed by a third. "Oh. Could be, at that. But how _could_ ... no,
cancel that."

"You'd better cancel it, Sandy. Give us a couple of months, and _maybe_
we can answer a few elementary questions."

Now inside the Hall, all the teams, from Astronomy to Zoology, went
efficiently to work. Everyone now knew what to look for, how to find
it, and how to study it.

"The First Team doesn't need you now too much, does it, Jarve?" Sawtelle
asked.

"Not particularly. In fact, I was just going to get back onto my own
job."

"Not yet. I want to talk to you," and the two went into a long
discussion of naval affairs.




XI


The Stretts' fuel-supply line had been cut long since. Many Strett
cargo-carriers had been destroyed. The enemy would of course have a very
heavy reserve of fuel on hand. But there was no way of knowing how large
it was, how many warships it could supply, or how long it would last.

Two facts were, however, unquestionable. First, the Stretts were
building a fleet that in their minds would be invincible. Second, they
would attack Ardane as soon as that fleet could be made ready. The
unanswerable question was: how long would that take?

"So we want to get every ship we have. How many? Five thousand? Ten?
Fifteen? We want them converted to maximum possible power as soon as we
possibly can," Sawtelle said. "And I want to get out there with my boys
to handle things."

"You aren't going to. Neither you nor your boys are expendable.
Particularly you." Jaw hard-set, Hilton studied the situation for
minutes. "No. What we'll do is take your Oman, Kedy. We'll re-set the
Guide to drive into him everything you and the military Masters ever
knew about arms, armament, strategy, tactics and so on. And we'll add
everything I know of coordination, synthesis, and perception. That ought
to make him at least a junior-grade military genius."

"You can play _that_ in spades. I wish you could do it to me."

"I can--if you'll take the full Oman transformation. Nothing else can
stand the punishment."

"I know. No, I don't want to be a genius that badly."

"Check. And we'll take the resultant Kedy and make nine duplicates of
him. Each one will learn from and profit by the mistakes made by
preceding numbers and will assume command the instant his preceding
number is killed."

"Oh, you expect, then...?"

"Expect? No. I know it damn well, and so do you. That's why we Ardans
will all stay aground. Why the Kedys' first job will be to make the
heavy stuff in and around Ardane as heavy as it can be made. Why it'll
all be on twenty-four-hour alert. Then they can put as many thousands of
Omans as you please to work at modernizing all the Oman ships you want
and doing anything else you say. Check?"

Sawtelle thought for a couple of minutes. "A few details, is all. But
that can be ironed out as we go along."

Both men worked then, almost unremittingly for six solid days; at the
end of which time both drew tremendous sighs of relief. They had done
everything possible for them to do. The defense of Ardvor was now
rolling at fullest speed toward its gigantic objective.

Then captain and director, in two Oman ships with fifty men and a
thousand Omans, leaped the world-girdling ocean to the mining operation
of the Stretts. There they found business strictly as usual. The
strippers still stripped; the mining mechs still roared and snarled
their inchwise ways along their geometrically perfect terraces; the
little carriers still skittered busily between the various miners and
the storage silos. The fact that there was enough concentrate on hand to
last a world for a hundred years made no difference at all to these
automatics; a crew of erector-mechs was building new silos as fast as
existing ones were being filled.

Since the men now understood everything that was going on, it was a
simple matter for them to stop the whole Strett operation in its
tracks. Then every man and every Oman leaped to his assigned job. Three
days later, all the mechs went back to work. Now, however, they were
working for the Ardans.

The miners, instead of concentrate, now emitted vastly larger streams of
Navy-Standard pelleted uranexite. The carriers, instead of one-gallon
cans, carried five-ton drums. The silos were immensely larger--thirty
