
We have now seen that the flower-stems of plants belonging to such widely
different families as the Cruciferae, Oxalidae, Leguminosae, Primulaceae,
Scrophularineae, Alismaceae, and Liliaceae, circumnutate; and that there
are indications of this movement in many other families. With these facts
before us, bearing also in mind that the tendrils of not a few plants
consist of modified peduncles, we may admit without much doubt that all
growing flower-stems circumnutate.

CIRCUMNUTATION OF LEAVES: DICOTYLEDONS.

Several distinguished botanists, Hofmeister, Sachs, Pfeffer, De Vries,
Batalin, Millardet, etc., have ob-

* 'Jenaische Zeitsch.,' B. v. p. 133.

**  'N. Mem. de l'Acad. R. de Bruxelles,' tom. xiv. 1841, p. 3.

*** 'Sitzungbericht des bot. Vereins der P. Brandenburg,' xxi. p. 84.
[page 227]
served, and some of them with the greatest care, the periodical movements
of leaves; but their attention has been chiefly, though not exclusively,
directed to those which move largely and are commonly said to sleep at
night. From considerations hereafter to be given, plants of this nature are
here excluded, and will be treated of separately. As we wished to ascertain
whether all young and growing leaves circumnutated, we thought that it
would be sufficient if we observed between 30 and 40 genera, widely
distributed throughout the vegetable series, selecting some unusual forms
and others on woody plants. All the plants were healthy and grew in pots.
They were illuminated from above, but the light perhaps was not always
sufficiently bright, as many of them were observed under a skylight of
ground-glass. Except in a few specified cases, a fine glass filament with
two minute triangles of paper was fixed to the leaves, and their movements
were traced on a vertical glass (when not stated to the contrary) in the
manner already described. I may repeat that the broken lines represent the
nocturnal course. The stem was always secured to a stick, close to the base
of the leaf under observation. The arrangement of the species, with the
number of the Family appended, is the same as in the case of stems.

Fig. 93. Sarracenia purpurea: circumnutation of young pitcher, traced from
8 A.M. July 3rd to 10.15 A.M. 4th. Temp. 17o - 18o C. Apex of pitcher 20
inches from glass, so movement greatly magnified.

(1.) Sarracenia purpurea (Sarraceneae, Fam. 11).--A young leaf, or pitcher,
8 ½ inches in height, with the bladder swollen but with the hood not as yet
open, had a filament fixed transversely
[page 228]
across its apex; it was observed for 48 h., and during the whole of this
time it circumnutated in a nearly similar manner, but to a very small
extent. The tracing given (Fig. 93) relates only to the movement during the
first 26 h.

(2) Glaucium luteum (Papaveraceae, Fam. 12).--A young plant, bearing only 8
leaves, had a filament attached to the youngest leaf but one, which was 3
inches in length, including the petiole. The circumnutating movement was
traced during 47 h. On both days the leaf descended from before 7 A.M.
until about 11 A.M., and then ascended slightly during the rest of the day
and the early part of the night. During the latter part of the night it
fell greatly. It did not ascend so much during the second as during the
first day, and it descended considerably lower on the second night than on
the first. This difference was probably due to the illumination from above
having been insufficient during the two days of observation. Its course
during the two days is shown in Fig. 94.

Fig. 94. Glaucium luteum: circumnutation of young leaf, traced from 9.30
A.M. June 14th to 8.30 A.M. 16th. Tracing not much magnified, as apex of
leaf stood only 5 ½ inches from the glass.

(3.) Crambe maritima (Cruciferae, Fam. 14).--A leaf 9 ½ inches in length on
a plant not growing vigorously was first observed. Its apex was in constant
movement, but this could hardly be traced, from being so small in extent.
The apex, however, certainly changed its course at least 6 times in the
course of 14 h. A more vigorous young plant, bearing only 4 leaves, was
then selected, and a filament was affixed to the midrib of the third leaf
from the base, which, with the petiole, was 5 inches in length. The leaf
stood up almost vertically, but the tip
[page 229]
was deflected, so that the filament projected almost horizontally, and its
movements were traced during 48 h. on a vertical glass as shown in the
accompanying figure (Fig. 95). We here plainly see that the leaf was
continually circumnutating; but the proper periodicity of its movements was
disturbed by its being only dimly illuminated from above through a double
skylight. We infer that this was the case, because two leaves on plants
growing out of doors, had their angles above the horizon measured in the
middle of the day and at 9 to about 10 P.M. on successive nights, and they
were found at this latter hour to have risen by an average angle of 9o
above their mid-day position: on the following morning they fell to their
former position. Now it may be observed in the diagram that the leaf rose
during the second night, so that it stood at 6.40 A.M. higher than at 10.20
P.M. on the preceding night; and this may be attributed to the leaf
adjusting itself to the dim light, coming exclusively from above.

Fig. 95. Crambe maritima: circumnutation of leaf, disturbed by being
insufficiently illuminated from above, traced from 7.50 A.M. June 23rd to 8
A.M. 25th. Apex of leaf 15 1/4 inches from the vertical glass, so that the
tracing was much magnified, but is here reduced to one-fourth of original
scale.

(4.) Brassica oleracea (Cruciferae).--Hofmeister and Batalin* state that
the leaves of the cabbage rise at night, and fall by day. We covered a
young plant, bearing 8 leaves, under a large bell-glass, placing it in the
same position with respect to the

* 'Flora,' 1873, p. 437.
[page 230]

light in which it had long remained, and a filament was fixed at the
distance of .4 of an inch from the apex of a young leaf nearly 4 inches in
length. Its movements were then traced during three days, but the tracing
is not worth giving. The leaf fell during the whole morning, and rose in
the evening and during the early part of the night. The ascending and
descending lines did not coincide, so that an irregular ellipse was formed
each 24 h. The basal part of the midrib did not move, as was ascertained by
measuring at successive periods the angle which it formed with the horizon,
so that the movement was confined to the terminal portion of the leaf,
which moved through an angle of 11o in the course of 24 h., and the
distance travelled by the apex, up and down, was between .8 and .9 of an
inch.

In order to ascertain the effect of darkness, a filament was fixed to a
leaf 5 ½ inches in length, borne by a plant which after forming a head had
produced a stem. The leaf was inclined 44o above the horizon, and its
movements were traced on a vertical glass every hour by the aid of a taper.
During the first day the leaf rose from 8 A.M. to 10.40 P.M. in a slightly
zigzag course, the actual distance travelled by the apex being .67 of an
inch. During the night the leaf fell, whereas it ought to have risen; and
by 7 A.M. on the following morning it had fallen .23 of an inch, and it
continued falling until 9.40 A.M. It then rose until 10.50 P.M., but the
rise was interrupted by one considerable oscillation, that is, by a fall
and re-ascent. During the second night it again fell, but only to a very
short distance, and on the following morning re-ascended to a very short
distance. Thus the normal course of the leaf was greatly disturbed, or
rather completely inverted, by the absence of light; and the movements were
likewise greatly diminished in amplitude.

We may add that, according to Mr. A. Stephen Wilson,* the young leaves of
the Swedish turnip, which is a hybrid between B. oleracea and rapa, draw
together in the evening so much "that the horizontal breadth diminishes
about 30 per cent. of the daylight breadth." Therefore the leaves must rise
considerably at night.

(5.) Dianthus caryophyllus (Caryophylleae, Fam. 26).--The

* 'Trans. Bot. Soc. Edinburgh,' vol. xiii. p. 32. With respect to the
origin of the Swedish turnip, see Darwin, 'Animals and Plants under
Domestication,' 2nd edit. vol. i. p. 344.
[page 231]

terminal shoot of a young plant, growing very vigorously, was selected for
observation. The young leaves at first stand up vertically and close
together, but they soon bend outwards and downwards, so as to become
horizontal, and often at the same time a little to one side. A filament was
fixed to the tip of a young leaf whilst still highly inclined, and the
first dot was made on the vertical glass at 8.30 A.M. June 13th, but it
curved downwards so quickly that by 6.40 A.M. on the following morning it
stood only a little above the horizon. In Fig. 96

Fig. 96. Dianthus caryophyllus: circumnutation of young leaf, traced from
10.15 P.M. June 13th to 10.35 P.M. 16th. Apex of leaf stood, at the close
of our observations, 8 3/4 inches from the vertical glass, so tracing not
greatly magnified. The leaf was 5 1/4 inches long. Temp. 15 1/2o - 17 1/2o
C.

the long, slightly zigzag line representing this rapid downward course,
which was somewhat inclined to the left, is not given; but the figure shows
the highly tortuous and zigzag course, together with some loops, pursued
during the next 2 ½ days. As the leaf continued to move all the time to the
left, it is evident that the zigzag line represents many circumnutations.

(6.) Camellia Japonica (Camelliaceae, Fam. 32).--A youngish leaf, which
together with its petiole was 2 3/4 inches in length and which arose from a
side branch on a tall bush, had a filament attached to its apex. This leaf
sloped downwards at an angle of 40o beneath the horizon. As it was thick
and rigid, and its
[page 232]
petiole very short, much movement could not be expected. Nevertheless, the
apex changed its course completely seven times in the course of 11 ½ h.,
but moved to only a very small distance. On the next day the movement of
the apex was traced during 26 h. 20 m. (as shown in Fig. 97), and was
nearly of the same nature, but rather less complex. The movement seems to
be periodical, for on both days the leaf circumnutated in the forenoon,
fell in the afternoon (on the first day until between 3 and 4 P.M., and on
the second day until 6 P.M.), and then rose, falling again during the night
or early morning.

Fig. 97. Camellia Japonica: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 6.40 A.M.
June 14th to 6.50 A.M. 15th. Apex of leaf 12 inches from the vertical
glass, so figure considerably magnified. Temp. 16o - 16 1/2o C.

In the chapter on the Sleep of Plants we shall see that the leaves in
several Malvaceous genera sink

Fig. 98. Pelargonium zonale: circumnutation and downward movement of young
leaf, traced from 9.30 A.M. June 14th to 6.30 P.M. 16th. Apex of leaf 9 1.4
inches from the vertical glass, so figure moderately magnified. Temp. 15o -
16 1/2o C.

at night; and as they often do not then occupy a vertical position,
especially if they have not been well illuminated during
[page 233]
the day, it is doubtful whether some of these cases ought not to have been
included in the present chapter.

(7.) Pelargonium zonale (Geraniaceae, Fam. 47).--A young leaf, 1 1/4 inch
in breadth, with its petiole 1 inch long, borne on a young plant, was
observed in the usual manner during 61 h.; and its course is shown in the
preceding figure (Fig. 98). During the first day and night the leaf moved
downwards, but circumnutated between 10 A.M. and 4.30 P.M. On the second
day it sank and rose again, but between 10 A.M. and 6 P.M. it circumnutated
on an extremely small scale. On the third day the circumnutation was more
plainly marked.

(8.) Cissus discolor (Ampelideae, Fam. 67).--A leaf, not nearly full-grown,
the third from the apex of a shoot on a cut-down plant, was observed during
31 h. 30 m. (see Fig. 99). The day was cold (15o - 16o C.), and if the
plant had been observed in the hot-house, the circumnutation, though plain
enough as it was, would probably have been far more conspicuous.

Fig. 99. Cissus discolor: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 10.35 A.M.
May 28th to 6 P.M. 29th. Apex of leaf 8 3/4 inches from the vertical glass.

(9.) Vicia faba (Leguminosae, Fam. 75).--A young leaf, 3.1 inches in
length, measured from base of petiole to end of leaflets, had a filament
affixed to the midrib of one of the two terminal leaflets, and its
movements were traced during 51 ½ h. The filament fell all morning (July
2nd) till 3 P.M., and then rose greatly till 10.35 P.M.; but the rise this
day was so great, compared with that which subsequently occurred, that it
was probably due in part to the plant being illuminated from above. The
latter part of the course on July 2nd is alone given in the following
figure (Fig. 100). On the next day (July 3rd) the leaf again fell in the
morning, then circumnutated in a conspicuous manner, and rose till late at
night; but the movement was not traced after 7.15 P.M., as by that time the
filament pointed towards the upper edge of the glass. During the latter
part of the night or early morning it again fell in the same manner as
before.
[page 234]

As the evening rise and the early morning fall were unusually large, the
angle of the petiole above the horizon was measured at the two periods, and
the leaf was found to have risen 19o

Fig. 100. Vicia faba: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 7.15 P.M. July
2nd to 10.15 A.M. 4th. Apex of the two terminal leaflets 7 1/4 inches from
the vertical glass. Figure here reduced to two-thirds of original scale.
Temp. 17o - 18o C.

between 12.20 P.M. and 10.45 P.M., and to have fallen 23o 30 seconds
between the latter hour and 10.20 A.M. on the following morning.

The main petiole was now secured to a stick close to the base
[page 235]
of the two terminal leaflets, which were 1.4 inch in length; and the
movements of one of them were traced during 48 h. (see Fig. 101). The
course pursued is closely analogous to that of the whole leaf. The zigzag
line between 8.30 A.M. and 3.30 P.M. on the second day represents 5 very
small ellipses, with their
Fig 101. Vicia faba: circumnutation of one of the two terminal leaflets,
the main petiole having been secured, traced from 10.40 A.M. July 4th to
10.30 A.M. 6th. Apex of leaflet 6 5/8 inches from the vertical glass.
Tracing here reduced to one-half of original scale. Temp. 16o - 18o C.

longer axes differently directed. From these observations it follows that
both the whole leaf and the terminal leaflets undergo a well-marked daily
periodical movement, rising in the evening and falling during the latter
part of the night or early morning; whilst in the middle of the day they
generally circumnutate round the same small space.
[page 236]

(10.) Acacia retinoides (Leguminosae).--The movement of a young phyllode, 2
3/8 inches in length, and inclined at a considerable angle above the
horizon, was traced during 45 h. 30 m.; but in the figure here given (Fig.
102), its circumnutation is shown during only 21 h. 30 m. During part of
this time (viz., 14 h. 30 m.) the phyllode described a figure representing
5 or 6 small ellipses. The actual amount of movement in a vertical
direction was .3 inch. The phyllode rose considerably between 1.30 P.M. and
4 P.M., but there was no evidence on either day of a regular periodic
movement.

Fig. 102. Acacia retinoides: circumnutation of a young phyllode, traced
from 10.45 A.M. July 18th to 8.15 A.M. 19th. Apex of phyllode 9 inches from
the vertical glass; temp. 16 1/2o - 17 1/2o C.

(11.) Lupinus speciosus (Leguminosae).--Plants were raised from seed
purchased under this name. This is one of the species in this large genus,
the leaves of which do not sleep at night. The petioles rise direct from
the ground, and are from 5 to 7 inches in length. A filament was fixed to
the midrib of one of the longer leaflets, and the movement of the whole
leaf was traced, as shown in Fig. 103. In the course of 6 h. 30 m. the
filament went four times up and three times down. A new tracing was then
begun (not here given), and during 12 ½ h. the leaf moved eight times up
and seven times down; so that it described 7 ½ ellipses in this time, and
this is an extraordinary rate of movement. The summit of the petiole was
then secured to a stick, and the separate leaflets were found to be
continually circumnutating.

Fig. 103. Lupinus speciosus: circumnutation of leaf, traced on vertical
glass, from 10.15 A.M. to 5.45 P.M.; i.e., during 6 h. 30 m.
[page 237]

(12.) Echeveria stolonifera (Crassulaceae, Fam. 84).--The older leaves of
this plant are so thick and fleshy, and the young ones so short and broad,
that it seemed very improbable that any circumnutation could be detected. A
filament was fixed to a young upwardly inclined leaf, .75 inch in length
and .28 in breadth, which stood on the outside of a terminal rosette of
leaves, produced by a plant growing very vigorously. Its movement was
traced during 3 days, as here shown (Fig. 104). The course was chiefly in
an upward direction, and this may be attributed to the elongation of the
leaf through growth; but we see that the lines are strongly zigzag, and
that occasionally there was distinct circumnutation, though on a very small
scale.

Fig. 104. Echeveria stolonifera: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 8.20
A.M. June 25th to 8.45 A.M. 28th. Apex of leaf 12 1/4 inches from the
glass, so that the movement was much magnified; temp. 23o - 24 1/2o C.
(13.) Bryophyllum (vel Calanchae) calycinum (Crassulaceae).--Duval-Jouve
('Bull. Soc. Bot. de France,' Feb. 14th, 1868) measured the distance
between the tips of the upper pair of leaves on this plant, with the result
shown in the following Table. It should be noted that the measurements on
Dec. 2nd were made on a different pair of leaves: --

               8 A.M.      2 P.M.      7 P.M.
Nov. 16. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15 mm.. . . . . .25 mm. . . ..
. . .(?)
  "     19. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .48  " . . . . . . .  60 ". .
. . . . .  48 mm.
Dec.   2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22  ". . . . . . . . 43 ". . .
. . . . .28  "

We see from this Table that the leaves stood considerably further apart at
2 P.M. than at either 8 A.M. or 7 P.M.; and this shows that they rise a
little in the evening and fall or open in the forenoon.

(14.) Drosera rotundifolia (Droseraceae, Fam. 85).--The movements of a
young leaf, having a long petiole but with its tentacles (or gland-bearing
hairs) as yet unfolded, were traced during 47 h. 15 m. The figure (Fig.
105) shows that it circumnutated largely, chiefly in a vertical direction,
making two ellipses each
[page 238]
day. On both days the leaf began to descend after 12 or 1 o'clock, and
continued to do so all night, though to a very unequal distance on the two
occasions. We therefore thought that the movement was periodic; but on
observing three other leaves during several successive days and nights, we
found this to be an error; and the case is given merely as a caution. On
the third morning the above leaf occupied almost exactly the same position
as on the first morning; and the tentacles by this time had unfolded
sufficiently to project at right angles to the blade or disc.

Fig. 105. Drosera rotundifolia: circumnutation of young leaf, with filament
fixed to back of blade, traced from 9.15 A.M. June 7th to 8.30 A.M. June
9th. Figure here reduced to one-half original scale.

The leaves as they grow older generally sink more and more downwards. The
movement of an oldish leaf, the glands of which were still secreting
freely, was traced for 24 h., during which time it continued to sink a
little in a slightly zigzag line. On the following morning, at 7 A.M., a
drop of a solution of carbonate of ammonia (2 gr. to 1 oz. of water) was
placed on the disc, and this blackened the glands and induced inflection of
many of the tentacles. The weight of the drop caused the leaf at first to
sink a little; but immediately afterwards it began to rise in a somewhat
zigzag course, and continued to do so till 3 P.M. It then circumnutated
about the same spot on a very small scale for 21 h.; and during the next 21
h. it sank in a zigzag line to nearly the same level which it had held when
the ammonia was first administered. By this time the tentacles had
re-expanded, and the glands had recovered their proper colour. We thus
learn that an old leaf
[page 239]
circumnutates on a small scale, at least whilst absorbing carbonate of
ammonia; for it is probable that this absorption may stimulate growth and
thus re-excite circumnutation. Whether the rising of the glass filament
which was attached to the back of the leaf, resulted from its margin
becoming slightly inflected (as generally occurs), or from the rising of
the petiole, was not ascertained.

In order to learn whether the tentacles or gland-bearing hairs
circumnutate, the back of a young leaf, with the innermost tentacles as yet
incurved, was firmly cemented with shellac to a flat stick driven into
compact damp argillaceous sand. The plant was placed under a microscope
with the stage removed and with an eye-piece micrometer, of which each
division equalled 1/500 of an inch. It should be stated that as the leaves
grow older the tentacles of the exterior rows bend outwards and downwards,
so as ultimately to become deflected considerably beneath the horizon. A
tentacle in the second row from the margin was selected for observation,
and was found to be moving outwards at a rate of 1/500 of an inch in 20 m.,
or 1/100 of inch in 1 h. 40 m.; but as it likewise moved from side to side
to an extent of above 1/500 of inch, the movement was probably one of
modified circumnutation. A tentacle on an old leaf was next observed in the
same manner. In 15 m. after being placed under the microscope it had moved
about 1/1000 of an inch. During the next 7 ½ h. it was looked at
repeatedly, and during this whole time it moved only another 1/1000 of an
inch; and this small movement may have been due to the settling of the damp
sand (on which the plant rested), though the sand had been firmly pressed
down. We may therefore conclude that the tentacles when old do not
circumnutate; yet this tentacle was so sensitive, that in 23 seconds after
its gland had been merely touched with a bit of raw meat, it began to curl
inwards. This fact is of some importance, as it apparently shows that the
inflection of the tentacles from the stimulus of absorbed animal matter
(and no doubt from that of contact with any object) is not due to modified
circumnutation.

(15.) Dionoea muscipula (Droseraceae).--It should be premised that the
leaves at an early stage of their development have the two lobes pressed
closely together. These are at first directed back towards the centre of
the plant; but they gradually rise up and soon stand at right angles to the
petiole, and ultimately in nearly a straight line with it. A young leaf,
which with the
[page 240]
petiole was only 1.2 inch in length, had a filament fixed externally along
the midrib of the still closed lobes, which projected at right angles to
the petiole. In the evening this leaf completed an ellipse in the course of
2 h. On the following day (Sept. 25th) its movements were traced during 22
h.; and we see in Fig. 106 that it moved in the same general direction, due
to the straightening of the leaf, but in an extremely zigzag line. This
line represents several drawn-out or modified ellipses. There can therefore
be no doubt that this young leaf circumnutated.

Fig. 106. Dionaea muscipula: circumnutation of a young and expanding leaf,
traced on a horizontal glass in darkness, from noon Sept. 24th to 10 A.M.
25th. Apex of leaf 13 ½ inches from the glass, so tracing considerably
magnified.

A rather old, horizontally extended leaf, with a filament attached along
the under side of the midrib, was next observed during 7 h. It hardly
moved, but when one of its sensitive hairs was touched, the blades closed,
though not very quickly. A new dot was now made on the glass, but in the
course of 14 h. 20 m. there was hardly any change in the position of the
filament. We may therefore infer that an old and only moderately sensitive
leaf does not circumnutate plainly; but we shall soon see that it by no
means follows that such a leaf is absolutely motionless. We may further
infer that the stimulus from a touch does not re-excite plain
circumnutation.

Another full-grown leaf had a filament attached externally along one side
of the midrib and parallel to it, so that the filament would move if the
lobes closed. It should be first stated that, although a touch on one of
the sensitive hairs of a vigorous leaf causes it to close quickly, often
almost instantly, yet when a bit of damp meat or some solution of carbonate
of ammonia is placed on the lobes, they close so slowly that generally 24
h. is required for the completion of the act. The above leaf was first
observed for 2 h. 30 m., and did not circumnutate, but it ought to have
been observed for a
[page 241]
longer period; although, as we have seen, a young leaf completed a fairly
large ellipse in 2 h. A drop of an infusion of raw meat was then placed on
the leaf, and within 2 h. the glass filament rose a little; and this
implies that the lobes had begun to close, and perhaps the petiole to rise.
It continued to rise with extreme slowness for the next 8 h. 30 m. The
position of the pot was then (7.15 P.M., Sept. 24th) slightly changed and
an additional drop of the infusion given, and a new tracing was begun (Fig.
107). By 10.50 P.M. the filament had risen only a little more, and it fell
during the night. On the following morning the lobes were closing more
quickly, and by 5 P.M. it was evident to the eye that they had closed
considerably; by 8.48. P.M. this was still plainer, and by 10.45 P.M. the
marginal spikes were interlocked. The leaf fell a little during the night,
and next morning (25th) at 7 A.M. the lobes were completely shut. The
course pursued, as may be seen in the figure, was

Fig. 107. Dionoea muscipula: closure of the lobes and circumnutation of a
full-grown leaf, whilst absorbing an infusion of raw meat, traced in
darkness, from 7.15 P.M. Sept. 24th to 9 A.M. 26th. Apex of leaf 8 ½ inches
from the vertical glass. Figure here reduced to two-thirds of original
scale.

strongly zigzag, and this indicates that the closing of the lobes was
combined with the circumnutation of the whole leaf; and there cannot be
much doubt, considering how motionless the leaf was during 2 h. 30 m.
before it received the infusion, that the absorption of the animal matter
had excited it to circumnutate. The leaf was occasionally observed for the
next four days, but was kept in rather too cool a place; nevertheless, it
continued to circumnutate to a small extent, and the lobes remained closed.

It is sometimes stated in botanical works that the lobes close or sleep at
night; but this is an error. To test the statement, very long glass
filaments were fixed inside the two lobes of three leaves, and the
distances between their tips were measured in the middle of the day and at
night; but no difference could be detected.

The previous observations relate to the movements of the whole leaf, but
the lobes move independently of the petiole, and
[page 242]
seem to be continually opening and shutting to a very small extent. A
nearly full-grown leaf (afterwards proved to be highly sensitive to
contact) stood almost horizontally, so that by driving a long thin pin
through the foliaceous petiole close to the blade, it was rendered
motionless. The plant, with a little triangle of paper attached to one of
the marginal spikes, was placed under a microscope with an eye-piece
micrometer, each division of which equalled 1/500 of an inch. The apex of
the paper-triangle was now seen to be in constant slight movement; for in 4
h. it crossed nine divisions, or 9/500 of an inch, and after ten additional
hours it moved back and had crossed 5/500 in an opposite direction. The
plant was kept in rather too cool a place, and on the following day it
moved rather less, namely, 1/500 in 3 h., and 2/500 in an opposite
direction during the next 6 h. The two lobes, therefore, seem to be
constantly closing or opening, though to a very small distance; for we must
remember that the little triangle of paper affixed to the marginal spike
increased its length, and thus exaggerated somewhat the movement. Similar
observations, with the important difference that the petiole was left free
and the plant kept under a high temperature, were made on a leaf, which was
healthy, but so old that it did not close when its sensitive hairs were
repeatedly touched, though judging from other cases it would have slowly
closed if it had been stimulated by animal matter. The apex of the triangle
was in almost, though not quite, constant movement, sometimes in one
direction and sometimes in an opposite one; and it thrice crossed five
divisions of the micrometer (i.e. 1/100 of an inch) in 30 m. This movement
on so small a scale is hardly comparable with ordinary circumnutation; but
it may perhaps be compared with the zigzag lines and little loops, by which
the larger ellipses made by other plants are often interrupted.

In the first chapter of this volume, the remarkable oscillatory movements
of the circumnutating hypocotyl of the cabbage have been described. The
leaves of Dionaea present the same phenomenon, which is a wonderful one, as
viewed under a low power (2-inch object-glass), with an eye-piece
micrometer of which each division (1/500 of an inch) appeared as a rather
wide space. The young unexpanded leaf, of which the circumnutating
movements were traced (Fig. 106), had a glass filament fixed
perpendicularly to it; and the movement of the apex was observed in the
hot-house (temp. 84o to 86o F.), with light admitted only from above, and
with any lateral currents of air
[page 243]
excluded. The apex sometimes crossed one or two divisions of the micrometer
at an imperceptibly slow rate, but generally it moved onwards by rapid
starts or jerks of 2/1000 or 3/1000, and in one instance of 4/1000 of an
inch. After each jerk forwards, the apex drew itself backwards with
comparative slowness for part of the distance which had just been gained;
and then after a very short time made another jerk forwards. Four
conspicuous jerks forwards, with slower retreats, were seen on one occasion
to occur in exactly one minute, besides some minor oscillations. As far as
we could judge, the advancing and retreating lines did not coincide, and if
so, extremely minute ellipses were each time described. Sometimes the apex
remained quite motionless for a short period. Its general course during the
several hours of observation was in two opposite directions, so that the
leaf was probably circumnutating.

An older leaf with the lobes fully expanded, and which was afterwards
proved to be highly sensitive to contact, was next observed in a similar
manner, except that the plant was exposed to a lower temperature in a room.
The apex oscillated forwards and backwards in the same manner as before;
but the jerks forward were less in extent, viz. about 1/1000 inch; and
there were longer motionless periods. As it appeared possible that the
movements might be due to currents of air, a wax taper was held close to
the leaf during one of the motionless periods, but no oscillations were
thus caused. After 10 m., however, vigorous oscillations commenced, perhaps
owing to the plant having been warmed and thus stimulated. The candle was
then removed and before long the oscillations ceased; nevertheless, when
looked at again after an interval of 1 h. 30 m., it was again oscillating.
The plant was taken back into the hot-house, and on the following morning
was seen to be oscillating, though not very vigorously. Another old but
healthy leaf, which was not in the least sensitive to a touch, was likewise
observed during two days in the hot-house, and the attached filament made
many little jerks forwards of about 2/1000 or only 1/1000 of an inch.

Finally, to ascertain whether the lobes independently of the petiole
oscillated, the petiole of an old leaf was cemented close to the blade with
shellac to the top of a little stick driven into the soil. But before this
was done the leaf was observed, and found to be vigorously oscillating or
jerking; and after it had been cemented to the stick, the oscillations of
about 2/1000 of an inch still continued. On the following day a little
infusion
[page 244]
of raw meat was placed on the leaf, which caused the lobes to close
together very slowly in the course of two days; and the oscillations
continued during this whole time and for the next two days. After nine
additional days the leaf began to open and the margins were a little
everted, and now the apex of the glass filament remained for long periods
motionless, and then moved backwards and forwards for a distance of about
1/1000 of an inch slowly, without any jerks. Nevertheless, after warming
the leaf with a taper held close to it, the jerking movement recommenced.

This same leaf had been observed 2 ½ months previously, and was then found
to be oscillating or jerking. We may therefore infer that this kind of
movement goes on night and day for a very long period; and it is common to
young unexpanded leaves and to leaves so old as to have lost their
sensitiveness to a touch, but which were still capable of absorbing
nitrogenous matter. The phenomenon when well displayed, as in the young
leaf just described, is a very interesting one. It often brought before our
minds the idea of effort, or of a small animal struggling to escape from
some constraint.

(16.) Eucalyptus resinifera (Myrtaceae, Fam. 94).--A young leaf, two inches
in length together with the petiole, produced by a lateral shoot from a
cut-down tree, was observed in the usual manner. The blade had not as yet
assumed its vertical position. On June 7th only a few observations were
made, and the tracing merely showed that the leaf had moved three times
upwards and three downwards. On the following day it was observed more
frequently; and two tracings were made (see A and B, Fig. 108), as a single
one would have been too complicated. The apex changed its course 13 times
in the course of 16 h., chiefly up and down, but with some lateral
movement. The actual amount of movement in any one direction was small.

Fig. 108. Eucalyptus resinifera: circumnutation of a leaf, traced, A, from
6.40 A.M. to 1 P.M. June 8th; B, from 1 P.M. 8th to 8.30 A.M. 9th. Apex of
leaf 14 ½ inches from the horizontal glass, so figures considerably
magnified.

(17.) Dahlia (garden var.) (Compositae, Fam. 122).--A fine young
[page 245]
leaf 5 3/4 inches in length, produced by a young plant 2 feet high, growing
vigorously in a large pot, was directed at an angle of about 45o beneath
the horizon. On June 18th the leaf descended from 10 A.M. till 11.35 A.M.
(see Fig. 109); it then ascended greatly till 6 P.M., this ascent being
probably due to the light

Fig. 109. Dahlia: circumnutation of leaf, traced from 10 A.M. June 18th to
8.10 A.M. 20th, but with a break of 1 h. 40 m. on the morning of the 19th,
as, owing to the glass filament pointing too much to one side, the pot had
to be slightly moved; therefore the relative position of the two tracings
is somewhat arbitrary. The figure here given is reduced to one-fifth of the
original scale. Apex of leaf 9 inches from the glass in the line of its
inclination, and 4 3/4 in a horizontal line.
coming only from above. It zigzagged between 6 P.M. and 10.35 P.M., and
ascended a little during the night. It should be remarked that the vertical
distances in the lower part of the diagram are much exaggerated, as the
leaf was at first deflected beneath the horizon, and after it had sunk
downwards, the filament pointed in a very oblique line towards the glass.
Next
[page 246]
day the leaf descended from 8.20 A.M. till 7.15 P.M., then zigzagged and
ascended greatly during the night. On the morning of the 20th the leaf was
probably beginning to descend, though the short line in the diagram is
horizontal. The actual distances travelled by the apex of the leaf were
considerable, but could not be calculated with safety. From the course
pursued on the second day, when the plant had accommodated itself to the
light from above, there cannot be much doubt that the leaves undergo a
daily periodic movement, sinking during the day and rising at night.

(18.) Mutisia clematis (Compositae).--The leaves terminate in tendrils and
circumnutate like those of other tendril-bearers; but this plant is here
mentioned, on account of an erroneous statement* which has been published,
namely, that the leaves sink at night and rise during the day. The leaves
which behaved in this manner had been kept for some days in a northern room
and had not been sufficiently illuminated. A plant therefore was left
undisturbed in the hot-house, and three leaves had their angles measured at
noon and at 10 P.M. All three were inclined a little beneath the horizon at
noon, but one stood at night 2o, the second 21o, and the third 10o higher
than in the middle of the day; so that instead of sinking they rise a
little at night.

(19.) Cyclamen Persicum (Primulaceae, Fam. 135).--A young leaf, 1.8 of an
inch in length, petiole included, produced by an old root-stock, was
observed during three days in the usual manner (Fig. 110). On the first day
the leaf fell more than afterwards, apparently from adjusting itself to the
light from above. On all three days it fell from the early morning to about
7 P.M., and from that hour rose during the night, the course being slightly
zigzag. The movement therefore is strictly periodic. It should be noted
that the leaf would have sunk each evening a little lower down than it did,
had not the glass filament rested between 5 and 6 P.M. on the rim of the
pot. The amount of movement was considerable; for if we assume that the
whole leaf to the base of the petiole became bent, the tracing would be
magnified rather less than five times, and this would give to the apex a
rise and fall of half an inch, with some lateral movement. This amount,
however, would not attract attention without the aid of a tracing or
measurement of some kind.

* 'The Movements and Habits of Climbing Plants,' 1875, p. 118.
[page 247]

 (20.) Allamanda Schottii (Apocyneae, Fam. 144).--The young leaves of this
shrub are elongated, with the blade bowed so much

