until they got enough bank vaults open to supply big bills. It made
cigarettes scarce.

I turned away and noticed for the first time that one of the elevators
was stopped on the main floor. The doors were closed, but they were
glass doors, and although there wasn't any light inside, I could see
the elevator was full. There must have been thirty or forty people in
the car when it happened.

I'd been thinking that, if nothing else, these New Yorkers were pretty
neat--I mean if you don't count the Bronx. But here were thirty or
forty skeletons that nobody had even bothered to clear away.

You call that neat? Right in plain view on the ground floor, where
everybody who came into the place would be sure to go--I mean if it
had been on one of the upper floors, what difference would it have
made?

I began to wish we were out of the city. But naturally that would have
to wait until we finished what we came here to do--otherwise, what was
the point of coming all the way here in the first place?

       *       *       *       *       *

The tobacco counter was bare. I got the wheelbarrow easily
enough--there were plenty of those, all sizes; I picked out a nice
light red-and-yellow one with rubber-tired wheel. I rolled it over to
Sporting Goods on the same floor, but that didn't work out too well. I
found a 30-30 with telescopic sights, only there weren't any
cartridges to fit it--or anything else. I took the gun anyway; Engdahl
would probably have some extra ammunition.

Men's Clothing was a waste of time, too--I guess these New Yorkers
were too lazy to do laundry. But I found the typewriter I wanted.

I put the whole load into the wheelbarrow, along with a couple of odds
and ends that caught my eye as I passed through Housewares, and I
bumped as gently as I could down the shallow steps of the motionless
escalator to the ground floor.

I came down the back way, and that was a mistake. It led me right past
the food department. Well, I don't have to tell you what _that_ was
like, with all the exploded cans and the rats as big as poodles. But I
found some cologne and soaked a handkerchief in it, and with that over
my nose, and some fast footwork for the rats, I managed to get to one
of the doors.

It wasn't the one I had come in, but that was all right. I sized up
the guard. He looked smart enough for a little bargaining, but not too
smart; and if I didn't like his price, I could always remember that I
was supposed to go out the other door.

I said: "Psst!"

When he turned around, I said rapidly: "Listen, this isn't the way I
came in, but if you want to do business, it'll be the way I come out."

He thought for a second, and then he smiled craftily and said: "All
right, come on."

Well, we haggled. The gun was the big thing--he wanted five thousand
for that and he wouldn't come down. The wheelbarrow he was willing to
let go for five hundred. And the typewriter--he scowled at the
typewriter as though it were contagious.

"What you want that for?" he asked suspiciously. I shrugged.

"Well--" he scratched his head--"a thousand?"

I shook my head.

"Five hundred?"

I kept on shaking.

"All right, all right," he grumbled. "Look, you take the other things
for six thousand--including what you got in your pockets that you
don't think I know about, see? And I'll throw this in. How about it?"

That was fine as far as I was concerned, but just on principle I
pushed him a little further. "Forget it," I said. "I'll give you fifty
bills for the lot, take it or leave it. Otherwise I'll walk right down
the street to Gimbel's and--"

He guffawed.

"Whats the matter?" I demanded.

"Pal," he said, "you kill me. Stranger in town, hey? You can't go
anyplace but here."

"Why not?"

"Account of there _ain't_ anyplace else. See, the chief here don't
like competition. So we don't have to worry about anybody taking their
trade elsewhere, like--we burned all the other places down."

That explained a couple of things. I counted out the money, loaded the
stuff back in the wheelbarrow and headed for the Statler; but all the
time I was counting and loading, I was talking to Big Brainless; and
by the time I was actually on the way, I knew a little more about this
"chief."

And that was kind of important, because he was the man we were going
to have to know very well.




II


I locked the door of the hotel room. Arthur was peeping out of the
suitcase at me.

I said: "I'm back. I got your typewriter." He waved his eye at me.

I took out the little kit of electricians' tools I carried, tipped the
typewriter on its back and began sorting out leads. I cut them free
from the keyboard, soldered on a ground wire, and began taping the
leads to the strands of a yard of forty-ply multiplex cable.

It was a slow and dull job. I didn't have to worry about which
solenoid lead went to which strand--Arthur could sort them out. But
all the same it took an hour, pretty near, and I was getting hungry by
the time I got the last connection taped. I shifted the typewriter so
that both Arthur and I could see it, rolled in a sheet of paper and
hooked the cable to Arthur's receptors.

Nothing happened.

"Oh," I said. "Excuse me, Arthur. I forgot to plug it in."

I found a wall socket. The typewriter began to hum and then it started
to rattle and type:

DURA AUK UKOO RQK MWS AQB

It stopped.

"Come on, Arthur," I ordered impatiently. "Sort them out, will you?"

Laboriously it typed:

!!!

Then, for a time, there was a clacking and thumping as he typed random
letters, peeping out of the suitcase to see what he had typed, until
the sheet I had put in was used up.

I replaced it and waited, as patiently as I could, smoking one of the
last of my cigarettes. After fifteen minutes or so, he had the hang of
it pretty well. He typed:

YOU DAMQXXX DAMN FOOL WHUXXX WHY DID YOU LEAQNXXX LEAVE ME ALONE Q Q

"Aw, Arthur," I said. "Use your head, will you? I couldn't carry that
old typewriter of yours all the way down through the Bronx. It was
getting pretty beat-up. Anyway, I've only got two hands--"

YOU LOUSE, it rattled, ARE YOU TRYONXXX TRYING TO INSULT ME BECAUSE I
DONT HAVE ANY Q Q

"Arthur!" I said, shocked. "You know better than that!"

The typewriter slammed its carriage back and forth ferociously a
couple of times. Then he said: ALL RIGHT SAM YOU KNOW YOUVE GOT ME BY
THE THROAT SO YOU CAN DO ANYTHING YOU WANT TO WITH ME WHO CARES ABOUT
MY FEELINGS ANYHOW

"Please don't take that attitude," I coaxed.

WELL

"Please?"

He capitulated. ALL RIGHT SAY HEARD ANYTHING FROM ENGDAHL Q Q

"No."

ISNT THAT JUST LIKE HIM Q Q CANT DEPEND ON THAT MAN HE WAS THE
LOUSIEST ELECTRICIANS MATE ON THE SEA SPRITE AND HE ISNT MUCH BETTER
NOW SAY SAM REMEMBER WHEN WE HAD TO GET HIM OUT OF THE JUG IN NEWPORT
NEWS BECAUSE

I settled back and relaxed. I might as well. That was the trouble with
getting Arthur a new typewriter after a couple of days without one--he
had so much garrulity stored up in his little brain, and the only
person to spill it on was me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Apparently I fell asleep. Well, I mean I must have, because I woke up.
I had been dreaming I was on guard post outside the Yard at
Portsmouth, and it was night, and I looked up and there was something
up there, all silvery and bad. It was a missile--and that was silly,
because you never see a missile. But this was a dream.

And the thing burst, like a Roman candle flaring out, all sorts of
comet-trails of light, and then the whole sky was full of bright and
colored snow. Little tiny flakes of light coming down, a mist of
light, radiation dropping like dew; and it was so pretty, and I took a
deep breath. And my lungs burned out like slow fire, and I coughed
myself to death with the explosions of the missile banging against my
flaming ears....

Well, it was a dream. It probably wasn't like that at all--and if it
had been, I wasn't there to see it, because I was tucked away safe
under a hundred and twenty fathoms of Atlantic water. All of us were
on the _Sea Sprite_.

But it was a bad dream and it bothered me, even when I woke up and
found that the banging explosions of the missile were the noise of
Arthur's typewriter carriage crashing furiously back and forth.

He peeped out of the suitcase and saw that I was awake. He demanded:
HOW CAN YOU FALL ASLEEP WHEN WERE IN A PLACE LIKE THIS Q Q ANYTHING
COULD HAPPEN SAM I KNOW YOU DONT CARE WHAT HAPPENS TO ME BUT FOR YOUR
OWN SAKE YOU SHOULDNT

"Oh, dry up," I said.

Being awake, I remembered that I was hungry. There was still no sign
of Engdahl or the others, but that wasn't too surprising--they hadn't
known exactly when we would arrive. I wished I had thought to bring
some food back to the room. It looked like long waiting and I wouldn't
want to leave Arthur alone again--after all, he was partly right.

I thought of the telephone.

On the off-chance that it might work, I picked it up. Amazing, a voice
from the desk answered.

I crossed my fingers and said: "Room service?"

And the voice answered amiably enough: "Hold on, buddy. I'll see if
they answer."

Clicking and a good long wait. Then a new voice said: "Whaddya want?"

There was no sense pressing my luck by asking for anything like a
complete meal. I would be lucky if I got a sandwich.

