The Project Gutenberg EBook of Acid Bath, by Vaseleos Garson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Acid Bath

Author: Vaseleos Garson

Illustrator: Herman Vestal

Release Date: June 19, 2009 [EBook #29159]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ACID BATH ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


ACID BATH

By VASELEOS GARSON


    _The starways' Lone Watcher had expected some odd developments in
    his singular, nerve-fraught job on the asteroid. But nothing like
    the weird twenty-one-day liquid test devised by the invading
    Steel-Blues._


Jon Karyl was bolting in a new baffle plate on the stationary rocket
engine. It was a tedious job and took all his concentration. So he
wasn't paying too much attention to what was going on in other parts of
the little asteroid.

He didn't see the peculiar blue space ship, its rockets throttled down,
as it drifted to land only a few hundred yards away from his plastic
igloo.

Nor did he see the half-dozen steel-blue creatures slide out of the
peculiar vessel's airlock.

It was only as he crawled out of the depths of the rocket power plant
that he realized something was wrong.

By then it was almost too late. The six blue figures were only fifty
feet away, approaching him at a lope.

Jon Karyl took one look and went bounding over the asteroid's rocky
slopes in fifty-foot bounds.

When you're a Lone Watcher, and strangers catch you unawares, you don't
stand still. You move fast. It's the Watcher's first rule. Stay alive.
An Earthship may depend upon your life.

As he fled, Jon Karyl cursed softly under his breath. The automatic
alarm should have shrilled out a warning.

Then he saved as much of his breath as he could as some sort of power
wave tore up the rocky sward to his left. He twisted and zig-zagged in
his flight, trying to get out of sight of the strangers.

Once hidden from their eyes, he could cut back and head for the
underground entrance to the service station.

He glanced back finally.

Two of the steel-blue creatures were jack-rabbiting after him, and
rapidly closing the distance.

Jon Karyl unsheathed the stubray pistol at his side, turned the oxygen
dial up for greater exertion, increased the gravity pull in his
space-suit boots as he neared the ravine he'd been racing for.

The oxygen was just taking hold when he hit the lip of the ravine and
began sprinting through its man-high bush-strewn course.

The power ray from behind ripped out great gobs of the sheltering
bushes. But running naturally, bent close to the bottom of the ravine,
Jon Karyl dodged the bare spots. The oxygen made the tremendous exertion
easy for his lungs as he sped down the dim trail, hidden from the two
steel-blue stalkers.

He'd eluded them, temporarily at least, Jon Karyl decided when he
finally edged off the dim trail and watched for movement along the route
behind him.

He stood up, finally, pushed aside the leafy overhang of a bush and
looked for landmarks along the edge of the ravine.

He found one, a stubby bush, shaped like a Maltese cross, clinging to
the lip of the ravine. The hidden entrance to the service station wasn't
