
Kit's lip curled when he read this hypocritical letter, and was tempted
to despise his uncle more now than ever. He lost no time in sending this
reply:

     UNCLE STEPHEN,--I have received your letter, and can only express
     my surprise at the view you take of your treatment of me. Whether
     my father really left me as destitute as you claim, I am not in a
     position to say. If you have really gone to personal expense in
     maintaining and educating me up to this point, I shall, when I am
     able, reimburse you to the last cent. But I cannot forgive you for
     your trying to force a boy, reared and educated as I have been, to
     learn the trade of a blacksmith. You say that I have enjoyed
     advantages similar to those of your son Ralph. I wish to ask
     whether you would dream of apprenticing him to any such business.

     You speak of my low associations, and call me a mountebank. In the
     town I have just left I was the guest of the mayor, and have
     promised to spend a week at his house on a visit when the circus
     season is over. Though you have done your best to lower me
     socially, I am confident that I shall be able to win a good place
     by my own unaided exertions.

     I have no intention in continuing as a circus performer, though I
     am very liberally paid. It is too soon for me to decide upon my
     future course, but you may tell Mr. Bickford he need not wait for
     me to resume my place in his shop.

     I do not know when I shall see you or Ralph again, but you need
     have no fear that I shall appeal to your generosity.

                                         Your nephew,
                                              CHRISTOPHER WATSON.

Stephen Watson read this letter with surprise and chagrin. He was sorry
to hear that Kit was doing so well, and alarmed at his implied doubt
whether he had really been left destitute by his father.

"That boy is going to give me trouble," he muttered.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE ATTACK ON THE CIRCUS TENT.


Four weeks passed, in which Kit continued to acquit himself to the
satisfaction of the manager. His youth and pleasant face, added to his
uncommon skill, made him a favorite with the public, and being a boy
with a love of adventure he enjoyed thoroughly the constant variety of
circus life and travel.

All circus existence is not sunshine, however. There are communities
which are always dreaded by circus managers, on account of the rough and
lawless element which dominates them.

Early one morning Barlow's circus arrived at the mining town of
Coalville (as we will call it), in Pennsylvania. An afternoon
performance was given, and passed off smoothly; but in the evening a
gang of about twenty miners made their appearance, bent on mischief.

Mr. Clark, the manager, sought Mr. Barlow.

"I think we shall have trouble this evening, Mr. Barlow," he said.

"Guard against it, then. What indications have you seen?"

"A gang of twenty miners have just entered the lot. They look ugly."

"Have the canvas men on guard, and summon the razorbacks, if necessary.
Don't provoke a conflict, but be ready for one."

Mr. Clark hastily made his arrangements as quietly as possible. Near the
ticket seller lounged a body of men, strong and muscular.

These were the canvas men. Some of them looked as reckless and dangerous
as the miners, from whom a disturbance was feared.

These canvas men, whose duty it is to set up and take down the tents,
are, for the most part, a rough set. They are paid from fifteen to
twenty dollars a month and board. Their accommodations are very poor,
but as good perhaps as they are accustomed to. They are not averse to a
scrimmage, and obeyed with alacrity the directions of Mr. Clark.

The body of miners marched in procession to the ticket seller and then
halted, one serving as spokesman.

"Give us twenty tickets, boss," said the leader.

"Where is your money?" asked the ticket seller, cautiously.

"Never you mind! We're on the free list, ain't we, boys?"

"Yes, we are!" was the chorus from his followers.

"There are no deadheads admitted to the show," said the ticket agent,
firmly.

"You'll be a deadhead yourself if you ain't careful, young feller!" was
the retort.

"Keep back, men! There are others waiting for a chance to buy tickets."

"Let 'em wait! Just hand over them tickets, or we'll run over you."

The fellow looked so dangerous that the ticket seller saw there was no
time to parley.

He raised the well-known circus cry, which is called out in times of
danger, like a summons to arms,

"Hey, Rube!"

Instantly the canvas men and razorbacks rushed to the rescue, and made
an impetuous attack on the disorderly crowd of miners. They, too, were
aching for a fight, and there was a wild scene of battle, in which, as
in the ancient days, the opposing forces fought hand to hand.

The canvas men were strong, but so were the miners. Their muscles were
toughened by daily toil, and it looked as if the outsiders might win.

Kit was not of course called upon to take part in the contest, but he
was unwillingly involved.

One of the miners detached himself from the main body, and creeping
stealthily to the big tent, whipped out a large knife, and was on the
point of cutting one of the ropes, his intention being to sever one
after another till the big tent collapsed. Kit saw his design, and
rushing forward seized his arm.

"Hold on there!" he cried. "What are you about?"

"Let me alone, and mind your own business!" returned the miner, in a
hoarse, deep voice.

But Kit saw that it was a critical moment, and that great mischief
might be done. He looked about him for help, for he was far from able to
cope with his brawny antagonist. Still he clung to the arm of the
intruder, and succeeded in delaying his purpose.

"Let go or I'll cut you!" said the miner, savagely.

Then Kit in desperation raised the cry, "Hey, Rube!"

But it hardly seemed likely to bring the needed assistance, for all the
fighting men were engaged in the battle near the ticket seller.

"That won't do no good, young bantam!" said the ruffian, as he aimed a
blow at our hero.

Kit's career would in all probability have been cut short, but for the
timely arrival of Achilles Henderson. The giant had heard the boy's
warning cry, and being near at hand, rushed to his aid. His arrival was
most opportune. He seized the miner in his powerful grasp, and the
ruffian, strong and muscular as he was, was like a child in his clutch.
His knife fell from his hand, as he was shaken like a reed by the giant.

"Secure the knife, Kit!" cried Achilles.

Kit needed no second bidding. He stooped swiftly and took up the weapon.

But Achilles was needed in another direction.

The contest between the miners and the canvas men still raged fiercely
near the ticket stand. It looked as if the intruders would conquer. From
the ranks of the defenders rose a wild and desperate cry, "Hey, Rube!"

Achilles heard it.

"Come, Kit!" he said. "We are wanted."

He hurled the miner in his grasp to the ground with such force that the
man lay senseless; then he rushed with all the speed which his long
limbs enabled him to attain to the scene of the conflict.

Here again he was none too soon. The leader of the miners, who had been
the first spokesman and aggressor, was armed with a powerful club with
which he was preparing to deal the ticket seller a terrible and possibly
fatal blow, when Achilles rushed into the _melee_ like a hurricane. He
snatched the club from the hands of the ruffian, and dealt about
unsparingly.

The ringleader was the first to fall. Next Achilles attacked the rest of
the brutal gang, till half a dozen men with broken heads lay upon the
ground. The attacking force were completely demoralized, and in dismay
fled from the field.

The ticket seller breathed a sigh of relief.

"I thought I was done for, Mr. Henderson," he said, when the giant
returned flushed with his exertions. "You are equal to half a dozen
men."

"I haven't had so much exercise in a long time," said Achilles, panting.
"Kit, where is the knife that scalawag was going to cut the rope with?"

"Here it is, Mr. Henderson."

"I will keep it in remembrance of this little adventure. Perhaps I had
better go and look after the original owner."

He met the ruffian limping like one disabled. His look was sullen and
menacing.

"Give me my knife," he growled.

"I couldn't think of it, my man!" said Achilles blandly. "Evidently you
are not old enough to be trusted with a knife."

"I'd like to thrash you!" growled the miner again.

"I've no doubt of it, my friend; your intentions are good, but can't be
carried out. And now I have a word to say," he continued, sternly. "Just
get out of the lot as fast as your legs can carry you, or I'll serve you
worse than I did before."

The ruffian looked toward the ticket stand. He saw several of his
friends limping away like himself, looking like whipped curs, and he saw
that there was no choice for him but to obey. With a muttered oath and a
sullen scowl, he left the grounds.

"Kit," said the giant, "it won't do for me to exercise like this every
day. I shall need a second supper."

"You are certainly entitled to one, Mr. Henderson," replied our hero.




CHAPTER XXVI.

KIT IS MADE A PRISONER.


It had been a day of exciting adventure, but so far as Kit was concerned
the end was not yet. He performed as usual, but as his second act was
over at quarter past nine, he thought, being fatigued, that he would not
wait until the close, but go at once to the circus car in which he had a
berth, and go to bed.

He crossed the lot, and emerged into the street.

It was moderately dark, there being no moon, and only the light of a few
stars to relieve the gloom.

Kit had not taken a dozen steps from the lot when two stout men
approached him, both evidently miners.

"That's the kid that prevented my cutting the rope," he heard one say.

"Is he? I saw him with the giant."

"I mean to settle his hash for him," said the first.

Kit saw that he was in danger, and turned to run back to his friends.
But it was too late! The first speaker laid a strong arm upon his
shoulder, and his boyish strength was not able to overcome it.

"Don't be in such a hurry, kid," said his captor.

"Let me go," cried Kit.

"You belong to the circus, don't you?"

"Yes."

"What do you do?"

"I am an acrobat."

"What's that?"

"I leap and turn somersaults, and so on."

"Yes, I know. Do you remember me?"

"I might if it were lighter."

The man lit a match and held it close to his face.

"Do you know me now?"

"Yes."

"Who am I?"

"You are the man who tried to cut the ropes of the tent."

"Right you are. I would have succeeded but for you."

"I suppose you would."

"Did you call that giant to pitch into me?"

"No; I didn't know he was near."

"He treated me like a brute," said the man, wrathfully. "My limbs are
aching now from the fall he gave me."

Kit did not answer.

"I'd like to give him a broken head, as he gave some of my friends.
Where is he?"

"I suppose he is somewhere in the lot. I'll go and call him, if you want
me to."

"That's too thin! Now I've got you I won't let you off so easy."

"What do you intend to do?" asked Kit becoming alarmed.

"To give you a lesson."

Kit did not ask what kind of a lesson was meant, but he feared it
included bodily injury. Then at least, if never before, he wished
himself back at his uncle's house in Smyrna, uncongenial as it was
otherwise.

The first speaker spoke in a low voice to the second. Kit did not hear
the words, but judged what they were from what followed.

The two men placed him beside them, and he was sternly ordered to move
on.

They kept the road for perhaps half a mile, then turned off into a
narrow lane which appeared to ascend a hill. Finally they stopped in
front of a dark cabin, of one story, which seemed to be unoccupied. The
outer door was fastened by a bolt.

One of the men drew out a bolt, and threw open the door. A dark interior
was revealed. One of the men lit a match, throwing a fitful light upon
an empty room. At one end of the apartment was a ring, fixed in a beam,
and in the corner was a stout rope.

"That will do," said the first speaker.

He took the rope, secured one end of it to the ring, and then tied Kit
firmly with the balance. It was long enough to allow of his lying down.

"Now," said the first man grimly, "I reckon the kid will be safe here
till to-morrow."

They prepared to leave the cabin.

"Are you going to leave me here?" asked Kit, in dismay.

"Yes."

"What good will it do you?"

"You'll see--to-morrow."

Kit had ten dollars in his pocket, and he thought of offering it in
return for his freedom, but it occurred to him fortunately that his
captors would deprive him of it, as it was quite within their power to
do, and not compensate him in any way. He understood by this time the
character of the men into whose hands he had fallen, and he thought it
prudent to remain silent.

As the first captor stood with the door open, while just on the point of
leaving, he said grimly, "How do you like it, kid?"

"Not at all," answered Kit.

"If you beg my pardon for what you did, I might let you go."

Kit did not believe this, and he had no intention of humiliating himself
for nothing.

"I only did my duty," he said. "I have nothing to ask pardon for."

"You may change your mind--to-morrow!"

Another ominous reference to to-morrow. Evidently he was only deferring
his vengeance, and intended to wreak it on his young prisoner the next
day.

It was not a comforting thought, nor was it calculated to sooth Kit,
weary as he was, to sleep.

The door was closed, and Kit heard the sliding of the bolt on the
outside. He was a prisoner, securely enough, and with small chance of
rescue.

Now, though Kit is my hero, I do not mean to represent him as above
human weakness, and I won't pretend that he didn't feel anxious and
disturbed. His prospects seemed very dark. He could not hope for mercy
from the brutal men who had captured him. As they could not get hold of
the giant they would undoubtedly seek to make him expiate the offenses
of Achilles Henderson as well as his own.

"If only Mr. Henderson knew where I was," he said to himself, "I should
soon be free."

But there seemed little hope of this. He had not told any one that he
intended to retire to the circus cars earlier than usual. The chances
were that he would not be missed till the circus company had reached the
next town on their route, ten miles away. Then there would be no clew to
his whereabouts, and even if there were he might be killed before any
help could come to him. So far as he had been able to observe, the
miners were--a portion of them, at least--a lawless set of men, who were
not likely to be influenced by considerations of pity or ordinary
humanity.

Kit had been very religiously brought up during his father's life, at
least, and he had not lost his faith in an overruling Providence. So in
this great peril it was natural for him to pray to God for deliverance
from danger. When his prayer was concluded, he felt easier, and in spite
of his disagreeable surroundings he managed to fall asleep.

