
Following this advice, Stoddard raced from the rocket with the rest.

At a safe distance, he turned and peered back--to see it standing
there at a crazy angle, dust and fumes issuing from under it in a
blast that was hollowing a deep crater to the far side.

Even as they looked, the strange craft quivered, tottered, and fell
over on its side, and the next instant was enveloped in a blinding
sheet of flame that brought with it a dull detonation and a blast of
dazing heat.

The party backed still farther away.

"A nasty mixture, oxygen and hydrogen," muttered the professor,
feeling of his singed eyebrows. "We got out of there just in time,
Jack."

"I'll say we did!" Stoddard agreed, with a shudder.

       *       *       *       *       *

By now the higher officials of the field were on the scene, among them
a number of Army men.

Curiosity ran high, not unmingled with indignation. Who were these
strange visitors? Where had they come from? What did they mean by
endangering the lives of everyone, with their damned contraption?

Inquiring for the commandant, they were taken to him--Major Clark
Hendricks, U.S.A.--and Stoddard briefly outlined their astounding
story, producing credentials, whereupon a squadron of fast military
planes was assembled.

From the way they described the mountainous region where the rocket
had first landed, mentioning the town Martin's Bluff, that Henry of
the ancient Ford had named, the major declared that it must have been
the Guadalupe Mountains a hundred miles to the east--and sure enough,
a government map showed such a town there.

So it was that presently the squadron lifted into the late afternoon
skies, with Major Hendricks in the leading plane, accompanied by the
two weary adventurers.

Swiftly the squadron winged eastward. They reached the mountains in
less than an hour, and circled them in search of that little wooden
shack which Prince Krassnov and his Cossacks had made their
rendezvous....

       *       *       *       *       *

It was like finding a needle in a haystack, and for a time Stoddard
despaired of success. But those rugged mountains were an open book to
the planes circling high overhead, and with Martin's Bluff once
located, the rest was not so hard.

At last, as twilight was falling, they found the shack and brought
their planes to rest near it.

But as the party approached the shack, after posting a heavy guard
over their planes, they saw that it was deserted.

This, after all, was only what Stoddard had feared, but nevertheless
they forced their way inside--and there, had Major Hendricks had any
doubt of their story, it was dispelled.

As Stoddard had told them, it was furnished like an Oriental
hunting-lodge, with evidences of the recent occupation of the Russians
on all sides.

But where were they? Had they got away or were they hiding somewhere?

Proceeding from room to room until they had searched it thoroughly,
the party paused baffled.

But not for long, for suddenly Stoddard discovered something that gave
him a clue. It was a barred door, within a closet, covered over with
clothes and uniforms so as to be fairly well concealed. On battering
it in, they found that it led into a passage below.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the party entered the passage, leaving further guards above, it
became obvious that what they had found was the shaft of an old mine.

It led down abruptly, for a while, then more gradually, with many
windings and twistings, and ending presently in another barred door.

This they in turn battered in--to be greeted suddenly by a volley of
rifle-fire that dropped three of them in their tracks.

Stoddard was one of those who fell.

Bending over him, Professor Prescott lifted up his head.

"Jack!" he called. "Where are you hit? Answer me!"

"I--it seems to be in the shoulder," came the weak reply. "If you've
got a handkerchief--"

The professor produced one and staunched the flow of blood as best he
could, working with the aid of his flashlight.

Meanwhile, ahead, the crash of pistols and rifles continued to split
the stillness of the passage, as the attacking party pressed forward.

"There--that does it!" gasped Stoddard, at length. "Help me up. I'll
be all right."

Prescott steadied him to his feet. They continued on.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now the firing ceased, and in a moment Major Hendricks appeared, at
the head of his party.

"Well, we've got them," he said, saluting Stoddard. "How are you, old
man?"

"All right," was the gritted reply. "Let's have a look at them."

A flashlight was swept across the stolid group of Cossack prisoners,
but as Stoddard peered into one face after another, he realized that
Krassnov was not among them.

"You haven't got the leader," he said. "See here, you birds," he
addressed the Cossacks, "where is he, eh?"

If they understood, they gave no indication of it, but shook their
heads sullenly.

"Well, damn it, we'll find him!" Stoddard wheeled and strode past
them. "Give me three or four men, Major. I'll smoke out that Russian
bear. He must be here somewhere."

Hendricks sent the main body above, with their prisoners, and gave
him the men he wanted, putting himself at their head.

"You'd better go on up, too, Professor," said Stoddard, addressing
Prescott. "You've risked enough, in my behalf."

But the older man shook his head.

"No, I'll come along, if you don't mind," he insisted. "I want to see
the end of this thing."

       *       *       *       *       *

It was an end that came with dramatic suddenness.

Pausing before a barred door some fifty paces down the passage, they
were debating what their next move would be--when suddenly it was
flung open.

"Come in, gentlemen," came a suave, ironical voice. "Sorry my servants
were so uncivil."

In the glare of light from beyond, Stoddard and the professor saw that
it was Prince Krassnov.

He stood there unarmed, smiling.

"Is this the fellow?" rasped Major Hendricks, his automatic levelled.

"It is," said Stoddard.

Slowly, cautiously, they followed the man into the room, which in
reality was merely the end of the passage sealed off, though its walls
were richly panelled and it was luxuriously furnished.

Pausing beside a small, heavy table, he swept his hand over it,
indicating a heap of rough diamonds that must have represented
millions.

"Merely a fraction of my treasure, gentlemen," he told them, with a
deprecating shrug. "I hadn't quite finished storing away the last
shipment, when you interrupted me."

He strode to one of the walls, drew out a small drawer from a built-in
cabinet and dumped its glittering contents on the table with the rest.

All around the room, Stoddard noted as he stood there swaying, were
other cabinets dotted with the knobs of similar drawers.

"And this, gentlemen, is but my American sub-headquarters," the
Prince went on. "In Siberia, in Brazil--but why bore you with the
multiplication of my now useless wealth? Tell me, instead, my good
friends--Professor Prescott, Doctor Stoddard--how come you back here,
after I saw you safely on your way earlier in the afternoon?"

"Because I happen to have a knack with can-openers, and my colleague
is rather adept with machinery," Stoddard told him, "while Major
Hendricks here is quite a hand with geography, not to mention
aviation."

       *       *       *       *       *

A question or two, which they answered briefly, and Krassnov had the
story.

"Ah, my poor rocket!" he sighed. "But it is fate, I suppose; Kismet,
as the Turkish say. Still, I deserved a better fate than to be
captured by a pair of American professors, when the secret service of
the world was on my trail."

"Then cheer up!" said Stoddard, gritting his teeth to keep back the
pain of his throbbing shoulder. "For I have the honor to represent
Washington in this case."

At that, the prince scowled darkly for a moment. Then he brightened.

"Kismet again! I might have acted differently, had I known that,
but--well, I drink to your success, Doctor Stoddard!"

Whereupon, before they could restrain him, he lifted a vial from a
shelf over one of the cabinets and downed its contents.

"A diamond-dust cocktail!" he smiled, replacing the vial. "The most
expensive, even in your country of costly drinks--and the most
deadly!"

But Stoddard knew, as the doomed nobleman stood there facing them in
stoic triumph, that diamond dust in the human system was as slow as it
was deadly, and that the desperate gesture had been futile, so far as
justice was concerned.

There would be ample time, in the weeks Prince Krassnov of Imperial
Russia still lived, to round up his international allies and stamp out
the remnants of their amazing ring of diamond smugglers.

While as for Professor Prescott, he was thinking with what amazement
the members of his expedition back on Kinchinjunga would receive the
cablegram he would dispatch that night, informing them that Stoddard
and himself were safe in El Paso, Texas.




The Slave Ship From Space

_By A. R. Holmes_

[Illustration: "_The slaves!" gasped Jim, and involuntarily backed
into the room._]

[Sidenote: Three kidnapped Earthlings show Xantra of the Tillas how
"docile" Earth slaves can be.]


Twice that night the two young men had seen the thing, and their hour
for turning in had long since passed as they lay half reclining on the
ground by their campfire waiting, hoping that it would return once
more. Their interest in the strange visitant had completely banished
all sensations of fatigue from a full day of vacation fishing in the
cold Adirondack streams among which they were camping for that month.

They had discussed the appearance until there was nothing more they
could say; and now as for the last hour, they watched in silence, only
moving to knock the dottle from their pipes and to get fresh lights
off the splinters they stuck into their slumbering fire. The velvet
night was now at full reign, and the myriad stars in their familiar
patterns leaned close--brilliant jewels for man to share but never
pluck.

Jim Wilson had seen the thing first--a pinpoint of cherry red that
moved upward in a perfect arc against the brilliant white
constellations of the east. As it rose, it grew perceptibly larger, to
dwindle again as it arced over the western horizon.

Nearly an hour later it had appeared again; but this time, when
halfway up the skies, it had changed its direction until it was
heading directly over the spot where the two thrilled campers were
watching; and as it approached they saw its color fade slowly until it
had disappeared completely from sight among the inky patches between
the stars overhead. For minutes the two were not able to locate
it--until Jim, once again, had pointed to a faint red spot that grew
in color and intensity as it drew away from the zenith. Once again it
had disappeared over the rim of the western world--and from then on
there was no thought of sleep in the minds of Jim Wilson and Clee
Partridge. They were watching the skies, hoping it would return.

"What was the thing?" Jim Wilson exclaimed suddenly with exasperation.
"I've been racking my brain, Clee, but nothing I can think of makes
sense. It couldn't have been a plane, and it couldn't have been a
meteor. And if it was a fire-fly--well, then I'm one too." He paused,
and looked at the other. "Any new suggestions?" he asked.

"Me--I still think it was a space ship from Mars or Venus," Clee
Partridge answered drily; "searching for a couple of good Earth-men
to help 'em out of some jam. You noticed the way it disappeared for a
moment when it was overhead: it was looking us over."

"Then it'll be back," answered Jim, not to be outdone, "for it's not
apt to find anyone better qualified. I, myself, would kinda like to
take a joy-ride out through the Great Dipper."

       *       *       *       *       *

Clee smiled and looked down at the luminous dial of his wrist watch.
The two resumed their vigil, and there was quietness between them. For
some time they lost themselves in the sparkling glory of the
firmament, hardly moving, except to pull closer the collars of their
flannel shirts against the increasing coldness of the mountain air.

And then for the third time that night the mysterious sky traveler
sprang over the trees on the eastern horizon. Suddenly it appeared;
both men saw it at once; and this time it made a clear, beautiful arc
straight for the zenith. As it raised, it grew in size, a beautiful,
delicate cherry star spanning the whole welkin. The two men got to
their knees and watched it, breathless with fascination.

"Look!" cried Jim suddenly.

As had happened on its second appearance, the thing began to slow up
and its color gradually faded as it drew directly overhead. By the
time it should have reached the zenith it could no longer be seen. It
had dissolved against the inky spaces above.

"It should come into view again in a moment," Clee said; "a little
farther on, like the other time."

They watched, thrilled by the mystery of the midnight phenomenon.
Minutes passed, but still it did not appear. Clee grew restive, and as
his eyes chanced on his wrist watch he started violently and held out
his arm for Jim to see. The radium-painted hands and dial were
glowing with unusual brilliance.

Looking quickly into the skies again, Clee sensed something wrong;
something different. For a moment he could not figure out what--and
then it came to him. One of the great stars, one that he had been
watching in its climb up the sky through the night, had disappeared!

       *       *       *       *       *

He got excitedly to his feet, grabbed his companion's arm and pointed
out this strange thing--and as he pointed another star blinked out and
did not reappear.

"Something's happening up there," Jim said soberly. "I don't know
what; but I, for one, don't feel quite comfortable."

He kept peering at the place pointed out, at a spot of black even
darker than the inky sky; or did he only imagine it was darker? he
asked himself. Soon the spot enlarged; became a distinct patch; then,
growing still, obliterated one star after another around its borders.
It made a pure circle; and before long the starlight glinting off its
sides showed it to be a great, tinted sphere.

Swiftly it dropped down on the two men, and they watched it
hypnotized, incapable of moving. It was only a hundred yards overhead
