they be, and what opinion they have of God and of religion, whom the
Bishop of Rome, before they were called to tell their tale, hath
condemned for heretics, without any good consideration, without any
example, and utterly without law or right, only because he heard tell
that they did dissent from him and his in some point of religion.

And although St. Hierom would have nobody to be patient when he is
suspected of heresy, yet we will deal herein neither bitterly nor
brablingly; nor yet be carried away with anger and heat; though he ought
to be reckoned neither bitter nor brabler that speaketh the truth.  We
willingly leave this kind of eloquence to our adversaries, who,
whatsoever they say against us, be it never so shrewdly or despitefully
said, yet think it is said modestly and comely enough, and care nothing
whether it be true or false.  We need none of these shifts which do
maintain the truth.

Further, if we do show it plainly that God's holy Gospel, the ancient
bishops, and the primitive Church do make on our side, and that we have
not without just cause left these men, and rather have returned to the
Apostles and old Catholic fathers; and if we shall be found to do the
same not colourably or craftily, but in good faith before God, truly,
honestly, clearly, and plainly; and if they themselves which fly our
doctrine, and would be called Catholics, shall manifestly see how all
these titles of antiquity, whereof they boast so much, are quite shaken
out of their hands; and that there is more pith in this our cause than
they thought for; we then hope and trust that none of them will be so
negligent and careless of his own salvation, but he will at length study
and bethink himself to whether part he were best to join him.
Undoubtedly, except one will altogether harden his heart and refuse to
hear, he shall not repent him to give good heed to this our Defence, and
to mark well what we say, and how truly and justly it agreeth with
Christian religion.

For where they call us heretics, it is a crime so heinous, that unless it
may be seen, unless it may be felt, and in manner may be holden with
hands and fingers, it ought not lightly to be judged or believed, when it
is laid to the charge of any Christian man.  For heresy is a forsaking of
salvation, a renouncing of God's grace, a departing from the body and
spirit of Christ.  But this was ever an old and solemn property with them
and their forefathers; if any did complain of their errors and faults,
and desired to have true religion restored, straightway to condemn such
ones for heretics, as men new-fangled and factious.  Christ for no other
cause was called a Samaritan, but only for that He was thought to have
fallen to a certain new religion, and to be the author of a new sect.  And
Paul the Apostle of Christ was called before the judges to make answer to
a matter of heresy; and therefore he said: "According to this way which
they call heresy I do worship the God of my fathers, believing all things
which be written in the law and in the Prophets."

Shortly to speak.  This universal religion which Christian men profess at
this day was called first of the heathen people a sect and heresy.  With
these terms did they always fill princes' ears, to the intent when they
had once hated us with a predetermined opinion, and had counted all that
we said to be faction and heresy, they might be so led away from the
truth and right understanding of the cause.  But the more sore and
outrageous a crime heresy is, the more it ought to be proved by plain and
strong arguments, especially in this time, when men begin to give less
credit to their words, and to make more diligent search of their
doctrine, than they were wont to do.  For the people of God are otherwise
instructed now than they were in times past, when all the bishops of
Rome's sayings were allowed for Gospel, and when all religion did depend
only upon their authority.  Nowadays the Holy Scripture is abroad, the
writings of the Apostles and Prophets are in print, whereby all truth and
Catholic doctrine may be proved, and all heresy may be disproved and
confuted.

Sithence, then, they bring forth none of these for themselves, and call
us nevertheless heretics, which have neither fallen from Christ, nor from
the Apostles, nor yet from the Prophets, this is an injurious and a very
spiteful dealing.  With this sword did Christ put off the devil when He
was tempted of him: with these weapons ought all presumption, which doth
advance itself against God, to be overthrown and conquered.  "For all
Scripture," saith St. Paul, "that cometh by the inspiration of God, is
profitable to teach, to confute, to instruct, and to reprove, that the
man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly framed to every good work."
Thus did the holy fathers always fight against the heretics with none
other force than with the Holy Scriptures.  St. Augustine, when he
disputed against Petilian, a heretic of the Donatists: "Let not these
words," quoth he, "be heard between us, 'I say, or you say:' let us
rather speak in this wise: 'Thus saith the Lord.'  There let us seek the
Church: there let us boult out our cause."  Likewise St. Hierom: "All
those things," saith he, "which without the testimony of the Scriptures
are holden as delivered from the Apostles, be thoroughly smitten down by
the sword of God's word."  St. Ambrose also, to Gratian the emperor: "Let
the Scripture," saith he, "be asked the question, let the prophets be
asked, and let Christ be asked."  For at that time made the Catholic
fathers and bishops no doubt but that our religion might be proved out of
the Holy Scriptures.  Neither were they ever so hardy as to take any for
a heretic whose error they could not evidently and apparently reprove by
the self-same Scriptures.  And we verily do make answer on this wise, as
St. Paul did: "According to this way which they call heresy we do worship
God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and do allow all things
which have been written either in the law or in the Prophets," or in the
Apostles' works.

Wherefore, if we be heretics, and they (as they would fain be called) be
Catholics, why do they not, as they see the fathers, which were Catholic
men, have always done?  Why do they not convince and master us by the
Divine Scriptures?  Why do they not call us again to be tried by them?
Why do they not lay before us how we have gone away from Christ, from the
Prophets, from the Apostles, and from the holy fathers?  Why stick they
to do it?  Why are they afraid of it?  It is God's cause.  Why are they
doubtful to commit it to the trial of God's word?  If we be heretics,
which refer all our controversies unto the Holy Scriptures, and report us
to the self-same words which we know were sealed by God Himself, and in
comparison of them set little by all other things, whatsoever may be
devised by men, how shall we say to these folk, I pray you what manner of
men be they, and how is it meet to call them, which fear the judgment of
the Holy Scriptures--that is to say, the judgment of God Himself--and do
prefer before them their own dreams and full cold inventions; and, to
maintain their own traditions, have defaced and corrupted, now these many
hundred years, the ordinances of Christ and of the Apostles?

Men say that Sophocles, the tragical poet, when in his old days he was by
his own sons accused before the judges for a doting and sottish man, as
one that fondly wasted his own substance, and seemed to need a governor
to see unto him; to the intent he might clear himself of the fault, he
came into the place of judgment; and when he had rehearsed before them
his tragedy called _OEdipus Coloneus_, which he had written at the very
time of his accusation, marvellous exactly and cunningly, did of himself
ask the judges whether they thought any sottish or doting man could do
the like piece of work.

In like manner, because these men take us to be mad, and appeach us for
heretics, as men which have nothing to do, neither with Christ, nor with
the Church of God, we have judged it should be to good purpose, and not
unprofitable, if we do openly and frankly set forth our faith wherein we
stand, and show all that confidence which we have in Christ Jesu; to the
intent all men may see what is our judgment of every part of Christian
religion, and may resolve with themselves, whether the faith which they
shall see confirmed by the words of Christ, by the writings of the
Apostles, by the testimonies of the Catholic fathers, and by the examples
of many ages, be but a certain rage of furious and mad men, and a
conspiracy of heretics.  This therefore is our belief.



PART II.


We believe that there is one certain nature and Divine power, which we
call God: and that the same is divided into three equal Persons--into the
Father, into the Son, and into the Holy Ghost; and that They all be of
one power, of one majesty, of one eternity, of one Godhead, and of one
substance.  And although these three Persons be so divided, that neither
the Father is the Son, nor the Son is the Holy Ghost, or the Father; yet,
nevertheless, we believe that there is but one very God, and that the
same one God hath created heaven, and earth, and all things contained
under heaven.

We believe that Jesus Christ, the only Son of the eternal Father (as long
before it was determined before all beginnings), when the fulness of time
was come, did take of that blessed and pure Virgin both flesh and all the
nature of man, that He might declare to the world the secret and hid will
of His Father; which will had been laid up from before all ages and
generations; and that He might full finish in His human body the mystery
of our redemption; and might fasten our sins to the cross, and also that
handwriting which was made against us.

We believe that for our sakes He died, and was buried, descended into
hell, the third day by the power of His Godhead returned to life, and
rose again; and that the fortieth day after His resurrection, whiles His
disciples beheld and looked upon Him He ascended into heaven to fulfil
all things, and did place in majesty and glory the self-same body
wherewith He was born, wherein He lived on earth, wherein He was jested
at, wherein He had suffered most painful torments and cruel kind of
death, wherein He rose again, and wherein He ascended to the right hand
of the Father, "above all rule, above all power, all force, all dominion,
and above every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
the world to come:" and that there He now sitteth, and shall sit, till
all things be full perfected.  And although the Majesty and Godhead of
Christ be everywhere abundantly dispersed, yet we believe that his body,
as St. Augustine saith, must needs be still in one place; and that Christ
hath given majesty unto His body, but yet hath not taken away from it the
nature of a body; and that we must not so affirm Christ to be God that we
deny Him to be man: and, as the Martyr Vigilius saith, that Christ hath
left us as touching His human nature, but hath not left us as touching
His Divine nature; and that the same Christ, though He be absent from us
concerning His manhood, yet is ever present with us concerning his
Godhead.

From that place also we believe that Christ shall come again to execute
that general judgment, as well of them whom He shall then find alive in
the body as of them that be already dead.

We believe that the Holy Ghost, who is the third person in the Holy
Trinity, is very God: not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding
from both the Father and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto men, and
unspeakable; and that it is His property to mollify and soften the
hardness of man's heart when He is once received thereinto, either by the
wholesome preaching of the Gospel, or by any other way: that he doth give
men light, and guide them unto the knowledge of God; to all way of truth;
to newness of the whole life; and to everlasting hope of salvation.

* * * * *

We believe that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut
up (as in times past among the Jews) into some one corner or kingdom, but
that it is catholic and universal, and dispersed throughout the whole
world.  So that there is now no nation which may truly complain that they
be shut forth, and may not be one of the Church and people of God: and
that this Church is the kingdom, the body, and the spouse of Christ; and
that Christ alone is the Prince of this kingdom; that Christ alone is the
Head of this Body; and that Christ alone is the Bridegroom of this
spouse.

Furthermore, we believe that there be divers degrees of ministers in the
Church; whereof some be deacons, some priests, some bishops; to whom is
committed the office to instruct the people, and the whole charge and
setting forth of religion.  Yet notwithstanding, we say that there
neither is, nor can be any one man, which may have the whole superiority
in this universal state: for that Christ is ever present to assist His
Church, and needeth not any man to supply His room, as His only heir to
all His substance: and that there can be no one mortal creature, which is
able to comprehend or conceive in his mind the universal Church, that is
to wit, all the parts of the world, much less able rightly and duly to
put them in order, and to govern them rightly and duly.  For all the
Apostles, as Cyprian saith, were of like power among themselves, and the
rest were the same that Peter was, and that it said indifferently to them
all, "feed ye;" indifferently to them all, "go into the whole world;"
indifferently to them all, "teach ye the Gospel."  And (as Hierom saith)
all bishops wheresoever they be, be they at Rome, be they at Eugubium, be
they at Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like pre-eminence,
and of like priesthood.  And, as Cyprian saith, there is but one
bishopric, and a piece thereof is perfectly and wholly holden of every
particular bishop.  And according to the judgment of the Nicene Council,
we say, that the Bishop of Rome hath no more jurisdiction over the Church
of God than the rest of the patriarchs, either of Alexandria, or of
Antiochia have.  And as for the Bishop of Rome, who now calleth all
matters before himself alone, except he do his duty as he ought to do,
except he minister the Sacraments, except he instruct the people, except
he warn them and teach them, we say that he ought not of right once to be
called a bishop, or so much as an elder.  For a bishop, as saith
Augustine, is a name of labour, and not of honour: because he will have
that man understand himself to be no bishop, which will seek to have pre-
eminence, and not to profit others.  And that neither the Pope, nor any
other worldly creature can no more be head of the whole Church, or a
bishop over all, than he can be the bridegroom, the light, the salvation,
and life of the Church.  For the privileges and names belong only to
Christ, and be properly and only fit for him alone.  And that no Bishop
of Rome did ever suffer himself to be called by such a proud name before
Phocas the emperor's time, who, as we know, by killing his own sovereign
Maurice the emperor, did by a traitorous villainy aspire to the empire
about the six hundredth and thirteenth year after Christ was born.  Also
the Council of Carthage did circumspectly provide, that no bishop should
be called the highest bishop or chief priest.  And therefore, sithence
the Bishop of Rome will nowadays so be called, and challengeth unto
himself an authority that is none of his; besides that he doth plainly
contrary to the ancient councils, and contrary to the old fathers; we
believe that he doth give unto himself, as it is written by his own
companion Gregory, a presumptuous, a profane, a sacrilegious, and an
antichristian name: that he is also the king of pride, that he is
Lucifer, which preferreth himself before his brethren: that he hath
forsaken the faith, and is the forerunner of Antichrist.

Further we say, that the minister ought lawfully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man hath power
to wrest himself into the holy ministry at his own pleasure and list.
Wherefore these persons do us the greater wrong, which have nothing so
common in their mouths, as that we do nothing orderly and comely, but all
things troublesomely and without order; and that we allow every man to be
a priest, to be a teacher, and to be an interpreter of the Scriptures.

Moreover, we say that Christ hath given to His ministers power to bind,
to loose, to open, to shut.  And that the office of loosing consisteth in
this point: that the minister should either offer by the preaching of the
Gospel the merits of Christ and full pardon, to such as have lowly and
contrite hearts, and do unfeignedly repent themselves, pronouncing unto
the same a sure and undoubted forgiveness of their sins, and hope of
everlasting salvation: or else that the same minister, when any have
offended their brothers' minds with a great offence, with a notable and
open fault, whereby they have, as it were, banished and made themselves
strangers from the common fellowship, and from the body of Christ; then
after perfect amendment of such persons, doth reconcile them, and bring
them home again, and restore them to the company and unity of the
faithful.  We say also, that the minister doth execute the authority of
binding and shutting, as often as he shutteth up the gate of the kingdom
of heaven against the unbelieving and stubborn persons, denouncing unto
them God's vengeance, and everlasting punishment: or else, when he doth
quite shut them out from the bosom of the Church by open excommunication.
Out of doubt, what sentence soever the minister of God shall give in this
sort, God Himself doth so well allow of it, that whatsoever here in earth
by their means is loosed and bound, God Himself will loose and bind, and
confirm the same in heaven.  And touching the keys, wherewith they may
either shut or open the kingdom of heaven, we with Chrysostom say, "They
be the knowledge of the Scriptures:" with Tertullian we say, "They be the
interpretation of the law:" and with Eusebius, we call them "The Word of
God."  Moreover, that Christ's disciples did receive this authority, not
that they should hear the private confessions of the people and listen to
their whisperings, as the common massing-priests do everywhere nowadays,
and do it so, as though in that one point lay all the virtue and use of
the keys: but to the end they should go, they should teach, they should
publish abroad the Gospel, and be unto the believing a sweet savour of
life unto life, and unto the unbelieving and unfaithful a savour of death
unto death; and that the minds of godly persons being brought low by the
remorse of their former life and errors, after they once began to look up
unto the light of the Gospel, and believe in Christ, might be opened with
the Word of God, even as a door is opened with a key.  Contrariwise, that
the wicked and wilful folk, and such as would not believe, nor return
into the right way, should be left still as fast locked, and shut up,
and, as St. Paul saith, "wax worse and worse."  This take we to be the
meaning of the keys; and that after this sort men's consciences either be
opened or shut.  We say, that the priest indeed is a judge in this case,
but yet hath no manner of right to challenge an authority, or power, as
saith Ambrose.  And therefore our Saviour Jesu Christ, to reprove the
negligence of the Scribes and Pharisees in teaching, did with these words
rebuke them, saying: "Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, which have
taken away the keys of knowledge, and have shut up the kingdom of heaven
before men."  Seeing then the key whereby the way and entry to the
kingdom of God is opened unto us, is the word of the Gospel, and the
expounding of the law and Scriptures; we say plainly, where the same word
is not there is not the key.  And seeing one manner of word is given to
all, and one only key belongeth to all, we say, that there is but one
only power of all ministers; as concerning opening and shutting.  And as
touching the Bishop of Rome, for all his parasites flatteringly sing
these words in his ears, "To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of
heaven" (as though those keys were fit for him alone, and for nobody
else), except he go so to work, as men's consciences may be made pliant,
and be subdued to the Word of God, we deny that he doth either open, or
shut, or hath the keys at all.  And although he taught and instructed the
people (as would God he might once truly do, and persuade himself it were
at the least some piece of his duty), yet we think his key to be never a
whit better, or of greater force than other men's.  For who hath severed
him from the rest?  Who hath taught him more cunningly to open, or better
to absolve than his brethren?

We say that matrimony is holy and honourable in all sorts and states of
persons, in the patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in holy
martyrs, in the ministers of the Church, and in bishops; and that it is
an honest and lawful thing (as Chrysostom saith) for a man, living in
matrimony, to take upon him therewith the dignity of a bishop.  And as
Sozomenus saith of Spiridion; and as Nazianzen saith of his own father,
that a good and diligent bishop doth serve in the ministry never the
worse for that he is married, but rather the better, and with more
ableness to do good.  Further, we say, that the same law which by
constraint taketh away this liberty from men, and compelleth them against
their wills to live single, is the doctrine of devils, as Paul saith:
and, that, ever sithence the time of this law, a wonderful uncleanness of
life and manners in God's ministers, and sundry horrible enormities have
followed, as the Bishop of Augusta, as Faber, as Abbas Panormitanus, as
Latomus, as the tripartite work, which is annexed to the second tome of
the councils, and other champions of the Pope's band, yea, and as the
matter itself, and all histories do confess.  For it was rightly said by
Pius the Second, Bishop of Rome, "that he saw many causes why wives
should be taken away from priests, but that he saw many more, and more
weighty causes why they ought to be restored them again."

* * * * *

We receive and embrace all the canonical Scriptures, both of the Old and
New Testament, giving thanks to our God, who hath raised up unto us that
light which we might ever have before our eyes, lest either by the
subtlety of man, or by the snares of the devil, we should be carried away
to errors and lies.  Also that these be the heavenly voices, whereby God
hath opened unto us His will: and that only in them man's heart can have
settled rest; that in them be abundantly and fully comprehended all
things, whatsoever be needful for our salvation, as Origen, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and Cyrillus have taught: that they be the very might and
strength of God to attain to salvation: that they be the foundations of
the Prophets and Apostles, whereupon is built the Church of God: that
they be the very sure and infallible rule, whereby may be tried, whether
the Church do stagger, or err, and whereunto all ecclesiastical doctrine
ought to be called to account: and that against these Scriptures neither
law, nor ordinance, nor any custom ought to be heard: no, though Paul his
own self, or an angel from heaven, should come and teach the contrary.

* * * * *

Moreover, we allow the Sacraments of the Church, that is to say, certain
holy signs and ceremonies, which Christ would we should use, that by them
He might set before our eyes the mysteries of our salvation, and might
more strongly confirm our faith which we have in His blood, and might
seal His grace in our hearts.  And these Sacraments, together with
Tertullian, Origen, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Basil, Dionysius, and
other Catholic fathers, do we call figures, signs, marks or badges,
prints, copies, forms, seals, signets, similitudes, patterns,
representations, remembrances and memories.  And we make no doubt,
together with the same doctors, to say, that these be certain visible
words, seals of righteousness, tokens of grace: and do expressly
pronounce, that in the Lord's Supper there is truly given unto the
believing the body and blood of the Lord, the flesh of the Son of God,
which quickeneth our souls, the meat that cometh from above, the food of
immortality, grace, truth, and life, and the Supper to be the communion
of the body and blood of Christ; by the partaking whereof we be revived,
we be strengthened, and be fed unto immortality; and whereby we are
joined, united, and incorporate unto Christ, that we may abide in Him,
and He in us.

Besides, we acknowledge there be two Sacraments, which, we judge,
properly ought to be called by this name; that is to say, Baptism and the
Sacrament of thanksgiving.  For thus many we say were delivered and
sanctified by Christ, and well allowed of the old fathers, Ambrose and
Augustine.

* * * * *

We say that Baptism is a Sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that
washing, which we have in the blood of Christ; and that no person which
will profess Christ's Name ought to be restrained or kept back therefrom;
no, not the very babes of Christians; forsomuch as they be born in sin,
and do pertain unto the people of God.

We say, that Eucharistia, that is to say the Supper of the Lord, is a
Sacrament; that is to wit, an evident token of the body and blood of
