rather stare. He was a lord."

"They are great heiresses, his daughters, they say at Mowbray," said
Egremont.

"I dare say," said Gerard. "A year ago this earl had a son--an only son,
and then his daughters were not great heiresses. But the son died and
now it's their turn. And perhaps some day it will be somebody else's
turn. If you want to understand the ups and downs of life, there's
nothing like the parchments of an estate. Now master, now man! He who
served in the hall now lords in it: and very often the baseborn change
their liveries for coronets, while gentle blood has nothing left
but--dreams; eh, master Franklin?"

"It seems you know the history of this Lord de Mowbray?"

"Why a man learns a good many things in his time; and living in these
parts, there are few secrets of the notables. He has had the title to
his broad acres questioned before this time, my friend."

"Indeed!"

"Yes: I could not help thinking of that to-day," said Gerard, "when he
questioned me with his mincing voice and pulled the wool with his cursed
white hands and showed it to his dame, who touched it with her little
finger; and his daughters who tossed their heads like pea-hens--Lady
Joan and Lady Maud. Lady Joan and Lady Maud!" repeated Gerard in a voice
of bitter sarcasm. "I did not care for the rest; but I could not stand
that Lady Joan and that Lady Maud. I wonder if my Sybil saw them."

In the meantime, Sybil had been sent for by Mrs Trafford. She had
inferred from the message that the guests had departed, and her animated
cheek showed the eagerness with which she had responded to the call.
Bounding along with a gladness of the heart which lent additional lustre
to her transcendent brightness, she suddenly found herself surrounded
in the garden by Lady Maud and her friends. The daughter of Lord de
Mowbray, who could conceive nothing but humility as the cause of her
alarmed look, attempted to re-assure her by condescending volubility,
turning often to her friends and praising in admiring interrogatories
Sybil's beauty.

"And we took advantage of your absence," said Lady Maud in a tone of
amiable artlessness, "to find out all about you. And what a pity we did
not know you when you were at the convent, because then you might have
been constantly at the castle; indeed I should have insisted on it. But
still I hear we are neighbours; you must promise to pay me a visit,
you must indeed. Is not she beautiful?" she added in a lower but still
distinct voice to her friend. "Do you know I think there is so much
beauty among the lower order."

Mr Mountchesney and Lord Milford poured forth several insipid
compliments, accompanied with some speaking looks which they flattered
themselves could not be misconstrued. Sybil said not a word, but
answered each flood of phrases with a cold reverence.

Undeterred by her somewhat haughty demeanour, which Lady Maud only
attributed to the novelty of her situation, her ignorance of the
world, and her embarrassment under this overpowering condescension,
the good-tempered and fussy daughter of Lord de Mowbray proceeded to
re-assure Sybil, and to enforce on her that this perhaps unprecedented
descent from superiority was not a mere transient courtliness of the
moment, and that she really might rely on her patronage and favourable
feeling.

"You really must come and see me," said Lady Maud, "I shall never be
happy till you have made me a visit. Where do you live? I will come and
fetch you myself in the carriage. Now let us fix a day at once. Let me
see; this is Saturday. What say you to next Monday?"

"I thank you," said Sybil, very gravely, "but I never quit my home."

"What a darling!" exclaimed Lady Maud looking round at her friends. "Is
not she? I know exactly what you feel. But really you shall not be the
least embarrassed. It may feel strange at first, to be sure, but then I
shall be there; and do you know I look upon you quite as my protege."

"Protege," said Sybil. "I live with my father."

"What a dear!" said Lady Maud looking round to Lord Milford. "Is not she
naive?"

"And are you the guardian of these beautiful flowers?" said Mr
Mountchesney.

Sybil signified a negative, and added "Mrs Trafford is very proud of
them."

"You must see the flowers at Mowbray Castle," said Lady Maud. "They are
unprecedented, are they not, Lord Milford? You know you said the other
day that they were almost equal to Mrs Lawrence's. I am charmed to find
you are fond of flowers," continued Lady Maud; "you will be so delighted
with Mowbray. Ah! mama is calling us. Now fix--shall it be Monday?"

"Indeed," said Sybil, "I never leave my home. I am one of the lower
order, and live only among the lower order. I am here to-day merely for
a few hours to pay an act of homage to a benefactor."

"Well I shall come and fetch you," said Maud, covering her surprise and
mortification by a jaunty air that would not confess defeat.

"And so shall I," said Mr Mountchesney.

"And so shall I," whispered Lord Milford lingering a little behind.

The great and distinguished party had disappeared; their glittering
barouche, their prancing horses, their gay grooms, all had vanished;
the sound of their wheels was no longer heard. Time flew on; the bell
announced that the labour of the week had closed. There was a half
holiday always on the last day of the week at Mr Trafford's settlement;
and every man, woman, and child, were paid their wages in the great
room before they left the mill. Thus the expensive and evil habits which
result from wages being paid in public houses were prevented. There was
also in this system another great advantage for the workpeople. They
received their wages early enough to repair to the neighbouring markets
and make their purchases for the morrow. This added greatly to their
comfort, and rendering it unnecessary for them to run in debt to the
shopkeepers, added really to their wealth. Mr Trafford thought that next
to the amount of wages, the most important consideration was the method
in which wages are paid; and those of our readers who may have read or
can recall the sketches, neither coloured nor exagerated, which we have
given in the early part of this volume of the very different manner in
which the working classes may receive the remuneration for their toil,
will probably agree with the sensible and virtuous master of Walter
Gerard.

He, accompanied by his daughter and Egremont, is now on his way home. A
soft summer afternoon; the mild beam still gilding the tranquil scene; a
river, green meads full of kine, woods vocal with the joyous song of the
thrush and the blackbird; and in the distance, the lofty breast of the
purple moor, still blazing in the sun: fair sights and renovating
sounds after a day of labour passed in walls and amid the ceaseless and
monotonous clang of the spindle and the loom. So Gerard felt it, as he
stretched his great limbs in the air and inhaled its perfumed volume.

"Ah! I was made for this, Sybil," he exclaimed; "but never mind, my
child, never mind; tell me more of your fine visitors."

Egremont found the walk too short; fortunately from the undulation of
the vale, they could not see the cottage until within a hundred yards of
it. When they were in sight, a man came forth from the garden to greet
them; Sybil gave an exclamation of pleasure; it was MORLEY.




Book 3 Chapter 9



Morley greeted Gerard and his daughter with great warmth, and then
looked at Egremont. "Our companion in the ruins of Marney Abbey," said
Gerard; "you and our friend Franklin here should become acquainted,
Stephen, for you both follow the same craft. He is a journalist like
yourself, and is our neighbour for a time, and yours."

"What journal are you on, may I ask?" enquired Morley.

Egremont reddened, was confused, and then replied, "I have no claim to
the distinguished title of a journalist. I am but a reporter; and have
some special duties here."

"Hem!" said Morley, and then taking Gerard by the arm, he walked away
with him, leaving Egremont and Sybil to follow them.

"Well I have found him, Walter."

"What, Hatton?"

"No, no; the brother."

"And what knows he?"

"Little enough; yet something. Our man lives and prospers; these are
facts, but where he is, or what he is--not a clue."

"And this brother cannot help us?"

"On the contrary, he sought information from me; he is a savage, beneath
even our worst ideas of popular degradation. All that is ascertained
is that our man exists and is well to do in the world. There comes an
annual and anonymous contribution, and not a light one, to his brother.
I examined the post-marks of the letters, but they all varied, and were
evidently arranged to mislead. I fear you will deem I have not done
much; yet it was wearisome enough I can tell you."

"I doubt it not; and I am sure Stephen, you have done all that man
could. I was fancying that I should hear from you to-day; for what think
you has happened? My Lord himself, his family and train, have all been
in state to visit the works, and I had to show them. Queer that, wasn't
it? He offered me money when it was over. How much I know not, I would
not look at it. Though to be sure, they were perhaps my own rents, eh?
But I pointed to the sick box and his own dainty hand deposited the sum
there."

"'Tis very strange. And you were with him face to face?"

"Face to face. Had you brought me news of the papers, I should have
thought that providence had rather a hand in it--but now, we are still
at sea."

"Still at sea," said Morley musingly, "but he lives and prospers. He
will turn up yet, Walter."

"Amen! Since you have taken up this thing, Stephen, it is strange how my
mind has hankered after the old business, and yet it ruined my father,
and mayhap may do as bad for his son."

"We will not think that," said Morley. "At present we will think of
other things. You may guess I am a bit wearied; I think I'll say good
night; you have strangers with you."

"Nay, nay man; nay. This Franklin is a likely lad enough; I think you
will take to him. Prithee come in. Sybil will not take it kindly if you
go, after so long an absence; and I am sure I shall not."

So they entered together.

The evening passed in various conversation, though it led frequently to
the staple subject of talk beneath the roof of Gerard--the Condition
of the People. What Morley had seen in his recent excursion afforded
materials for many comments.

"The domestic feeling is fast vanishing among the working classes of
this country," said Gerard; "nor is it wonderful--the Home no longer
exists."

"But there are means of reviving it," said Egremont; "we have witnessed
them to-day. Give men homes, and they will have soft and homely notions,
If all men acted like Mr Trafford, the condition of the people would be
changed."

"But all men will not act like Mr Trafford," said Morley. "It requires
a sacrifice of self which cannot be expected, which is unnatural. It
is not individual influence that can renovate society: it is some new
principle that must reconstruct it. You lament the expiring idea of
Home. It would not be expiring, if it were worth retaining. The domestic
principle has fulfilled its purpose. The irresistible law of progress
demands that another should be developed. It will come; you may
advance or retard, but you cannot prevent it. It will work out like the
development of organic nature. In the present state of civilization and
with the scientific means of happiness at our command, the notion of
home should be obsolete. Home is a barbarous idea; the method of a
rude age; home is isolation; therefore anti-social. What we want is
Community."

"It is all very fine," said Gerard, "and I dare say you are right,
Stephen; but I like stretching my feet on my own hearth."




Book 3 Chapter 10



Time passes with a measured and memorable wing during the first period
of a sojourn in a new place, among new characters and new manners.
Every person, every incident, every feeling, touches and stirs the
imagination. The restless mind creates and observes at the same time.
Indeed there is scarcely any popular tenet more erroneous than that
which holds that when time is slow, life is dull. It is very often and
very much the reverse. If we look back on those passages of our life
which dwell most upon the memory, they are brief periods full of action
and novel sensation. Egremont found this so during the first days of his
new residence in Mowedale. The first week, an epoch in his life, seemed
an age; at the end of the first month, he began to deplore the swiftness
of time and almost to moralize over the brevity of existence. He found
that he was leading a life of perfect happiness, but of remarkable
simplicity; he wished it might never end, but felt difficulty in
comprehending how in the first days of his experience of it, it had
seemed so strange; almost as strange as it was sweet. The day that
commenced early, was past in reading--books lent him often too by Sybil
Gerard--sometimes in a ramble with her and Morley, who had time much
at his command, to some memorable spot in the neighbourhood, or in the
sport which the river and the rod secured Egremont. In the evening, he
invariably repaired to the cottage of Gerard, beneath whose humble roof
he found every female charm that can fascinate, and conversation that
stimulated his intelligence. Gerard was ever the same; hearty, simple,
with a depth of feeling and native thought on the subjects on which they
touched, and with a certain grandeur of sentiment and conception which
contrasted with his social position, but which became his idiosyncracy.
Sybil spoke little, but hung upon the accents of her father; yet ever
and anon her rich tones conveyed to the charmed ear of Egremont some
deep conviction, the earnestness of her intellect as remarkable as
the almost sacred repose of her mien and manner. Of Morley, at first
Egremont saw a great deal: he lent our friend books, opened with
unreserve and with great richness of speculative and illustrative power,
on the questions which ever engaged him, and which were new and highly
interesting to his companion. But as time advanced, whether it were that
the occupations of Morley increased, and the calls on his hours left him
fewer occasions for the indulgence of social intercourse, Egremont saw
him seldom, except at Gerard's cottage, where generally he might be
found in the course of the week, and their rambles together had entirely
ceased.

Alone, Egremont mused much over the daughter of Gerard, but shrinking
from the precise and the definite, his dreams were delightful, but
vague. All that he asked was, that his present life should go on for
ever; he wished for no change, and at length almost persuaded himself
that no change could arrive; as men who are basking in a summer sun,
surrounded by bright and beautiful objects, cannot comprehend how the
seasons can ever alter; that the sparkling foliage should shrivel and
fall away, the foaming waters become icebound, and the blue serene, a
dark and howling space.

In this train of mind, the early days of October having already stolen
on him, an incident occurred which startled him in his retirement, and
rendered it necessary that he should instantly quit it. Egremont
had entrusted the secret of his residence to a faithful servant who
communicated with him when necessary, under his assumed name. Through
these means he received a letter from his mother, written from London,
where she had unexpectedly arrived, entreating him, in urgent terms, to
repair to her without a moment's delay, on a matter of equal interest
and importance to herself and him. Such an appeal from such a quarter,
from the parent that had ever been kind, and the friend that had been
ever faithful, was not for a moment to be neglected. Already a period
had elapsed since its transmission, which Egremont regretted. He
resolved at once to quit Mowedale, nor could he console himself with
the prospect of an immediate return. Parliament was to assemble in the
ensuing month, and independent of the unknown cause which summoned him
immediately to town, he was well aware that much disagreeable business
awaited him which could no longer be postponed. He had determined not
to take his seat unless the expenses of his contest were previously
discharged, and despairing of his brother's aid, and shrinking from
trespassing any further on his mother's resources, the future looked
gloomy enough: indeed nothing but the frequent presence and the constant
influence of Sybil had driven from his mind the ignoble melancholy
which, relieved by no pensive fancy, is the invariable attendant of
pecuniary embarrassment.

And now he was to leave her. The event, rather the catastrophe,
which under any circumstances, could not be long postponed, was to be
precipitated. He strolled up to the cottage to bid her farewell and to
leave kind words for her father. Sybil was not there. The old dame who
kept their home informed him that Sybil was at the convent, but would
return in the evening. It was impossible to quit Mowedale without seeing
Sybil; equally impossible to postpone his departure. But by travelling
through the night, the lost hours might be regained. And Egremont made
his arrangements, and awaited with anxiety and impatience the last
evening.

The evening, like his heart, was not serene. The soft air that had
lingered so long with them, a summer visitant in an autumnal sky and
loth to part, was no more present. A cold harsh wind, gradually rising,
chilled the system and grated on the nerves. There was misery in its
blast and depression in its moan. Egremont felt infinitely dispirited.
The landscape around him that he had so often looked upon with love and
joy, was dull and hard; the trees dingy, the leaden waters motionless,
the distant hills rough and austere. Where was that translucent sky,
once brilliant as his enamoured fancy; those bowery groves of aromatic
fervor wherein he had loved to roam and muse; that river of swift
and sparkling light that flowed and flashed like the current of his
enchanted hours? All vanished--as his dreams.

He stood before the cottage of Gerard; he recalled the eve that he had
first gazed upon its moonlit garden. What wild and delicious thoughts
were then his! They were gone like the illumined hour. Nature and
fortune had alike changed. Prescient of sorrow, almost prophetic
of evil, he opened the cottage door, and the first person his eye
encountered was Morley.

Egremont had not met him for some time, and his cordial greeting of
Egremont to-night contrasted with the coldness, not to say estrangement,
which to the regret and sometimes the perplexity of Egremont had
gradually grown up between them. Yet on no occasion was his presence
less desired by our friend. Morley was talking as Egremont entered with
great animation; in his hand a newspaper, on a paragraph contained in
which he was commenting. The name of Marney caught the ear of Egremont
who turned rather pale at the sound, and hesitated on the threshold. The
unembarrassed welcome of his friends however re-assured him, and in a
moment he even ventured to enquire the subject of their conversation.
Morley immediately referring to the newspaper said, "This is what I have
just read--

"EXTRAORDINARY SPORT AT THE EARL OF MARNEY'S.

On Wednesday, in a small cover called the Horns, near Marney Abbey, his
grace the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine, the Earl of Marney, Colonel Rippe and
Captain Grouse, with only four hours shooting, bagged the extraordinary
number of seven hundred and thirty head of game, namely hares three
hundred and thirty-nine; pheasants two hundred and twenty-one; partridges
thirty-four; rabbits eighty-seven; and the following day upwards of fifty
hares, pheasants, &c., (wounded the previous day) were picked up. Out
of the four hours' shooting two of the party were absent an hour and
a-half, namely the Earl of Marney and Captain Grouse, attending an
agricultural meeting in the neighbourhood; the noble earl with his
usual considerate condescension having kindly consented personally
to distribute the various prizes to the labourers whose good conduct
entitled them to the distinction."

"What do you think of that, Franklin?" said Morley. "That is our worthy
friend of Marney Abbey, where we first met. You do not know this part of
the country, or you would smile at the considerate condescension of the
worst landlord in England; and who was, it seems, thus employed the day
or so after his battue, as they call it." And Morley turning the paper
read another paragraph:--

"At a Petty Sessions holden at the Green Dragon Inn, Marney, Friday,
October--, 1837.

"Magistrates present: The Earl of Marney, the Rev. Felix Flimsey, and
Captain Grouse.

"Information against Robert Hind for a trespass in pursuit of game in
Blackrock Wood, the property of Sir Vavasour Firebrace, Bart. The case
was distinctly proved; several wires being found in the pocket of the
defendant. Defendant was fined in the full penalty of forty shillings
and costs twenty-seven; the Bench being of opinion there was no excuse
for him, Hind being in regular employ as a farm labourer and gaining his
seven shillings a-week. Defendant being unable to pay the penalty, was
sent for two months to Marham Gaol."

"What a pity," said Morley, "that Robert Hind, instead of meditating the
snaring of a hare, had not been fortunate enough to pick up a maimed one
crawling about the fields the day after the battue. It would certainly
have been better for himself; and if he has a wife and family, better
for the parish."

"Oh!" said Gerard, "I doubt not they were all picked up by the poulterer
who has the contract: even the Normans did not sell their game."

"The question is," said Morley, "would you rather be barbarous or mean;
that is the alternative presented by the real and the pseudo Norman
nobility of England. Where I have been lately, there is a Bishopsgate
Street merchant who has been made for no conceiveable public reason a
baron bold. Bigod and Bohun could not enforce the forest laws with such
severity as this dealer in cotton and indigo."

"It is a difficult question to deal with--this affair of the game laws,"
said Egremont; "how will you reach the evil? Would you do away with the
offence of trespass? And if so, what is your protection for property?"

"It comes to a simple point though," said Morley, "the Territorialists
must at length understand that they cannot at the same time have the
profits of a farm and the pleasures of a chase."

At this moment entered Sybil. At the sight of her, the remembrance that
they were about to part, nearly overwhelmed Egremont. Her supremacy over
his spirit was revealed to him, and nothing but the presence of other
persons could have prevented him avowing his entire subjection. His hand
trembled as he touched her's, and his eye, searching yet agitated, would
have penetrated her serene soul. Gerard and Morley, somewhat withdrawn,
pursued their conversation; while Egremont hanging over Sybil, attempted
to summon courage to express to her his sad adieu. It was in vain.
Alone, perhaps he might have poured forth a passionate farewell. But
constrained he became embarrassed; and his conduct was at the same time
tender and perplexing. He asked and repeated questions which had already
been answered. His thoughts wandered from their conversation but not
from her with whom he should have conversed. Once their eyes met, and
Sybil observed his suffused with tears. Once he looked round and caught
the glance of Morley, instantly withdrawn, but not easy to be forgotten.

Shortly after this and earlier than his wont, Morley rose and wished
them good night. He shook hands with Egremont and bade him farewell with
some abruptness. Harold who seemed half asleep suddenly sprang from the
side of his mistress and gave an agitated bark. Harold was never very
friendly to Morley, who now tried to soothe him, but in vain. The dog
looked fiercely at him and barked again, but the moment Morley had
disappeared, Harold resumed his usual air of proud high-bred gentleness,
and thrust his nose into the hand of Egremont, who patted him with
fondness.

The departure of Morley was a great relief to Egremont, though the
task that was left was still a painful effort. He rose and walked for
a moment up and down the room, commenced an unfinished sentence,
approached the hearth and leant over the mantel; and then at length
extending his hand to Gerard he exclaimed, in a trembling voice, "Best
of friends, I must leave Mowedale."

"I am very sorry," said Gerard; "and when?"

"Now," said Egremont.

"Now!" said Sybil.

"Yes; this instant. My summons is urgent. I ought to have left this
morning. I came here then to bid you farewell," he said looking at
Sybil, "to express to you how deeply I was indebted to you for all your
goodness--how dearly I shall cherish the memory of these happy days--the
happiest I have ever known;" and his voice faltered. "I came also to
leave a kind message for you, my friend, a hope that we might meet again
and soon--but your daughter was absent, and I could not leave Mowedale
without seeing either of you. So I must contrive to get on through the
night."

"Well we lose a very pleasant neighbour," said Gerard; "we shall miss
you, I doubt not, eh, Sybil?"

But Sybil had turned away her head; she was leaning over and seemed to
be caressing Harold and was silent.

How much Egremont would have liked to have offered or invited
correspondence; to have proffered his services when the occasion
permitted; to have said or proposed many things that might have
cherished their acquaintance or friendship; but embarrassed by his
incognito and all its consequent deception, he could do nothing but
tenderly express his regret at parting, and speak vaguely and almost
mysteriously of their soon again meeting. He held out again his hand
to Gerard who shook it heartily: then approaching Sybil, Egremont said,
"you have shewn me a thousand kindnesses, which I cherish," he added
in a lower tone, "above all human circumstances. Would you deign to
let this volume lie upon your table," and he offered Sybil an English
translation of Thomas a Kempis, illustrated by some masterpieces. In its
first page was written "Sybil, from a faithful friend."

"I accept it," said Sybil with a trembling voice and rather pale, "in
remembrance of a friend." She held forth her hand to Egremont, who
retained it for an instant, and then bending very low, pressed it to his
lips. As with an agitated heart, he hastily crossed the threshold of
the cottage, something seemed to hold him back. He turned round. The
bloodhound had seized him by the coat and looked up to him with an
expression of affectionate remonstrance against his departure. Egremont
bent down, caressed Harold and released himself from his grasp.

When Egremont left the cottage, he found the country enveloped in a
thick white mist, so that had it not been for some huge black shadows
which he recognized as the crests of trees, it would have been
very difficult to discriminate the earth from the sky, and the mist
thickening as he advanced, even these fallacious landmarks threatened to
disappear. He had to walk to Mowbray to catch a night train for London.
Every moment was valuable, but the unexpected and increasing obscurity
rendered his progress slow and even perilous. The contiguity to the
river made every step important. He had according to his calculations
proceeded nearly as far as his old residence, and notwithstanding the
careless courage of youth and the annoyance of relinquishing a project,
intolerable at that season of life, was meditating the expediency of
renouncing that night the attempt on Mowbray and of gaining his former
quarters for shelter. He stopped, as he had stopped several times
before, to calculate rather than to observe. The mist was so thick that
he could not see his own extended hand. It was not the first time that
it had occurred to him that some one or something was hovering about his
course.

"Who is there?" exclaimed Egremont. But no one answered.

He moved on a little, but very slowly. He felt assured that his ear
caught a contiguous step. He repeated his interrogatory in a louder
tone, but it obtained no response. Again he stopped. Suddenly he was
seized; an iron grasp assailed his throat, a hand of steel griped his
arm. The unexpected onset hurried him on. The sound of waters assured
him that he was approaching the precipitous bank of that part of the
river which, from a ledge of pointed rocks, here formed rapids. Vigorous
and desperate, Egremont plunged like some strong animal on whom a beast
of prey had made a fatal spring. His feet clung to the earth as if they
were held by some magnetic power. With his disengaged arm he grappled
with his mysterious and unseen foe.

At this moment he heard the deep bay of a hound.

"Harold!" he exclaimed. The dog, invisible, sprang forward and seized
upon his assailant. So violent was the impulse that Egremont staggered
and fell, but he fell freed from his dark enemy. Stunned and exhausted,
some moments elapsed before he was entirely himself. The wind had
suddenly changed; a violent gust had partially dispelled the mist; the
outline of the landscape was in many places visible. Beneath him
were the rapids of the Mowe, over which a watery moon threw a faint,
flickering light. Egremont was lying on its precipitous bank; and Harold
panting was leaning over him and looking in his face, and sometimes
licking him with that tongue which, though not gifted with speech, had
spoken so seasonably in the moment of danger.


END OF THE THIRD BOOK




BOOK IV




Book 4 Chapter 1



"Are you going down to the house, Egerton?" enquired Mr Berners at
Brookes, of a brother M.P., about four o'clock in the early part of the
spring of 1839.

"The moment I have sealed this letter; we will walk down together, if
you like!" and in a few minutes they left the club.

"Our fellows are in a sort of fright about this Jamaica bill," said Mr
Egerton in an undertone, as if he were afraid a passer-by might overhear
him. "Don't say anything about it, but there's a screw loose."

"The deuce! But how do you mean?"

"They say the Rads are going to throw us over."

"Talk, talk. They have threatened this half-a-dozen times. Smoke, sir;
it will end in smoke."

"I hope it may; but I know, in great confidence mind you, that Lord John
was saying something about it yesterday."

"That may be; I believe our fellows are heartily sick of the business,
and perhaps would be glad of an excuse to break up the government: but
we must not have Peel in; nothing could prevent a dissolution."

"Their fellows go about and say that Peel would not dissolve if he came
in."

"Trust him!"

"He has had enough of dissolutions they say."

"Why, after all they have not done him much harm. Even --34 was a hit."
