                            WE'RE CIVILIZED!


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.

Title: We're Civilized!

Author: Mark Clifton and Alex Apostolides

Release Date: December 13, 2011 [EBook #38287]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WE'RE CIVILIZED! ***




Produced by Frank van Drogen, Greg Weeks, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.

    WE'RE CIVILIZED!

    By MARK CLIFTON and ALEX APOSTOLIDES


    _Naturally, the superior race should win ... but superior by
    which standards ... and whose?_

    Illustrated by BALBALIS


The females and children worked among the lichen growth, picking off the
fattest, ripest leaves for their food and moisture, completing their arc
of the circle of symbiosis.

The males worked at the surface of the canals, or in open excavations.
Their wide, mutated hands chipped into the rock-hard clay, opening a
channel which was to be filled with sand and then sealed off with clay
on all sides and surface. That water might seep through the sand without
evaporation, without loss, from the poles to the equator of Mars--seep
unimpeded, so that moisture might reach the lichen plants of everyone,
so that none might thirst or hunger.

The seepage must flow. Not even buried in the dim racial memory had
there ever been one who took more than his share, for this would be like
the fingers of one hand stealing blood from the fingers of the other.

Among the Mars race there were many words for contentment, kinship of
each to all. There were words to express the ecstasy of watching the
eternal stars, by night and by day, through the thin blackish
atmosphere. There were words to express the joy of opening slitted
nostrils to breathe deeply in those protected places where the blowing
sands did not swirl, of opening folds of rubbery skin to catch the weak
rays of the distant Sun.

But there were no words for "mine" as separate from "yours." And there
was no urge to cry out, "Why am I here? What is the purpose of it all?"

Each had his purpose, serene, unquestioning. Each repaired or extended
the seepage canals so that others, unborn, might know the same joys and
ecstasies as they. The work was in itself a part of the total joy, and
they resisted it no more than healthy lungs resist clear, cool air.

So far back that even the concept of beginnings had been forgotten, the
interwoven fabric of their symbiotic interdependence seeped through
their lives as naturally as the precious water seeped through the canal
sands. As far back as that, they had achieved civilization.

Their kind of civilization.

                                  ----

Captain Griswold maintained an impassive face. (Let that, too, be a part
of the legend.) Without expression, he looked through the screen at the
red land flashing below the ship. But unconsciously he squared his
shoulders, breathed deeply, enjoying the virile pull of his uniform over
his expanding chest. Resolutely he pushed aside the vision of countless
generations of school children, yet to come, repeating the lesson
dutifully to their teachers.

"Captain Thomas H. Griswold took possession of Mars, June 14, 2018."

No, he must not allow any mood of vanity to spoil his own memories of
this moment. It was beside the point that his name would rank with the
great names of all times. Still, the history of the moment could not be
denied.

Lieutenant Atkinson's voice broke through his preoccupation, and saved
