
"Don't touch it," Conners warned.

"I'm not going to. Let me have your spade." Micheals took the spade and
prodded the object experimentally. It was completely unyielding. He held
the spade to the surface for a moment, then withdrew it. Another inch
was gone.

Micheals frowned, and pushed his glasses tighter against his nose. He
held the spade against the rock with one hand, the other held close to
the surface. More of the spade disappeared.

"Doesn't seem to be generating heat," he said to Conners. "Did you
notice any the first time?"

Conners shook his head.

Micheals picked up a clod of dirt and tossed it on the object. The dirt
dissolved quickly, leaving no trace on the gray-black surface. A large
stone followed the dirt, and disappeared in the same way.

"Isn't that just about the damnedest thing you ever saw, Professor?"
Conners asked.

"Yes," Micheals agreed, standing up again. "It just about is."

He hefted the spade and brought it down smartly on the object. When it
hit, he almost dropped the spade. He had been gripping the handle
rigidly, braced for a recoil. But the spade struck that unyielding
surface and _stayed_. There was no perceptible give, but absolutely no
recoil.

"Whatcha think it is?" Conners asked.

"It's no stone," Micheals said. He stepped back. "A leech drinks blood.
This thing seems to be drinking dirt. And spades." He struck it a few
more times, experimentally. The two men looked at each other. On the
road, half a dozen Army trucks rolled past.

"I'm going to phone the college and ask a physics man about it,"
Micheals said. "Or a biologist. I'd like to get rid of that thing before
it spoils my lawn."

They walked back to the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everything fed the leech. The wind added its modicum of kinetic energy,
ruffling across the gray-black surface. Rain fell, and the force of each
individual drop added to its store. The water was sucked in by the
all-absorbing surface.

The sunlight above it was absorbed, and converted into mass for its
body. Beneath it, the soil was consumed, dirt, stones and branches
broken down by the leech's complex cells and changed into energy. Energy
was converted back into mass, and the leech grew.

Slowly, the first flickers of consciousness began to return. Its first
realization was of the impossible smallness of its body.

It grew.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Micheals looked the next day, the leech was eight feet across,
sticking out into the road and up the side of the lawn. The following
day it was almost eighteen feet in diameter, shaped to fit the contour
of the ditch, and covering most of the road. That day the sheriff drove
up in his model A, followed by half the town.

"Is that your leech thing, Professor Micheals?" Sheriff Flynn asked.

"That's it," Micheals said. He had spent the past days looking
unsuccessfully for an acid that would dissolve the leech.

"We gotta get it out of the road," Flynn said, walking truculently up to
the leech. "Something like this, you can't let it block the road,
Professor. The Army's gotta use this road."

"I'm terribly sorry," Micheals said with a straight face. "Go right
ahead, Sheriff. But be careful. It's hot." The leech wasn't hot, but it
seemed the simplest explanation under the circumstances.

Micheals watched with interest as the sheriff tried to shove a crowbar
under it. He smiled to himself when it was removed with half a foot of
its length gone.

The sheriff wasn't so easily discouraged. He had come prepared for a
stubborn piece of rock. He went to the rumble seat of his car and took
out a blowtorch and a sledgehammer, ignited the torch and focused it on
one edge of the leech.

After five minutes, there was no change. The gray didn't turn red or
even seem to heat up. Sheriff Flynn continued to bake it for fifteen
minutes, then called to one of the men.

"Hit that spot with the sledge, Jerry."

Jerry picked up the sledgehammer, motioned the sheriff back, and swung
it over his head. He let out a howl as the hammer struck unyieldingly.
There wasn't a fraction of recoil.

In the distance they heard the roar of an Army convoy.

"Now we'll get some action," Flynn said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Micheals wasn't so sure. He walked around the periphery of the leech,
asking himself what kind of substance would react that way. The answer
was easy--no substance. No _known_ substance.

The driver in the lead jeep held up his hand, and the long convoy ground
to a halt. A hard, efficient-looking officer stepped out of the jeep.
From the star on either shoulder, Micheals knew he was a brigadier
general.

"You can't block this road," the general said. He was a tall, spare man
in suntans, with a sunburned face and cold eyes. "Please clear that
thing away."

"We can't move it," Micheals said. He told the general what had happened
in the past few days.

"It must be moved," the general said. "This convoy must go through." He
walked closer and looked at the leech. "You say it can't be jacked up by
a crowbar? A torch won't burn it?"

