
"Major," the adjutant asked, "how long is the general going to be tied
up? He won't let me in the conference and the lieutenant here is
supposed to see him."

Grant paused at the opposite door and pointing two thumb-and-forefinger
guns at his head exploded them. The adjutant groaned understandingly.
Even the first lieutenant caught on.

"Major, it's pretty important," the waiting officer said, standing
again. Grant shifted his attention.

"Look, lieutenant--" Grant bottled the sarcasm behind his suddenly lax
mouth. He saw a first lieutenant's uniform, but it bulged aesthetically;
and he saw a first lieutenant's cap and bar, but it sat rakishly on
puffed-up brown curls.

"If you'll just look at these papers, major, you'll understand. I
stratoed in from the Pentagon this morning," she said crisply.

Though it was Grant's turn to say something, he found too much of his
concentration on her challenging brown eyes and the efficient down-sweep
of her half-pouting mouth, plus a nub of a nose that pointed proudly
upwards with the tilt of her head. In a temporary defensive maneuver,
Grant took the papers handed him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The borders were marked CONFIDENTIAL and the attached signatures would
have impressed even the general. The subject--he might have
expected--ATOMJET PATROL LOSSES.

"Er ... look, lieutenant-- What was it?" Grant glanced down at the
papers.

"First Lieutenant Bridget Ashley."

"Look, Lieutenant Ashley, the general's been getting nothing but
troubles all day. For your sake and his sake, I suggest you come back
tomorrow, huh?" Grant handed back the papers and put a hand on her
elbow, but she jerked back.

"Major, I've been given a great deal of responsibility in this
assignment," she flared, "and it's important for me to get work started
at once. I was led to understand these patrol losses constituted a
fairly urgent matter."

Grant glanced ominously toward the general's door. "Lieutenant, I'm
trying to explain to you that it's in your best interests to take this
up with him tomorrow. I'm one of his aides and I know him. I realize
you're authorized to see him today, but--"

"Then I'll wait." She reseated herself and emphatically crossed her
legs--a motion not escaping Grant's notice.

The adjutant and Grant mutually shrugged at each other, and Grant headed
outside, saying over his shoulder, "I'll be back in a minute."

       *       *       *       *       *

As it developed, it was far more than a minute; but whatever it was,
when Grant returned she was gone. The major looked at the adjutant, and
the adjutant indicated the general's door with an apprehensive nod.
Grant bit his lip and entered the private office.

He had expected to hear the general's bass raging, but through the inner
door came the strident tones of the lieutenant's modulating contralto.
He had expected to see the general towering over the girl's shrinking
figure, but as he entered she was bent earnestly in the middle, and the
top of her torso inclined toward General Morrison, who had tilted as far
back as his swivel chair would permit.

"... So, if you haven't isolated any mechanical causation, how can you
be sure it's mechanical?" she was laying it on. "And if you're not sure
it's mechanical, how can you suggest there's no possibility of
psychological causation? The authorities that sent me here have not only
considered the possibility, they feel it's quite probable. All I am
requesting, sir, is immediate implementation of my authority so your
investigation can be broadened. It's really to your benefit that--"

Grant said, "Lieutenant Ashley."

"... My work be started at once so as to catch up on what findings you
have obtained in the--"

Grant shouted, "Lieutenant Ashley!"

"... Investigation so far in the mechanical aspects. It's not unlikely
that a combining factor, both psychological and mechanical--"

Grant yelled, "LIEUTENANT ASHLEY!!"

"Yes, sir, major."

"Would you please wait in the outer office for just a moment?"

"But--"

"For just a moment, lieutenant."

"Yes, sir."

Grant waited until the door closed before he tried communication with
the general. The officer still teetered in his chair, his eyes bulging
from his reddened face.

"They sent me a shape," he sputtered. "That I could take. Shapes I don't
mind, even with authority. But this one-- You know where she's from,
Grant?"

Grant sighed hopelessly.

"She's from syk," the general was beginning to roar, "with a blank
check of authority from Washington. She stood there and called the
losses pilot-error. My pilots, Grant, the ones I trained!"

"Just a possibility, she meant," soothed Grant.

"Possibility, hell! With that attitude around Mojave we'll never get
anywhere in this investigation." He untilted with a crash. "I want her
kept away from me, do you hear? Give her anything she wants--but
appointments with me. I've got United Nuclear here for stress tests,
coolant analyses, radiation metering in the morning just as a start, and
I'm not going to have that shape around fusing up the works."

"I'll see what I can do, sir."

"You're right you will. I'm putting Colonel Sorenson in as G-2, and
you're going to be the new Syk Cooerdinator for the duration of this
investigation!"

"The what?"

"You heard me."

"It couldn't be that bad, general," Grant grumbled.

"It is."

"Baby-sitting."

The general stood up from his desk. "No, you'll relay any data she may
turn up to me, and you'll see she gets what supplies and personnel she
may need. Look, Washington thinks we need her, so I take orders. And so
do you, Grant. I'll have a special order out this afternoon."

"Yes, sir," Grant saluted and wheeled, grinding his molars.

       *       *       *       *       *

With dubious explanations, Grant managed to steer Lieutenant Ashley
toward the Officers' Club. What excuses he gave her evidently had some
effect; after the first fifty yards across the drill ground she steered
easily, though still under vocal protest.

