The Project Gutenberg eBook, Commercial Geography, by Jacques W. Redway


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Commercial Geography
       A Book for High Schools, Commercial Courses, and Business Colleges


Author: Jacques W. Redway



Release Date: March 20, 2008  [eBook #24884]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COMMERCIAL GEOGRAPHY***


E-text prepared by Kevin Handy, John Hagerson, Greg Bergquist, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24884-h.htm or 24884-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/8/8/24884/24884-h/24884-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/8/8/24884/24884-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by equal signs was in bold face in the
      original (=bold=).





COMMERCIAL GEOGRAPHY

A Book for High Schools
Commercial Courses, and
Business Colleges

by

JACQUES W. REDWAY, F.R.G.S.

Author of "A Series of Geographies," "An Elementary
Physical Geography," "The New Basis of Geography"







Charles Scribner's Sons
New York ... 1907

Copyright, 1903, by
Jacques W. Redway




PREFACE


The quiet industrial struggle through which the United States passed
during the last decade of the nineteenth century cannot fail to impress
the student of political economy with the fact that commercial
revolution is a normal result of industrial evolution. Within a period
of twenty-five years the transportation of commodities has grown to be
not only a science, but a power in the betterment of civil and political
life as well; and the world, which in the time of M. Jules Verne was
eighty days wide, is now scarcely forty.

The invention of the Bessemer process for making steel was intended
primarily to give the railway-operator a track that should be free from
the defects of the soft, wrought-iron rail; in fact, however, it created
new industrial centres all over the world and brought Asia and Africa
under commercial conquest. The possibilities of increased trade between
the Atlantic seaboard and the Pacific Coast States led to the building
of the Northern Pacific and Great Northern Railways. But when these were
thoroughly organized, there unexpectedly resulted a new trade-route that
already is drawing traffic away from the Suez Canal and landing it at
Asian shores by way of the ports of Puget Sound. It is a repetition of
the adjustment that occurred when the opening of the Cape route to India
transferred the trade that had gathered about Venice and Genoa to the
shores of the North and Baltic Seas.

In other words, a new order of things has come about, and the world and
the people therein are readjusting themselves to the requirements made
upon them by commerce. And so at the beginning of a new century,
civilized man is drawing upon all the rest of the world to satisfy his
wants, and giving to all the world in return; he is civilized because of
this interchange and not in spite of it.

The necessity for instruction in a subject that pertains so closely to
the welfare of a people is apparent, and an apology for presenting this
manual is needless. Moreover, it should not interfere in any way with
the regular course in geography; indeed, more comprehensive work in the
latter is becoming imperative, and it should be enriched rather than
curtailed.

In the preparation of the work, I wish to express my appreciation of the
great assistance of Principal Myron T. Pritchard, Edward Everett School,
Boston, Mass. I am also much indebted to the map-engraving department of
Messrs. The Matthews-Northrup Company, Buffalo, N.Y.

                                                                   J.W.R.


 CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                                      PAGE


       I. GENERAL PRINCIPLES                                      1

      II. HOW COMMERCE CIVILIZED MANKIND                          7

     III. TOPOGRAPHIC CONTROL OF COMMERCE                        17

      IV. CLIMATIC CONTROL OF COMMERCE                           29

       V. TRANSPORTATION--OCEAN AND INLAND NAVIGATION            39

      VI. TRANSPORTATION--RAILWAYS AND RAILWAY ORGANIZATION;
            PUBLIC HIGHWAYS                                      62

     VII. FACTORS IN THE LOCATION OF CITIES AND TOWNS            81

    VIII. THE CEREALS AND GRASSES                                88

      IX. TEXTILE FIBRES                                        105

       X. PLANT PRODUCTS OF ECONOMIC USE--BEVERAGES AND
            MEDICINAL SUBSTANCES                                127

      XI. GUMS AND RESINS USED IN THE ARTS                      141

     XII. COAL AND PETROLEUM                                    147

    XIII. METALS OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES                       159

     XIV. SUGAR AND ITS COMMERCE                                185

      XV. FORESTS AND FOREST PRODUCTS                           193

     XVI. SEA PRODUCTS AND FURS                                 203

    XVII. THE UNITED STATES--THE SEAPORTS AND THE ATLANTIC
             COAST-PLAIN                                        211

   XVIII. THE UNITED STATES--THE NEW ENGLAND PLATEAU
            AND THE APPALACHIAN REGION                          219

     XIX. THE UNITED STATES--THE BASIN OF THE GREAT LAKES
              AND THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY                        227

      XX. THE UNITED STATES--THE WESTERN HIGHLANDS AND
            TERRITORIAL POSSESSIONS                             247

     XXI. CANADA AND NEWFOUNDLAND                               261

    XXII. MEXICO--CENTRAL AMERICA--WEST INDIES                  267

   XXIII. SOUTH AMERICA--THE ANDEAN STATES                      275

    XXIV. SOUTH AMERICA--THE LOWLAND STATES                     285

     XXV. EUROPE--GREAT BRITAIN AND GERMANY                     295

    XXVI. EUROPE--THE BALTIC AND NORTH SEA STATES               310

   XXVII. EUROPE--THE MEDITERRANEAN STATES AND SWITZERLAND      320

  XXVIII. EUROPE--THE DANUBE AND BALKAN STATES                  335

    XXIX. EUROPE-ASIA--THE RUSSIAN EMPIRE                       343

     XXX. THE IRAN PLATEAU AND ARABIA                           349

    XXXI. BRITISH INDIA AND THE EAST INDIES                     358

   XXXII. CHINA AND JAPAN                                       367

  XXXIII. AFRICA                                                381

   XXXIV. OCEANIA                                               391

  APPENDIX                                                      398

  INDEX                                                         399




  COLORED MAPS

                                                             PAGE


  PRINCIPAL TRANSPORTATION LINES AND REGIONS OF LARGEST
   COMMERCE                                                 x, xi

  MEAN ANNUAL RAINFALL                                         28

  CITY OF NEW YORK AND VICINITY, WITH HARBOR APPROACHES        49

  DISTRIBUTION OF VEGETATION                                   80

  NORTH AMERICA                                               210

  PUGET SOUND                                                 253

  MEXICO                                                      268

  SOUTH AMERICA                                               274

  BRITISH ISLES                                               299

  GERMANY AND SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRIES                          304

  HOLLAND AND BELGIUM                                         314

  FRANCE                                                      321

  ITALY                                                       326

  SPAIN AND PORTUGAL                                          329

  TURKEY AND GREECE                                           338

  RUSSIAN EMPIRE                                              342

  THE IRAN PLATEAU AND ARABIA                                 349

  EASTERN CHINA                                               369

  JAPAN AND KOREA                                             375

  AFRICA                                                      382

  THE COMMERCE OF THE PACIFIC                                 393

[Illustration: PRINCIPAL TRANSPORTATION LINES AND REGIONS OF LARGEST
COMMERCE]

TO THE TEACHER:--The contents of this book are so topicalized and
arranged that, if the time for the study is limited, a short course may
be selected. Under no circumstances, however, should Chapters V, VI,
VIII, IX, XII, and XIII be omitted. A casual inspection of the questions
at the end of each chapter will serve to show that they cannot be
answered from the pages of the book, and they have been selected with
this idea in view. They are intended first of all to stimulate
individual thought, and secondly to encourage the pupil to investigate
the topics by consulting original sources. The practice of corresponding
with pupils in other parts of the world cannot be too highly commended.

The following list represents a minimum rather than a maximum reference
library. It may be enlarged at the judgment of the teacher. A good atlas
and a cyclopaedia are also necessary.

     Industrial Evolution of the United States. WRIGHT. Charles
     Scribner's Sons.

     History of Commerce in Europe. GIBBINS. The Macmillan Company.

     Discovery of America. FISKE. Houghton, Mifflin & Co.

     The New Empire. ADAMS. The Macmillan Company.

     Statesman's Year-Book. KELTIE. The Macmillan Company.

     Outlines of Political Science. GUNTON AND ROBBINS. D. Appleton &
     Co.

     The Wheat Problem. CROOKES. G.P. Putnam's Sons.

     South America. CARPENTER. American Book Company.

     From the Bureau of Statistics, Department of Commerce, Washington,
     D.C., the following monographs may be procured:[1]

     Commercial China. American Commerce. Commercial Australia.
     Commercial Japan. Commercial Africa. Commercial India. Statistical
     Abstract. Great Canals of the World. World's Sugar Production and
     Consumption.

     The following from the Department of Agriculture is necessary:

     Check List of Forest Trees of the United States.

Lantern slides illustrating the subjects treated in this book may be
procured from T.H. McAllister, 49 Nassau Street, New York. Stereoscopic
views may be obtained from Underwood & Underwood, Fifth Avenue and
Nineteenth Street, New York.




COMMERCIAL GEOGRAPHY

CHAPTER I

GENERAL PRINCIPLES


Commerce and modern civilization go hand in hand, and the history of the
one is the history of the other; and whatever may be the basis of
civilization, commerce has been the chief agent by which it has been
spread throughout the world. Peoples who receive nothing from their
fellow-men, and who give nothing in return, are usually but little above
a savage state. Civilized man draws upon all the rest of the world for
what he requires, and gives to the rest of the world in return. He is
civilized because of this fact and not in spite of it.

There is scarcely a country in the world that does not yield something
or other to civilized peoples. There is scarcely a household whose
furnishings and contents do not represent an aggregate journey of
several times around the earth. A family in New York at breakfast occupy
chairs from Grand Rapids, Mich.; they partake of bread made of wheat
from Minnesota, and meat from Texas prepared in a range made in St.
Louis; coffee grown in Sumatra or Java, or tea from China is served in
cups made in Japan, sweetened with sugar from Cuba, stirred with spoons
of silver from Nevada. Spices from Africa, South America, and Asia
season the food, which is served on a table of New Hampshire oak,
covered with a linen spread made from flax grown in Ireland or in
Russia. Rugs from Bokhara, or from Baluchistan, cover the floors;
portieres made in Constantinople hang at the doors; and the room is
heated with coal from Pennsylvania that burns in a furnace made in Rhode
Island.

Now all these things may be, and usually are, found in the great
majority of families in the United States or Europe, and most of them
will be found in nearly all households. Certain it is that peoples do
exist who, from the immediate vicinity in which they live, procure all
the things they use or consume. In the main, however, such peoples are
savages.

A moment's thought will make it clear that before an ordinary meal can
be served there must be railways, steamships, great manufacturing
establishments, iron quarries, and coal mines, aggregating many thousand
millions of dollars, and employing many million people. A casual
inspection, too, reveals the fact that all of the substances and things
required by mankind come from the earth, and, a very few excepted, every
one requires a certain amount of manufacture or preliminary treatment
before it is usable. The grains and nearly all the other food-stuffs
require various processes of preparation before they are ready for
consumption by civilized peoples. Iron and the various other ores used
in the arts must undergo elaborate processes of manufacture; coal must
be mined, broken, cleaned, and transported; the soil in which
food-stuffs are grown must be fertilized and mechanically prepared; and
even the water required for domestic purposes in many instances must be
transported long distances.

[Illustration: AGRICULTURE AND MANUFACTURE SUPPLEMENT EACH OTHER]

A little thought will suffice to show that not only are all food-stuffs
derived from the earth, but that also every usable resource which
constitutes wealth is also drawn from the same source. The same is also
pretty nearly true of the various forms of energy, for although the sun
is the real source of light and heat, and probably of electricity, these
agents are usable only when they have been transformed into earth
energies. Thus, the physical energy generated by falling water is merely
a transformed portion of solar heat; so also the coal-beds contain both
the chemical and physical energy of solar heat and light converted into
potential energy--that is, into force that can be used at the will of
intelligence. Indeed, the physical being of mankind is an organism born
of the earth, and adapted to the earth; and when that physical form
dies, it merely is transformed again to ordinary earth substances.

The chief activities of living beings are those relating to the
maintenance of life. In other words, animals must feed, and they must
also protect themselves against extermination. In the case of all other
animals this is a very simple matter, they simply live in immediate
contact with their food, migrating or perishing if the supply gives out.
In the case of mankind the conditions are different and vastly more
elaborate. Savage peoples excepted, man does not live within close touch
of the things he requires; indeed, he cannot, for he depends upon all
the world for what he uses. In a less enlightened state many of these
commodities were luxuries; in a civilized state they have become
necessities. Moreover, nearly everything civilized man employs has been
prepared by processes in which heat is employed.

Therefore one may specify several classes of human activities and
employments:

     (_a_) The production of food-stuffs and other commodities by the
     cultivation of the soil--_Agriculture_.

     (_b_) The preparation of food-stuffs and things used for shelter,
     protection, or ornament--_Manufacture_.

     (_c_) The production of minerals for the generation of power, such
     as coal, or those such as iron, copper, stone, etc., required in
     the arts and sciences--_Mining_.

     (_d_) The exchange of food stuffs and commodities--_Commerce_.

     (_e_) The transfer of commodities--_Transportation_.

It is evident that the prosperity and happiness of a people depend very
largely on the condition of their surroundings--that is, their
environment. If a country or an inhabited area produces all the
food-stuffs and commodities required by its people, the conditions are
very fortunate. A very few nations, notably China and the United States,
have such diverse conditions of climate, topography, and mineral
resources, that they can, if necessary, produce within their national
borders everything needed by their peoples.
