         the center by a Tudor rose. In an instant there
         flashed across my mind the old saying which Jack
         had quoted:

              He who plucks a rose at Yule
              Will bring back luck to Dacrepool.

         What impulse urged me I cannot say, but compelled
         by some seemingly irresistible suggestion I seized
         the sculptured rose and wrenched at it with all my
         strength. There was a dull thud, followed by a
         harsh grinding noise, and the whole of the paneling
         slid slowly back, revealing a cavity behind, where,
         half hidden by the accumulations of dust and
         cobwebs, I could catch a sight of silver tankards
         and masses of plate enough to make the mouth of a
         collector water with envy. Still scarcely certain
         whether I was sleeping or waking, I put in my hand
         and drew out a bag filled with something heavy, and
         even as I did so the rotten mildewed canvas broke
         with the strain, and a stream of golden coins
         descended with a clatter upon the floor.

         "Like a maniac I rushed to my door and hallooed
         lustily for Jack, who, roused by my shouts, came
         hurrying up in scanty attire, with a revolver in
         one hand and a poker in the other.

         "'What is it, old man, thieves or bailiffs? Just
         hold 'em till I come, can't you?'

         "'It's neither,' I replied, as I hauled him in with
         triumph, 'but I believe I have had a visit from
         your esteemed ancestor, and, as a Christmas gift,
         allow me to introduce you to the long-lost family
         treasure.'

         "There was no mistake about it--it was real enough,
         and, as the Christmas bells came chiming through
         the frosty air, we turned out bags of gold, piles
         of silver and priceless jewels warranted to redeem
         Dacrepool Grange twice over if necessary, and
         sending Jack into a very ecstasy of joy.

         "'By Jove, old chap,' he exclaimed, 'I owe it all
         to you. Here I've slept in this room for years, and
         never paid any heed to the raps and taps, though
         I've heard them often enough, while the treasure
         was under my very nose, only waiting to be
         discovered. Then you come along with your
         ghost-seeing eyes, and the spirit, if spirit it
         was, is able to convey to you the secret it's been
         trying to get off its mind for hundreds of years.
         You've saved me from the bankruptcy court, and it's
         a debt of gratitude you'll find I shan't lightly
         forget.'

         "It was a very jovial Christmas which we spent
         that day, for the news of the find got abroad at
         daylight, and we were promptly visited by the
         butcher and baker, bringing stores of good cheer
         and profuse apologies for past misunderstandings;
         even the severe old servant relapsed into smiles as
         she bore in a smoking sirloin of beef. Jack's
         spirits rose to the wildest pitch, and little
         Bessie, who persisted in calling me the savior of
         the family credit, could scarcely do enough to show
         her gratitude. Jack wanted me to share the best of
         the jewels with him, and was so annoyed at my
         refusal that I could only gain peace by a hint that
         I should sometime ask him for something more
         valuable still. And I got my way, for my unexpected
         visit lengthened out to a stay of some weeks,
         during which pretty Bessie's gratitude had time to
         ripen into a warmer feeling. So in the end it was
         quite a different treasure which I bore away from
         Dacrepool Grange, and I feel equally with Jack that
         I have cause to remember that strange Christmas
         Eve, and to render my thanks to old Sir Godfrey,
         who now sleeps soundly in his grave, secure in the
         accomplishment of his mission, having rid his soul
         of the burden of his secret and restored luck to
         Dacrepool."

"Is it true?" asked Sheila, as Canon Clark folded up his manuscript.

"Well, I can hardly call it a personal reminiscence, but you must allow
for author's license. Old historic houses sometimes have secret
hiding-places, and dreams are undoubtedly strange things. It's all
founded upon legends which I have heard. Mrs. Clark and I first met in
an ancient grange not at all unlike Dacrepool, didn't we, Bess? And if
we didn't find treasure behind the paneling we certainly ought to have
done so. Now I'm extremely sorry to have to hurry you, but I promised
Miss Morley that you should be back at school by half past six, and I
undertook to escort you through the town. I hope you'll all come and
have tea with us some afternoon next term and we'll have another
competition. Don't say good-by to Mrs. Clark. Give the Italian 'A
rivederci' instead, because that means not a parting greeting but 'May
we see one another again.'"




CHAPTER XV

Peachy's Birthday


Delia Watts, walking one afternoon along the lemon pergola, came across
a small group of Camellia Buds ensconced in a cozy corner at the foot of
the steps by the fountain.

"Hello! You've found a dandy place here. You look so comfy. May I join
on?" she chirped.

"Sure_lee_!" said Jess cordially, pushing Irene farther along to make
room. "Come and squat down, dearie, and add your voice to the powwow.
We're just discussing something fearfully urgent and important. Do you
know it'll be Peachy's birthday next week?"

"Of course I know. Nobody could room with Peachy and not hear about
that. She's the most excited girl on earth. She's been promised a gold
wrist-watch and a morocco hand-bag, and I can't tell you what else, and
she's just living till she gets them. I wish it was my birthday. I'm
jealous!"

"Don't be such a pig," responded Jess. "You got your fun in the
holidays. You can't have things twice over. What we were talking about
was this--the sorority ought to rally somehow and give Peachy a
surprise. Can't we get up a special stunt?"

"Rather! Put me on the committee, please! Couldn't we get leave for a
dormitory tea? I know Miss Rodgers rather frowned on them last term, but
perhaps if we wheedled Miss Morley she'd say 'yes.' We'd promise to
clear up and not make any mess, and to finish promptly before prep time.
That ought to content her. What votes?"

Every hand ascended with enthusiasm.

"Good for you, Delia!" complimented Jess. "We haven't had a dormitory
tea for just ages; not, in fact, since Aggie upset the spirit-lamp. I
think Miss Morley's forgotten that now, though. You must do the asking
yourself. You're our champion wheedler. If anybody can soften Miss
Morley's hard heart it will be you. Tell her Peachy will be homesick,
and we feel it'll be our duty to cheer her up a little."

"I'll pitch it as strong as I can," said Delia, "but of course it's no
use going too far. Peachy doesn't look a homesick subject in need of
cheering. I'm afraid Miss Morley may snort if I put it on that score.
I'd better just explain we want to have a stunt. I believe she'll catch
on. Leave it to me and I'll try my best to manage her."

"Right-o! We give you carte blanche!"

"Then I'll waddle off now."

Delia's success mostly depended upon tact. She judged that if she asked
Miss Morley, tired at the end of a busy morning, she would probably meet
with a curt refusal, but that if she found her, seated in her own
bed-sitting-room, soothed with afternoon tea and reading a delectable
book, her sympathy would be much more readily aroused. On this occasion
Delia's judgment was correct. After a perfectly harmonious interview
with the Principal she scurried back to her fellow Camellia Buds, her
face one satisfied grin.

"She said, 'Certainly, my dear!' We may ask Elvira for a special teapot
and a plate of bread and butter, and we may give Antonio three lira
apiece to buy us cakes. We may do what we like so long as the room is
tidy again before prep. She'll send a prefect at 5.45 to inspect. If the
place is in a muddle it'll be the last time, so we'd better be careful,
for I could see she meant that."

"We're in luck!" cried Irene, giving a bounce of rapture.

"It's great!"

"Yummy!"

"I thought you'd congratulate me," smirked Delia. "Now let's get busy
and decide what sort of a stunt we mean to have. Is Peachy to know, or
is it to be a surprise?"

"That's the question! She'll have to be told and invited and all the
rest of it, but she needn't hear any details beforehand. I vote we all
arrange to come in fancy costume--that would really be a stunt."

"We shall have to tell Peachy _that_!"

"No, you mustn't. We'll have a costume all ready prepared for her, like
the wedding garment in the parable. She'll have nothing to do but slip
it on."

If Peachy was looking forward to her own birthday, her friends were
anticipating the happy event with enthusiasm. They had decided to hold
the festivities in her dormitory, but had required her to give a solemn
pledge not to enter the room after 2 p.m. so as to give them a free
hand. During the half-hour before drawing-class they met, and held a
"Decoration Bee." Nine determined girls, who have prepared their
materials, can work wonders in a short time, and in ten hurried minutes
they accomplished a vast amount.

"Mary, lend a hand, and help me stand on the dressing table."

"She won't know the place when she sees it!"

"Aren't we all busy bees!"

"It begins to look rather nice, doesn't it?"

"Don't tug this chain! It's tearing! Now you've done it!"

"I flatter myself she'll get the surprise of her life!"

"_Ra_-ther!"

With flags, paper chains, and garlands of flowers, the decorators
contrived to make dormitory 13 look absolutely _en fete_. They borrowed
a table from another bedroom, placed the two together, covered them with
a cloth, and spread forth the cakes which Antonio had been commissioned
to buy.

"Elvira will fetch us the teapot and the bread and butter at four. We
can yank into our costumes in a few seconds, so we needn't waste much
time. Don't let Miss Darrer keep you dawdling about the studio," urged
Agnes.

"No fear of that. The moment the bell goes it will be 'down pencils.'
She can hold forth to the others to-day if she wants to talk after
school. By the by, everybody's _so_ jealous of us!"

"I know! The seniors are grumbling like anything because they didn't
think of having a bedroom tea for Phyllis. It's their own fault. They
haven't another birthday amongst them this term. That's the grievance.
And Miss Morley won't give leave for a dormitory stunt unless it's
somebody's birthday. She's firm on that point. We've certainly all the
luck."

The Camellia Buds pursued their art studies that afternoon with a
certain abstraction. Peachy worked with her left wrist poised, so that
she could obtain a perpetual view of the new gold watch that had arrived
by post that morning; Delia frittered her time shamelessly; Esther was
guilty of writing surreptitious messages to Joan upon the edges of her
chalk copy of "Apollo"; and Irene, usually interested in her work, had a
fit of the fidgets. The moment the bell sounded and the class was
dismissed they bundled their pencils into their boxes, and left the
studio with almost indecent haste.

"Only an hour and a half altogether for our stunt doesn't leave us much
time to be polite," remarked Aggie, smarting under a rebuke administered
by Miss Darrer, who had restrained their stampede and insisted upon an
orderly retreat. "It's all very well for people to saunter elegantly
when they've nothing particular to do. I dare say the Italians _may_
look dignified, but we can't stalk about as if we were perpetually
carrying water-pots on our heads."

"American girls have more energy than that. I'm just ready to fly to
bits," declared Delia, prancing down the passage like a playful kitten.

"I give everybody five minutes to get on their costumes," decreed Jess.
"Peachy must stay outside in the passage and wait. I'll tinkle my Swiss
goat-bell when you're all to come in."

Peachy, pulling a long face of protest, took her stand obediently in the
corridor, while her three roommates entered dormitory 13. Their fancy
dresses were lying ready on their beds, and they whisked into them with
the utmost haste.

"There! Is my cap on straight? Jess, you look fine! I guess we shan't
keep the crowd waiting. We'd earn our livings as quick-change artistes
any day. Is that Elvira? Oh, thanks! Put the teapot down there, please.
What a huge plate of bread and butter. We'll never eat it! Mary, if
you're ready you might be uncovering the grub."

The girls had laid everything in preparation for their feast, and, to
protect their dainties from flies, had put sheets of tissue paper over
the table. Mary lifted these deftly, but as she removed them her smug
satisfaction changed to a howl of dismay. Instead of the tempting
dainties which they had placed there with their own hands stood a circle
of bricks and stones.

For a moment all three gazed blankly at the awful sight. Then they found
speech.

"Our beautiful cakes!"

"Where are they?"

"Who's done this?"

"Oh! the _brutes_!"

"Who's been in?"

"How _dare_ they?"

"Wherever have they put them?"

"Have they eaten them?"

"Oh! What a shame!"

"What _are_ we to do?"

It was indeed a desperate situation, for loud thumps at the door
proclaimed the advent of the visitors, who seemed likely to be provided
with a decidedly Barmecide feast. Delia, however, had an inspiration.
She stooped on hands and knees and foraged under the beds, announcing by
a jubilant screech that she had discovered the lost property. It did not
take long to move away the stones and to transfer the plates from the
floor to the table, after which three much flustered hostesses opened
the door and gushed a welcome to their guests. It was rather a motley
group who entered: Irene as a nun in waterproof and hood; Agnes as a Red
Cross Nurse; Esther a Turk, with a towel for a turban; Joan a sportsman
in her gymnasium knickers; Sheila, in a tricolor cap, represented
France; and Lorna was draped with the Union Jack; Jess with a plaid
arranged as a kilt made a sturdy Highlander; Mary was an Irish colleen;
while Delia, in a wrapper ornamental with fringes of tissue paper, stood
for "Carnival." A white dressing jacket trimmed with green leaves, and a
garland of flowers were waiting for Peachy, and when the latter was
popped on her head she was promptly proclaimed "Queen o' the May." Very
much flattered by these preparations in her honor, the guest of the
occasion took her place at the table.

"I'm absolutely astounded," she announced. "Where did you get all this
spread? You don't mean to tell me Antonio was _allowed_ to go and buy
it! It's too topping for words!"

"We thought it had gone out of the window, a moment ago," said Jess,
explaining their horrible predicament as she wielded the teapot.

The Camellia Buds listened aghast. Somebody had evidently been playing a
shameful trick upon them.

"It's Mabel!"

"Or Bertha!"

"No, no! They'd have taken the cakes quite away instead of only hiding
them!"

"Then it must be Winnie or Ruth!"

"Quite likely. They knew we were having the party."

"The wretches!"

"We'll pay them out afterwards!"

"What a mean thing to do!"

"They were honest, at any rate, and didn't take so much as a biscuit."

"They'd have heard about it if they had!"

"'All's well that ends well!'"

"And we'd better clear the dishes while we can. Have another piece of
iced sandwich, Mary!"

"No, thanks! I really don't want any more."

The Camellia Buds, having disposed of the feast, and having yet half an
hour of the birthday party left on their hands, decided to hold what
they called a "Mixed Recitation Stunt." They sat in a circle on the
floor and counted out till the lot fell upon one of them, whose pleasing
duty it became to act entertainer for the next five minutes, when she
was entitled to hand the part on to somebody else. Fate, aided perhaps
by a little gentle maneuvering, gave the first turn to Jess.

"I adore poetry, but I never can remember it by heart," she protested,
"so don't expect me to 'speak a piece,' please. No, I'm not trying to
get out of it. I'll do my bit the same as everybody else. Stop giggling
and listen, because I'm going to tell you something spooky. It's a real
Highland story. It happened to an aunt of mine. Are you ready? Well then
be quiet, because I'm going to begin:

"I have an aunt who lives in the Highlands. Her name is Jessie
M'Gregor. Yes, I'm named after her! Some of her family had had the gift
of second sight, but not all of them. Her grandmother had it very
strongly, and used to foretell the strangest things, and they always
came true. Aunt Jessie was a seventh child. That's always supposed to
give people the power of seeing visions. If she'd been the seventh child
_of_ a seventh child then she'd have been a 'spey wife' and foreseen the
future, but she wasn't that exactly. She came very near to it once,
though, and that's what I want to tell you about. Uncle Gordon was going
to London, and, the day before he started, Auntie was sitting alone in
the garden. She hadn't been very well, so she was just leaning back in a
deck-chair resting. She wasn't asleep; she was looking at the view and
thinking how lovely it all was. She could see right across the moor and
down the valley where the river ran; the heather was in blossom and it
was a glorious sight. Suddenly it seemed as if everything became blurred
and dark, as if a mist were before her eyes. A patch cleared through the
midst of this and she could see the valley below as if she were looking
through an enormous telescope. The river had burst its banks, and was
flowing all over the line, and through the flood came the train, and
dashed into the water. She saw this vision only for a moment, then it
passed. She rubbed her eyes and wondered if it was a dream. She decided
it was a warning. She's very superstitious. Most Highland people are.
She didn't want Uncle Gordon to go next day by the little train that ran
down the valley, but she knew if she told him her 'vision' he would only
laugh at her. So she pretended she wanted to do some shopping at
Aberfylde, a town fifteen miles away, where the local railway joins the
main line. She told Uncle Gordon that if they motored there together she
could see him off on the London express, and then have a day's shopping.
So he agreed, and they went in the car. There was a tremendous storm in
the night, and it was still raining when they started. Auntie spent the
day in Aberfylde and motored back, and when she reached home she noticed
the valley had turned into a lake. The terrific rain had swollen all the
streams and made the river burst its banks, and the line was flooded,
and it was impossible for the train to run. So her 'vision' really did
come true after all. She's ever so proud of it, and wrote it all down so
that she shouldn't forget it. That's my story. Now it's somebody else's
stunt. Let's count out again."

Fortune cast the lot this time on Agnes, who wrinkled up her forehead
and protested she didn't know anything to tell, but, when urged,
remembered something she had heard during the summer holidays.

"It's true too!" she assured them. "We were staying at Tarana. We had
a villa there. Water was very scarce, and we used to have two barrels of
it brought every day on donkeyback by a woman whose business it was to
act as carrier. Her name was Luigia, and she was very picturesque
looking, and had the most beautiful dark eyes, though she always looked
fearfully sad. Daddy is fond of sketching, and he painted a picture of
her standing with her donkey under the vines. We guessed somehow that
she had a history, and we asked Sareda, our cook, about her. Sareda knew
everybody in the place. She was a dear old gossip. She got quite excited
over Luigia's story. She said it had been the talk of Tarana at the
time. Luigia used to be a lovely girl when she was young, and she was
quite wealthy for a peasant, because she owned a little lemon grove on
the hillside. She inherited it from her father, who was dead. Of course,
because she was beautiful and a village heiress, she soon found a
sweetheart, and became engaged to Francesco, a fisherman who lived down
on the Marina. Everything was going on very happily, and the wedding was
fixed, when suddenly it was found there was something wrong with
Luigia's glorious eyes. She went to a doctor in Naples, and he told her
that unless a certain operation were performed she would go blind. If
she went to Paris, to a specialist whom he named, her sight might be
saved. Poor Luigia sold her lemon grove in a hurry, to get the necessary
money, and packed up and started for Paris immediately. She was away six
months, and she came back penniless, but seeing as well as ever. She
trudged all the way from Liparo to Tarana, along the coast road, because
she could not afford to take the train. When she walked into her own
village, the first thing she saw was a wedding party leaving the church.
She stopped to watch, and as the procession passed her who should the
gayly-dressed bridegroom prove to be but her own faithless sweetheart
