lookout; and there was a great deal of discussion about mutiny in
general, and the Young America mutiny in particular. It was generally
conceded even by the rebels, that it "did not pay."

After the runaways had in some measure recovered from the first blush
of defeat, some of them wanted to know about the ribbons; but the
members of the Order of the Faithful did not consider themselves
authorized to impart the secrets of the organization, and declined to
explain them. Doubtless they enjoyed the mystery, and desired to keep
it up for their own amusement. Howe, when he found a tongue, reproached
his companions in mischief for their cowardice, and boasted of what
great things would have been accomplished if they had supported him to
the end; but his most intimate associates were disgusted with him, and
avoided him as much as possible.

At seven bells in the morning, a breakfast of coffee, mutton chops,
potatoes, and hot biscuit put most of the runaways in the port watch in
better humor than before, and another did a similar service for those
in the starboard watch half an hour later. They ate and drank all they
could, rather than all they needed, and probably shuddered when they
thought of the consequences of evil-doing, as embodied in salt beef and
hard bread, without a drop of water.

At one bell in the forenoon watch, the lookout in the foretop shouted,
"Land, ho, on the lee bow." An hour after, the bold rugged shores of
Ushant were plainly in sight, and Dr. Winstock informed Paul and Grace
that they were in the very waters where the English fleet, under
Admiral Sir Edward Hawkes, had won the great naval victory over the
French in 1759.

"Sail, ho!" shouted the lookout.

"Where away?" called the officer forward.

"On the weather bow. It's a topsail schooner, and looks like the
Josephine."

Glasses were in demand, and the officers soon satisfied themselves that
the sail ahead was the consort. It was evident that, hugging the wind
closely, she had gone farther from the coast than the Young America.
She took a pilot off Ushant, and continued on her course, though Mr.
Lowington was anxious to communicate with her, and learn the result of
the mutiny which had also prevailed on board. Off the island, the ship
was boarded by a pilot, and following the Josephine, passed through the
Goulet de Brest, which is the only entrance to the harbor. This passage
is not more than a mile wide, and is defended on each side by strong
forts. The harbor is a land-locked bay, deep enough for vessels of the
largest class, and with space enough to accommodate, at least, five
hundred of them. Brest is the most important naval station of France,
and its fortress and docks were full of interest to the young tourists.
The city, which contains a population of eighty thousand, is built on
the summit and slopes of a hill, some of the streets upon whose sides
are so steep as to be impassable for vehicles.

The Josephine had already come to anchor, and the ship followed her
example, taking position as near to her as it was safe to lie. As
usual, when the vessels came into port, there was a great excitement on
board, for new sights and sounds are peculiarly agreeable after the
voyager comes from the monotony of the swelling ocean; and the students
made the most of them. In coming into port, all hands had been on duty;
and after the sails had all been furled, Captain Shuffles declared that
he was perfectly satisfied with the discipline of his crew. The
runaways, who were generally good seamen, whatever else they were, did
not deem it prudent to "pipe to mischief" again, or to attempt to
create any confusion. All eyes were fixed on them if anything went
amiss, and if they were disposed to do wrong, they made a merit of
necessity. But Brest was an old story to them, and brought up
unpleasant memories. They knew the harbor, and were familiar with the
sights, having served on board of the Josephine in this port for three
weeks after the runaway cruise. Indeed, their knowledge of the harbor
brought them into favor with others, who asked them many questions
about the objects to be seen.

After everything was made snug on board of the ship, the yards squared,
and every rope hauled taut in man-of-war style, the first cutter was
lowered, and the principal visited the Josephine. As he went over the
side, he saw Adler, Phillips, and others of the runaways, who belonged
to the consort, on deck, and he concluded that his plan had worked as
well in her as in the ship.

"Well, Mr. Fluxion," said he, as he grasped the hand of his able
assistant, "I see the Josephine has not yet been taken away from you."

"No, sir. We had but a dozen mutineers on board," replied the
vice-principal, "and they are about the sickest dogs you ever saw. I
kept them in the steerage, and fed them on salt beef and hard bread, as
you suggested to me."

"Did you give them any water?"

"Not a drop. After I learned that your ruffians had stove the water
tanks, I concluded they were all in the same boat, and that my fellows
were as responsible for the deed as yours. I suppose it was all a
contrived plan before we left Havre."

"I don't know whether it was or not. I should have treated it in a
different manner if the young rascals had not dragged in a large number
of the students who seldom give us any trouble."

"The plan worked well, though I did not very strongly approve of it at
first. Last night, the rebels sent for me, and begged, with tears in
their eyes, to be permitted to return to their duty, promising to be
faithful as long as they remained on board. I gave them a pretty severe
lecture, but they declared they had nothing to do with staving the
water tanks in the ship, and did not know anything about it. I'm not
apt to believe what those fellow say."

"It matters little whether they knew it or not; they certainly agreed
together to refuse to do duty. Well, they have come to their senses
now, and both vessels seem to be in good order. Of course, after what
has happened, it is not proper to take these mischief-makers with us
into Germany," added Mr. Lowington.

"Certainly not," replied Mr. Fluxion, promptly.

"Then, as you are going to Italy, what shall be done with them while we
are absent?" asked the principal, anxiously.

"My sister, who intends to spend the winter in Italy with her husband,
desires to see me on a matter of business connected with her private
property. As she is an invalid, I think she wishes to consult me in
regard to the disposition of her estate, so that her children may enjoy
it after her decease; for, as I have told you before, her husband is
not a reliable man. If it were a matter of any less consequence, I
would not think of leaving."

"Undoubtedly it is your duty to go, and you must do so. But I do not
like the idea of leaving thirty such students as Howe, Little, and
Phillips in the sole charge of Dr. Carboy. He is a good man; but he has
not quite tact and energy enough for such a responsibility."

"Suppose I take them with me," suggested Mr. Fluxion, with a smile.

"That is hardly practicable."

"I mean in the Josephine," added the vice-principal.

"It's a long voyage round through the Strait of Gibraltar."

"I am in no hurry to reach Italy. How long shall you be absent in
Germany?"

"About three weeks."

"Say twenty-one days," said Mr. Fluxion, musing. "The Josephine is a
fast vessel. Under the most favorable circumstances, she would make the
run in eight days. A fair passage would be twelve days. If I remain one
day in Genoa, where my sister lives, the cruise would last twenty-five
days."

"A few days' time, or a week, is of no consequence," added Mr.
Lowington.

"But suppose you take the ship to Lisbon, on your return, and I will
meet you there, say about the twenty-seventh or eighth of the month."

"I rather like the plan; but isn't it a little hard on the boys?"

"Not at all. It's giving them plenty of sea-service; but that is what
they need for their complaint. We shall feed them well on fresh
provisions, and it is a pleasant trip up the Mediterranean at this
season of the year. But I only mention the idea to solve the difficulty
you suggest."

"I will consider the matter, and give you an answer before night,"
added Mr. Lowington, thoughtfully.

"If the plan is adopted, I should like to have Peaks and Bitts with me,
to act as watch officers with Cleats and Gage."

"You shall have them," replied Mr. Lowington, as he directed the
officer of the boat to call his crew, who had been permitted to come on
board.

In the first cutter's crew were three of the runaways, who had taken
the opportunity to communicate with Adler, Phillips, and other of the
runaways in the consort. After each party had related to the other its
experience in rebellion, and commented on its unsatisfactory results,
they touched upon the old topic--how to get to Paris, where remittances
from their friends were waiting for most of them.

"Old Carboy is to have charge of us while the crowd are gone," said
Sheffield, irreverently. "We can easily come it over him."

"If we can only get on shore, we are all right," added Phillips.

"Only we have no money to pay our fare to Paris," interposed Adler.

"I can raise some," suggested Sheffield. "My father sent me a letter of
credit on a Paris banker; but any banker will let me have some money on
it, if I draw on Paris in his favor."

"That's the idea!" exclaimed Adler. "I have a letter also."

"But we are not to go together this time," added Little.

"Any way, if we are only to go," said Phillips, as the coxswain of the
first cutter called away his crew, and ended the conversation.

It was renewed as soon as the ship was reached and the boat hauled up.
The runaways had abandoned all thought of joining the excursion to the
Rhine; and "how to get away" was an exciting topic to them. In the
tops, out on the bowsprit, and in other secluded places, small knots of
them gathered to discuss the subject. Promises made to do better were
forgotten, and the bitter experience of the past was wholly ignored. If
they could get away from the ship or the consort,--in whichever one
they were to be confined,--they would make amends for all their
sufferings and all their humiliations. Herman and Little were
especially earnest, though they still avoided their late leader, Howe.
Perth was regarded as lost to them, for he wore a white ribbon on his
breast, and had done his duty as an officer.

"We will all be pious for a day or two, till Carboy closes his eyes,"
said Little. "You, and Ibbotson, and I will look out for ourselves, and
the rest of the fellows must do the same. I have an idea."

"Have you? What is it?" demanded Herman.

"We shall all be sent on board the Josephine as soon as the lambs get
ready to start for Germany."

"Yes, I suppose so," added Herman, eagerly.

"Then it will be an easy matter. But I don't want to talk about it yet.
Too many cooks spoil the soup," continued Little, with his air of
mysterious assurance.

"Tell us what it is. We won't mention it."

"I've got it all arranged; and if the rest of our fellows are smart,
they can take advantage of it. We all know this harbor pretty well,"
added the little villain.

"Why don't you tell us what the idea is?"

Little rose from his seat in the main-top, and looked over to see that
no inquisitive person was concealed on the cat-harpings.

"You are not to mention it to any one, you understand, or hint at it.
We three, I repeat, are to look out for ourselves only. Ibbotson is to
find the money to get to Paris, and I furnish the brains."

"What am I to find?"

"Find your way to Paris, if you can. You are a good fellow, Herman, and
I will take you in because you are some punkins."

"But you haven't told us the plan," said Ibbotson, not particularly
pleased with the self-sufficiency of his little companion.

"I will tell you," whispered Little, throwing an arm around the neck of
each of his friends, and drawing their heads together near his mouth.
"At night, when everything is quiet, one of us will just unbit the
cable, and let it run out. Then another shall sing out that the vessel
is going adrift. That will make a row. Then we will try to do
something. You, Herman, and I, will offer to carry a line to another
vessel--the ship, for instance. Carboy--who don't know any more about a
vessel than a kitten does of the ten commandments--will tell you to do
it. Then we three will jump into a boat, and carry off the line. We can
carry it to the ship, or not, just as we think best; but you may bet
your life we don't return to the Josephine! How does that strike you?"

"Yes; but where are Cleats and Gage all this time? They know all about
a vessel, if Carboy don't," suggested Herman.

"Wherever you please," replied Little, confidently.

"Suppose they happen to be on deck, and are disposed to take the boat
and carry out the line themselves?"

"So much the better! Thanks to the prudence and good management of the
principal, there are four boats belonging to the Josephine," answered
the little villain, who appeared to have provided for every emergency
which could possibly occur. "The moment the boatswain and carpenter are
clear of the vessel, we will suggest that another line ought to be
carried to some other vessel; and Mr. Carboy will see the necessity of
the measure."

"Perhaps he won't see it," interposed Ibbotson.

"Then I'll fall overboard."

"Fall overboard?"

"Precisely so," replied Little.

"I don't see what that has to do with it," said Herman.

"Don't you? Well, I hope you and Ibbotson would have the courage and
the energy to save me from a watery grave, and all that sort of thing."

"What! jump in after you?" inquired Herman.

"No! How heavy your wits are to-day! You need not dampen your trousers.
Just drop the fourth cutter into the water, pick me up, and then we
will find our way to the shore."

"Some other fellows might take it into their heads to rescue you from a
watery grave, and all that sort of thing," added Herman.

"If they do, so much the better for them. You and Ibbotson must make
sure that you get into the boat, whoever else does. There will be no
officers to bother, unless Perth happens to be left on board. If he is,
all right. He will know what to do. If the other fellows don't want to
go to Paris with us, or rather on their own hook, they can return to
the vessel, and mildly break it to the professor, that we were all
drowned. There will not be a particle of trouble about the business.
There are twenty other ways of managing the case. As soon as the lambs
are off, and we are put on board of the Josephine, we will arrange
everything."

"Perhaps we shall remain in the ship," suggested Herman.

"So much the worse for the ship, for her cable can be unbitted, as well
as the schooner's."

"That's so."

"In the dark, with the ship adrift and liable to be thrown on shore, or
to run afoul of another vessel, there will be a big excitement, and we
can do anything we wish. When the rest of the fellows see what is up,
they can take care of themselves," continued Little, who did not
believe in the possibility of a failure.

"Very well; we will suppose we get on shore all right--what then? We
shall be in Brest, which is a fortified city, with gates through which
none can pass without permission," said Ibbotson.

"Never mind the gates. We shall leave by railroad for Paris. As soon as
you raise some money to pay for the tickets, I will take care of the
rest."

"I have no doubt we can raise the money. My father sent me a letter of
credit for five hundred francs. I heard my cousin say he could get
money in any large city on his letter of credit, for the bankers know
each other," added Ibbotson.

"If he had only sent you a circular letter of credit, you could draw
almost anywhere," said Herman.

"Well, if we can't raise any money on the letter, I have a gold watch
that cost about a hundred dollars in New York. I can raise two hundred
francs on it, and redeem it when we come back," continued Ibbotson.

"That's the talk!" exclaimed Little. "I like to see energy in a fellow.
There isn't a ghost of a doubt in my mind but that we shall be in Paris
in two or three days from now."

This interesting conversation was interrupted by the boatswain's call,
piping all hands to muster. The crew were then drilled for an hour in
all the evolutions of getting under way, and making sail. The runaways
dared not repeat the experiments which had been tried with so much
apparent success at Havre, for they feared the squadron would be sent
to sea again if the drill was not perfect. The various movements were
admirably performed, and entirely to the satisfaction of Captain
Shuffles. The ship's company were then piped to dinner. When they came
on deck, the signal, "All hands, attend lecture," was flying on board
the ship. This was a hopeful sign for those who were impatient to visit
the Rhine, and most of the crew were ready to hear Professor Mapps's
description of Germany.

While the ship's company were waiting for the arrival of the
Josephine's, a very interesting ceremony was performed in the waist.
The Grand Protectress of the Order of the Faithful raised the members
of the second degree to the third, adorning them with the white ribbon.
They had been faithful in the discharge of all their duties, and Grace
insisted that all the members should now stand on an equal footing.
Those who wore the yellow ribbon were advanced to the second degree;
but Grace promised them that if they listened attentively to the
lecture, they should receive the white ribbon before night.

With the crew of the Josephine came Mr. Fluxion, who immediately
retired to the main cabin with the principal, where the further details
of the cruise to Genoa were discussed. It was finally agreed that the
vice-principal's plan should be adopted, and that the Josephine should
sail as early the next day as she could be fitted out for the voyage.
The two vessels were to meet at Lisbon, near the end of the month, and
from that port proceed on the homeward voyage. Peaks and Gage were sent
for, and were very willing to be temporarily transferred to the
consort; while Leach was to remain as ship-keeper, in charge of the
Young America, during the absence of the party in Germany.

While the professor was engaged upon his lecture in the steerage, Mr.
Fluxion returned to the consort with the two forward officers, and,
taking in the head steward, proceeded to the shore. In half an hour a
