There was a house hard by with creamy-white walls, green-shuttered
windows, and a red-tiled roof. The door of the house was open, showing a
little ruddy fire upon a great hearth, kindled to drive away the damp;
and in the windows facing the garden there were lights shining warmly
out among the rose-trees.

The table was spread with a red damask cloth, on which were a tray of
raisins and nuts and a small rally of silver cups. Above the table an
apple-tree nodded its new leaves, and from an overhanging bough a
lantern hung glowing like a great yellow bee.

There was a young fellow with a white apron and a jolly little whisper
of a whistle on his puckered lips going around with a plate of cakes and
a tray of honey-bowls; and the men were eating and drinking and
chatting together so gaily, and seemed to be all such good friends, that
it was a pleasant thing just to see them sitting there in their
comfortable leather-bottomed chairs, taking life easily because the
spring had come again.

One tall fellow was smoking a pipe. He held the bowl in one hand, and
kept tamping down the loose tobacco with his forefinger. Now and again
he would be so eagerly talking he would forget that his finger was in
the bowl, and it would be burned. He would take it out with a look of
quaint surprise, whereat the rest all roared. Another was a fat, round
man who chuckled constantly to himself, as if this life were all a joke;
and there was a quite severe, important-seeming, oldish man who said,
"Hem--hem!" from time to time, as if about to speak forthwith, yet never
spoke a word. There was also among the rest a raw-boned, lanky fellow
who had bitten the heart out of an oat-cake and held the rim of it in
his fingers like a new moon, waving it around while he talked, until the
little man beside him popped it deftly out of his grasp and ate it
before the other saw where it was gone. But when he made out what was
become of that oat-cake he rose up solemnly, took the little man by the
collar as a huntsman takes a pup, and laid him softly in the grass
without a word.

What a laughing and going-on was then! It was as if they all were
growing young again. And in the middle of the row a head popped over the
quick-set hedge, and a most stentorian voice called out, "Here, here! Go
slow--I want a piece of that!"

They all looked up, and the moment they spied that laughing face and
cloak of Holland cloth, raised a shout of "What, there!" "Well met!"
"Come in, Ben." "Where hast thou tarried so long?" and the like; while
the waiter ran to open the gate and let the stranger in.

A quiet man with a little chestnut-colored beard and hazel eyes, which
lit up quickly at sight of the stranger over the hedge, arose from his
place by the table and went down the path with hands outstretched to
greet him.

"Welcome, welcome, hurly-burly Ben," said he. "We've missed thee from
the feast. Art well? And what's the good word?"

"Ah, Will, thou gentle rogue!" the other cried, catching the hands of
the quiet man and holding him off while he looked at him there. "How
thou stealest one's heart with the glance of thine eye! I was going to
give thee a piece of my mind; but a plague, old heart! who could chide
thee to thy face? Am I well? Ay, exceedingly well. And the news? Jove!
the best that was baked at the Queen's to-day, and straight from the
oven-door! The thing is done--huff, puff, and away we go! But come
on--this needs telling to the rest."

They came up the path together, the big man crunching the mussel-shells
beneath his sturdy tread, and so into the circle of yellow light that
came down from the lantern among the apple-leaves, the big man with his
arm around the quiet man's shoulders, holding his hand; for the quiet
man was not so large as the other, although withal no little man
himself, and very well built and straight.

His tabard was black, without sleeves, and his doublet was scarlet
silk. His collar and wrist-bands were white Holland linen turned loosely
back, and his face was frank and fair and free. He was not old, but his
hair was thin upon his brow. His nose and his full, high forehead were
as cleanly cut as a finely chiseled stone; and his sensitive mouth had a
curve that was tender and sad, though he smiled all the while, a glimpse
of his white teeth showing through, and his little mustache twitching
with the ripple of his long upper lip. His flowing hair was
chestnut-colored, like his beard, and curly at the ends; and his
melancholy eyelids told of study and of thought; but under them the
kindly eyes were bright with pleasant fancy.

"What, there, all of you!" said he; "a good investment for your ears!"

"Out with it, Will!" they cried, and whirled around.

"The Queen hath made Lord Hunsdon chamberlain," the big man said.

An instant's hush fell on the garden. No one spoke; but they caught each
other by the hand, and, suddenly, the silence there seemed somehow
louder than a shout.

"We'll build the new Globe play-house, lads, and sweep the Bankside
clean from end to end!" a sturdy voice broke sharply on the hush. And
then they cheered--a cheer so loud that people on the river stopped
their boats, and came ashore asking where the fire was. And over all the
cheering rose the big man's voice; for the quiet man was silent, and the
big man cheered for two.

"Pull up thy rose-bushes, Will," cried one, "and set out laurels in
their stead--thou'lt need them all for crowns."

"Ay, Will, our savor is not gone--Queen Bess knows salt!"

"With Will and Ben for meat and crust, and the rest of us for seasoning,
the court shall say it never ate such master pie!"

"We'll make the walls of Whitehall ring come New Year next, or Twelfth
Night and Shrove Tuesday."

"Ay, that we will, old gossip! Here's to thee!"

"Here's to the company, all of us!"

"And a health to the new Lord Chamberlain!"

"God save the Queen!"

With that, they shook each other's hands, as merry as men could be, and
laughed, because their hearts ran short of words; for these were young
Lord Hunsdon's men, late players to the Queen in the old Lord
Chamberlain's troupe; who, for a while deprived of favor by _his_ death,
were now, by this succession of his son, restored to prestige at the
court, and such preferment as none beside them ever won, not even the
Earl of Pembroke's company.

There was Kemp, the stout tragedian; gray John Lowin, the walking-man;
Diccon Burbage, and Cuthbert his brother, master-players and managers;
Robin Armin, the humorsome jester; droll Dick Tarlton, the king of
fools. There was Blount, and Pope, and Hemynge, and Thomas Greene, and
Joey Taylor, the acting-boy, deep in the heart of a honey-bowl, yet who
one day was to play "Hamlet" as no man ever has played it since. And
there were others, whose names and doings have vanished with them; and
beside these--"What, merry hearts!" the big man cried, and clapped his
neighbor on the back; "we'll have a supper at the Mermaid Inn. We'll
feast on reason, reason on the feast, toast the company with wit, and
company the wit with toast--why, pshaw, we are good fellows all!" He
laughed, and they laughed with him. _That_ was "rare Ben Jonson's" way.

"There's some one knocking, master," said the boy.

A quick tap-tapping rattled on the wicket-gate.

"Who is it?" asked the quiet man.

"'Tis Edmund with the news," cried one.

"I've dished him," said Ben Jonson.

"'Tis Condell come to raise our wages," said Robin Armin, with a grin.

"Thou'lt raise more hopes than wages, Rob," said Tarlton, mockingly.

"It is a boy," the waiter said, "who saith that he must see thee,
master, on his life."

The quiet man arose.

"Sit down, Will," said Greene; "he'll pick thy pocket with a doleful
lie."

"There's nothing in it, Tom, to pick."

"Then give him no more than half," said Armin, soberly, "lest he
squander it!"

"He saith he comes from Stratford town," the boy went on.

"Then tell him to go back again," said Master Ben Jonson; "we've sucked
the sweet from Stratford town--be off with his seedy dregs!"

"Go bring him in," said the quiet man.

"Nay, Will, don't have him in. This makes the third within the
month--wilt father all the strays from Stratford town? Here, Ned, give
him this shilling, and tell him to be off to his cony-burrow as fast as
his legs can trot."

"We'll see him first," said the quiet man, stopping the other's shilling
with his hand.

"Oh, Willy-nilly!" the big man cried; "wilt be a kite to float all the
draggle-tails that flutter down from Warwickshire?"

"Why, Ben," replied the quiet man, "'tis not the kite that floats the
tail, but the wind which floats both kite and tail. Thank God, we've
caught the rising wind; so, hey for draggle-tails!--we'll take up all
we can."

The waiter was coming up the path, and by his side, a little back,
bareheaded and flushed with running, came Nicholas Attwood. He had
followed the big man through the fields from the gates of the
Falcon Inn.

He stopped at the edge of the lantern's glow and looked around
uncertain, for the light was in his eyes.

"Come, boy, what is it?" asked Ben Jonson.

Nick peered through the brightness. "Master Will--Master Will
Shakspere!" he gasped.

"_Well, my lady_," said the quiet man; "_what wilt thou have of me_?"

Nick Attwood had come to his fellow-townsman at last.

Over the hedge where the lantern shone through the green of the
apple-leaves came a sound of voices talking fast, a listening hush, then
a clapping of hands, with mingled cries of "Good boy!" "Right, lad; do
not leave her till thou must!" and at the last, "What! take thee home to
thy mother, lad? Ay, marry, that will I!" And the _last_ was the voice
of the quiet man.

Then followed laughter and scraps of song, merry talking, and good
cheer, for they all made glad together.

       *       *       *       *       *

Across the fields beyond the hedge the pathway ran through Paris Garden,
stark and clear in the white moon-shine, save here and there where the
fog from the marsh crept down to meet the river-mist, and blotted out
the landscape as it went. In the north lay London, stirring like a
troubled sea. In the south was drowsy silence, save for the crowing of
the cocks, and now and then the baying of a hound far off. The smell of
bears was on the air; the river-wind breathed kennels. The Swan
play-house stood up, a great, blue blank against the sky. The sound of
voices was remote. The river made a constant murmur in the murk beyond
the landing-place; the trees moved softly.

Low in the west, the lights of the Falcon Inn were shrunk to pin-pricks
in the dark. They seemed to wink and to shut their eyes. It was too far
to see the people passing by.

On a sudden one light winked and did not open any more; and through the
night a faint, far cry came drifting down the river-wind--a long, thin
cry, like the wavering screech of an owl--a shrill, high, ugly sound;
the lights began to wink, wink, wink, to dance, to shift, to gather into
one red star. Out of the darkness came a wisp of something moving in
the path.

Where the moonlight lay it scudded like the shadow of a windy cloud, now
lost to sight, now seen again. Out of the shadow came a man, with hands
outstretched and cap awry, running as if he were mad. As he ran he
looked from side to side, and turned his head for the keener ear. He was
panting hard.

When he reached the ditch he paused in fault, ran on a step or two, went
back, stood hesitating there, clenching his hands in the empty wind,
listening; for the mist was grown so thick that he could scarcely see.

But as he stood there doubtfully, uncertain of the way, catching the
wind in his nervous hands, and turning about in a little space like an
animal in a cage, over the hedge through the apple-boughs a boy's clear
voice rose suddenly, singing a rollicking tune, with a snapping of
fingers and tapping of feet in time to its merry lilt.

Then the man in the mist, when he heard that clear, high voice, turned
swiftly to it, crying out, "The Skylark! Zooks! It is the place!" and
ran through the fog to where the lantern glimmered through the hedge.
The light fell in a yellow stream across his face. He was pale as a
ghost. "What, there, within! What, there!" he panted. "Shakspere!
Jonson! Any one!"

The song stopped short. "Who's there?" called the voice of the quiet
man.

"'Tis I, Tom Heywood. there's to-do for players at the Falcon Inn.
Gaston Carew hath stabbed Fulk Sandells, for cheating at the dice, as
dead as a door-nail, and hath been taken by the watch!"




CHAPTER XXXII


THE LAST OF GASTON CAREW

It was Monday morning, and a beautiful day.

Master Will Shakspere was reading a new play to Masters Ben Jonson and
Diccon Burbage at the Mermaid Inn.

Thomas Pope, the player, and Peter Hemynge, the manager, were there with
them at the table under the little window. The play was a comedy of a
wicked money-lender named Shylock; but it was a comedy that made Nick
shudder as he sat on the bench by the door and listened to it through
happy thoughts of going home.

Sunday had passed like a wondrous dream. He was free. Master Carew was
done for. On Saturday morning Master Will Shakspere would set out on the
journey to Stratford town, for his regular summer visit there; and Nick
was going with him--going to Stratford--going home!

The comedy-reading went on. Master Burbage, his moving face alive,
leaned forward on his elbows, nodding now and then, and saying, "Fine,
fine!" under his breath. Master Pope was making faces suited to the
words, not knowing that he did so. Nick watched him, fascinated.

A man came hurrying down Cheapside, and peered in at the open door. It
was Master Dick Jones of the Admiral's company. He looked worried and as
if he had not slept. His hair was uncombed, and the skin under his eyes
hung in little bags. He squinted so that he might see from the broad
daylight outside into the darker room.

"Gaston Carew wants to see thee, Skylark," said he, quickly, seeing Nick
beside the door.

Nick drew back. It seemed as if the master-player must be lying in wait
outside to catch him if he stirred abroad.

"He says that he must see thee without fail, and that straightway. He is
in Newgate prison. Wilt come?"

Nick shook his head.

"But he says indeed he _must_ see thee. Come, Skylark, I will bring thee
back. I am no kidnapper. Why, it is the last thing he will ever ask of
thee. 'Tis hard to refuse so small a favor to a doomed man."

"Thou'lt surely fetch me back?"

"Here, Master Will Shakspere," called the Admiral's player; "I am to
fetch the boy to Carew in Newgate on an urgent matter. My name is
Jones--Dick Jones, of Henslowe's company. Burbage knows me. I'll bring
him back."

Master Shakspere nodded, reading on; and Burbage waved his hand,
impatient of interruption. Nick arose and went with Jones.

As they came up Newgate street to the crossing of Giltspur and the Old
Bailey, the black arch of the ancient gate loomed grimly against the
sky, its squinting window-slits peering down like the eyes of an old
ogre. The bell of St. Sepulchre's was tolling, and there was a crowd
about the door, which opened, letting out a black cart in which was a
priest praying and a man in irons going to be hanged on Tyburn Hill. His
sweating face was ashen gray; and when the cart came to the church door
they gave him mockingly a great bunch of fresh, bright flowers. Nick
could not bear to watch.

The turnkey at the prison gate was a crop-headed fellow with jowls like
a bulldog, and no more mercy in his face than a chopping-block. "Gaston
Carew, the player?" he growled. "Ye can't come in without a permit from
the warden."

"We must," said Jones.

"Must?" said the turnkey. "I am the only one who says 'must' in
Newgate!" and slammed the door in their faces.

The player clinked a shilling on the bar.

"It was a boy he said would come," growled the turnkey through the
wicket, pocketing the shilling; "so just the boy goes up. A shilling's
worth, ye mind, and not another wink." He drew Nick in, and dropped
the bars.

It was a foul, dark place, and full of evil smells. Drops of water stood
on the cold stone walls, and a green mould crept along the floor. The
air was heavy and dank, and it began to be hard for Nick to breathe. The
men in the dungeons were singing a horrible song, and in the corner was
a half-naked fellow shackled to the floor. "Give me a penny," he said,
"or I will curse thee." Nick shuddered.

"Up with thee," said the turnkey, gruffly, unlocking the door to the
stairs.

The common room above was packed with miserable wretches, fighting,
dancing, gibbering like apes. Some were bawling ribald songs, others
moaning with fever. The strongest kept the window-ledges near light and
air by sheer main force, and were dicing on the dirty sill. The turnkey
pushed and banged his way through them, Nick clinging desperately to
his jerkin.

In a cell at the end of the corridor there was a Spanish renegade who
cursed the light when the door was opened, and cursed the darkness when
it closed. "Cesare el Moro, Cesare el Moro," he was saying over and over
again to himself, as if he feared that he might forget his own name.

Carew was in the middle cell, ironed hand and foot. He had torn his
sleeves and tucked the lace under the rough edges of the metal to keep
it from chafing the skin. He sat on a pile of dirty straw, with his face
in his folded arms upon his knees. By his side was a broken biscuit and
an empty stone jug. He had his fingers in his ears to shut out the
tolling of the knell for the man who had gone to be hanged.

The turnkey shook the bars. "Here, wake up!" he said.

Carew looked up. His eyes were swollen, and his face was covered with a
two days' beard. He had slept in his clothes, and they were full of
broken straw and creases. But his haggard face lit up when he saw the
boy, and he came to the grating with an eager exclamation: "And thou
hast truly come? To the man thou dost hate so bitterly, but wilt not
hate any more. Come, Nick, thou wilt not hate me any more. 'Twill not
be worth thy while, Nick; the night is coming fast."

"Why, sir," said Nick, "it is not so dark outside--'tis scarcely noon;
and thou wilt soon be out."

"Out? Ay, on Tyburn Hill," said the master-player, quietly. "I've spent
my whole life for a bit of hempen cord. I've taken my last cue. Last
night, at twelve o'clock, I heard the bellman under the prison walls
call my name with the names of those already condemned. The play is
nearly out, Nick, and the people will be going home. It has been a wild
play, Nick, and ill played."

"Here, if ye've anything to say, be saying it," said the turnkey. "'Tis
a shilling's worth, ye mind."

Carew lifted up his head in the old haughty way, and clapped his
shackled hand to his hip--they had taken his poniard when he came into
the gaol. A queer look came over his face; taking his hand away, he
wiped it hurriedly upon his jerkin. There were dark stains upon
the silk.

"Ye sent for me, sir," said Nick.

Carew passed his hand across his brow. "Yes, yes, I sent for thee. I
have something to tell thee, Nick." He hesitated, and looked through the
bars at the boy, as if to read his thoughts. "Thou'lt be good and true
to Cicely--thou'lt deal fairly with my girl? Why, surely, yes." He
paused again, as if irresolute. "I'll trust thee, Nick. We've taken
money, thou and I; good gold and silver--tsst! what's that?" He
stopped suddenly.

Nick heard no sound but the Spaniard's cursing.

"'Tis my fancy," Carew said. "Well, then, we've taken much good money,
Nick; and I have not squandered all of it. Hark'e--thou knowest the old
oak wainscot in the dining-hall, and the carven panel by the Spanish
chest? Good, then! Upon the panel is a cherubin, and--tsst! what's
that, I say?"

There was a stealthy rustling in the right-hand cell. The fellow in it
had his ear pressed close against the bars. "He is listening,"
said Nick.

The fellow cursed and shook his fist, and then, when Master Carew
dropped his voice and would have gone on whispering, set up so loud a
howling and clanking of his chains that the lad could not make out one
word the master-player said.

"Peace, thou dog!" cried Carew, and kicked the grating. But the fellow
only yelled the louder.

Carew looked sorely troubled. "I dare not let him hear," said he. "The
very walls of Newgate leak."
