he was very witty. He was going from home one time and he said to the
wife 'If it is a daughter you have this time I'll kill you when I come
back'; for up to that time he had no sons, but only daughters. And it
was a daughter she had; but a neighbouring woman had a son at the same
time, and they made an exchange to save the life of the Goban's wife.
But when the boy began to grow up he had no wit, and the Goban knew by
that he was no son of his. That is the reason he wanted a witty wife
for him. So there came a girl to the house one day, and the Goban Saor
bade her look round at all that was in the room, and he said 'Do you
think a couple could get a living out of this?' 'They could not,' she
said. So he said she wouldn't do, and he sent her away. Another girl
came another day, and he bade her take notice of all that was in the
house, and he said 'Do you think could a couple knock a living out of
this?' 'They could if they stopped in it,' she said. So he said that
girl would do. Then he asked her could she bring a sheepskin to the
market and bring back the price of it, and the skin itself as well. She
said she could, and she went to the market, and there she pulled off the
wool and sold it and brought back the price and the skin as well. Then
he asked could she go to the market and not be dressed or undressed. And
she went having only one shoe and one stocking on her, so she was
neither dressed or undressed. Then he sent her to walk neither on the
road or off the road, and she walked on the path beside it. So he said
then she would do as a wife for his son."


AN ADVICE SHE GAVE

"One time some great king or lord sent for the Goban to build a
_caislean_ for him, and the son's wife said to him before he went 'Be
always great with the women of the house, and always have a comrade
among them.' So when the Goban went there he coaxed one of the women the
same as if he was not married. And when the castle was near built, the
woman told him the lord was going to play him a trick, and to kill him
or shut him up when he had the castle made, the way he would not build
one for any-other lord that was as good. And as she said, the lord came
and bade the Goban to make a cat and two-tails, for no one could make
that but himself, and it was meaning to kill him on it he was. And the
Goban said he would do that when he had finished the castle, but he
could not finish it without some tool he had left at home. And they must
send the lord's son for it--- for he said it would not be given to any
other one. So the son was sent, and the Goban sent a message to the
daughter-in-law that the tool he was wanting was called 'When you open
it shut it.' And she was surprised, for there was no such tool in the
house; but she guessed by the message what she had to do, and there was
a big chest in the house and she set it open. 'Come now,' she said to
the young man,' look in the chest and find it for yourself.' And when he
looked in she gave him a push forward, and in he went, and she shut the
lid on him. She wrote a letter to the lord then, saying he would not get
his son back till he had sent her own two men, and they were sent back
to her."


SHORTENING THE ROAD

"Himself and his son were walking the road together one day, and the
Goban said to the son 'Shorten the road for me.' So the son began to
walk fast, thinking that would do it, but the Goban sent him back home
when he didn't understand what to do. The next day they were walking
again, and the Goban said again to shorten the road for him, and this
time he began to run, and the Goban sent him home again. When he went in
and told the wife he was sent home the second time, she began to think,
and she said, 'When he bids you shorten the road, it is that he wants
you to be telling him stories.' For that is what the Goban meant, but it
took the daughter-in-law to understand it. And it is what I was saying
to that other woman, that if one of ourselves was making a journey, if
we had another along with us, it would not seem to be one half as long
as if we would be alone. And if that is so with us, it is much more with
a stranger, and so I went up the hill with you to shorten the road,
telling you that story."


THE GOBAN'S SECRET

"The Goban and his son were seven years building the castle, and they
never said a word all that time. And at the end of seven years the son
was at the top, and he said 'I hear a cow lowing.' And the Goban said
then 'Make all strong below you, for the work is done,' and they went
home. The Goban never told the secret of his building, and when he was
on the bed dying they wanted to get it from him, and they went in and
said 'Claregalway Castle is after falling in the night.' And the Goban
said 'How can that be when I put a stone in and a stone out and a stone
across.' So then they knew the way he built so well."


THE SCOTCH ROGUE

"One time he was on the road going to the town, and there was a Scotch
rogue on the road that was always trying what could he pick off others,
and he saw the Connemara man--that was the Goban--had a nice cravat, and
he thought he would get a hold of that. So he began talking with him,
and he was boasting of all the money he had, and the Goban said whatever
it was he had three times as much as it, and he with only thirty pounds
in the world. And the Scotch rogue thought he would get some of it from
him, and he said he would go to a house in the town, and he gave him
some food and some drink there, and the Goban said he would do the same
for him on the morrow. So then the Goban went out to three houses, and
in each of them he left ten pounds of his thirty pounds, and he told the
people in every house what they had to do, and that when he would strike
the table with his hat three times they would bring out the money. So
then he asked the Scotch rogue into the first house, and ordered every
sort of food and drink, ten pounds worth in all. And when they had used
all they could of it, he struck with his hat on the table, and the man
of the house brought out the ten pounds, and the Goban said 'Keep that
to pay what I owe you.' The second day he did the same thing in another
house. And in the third house they went to he ordered ten pounds worth
of food and drink in the same way. And when the time came to pay, he
struck the table with the hat, and there was the money in the hand of
the man of the house before them. 'That's a good little caubeen,' said
the Scotch rogue, 'when striking it on the table makes all that money
appear.' 'It is a wishing hat,' said the Goban; 'anything I wish for I
can get as long as I have that.' 'Would you sell it?' said the Scotch
rogue. 'I would not,' said the Goban. 'I have another at home, but I
wouldn't sell one or the other.' 'You may as well sell it, so long as
you have another at home,' said the Scotch rogue. 'What will you give
for it?' says the Goban. 'Will you give three hundred pounds for it?' 'I
will give that,' says the Scotch rogue, 'when it will bring me all the
wealth I wish for.' So he went out and brought the three hundred pound,
and gave it to the Goban, and he got the caubeen and went away with it,
and it not worth three halfpence. There was no beating the Goban.
Wherever he got it, he had got the gift."


THE DANES

"The reason of the wisps and the fires on Saint John's Eve is that one
time long ago the Danes came and took the country and conquered it, and
they put a soldier to mind every house through the whole country. And at
last the people made up their mind that on one night they would kill its
soldiers. So they did as they said, and there wasn't one left, and that
is why they light the wisps ever since. It was Brian Boroihme was the
first to light them. There was not much of an army left to the Danes
that time, for he made a great scatter of them. A great man he was, and
his own son was as good, that is Murrough. It was the wife brought him
to his end, Gormleith. She was for war, and he was all for peace. And he
got to be very pious, too pious, and old and she got tired of that."


THE BATTLE OF CLONTARF

"Clontarf was on the head of a game of chess. The generals of the Danes
were beaten at it, and they were vexed; and Cennedigh was killed on a
hill near Fermoy. He put the Holy Gospels in his breast as a protection,
but he was struck through them with a reeking dagger. It was Brodar,
that the Brodericks are descended from, that put a dagger through
Brian's heart, and he attending to his prayers. What the Danes left in
Ireland were hens and weasels. And when the cock crows in the morning
the country people will always say 'It is for Denmark they are crowing.
Crowing they are to be back in Denmark.'"


THE ENGLISH

"It was a long time after that, the Pope encouraged King Henry to take
Ireland. It was for a protection he did it, Henry being of his own
religion, and he fearing the Druids or the Danes might invade Ireland."


THE QUEEN OF BREFFNY

"Dervorgilla was a red-haired woman, and it was she put the great curse
on Ireland, bringing in the English through MacMurrough, that she went
to from O'Rourke. It was to Henry the Second MacMurrough went, and he
sent Strongbow, and they stopped in Ireland ever since. But who knows
but another race might be worse, such as the Spaniards that were
scattered along the whole coast of Connacht at the time of the Armada.
And the laws are good enough. I heard it said the English will be dug
out of their graves one day for the sake of their law. As to
Dervorgilla, she was not brought away by force, she went to MacMurrough
herself. For there are men in the world that have a coaxing way, and
sometimes women are weak."


KING HENRY VIII.

"Henry the Eighth was crying and roaring and leaping out of the bed for
three days and nights before his death. And he died cursing his
children, and he that had eight millions when he came to the Throne,
coining leather money at the end."


ELIZABETH

"Queen Elizabeth was awful. Beyond everything she was. When she came to
