The Project Gutenberg EBook of Divinity, by William Morrison

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Divinity

Author: William Morrison

Illustrator: Freas

Release Date: September 16, 2007 [EBook #22623]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIVINITY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                                DIVINITY

                          BY WILLIAM MORRISON

                          ILLUSTRATED BY FREAS


           Bradley had one fear in his life. He had to escape
           regeneration. To do that, he was willing to take
           any chance, coward though he was--even if it meant
           that he had to become a god!


Bradley seemed to have escaped regeneration. Now he had only death to
worry about.

Ten minutes before, he had been tumbling through the air head over
heels, helpless and despairing. And before that--

He remembered how his heart had been in his mouth as he had crept down
the corridor of the speeding ship. He could hear Malevski's voice coming
faintly through one of the walls, and had been tempted to run back,
fearful of being shot down on the spot if he were caught. He had fought
back the temptation and kept on. No one had seen him as he crept into
the lifeboat.

"This is your one chance," he told himself. "You have to take it. If
they get you back to port, you're finished."

Luck had been with him. They were broadcasting the results of the
Mars-Earth matches at the time, and most of the crew were grouped around
the visors. He had picked the moment when news came of a sensational
upset, and for a minute or two after the lifeboat blasted off, no one
realized what had happened. When the truth did penetrate, they had a
hard time swinging the ship around, and by then the lifeboat was out of
radar range. He was free.

He had exulted wildly for a moment, until it struck him that freedom in
space might be a doubtful gift. He would have to get to some civilized
port, convince the port authorities that he had been shipwrecked and
somehow separated from the other crew members, and then lose himself
quickly in the crowd of people that he hoped would fill the place. There
would be risks, but he would take them. It would be better than running
out of air and food in space.

[Illustration]

It had been the best possible plan, and it had gone wrong, all wrong. He
had been caught, before he knew it, in the gravity of a planet he had
overlooked. The lifeboat had torn apart under the combined stresses of
its forward momentum and its side rockets blasting full force, and he
had been hurled free in his space suit, falling slowly at first, then
faster, faster, faster--

The automatic parachutes had suddenly sprung into operation when he
reached a critical speed, and he had slowed down and stopped tumbling.
He fell more gently, feet first, and when he landed it was with a shock
that jarred but did no real damage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly he picked himself up and fumbled at the air valve. Something in
the intake tubes had jammed under the shock of landing, and the air was
no longer circulating properly. Filled with the moisture of his own
breath, it felt hot and clammy, and clouded the viewplates.

If he had kept all his wits about him he would have tried to remember,
before he took a chance, whether the planet had an oxygen atmosphere,
and whether the oxygen was of sufficient concentration to support human
life. Not that he had any real choice, but it would have been good to
know. As it was, he turned the air valve automatically, and listened
nervously as the stale air hissed out and the fresh air hissed in.

He took a deep breath. It didn't kill him. Instead, it sent his blood
racing around with new energy. Slowly the moisture evaporated from his
