
Without a pause, without an erasure this letter had transcribed itself
from Cornelia's heart to the small gilt-edged note paper; but she found
it a much more difficult thing to answer the request of Rem Van Ariens.
She was angry at him for putting her in such a dilemma. She thought
that she had made plain as possible to him the fact that she was
pleased to be a companion, a friend, a sister, if he so desired, but
that love between them was not to be thought of. She had told Arenta
this many times, and she had done so because she was certain Arenta
would make this position clear to her brother. And under ordinary
circumstances Arenta would have been frank and free enough with Rem,
but while her own marriage was such an important question she was not
inclined to embarrass or shadow its arrangements by suggesting things
to Rem likely to cause disagreements when she wished all to be
harmonious and cheerful. So Arenta had encouraged, rather than dashed,
Rem's hopes, for she did not doubt that Cornelia would finally undo
very thoroughly what she had done.

"A little love experience will be a good thing for Rem," she said to
herself--"it will make a man of him; and I do hope he has more
self-respect and courage than to die of her denial."

It is easy, then, to understand how Cornelia, relying on Arenta's
usually ready advice and confidences, was sure that Rem had accepted
the friendship that was all in her power to give him, and that this
belief gave to their intercourse a frank and kindly intimacy that it
would not otherwise have obtained. This state of things was desirable
and comfortable for Arenta, and Cornelia also had found a great
satisfaction in a friendship which she trusted had fully recognized and
accepted its limitations. Now, all these pleasant moderate emotions
were stirred into uncomfortable agitation by Rem's unlooked-for and
unreasonable request. She was hurt and agitated and withal a little
sorry for Rem, and she was also in a hurry, for the letter for Joris
was waiting, as she wished to send both by the same messenger. Finally
she wrote the following words, not noticing at the time, but
remembering afterwards, what a singular soul reluctance she
experienced; how some uncertain presentiment, vague and dark and drear,
stifled her thoughts and tried to make her understand, or at least
pause. But alas! the doom that walks side by side with us, never warns;
it seems rather to stand sarcastic at our ignorance, and to watch
speculatively the cloud of trouble coming--coming on purpose because we
foolishly or carelessly call it to us.

MY DEAR AND HONOURED FRIEND:

Your letter has given me very great sorrow. You must have known for
many weeks, even months, that marriage between us was impossible. It
has always been so, it always will be so. Why could you not be content?
We have been so happy! So happy! and now you will end all. But Fortune,
though often cruel, cannot call back times that are past, and I shall
never forget our friendship. I grieve at your going away; I pray that
your absence may bring you some consolation. Do not, I beg you, attempt
to call on my father. Without explanations, I tell you very sincerely,
such a call will cause me great trouble; for you know well a girl must
trust somewhat to others' judgment in her disposal. It gives me more
pain than I can say to write in this mood, but necessity permits me no
kinder words. I want you to be sure that the wrench, the "No" here is
absolute. My dear friend, pity rather than blame me; and I will be so
unselfish as to hope you may not think so kindly of me as to be cruel
to yourself. Please to consider your letter as never written, it is the
greatest kindness you can do me; and, above all, I beg you will not
take my father into your confidence. With a sad sense of the pain my
words must cause you, I remain for all time your faithful friend and
obedient servant,

CORNELIA MORAN.

Then she rang for a lighted candle, and while waiting for its arrival
neatly folded her letters. Her white wax and seal were at hand, and she
delayed the servant until she had closed and addressed them.

"You will take Lieutenant Hyde's letter first," she said; "and make no
delay about it, for it is very important. Mr. Van Ariens' note you can
deliver as you return."

As soon as this business was quite out of her hands, she sank with a
happy sigh into a large comfortable chair; let her arms drop gently,
and closed her eyes to think over what she had done. She was quite
satisfied. She was sure that no length of reflection could have made
her decide differently. She had Hyde's letter in her bosom, and she
pressed her hand against it, and vowed to her heart that he was worthy
of her love, and that he only should have it. As for Rem, she had a
decided feeling of annoyance, almost of fear, as he entered her mind.
She was angry that he had chosen that day to urge his unwelcome suit,
and thus thrust his personality into Hyde's special hour.

"He always makes himself unwelcome," she thought, "he ever has the way
to come when he was least wanted; but Joris! Oh there is nothing I
would alter in him, even at the cost of a wish! JORIS! JORIS!" and she
let the dear name sweeten her lips, while the light of love brightened
and lengthened her eyes, and spread over her lovely face a blushing
glow.

After a while she rose up and adorned herself for her lover's visit.
And when she entered the parlor Mrs. Moran looked at her with a little
wonder. For she had put on with her loveliest gown a kind of
bewildering prettiness. There was no cloud in her eyes, only a glow of
soft dark fire. Her soul was in her face, it spoke in her bright
glances, her sweet smiles, and her light step; it softened her speech
to music, it made her altogether so delightful that her mother thought
"Fortune must give her all she wishes, she is so charming."

The tea tray was brought in at five o'clock, but Doctor Moran had not
returned, and there was in both women's hearts a little sense of
disappointment. Mrs. Moran was wondering at his unusual delay, Cornelia
feared he would be too weary and perhaps, too much interested in other
matters to permit her lover to speak. "But even so," she thought,
"Joris can come again. To-night is not the only opportunity."

It was nearly seven o'clock when the doctor came, and Cornelia was sure
her lover would not be much behind that hour; but tea time was ever a
good time to her father, he was always amiable and gracious with a cup
in his hand, and the hour after it when his pipe kept him company, was
his best hour. She told her heart that things had fallen out better
than if she had planned them so; and she was so thoughtful for the
weary man's comfort, so attentive and so amusing, that he found it easy
to respond to the happy atmosphere surrounding him. He had a score of
pleasant things to tell about the fashionable exodus to Philadelphia,
about the handsome dresses that had been shown him, and the funny
household dilemmas that had been told him. And he was much pleased
because Harry De Lancey had been a great part of the day with him, and
was very eloquent indeed about the young man's good sense and good
disposition, and the unnecessary, and almost cruel, confiscation of
property his family had suffered, for their Tory principles.

And in the midst of the De Lancey lamentation, seven o'clock struck and
Cornelia began to listen for the shutting of the garden gate, and the
sound of Hyde's step upon the flagged walk. It did not come as soon as
she hoped it would, and the minutes went slowly on until eight struck.
Then the doctor was glooming and nodding, and waking up and saying a
word or two, and relapsing again into semi-unconsciousness. She felt
that the favourable hour had passed, and now the minutes went far too
quickly. Why did he net come? With her work in her hand-making
laborious stitches by a drawn thread--she sat listening with all her
being. The street itself was strangely silent, no one passed, and the
fitful talk at the fireside seemed full of fatality; she could feel the
influence, though she did not inquire of her heart what it was, of what
it might signify.

Half-past eight! She looked up and caught her mother's eyes, and the
trouble and question in them, and the needle going through the fine
muslin, seemed to go through her heart. At nine the watching became
unbearable. She said softly "I must go to bed. I am tired;" but she put
away with her usual neatness her work, and her spools of thread, her
thimble and her scissors. Her movement in the room roused the doctor
thoroughly. He stood up, stretched his arms outward and upward, and
said "he believed he had been sleeping, and must ask their pardon for
his indifference." And then he walked to the window and looking out
added "It is a lovely night but the moon looks like storm. Oh!"--and he
turned quickly with the exclamation--"I forgot to tell you that I heard
a strange report to-day, nothing less than that General Hyde returned
on the Mary Pell this morning, bringing with him a child."

"A child!" said Mrs. Moran.

"A girl, then, a little mite of a creature. Mrs. Davy told me the
Captain carried her in his arms to the carriage which took them to Hyde
Manor."

"And how should Mrs. Davy know?"

"The Davys live next door to the Pells, and the servants of one house
carried the news to the other house. She said the General sent to his
son's lodging to see if he was in town, but he was not. It was then
only eight o'clock in the morning."

"How unlikely such a story is! Do you believe it?"

"Ask to-morrow. As for me, I neither know nor care. That is the report.
Who can tell what the Hydes will do?"

Then Cornelia said a hasty "good-night" and went to her room. She was
sick at heart; she trembled, something in her life had lost its
foot-hold, and a sudden bewildering terror--she knew not how to
explain--took possession of her. For once she forgot her habitual order
and neatness; her pretty dress was thrown heedlessly across a chair,
and she fell upon her knees weeping, and yet she could not pray.

Still the very posture and the sweet sense of help and strength it
implied, brought her the power to take into consideration such
unexpected news, and such unexplained neglect on her lover's part,
"General Hyde has returned; that much I feel certain of," she thought,
"and Joris must have left Hyde Manor about the time his father reached
New York. Joris would take the river road, being the shortest, his
father would take the highway as the best for the carriage.
Consequently, they passed each other and did not know it. Then Joris
has been sent for, and it was right and natural that he should go--but
oh, he might have written!--ten words would have been enough--It was
right he should go--but he might have written!--he might have
written!"--and she buried her face in her pillow and wept bitterly.
Alas! Alas! Love wounds as cruelly when he fails, as when he strikes;
and even when Cornelia had outworn thought and feeling, and fallen into
a sorrowful sleep, she was conscious of this failure, and her soul
sighed all night long "He might have written!"




CHAPTER IX

MISDIRECTED LETTERS


The night so unhappy to Cornelia was very much more unhappy to Hyde. He
had sent his letter to her before eleven in the morning, and if Fortune
were kind to him, he expected an answer soon after leaving Madame
Jacobus. Her departure from New York depressed him very much. She had
been the good genius of his love, but he told himself that it had now
"grown to perfection, and could, he hoped, stand in its own strength."
Restlessly he watched the hours away, now blaming, now excusing, anon
dreaming of his coming bliss, then fidgeting and fearing disappointment
from being too forward in its demanding. When noon passed, and one
o'clock struck, he rang for some refreshment; for he guessed very
accurately the reason of delay.

"Cornelia has been visiting or shopping," he thought; "and if it were
visiting, no one would part with her until the last moment; so then if
she get home by dinner-time it is as much as I can expect. I may as
well eat, and then wait in what patience I can, another hour or
two--yes, it will be two hours. I will give her two hours--for she will
be obliged to serve others before me. Well, well, patience is my
penance."

But in truth he expected the letter to be in advance of three o'clock.
"Twenty words will answer me," he thought; "yes, ten words; and she
will find or make the time to write them;" and between this hope and
the certainty of three o'clock, he worried the minutes away until three
struck. Then there was a knock at his door and he went hastily to
answer it. Balthazar stood there with the longed-for letter in his
hand. He felt first of all that he must be quite alone with it. So he
turned the key and then stood a moment to examine the outside. A letter
from Cornelia! It was a joy to see his own name written by her hand. He
kissed the superscription, and kissed the white seal, and sank into his
chair with a sigh of delight to read it.

In a few moments a change beyond all expression came over his
face--perplexity, anger, despair cruelly assailed him. It was evident
that some irreparable thing had ruined all his hopes. He was for some
moments dumb. He felt what he could not express, for a great calamity
had opened a chamber of feeling, which required new words to explain
it. This trance of grief was followed by passionate imprecations and
reproaches, wearing themselves away to an utter amazement and
incredulity. He had flung the letter to the floor, but he lifted it
again and went over the cruel words, forcing himself to read them
slowly and aloud. Every period was like a fresh sentence of death.

"'YOUR LETTER HAS GIVEN ME VERY GREAT SORROW;' let me die if that is
not what she says; 'VERY GREAT SORROW. YOU MUST HAVE KNOWN FOR WEEKS,
EVEN MONTHS, THAT MARRIAGE BETWEEN US WAS IMPOSSIBLE;' am I perfectly
in my senses? 'IT ALWAYS HAS BEEN AND ALWAYS WILL BE;' why, 'tis heart
treason of the worst kind! Can I bear it? Can I bear it? Can I bear it?
Oh Cornelia! Cornelia! 'WE HAVE BEEN SO HAPPY.' Oh it is piteous, sad.
So young, so fair, so false! and she 'GRIEVES AT MY GOING AWAY,' and
bids me on 'NO ACCOUNT CALL ON HER FATHER'--and takes pains to tell me
the 'NO IS ABSOLUTE'--and I am not to 'BLAME HER.' Oh this is the
vilest treachery! She might as well have played the coquette in speech
as writing. It is Rem Van Ariens who is at the bottom of it. May the
devil take the fellow! I shall need some heavenly power to keep my
hands off him. This is a grief beyond all griefs--I believed she loved
me so entirely. Fool! a thousand times fool! Have I not found all women
of a piece? Did not Molly Trefuses throw me over for a duke? and Sarah
Talbot tell me my love was only calf-love and had to be weaned? and
Eliza Capel regret that I was too young to guide a wife, and so marry a
cabinet minister old enough for her grandfather? Women are all just so,
not a cherry stone to choose between them--I will never wonder again at
anything a woman does--Was ever a lover so betrayed? Oh Cornelia! your
ink should have frozen in your pen, ere you wrote such words to me."

Thus his passionate grief and anger tortured him until midnight. Then
he had a high fever and a distracting headache, and, the physical
torment being the most insistent and distressing, he gave way before
it. With such agonizing tears as spring from despairing wounded love he
threw himself upon his bed, and his craving, suffering heart at length
found rest in sleep from the terrible egotism of its sorrow.

Never for one instant did he imagine this sorrow to be a mistaken and
quite unnecessary one. Indeed it was almost impossible for him to
conceive of a series of events, which though apparently accidental, had
a fatality more pronounced than anything that could have been arranged.
Not taking Rem Van Ariens seriously into his consideration, and not
fearing his rival in any way, it was beyond all his suspicions that Rem
should write to Cornelia in the same hour, and for the same purpose as
himself. He had no knowledge of Rem's intention to go to Boston, and
could not therefore imagine Cornelia "grieving" at any journey but his
own impending one to England. And that she should be forced by
circumstances to answer both Rem and himself in the same hour, and in
the very stress and hurry of her great love and anxiety should
misdirect the letters, were likelihoods outside his consciousness.

It was far otherwise with Rem. The moment he opened the letter brought
him by Cornelia's messenger, in that very moment he knew that it was
NOT his letter. He understood at once the position, and perceived that
he held in his hand an instrument, which if affairs went as he desired,
was likely to make trouble he could perchance turn to his own
advantage. The fate that had favoured him so far would doubtless go
further--if he let it alone. These thoughts sprang at once into his
reflection, but were barely entertained before nobler ones displaced
them. As a Christian gentleman he knew what he ought to do without
cavil and without delay, and he rose to follow the benignant justice of
his conscience. Into this obedience, however, there entered an
hesitation of a second of time, and that infinitesimal period was
sufficient for his evil genius.

"Why will you meddle?" it asked. "This is a very dubious matter, and
common prudence suggests a little consideration. It will be far wiser
to let Hyde take the first step. If the letter he has received is so
worded, that he knows it is your letter, it is his place to make the
transfer--and he will be sure to do it. Why should you continue the
