
"No; he said he had left it here on the table, and did not think of it
till some time afterwards."

"A likely story. He must think I am a fool. Even a boy like you can see
through that."

"He seemed to me like an honest man."

"Oh, well, you are from the country, and could not be expected to know.
We have some sharp swindlers in New York."

Chester was quite of that opinion, but he was beginning to think that
the description would apply better to David Mullins than to James Long.

"By the way, Chester," said Mr. Mullins, with unusual blandness, "this
is my cousin, Felix Gordon."

"Glad to meet you," said Felix, with an artificial smile.

Chester took the extended hand. He was not especially drawn to Felix,
but felt that it behooved him to be polite.

"You boys must be somewhere near the same age," said the bookkeeper. "I
will give you a chance to become acquainted. Chester, I want you to go
to number four seventy-one Bleecker Street. I suppose you don't know
where it is?"

"No, sir."

"Felix, go with him and show him the way."

Chester was quite amazed at this unusual and unexpected kindness on the
part of a man whom he had regarded as an enemy. Was it possible that he
had misjudged him?

The two boys went out together.

When they were fairly in the street, Felix produced his package of
cigarettes.

"Have one?" he asked.

"No, thank you; I don't smoke."

"Don't smoke!" repeated Felix, in apparent amusement. "You don't mean
that?"

"I never smoked a cigarette in my life."

"Then it's high time you learned. All boys smoke in the city."

"I don't think I should like it."

"Oh, nonsense! Just try one for my sake."

"Thank you, Felix. You are very kind, but I promised mother I wouldn't
smoke."

"Your mother lives in the country, doesn't she?"

"Yes."

"Then she won't know it."

"That will make no difference. I made the promise, and I mean to keep
it," said Chester, firmly.

"Oh, well, suit yourself. What a muff he is!" thought Felix. "However,
he'll soon break over his virtuous resolutions. Do you know," he
continued, changing the subject, "that you have got the situation I was
after?"

"I think I heard Mr. Mullins say something about it. I am sorry if I
have stood in your way."

"Oh, if it hadn't been you it would have been some other boy. How do
you think you shall like the city?"

"Very much, I think."

"What pay do you get?"

"Five dollars a week."

"You can't live on that."

"I will try to."

"Of course, it is different with me. I should have lived at home.
You'll have to run into debt."

"I will try not to."

"Where do you live?"

"I am staying with a friend--Mr. Conrad, an artist--just now, but I
shall soon get a boarding place."

"I live on Eighty-sixth Street--in a flat. My father is in the custom
house."

"How long has your cousin--Mr. Mullins--been in this office?"

"About five years. He's awfully smart, cousin David is. It's he that
runs the business. Mr. Fairchild is no sort of a business man."

Chester wondered how, under the circumstances, Mr. Mullins should not
have influence enough to secure the situation of office boy for Felix.

They soon reached Bleecker Street. Chester took notice of the way in
order that he might know it again. He was sharp and observing, and
meant to qualify himself for his position as soon as possible.

At five o'clock the office was vacated. Chester remained to sweep up. A
piece of paper on the floor attracted his attention. He picked it up
and found, to his surprise, that it was James Long's missing receipt.
It was on the floor of the clothes closet, and he judged that it had
dropped from the bookkeeper's pocket.

What should he do with it?




CHAPTER XIV.

THE TABLES TURNED.


Under ordinary circumstances, Chester would have handed the receipt to
the bookkeeper, but he was convinced that it was the purpose of Mr.
Mullins to defraud the tenant out of a month's rent, and he felt that
it would not be in the interest of the latter for him to put this power
in the hands of the enemy. Obviously the receipt belonged to James
Long, who had lost it.

Fortunately, Chester had the address of the mechanic on East Twentieth
Street, and he resolved, though it would cost him quite a walk, to call
and give him the paper. In twenty minutes after locking the office he
found himself in front of a large tenement house, which was occupied by
a great number of families. He found that Long lived on the third floor
back.

He knocked at the door. It was opened to him by a woman of forty, who
had a babe in her arms, while another--a little girl--was holding onto
her dress.

"Does Mr. James Long live here?" asked Chester.

"Yes."

"Is he at home?"

"No, but I am expecting him home from work every minute. Will you come
in, or shall I give him your message?"

"Perhaps I had better see him, if it won't inconvenience you."

"Oh, no, if you will excuse my poor rooms," said Mrs. Long, pleasantly.

"I am poor myself, and am not used to fine rooms."

"Take the rocking-chair," said Mrs. Long, offering him the best chair
in the room. "If you will excuse me, I will go on preparing my
husband's supper."

"Certainly. Shall I take the baby?"

"Oh, I wouldn't like to trouble you."

"I like babies."

Chester had seen that the baby's face was clean, and that it looked
attractive. Babies know their friends instinctively, and this
particular baby was soon in a frolic with its young guardian.

"I guess you are used to babies," said the mother, pleased.

"No, I am the only baby in my family, but I am fond of children."

I may remark here that manly boys generally do like children, and I
haven't much respect for those who will tease or tyrannize over them.

In ten minutes a heavy step was heard on the stairs, and James Long
entered. His face was sober, for, after his interview with Chester
Rand--he had not had time for a second call--he began to fear that he
should have to pay his month's rent over again, and this to him would
involve a severe loss.

He looked with surprise at Chester, not immediately recognizing him.

"I come from Mr. Fairchild's office," explained Chester.

"Oh, yes; I remember seeing you there. Has the receipt been found?" he
added, eagerly.

"Yes."

James Long looked very much relieved.

"I am very glad," he sighed. "Mr. Mullins wouldn't have believed me.
What does he say now?"

"He doesn't know that the receipt is found."

"How is that?" asked the mechanic, puzzled.

"I found it after Mr. Mullins went away."

"Where did you find it?"

"In the clothes closet, just under where Mr. Mullins hangs his coat,"
added Chester, significantly.

"And you bring it to me?"

"Yes, it belongs to you. Besides, after what I heard, I didn't dare to
trust it in the hands of the bookkeeper."

"I see you think the same of him as I do."

"I don't like him."

"You think he meant to cheat me?"

"It looks like it."

"I am all right now. What do you think I had better do?"

"Come round to-morrow, but don't show the receipt unless Mr. Fairchild
is in the office. He is a very different man from Mr. Mullins. The
bookkeeper might still play a trick upon you?"

"I believe you're right. Shall I tell him how you found and gave me
back the receipt?"

"No; let Mr. Mullins puzzle over it. It is fortunate he didn't destroy
the receipt, or you would have had no resource."

"You're a smart boy, and I'll take your advice. How long have you been
in the office?"

"This is my first day," answered Chester, smiling.

"Well, well! I couldn't have believed it. You will make a smart
business man. You've been a good friend to James Long, and he won't
forget it. I say, wife, perhaps this young gentleman will stay to
supper."

"Thank you," answered Chester. "I would, but I am to meet a friend
uptown at six o'clock. It is so late," he added, looking at the clock
on the mantel, "that I must go at once."

When Chester met his friend the artist, he told him of what had
happened.

"That Mullins is evidently a rascal, and a very mean one," said Mr.
Conrad. "If I were going to defraud anyone, it wouldn't be a poor
mechanic."

"Mr. Mullins has already taken a dislike to me. If he should discover
that I have found the receipt and given it to Mr. Long, he would hate
me even worse."

"You must look out for him. He will bear watching."

"I wish he were more like Mr. Fairchild. He seems a fair, honorable
man."

"He is. I don't understand why he should employ such a fellow as
Mullins."

"Perhaps he hasn't found him out."

"Mullins will find it hard to explain this matter. Let me know how it
comes out. I suppose Long will call at the office to-morrow?"

"Yes; I advised him to."

The next day, about twenty minutes after twelve, James Long entered the
office. He looked about him anxiously, and, to his relief, saw that Mr.
Fairchild was present. He went up to the table where the broker was
seated.

"I came about my rent," he said.

"You can speak to Mr. Mullins," said the broker, going on with his
writing.

"I would rather speak with you, sir."

"How is that?" asked Mr. Fairchild, his attention excited.

"I will tell you, sir," said the bookkeeper, with an ugly look. "This
man came here yesterday and declined to pay his rent, because, he said,
he had paid it already."

"And I had," said Long, quietly. "I am a mechanic on small wages, and I
can't afford to pay my rent twice."

"Did you pay the rent to Mr. Mullins?"

"Yes, sir."

"When?"

"Day before yesterday."

"Then he gave you a receipt?"

"He did, sir."

"It seems to me that than settles the question. Did you give him a
receipt, Mr. Mullins?"

"If I had, he could show it now. He says that he left it behind in the
office here. Of course, that's too thin!"

"It is very important to take good care of your receipt, Mr. Long."

"Did you ever lose or mislay a receipt, sir?"

"Yes, I have on two or three occasions."

"So that I am not the only one to whom it has happened."

"Mr. Mullins, did Mr. Long come to the office on the day when he says
he paid the rent?"

"Yes, sir."
