and appreciation of each other's company, but little more. Whether or
not the creature could understand his thoughts, he could not tell.

As he went on, he reviewed, mentally, the events leading up to his
landing here. The sudden appearance on his teleview screen of the
face and slim shoulders of a girl. Her attractiveness plainly
distinguishable through her helmet; for a moment he forgot that he
disliked women. The call for help, cut short ... but not before he had
learned that apparently she was being held prisoner on Asteroid Moira.
He knew he'd have to do what he could even if it meant unwonted
company for an indefinite length of time. The spell was gone soon
after her face vanished; he remembered former experiences with
attractive-looking girls. Damn traditions!

A change in his course and a landing on Asteroid Moira. Here he'd
found a honeycomb of caves, all leading from one large main tunnel.
The cavern walls had been of a translucent, quartz-like substance,
ranging in color from yellowish-brown to violet-grey. It looked
vaguely familiar, yet he could not place it. There was not time to
examine it more carefully.

The room in which he'd found the evil, hungry lake had been the first
one to the right. Now he crossed to the opening in the opposite wall.
The mouth of this cave was much larger, wider than the other. He stood
in the opening, slowly swung the beam of his torch around the smooth
walls, still holding Digger, who, by now, was indicating that he'd like
to be set down. Nat released him unthinkingly, his mind fully taken up
with what the light revealed.

                *       *       *       *       *

Spaceships! The room was packed with them--all sizes, old and new. A
veritable sargasso. At first, he thought they might be craft belonging
to nameless inhabitants of this world, but, as he approached them, he
recognized Terrestrial identifications.

The first was a scout ship of American Spaceways! Nat recognized the
name: _Ceres_, remembered a telecast account of its disappearance in
space. There was a neat little reward for information as to its
whereabouts. Nat's lips curled in derision: it wouldn't equal the
expense of his journey out here. There was a deep groove in the smooth
material of the floor where the ship had been dragged through the
doorway into the room. What machines could have done this work without
leaving their own traces? He went to the other ships: all were small,
mostly single or two-passenger craft. The last entry in the logs of
many was to the effect that they were about to land on the Asteroid
Moira to rescue a girl held captive there.

None had crashed; all ships were in perfect order. But all were
deserted. Two doors were gone from the interior of one of the vessels.
They might have been removed for any of a hundred reasons--but why
here?

Nat's glance swept the room, came to rest on the figure of a heavy duty
robot of familiar design. Semi-human in form, it looked like some
misshapen, bent, headless giant. He inspected it: _Meyers Robot, Inc._
Earth designed for mining operations on Mars.

"Well, Digger, I can see now how these ships were brought in here; that
robot could move any one of these with ease. But that doesn't explain
where the humans have gone. It might be space pirates using this
asteroid for a base, or it might be some alien form of life. We're
still free. Shall we beat it or stay and try to check this out?"

He did not know how much of this got over to the spacehound, but the
impressions he received in answer were those of approving their
remaining where they were.

"I suppose the best system is to explore the rest of the caves in
order; let's go."

Followed by Digger, he walked quietly toward the next cave on the left,
slipped through the doorway, and, standing with his back against the
wall, swung the light of his torch in a wide, swift arc about the room.
Halfway around, he stopped abruptly; a slim, petite figure appeared
clearly in the searchlight's glare. The girl he had seen on the
televisor stood in the middle of the room, facing a telecaster, her
back toward him. She did not seem aware of him as he moved forward.
What could be wrong; surely that light would arouse her.

The figure did not turn as he approached. So near was he now that he
could seize her easily, still she made no move. Nat stepped to one
side, flashed his torch in her face. Her beautifully-lashed eyes stared
straight ahead unblinkingly; the expression on her lovely composed face
did not change. A robot! He laughed bitterly. But then, he was not the
only one....

She was an earth product; Nat opened her helmet and found the
trade-mark of _Spurgin's Robots_ hung like a necklace about her throat.
But whoever had lured him here easily could have removed her from one
of the vessels in the front cave. It did not seem like the work of
pirates, more likely unknown intelligent beings.
