The Project Gutenberg EBook of Five Little Peppers Midway, by Margaret Sidney

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Five Little Peppers Midway

Author: Margaret Sidney

Posting Date: April 30, 2013 [EBook #5632]
Release Date: May, 2004
First Posted: July 26, 2002
Last Updated: April 17, 2007

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE LITTLE PEPPERS MIDWAY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team.










FIVE LITTLE PEPPERS MIDWAY

By MARGARET SIDNEY




              To
      MY LITTLE MARGARET
 Who Is Phronsie Pepper to All
         Who Know Her
This Book Is Lovingly Inscribed




CONTENTS

  1   Phronsie's Pie
  2   Cousin Eunice Chatterton
  3   The Rehearsal
  4   Welcome Home!
  5   After the Play
  6   The Little Brown House
  7   Old Times Again
  8   Some Badgertown Calls
  9   A Sudden Blow
 10   The Party Separates
 11   Poor Polly!
 12   New Work for Polly
 13   A Piece of News
 14   Mamsie's Wedding
 15   Mrs. Chatterton Has a New Plan
 16   Where Is Phronsie?
 17   Phronsie Is Found
 18   The Girls Have Polly Again
 19   Phronsie Is Well Again
 20   The Secret
 21   The Whitneys' Little Plan
 22   Joel
 23   Of Many Things
 24   Away




I

PHRONSIE'S PIE


"Jefferson," said Phronsie, with a grave uplifting of her eyebrows, "I
think I will go down into the kitchen and bake a pie; a very little
pie, Jefferson."

"Bless you, Miss," replied the cook, showing his white teeth in glee,
"it is the making of the kitchen when you come it."

"Yes, Jefferson," said Phronsie slowly, "I think I will go down make
one. It must be very, very full of plums, you know," looking up at him
anxiously, "for Polly dearly loves plums."

"It shall be that plummy," said Jefferson convincingly, "that you'd
think you never saw such a one for richness. Oh, my! what a pie that
shall be!" exclaimed the cook, shutting up one eye to look through the
other in a spasm of delight at an imaginary pie; "so it's for Miss
Mary, is it?"

"Yes," said Phronsie, "it is. Oh, Jefferson, I'm so glad you like to
have me make one," she clasped her hands in silent rapture, and sat
down on the lowest stair to think it over a bit, Jefferson looking at
her, forgetful that the under cook was fuming in the deserted domains
over his delay to return. At last he said, bowing respectfully, "If you
please, Miss, it's about time to begin. Such a pie ain't done without a
deal of care, and we'd best have it a-baking as soon as may be."

"Yes," said Phronsie, getting off from her stair, and surrendering her
hand to his big black palm, "we ought to go right this very minute. But
I must get my apron on;" she stopped and looked down at her red dress.

"Oh! you can take one of my aprons," said the cook, "they're as fine,
and big, and white, and I'll just put you in one of 'em and tie you up
as snug; you'll come out as clean and sweet when we're through, as you
are now, Miss."

"Tie me up?" laughed Phronsie in glee. "Oh! how nice, Jefferson. Do you
know I love you very much, Jefferson, you're so very good to me?"

The big fellow drew a long breath. "No, Miss, I'm big and black, and
just fit to stay downstairs," he managed to say.

"But I love you better because you are black, Jefferson," insisted
Phronsie, "a great deal better. You are not like everybody else, but
you are just yourself," clinging to his hand.

"Well, Miss, I ain't just fit for a lily to touch and that's the
truth," looking down at his palm that the small white hand grasped
closely. "It's clean, Miss," he added with pardonable pride, "but it's
awful black."

"I like it better black, Jefferson," said Phronsie again, "really and
truly I do, because then it's your very, very own," in a tone that
thrilled him much as if a queen had knighted him on the spot.

This important declaration over, the two set forth on their way toward
the kitchen, Phronsie clinging to his hand, and chatting merrily over
the particular pie in prospect, with varied remarks on pies in general,
that by and by would be ventured upon if this present one were a
success--and very soon tied up in one of the cook's whitest aprons she
was seated with due solemnity at the end of the baking table, the
proper utensils and materials in delightful confusion before her, and
the lower order of kitchen satellites revolving around her, and
Jefferson the lesser sphere.

"Now all go back to your work," said that functionary when he
considered the staring and muttered admiration had been indulged in
long enough, "and leave us."

"I want you," said his assistant, touching his elbow.

"Clear out," said Jefferson angrily, his face turned quite from
Phronsie.

But she caught the tone and immediately laid down the bit of dough she
was moulding.

"Do go," she begged, "and come back quickly," smiling up into his face.
"See, I'm going to pat and pat and pat, oh! ever so much before you
come back."

So Jefferson followed the under cook, the scullery boy went back to
cleaning the knives, Susan, the parlor maid who was going through the
kitchen with her dustpan and broom, hurried off with a backward glance
or two, and Phronsie was left quite alone to hum her way along in her
blissful culinary attempt.

"Bless me!" exclaimed a voice close to her small ear, as she was
attempting for the fifth time to roll out the paste quite as thin as
she had seen Jefferson do, "what is this? Bless my soul! it's Phronsie!"

Phronsie set down the heavy rolling-pin and turned in her chair with a
gleeful laugh.

"Dear, dear Grandpapa!" she cried, clasping her floury hands, "oh! I'm
so glad you've come to see me make a pie all by myself. It's for Polly,
and it's to be full of plums; Jefferson let me make it."

"Jefferson? And where is he, pray?" cried Mr. King irately. "Pretty
fellow, to bring you down to these apartments, and then go off and
forget you. Jefferson!" he called sharply, "here, where are you?"

"Oh, Grandpapa!" exclaimed Phronsie in dire distress, "I sent him;
Jefferson didn't want to go, Grandpapa dear, really and truly, he went
because I asked him."

"If you please, sir," began Jefferson, hurrying up, "I only stepped off
a bit to the cellar. Bassett sent down a lot of turnips, they ain't
first-rate, and"--

"All right," said Mr. King, cutting him short with a wave of his hand,
"if Miss Phronsie sent you off, it's all right; I don't want to hear
any more elaborate explanations."

"Little Miss hasn't been alone but a few minutes," said Jefferson in a
worried way.

"And see," said Phronsie, turning back to her efforts, while one hand
grasped the old gentleman's palm, "I've almost got it to look like
Jefferson's. Almost, haven't I?" she asked, regarding it anxiously.

"It will be the most beautiful pie," cried Mr. King, a hearty
enthusiasm succeeding his irritability, "that ever was baked. I wish
you'd make me one sometime, Phronsie."

"Do you?" she cried in a tremor of delight, "and will you really have
it on the table, and cut it with Aunt Whitney's big silver knife?"

"That I will," declared Mr. King solemnly.

"Then some day I'll come down here again, Jefferson," cried Phronsie in
a transport, "and bake one for my dear Grandpapa. That is, if this one
is good. Oh! you do suppose it will be good, don't you?" appealingly at
him.

"It shall," said Jefferson stoutly, and seizing the rolling-pin with
extreme determination. "You want a bit more butter worked in, here," a
dab with skillful fingers, and a little manipulation with the flour, a
roll now and then most deftly, and the paste was laid out before
Phronsie. "Now, Miss, you can put it in the dish."

"But is isn't my pie," said Phronsie, and, big girl as she felt herself
to be, she sat back in her chair, her lower lip quivering.

"Not your pie?" repeated the cook, bringing himself up straight to gaze
at her.

"No," said Phronsie, shaking her yellow head gravely, "it isn't my pie
now, Jefferson. You put in the things, and rolled it."

"Leave your fingers off from it, can't you?" cried Mr. King sharply.
"Goodness! this pie isn't to have a professional touch about it. Get
some more flour and stuff, whatever it is you make a pie of, and let
her begin again. There, I'll sit down and watch you; then there'll be
some chance of having things straight." So he drew up a chair to the
side of the table, first calling off Pete, the scullery boy, from his
knives to come and wipe it off for him, and Mrs. Tucker who was in
kitchen dialect "Tucker," to see that the boy did his work well.

"Lor' bless you, sir," said Tucker, bestowing a final polish with her
apron, "'twas like satin before, sir--not a wisp of dust."

"I don't want any observations from you," said the old gentleman,
depositing himself in the chair. "There, you can go back to your work,
Mrs. Tucker, and you too, Pete. Now I'll see that this pie is to your
liking, Phronsie."

But Phronsie still sat back in her chair, thoughtfully surveying
Jefferson.

"Grandpapa," she said at last slowly, "I think I'd rather have the
first pie, I really would, Grandpapa, may I?" She brought her yellow
head forward by a sudden movement, and looked deep into his keen eyes.

"Bless my soul! Rather have the first pie?" repeated the old gentleman
in astonishment, "why, I thought you wanted to make one all yourself."

"I think I'd rather do part of it," said Phronsie with great
deliberateness, "then Polly'll like it, and eat it, and I'll do yours,
Grandpapa dear, just as Jefferson fixed mine, all alone. Please let
me." She held him fast with her eyes, and waited for his answer.

"So you shall!" cried Mr. King in great satisfaction, "make mine all
alone. This one would better go as it is. Put away the flour and
things, Jefferson; Miss Phronsie doesn't want them."

Phronsie gave a relieved little sigh. "And, Jefferson, if you hadn't
showed me how, I couldn't ever in all this world make Grandpapa's. Now
give me the little plate, do."

"Here 'tis, Miss," said the cook, all his tremor over the blunder he
had made, disappearing, since, after all, things were quite
satisfactory. And the little plate forthcoming, Phronsie tucked away
the paste lovingly in its depths, and began the important work of
concocting the mixture with which the pie was to be filled, Mr. King
sitting by with the gravity of a statue, even to the deliberate placing
of each plum.

"Where's Phronsie?" called a voice above in one of the upper halls.

"Oh! she's coming, Polly is!" cried Phronsie, deserting a plum thrust
in endwise in the middle of the pie, to throw her little sticky fingers
around Jefferson's neck; "oh! do take off my apron; and let me go.
She'll see my pie!"

"Stop!" cried Mr. King, getting up somewhat stiffly to his feet, "I'll
take off the apron myself. There, Phronsie, there you are. Whew! how
hot you keep your kitchen, Jefferson," and he wiped his face.

"Now we'll run," said Phronsie softly, "and not make a bit of noise,
Grandpapa dear, and, Jefferson, please put on my top to the pie, and
don't let it burn, and I'll come down very, very soon again, and bake
one all alone by myself for Grandpapa."

The old gentleman kept up very well with the soft patter of her feet
till they reached the foot of the staircase. "There, there, child," he
said, "there's not the least need of hurry now."

"But she will come down," said Phronsie, in gentle haste pulling at his
hand, "then if she should see it, Grandpapa!"

"To be sure; that would indeed be dreadful," said Mr. King, getting
over the stairs very creditably. "There, here we are now. Whew! it's
terribly warm in this house!"

But there was no danger from Polly; she was at this very instant, not
being able to find Phronsie, hurrying off toward the library in search
of Mrs. Whitney.

"We want to do the very loveliest thing!" she cried, rushing in, her
