quite certain on that point. Burning words half rose to her lips, but
she checked them. She did not doubt George. She read the truth in his
eyes; what fell from his lips was nothing.

Mrs. Staunton kept on talking. "We shall have real comforts at home
now," she said. "I am, as my boy says, a wonderful manager."

"The best in all the world," interrupted George; "there never was such a
mother."

Mrs. Staunton's eyes quite shone with pleasure.

"What I was thinking was this, Effie," she continued, "that if you
really are not strong enough to go on with your work, we can now afford
to keep you at home."

"Of course we can," said George.

He had scarcely said these words, half turning his back on Effie as he
spoke, when the room door was opened by Mrs. Robinson, and Lawson was
announced.

When he saw his friend, George suddenly turned pale. He recovered
himself in a moment, however, and went forward to meet him, speaking in
a loud and bragging voice.

"Is that you, Lawson? Welcome, old chap. We did not expect you to-day,
but we are right glad to see you, of course."

"You will stay and have tea with us, won't you, Mr. Lawson?" said Mrs.
Staunton in her sweet voice.

"Yes, certainly," said Lawson.

He had given Effie his hand when he came into the room, but he scarcely
looked at her.

He sat down near Mrs. Staunton, and began to talk to her in his usual
bright way. She yielded after a moment to his charm. Lawson was a young
fellow with a great amount of general information; he had also abundance
of tact, and he knew how to suit his words to Mrs. Staunton's
requirements.

When George saw his friend talking to his mother, he went up to Effie
and stood near her.

"Come to this end of the room," he said abruptly.

Effie followed him.

"I am likely to make quite a pile of money," he said, speaking in a low
voice and glancing toward his mother. "I know you think badly of
me,--it's awfully hard on a fellow when his sister thinks badly of
him,--but, nevertheless, I am likely to be in a real good way of
business soon. And what I want to say now is this, Effie. I am anxious
to pay back that L250 which you borrowed for me."

"I wish you would," said Effie.

"Well, I dare say I can give you fifty pounds toward it this week.
Squire Harvey won't require the whole of the money back at once."

"Oh, he doesn't require it at all," said Effie. "It is I who require it.
It is my honor and the honor of my dead father that demands it. It ought
to be paid back, and you ought to do it."

"Don't speak so loudly--you do get so excited about things," said
George.

Effie lowered her voice. Lawson, as he talked to Mrs. Staunton, glanced
sharply at her.

Tea was brought in, and Effie had to take her place at the tea-tray.
George's words had made her feel more uncomfortable than ever. It was
absolute nonsense to suppose that he could be earning money at this
rate.

After tea, Effie had to go back to the hospital.

"Good-by mother," she said. "I won't see you now for a fortnight."

Mrs. Staunton got up and put her feeble old arms round her daughter's
neck. "Good-by, my darling," she said. "Take care of yourself; don't
overwork yourself. Remember it is unnecessary. You have got a home, and
a dear, noble, faithful brother to provide for you."

"Yes, Effie, you are heartily welcome to all that I can give you," said
George in a lofty tone.

Effie pressed her lips to her mother's, kept her arms for one moment
round her neck, and then turned away with tears in her eyes.

"Good-by, George," she said, holding out her hand.

"I'll see you back to the hospital," said George.

"Don't do that. It is a beautiful evening; mother would like you to take
a walk with her."

"And I'd have the greatest pleasure in seeing Miss Effie home, if she
would let me," said Lawson.

George hesitated for a moment. For some reason, which was more than
evident, he did not want Effie to be alone with his friend.

He looked at his mother. She did not catch his eye, or she would have
read his wish by instinct. The evening was really very fine, and she
liked to walk round the square leaning on George's arm. When well
enough, too, she liked him to take her to church.

"I think I'd enjoy a little walk with you, George," she said. "The
evening is quite like spring--Wonderful weather for so near Christmas;
the air is as mild and soft as milk; and as Mr. Lawson has so kindly
promised to see Effie back, perhaps you'd come?"

"All right," said George. "By-by, Effie; you'll hear from me, perhaps,
in the course of the week."

Effie went downstairs, followed by Lawson. As soon as ever they got out,
he looked her full in the face.

"You must be greatly amazed," he said, "at my presuming to bother you
about your family affairs."

"Oh, no!" she replied. "I think you are kind, but your words have made
me very anxious."

"Then," said Lawson, "you see for yourself that things are not all
right."

"I have known that for some time."

"George is a great friend of mine," continued Lawson. "We saw a good
deal of each other when he first came to town--he was a right jolly sort
of fellow then; it was only about six months ago that, all of a sudden,
he seemed to change. I suppose he took up with some bad companions, but
I really can't say for certain."

"But what about him now?" said Effie, in a voice almost irritable with
anxiety. "Have you anything fresh to tell me?"

"You heard him, probably, say to your mother that he had a rise of
salary?"

"Yes."

"The fact is," continued Lawson, "I know that not to be true."

Effie also in her heart of hearts knew it not to be true, but she could
not bear to hear a stranger abuse her brother.

"How can you be sure?" she said, somewhat inconsistently.

"How can I be sure?" he retorted. "This is not a matter of sentiment, I
happen to know. George is working with a relative, it is true, but Mr.
Gering is one of the hardest men in the City. Everyone who understands
him knows the system on which he works, and a relative has no more
chance with him than another. George will have to take his rise step by
step at something like the rate of ten pounds a year. Perhaps he has
told your mother that he has had quite a large rise."

"He said a hundred a year; he said he was now receiving two hundred a
year."

"What is to be done?" said Lawson, "Something ought to be done to stop
it. Your mother will certainly live beyond her means, and then you will
all get into no end of a mess. Do forgive me for taking an interest; the
fact is, George was a great friend of mine once."

"Oh, please don't give him up!" said Effie. "If good men turn against
him, what chance has he, poor fellow?"

"I won't, if you wish me to look after him," said Lawson, giving her a
quick glance.

At this moment two nurses from St. Joseph's Hospital, who were crossing
the street, saw Effie. They noticed her earnest face, the sparkle in her
eyes; they also observed the glance which the handsome young medical
student gave her. The women nudged one another, smiled, and went on.

Effie never saw them.

"Let us walk a little faster," said Lawson, who was not so unobservant.
He felt vexed that the women should see him with Effie, but now that he
was with her he must at least unburden his mind.

"George told me," said Effie,--"perhaps it is not wrong to repeat it to
you,--that he is likely to make a great deal of money."

"Did he? Did he tell you that--did he happen to say how much?"

"Well, he spoke as if money were very easily earned," said Effie. "He
said something about getting fifty pounds this week."

"I must tell you the truth," said Lawson. "There's no help for it. Your
brother will go straight to the bad if he is not rescued, and that at
once."

"What do you mean? Oh, how you frighten me!"

Effie's face was as white as a sheet.

"I am ever so sorry," said Lawson; "but what is the use of keeping back
the truth? George has had no rise of salary--indeed, if he is not
careful, he is mother has gone far beyond our means. She hasn't
[Transcriber's note: text of this paragraph in original is as shown and
ends abruptly at this point.]

"Then how does he get his money?"

"He gets it by gambling."

"Gambling! Oh, no! oh, no!" said Effie.

She had the horror of that vice which a pure-minded, well-brought-up
girl must ever have.

"It is true," said Lawson; "it gives me the greatest pain to tell you
anything so bad of your brother, but there's no help for it."

"But how do you know?" interrupted Effie.

"I know by the best of evidence. I have had my suspicions for some time,
but I happened to see him coming out of one of those places last
week--yes, I must tell you, I saw him coming out of a gambling den. I
think he goes night after night. At present he is winning more than he
loses, but that is always the game for drawing fellows on."

"It must be stopped," said Effie. She felt quite faint and sick. If her
mother knew this it would kill her on the spot.

They had nearly reached the hospital, and Effie turned and faced
Lawson.

"You don't half know what this means to me," she said. "George is not
exactly like an ordinary brother. When my father died quite suddenly of
diphtheria some months ago, he left my mother in George's care. If
George goes to the bad now, she will certainly die; you must have
noticed for yourself how she is wrapped up in him."

"Yes; no one could fail to notice it. I think her love for him
beautiful; and he loves her, too. Poor fellow! that is his great
redeeming point."

"Oh, I don't call it real love," said Effie, almost with passion--"to
deceive her as he does--to do wrong, and that sort of wrong. Oh, I think
my heart will break!"

Tears choked her voice, she had the greatest possible difficulty in
keeping them back. Lawson took out his watch.

"You are not late," he said. "Let us take a turn round this square."

They had entered an old-fashioned square where there were very few
people. They walked round and round the dismal central garden for some
time. Lawson talked, and Effie listened. After a time they decided that
George's perilous downward career must be stopped at any cost. Lawson
said he would make it his business to see George the following evening,
to tell him quite frankly what he knew, and, in short, to compel him, if
necessary, to do what was right.

"He'll be obstinate," said Effie--"I know he'll be hard to deal with.
Oh, what shall we do?--what shall we do? I am quite certain that already
my mother has gone far beyond our means. She hasn't been half careful
enough since I left her. If George stops getting money in this way
she'll wonder and question. I doubt very much whether you can have the
least influence over him. What is to be done?"

"Don't be so down-hearted," said Lawson. "He requires a man to tackle
him--a man who really knows the temptations young fellows meet. If
you'll allow me to say so, Miss Staunton, I don't think the case quite
hopeless; anyhow, you may be quite sure I'll do my best for him."

"Thank you," said poor Effie; "you are more than good, and I do trust
you." She hurried back to the hospital; but, to her dismay, when she got
there, found that she was a quarter of an hour late.

Absolute punctuality in returning from any outdoor pleasure is expected
from all nurses. She hurried upstairs, hoping that she might gain her
room, put on her cap and apron, and return to the ward before Sister
Kate had time to miss her. This might have been the case--for Sister
Kate had been very much occupied with some anxious cases during the
afternoon--had not one of the nurses, who had a spite against Effie for
being prettier and cleverer than herself, drawn Sister Kate's attention,
to the fact that the young probationer was behind her time. This nurse
had seen Effie walking with Lawson. Immediately her spirit of jealousy
and envy was up in arms; she did not for a moment consider what injury
she might do the poor girl by her false and unkind words.

"Nurse Staunton is late," she said. "I don't know how I am possibly to
get the ward in order for the night unless I have some help."

"I must speak to her," said Sister Kate, glancing at the clock, and
looking a little annoyed. "This wasn't her Sunday to go out, either. I
cannot let the rules be broken in this way. Let me know as soon as ever
she comes in."

"I suppose there's some excuse to be made for her," said the nurse,
speaking in a knowing way. "She's a very careful, good sort of girl, but
there _are_ times when the best of us forget ourselves."

The woman knew that Sister Kate would interpret her words as she wished
her to do. She went off in a hurry to perform her duties, and when Effie
entered the ward, Sister Kate received her with marked coldness.

"You are very late, nurse," she said. "Where have you been?"

"I have been at home with my mother."

"Was your mother ill? Is that your excuse for being behind your time?"

"No; mother was well--better than she has been for some time."

"Then why are you late?"

"The fact is, I was walking with a friend, and forgot to notice the
hour."

"That's no excuse. You have certainly behaved very carelessly, and have
put the other nurses out by not being in time to take your duties. Who
was the friend with whom you were walking?"

Sister Kate had no right to ask this question, but she felt much
provoked at the moment, and the color which rushed all over Effie's face
excited her curiosity.

"Perhaps you'll think I did wrong," said Effie, looking up at her almost
defiantly. "The friend was Mr. Lawson. He knows my brother very well; he
was talking to me about him. I cannot refuse to speak to him when I see
him out of doors, can I?"

"Don't be pert, nurse! You know it is one of the strictest rules of the
hospital that none of the nurses are to speak to the medical students."

"I know; and I don't wish to speak to him in the hospital."

"See you don't, or you'll be dismissed at once; in fact, the less you
know of any of the medical students, the better for you. I am very sorry
that this young man knows your brother. I should not have had anything
to do with you, had I been aware of this fact."

"How absurd and unjust!" murmured Effie under her breath. She turned
away--she felt absolutely cross.

Sister Kate called her back.

"Now, bustle about," she said. "The supper-trays want to be taken away;
the women are perfectly tired of waiting to be settled for the night."

Effie moved mechanically about her duties. Her heart felt sick. She did
not think she could remain much longer under Sister Kate's care. "If she
treats me like this," thought the proud girl, "I cannot endure it. Mr.
Lawson is nothing to me--he is only my brother's friend. He is good, and
wants to help us in an hour of great perplexity. What shall I do? I feel
