the boat.

"Ay, lad, every one.  Fifteen all told, includin' a woman and a little
girl.  Lend a hand to get the poor things up to our house, Harry," said
the captain, lifting the apparently inanimate form of a young girl over
the side as he spoke; "she ain't dead--only benumbed a little with the
cold."

Many hands were stretched out, but Harry thrust all others aside, and,
receiving the light form of the child in his strong arms, bore her off
to his father's cottage, leaving his comrades to attend to the wants of
the others.

"Oh Harry!" exclaimed Mrs Boyns, when her son burst into the house, "is
your father safe?"

"Ay, safe and well," he cried.  "Look sharp, mother--get hot blankets
and things ready, for here's a little girl almost dead with cold.  She
has just been rescued from a wreck--saved by the new lifeboat!"



CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A MERCHANT AND HIS GOD, AND CONCLUDES WITH "A MESSAGE FROM THE
SEA."

A close-fisted, hard-hearted, narrow-minded, poor-spirited man was John
Webster, Esquire, merchant and shipowner, of Ingot Lane, Liverpool.  And
yet he was not altogether without good points.  Indeed, it might be said
of him that if he had been reared under more favourable circumstances he
might have been an ornament to society and a blessing to his country,
for he was intelligent and sociable, and susceptible to some extent of
tender influences, when the indulging of amiable feelings did not
interfere with his private interests.  In youth he had even gone the
length of holding some good principles, and was known to have done one
or two noble things--but all this had passed away, for as he grew older
the hopeful springs were dried up, one by one, by an all-absorbing
passion--the love of money--which ultimately made him what he was, a
disgrace to the class to which he belonged, and literally (though not,
it would seem, in the eye of law) a wholesale murderer!

At first he began by holding, and frequently stating, the opinion that
the possession of much money was a most desirable thing; which
undoubtedly was--and is, and will be as long as the world lasts--
perfectly true, if the possession be accompanied with God's blessing.
But Mr Webster did not even pretend to look at the thing in that light.
He scorned to make use of the worldly man's "Oh, of course, of course,"
when that idea was sometimes suggested to him by Christian friends.  On
the contrary, he boldly and coldly asserted his belief that "God, if
there was a God at all, did not interfere in such matters, and that for
his part he would be quite satisfied to let anybody else who wanted it
have the blessing if he only got the money."  And so it pleased God to
give John Webster much money without a blessing.

The immediate result was that he fell in love with it, and, following
the natural laws attached to that vehement passion, he hugged it to his
bosom, became blind to everything else, and gave himself entirely up to
it with a self-denying devotion that robbed him of much of his natural
rest, of nearly all his graces, and most of his happiness--leaving him
with no hope in this world, save that of increasing his stores of money,
and with no hope for the world to come at all.

The abode of Mr Webster's soul was a dingy little office with dirty
little windows, a miserable little fireplace, and filthy little chairs
and tables--all which were quite in keeping with the little occupant of
the place.  The abode of his body was a palatial residence in the
suburbs of the city.  Although Mr Webster's soul was little, his body
was large--much too large indeed for the jewel which it enshrined, and
which was so terribly knocked about inside its large casket that its
usual position was awry, and it never managed to become upright by any
chance whatever.

To the former abode Mr Webster went, body and soul, one dark November
morning.  Having seated himself before his desk, he threw himself back
in his chair and began to open his letters--gazing with a placid smile,
as he did so, at the portrait of his deceased wife's father--a very
wealthy old gentleman--which hung over the fireplace.

We omitted to mention, by the way, that Mr Webster had once been
married.  This trifling little event of his life occurred when he was
about forty-eight years of age, and was a mercantile transaction of an
extremely successful kind, inasmuch as it had brought him, after
deducting lawyers' fees, stamps, duties, lost time in courtship,
wedding-tour expenses, doctor's fees, deathbed expenses, etcetera, a
clear profit of sixty thousand pounds.  To be sure there were also the
additional expenses of four years of married life, and the permanent
board, lodging, and education of a little daughter; but, all things
considered, these were scarcely worth speaking of; and in regard to the
daughter--Annie by name--she would in time become a marketable
commodity, which might, if judiciously disposed of, turn in a
considerable profit, besides being, before she was sold, a useful
machine for sewing on buttons, making tea, reading the papers aloud,
fetching hats and sticks and slippers, etcetera.  There had, however,
been a slight drawback--a sort of temporary loss--on this concern at
first, for the piece of goods became damaged, owing to her mother's
death having weighed heavily on a sensitive and loving spirit, which
found no comfort or sympathy at home, save in the devoted affection of
an old nurse named Niven.  When Annie reached the age of six years, the
doctors ordered change of air, and recommended a voyage to the West
Indies.  Their advice was followed.  Nothing was easier.  Mr Webster
had many ships on the sea.  These were of two classes.  The first class
consisted of good, new, well found and manned ships, with valuable
cargoes on board which were anxiously watched and longed for; the second
class comprised those which were old, worn-out, and unseaworthy, and
which, being insured beyond their value, might go to the bottom when
they pleased.

One of the best of the first class was selected--the _Water Lily_, A1 on
Lloyd's--and in it Annie, with her nurse, was sent to sea for the
benefit of her health.  The parting was a somewhat important event in
Mr Webster's life, for it convinced him, to his own surprise, that his
power to love a human being was not yet utterly gone!  Annie's arms
clasped convulsively round his neck at the moment of parting--her
sobbing "Good-bye, darling papa," had stirred depths which had lain
unmoved almost from the days of early manhood.  But the memory of this
passed away as soon as he turned again to gaze upon the loved
countenance of his yellow mistress.

The voyage did Annie much good.  The short residence in Demerara, while
the vessel was discharging cargo and reloading, wrought wonders, and a
letter, forwarded by a ship that sailed a short time after their arrival
in "foreign parts," told Mr Webster that he might expect to see his
daughter home again, sound and well, in a month or two at the farthest.

But, to return from this digression to the abode of Mr Webster's
soul:--

Having looked at the portrait of his late wife's father for a moment and
smiled, he glanced at the letter in his hand and frowned.  Not because
he was displeased, but because the writing was cramped and difficult to
read.  However, the merchant was accustomed to receive such letters from
seafaring men on many subjects of interest; he therefore broke the seal
and set himself patiently to decipher it.  Immediately his countenance
became ghastly pale, then it flushed up and became pale again, while he
coughed and gasped once or twice, and started up and sat down abruptly.
In fact Mr Webster exhibited all the signs of having received a severe
shock, and an eye-witness might have safely concluded that he had just
read the news of some great mercantile loss.  So it was in one sense--
but that was not the ordinary sense.

The letter in question was in the handwriting of a fussy officious
"bumble" friend of the wealthy man, who dwelt in the town of Covelly.
It ran as follows:

  "My dear Sir,--I write in great haste, and in much perturbation,
  having just heard from my servant of the wreck of your ship, the
  _Water Lily_, in Covelly Bay.  She does not seem to be quite sure,
  however, of the name, and says that the only man who has been rescued
  is scarcely able to speak, so that I do sincerely hope my domestic,
  who is a stupid old woman, may turn out to be mistaken.  I am on the
  point of hasting down to the shore to ascertain the truth for myself,
  but am obliged to write to you this brief and unsatisfactory account
  of what I have heard, in order to save the post, which is just being
  closed.  You shall hear from me again, of course, by the next mail.--I
  remain, my dear sir, in much anxiety, your most obedient humble
  servant,

  "JOSEPH DOWLER."

It chanced that at the moment the above letter was handed to the
postmaster, and while the wax was being melted before the final sealing
of the post-bag, a sailor lad, drenched to the skin and panting
vehemently, dashed into the office.

"Stop! stop!" he cried, "a letter--about the wreck--the _Water Lily_--to
the owners--not too late, I hope?"

"No, no, just in time.  Here, in with it.  There, all right.  Now, Jim,
off with 'ee."

The postman jumped on his vehicle, the whip cracked, and in another
minute the Royal Mail was gone.  Thus it came to pass that two epistles
reached Mr Webster that morning from Covelly.  But in the extreme
agitation of his spirit, he did not observe the other letter which lay
among the usual morning mass that still awaited examination.  After
reading the letter twice, and turning it over with trembling hands, as
if he wished there were more in it, he pronounced a deep malediction on
his "humble" friend, and rang the bell for his confidential clerk, who
was an unusually meek, mild, and middle-aged little man, with a bald
head, a deprecatory expression of countenance, and a pen behind his ear.

"Mr Grinder," said Mr Webster, putting strong constraint on himself,
and pretending to be quite composed, "a letter from Covelly informs me
that it is feared the _Water Lily_ has been wrecked in--"

"The _Water Lily_, sir!" exclaimed Grinder, starting as if he had
received an electric shock.

"I spoke audibly, did I not?" said Mr Webster, turning with a sharp
look on his confidential clerk.

"Ye-es, sir, but, I--Miss An--" The poor man could get no further, being
of a timid, nervous temperament, and Mr Webster, paying no attention to
his remark, was going on to say that he intended to go by the mail to
Covelly without delay to ascertain the truth for himself, when he was
interrupted by the confidential clerk who exclaimed in a burst of
agitation--

"There were _two_ letters, sir, from Covelly this morning--did you
read--"

He stopped, for already his employer had sought for, found, and torn
open the second epistle, which was written in a fair, legible hand.  It
ran thus:--

  "SIR,--My father, Captain Boyns, directs me to inform you that your
  daughter, Miss Annie, has been saved from the wreck of your brig, the
  _Water Lily_, which ran aground here this afternoon, and has become a
  total wreck.  Your daughter's nurse and the crew have also been
  rescued by our new lifeboat, which is a noble craft, and, with God's
  blessing, will yet do good service on this coast.  I have pleasure in
  adding, from myself, that it was my father who rescued your child.
  She fell into the sea when being passed from the wreck into the boat,
  and sank, but my father dived and brought her up in safety.

  "Much of the brig's cargo has been lost, I regret to say, but a good
  deal of it has been washed ashore and saved in a damaged state.  The
  captain says that defective compasses were the cause of the disaster.
  There is not time to give you a more particular account, as it is
  close upon post-time.  Miss Annie sends you her kindest love, and bids
  me say she is none the worse of what she has passed through.--I am,
  sir, your obedient servant,

  "HARRY BOYNS."

"Thank God!" exclaimed Mr Webster fervently.  "Why, what are you
staring at, Mr Grinder?" he added, on observing that his confidential
servant was gazing at him with an expression of considerable surprise.

"Excuse me, sir," stammered the unfortunate man, "I--I--in fact--you
have so often told me that you did not believe in God that I fancied--
I--wondered--"

"Really, Mr Grinder, I must beg of you to confine your remarks in
future entirely to matters of business.  The so-called religious
observations which you sometimes venture to make in my presence are
extremely distasteful, I assure you.  In explanation of what I said,
however, I may tell you that this letter informs me of my daughter's
safety, and I merely used the expression of satisfaction that is usual
on such occasions.  The phrase, as it is generally understood (except by
weak men), commits me to nothing more.  But enough of this.  I find that
the _Water Lily_ has indeed been lost.  It was fully insured, I
believe?"

"Yes, sir, it was."

"Very well; report the matter without delay.  I will go to Covelly
to-night, and shall probably be back to-morrow."

Saying this, Mr Webster left the office, and, on the evening of that
day, found himself seated in Captain Boyns's parlour, with little Annie
on his knee.  Her pretty head was on his shoulder, her fair curls
straggled over his chest, and her round little arms tightly encircled
his large body as far as they could reach, while she sobbed on his bosom
and kissed him by turns.

This was quite a new experience in the life of the gold-lover.  He had
declined to submit to familiar caresses in former years, but on such an
occasion as the present, he felt that common propriety demanded the
sacrifice of himself to some extent.  He therefore allowed Annie to kiss
him, and found the operation--performed as she did it--much more
bearable than he had anticipated; and when Annie exclaimed with a burst
of enthusiasm, "Oh, dear, dear papa, I did feel such a dreadful longing
for you when the waves were roaring round us!" and gave him another
squeeze, he felt that the market price of the bundle of goods on his
knee was rising rapidly.

"Did you think you were going to be drowned, dear?" said Mr Webster
with the air of a man who does not know very well what to say.

"I'm not sure what I thought," replied Annie smiling through her tears.
"Oh, I was so frightened!  You can't think, papa, how very dreadful it
is to see the water boiling all round, and sometimes over you; and such
awful thumping of the ship, and then the masts breaking; but what I
feared most was to see the faces of the sailors, they were so white, and
they looked as if they were afraid.  Are men ever afraid, papa?"

"Sometimes, Annie; but a white face is not always the sign of fear--that
may be caused by anxiety.  Did any of them refuse to obey orders?"

"No; they were very obedient."

"Did any of them get into the lifeboat before you and nurse!"

"Oh, no; they all refused to move till we were put into it, and some of
them ran to help us, and were very very kind?"

"Then you may be quite sure they were not afraid, however pale their
faces were; but what of yourself, Annie--were you afraid?"

"Oh, dreadfully, and so was poor nurse; but once or twice I thought of
the text that--that--you know who was so fond of,--`Call upon me in the
time of trouble and I will deliver thee,' so I prayed and felt a little
better.  Then the lifeboat came, and, oh! how my heart did jump, for it
seemed just like an answer to my prayer.  I never felt any more fear
after that, except when I fell into the sea; but even then I was not so
frightened as I had been, for I felt somehow that I was sure to be
saved, and I was right, you see, for dear Captain Boyns dived for me.  I
