could not be drawn from the earth?" retorted the other.

"Did he do that?" asked several, and for a moment the feeling that had
been with the cripple, and against the victim of this latest disaster,
seemed divided.

Sergius perceived only too clearly that, in the present temper of men's
minds, the faintest spark could light fires of riot and murder that
might leave but a heap of ashes and corpses for the Carthaginian to
gain.  Taking advantage of the momentary lull, he said in conciliatory
tones:--

"Flaminius neglected the auspices, and disaster came upon us for his
impiety, but it appears that he died like a brave soldier, and he is a
whip-knave who strikes at such.  As for this man, he needs succour and
care.  Stand aside, then, that I may take him where his wants may be
ministered to.  There will soon be plenty of fugitives to fill your
ears with tales."

"Not many, master, not many," murmured Decius, as the young man forced
a way for them through the crowd.  "Some are taken, but most lie in the
defile of Trasimenus or under the waters of the Lake."

Sergius hurried on, thinking of Varbo the butcher's dream, and of
Arates the Greek soothsayer's interpretation.




II.

WORDS.

Three days had passed since the awful news from the shore of Lake
Trasimenus had plunged Rome into horror and despair.  Every hour had
brought in stragglers: horse, foot, fugitives from the country-side,
each bearing his tale of slaughter.  Crowds gathered at the gates,
swarming about every newcomer, vociferous for his story, and then
cursing and threatening the teller because it was what they knew it
must be.

In the atrium of Titus Manlius Torquatus, on the brow of the Palatine,
overlooking the New Way, was gathered a company of three: the aged
master of the house, a type of the Roman of better days, and a worthy
descendant of that Torquatus who had won the name; his son Caius, the
youth who had been with Sergius in the Forum; and Lucius Sergius
himself.  All were silent and serious.

The elder Torquatus sat by a square fountain ornamented with bronze
dolphins, that lay in the middle of the mosaic paving of the apartment.
The walls were painted half yellow, half red, after the manner of Magna
Grascia, while around them were ranged the statues of the Manlian
nobles.  The roof was supported in the Tuscan fashion by four beams
crossing each other at right angles, and including between them the
open space above the fountain.

It was the old man who spoke first.

"Do not think, my Lucius, but that I see the justice of your prayer, or
that I wish otherwise than that Marcia should wind wool about your
doorposts.  Still there is much to be said for delay.  Surely these
days are not auspicious ones for marriages, and surely better will
come.  You have my pledge, as had my dead friend Marcus Marcius in the
matter of her name.  Do you think it was nothing for me to call a
daughter other than Manlia--and for a plebeian house at that?  Yet she
is Marcia.  Doubt not that I will keep this word as well."

"Aye, but, father," persisted Sergius, "is it not something that she
should be mine to protect in time of peril?"

"And who so able to protect as Lucius," put in Caius, with an admiring
glance, for Caius Torquatus was six years younger than his friend, and
admired him with all the devotion of a younger man.

"Has it come that our house cannot protect its women?" cried the elder
Torquatus.  "What more shameful than that our daughter should be
carried thus across a Sergian threshold--going like a slave to her
master!"  He spoke proudly and sternly.  Then, turning to Sergius, he
went on more gently: "Were you to remain in the city, my son, there
might be more force in what you claim; but you will go out with one of
the new legions that they will doubtless raise, and you will believe an
old man who says that it is not well for a soldier in the field to have
a young wife at home."

Sergius flushed and was silent, lest his answer should savour of pride
or disrespect toward an elder.

Suddenly they became conscious of a commotion in the street.  Shrill
cries were borne to their ears, and, a moment later, blows fell upon
the outer door, followed by the grinding noise as it turned upon its
pivots.  A freedman burst into the atrium.

Titus Torquatus rose from his seat, and half raised his staff as if to
punish the unceremonious intrusion.  Then he noted the excitement under
which the man seemed to be labouring, and stood stern and silent to
learn what news could warrant such a breach of decorum.

"It is Maharbal, they say--" and the speaker's voice came almost in
gasps--"Maharbal and the Numidians--"

"Not at the gates!" cried both young men, springing to their feet; but
the other shook his head and went on:--

"No, not that--not _yet_, but he has cut up four thousand cavalry in
Umbria with Caius Centenius.  The consul had sent them from Gaul--"

"Be silent!" commanded the elder Torquatus.  "Surely I hear the public
crier in the street.  Is he not summoning the Senate?  Velo," he said,
turning to the freedman; "you are pardoned for your intrusion.  Go,
now, and bear orders from me to arm my household, and that my clients
and freedmen wait upon me in the morning.  It is possible that the
Republic may call for every man; and though I fear Titus Manlius
Torquatus cannot strike the blows he struck in Sicily, yet even _his_
sword might avail to pierce light armour; and he is happy in that he
can give those to the State whose muscles shall suffice to drive the
point through heavy buckler and breastplate."

"Shall it be permitted that I attend you to the Senate House?" asked
Caius.

His father inclined his head, and, donning the togas which slaves had
brought, they hurried into the street, hardly noting that Sergius had
reseated himself and was gazing absently down into the water, counting
the ripples that spread from where each threadlike stream fell from its
dolphin-mouth source.

He did not know how long he had sat thus, nor was he, perhaps,
altogether conscious of his motive in failing to pay the aged senator
the honour of accompanying him, at least so far as the gates of the
Temple of Concord.  Sounds came to his ears from the apartments above:
the trampling of feet and bustle of preparation that told of Velo's
delivery of his patron's commands.  Then a woman's laugh rang through
the passage that led back to the garden of the peristyle.

Sergius rose and turned, just as a girl sprang out into the atrium,
looking back with a laughing challenge to some one who seemed to pursue
her, but who hesitated to issue from the protecting darkness.

"What do you fear, Minutia," she cried.  "My father and Caius have
gone, and there is no one--oh!"

Suddenly she became conscious of Sergius' presence, and her olive
cheeks flushed to a rich crimson.  Then she faced him with an air of
pretty defiance and went on:--

"No one here but Lucius Sergius Fidenas, who should have business
elsewhere."

Sergius said nothing, but continued to stand with eyes fixed
thoughtfully upon her face.

Her figure was tall, slender, and very graceful, her hair and eyes were
dark, and her features delicate and perfectly moulded.  Over all was
now an expression of hoydenish mirth that bespoke the complete
forgetfulness of serious things that only comes to young girls.  His
attentive silence seemed at last to disturb her.  An annoyed look drove
the smile from her lips, and, with an almost imperceptible side motion
of her small head, she went on:--

"Surely Lucius Sergius Fidenas has not allowed my father to go to the
Senate House with only Caius to attend him!  Lucius respects my father
too much for that--and too disinterestedly.  It is an even more serious
omission than his failure to attend the consul at Trasimenus--"

Sergius' eyes blazed at the taunt, and, struggling with the answer that
rose to his lips, he said nothing for fear he might say too much.

The girl watched him closely.  Her mirth returned a little at the sight
of his confusion, and, with her mirth, came something of mercy.

"Oh, to be sure, his wound.  I almost forgot that.  Tell me, my brave
Lucius, did the Gauls bite hard when they caught you in the woods and
drove you and my brave uncle to Tanes?  How funny for naked Gauls to
ambush Roman legionaries and chase them home!  Father has not spoken to
Uncle Cneus since.  He says it was his duty to have remained on the
field, and I suppose he thinks it was yours, too, instead of running
away like a fox to be shut up in his hole."

Sergius had recovered his composure now, but his brow was clouded.

"You are as cruel as ever, Marcia," he said.  "And yet I know you have
heard that it was the men of my maniple who carried me away, senseless
from the blow of a dead man."

"Oh, you _did_ kill him.  I remember now," she resumed, with some
display of interest.  "You had run him through, had you not? and he
just let his big sword drop on your head.  I got Caius to show me about
it, and I was the Gaul.  Caius did not stab me, but I let the stick
fall pretty hard, and Caius had a sore head for two days.  I meant it
for you, because you are trying to make an old woman of me when I am
hardly a girl."

"Marcia--" began Lucius; but she raised her hand warningly and went
on:--

"Do you want me to tell you why my father will not let you marry me
now?  There are two reasons.  One because I don't want him to, and
another because he thinks you must do something great to wipe out the
stain of a Roman centurion's even being _carried_ away before the
Gauls."

"That will be an easy task, judging by the news we receive each day.  I
wish I felt as certain of the safety of the Republic as I am that my
honour shall be satisfactorily vindicated."

He spoke bitterly, but she went on without taking note of his meaning.

"These are auspicious words, my Lucius.  You will regain your honour;
father will once more receive you into his favour, and, by that time, I
shall doubtless be old enough to marry,--perhaps too old,--but, no, I
must not wait so long as that.  Perhaps I shall have married some one
else by the time you are worthy of my favour."

"More probably I shall have ceased to care for the favour of living men
and women."

"Truly?  And you think you will have to die?  Perhaps you will be a
Decius Mus, and stand on the javelin and wear the Cincture Gabinus; and
then I shall mourn for you and hang so many garlands on your tomb that
all the shades of your friends will be mad with jealousy--"

"Marcia, is it possible for you to be serious?"

He was pale with suppressed passion, and, as he spoke, he stepped
forward and laid his hand upon her wrist.

She sprang back and half raised a light staff she carried, while her
face flushed crimson.

"I will be more serious than will please you," she said, "if you please
me as little as you do now.  Learn, I am not your wife that you should
seek to restrain me, and it is quite possible that I never shall be."

"You speak truly," he said; "it is quite possible that no woman shall
be a new mother to the house of Fidenas--that our name shall die in me.
So be it; and may the gods only avert the evils that threaten the
Republic, nor look upon one of the race of the Trojan Segestes as an
unworthy offering."

Bending his head in respectful salutation, he turned toward the
entrance hall.

Marcia stood silent beside the fountain, and her face clouded with
thought.  The sound of her lover's footsteps grew fainter and fainter.
She started forward as if to follow him.  Then she stopped and
listened.  The noise of the street had drowned their echoes; the door
had creaked twice on its pivots.  He was gone.  Then she called,
"Lucius!" but there was no answer.  Her eyes drooped with a little
frown of regret, but in a moment she turned away laughing.

"Never mind.  He cannot do anything very desperate yet, and I will
treat him better next time--perhaps."




III.

PARTING.

The ensuing days were pregnant with rumour and action.  The waves of
terror and despair that lashed over the city, as blow after blow fell,
had now receded.  The white banner, that was always lowered at the
approach of an enemy, still spread its undulating folds above
Janiculum; the crops and fruit trees and vines smiled upon the
hillsides; the flocks and herds browsed peacefully along the Campagna
with never a Numidian pillager to disturb their serenity; and, amid
all, there was no rumour of allied gates opened to receive the invader,
no welcome from the Italians whom he had striven to conciliate.
Courage returned, and with courage firmness, and with firmness
confidence to endure and dare and do, so long as invaders presumed to
set foot upon the heritage of Rome.

How far this new confidence was born of the news that the Carthaginian
was turning aside to the west, through Umbria and Picenum, how far by
the rumour that Spoletum had closed her gates and repulsed his
vanguard, or how far by wrath at the tales of ravage and the numberless
murders of Roman citizens that marked his line of march, it would be
difficult to apportion.

However these, the city was now seething with energetic preparation.
The Senate sat daily and into each night.  No word of peace was
uttered--all was war and revenge.  Quintus Fabius Maximus was elected
pro-dictator by a vote of the Comitia--not dictator, because that could
only be done through appointment by the surviving consul, then absent
in Gaul--or none knew where.  By the same power, and in order to
appease the commons irritated by criticisms of Flaminius, Marcus
Minutius Rufus was elected master of the horse.  Nor were the gods
neglected.  Their stimulating influence was invoked by the dictator to
inspire the people with confidence, while he soothed them with the
intimation that Flaminius had failed rather through overcourage and
neglect of divine things than through mere plebeian temerity and
ignorance.  Fabius took care to impress it upon all that he himself
would take full warning from the lesson.  He moved that the Sibylline
books should be consulted, and the Senate promptly acted upon the
motion.  These directed that a holy spring be proclaimed forthwith;
that every animal fit for sacrifice, and born between the Kalends of
March and May throughout all Italy, should be offered to Jupiter.
Votive games were decided upon, couches were set by the judges, whereon
the twelve gods should feast in splendour, temples were vowed, to Venus
Erycina by the dictator himself, to Mens by Titus Otacilius, the
praetor.

But with all, and, as Fabius put it, that the immortal gods should not
be overburdened with the petty affairs of mortals, every care that
human prudence and warcraft could suggest was taken.  Walls and towers
were strengthened, and bridges were broken down; the inhabitants of
open towns were driven into places of security, and their houses and
crops destroyed.  Amid all, the rumour came that Servilius was
hastening back from Gaul; then, that he was close at hand, and,
finally, Fabius set out to meet him, sending orders in advance that the
consul should come without lictors, so that the dignity of the
dictatorship might stand high before the people.  And when Servilius
had come, in all respects as commanded, then he, the consul, after
first delivering up his legions which he had left at Ariminum, was
ordered to Ostia and the fleet to keep watch and ward over the Italian
coast and to protect the corn ships.  So all the armies of the Republic
went to the pro-dictator, together with authority to raise such more as
he should consider needful; two new legions in the place of those dead
on the shores of Trasimenus, and some thousands of poorer citizens from
the tribes, to man the quinqueremes of Servilius and the walls of Rome.

Amid these days of bustle and preparation, Sergius had found little
difficulty in keeping his footsteps from Marcia's threshold.  After the
first grief of the conviction that she did not love him, pride came to
his rescue.  Should he, the head of the noblest house of the noble
Sergian gens, should he abase himself and submit to scornful words even
from a daughter of Torquatus? or, yet, should he, as a man, desire to
bear the torch before an unwilling bride?  These were simple questions,
and there was but one word that could answer them; so Sergius struggled
to put Marcia from his heart, until he flattered himself that the
difficult task had at last been accomplished.

During this internal struggle, there came, also, to help him, word that
he had been named as one of the military tribunes in the new Fourth
Legion, and, his wound being now almost well, he threw himself headlong
into the work of the levy and of exercising his men, striving to bring
them to such a degree of efficiency as might win honour for himself and
advantage to the Republic.  Now and again twinges of the old heart-pain
would rack him, but he obstinately attributed all depression and
melancholy to the inferior quality, both physically and socially, of
many of the new levies, and to his misgivings as to the account they
would render of themselves when confronted by the veterans of Hannibal.

At last the day of marching arrived, and with it the greatest struggle
of all.  Suddenly a suspicion awoke within him, whispering that the
task he had set for himself was but poorly done; that the image of
Marcia still smiled unbanished above the altar of his heart; and, with
all his pride and strength, this suspicion of his weakness was, oddly
enough, a source of positive exultation.  Caius had been with him
through much of his work, for Caius served in the same legion.  It was
evident, however, that the young man had received strict orders on one
subject; for, in all their talks, the name of Marcia never passed his
lips.  This was unlike Caius, who was thought by many to be given to
overmuch speaking, and, for that reason, it irritated Sergius the more,
who would sooner have cut away his hand than questioned his friend
concerning his sister.  Thus the two men, illogically but humanly
enough, continued to grow apart, until, with never a thought but of
friendliness, their intercourse became limited, through sheer
embarrassment, to the commonplaces of fellow-soldiers who held light
acquaintance with each other's names and faces.

As the hour drew near, the city bubbled with excitement, and the altars
of the gods reeked with unnumbered victims.  Especially invoked were
Castor, Fortune, Liberty, and Hope, but, above all, the mighty trinity
of the Capitol.  Lest the pang of so great a parting with men who were
about to encounter such grave dangers might sap the courage of those
remaining, and thence that of the new levies, the dictator had wisely
decreed that the army should assemble at Tibur.  So it happened that
there was none to go now save himself and a small escort of cavalry,
five turmae, at the head of which was Sergius.  With these went Rome's
last hope: the cast behind which lay only ruin, but for the averting
favour of the gods.

At midday the fasces would be carried forth, and it lacked but an hour
of the time.  Sergius had prepared everything; his men were ready to
mount at the blast of the trumpet, and his household was set in order
against the absence of its master.  He was standing within the Viminal
Gate, while an attendant held his horse close by and a little apart
from the crowds of weeping women who surrounded the soldiers of the
dictator's escort.  Suddenly he felt some one pluck him by the cloak,
and turned quickly to see a young woman in the single tunic of a slave.
Her dress, however, was of finer texture than that worn by most of her
class, and seemed to bespeak a rich mistress and especial favour.  She
stood with her finger to her lips, her eyes great with the importance
of her mission.

"My mistress, the Lady Marcia, orders that you come and bid her
farewell," she whispered hurriedly.

Then she darted away among the crowd, before the young tribune could
make answer to an invitation so oddly worded.

His first impulse was to show the Lady Marcia that he was not to be
dismissed and sent for--much less ordered back at the caprice of a
girl.  His next was to humour the whim of a child, and his third was to
obey humbly and thankfully, without a thought but of Marcia's beauty
and his own good fortune.

A word to his slave and another to his horse, whereat the former loosed
the bridle, and the latter knelt for his master.  Then came a wild
gallop across the crest of the Viminal Hill, through the ill-omened
street where the wicked Tullia had driven over her father's corpse,
into the Forum, and out up the New Way to the house of Torquatus.

Throwing his rein to the porter, Sergius entered the court of the
atrium, vacant and resounding to the hurried tread of his cothurni.
Pausing for a moment and hesitating to penetrate farther into the
house, he became aware that the porter had followed him.  Like most of
his class, he was a man considerably past middle life, and thus
considered suited to the comparative ease and responsibility of his
position.  With a freedom and garrulity born of long service, he
began:--

