indispensable at present, though she supposed if she went to College
later on, she would have to get used to being away.

Eastertide came, and brought welcome holidays. Gwen helped to deck the
church with daffodils, and great boughs of pink almond blossom, and
bunches of sweet-smelling wallflowers. She loved the Easter
decorations far more than those at Christmas, and this time she had
rather a free hand, for Beatrice was too busy to come, and Gwen was
allowed to do the lectern and reading desk all by herself, while
Winnie undertook the pulpit. She gave infinite pains to her work, and
Father praised the result, which was a tremendous satisfaction. To do
anything for Father was a joy. Gwen often wished she could play the
organ like Winnie, but she was not clever at music. Beatrice had made
a great effort to teach her the piano, with poor success, for she was
not a docile or attentive pupil, and the lessons generally involved a
wrangle between the two sisters, Beatrice losing her patience, and
Gwen arguing hotly. Finally Father had put a stop to the lessons
altogether, on the ground that it was sheer waste of time, and Gwen
was better employed at something else. Lesbia, however, played rather
nicely; she could manage the harmonium at the Sunday School, and was
just beginning to practise the organ under Winnie's instructions. It
was the one thing Lesbia did pretty well, for she did not distinguish
herself at school. She was not a remarkably bright girl, and was very
childish for her age. Though Gwen was fond of her younger sister, and
petted her like everybody else, the two were not in any sense
companions. Lesbia was far more on a level with the little boys, and
generally amused herself with Giles or Basil; Gwen's schemes and
projects were miles above her head.

The holidays, though very enjoyable, were quite uneventful. They
slipped away much too swiftly, and the ordinary round of school and
home work began again. It was the summer term, however, and to Gwen
that meant a great deal. She took up tennis with hot enthusiasm,
practising both at home and at school in any time she could spare. Her
long arms and strong wrists stood her in good stead, and it began to
be said in the Form that "Gwen Gascoyne's play was quite decent". She
mowed and rolled the little lawn at the Parsonage vigorously, marked
out the courts with a brush, and persuaded either Beatrice or Winnie
to have a game every evening before bedtime, and Father whenever she
could catch him.

"If only I'd a better racket!" she sighed one night, "it's impossible
to do very much with a wretched old thing that's half sprung. You
should have seen my serves when Netta lent me hers yesterday!"

"Why don't you buy a new one, then?" suggested Lesbia. "You're the
Croesus of the family. Your money box must be bursting, for you've
been hoarding up for ages. How much have you got in it?"

"Ah! Wouldn't you like to know!" returned Gwen, suddenly desirous of
changing the subject.

"You really might get a new racket, Gwen," agreed Winnie. "It's a good
idea of Lesbia's. We'd all borrow it on occasion."

"Oh, I dare say! Very nice for you all, no doubt. Rackets are rather
expensive little luxuries, my dear girl. Otherwise I'd be happy to
accommodate you."

"You're a perfect old miser! What are you going to do with your
wealth? Invest it in an annuity?"

"Probably speculate on the Stock Exchange, or take up Mexican mines!"
declared Gwen, trying to turn things off with a laugh.

"Well, you're the only member of the family who keeps any money."

"A good example in thrift to the rest of you, then!"

Gwen did not dare to complain again about the poorness of her racket,
though it was a serious handicap in her games at school, where most of
the girls came supplied with the very best. In spite of this
impediment her play improved steadily, and she several times beat
Louise Mawson, though she could not vanquish Hilda Brown or Charlotte
Perry, the champions at present of the Form.

"I suppose you're going to take swimming, Gwen?" said Netta one day.
"Miss Trent says we begin this afternoon."

"Haven't heard anything about it. Please condescend to enlighten my
ignorance."

"Why, don't you know? We're going to the baths every Wednesday. It's
clean-water day, and the whole school's to go in relays. They've a
ripping teacher of swimming there now, a Miss Morris, who swam the
Channel halfway, or did something else marvellous, I forget exactly
what. Anyway, it's arranged we're to have a proper course of lessons.
I expect every girl in the Form will join."

"It sounds--well, just idyllic!" said Gwen. "Whether I can take it or
not is another question. I shall have to ask at home first."

"Oh, Mr. Gascoyne's sure to say 'yes'. Why shouldn't he? All girls
ought to learn to swim."

It was impossible to explain to Netta that the fee for the course
might prove an insurmountable barrier. Gwen was always too proud to
plead poverty, and hid her father's narrow circumstances from her
schoolmates as well as she could.

"You won't have time to ask before this afternoon," said Netta. "I
advise you to go to the baths, though. I believe the lessons don't
begin till next week, and this is only what you might call a trial
trip, so you could see how you like it. Miss Trent says we can get
bathing dresses there to-day, and bring our own afterwards."

The Rodenhurst girls had not before been taken to the public baths at
Stedburgh, and the swimming course was a new departure of Miss
Roscoe's. The idea proved extremely popular, and almost everybody
wanted at least to sample the experiment.

"Oh, yes, you might go to-day," said Winnie, whom Gwen caught and
consulted in the passage. "There's no great damage in that. You don't
pledge yourself to take the course. Lesbia can go too. Miss Roscoe
said it was to be a special afternoon."

"That's all right, then," said Gwen, rushing jubilantly away.

She was immensely anxious to learn to swim. The bay at Skelwick was so
dangerous that Father would not allow any of them to bathe there, so
as yet she had had no chance of testing her skill in natation. She
loved all kinds of physical sports, they seemed a necessity of her
active, fast-growing young body, and the prospect of trying a new
element was alluring. In the very highest of spirits she joined the
procession of Fifth Form girls that filed off at three o'clock, in
charge of Miss Douglas.

The baths at Stedburgh had only lately been enlarged and re-opened,
and in their improved shape were now quite a feature of the town. They
were supplied with salt water, and could boast great conveniences in
the matter of dressing-rooms, hair-drying apparatus, and plentiful hot
towels. Gwen had never been inside before, so she gazed with delighted
admiration, at the ladies' large bath, with its pale-green tiles, its
flights of steps, and its diving board at the deep end. There was a
cord across the middle, with a big notice that non-swimmers were to
venture no farther, and must confine themselves to the shallow end;
also that water wings could be hired.

"I hear Miss Morris won't let her pupils use those, though," said
Netta. "She calls it an amateurish dodge. I should think we shall have
to hold each other up while we practise our strokes!"

Gwen secured a bathing costume that fitted quite tolerably. She had no
mackintosh cap, but she plaited her hair very tightly instead. She did
not much care whether it got wet or not. It was most exciting to run
down the steps and slip into the lovely clear green water. She had
undressed with such record speed that she was actually the first, but
she was very soon joined by a bevy of laughing, squealing maidens. It
was an amusing, but not a picturesque sight. The Fifth Form attired in
bathing costumes were about as different from the academy pictures of
classical nymphs as a man in the street from a statue of Apollo.
Instead of floating about in graceful attitudes, with the "amber
dropping hair" of Milton's Sabrina, they "larked" like a school of
porpoises, splashing each other and playing tricks. There was no
attempt at a lesson that afternoon. The girls just enjoyed themselves
in their own way, with many cautions from Miss Douglas not to trespass
beyond the danger line. Gwen, held up by Netta, made frantic efforts
to try her strokes, though her attempts invariably ended in a plunge
from which she came up spluttering. Netta, with a very little help
from Gwen, got on much better, for she had been to the baths before,
and had had some practice. Several of the girls were already good
swimmers, and after showing their prowess, were allowed to disport
themselves at the deep end.

"I shan't be content till I can dive," declared Gwen, watching
enviously as Elspeth Frazer took a header. "I shouldn't think it's
difficult when you get the knack. It will be just having the pluck to
try. I can float the least little scrap already, so I've learnt
something this afternoon, and so have you."

"We shall both get on grandly at the lessons," assented Netta.

The whole Form agreed unanimously that the experiment was "ripping",
and everyone was extremely anxious to come again. Gwen went home mad
with enthusiasm, and Lesbia, whose Form had preceded the Fifth, was in
equal ecstasies. Both besieged their father with wild entreaties to be
allowed to take the course.

"You haven't told me the fees, and that's a very important point,"
said Mr. Gascoyne.

"I quite forgot to ask," admitted Gwen, brought down to the mundane
side of the question. "Lesbia, do you know?"

Lesbia shook her head. She rarely knew anything; as a rule other
people were ready to manage her affairs for her.

"Miss Douglas says the swimming course is to be half a guinea each,
and admission to the baths threepence a time. There is a special
arrangement for schools," said Winnie, supplying the needed
information.

"Then I must think it over," returned Father. "Times are bad just now,
chicks, and I don't know whether I can afford it. A curacy is not a
fat living, remember, and there are seven of you!"

Very much sobered, the enthusiastic bathers betook themselves to their
preparation.

"I wish everything nice didn't cost money!" sighed Gwen.

She broached the subject to Beatrice during the evening.

"I've been talking about it to Father," said the latter. "I'm afraid
he can't manage it for you both, but he might possibly for one. It
will be a choice between you and Lesbia."

"I'm the eldest!" urged Gwen quickly.

"Yes, I know you are, but on the other hand, it really is Lesbia's
turn, because you took the St. John's Ambulance last winter at the
Parish Room, and Lesbia didn't."

"Swimming's a million times nicer than ambulance!"

"It's not any more useful. Don't be selfish, Gwen! You know how hard
up we are. We can't all of us do everything, and I think this time it
certainly ought to be Lesbia."

Gwen kicked the orchard gate against which they were leaning, and
tried to keep down a lump that rose in her throat. Beatrice's
arguments were unanswerable.

"It'll be sickening to be the only one in the Form who doesn't take
swimming," she said at last. "Every single girl will join except me. I
shall have to stop behind and do prep. instead. I'll feel more utterly
out of things than ever."

"You could pay for the course yourself, if you like," suggested
Beatrice. "What have you done with all your money?"

Gwen's restless hands were hacking notches on the top bar of the gate.
Her penknife slipped suddenly, and cut her finger.

"Your own fault, if you will be so clumsy!" said Beatrice. "Come
indoors, and I'll tie it up for you. You'd better hold it under the
cold-water tap first."

Gwen groaned in spirit as she went to bed that night.

"I shall never hear the last of that wretched fifteen shillings!" she
thought "I feel like Mr. Caudle in the _Curtain Lectures_, when he'd
lent a five-pound note to a friend. That money of mine was to have
bought Christmas presents, and boots for Johnnie Cass, and a new
tennis racket, and paid for the swimming, and I don't know what else,
according to my family's ideas. Oh, dear! Being poor's a hateful
business! I wish Dad were Archbishop of Canterbury, instead of only
Curate-in-charge of Skelwick Bay!"




CHAPTER XIV

Gwen meets Trouble


    "There's a sickening author called Virgil,
    Don't I wish I were chanting his dirge--ill!
      As a door-nail he's dead
      Yet his works live instead,
    And to me they're a regular scourge--ill!"

So sang Netta, banging down her copy of _AEneid I_ and _II_ with a
force that almost dissevered its cover and made the desk ring.

"I call it absolute sickening nonsense," she continued energetically.
"Why in the name of all common sense should we girls in this modern
twentieth century be expected to bother our precious heads over
antiquated old rubbish that would be far better consigned to decent
burial? What's the use of it, I want to know?"

"'An admirable training for the intellect', my dear! to quote
Thistles," said Annie Edwards. "According to her theory you ought to
feel your mind sprouting at every fresh page, and sending out shoots
of wisdom."

"Sprouting, indeed! Just the other way!" grunted Netta. "Latin has a
paralysing effect upon my brain. Instead of sharpening me it deadens
my faculties. When I've been trying to construe a page of Virgil, my
intellect feels a pulp."

"Then the obvious moral is, don't try!" yawned Millicent Cooper.

"I don't."

"No more you do, you old slacker!"

"Why should one try when one can scrape through without?"

"Not an easy thing if Thistles puts you on a difficult bit! Have you
made any sense out of this part? It's uncommonly stiff."

"Not I--I shall throw myself as usual on Gwen's mercy. Come here,
Gwendolen mine, that's a sweet angelic cherub, and interpret these
abominable lines!"

Gwen came rather reluctantly. Of late Netta had grown into the habit
of applying to her for help with her extremely ill-prepared work, and
the habit was assuming proportions that Gwen did not like. At first it
had only been a word or two, then an odd sentence, but it was rapidly
developing into a demand for a translation of the whole lesson.

"Oh, I say, Netta, you make me a regular henchman!" she objected. "Why
should I act as providence to you continually?"

"Because you know the lesson, my hearty, and I don't. Ergo, it is your
duty and privilege to impart your information to me."

