a beauty and so inflamed the hearts of all beholding her.

On the first day after her ladyship's last battle with her horse, the one
which ended in such victory to her that she rode him home hard through
the streets without an outbreak, he white with lather, and marked with
stripes, but his large eye holding in its velvet a look which seemed
almost like a human thought--on that day after there occurred a thing
which gave the town new matter to talk of.

His Grace of Osmonde had been in France, called there by business of the
State, and during his absence the gossip concerning the horse Devil had
taken the place of that which had before touched on himself.  'Twas not
announced that he was to return to England, and indeed there were those
who, speaking with authority, said that for two weeks at least his
affairs abroad would not be brought to a close; and yet on this morning,
as my Lady Dunstanwolde rode 'neath the trees, holding Devil well in
hand, and watching him with eagle keenness of eye, many looking on in
wait for the moment when the brute might break forth suddenly again, a
horseman was seen approaching at a pace so rapid that 'twas on the verge
of a gallop, and the first man who beheld him looked amazed and lifted
his hat, and the next, seeing him, spoke to another, who bowed with him,
and all along the line of loungers hats were removed, and people wore the
air of seeing a man unexpectedly, and hearing a name spoken in
exclamation by his side, Sir John Oxon looked round and beheld ride by my
lord Duke of Osmonde.  The sun was shining brilliantly, and all the Park
was gay with bright warmth and greenness of turf and trees.  Clorinda
felt the glow of the summer morning permeate her being.  She kept her
watch upon her beast; but he was going well, and in her soul she knew
that he was beaten, and that her victory had been beheld by the one man
who knew that it meant to her that which it seemed to mean also to
himself.  And filled with this thought and the joy of it, she rode
beneath the trees, and so was riding with splendid spirit when she heard
a horse behind her, and looked up as it drew near, and the rich crimson
swept over her in a sweet flood, so that it seemed to her she felt it
warm on her very shoulders, 'neath her habit, for 'twas Osmonde's self
who had followed and reached her, and uncovered, keeping pace by her
side.

Ah, what a face he had, and how his eyes burned as they rested on her.  It
was such a look she met, that for a moment she could not find speech, and
he himself spoke as a man who, through some deep emotion, has almost lost
his breath.

"My Lady Dunstanwolde," he began; and then with a sudden passion,
"Clorinda, my beloved!"  The time had come when he could not keep
silence, and with great leapings of her heart she knew.  Yet not one word
said she, for she could not; but her beauty, glowing and quivering under
his eyes' great fire, answered enough.

"Were it not that I fear for your sake the beast you ride," he said, "I
would lay my hand upon his bridle, that I might crush your hand in mine.
At post-haste I have come from France, hearing this thing--that you
endangered every day that which I love so madly.  My God! beloved, cruel,
cruel woman--sure you must know!"

She answered with a breathless wild surrender.  "Yes, yes!" she gasped,
"I know."

"And yet you braved this danger, knowing that you might leave me a
widowed man for life."

"But," she said, with a smile whose melting radiance seemed akin to
tears--"but see how I have beaten him--and all is passed."

"Yes, yes," he said, "as you have conquered all--as you have conquered
me--and did from the first hour.  But God forbid that you should make me
suffer so again."

"Your Grace," she said, faltering, "I--I will not!"

"Forgive me for the tempest of my passion," he said.  "'Twas not thus I
had thought to come to make my suit.  'Tis scarcely fitting that it
should be so; but I was almost mad when I first heard this rumour,
knowing my duty would not loose me to come to you at once--and knowing
you so well, that only if your heart had melted to the one who besought
you, you would give up."

"I--give up," she answered; "I give up."

"I worship you," he said; "I worship you."  And their meeting eyes were
drowned in each other's tenderness.

They galloped side by side, and the watchers looked on, exchanging words
and glances, seeing in her beauteous, glowing face, in his joyous one,
the final answer to the question they had so often asked each other.
'Twas his Grace of Osmonde who was the happy man, he and no other.  That
was a thing plain indeed to be seen, for they were too high above the
common world to feel that they must play the paltry part of outward
trifling to deceive it; and as the sun pierces through clouds and is
stronger than they, so their love shone like the light of day itself
through poor conventions.  They did not know the people gazed and
whispered, and if they had known it, the thing would have counted for
naught with them.

"See!" said my lady, patting her Devil's neck--"see, he knows that you
have come, and frets no more."

They rode homeward together, the great beauty and the great duke, and all
the town beheld; and after they had passed him where he stood, John Oxon
mounted his own horse and galloped away, white-lipped and with mad eyes.

"Let me escort you home," the duke had said, "that I may kneel to you
there, and pour forth my heart as I have so dreamed of doing.  To-morrow
I must go back to France, because I left my errand incomplete.  I stole
from duty the time to come to you, and I must return as quickly as I
came."  So he took her home; and as they entered the wide hall together,
side by side, the attendant lacqueys bowed to the ground in deep,
welcoming obeisance, knowing it was their future lord and master they
received.

Together they went to her own sitting-room, called the Panelled Parlour,
a beautiful great room hung with rare pictures, warm with floods of the
bright summer sunshine, and perfumed with bowls of summer flowers; and as
the lacquey departed, bowing, and closed the door behind him, they turned
and were enfolded close in each other's arms, and stood so, with their
hearts beating as surely it seemed to them human hearts had never beat
before.

"Oh! my dear love, my heavenly love!" he cried.  "It has been so long--I
have lived in prison and in fetters--and it has been so long!"

Even as my Lord Dunstanwolde had found cause to wonder at her gentle
ways, so was this man amazed at her great sweetness, now that he might
cross the threshold of her heart.  She gave of herself as an empress
might give of her store of imperial jewels, with sumptuous lavishness,
knowing that the store could not fail.  In truth, it seemed that it must
be a dream that she so stood before him in all her great, rich
loveliness, leaning against his heaving breast, her arms as tender as his
own, her regal head thrown backward that they might gaze into the depths
of each other's eyes.

"From that first hour that I looked up at you," she said, "I knew you
were my lord--my lord!  And a fierce pain stabbed my heart, knowing you
had come too late by but one hour; for had it not been that Dunstanwolde
had led me to you, I knew--ah! how well I knew--that our hearts would
have beaten together not as two hearts but as one."

"As they do now," he cried.

"As they do now," she answered--"as they do now!"

"And from the moment that your rose fell at my feet and I raised it in my
hand," he said, "I knew I held some rapture which was my own.  And when
you stood before me at Dunstanwolde's side and our eyes met, I could not
understand--nay, I could scarce believe that it had been taken from me."

There, in her arms, among the flowers and in the sweetness of the sun, he
lived again the past, telling her of the days when, knowing his danger,
he had held himself aloof, declining to come to her lord's house with the
familiarity of a kinsman, because the pang of seeing her often was too
great to bear; and relating to her also the story of the hours when he
had watched her and she had not known his nearness or guessed his pain,
when she had passed in her equipage, not seeing him, or giving him but a
gracious smile.  He had walked outside her window at midnight sometimes,
too, coming because he was a despairing man, and could not sleep, and
returning homeward, having found no rest, but only increase of anguish.
"Sometimes," he said, "I dared not look into your eyes, fearing my own
would betray me; but now I can gaze into your soul itself, for the
midnight is over--and joy cometh with the morning."

As he had spoken, he had caressed softly with his hand her cheek and her
crown of hair, and such was his great gentleness that 'twas as if he
touched lovingly a child; for into her face there had come that look
which it would seem that in the arms of the man she loves every true
woman wears--a look which is somehow like a child's in its trusting,
sweet surrender and appeal, whatsoever may be her stateliness and the
splendour of her beauty.

Yet as he touched her cheek so and her eyes so dwelt on him, suddenly her
head fell heavily upon his breast, hiding her face, even while her
unwreathing arms held more closely.

"Oh! those mad days before!" she cried--"Oh! those mad, mad days before!"

"Nay, they are long passed, sweet," he said, in his deep, noble voice,
thinking that she spoke of the wildness of her girlish years--"and all
our days of joy are yet to come."

"Yes, yes," she cried, clinging closer, yet with shuddering, "they were
_before_--the joy--the joy is all to come."




CHAPTER XV--In which Sir John Oxon finds again a trophy he had lost


His Grace of Osmonde went back to France to complete his business, and
all the world knew that when he returned to England 'twould be to make
his preparations for his marriage with my Lady Dunstanwolde.  It was a
marriage not long to be postponed, and her ladyship herself was known
already to be engaged with lacemen, linen-drapers, toyshop women, and
goldsmiths.  Mercers awaited upon her at her house, accompanied by their
attendants, bearing burdens of brocades and silks, and splendid stuffs of
all sorts.  Her chariot was to be seen standing before their shops, and
the interest in her purchases was so great that fashionable beauties
would contrive to visit the counters at the same hours as herself, so
that they might catch glimpses of what she chose.  In her own great house
all was repressed excitement; her women were enraptured at being allowed
the mere handling and laying away of the glories of her wardrobe; the
lacqueys held themselves with greater state, knowing that they were soon
to be a duke's servants; her little black Nero strutted about, his turban
set upon his pate with a majestic cock, and disdained to enter into
battle with such pages of his own colour as wore only silver collars, he
feeling assured that his own would soon be of gold.

The World of Fashion said when her ladyship's equipage drove by, that her
beauty was like that of the god of day at morning, and that 'twas plain
that no man or woman had ever beheld her as his Grace of Osmonde would.

"She loves at last," a wit said.  "Until the time that such a woman
loves, however great her splendour, she is as the sun behind a cloud."

"And now this one hath come forth, and shines so that she warms us in
mere passing," said another.  "What eyes, and what a mouth, with that
strange smile upon it.  Whoever saw such before? and when she came to
town with my Lord Dunstanwolde, who, beholding her, would have believed
that she could wear such a look?"

In sooth, there was that in her face and in her voice when she spoke
which almost made Anne weep, through its strange sweetness and radiance.
'Twas as if the flood of her joy had swept away all hardness and disdain.
Her eyes, which had seemed to mock at all they rested on, mocked no more,
but ever seemed to smile at some dear inward thought.

One night when she went forth to a Court ball, being all attired in
brocade of white and silver, and glittering with the Dunstanwolde
diamonds, which starred her as with great sparkling dewdrops, and yet had
not the radiance of her eyes and smile, she was so purely wonderful a
vision that Anne, who had been watching her through all the time when she
had been under the hands of her tirewoman, and beholding her now so
dazzling and white a shining creature, fell upon her knees to kiss her
hand almost as one who worships.

"Oh, sister," she said, "you look like a spirit.  It is as if with the
earth you had naught to do--as if your eyes saw Heaven itself and Him who
reigns there."

The lovely orbs of Clorinda shone more still like the great star of
morning.

"Sister Anne," she said, laying her hand on her white breast, "at times I
think that I must almost be a spirit, I feel such heavenly joy.  It is as
if He whom you believe in, and who can forgive and wipe out sins, has
forgiven me, and has granted it to me, that I may begin my poor life
again.  Ah!  I will make it better; I will try to make it as near an
angel's life as a woman can; and I will do no wrong, but only good; and I
will believe, and pray every day upon my knees--and all my prayers will
be that I may so live that my dear lord--my Gerald--could forgive me all
that I have ever done--and seeing my soul, would know me worthy of him.
Oh! we are strange things, we human creatures, Anne," with a tremulous
smile; "we do not believe until we want a thing, and feel that we shall
die if 'tis not granted to us; and then we kneel and kneel and believe,
because we _must_ have somewhat to ask help from."

"But all help has been given to you," poor tender Anne said, kissing her
hand again; "and I will pray, I will pray--"

"Ay, pray, Anne, pray with all thy soul," Clorinda answered; "I need thy
praying--and thou didst believe always, and have asked so little that has
been given thee."

"Thou wast given me, sister," said Anne.  "Thou hast given me a home and
kindness such as I never dared to hope; thou hast been like a great star
to me--I have had none other, and I thank Heaven on my knees each night
for the brightness my star has shed on me."

"Poor Anne, dear Anne!" Clorinda said, laying her arms about her and
kissing her.  "Pray for thy star, good, tender Anne, that its light may
not be quenched."  Then with a sudden movement her hand was pressed upon
her bosom again.  "Ah, Anne," she cried, and in the music of her voice,
agony itself was ringing--"Anne, there is but one thing on this earth God
rules over--but one thing that belongs--_belongs_ to me; and 'tis Gerald
Mertoun--and he is mine and _shall_ not be taken from me, for he is a
part of me, and I a part of him!"

"He will not be," said Anne--"he will not."

"He cannot," Clorinda answered--"he shall not!  'Twould not be human."

She drew a long breath and was calm again.

"Did it reach your ears," she said, reclasping a band of jewels on her
arm, "that John Oxon had been offered a place in a foreign Court, and
that 'twas said he would soon leave England?"

"I heard some rumour of it," Anne answered, her emotion getting the
better of her usual discreet speech.  "God grant it may be true!"

"Ay!" said Clorinda, "would God that he were gone!"

But that he was not, for when she entered the assembly that night he was
standing near the door as though he lay in waiting for her, and his eyes
met hers with a leaping gleam, which was a thing of such exultation that
to encounter it was like having a knife thrust deep into her side and
through and through it, for she knew full well that he could not wear
such a look unless he had some strength of which she knew not.

This gleam was in his eyes each time she found herself drawn to them, and
it seemed as though she could look nowhere without encountering his gaze.
He followed her from room to room, placing himself where she could not
lift her eyes without beholding him; when she walked a minuet with a
royal duke, he stood and watched her with such a look in his face as drew
all eyes towards him.

"'Tis as if he threatens her," one said.  "He has gone mad with
disappointed love."

But 'twas not love that was in his look, but the madness of long-thwarted
passion mixed with hate and mockery; and this she saw, and girded her
soul with all its strength, knowing that she had a fiercer beast to deal
with, and a more vicious and dangerous one, than her horse Devil.  That
he kept at first at a distance from her, and but looked on with this
secret exultant glow in his bad, beauteous eyes, told her that at last he
felt he held some power in his hands, against which all her defiance
would be as naught.  Till this hour, though she had suffered, and when
alone had writhed in agony of grief and bitter shame, in his presence she
had never flinched.  Her strength she knew was greater than his; but his
baseness was his weapon, and the depths of that baseness she knew she had
never reached.

At midnight, having just made obeisance before Royalty retiring, she felt
that at length he had drawn near and was standing at her side.

"To-night," he said, in the low undertone it was his way to keep for such
occasions, knowing how he could pierce her ear--"to-night you are Juno's
self--a very Queen of Heaven!"

She made no answer.

"And I have stood and watched you moving among all lesser goddesses as
the moon sails among the stars, and I have smiled in thinking of what
these lesser deities would say if they had known what I bear in my breast
to-night."

She did not even make a movement--in truth, she felt that at his next
words she might change to stone.

"I have found it," he said--"I have it here--the lost treasure--the tress
of hair like a raven's wing and six feet long.  Is there another woman in
England who could give a man a lock like it?"

She felt then that she had, in sooth, changed to stone; her heart hung
without moving in her breast; her eyes felt great and hollow and staring
as she lifted them to him.

"I knew not," she said slowly, and with bated breath, for the awfulness
of the moment had even made her body weak as she had never known it feel
before--"I knew not truly that hell made things like you."

Whereupon he made a movement forward, and the crowd about surged nearer
with hasty exclamations, for the strange weakness of her body had
overpowered her in a way mysterious to her, and she had changed to
marble, growing too heavy of weight for her sinking limbs.  And those in
the surrounding groups saw a marvellous thing--the same being that my
Lady Dunstanwolde swayed as she turned, and falling, lay stretched, as if
dead, in her white and silver and flashing jewels at the startled
beholders' feet.

* * * * *

She wore no radiant look when she went home that night.  She would go
home alone and unescorted, excepting by her lacqueys, refusing all offers
of companionship when once placed in her equipage.  There were, of
course, gentlemen who would not be denied leading her to her coach; John
Oxon was among them, and at the last pressed close, with a manner of
great ceremony, speaking a final word.

"'Tis useless, your ladyship," he murmured, as he made his obeisance
gallantly, and though the words were uttered in his lowest tone and with
great softness, they reached her ear as he intended that they should.  "To-
morrow morning I shall wait upon you."

Anne had forborne going to bed, and waited for her return, longing to see
her spirit's face again before she slept; for this poor tender creature,
being denied all woman's loves and joys by Fate, who had made her as she
was, so lived in her sister's beauty and triumphs that 'twas as if in
some far-off way she shared them, and herself experienced through them
the joy of being a woman transcendently beautiful and transcendently
beloved.  To-night she had spent her waiting hours in her closet and upon
her knees, praying with all humble adoration of the Being she approached.
She was wont to pray long and fervently each day, thanking Heaven for the
smallest things and the most common, and imploring continuance of the
mercy which bestowed them upon her poor unworthiness.  For her sister her
prayers were offered up night and morning, and ofttimes in hours between,
and to-night she prayed not for herself at all, but for Clorinda and for
his Grace of Osmonde, that their love might be crowned with happiness,
and that no shadow might intervene to cloud its brightness, and the
tender rapture in her sister's softened look, which was to her a thing so
wonderful that she thought of it with reverence as a holy thing.

Her prayers being at length ended, she had risen from her knees and sat
down, taking a sacred book to read, a book of sermons such as 'twas her
simple habit to pore over with entire respect and child-like faith, and
being in the midst of her favourite homily, she heard the chariot's
returning wheels, and left her chair, surprised, because she had not yet
begun to expect the sound.

"'Tis my sister," she said, with a soft, sentimental smile.  "Osmonde not
being among the guests, she hath no pleasure in mingling with them."

She went below to the room her ladyship usually went to first on her
return at night from any gathering, and there she found her sitting as
though she had dropped there in the corner of a great divan, her hands
hanging clasped before her on her knee, her head hanging forward on her
fallen chest, her large eyes staring into space.

"Clorinda!  Clorinda!" Anne cried, running to her and kneeling at her
side.  "Clorinda!  God have mercy!  What is't?"

Never before had her face worn such a look--'twas colourless, and so
drawn and fallen in that 'twas indeed almost as if all her great beauty
was gone; but the thing most awful to poor Anne was that all the new
softness seemed as if it had been stamped out, and the fierce hardness
had come back and was engraven in its place, mingled with a horrible
despair.

"An hour ago," she said, "I swooned.  That is why I look thus.  'Tis yet
another sign that I am a woman--a woman!"

"You are ill--you swooned?" cried Anne.  "I must send for your physician.
Have you not ordered that he be sent for yourself?  If Osmonde were here,
how perturbed he would be!"

"Osmonde!" said my lady.  "Gerald!  Is there a Gerald, Anne?"

"Sister!" cried Anne, affrighted by her strange look--"oh, sister!"

"I have seen heaven," Clorinda said; "I have stood on the threshold and
seen through the part-opened gate--and then have been dragged back to
hell."

Anne clung to her, gazing upwards at her eyes, in sheer despair.

"But back to hell I will not go," she went on saying.  "Had I not seen
Heaven, they might perhaps have dragged me; but now I will not go--I will
not, that I swear!  There is a thing which cannot be endured.  Bear it no
woman should.  Even I, who was not born a woman, but a wolf's she-cub, I
cannot.  'Twas not I, 'twas Fate," she said--"'twas not I, 'twas
Fate--'twas the great wheel we are bound to, which goes round and round
that we may be broken on it.  'Twas not I who bound myself there; and I
will not be broken so."

She said the words through her clenched teeth, and with all the mad
passion of her most lawless years; even at Anne she looked almost in the
old ungentle fashion, as though half scorning all weaker than herself,
and having small patience with them.
