Animated by this hope he hastened back to the beach in quest of another
line, resolved himself to attempt to carry it to the wreck.

Guy was right in his conjecture that Bax had cut the rope.  On nearing
the ship the latter had come unexpectedly on a large rock, under the lee
of which he paused to recover breath before making the last gallant
struggle towards the wreck.  It was this pause that caused the alarm of
those on shore.  When Bax felt himself dragged violently back to the
land, he at once divined the cause, and, knowing that there was no other
resource, he seized the clasp-knife, and cut the rope.  A few minutes
later he swam under the lee of the wreck, and, catching hold of the
rigging of the foremast, which had gone by the board when the ship
struck, he clambered up the side and soon stood on the quarter-deck.

The hope raised among the passengers by the sudden appearance of the
gigantic stranger in the midst of them, was quickly dispelled when he
told them how he had failed in the main object of his effort.  But it
revived somewhat when they observed the active and energetic way in
which Bax set about preparations for returning to the shore with a line
from the ship.  His first act was to ask for a blue-light, which after a
few minutes was produced.  This he set fire to, and, springing into the
main rigging, held it aloft, and sent a bright glare for a few minutes,
far and wide, over the scene.

The effect of this was twofold.  It revealed to the shipwrecked people
the dangers by which they were surrounded, and the active efforts that
were being made by land and water for their deliverance.  On shore, they
saw crowds of men and women surrounding an instrument, which Bax, after
giving vent to a hopeful cheer, explained was a rocket apparatus.
Scarcely had they learned this, when Bax shouted and waved his hand
seaward.  On turning their eyes in that direction, they beheld a
lifeboat bearing down towards them, her white-painted sides gleaming
like the wings of an angel of light in the midst of the dark tempest.

The lifeboat was also seen by the people on shore, and Guy, who at once
recognised the figure, and the _vigour_, of his friend with the
blue-light, lent able assistance to those who managed the rocket.

Dennett's Rocket Apparatus, which was being placed in position on the
rocks, is an invention by which many human lives are saved on our coasts
every year.  Like Manby's Mortar Apparatus, it is simple in its action
and most effective in operation.

The grand difficulty in the case of a wreck near shore is to establish a
communication, by means of a rope, between the wreck and the land; and
this difficulty is, of course, much increased when the wreck occurs off
a coast lined with rocks or steep cliffs.  To swim off from the shore to
the wreck, or _vice versa_, is, in most cases, an absolute
impossibility.  The rocket apparatus has been devised for the purpose of
overcoming this difficulty.  By means of it a light "line" as it is
called, or rope, the thickness of the point of one's little finger, can
be thrown over a wreck lying at a distance of several hundred yards from
the beach.  This line, when caught, is the means by which many a life
has been saved from the devouring sea.  The _modus operandi_ will be
seen in the sequel.

The apparatus consists of five parts; the rocket, the stand, the line,
the whip, and the hawser.  The rocket is a strong metal cylinder, of
about eighteen inches in length, and more than two in diameter.  When
about to be used a long stick is attached to it, and the principle on
which it acts is precisely similar to that of the small rockets used in
our pyrotechnic displays.  The stand is a tripod supporting a rest for
the rocket.  The line, which is made of the best material, is coiled in
a large box in a zig-zag manner on a number of pegs; these pegs, when
withdrawn in a mass by removing the bottom of the box to which they are
attached, leave the line loose and free to fly out with the utmost
rapidity.  The end of the line is fastened to the head of the rocket.

Any one who has stood near an ordinary rocket when it was being fired,
can form some conception of the force and furor with which this iron
monster springs into the air and dashes out to sea in the teeth of the
wildest storm.  So tremendous is the gush of fire and smoke, that it has
to be let off by means of a lock, the trigger of which is pulled by a
man standing some yards distant with a cord attached to it in his hand.

Before the rocket was quite ready for action, the lifeboat had
approached the wreck, a hundred yards or so to windward of her.  Here
they cast anchor in such a position that by paying out cable they could
veer down towards her slowly and endeavour to range up under her lee.
Every different operation the lifeboat had to perform was fraught with
extreme danger.  The mere being overwhelmed by the furious sea and
filled was comparatively a trifling risk.  This it had been twice
already, and, but for the time lost in bailing out, it would have been
much earlier on the scene.  While paying out cable there was the fear of
the rope breaking or the anchor dragging; then, on nearing the wreck,
there was the risk of being dashed to pieces on the rocks, and after
getting under her lee, the surging of the waves kept them constantly on
the verge of being hurled against the rigging.  The wreck of the
foremast, too, which still lay rolling alongside, was a source of
constant anxiety, and the rolling of the ship itself rendered it
probable that one or both of the remaining masts would give way and fall
over the side, in which case the destruction of the boat would be almost
inevitable.  Add to this the intense darkness, the terrible uproar of
wind and water, and the difficulty of acting effectively in a boat that
pitched and swooped wildly on the broken seas like the plungings of a
fiery charger,--and some faint idea may be formed of the horrors, as
well as the dangers of the lifeboat service.

Gradually, but surely, the boat dropped nearer and nearer to the doomed
ship, under the guidance of her able coxswain.  As it passed under the
stern a cheer burst from the crowd of eager faces that gazed over the
side of the "Trident."  Yet there were many hearts there that grew faint
and chill when they beheld the little white speck that seemed to be
their only hope of rescue in that dark hour.  "What hope was there that
such a nutshell should save them all?" they thought, perchance, on
seeing it approach.  They little knew the wonderful vitality of a
lifeboat!

Just as it passed under the quarter, a sea swept it right up into the
mizzen-chains.  The utmost efforts of the crew to fend off were
unavailing.  As the billow rolled on, the boat dropt swiftly, scraping
against the ship's side as it fell into the trough of the sea, and
escaping an upset almost by a miracle.

"Throw a line aboard!" shouted Bax, who stood on the lee bulwarks, high
above the crowd, holding on by the mizzen-shrouds.

The middy caught up the instrument used for this purpose, and threw a
line on board at once.  This steadied the boat a little, and, watching
their opportunity, they succeeded in lowering three women and a child
into it by means of a bow-line.

In this way, one by one, the females and children were placed in the
boat until it was full.  Then there was a cry to shove off, and a rush
was made by the more timid and ignorant among the passengers, who
thought they were about to be forsaken.  Bax had foreseen this.  He and
several of the sailors met and checked the crowd, and before any
mischief could be done the boat was away.

It made straight for the shore where hundreds of stout arms were ready
to seize it.  The midshipman stood on the bow with a rope in his hand.
The sea through which they rushed was milk white with foam.  To prevent
the boat broaching-to and being rolled over on the beach was now the
main effort of the coxswain.  On they went steadily.  A wave broke under
them, carried them on its boiling crest with lightning speed, and
launched them with a roar like thunder on the shingle.  The rope was
thrown before they touched.  It was seized and manned; and before the
retiring wave could suck them back, the lifeboat with her living freight
was run high upon the beach.

She was soon emptied and relaunched, for there was no time to waste.
Many lives were still in danger, and the "Trident" could not be expected
to hold together long.

It was just as the boat quitted the side of the wreck, as above
described, that the rocket was got in readiness to act.

"Stand by to fire," said the coast-guard-man who had been engaged for
some minutes in adjusting it carefully.

"Keep back! clear out o' the road," cried several of the seamen, as they
pushed back the more curious among the crowd.

There was a flash, a mighty burst of flame and smoke, as the rocket
trembled for an instant on its stand; then, with an impulse that seemed
irresistible, and a hissing shriek that rose above the storm, it sprang
into the air and described a bright curved line of light against the
black sky.

Its own wild blaze served to show that it had been well aimed, and that
the line had fallen across the wreck.  This was all that could be done
by the people on shore, until those on the wreck had performed their
part of the work.  But while they stood anxiously awaiting the result,
they had no cause to fear that the ignorance of those whom they sought
to rescue would render their efforts useless (as has unfortunately been
the case more than once), for it was known now that Bax was on board.

The ignorance of some seamen as to what should be done with the line
when it is caught, has been the cause of loss of life several times.  On
one occasion five men, the crew of a small vessel, being ignorant on
this point, tied the rocket-line round them and leaped together into the
sea!  Of course those on shore could do nothing but haul them to land as
quickly as possible; when they had done so, all were found to be drowned
except one.

On the present occasion Bax seized the line as soon as it fell on the
wreck and began to haul it in-board.  Guy had attached to it a pulley or
block with a stoutish rope rove through it, and soon those on shore had
the satisfaction of seeing this second and double line (named the
"whip"), hauled out by the people on the wreck.  After a time it ceased
to run out, and then they knew that Bax had got hold of the pulley, and
would quickly attach it to the ship.  This was soon done.  Bax fastened
the pulley to the mainmast, and then caused a lantern to be shown for a
moment, to indicate that all was ready.

Still those on shore delayed to act for a minute, in order to make quite
sure that ample time had been allowed for the fastening of the pulley.
And now the all-important operation of conveying a thick hawser to the
wreck was begun.  With the tackle already fast to the ship this was
comparatively easy.  The _whip_ being rove through a pulley, both ends
were kept on shore and fastened together.  It thus became a sort of
endless rope, by which things could be passed to the wreck and back
again.  Even without any hawser at all, many lives might have been saved
by this rope; but, being small, it was liable to get broken, therefore
the end of the thick hawser was sent out and received by Bax, who bound
it also securely to the mainmast close to the pulley, about fifteen feet
above the deck.

The reader will understand that two ropes were now fastened to the
mainmast of the "Trident," their other ends being fixed to a heavy
anchor buried in the sand on shore.  One of these ropes was the thick
hawser, the other the whip; but as this whip was an endless or revolving
rope, as has been explained, to an onlooker it appeared that there were
_three_ ropes stretched between the vessel and the shore, two of them
thin and one thick.

These preliminary arrangements having been made, much more rapidly than
the description of them might lead one to suppose, the purpose for which
they had been fixed soon began to be carried out.  Just as the lifeboat
arrived with its first cargo of passengers, a large block or pulley was
run out along the hawser by means of the whip, having attached to it a
circular lifebuoy with a canvas bag hanging from it.  This was the
contrivance into which one individual at a time was placed and drawn
ashore.  Two holes in the bag allowed the legs of the occupant to hang
down, and as the belt reached almost up to the neck, there was not much
chance of his being tossed out of it.  It was in order to prevent this,
however, that Bax had fastened the end of the hawser high on the
mainmast, so that the travelling bag was raised sufficiently above the
water, except when it neared the shore.  Then, indeed, it was frequently
immersed in the towering waves, but then, too, it was so near the land
that a few seconds sufficed to draw it beyond the reach of the sea.
[See Note 1.]

For two hours did these men of the coast toil in this arduous labour of
love.  More than a hundred persons had been saved; but nearly a hundred
still remained on board the wreck.

The storm was now at its height, and the vessel rolled over on her bilge
so violently that the lifeboat was more than once on the point of being
crushed under her massive sides.  On her last trip she came close up
under the quarter as on former occasions, but before any one could be
taken off a monstrous wave lifted the hull right over the rocks on which
she lay, and let her fall with fearful violence on a bed of sand in such
a position that one of her large timbers snapped across with a report
like a cannon shot.

The lifeboat got entangled in the wreck and could not get clear.  To
make matters worse it grounded on a sandbank that rose close to the side
of the "Trident," and could not be hauled out of the dangerous position
in which it was thus suddenly placed.  The top-gallant masts of the ship
were swaying wildly over it, the yards were swinging to and fro,
threatening each moment to strike it, and the ragged sails flapped over
it with a noise like thunder.

"Haul off! haul off!" shouted Bax, who observed the extreme danger in
which the boat was placed.

The crew attempted to do so, but for some minutes were unsuccessful.  At
last they got into deep water, but just as this was accomplished the
mainyard struck it on the side and overturned it in an instant.

Not being constructed on the self-righting principle, the boat remained
keel up, but the men, buoyed up by their life-jackets, succeeded in
climbing on board the wreck.

A cry of despair arose from those still on board the ill-fated "Trident"
when this catastrophe happened.  During the next half-hour the rocket
apparatus was plied with great success, but although most of the women
and children were saved by it (and by the boat before it was disabled),
there were still upwards of fifty men on board the wreck.

"D'you think the ship will hold together long?" said Bax, going aft to
the captain, who clung to the mizzen-shrouds superintending the
operations of the men.

"Not long, I fear," he replied.  "If she had been thoroughly repaired
before starting on this voyage she might have weathered the gale; but,
but--"

"But," interposed Mr Clelland,--the dark passenger, who during the
whole of the proceedings which we have narrated had stood calmly beside
the captain looking on--"but Messrs. Denham, Crumps, and Company, being
penny wise and pound foolish, thought that the ships were strong enough
for _their_ purpose, both ship and cargo being fully covered by
insurance!"

There was a spice of bitterness in this man's tone and manner which
displeased Bax.  He was about to administer a rebuke to him, when a
larger wave than usual lifted the ship up, and let her fall with such
force that another of her large timbers broke across like a pipe-stem,
and the two remaining masts went by the board, sweeping several of the
passengers and crew into the sea along with the wreck of spars and
cordage.

Just under the quarter a child fell into the water.  It had been
wrenched from its mother's arms by the coil of a flying rope.  The
mother leaped frantically on the bulwarks, and would have plunged into
the sea had not Bax seized her.  At that moment Mr Clelland passed a
rope round his waist, tied it in that swift and perfect manner peculiar
to seamen, and sprang into the sea.  He seized the child in his arms.
The captain of the "Trident" had caught the rope as Clelland sprang over
the side.  Bax assisted him, and in a few minutes both were hauled
safely on board.

"You're better stuff than I gave you credit for," said Bax, as the dark
passenger delivered the child to its mother.

"Indeed!" said Mr Clelland, with a touch of sarcasm in his tone; "I
hope that I may be able to return you the like compliment at a more
fitting season.  At present there is other work for us to do.  Come,
lads, we must try to right the lifeboat, who will help me?"

Mr Clelland sprang into the sea as he spoke and swam towards the boat,
which still lay under the lee of the wreck with its keel uppermost.  Bax
followed instantly, and so did nearly the whole crew of the boat.  These
latter, having on their cork-jackets, ran comparatively little risk of
drowning, but they, as well as Bax and Clelland, were in danger of being
disabled by the rolling spars that surrounded them.  With great
difficulty they succeeded in turning the boat over, but, as it was
nearly full of water, much valuable time was wasted before it could be
baled out sufficiently to render it once more serviceable.  When this
was accomplished they hauled clear of the wreck, intending to veer round
towards the stern, where they could approach the ship with greater
safety.

The remaining passengers seeing this, rushed upon the poop.  At that
moment the ship was lifted up, and hurled with such violence on a sunken
rock that her back was broken; the sea dashed against her side,
separating the poop from the fore part of the vessel, and turning it
completely over, so that every soul on board was plunged suddenly into
the sea.

A wild shriek of despair rose high above the howling of the storm, and
most of the weaker among the passengers sank in the raging sea to rise
no more.  But the lifeboat was now in a condition to render effectual
aid to those who were strong enough to struggle a few minutes for their
lives, or to cling to broken portions of the wreck.  She was soon as
full as she could hold, and Bax, seizing the bow oar, forced her head
round towards the shore.  The coxswain sprang to the helm; "Give way,
lads," was shouted, and in a few seconds the boat was once again
careering towards the shore on the crest of a towering billow.  She took
the beach in safety.

"Now, then, shove off again," cried Bax, when the last of the passengers
was assisted out of her.

"Stop!" cried a coast-guard-man, "some of the men are too much knocked
up to go off again."
