here to-day--there are those who recommend good books. That is all
right. But I want to tell you that the Bible is the best book under
such circumstances. Baxter wrote "A Call to the Unconverted," but the
Bible is the best call to the unconverted. Philip Doddridge wrote "The
Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul," but the Bible is the best
rise and progress. John Angell James wrote "Advice to the Anxious
Inquirer," but the Bible is the best advice to the anxious inquirer.

O, the Bible is the very book you need, anxious and inquiring soul! A
dying soldier said to his mate: "Comrade, give me a drop!" The comrade
shook up the canteen, and said: "There isn't a drop of water in the
canteen." "Oh," said the dying soldier, "that's not what I want; feel
in my knapsack for my Bible," and his comrade found the Bible, and
read him a few of the gracious promises, and the dying soldier said:
"Ah, that's what I want. There isn't anything like the Bible for a
dying soldier, is there, my comrade?" O blessed book while we live!
Blessed book when we die!

I remark, again, we must seek God through church ordinances. "What,"
say you, "can't a man be saved without going to church?" I reply,
there are men, I suppose, in glory, who have never seen a church: but
the church is the ordained means by which we are to be brought to God;
and if truth affects us when we are alone, it affects us more mightily
when we are in the assembly--the feelings of others emphasizing our
own feelings. The great law of sympathy comes into play, and a truth
that would take hold only with the grasp of a sick man, beats mightily
against the soul with a thousand heart-throbs.

When you come into the religious circle, come only with one notion,
and only for one purpose--to find the way to Christ. When I see people
critical about sermons, and critical about tones of voice, and
critical about sermonic delivery, they make me think of a man in
prison. He is condemned to death, but an officer of the government
brings a pardon and puts it through the wicket of the prison, and
says: "Here is your pardon. Come and get it." "What! Do you expect me
to take that pardon offered with such a voice as you have, with such
an awkward manner as you have? I would rather die than so compromise
my rhetorical notions!" Ah, the man does not say that; he takes it! It
is his life. He does not care how it is handed to him. And if, this
morning, that pardon from the throne of God is offered to our souls,
should we not seize it, regardless of all criticism, feeling that it
is a matter of heaven or hell?

But I come now to the last part of my text. It tells us when we are to
seek the Lord. "While He may be found." When is that? Old age? You may
not see old age. To-morrow? You may not see to-morrow. To-night? You
may not see to-night. Now! O if I could only write on every heart in
three capital letters, that word N-O-W--Now!

Sin is an awful disease. I hear people say with a toss of the head and
with a trivial manner: "Oh, yes, I'm a sinner." Sin is an awful
disease. It is leprosy. It is dropsy. It is consumption. It is all
moral disorders in one. Now you know there is a crisis in a disease.
Perhaps you have had some illustration of it in your family. Sometimes
the physician has called, and he has looked at the patient and said:
"That case was simple enough; but the crisis has passed. If you had
called me yesterday, or this morning, I could have cured the patient.
It is too late now; the crisis has passed." Just so it is in the
spiritual treatment of the soul--there is a crisis. Before that, life!
After that, death! O my dear brother, as you love your soul do not let
the crisis pass unattended to!

There are some here who can remember instances in life when, if they
had bought a certain property, they would have become very rich. A few
acres that would have cost them almost nothing were offered them.
They refused them. Afterward a large village or city sprung up on
those acres of ground, and they see what a mistake they made in not
buying the property. There was an opportunity of getting it. It never
came back again. And so it is in regard to a man's spiritual and
eternal fortune. There is a chance; if you let that go, perhaps it
never comes back. Certainly, that one never comes back.

A gentleman told me that at the battle of Gettysburg he stood upon a
height looking off upon the conflicting armies. He said it was the
most exciting moment of his life; now one army seeming to triumph, and
now the other. After awhile the host wheeled in such a way that he
knew in five minutes the whole question would be decided. He said the
emotion was almost unbearable. There is just such a time to-day with
you, O impenitent soul!--the forces of light on the one side, and the
siege-guns of hell on the other side, and in a few moments the matter
will be settled for eternity.

There is a time which mercy has set for leaving port. If you are on
board before that, you will get a passage for heaven. If you are not
on board, you miss your passage for heaven. As in law courts a case is
sometimes adjourned from term to term, and from year to year till the
bill of costs eats up the entire estate, so there are men who are
adjourning the matter of religion from time to time, and from year to
year, until heavenly bliss is the bill of costs the man will have to
pay for it.

Why defer this matter, oh, my dear hearer? Have you any idea that sin
will wear out? that it will evaporate? that it will relax its grasp?
that you may find religion as a man accidentally finds a lost
pocket-book? Ah, no! No man ever became a Christian by accident, or by
the relaxing of sin. The embarrassments are all the time increasing.
The hosts of darkness are recruiting, and the longer you postpone this
matter the steeper the path will become. I ask those men who are
before me this morning, whether, in the ten or fifteen years they have
passed in the postponement of these matters, they have come any nearer
God or heaven?

I would not be afraid to challenge this whole audience, so far as they
may not have found the peace of the Gospel, in regard to the matter.
Your hearts, you are willing frankly to tell me, are becoming harder
and harder, and that if you come to Christ it will be more of an
undertaking now than it ever would have been before. Oh, fly for
refuge! The avenger of blood is on the track! The throne of judgment
will soon be set; and, if you have anything to do toward your eternal
salvation, you had better do it now, for the redemption of your soul
is precious, and it ceaseth forever!

Oh, if men could only catch just one glimpse of Christ, I know they
would love Him! Your heart leaps at the sight of a glorious sunrise or
sunset. Can you be without emotion as the Sun of Righteousness rises
behind Calvary, and sets behind Joseph's sepulcher? He is a blessed
Saviour! Every nation has its type of beauty. There is German beauty,
and Swiss beauty, and Italian beauty, and English beauty; but I care
not in what land a man first looks at Christ, he pronounces Him "chief
among ten thousand, and the One altogether lovely." O my blessed
Jesus! Light in darkness! The Rock on which I build! The Captain of
Salvation! My joy! My strength! How strange it is that men can not
love Thee!

The diamond districts of Brazil are carefully guarded, and a man does
not get in there except by a pass from the government; but the love of
Christ is a diamond district we may all enter, and pick up treasures
for eternity. Oh, cry for mercy! "To-day, if ye will hear His voice,
harden not your hearts." There is a way of opposing the mercy of God
too long, and then there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful looking for judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour
the adversary. My friends, my neighbors, what can I say to induce you
to attend to this matter--to attend to it now? Time is flying,
flying--the city clock joining my voice this moment, seeming to say to
you, "Now is the time! Now is the time!" Oh, put it not off!

Why should I stand here and plead, and you sit there? It is your
immortal soul. It is a soul that shall never die. It is a soul that
must soon appear before God for review. Why throw away your chance for
heaven? Why plunge off into darkness when all the gates of glory are
open? Why become a castaway from God when you can sit upon the throne?
Why will ye die miserably when eternal life is offered you, and it
will cost you nothing but just willingness to accept it? "Come, for
all things are now ready." Come, Christ is ready, pardon is ready! The
Church is ready. Heaven is ready. You will never find a more
convenient season, if you should live fifty years more, than this
very one. Reject this, and you may die in your sins. Why do I say
this? Is it to frighten your soul? Oh, no! It is to persuade you. I
show you the peril. I show you the escape. Would I not be a coward
beyond all excuse, if, believing that this great audience must soon be
launched into the eternal world, and that all who believe in Christ
shall be saved, and that all who reject Christ will be lost--would I
not be the veriest coward on earth to hide that truth or to stand
before you with a cold, or even a placid manner? My dear brethren, now
is the day of your redemption.

It is very certain that you and I must soon appear before God in
judgment. We can not escape it. The Bible says: "Every eye shall see
Him, and they also which pierced Him, and all the kindreds of the
earth shall wail because of Him." On that day all our advantages will
come up for our glory or for our discomfiture--every prayer, every
sermon, every exhortatory remark, every reproof, every call of grace;
and while the heavens are rolling away like a scroll, and the world is
being destroyed, your destiny and my destiny will be announced. Alas!
alas! if on that day it is found that we have neglected these matters.
We may throw them off now. We can not then. We will all be in earnest
then. But no pardon then. No offer of salvation then. No rescue then.
Driven away in our wickedness--banished, exiled, forever!

Have you ever imagined what will be the soliloquy of the soul on that
day unpardoned, as it looks back upon its past life? "Oh," says the
soul, "I had glorious Sabbaths! There was one Sabbath in autumn when
I was invited to Christ. There was a Sabbath morning when Jesus stood
and spread out His arm and invited me to His holy heart. I refused
Him. I have destroyed myself. I have no one else to blame. Ruin
complete! Darkness unpitying, deep, eternal! I am lost!
Notwithstanding all the opportunities I have had of being saved, I am
lost! O Thou long-suffering Lord God Almighty, I am lost! O day of
judgment, I am lost! O father, mother, brother, sister, child in
glory, I am lost!" And then as the tide goes out, your soul goes out
with it--further from God, further from happiness, and I hear your
voice fainter, and fainter, and fainter: "Lost! Lost! Lost! Lost!
Lost!" O ye dying, yet immortal men, "seek the Lord while He may be
found."

But I want you to take the hint of the text that I have no time to
dwell on--the hint that there is a time when He can not be found.
There is a man in New York, eighty years of age, who said to a
clergyman who came in, "Do you think that a man at eighty years of age
can get pardoned?" "Oh, yes," said the clergyman. The old man said: "I
can't; when I was twenty years of age--I am now eighty years--the
Spirit of God came to my soul, and I felt the importance of attending
to these things, but I put it off. I rejected God, and since then I
have had no feeling." "Well," said the minister, "wouldn't you like to
have me pray with you?" "Yes," replied the old man, "but it will do no
good. You can pray with me if you like to." The minister knelt down
and prayed, and commended the man's soul to God. It seemed to have no
effect upon him. After awhile the last hour of the man's life came,
and through his delirium a spark of intelligence seemed to flash, and
with his last breath he said; "I shall never be forgiven!" "O seek the
Lord while He may be found."




THE GREAT ASSIZE.

DOCTOR TALMAGE'S SERMON, PREACHED AT CORK, IRELAND,
SUNDAY MORNING, SEPT 6th, 1885.

    "When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, and all the holy
    angels with Him, then shall He sit upon the throne of His
    glory: and before Him shall be gathered all nations: and He
    shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth
    his sheep from the goats."--MATTHEW xxv: 31, 32.


Half-way between Chamouny, Switzerland, and Martigny, I reined in the
horse on which I was riding, and looked off upon the most wonderful
natural amphitheater of valley and mountain and rock, and I said to my
companion, "What an appropriate place this would be for the last
judgment. Yonder overhanging rock the place for the judgment seat.
These galleries of surrounding hills occupied by attendant angels.
This vast valley, sweeping miles this way and miles that, the
audience-room for all nations." But sacred geography does not point
out the place. Yet we know that somewhere, some time, somehow, an
audience will be gathered together stupendous beyond all statistics,
and just as certainly as you and I make up a part of this audience
to-day, we will make up a part of that audience on that day.

A common sense of justice in every man's heart demands that there
shall be some great winding-up day, in which that which is now
inexplicable shall be explained.

Why did that good man suffer, and that bad man prosper? You say, "I
don't know, but I must know." Why is that good Christian woman dying
of what is called a spider cancer, while that daughter of folly sits
wrapped in luxury, ease, and health? You say, "I don't know, but I
must know." There are so many wrongs to be righted that if there were
not some great righting-up day in the presence of all ages, there
would be an outcry against God from which His glory would never
recover. If God did not at last try the nations, the nations would try
Him. We are, therefore, ready for the announcement of the text. The
world never saw Christ except in disguise. If once when He was on
earth He had let out His glory, instead of the blind eyes being
healed, all visions would have been extinguished. No human eye could
have endured it. And instead of bringing the dead to life, all around
about him would have been the slain under that overpowering
effulgence. Disguise of human flesh. Disguise of seamless robe.
Disguise of sandal. Disguise of voice. From Bethlehem caravansary to
mausoleum in the rock, a complete disguise.

But on the day of which I speak the Son of Man will come in His glory.
No hiding of luster. No sheathing of strength. No suppression of
grandeur. No wrapping out of sight of the Godhead. Any fifty of the
most brilliant sunsets that you ever saw on land or sea would be dim
as compared with the cerulean appearance on that day when Christ
rolls through, and rolls on, and rolls down in His glory. The air will
be all abloom with His presence, and everything from horizon to
horizon aflame with His splendor.

Elijah rode up the sky-steep in a chariot, the wheels of whirling fire
and the horses of galloping fire, and the charioteer drawing reins of
fire on bits of fire; but Christ will need no such equipage, for the
law of gravitation will be laid aside, and the natural elements will
be laid aside, and Christ will descend swiftly enough to make speedy
arrival, but slowly enough to allow the gaze of millions of
spectators. In his glory! Glory of form, glory of omnipotence, glory
of holiness, glory of justice, glory of love. In His glory! An
unveiled, an uncovered God descending to meet the human race in an
interview which will be prolonged only for a few hours, and yet which
shall settle all the past and all the present and all the future, and
be closed before the end of that day, which will close, not with
setting sun, but with the destruction of the planet as a snuffers
takes off the top of a burned wick.

It is a solemn time in a court-room when there is an important case on
hand, and the judge of the Supreme Court enters, and he sits down, and
with gavel strikes on the desk commanding bar and jury and witnesses
and audience into silence. All voices are hushed, all heads are
uncovered. But how much more impressive when Christ shall take the
judgment seat on the last day of the last week of the last month of
the last year of the world's existence, and with gavel of thunder-bolt
shall smite the mountains, commanding all the land and all the sea
into silence.

Can you have any doubt about who it is on the seat on the judgment
day? Better make investigation, to see whether there are any scars
about Him that reveal His person. Apparel may change. You can not
always tell by apparel. But scars will tell the story after all else
fails. I find under His left arm a scar, and on His right hand a scar,
and on His left hand a scar, and on His right foot a scar, and on His
left foot a scar. Oh, yes, He is the Son of Man in His glory. Every
mark of wound now a badge of victory, every ridge showing the fearful
gash now telling the story of pain and sacrifice which He suffered in
behalf of the human race.

But what is all that commotion and flutter, and surging to and fro
above Him and on either side of Him? It is a detailed regiment of
heaven, a constabulary angelic, sent forth to take part in that scene,
and to execute the mandates that shall be issued. Ten regiments, a
hundred regiments, a thousand regiments of angels; for on that day all
heaven will be emptied of its inhabitants to let them attend the
scene. All the holy angels. From what a center to what a
circumference. Widening out and widening out, and higher up and higher
up. Wings interlocking wings. Galleries of cloud above galleries of
cloud, all filled with the faces of angels come to listen and come to
watch, and come to help on that day for which all other days were
made. Who are those two taller and more conspicuous angels? The one is
Michael, who is the commander of all those who come out to destroy
sin. The other is Gabriel, who is announced as commander of all those
who come forth to help the righteous. Who is that mighty angel near
the throne? That is the resurrection angel, his lips still aquiver and
his cheek aflush with the blast that shattered the cemeteries and woke
the dead. Who is that other great angel, with dark and overshadowing
brow? That is the one who in one night, by one flap of his wing,
turned one hundred and eighty-five thousand of Sennacherib's host into
