The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Risk Profession, by Donald Edwin Westlake

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Risk Profession

Author: Donald Edwin Westlake

Illustrator: Ivie

Release Date: October 29, 2008 [EBook #27089]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RISK PROFESSION ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Illustrated by IVIE]


    _The men who did dangerous work had a special kind of insurance
    policy. But when somebody wanted to collect on that policy, the
    claims investigator suddenly became a member of ..._


The RISK PROFESSION

By DONALD E. WESTLAKE


Mister Henderson called me into his office my third day back in
Tangiers. That was a day and a half later than I'd expected. Roving
claims investigators for Tangiers Mutual Insurance Corporation don't
usually get to spend more than thirty-six consecutive hours at home
base.

Henderson was jovial but stern. That meant he was happy with the job I'd
just completed, and that he was pretty sure I'd find some crooked
shenanigans on this next assignment. That didn't please me. I'm
basically a plain-living type, and I hate complications. I almost wished
for a second there that I was back on Fire and Theft in Greater New
York. But I knew better than that. As a roving claim investigator, I
avoided the more stultifying paper work inherent in this line of work
and had the additional luxury of an expense account nobody ever
questioned.

It made working for a living almost worthwhile.

When I was settled in the chair beside his desk, Henderson said, "That
was good work you did on Luna, Ged. Saved the company a pretty pence."

I smiled modestly and said, "Thank you, sir." And reflected to myself
for the thousandth time that the company could do worse than split that
saving with the guy who'd made it possible. Me, in other words.

"Got a tricky one this time, Ged," said my boss. He had done his
back-patting, now we got down to business. He peered keenly at me, or at
least as keenly as a round-faced tiny-eyed fat man _can_ peer. "What do
you know about the Risk Profession Retirement Plan?" he asked me.

"I've heard of it," I said truthfully. "That's about all."

He nodded. "Most of the policies are sold off-planet, of course. It's a
form of insurance for non-insurables. Spaceship crews, asteroid
prospectors, people like that."

"I see," I said, unhappily. I knew right away this meant I was going to
have to go off-Earth again. I'm a one-gee boy all the way. Gravity
changes get me in the solar plexus. I get g-sick at the drop of an
elevator.

       *       *       *

"Here's the way it works," he went on, either not noticing my sad face
or choosing to ignore it. "The client pays a monthly premium. He can be
as far ahead or as far behind in his payments as he wants--the policy
has no lapse clause--just so he's all paid up by the Target Date. The
Target Date is a retirement age, forty-five or above, chosen by the
client himself. After the Target Date, he stops paying premiums, and we
begin to pay him a monthly retirement check, the amount determined by
the amount paid into the policy, his age at retiring, and so on. Clear?"

I nodded, looking for the gimmick that made this a paying proposition
for good old Tangiers Mutual.

"The Double R-P--that's what we call it around the office here--assures
the client that he won't be reduced to panhandling in his old age,
should his other retirement plans fall through. For Belt prospectors, of
course, this means the big strike, which maybe one in a hundred find.
For the man who never does make that big strike, this is something to
fall back on. He can come home to Earth and retire, with a guaranteed
income for the rest of his life."

I nodded again, like a good company man.

"Of course," said Henderson, emphasizing this point with an upraised
chubby finger, "these men are still uninsurables. This is a retirement
plan only, not an insurance policy. There is no beneficiary other than
the client himself."

And there was the gimmick. I knew a little something of the actuarial
statistics concerning uninsurables, particularly Belt prospectors. Not
many of them lived to be forty-five, and the few who would survive the
Belt and come home to collect the retirement wouldn't last more than a
year or two. A man who's spent the last twenty or thirty years on
low-gee asteroids just shrivels up after a while when he tries to live
on Earth.

It needed a company like Tangiers Mutual to dream up a racket like that.
The term "uninsurables" to most insurance companies means those people
whose jobs or habitats make them too likely as prospects for obituaries.
To Tangiers Mutual, uninsurables are people who have money the company
can't get at.

"Now," said Henderson importantly, "we come to the problem at hand." He
ruffled his up-to-now-neat In basket and finally found the folder he
wanted. He studied the blank exterior of this folder for a few seconds,
pursing his lips at it, and said, "One of our clients under the Double
R-P was a man named Jafe McCann."

"Was?" I echoed.

He squinted at me, then nodded at my sharpness. "That's right, he's
dead." He sighed heavily and tapped the folder with all those pudgy
fingers. "Normally," he said, "that would be the end of it. File closed.
However, this time there are complications."

Naturally. Otherwise, he wouldn't be telling _me_ about it. But
Henderson couldn't be rushed, and I knew it. I kept the alert look on my
face and thought of other things, while waiting for him to get to the
point.

"Two weeks after Jafe McCann's death," Henderson said, "we received a
cash-return form on his policy."

"A cash-return form?" I'd never heard of such a thing. It didn't sound
like anything Tangiers Mutual would have anything to do with. We _never_
return cash.

       *       *       *

"It's something special in this case," he explained. "You see, this
isn't an insurance policy, it's a retirement plan, and the client can
withdraw from the retirement plan at any time, and have seventy-five per
cent of his paid-up premiums returned to him. It's, uh, the law in plans
such as this."

"Oh," I said. That explained it. A law that had snuck through the World
Finance Code Commission while the insurance lobby wasn't looking.
